GOSPEL-MARROW, THE Great God giving himself for the sons of Men: OR, The
Sacred Mystery of Redemption by Jesus Christ, with two of the Ends thereof,
Justification and Sanctification.

Doctrinally Opened, AND Practically Applied.

Wherein (among many other useful and profitable Truths) the unhappy
Controversy of the Times about the Extent of Christ's Death is modestly and
plainly discussed and determined for the satisfaction of those who are willing
to receive it.

To which is added Three Links of a Golden Chain.

As it was lately held forth to the Church of God at Great Yarmouth.

By JOHN BRINSLEY, Minister of the Gospel there.

London, Printed by S. Griffin for Richard Tomlins, and are to be sold at the
Sign of the Suu and Bible near Pye-Corner. 1659.

To the Redeemed of the Lord in the Town of Great Yarmouth, Grace and Peace.
(Dearly Beloved)
WHat the great Doctor of the Gentiles declared to his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 2.2.
that he determined not to know any thing among them, save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified, let me in like manner freely profess unto you, that in the course of
my Ministry it has been my chief design to hold forth the Lord Jesus,
desiring and endeavoring according to my weak abilities, that he might be in
my Preaching evidently set forth before your eyes, and even crucified among you
(as that Apostle speaks to his Galathians, Gal. 3.1.) looking upon no Doctrine
so proper and profitable for me to Preach, and you to hear, as the Doctrine of
that Gospel whereof (as he also says of himself) I am Ephesians. 3.7. Col. 1.23.
made a Minister, And upon this ground it is that I have purposely singled out
diverse choice portions of Scripture (of some whereof I have given an account to
the world) to insist upon among you, which have presented you with this
subject. Among which I know none that have done it more fully than this which
is here now set before you. A Text wherein (as the Title prefixed makes promise
of) you shall meet with Marrow, even that Marrow wherewith the Lord promises
to Feast his people, Isa. 25.6. Gospel-Marrow, there being here much in a
little, diverse precious truths of great soul concernment held forth unto you,
as viz. Your Redemption, Justification, Sanctification, with your peculiar
Relation to Jesus Christ, and requisite Qualification, viz. Zeal for good
works. All which having lately handled in the audience of some of you, I do now
here present unto you all, wishing unto you (what David upon another account
promised to himself, Psalm 63.5.) that your souls may be herewith satisfied as
with marrow and fatness. And hereof I shall not doubt, if so be there be no
prejudice upon your spirits to hinder the swallowing and digesting of some of
them; As in particular that touching the Extent of Christ's death, which is here
asserted, and contended for not to be so large as Arminius and his followers
have of late represented it. Concerning which, what is here said, let me desire
you seriously to weigh and consider. This if you shall do, I shall not doubt but
you shall find that which will serve so to ballast your spirits, as that they
shall not be over-set with that Wind of Doctrine, which has already prevailed
too much against some unstable souls among you. So I am bold to call that so
much, by too many, applauded Doctrine of Universal Redemption, a Wind, which
however at the first breathing it may seem like the West-wind, (...), q. (...):
Favonius a favendo, quod ejus favore terra germinat.
a (...), a Favonius, pleasing and profitable, and at present may make a great
noise, yet upon a due trial it will be found to be no ways advantageous in
carrying you on to your desired Port, no ways conducing to your comfort here,
or happiness hereafter. For the proof whereof I shall refer you to what the
Treatise will acquaint you with. Which leaving in your hands, I commit it and
you to the blessing of the Great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, in whom I am

Yarmouth M. 6. D. 1. Your servant, JOHN BRINSLEY.

To the Reader.
Good Reader,
ALthough this Treatise needs none of my commendations, yet having read so
much of it as concerns the Doctrine of Universal and particular Redemption, I
cannot but say to thee, Surge, lege, arise and read.

The Reverend and learned Author has therein with much clearness and
perspicuity (a gift wherewith God has blessed him above many) delivered the
truth unto thee: And it is no other than that good old Gospel Truth, which has
been owned and maintained in all Ages, more especially in some: I shall not
instance in the times before Augustine, because the Controversy was not then
started, though the truth was acknowledged.

In the 4th Century Augustine vigorously contended for it, and for those Truths
that accompany it, against the Semi-Pelagians. Pelagius held that none are
condemned merely for the sin of Adam, in eating the forbidden fruit, because he
did not in that sin stand in the room of all men, and ergo that all men did not
fall in him, but have free will naturally unto good; but the Semi-Pelagians,
seeing this error, did grant Haec enim ipsorum definitio and professio est,
omnem quidem hominem Adamo peccante peccasse, and neminem per opera sua, sed
per Dei gratiam regeneratione salvari. Prosp. Epist. ad August. de reliquiis
Pelag. caeterum ad nullum opus vel incipiendum, nedum proficiendum, quenquam
sibi sufficere posse consentiunt. Hilar. Augustino de eadem materia.
that all men sinned in Adam, and that without grace a man naturally is unable
to begin or perfect any good work. Yet they held Qui autem credituri sunt,
quive in ea fide, quae deinceps per dei gratiam sit juvanda, mansuri sunt,
prescisse ante mundi constitutinem Deum, and eos predestinasse in regnum suum.
Prosper ibid.
that 1. God does predestinate men to salvation upon foresight of their
believing. 2. That Ad hoc salutis donum omnes homines universaliter, sive per
naturalem, sive per scriptam legem, sive per Evangelicam praedicationem vocari,
ut and qui voluerint fiant filii dei, and ideo plurimi non renovantur; quod nec
renovari velle habeant, praenoscantur. Prosper ibid.
it is in the power of man to resist and turn aside the converting grace of
God. 3. That Nec cuiquam talem dari perseverantiam a qua non permittitur
praevaricari, sed a qua possit sua voluntate deficere and infirmari; caeterum
quicquidlibet donatum sit praedestinatis, id posse and amittere and retinere
propria voluntate, contendunt. Hilar. ibid.
the Saints may fall from Grace, and not persevere to the end. 4. That Haec
enim ipsorum definitio ac professio est universis hominibus propitiationem quae
est in Sacramento sanguinis Christi sine exceptione esse propositam,
utquicunque ad fidem and ad baptismum accedere voluerint, salvi esse possunt.
Pro universo autem humano genere mortuum esse dominum nostrum Jesum Christum,
and neminem prorsus a redemtione sanguinis ejus, exceptum, etiamsi omnem hanc
vitam alienissima ab eo mente pertranseat, indifferenter universos Deus velit
salvos fieri, and in agnitionem veritatis venire. Prosper ibid.
Christ died for all the particular men of the world. This is (says Prosper)
their very opinion and profession, that that Reconciliation which is in the
Sacrament of Christ's blood, is without exception offered unto all men, so that
whoever will come unto Faith and Baptism may be saved. Yea (says he) They hold
that our Lord Jesus Christ died for all mankind, and that no man is excepted
from his Redemption, although he pass his whole life with a mind altogether
estranged from Christ, because the Sacrament of divine mercy does extend to
all; yea they hold (says Prosper) that God does indifferently will the
salvation of all. In Answer whereunto Augustine wrote two Books, the one de
praedestinatione Sanctorum; the other de bono perseverantiae. In the first, he
lays his axe to the root of the tree, and proves at large, that the (...),
the very act of believing is the gift of God, which truth Disputans quid
elegerit Deus in nondum nato; ad hoc perduxi ratiocinatione^ ut dicerem, non
ergo elegit Deus opera cujusquam praescientia; quae ipse daturus est, sed fidem
elegit in praescientia, ut quem sibi crediturum esse praescivit, ipsum
elegerit, ^ondum diligentius, quaesiveram, nec adhuc inveneram, qualis sit
electio gratiae. etc. August. Retracta. lib. 1. cap. 23. de praedestinat.
Sanctorum. cap. 3.
(says he) whilst I was ignorant of, I held and wrote, that God does
predestinate us upon the foresight of our faith, which I would not have said,
if I had then known that faith it self is the gift of God, and ergo I retract
that opinion of Predestination upon faith foreseen. In the other (as elsewhere)
he proves at large, and that out of Cyprian, that Sicut operatur ut accedamus
sic operatur ne discedamus. Post casum hominis, non nisi ad gratiam suam Deus
voluit pertinere ut homo accedat ad eum, neque nisi ad gratiam suam pertinere
voluit, ut homo non recedat ab eo. August. de bono persever.
men being truly the children of God cannot fall from grace, but shall
certainly persevere. And as for his judgment concerning the latitude of Christ's
Redemption, the extent of Gods will in reference to man's salvation, and the
sufficiency, efficacy, and irresistibility of grace, in reference to our
conversion, Jansenius Augustinus who had read over all Augustins works Fassus
est se decies etc. Jansen. Aug. vita.
ten times, and those works of his which are against the Pelagians thirty
times) says Nunquam in scriptis suis, etc. Jansen. August. lib. 3. de gratia
salvatoris cap. 20.
that Augustine never did confess in his writings that Christ died for all men,
none excepted, or that Christ gave himself a ransom, or was crucified for all,
but only for those whom his death profits. But let us see this great light
shining forth in his own expressions Quid est omnis qui audivit a patre and
didicit venit ad me, nisi nullus est qui audiat and discat a patre and non
veniat ad me? si enim omnis qui audivit a patre and didicit venit, profecto
omnis qui non venit non audivit a patre, nec didicit, nam si audisset and
didicisset, veniret. Haec itaque gratia quae occulte humanis cordibus divina
largitate tribuitur a nullo duro cord respuitur, ideo quippe tribuitur, ut
cordis duritia primitus auferatur, omnis qui audivit a patre venit ad me. Sicut
integre loquimur cum de aliquo Magistro qui in Civitate solus est dicimus,
omnes iste hic literas docet, non quia omnes discunt, sed quia nemo nisi ab
illo discit, etc. August. de praedest. Sanctorum, Cap. 11.
whereas our Savior Christ says, John 6.45. And they shall be all taught of
God, Every man ergo that has heard and learned of the Father comes unto me.
What is (says Augustine) every one that has heard and learned of the Father
comes to me, but that no man hears or learneth of the Father, and does not
come to me; for if every one who has heard and learned come, then surely
whoever does not come, has not heard of the Father and learned. For if he had
heard and learned, he would come. And this grace cannot be refused by any hard
heart, because it is ergo given that hardness of heart may be first taken away;
yet (says he) all are said to be taught of God, as a Schoolmaster is said to
teach all the children of the Town, not because all learn of him, but because
none learnes but of him; for God teaches all to come to Christ, not because all
come, Cum audimus and in sacris literis le gimus quod Deus velit omnes homines
salvos fieri, ita intelligimus, tanquam diceretur nullum hominem salvum fieri,
nisi quem salvum fieri ipse voluerit, non quod nullus sit hominum nisi que^
salvum fieri velit, sed quod nullus fiat nisi quem velit; aut certe sic dictum
est quia omnes homines vult salvos fieri non quod nullus hominum esset quem
salvum fieri nollet, sed ut omnes homines omne genus humanum intelligamus per
quascunque differentias distributum, reges, privatos, nobiles, ignobiles,
sublimes, humiles, doctos, indoctos, etc. August. Enchirid ad Laurent. cap.
103. De praedestinat. cap. 11. De corrept. and gratia, cap. 14.
August. Tract. in Evang. Joan. 55. Tract. in Evang. Joan. 87. Tract. in Evang.
Joan. 1. and 5.


but because none come otherwise. And in this sense (says he) God would have
all to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. For if God would
teach them unto whom the cross of Christ is foolishness, they also would come,
for he neither does deceive nor is deceived that says, All that have heard and
learned of the Father come unto me. And again, whereas its said 1 Timothy 2. Who
will have all men to be saved, that is (says Augustine) all sorts of men. Not
that there is no man whom he would not have saved, for he would not work
miracles before them, who would have repented if he had wrought them. In the
13. of John its said, Christ began to wash his Disciples feet, even Judas his
feet also (says Augustine) for being to suffer death, he does promise his
service, not only to them for whom he was delivered unto death, but to him that
delivered him unto death. In the 15th of John Christ says to his Disciples, If
ye were of the world the world would love you. Where (says Augustine) he speaks
of the Church universal, which Christ oftentimes calls the World: As in that
Scripture, God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself; and in that
Scripture, Artic. 1. Quod Dominus noster Jesus Christus non pro omnium hominum
Redemptione sit passus. Respon. Quod ergo ad magnitudinem and potentiam precii,
and quod ad unam pertinet causam generis humani, sanguis Christi Redemptio est
totius mundi, sed qui hoc seculum sine fide Christi, and sine regenerationis
Sacramento pertranseunt, redemptionis aliena sunt; Cum itaque per unam omnium
naturam, omnium causam a Domino nostro in veritate susceptam, redemti recte
omnes dicantut, non tamen omnes captivitate sunt liberati; Redemptionis
proprietas haud dubium penes illos est, de quibus princeps mundi hujus missus
est for as, and jam non vasa diaboli, sed membra Christi sunt. August. liber
refellens articulos fa^so ipsi impositos. Artic. 1. Prosp. ad capit. object.
Vincent. Respons. 1.
The Son of man came not to condemn, but to save the world; and in that
Scripture, We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, who is the
Propitiation, not for our sins only, but for the sins of the whole world. That
is, the Church, so called, because scattered throughout the world. And whereas
he was charged by the Pelagians with denying that Christ suffered for the
Redemption of all men, he plainly gave his sense therein thus. As for the
greatness and suffciency of the price, the blood of Christ is the Redemption of
the whole world; but they that die without Faith and Regeneration, are aliens
from Redemption All men (says he) are rightly said to be redeemed in respect
of one nature of all, and the one cause of all, which the Lord did truly take
upon him, and yet all are not not delivered from captivity. The propriety of
Redemption without doubt belongs unto them out of whom the Prince of this
world is cast, who are not vessels of Satan, but the members of Christ. And
herein Prosper does totidem verbis concur with him. This ergo was the sense of
the Orthodox (for by Augustins judgment you may measure the rest) in those
times.

In the 8th Century this truth of Christ was defended and maintained by
Gotteschalchus, and for which, with other truths of the same concernment, he
suffered imprisonment 20. years, as appears by the Articles which his
Adversaries charged him with, accused him of, and condemned him for, viz. 1.
Sicut Deus quosdam ad vitam aeternam, ita quosdam praedestinavit ad morte^
eternam.

2. Non vult Deus omnes homines salvos fieri, sed tantum eos qui salvantur,
quia quaecunque voluit dominus fecit in coelo and in terra.

3. Non pro totius mundi redemptione, i. e. non pro omnium hominum salute and
redemptione Dominus and salvator noster Jesus Christus est crucifixus, and
mortuus, sed tantum pro his qui salvantur.

Baron Annual. anno dom. 848

Ca^vis. Crono^og. anno dom. 848.

Vossii histor. Pelag. lib. 7. Ps. 4.

Vsheri histor. Gotteschal. p. 15.


that he said, that as God has predestined some to eternal life, so he has
predestined some to eternal death. 2. That God would not have all men to be
saved, but only those that are saved; because whatever God wills, that does
he in heaven and in earth. 3. That Christ did not dye for all, but only those
that are saved. Another Article there was also about the Trinity, but that was
not insisted on. His great Adversaries were Rabanus Maurus, and Hinomarus; but
though he was condemned by a Synod of their packing, yet he was defended and
justified by Remigius, Flerus, Prudentius, Strabus, the Church of Lions, and
the Valentine Council in these particulars. As for the truth now in hand
Remigius says De dominici sanguinis pretio, quod pro his tantum qui credere
voluerint datum sit, ma^ifesta est beatorum Patrum sententia, quam iste (ut
putamus) and legendo didicerat and damnare metuebat. Usher. histor. Gottes. p.
64.
concerning the price of Christ's blood, that it is given only for those that
shall believe is the manifest sentence of the blessed Fathers, which
Gotteschalcus (as we think) in reading has learned and dares not condemn: the
Church of Lions says Admoneamus ut vigilanter and fideliter pensare studeant;
ne sort minus considerando quod dicendum erat, contra fidem and conscientiam
suam talia dixerint and scripserint, nec ipsos qui haec dixerunt credere
putamus, quod pro iis in sua impietate mortuis and aeterno jam judicio
condemnatis dominus passus esse credendus sit; si enim pro eis cur non pro
diabolo? Usher. Histor. Gottes. p. 80.
whilst men say that Christ died for all men, let them take heed that they do
not speak against their own consciences; for can they believe that Christ died
for them that were dead, and in hell before Christ was born? then why may it
not be as well said that Christ died for the Devils? and says the Valentine
Council De redemptione sanguinis Christi propter nimium errorem qui de hac
causa exortus est, ita ut quidam (sicut eorum scripta indicant) etiam pro illis
impiis, qui a mundi exordio usque ad passionem domini in sua impietate mortui
and aeterna damnatione puniti sunt, effusum definiunt: contra illud
Propheticum, ero mors tua o mors, ero morsus tuus inferne. Illud nobis
simpliciter and fideliter tenendum and docendum placet, juxta Evangelica^ and
Apostolica^ veritate^, quod pro illis hoc datum pretium teneamus, de quibus
ipse dominus noster dicit; sicut Moses exaltavit serpentem in deserto, ita
exaltari oporter filium hominis, ut omnis qui credit in ipso non pereat, sed
habeat vitam aeternam, sic enim Deus dilexit mundum, etc. and Apostolus inquit,
semel oblatus est ad multorum exhaurienda peccata. Council. Valentin. sub Pap.
Leo 4. cap. 4. Binius Tom. 6. Voss. histor. Pelag. lib. 7. p. 4. Usher. hist.
Got. p. 181.
concerning the Redemption of Christ's blood, by reason of the exceeding errors
that have grown in respect thereof, insomuch as some (as your own writings
declare) do hold, that it was shed even for those ungodly ones, who from the
beginning of the world until the passion of our Lord were dead in their
ungodliness, and punished with eternal damnation, contrary to the saying of the
Prophet, O death I will be thy death, and thy sting O hell. We do decree that
it ought simply and faithfully to be held and taught according to the
Evangelical and Apostolical truth, that this ransom was given for them of whom
the Lord himself says, Even as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness,
so must the Son of man be lifted up, that every one that believes in him may
not perish but have eternal life. So God loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that every one that believes in him might not perish, but have
everlasting life. And the Apostle says, Christ was once offerred for the
taking away of the sins of many. And in those days was the ordinary Gloss
compiled (for Strabus Vsheri histor. Gottes. p. 433.

Calvis Chronol. 840.

Possevini Apparat. Strabus.

Sixtus Senens. biblioth,

Qui omnes vult salvos fieri, non quod nullus hominum esset, quem salvum fieri
nollet, qui virtutes miraculorum facere noluit apud eos, quos dicit acturos
suisse poenitentiam si fecisset; sed ut omnes homines, omne hominum genus
intelligamus per quascunque differentias distributum. Gloss. ordin. in 1 Timothy 2.

Ut gustaret mortem pro omnibus, praedestinatis, vel omnibus hominibus
generaliter, quia omnibus pretium sufficit. Gloss. ordin in 2 Heb.


the great admirer of Gotteschalcus was the compiler of it) which speaking in
the very words of Augustine on Tim. 1.2. says; Whereas it is said that God
would have all men to be saved, the meaning is not that there is none whom God
would not have saved, but all, that is, all sorts of men. So Heb. 2. Who tasted
death for every man, or all men, that is, (says the common Gloss) for all that
are predestined, or for all men generally, because the price is sufficient
for all. Neither can it be thought that the ordinary Gloss should hold forth
any other doctrine, seeing the Compiler thereof was so great an Admirer of
Gotteschalchus, and his Doctrine. Now who does not know that this ordinary
Gloss has been generally received in the Church of God, especially in those
times wherein it was made and published.

In the 10th and 11th Centuries this truth lived, and was owned by Anselmus
Cantuariensis, for he says Pro omnibus mortuis mortuus est unus Christus, i.
e. nullum habens omnino peccatum, qui solus hostia sufficiens suit pro peccatis
omnium. Anselm in 2 Corinthians. 5.

Sic justo judicio etiam per unius justitiam venientem in omnes homines electos
itum est in justificationem, etc. quae justificatio transit in omnes homines,
non quia omnes homines veniant ad gratiam justificationis Christi, cum ram
multi alienati ab illa in aeternum moriantur, sed quia omnes qui renascuntur in
justificationem non nisi per Christum renascuntur. Sicut omnes qui nascuntur in
condemnationem non nisi per Adam nascuntur. Ideo dictum est omnes and omnes:
eosdem autem omnes postea multos dicit. Anselm. in hom. 5.

Sed per omnes homines omne genus hominum intelligamus per quascunque
differentias distributum. Anselm. in 1 Timothy 2.


that Christ is said to die for all men that he was a sacrifice sufficient for
the sins of all; and whereas the Apostle says, As by the offense of one
judgment came upon all to condemnation, even so by that righteousness of one
the free gift came upon all to justification of life, that is, (says Anselm)
not because all men do come to justification of life by Christ, (but because
none are justified but by Christ) as none are generated but by Adam; and
therefore it is said All and All; but these all are by the Apostle called many,
and are the Elect. And whereas it is said, who would have all men to be saved,
that is (says he) not because there are none whom God would not have saved,
but by All we are to understand all sorts of men. By the Waldenses, who say in
their confession The History of the Waldenses translated out of French by
Sampson Leunard. lib. 1. cap. 8. cap. 12.
that Christ is our life, and truth, and peace, and justice, Advocate and
Sacrifice, who died for the salvation of all those that believe, and whose
Doctrine was the same with Calvin's. By Peter Lombard, who says also with
Augustine Ideoque cum audimus, and in sacris literis legimus, quod velit omnes
homines salvos fieri, ita intelligere debemus, tanqua^ diceretur nullum hominem
salvum fieri, nisi quem salvum fieri ipse voluerit, non quod nullus sit hominum
nisi quem salvum fieri velit, etc. Pet. Lombard senten. lib. 1. did. 46.
that whereas it is said, God would have all to be saved, that is to be
understood of all sorts of men, not that there are none whom God would not have
saved. And by the Interlineary Gloss, which was compiled by Anselmus Anselmus
Laudunensis glossam interlin. composuit.

Sixtus Senensis bibliothe. Anselmus. Possevin Apparat. -- Anselmus.
Filius hominis venit ut daret animam suam redemptionem pro multis, non pro
omnibus sed pro his qui credere voluerunt. Gloss interlin. in Marc. 10.

Tho. Bradwardinus Doctor profundus.

Gre. Ariminensis Scholasticorum subtilissimus.

Jo. Wiclephus Anglorum decus, Bobemiae desiderium, Reformatorum facile
Princeps.

Jo. Huss. Martyr and Propheta.


Laudunensis, which says that Christ gave himself a ransom for many; that is,
not for all, but for such as should believe. And who does not know also that
the Interlineary Gloss was generally received?

In the 13th and 14th Centuries lived Thomas Bradwardinus, Gregorius
Ariminensis, John Wicleffe, John Husse, and Hierom of Prague. Bradwardine
makes it his work and business throughout his Book de causa Dei, to prove and
demonstrate the immutability and impedibility of the will of God, that Gods
will and decrees are absolute and inconditionate, and the efficacy of grace
determining man's will, against the Pelagians and Semi-Pelagians. Gregorius
Ariminensis lays down 5 Propositions 1. Nullus est praedestinatus propter
bonum usum lib. arbitrii quem Deus scivit illum habiturum, qualitercunque
consideretur bonitas ejus.

2. Nullus est praedestinatus quia prastitutus finaliter sore, sine obice
habituali gratiae.

3. Quemcunque Deus praedestinavit, gratis tantummodo and misericorditer
praedestinavit.

4. Nullus est reprobatus propter malum usum liberi arbitrii quem Deus
praevidit illum habiturum.

5. Nullus est reprobatus quia praevisus fore finaliter cum obice gratiae, sive
originali, sive actuali.

Gregor. Ariminens. in senten. fol. 162.

Deus non vult omnes homines salvos fire, and ad verbum Apostoli dico, sicut
dicit Augustinus, intelligendum est secundum distributionem accommodam; ut sit
sensus, deus vult omnes homines salvos fieri, id est omnes homines qui
salvantur salvos fieri, null^s enim nisi eo volente salvatur; vel in praed^cato
verbo fit distributio, non pro sing^lis generum, sed pro generibus singulorum,
quia de quolibet gene^e and statu hominum vult aliquos salvos fieri. Greg.
Ariminens. fol. 165.


1. That no man is predestined for the good use of free will, which God
fore-knew that he should have. 2. That no man is predestined because he was
fore-known to continue to the end without let to habitual grace. 3. That
whomsoever God has predestined, he has mercifully and most freely
predestined. 4. That no man is reprobated for the ill use of free will, which
God did foresee he would be guilty of. 5. That no man is reprobated because he
was foreknown to have finally an impediment of grace, whether original or
actual. And (says he) God would not have every particular man to be saved. And
whereas the Apostle says, God would have all men to be saved. John Wicleffe
was of the same judgment with John Husse, and John Husse says expressly, that
Christ is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world in regard of
sufficiency, but for the Elect only in regard of efficacy Non tantum pro
nostris sed etiam pro totius mundi: scil. quantum ad sufficientiam, sed electis
tantum quantum ad efficaciam.

Explicat. Joan Hus in Epist. Jean cap. 2. Hussi opera.




In the 15th and 16th Centuries this truth was maintained and defended by
Luther, Calvin, Beza, Peter Martyr, Musculus, Zanchius, Piscator, Junius,
Rollock, Perkins, Whitaker, Fulk, Cartwright, Pareus, Molineus, Willet, Pemble,
Prideaux, Rivet, Ames, Twisse, the Synod of Dort, and many other of great worth
for learning and holiness, which is so well known, that it needs not my proof.
And thus (good Reader) by this taste you see how this truth has one time after
another descended upon you as your right and inheritance; and will you readily
lose or easily part with your Inheritance?

I shall not use any arguments or reasons to demonstrate this truth, that is
the work of this Treatise; neither shall I endeavor to vindicate all those
Scriptures which are brought to prove Universal Redemption, for that would be
the work of another Treatise: only, whereas it is said in Scripture that Christ
died for all, or for the world, thou may be pleased to consider the ground,
occasion, or rise of these expressions: (...)
In the times of the Old Testament it was said, He (that is, Christ) shall
confirm the Covenant for many, Dan. 9.27. In the English it is, with many; but
in the Hebrew it is, for, or unto many: In Christ's time, whilst he lived on
earth it was said, for many, He gave himself a ransom for many: If you ask the
Merchant himself (says Augustine) who those were that he paid the price for, De
hoc autem precio, quare sit susum, quid interrogamus alium? Redemptor ipse
respondeat dicat ipse mercator, hic est inquit sanguis meus qui pro multis
effundetur in remissionem pecatorum. August. contra Julian. Pelag, lib. 3. cap.
3.
he will tell you, for many, Mar. 10.45. For even the Son of man came to give
his life a ransom for many; not for all, but for many. So Mat. 26.28. Christ
said, This is my blood of the new Testament which is shed for many; not for
all, but for many; but when Christ was risen from the dead, and had sent out
his Apostles to preach the Gospel, not only to the Jews, but to all Nations,
or unto every creature; and when the Gentiles did receive the Gospel, and
believe on Christ, then the Apostles in their Preaching said, God would have
all to be saved, and that Christ died for all, and for the world. Why so? not
because he died for every particular man in the world, but for the Gentiles as
well as the Jews. No sooner therefore did Cornelius a Gentile believe, but the
Apostle Peter says of Christ, He is the Lord of all, Act. 10.36. And Paul
speaking both of Jews and Gentiles, Romans 3.9. says, But now the
righteousness of God is manifested, even the righteousness of God which is by
the faith of Jesus Christ unto all, even upon all them that believe, for there
is no differenee, v. 21, 22. So 1 Timothy 2.3. he says God would have all men to
be saved, v. 4. And Christ gave himself a ransom for all, v. 6. which he
plainly speaks in regard of the Gentiles, for he says in the verse, whereunto
I am ordained a Preacher and an Apostle, a Teacher of the Gentiles, v. 7. So
also 1 John 2. And he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for our sins
only, but also for the sins of the whole world; that is, not for ours only who
are believing Jews, but also for the sins of the Gentiles, the world of the
Gentiles. Thus Cyril interprets the words, because John (says he) was by
Nation a Jew, and lest it should be thought that he taught that Christ was only
a Propitiation for the Jews, saying, Who is the Propitiation for our sins, he
adds Joannes quia natione Judaeus erat, ne existimaretur docuisse, pro
Judaeis tantum Christum propitiationem esse, quando dixit est propitiatio pro
peccatis nostris, adjecit, pro totius etiam mundi peccatis, ut etiam Gentes
significaret.

Cyril. lib. 11. cap. 19.


and for the sins of the whole world, that he might signify the Gentiles. And
you may observe, that when an Epistle is entitled the Epistle General, then it
is directed to the Jews that were scattered up and down throughout the world.
So 1 Pet. 1.1. Peter an Apostle to the strangers scattered through Pontus, etc.
And that Epistle is styled the Catholic, or Epistle General. So also James
1.1. Now this Epistle of John is entitled the Epistle General, and therefore
directed or sent to the Jews scattered throughout the world; and therefore the
Apostle says, who is the propitiation, not for our sins only, who are
believing Jews, but for the sins of the Gentiles, or the whole world. Herein
also our learned Dr. Lightfood will help you with some light, for (says he)
the world was by Jewish Universum terrarum orbis populum distribuunt in (...)
Israelitas and (...) nationes mundi; istam etiam phrasiologiam agnoscit eade^
pagina Evangelica Mat. 6.32. (...) quod Luc. 12.30. est (...) hinc vox mundus
usitatissime pro Gentibus, Joan 3.16, 17. 1 Joan. 2.2. Centur. Chorograph. cap.
1.
Writers divided into Israel, and the Nations of the world; which Phrasiology
the Evangelists do acknowledge, Mat. 6.32. After all these things do the
Nations seek, which Luke 12.30. is the Nations of the world. Hence the word
world (says he) is most ordinarily used for the Gentiles, John 3.16, 17. 1
John 2.2. Now because men do not diligently observe or weigh the Ground and
Rise of these expressions, they are mistaken into the Doctrine of Universal
Redemption. Neither shall I say any thing in answer to those reasons that are
ordinarily brought to prove the universality of Redemption, and sufficiency of
grace given to all. Bellarmine himself has said enough; who after he had
earnestly labored to prove a sufficiency of grace given to all, because else
all men would not be capable of admonitions, exhortations, and reprehensions,
or of Gods displeasure for their sins, he grants two Propositions. The one is
this, Sit jam rertia Propositio, nulla esset in Deo iniquitas, si non solum
aliquibus, sed etiam omnibus hominibus auxilium sufficiens ad salutem negaret,
haec certissima est apud omnes qui ex divinis literis peccatum originale
noverunt; nam cum per peccatum primi hominis nascantur omnes filii irae, nihil
nobis jure debetur nisi poena.

Quarta Propositio: sive detur sufficiens auxilium omnibus, sive tantum
aliquibus, nos tamen de nullius salute, donec in hac vita fuerit, desperare
debemus, neque ab ullo subtrahere correptionem, exhortationem, and alia
charitatis officia.

Haec quoque sine controversia recipitur ab omnibus; nam tametsi nonnulli ita
desererentur a Deo, omnique auxilio prorsus destituerentur, ut nulla ratione
converti possint; nos tamen qui nescimus qui sunt illi, de omnibus been sperare
debemus, and Apostolum Paulum audire, qui jubet ut cum patientia corripiamus
cos qui resistunt veritati.

Bellarm. de gratia and lib. arbitr. lib. 2. cap. 4.


There should be no iniquity in God though he should deny sufficiency of grace,
not only to some, but unto all; for (says he) seeing by the sin of the first
man we are all born the children of wrath, nothing is due unto us but
punishment.

The other Proposition is this, whether there be a sufficiency of grace or help
given to all, or only to some, we are not to despair of the salvation of any,
while they are in this life; neither are we to withdraw our admonition,
exhortations, or reprehensions. For (says he) though some be forsaken of God,
yet we know them not.

Neither shall I say much in reference to, or of the persons engaged in this
Controversy. I know there are Learned men of both persuasions; only I wish,
That (according to the practice of this Judicious Author) the Controversy may
be so managed, that there be no transgression of the law of peace and
moderation; for as the Church of Lions speaks in this case Qui non tranquille
and pacifice moderatur quod sentir, sed statim paratus est ad contentiones,
dissentiones and scandala; etiamsi non habeat haereticum sensum, certissime
habet haereticum animum: Usher. histor. Gottes. page 77.
he that does not quietly and peaceably moderate his judgment, but is apt to
fall into dissentions and scandals, though he have not an heretical sense, yet
he has an heretical mind. 2. That in the management of this cause there may be
no reflection upon God himself, as to say if it be so, or so, then God is the
Author of sin, or then God is cruel, or not sincere, or not wise, or not just,
etc. for is not God able to make out his justice, wisdom, or sincerity,
though I understand it not? Augustine speaks well unto this matter. In one
Scripture (says he) it is said, God will have mercy on whom he will have
mercy. In another Scripture it is said, He would have all men to be saved
Occurit enim, cur pereant ex his aliqui, cum omnipotens Deus omnes homines
salvos fieri velit, and in aguitionem veritatis venire; deinde cur rursus
induret alios, misertus aliorum, aut quomodo omnes salvos fieri velit homines,
eum ipse nonnullos ne salventur indurer: hoc quantum ad humanam justitiam,
videtur injustum, sed quis ita desipiat, vel potius quis ita blasphemet, ut
dicat de justitia dei lege humanae justitiae disputandum? quae profecto si
justitiae dei adversatur injusta est; ab illo enim qui sum justus est, omne
quod qualitercunque justum est manare manifestum est. -- Non est ergo de illa
majestate divinae sapientiae, humanae vanitatis arbitrio disputandum. August.
de praedestinat. and gratia. cap. 2.
it may be some will say, why then do any perish, if God would have all to be
saved? and why does he then harden some, and show mercy to others? or how does
he will that all should be saved, seeing he hardens some that they may not be
saved? This as to man's justice seems unjust; but who is so mad, or rather, who
does so blaspheme, as to dispute of Gods justice by the rule of humane justice?
or who will measure Gods wisdom by the wisdom of man? We are not to dispute
of the Majesty of Divine Wisdom, by the vanity of humane wisdom; for the
wisdom of the flesh is enmity to God.

3. That there may be no reflections upon men's persons that are now living;
Perit judicium cum res transit in affectum.
for when it comes to personal reflection, an affection and heat is begotten,
and when affection prevails, the matter and judgment is lost. The Apostle Paul
says, But foolish talking and jesting, let it not be once named among you, as
becomes Saints, Ephesians. 5.3, 4. The word for jesting is (...), which by
Aristotle Aristot. Ethic. lib. 4. cap. 3.
is used for the virtue of urbanity and facetious deportment; but because this
facetiousness does often degenerate into evil, he says the word is used for
dicacity and scurrility, and so it is forbidden by the Apostle in this
Scripture. No man is to make himself or others merry with the sins or reproach
of another. This kind of jesting in Print does neither commend a man's cause,
Qui talibus dictis scatent (...) graecis, ridicularii latinis; talia vero
personam graviorem, qualis est hominis Christiani, non decent. Grotius in locum.
nor become his person, especially if he be a Minister of the Gospel. Surely
Gods cause has no need of our passions or vanities.

4. That there may be no wrong done to the persons that are dead, by making
them to speak when they are dead what they never thought while they lived, or
what is contrary to the general scope and sense of their Writings; for this (if
willingly done) will be found at the great day to be no better then false
witness: But if there shall any word or line drop from their pen that may
occasion such a Citation, let men take the Counsel of the Church of Lions, who
farther speaks thus in this case De caeteris vero qui in ipsa infidelitate
atque impietate sua perseverantes, sunt perituri; si de Scripturae sanctae
autoritate, quod etiam pro talibus dominus passus sit, certissimis and
clarissimis testimoniis nobis demonstrare potuerunt boni viri qui talia
definierunt, dignum omnino est ut credamus and nos: Si vero non potuerint,
cessent contendere pro eo, quod non legunt; pude^t eos definire quod nesciunt,
timeant statuere quod nullum Sanctorum Patrum Concilium, nullum Apostolicae
sedis Pontificum, nullum Ecclesiasticorum Dogmatum decretum hactenus inveniant
statuisse: quod etsi quid a sanctis and venerabilibus Ecclesiae Doctoribus vel
scriptum vel dictum, unde hujusmodi sensus occasio sumi posse videatur,
inveniant; salva eorum debita Reverentia cohibeant se potius, and submittant se
humiliter divinae auctoritati, and rem tam obscuram, tamque inusitatam, divinae
reservent humiliter Majestati. Vsheri histor. Gotteschal. page 81.
As for the rest (say they) which having persevered in their infidelity, and
perished in their ungodliness, if it can be proved by Testimony of Scripture
that Christ died for them, it is fit that we also should believe it; but if men
cannot so prove it, then let them cease to contend for that which they read
not, let them be ashamed to define that which they know not, and let them be
afraid to affirm that which no Council of Fathers, none of the Apostolical Sea,
and no Ecclesiastical Decree has affirmed or established; and if they find any
word in the holy and Reverend Doctors of the Church from whence the occasion of
such a sense may arise, let them rather contain themselves, humbly submitting
to Divine Authority, and refer themselves in so obscure a matter to the Divine
Majesty:

Wherefore (good Reader) being compassed about with so great a cloud of
witnesses, I am not unwiling to bear my Testimony also, though of small moment,
unto this Truth presented to thee, and to accompany my Reverend and Learned
Brother to the Press. Now the Lord give thee an heart to receive this and all
other truth in the love thereof.

Thine in the service of the Gospel, WILLIAM BRIDGE.
Febr. 15. 1658. Yarmouth.
Errata.
1. Treatise.
PAge 2. line 5. r. there propounded. p. 7. l. 9. r. acknowledge. p. 36. l. 6.
r. speciatim. p. 37. l. 29. r: possession. p. 38. l. 5. m. r. crederent. ibid.
l. 23. m. r: in uno. l. 28. r. the main. p. 39. l. 2. r. censured. p. 52. l.
16. r. Texts. ibid. m. r. counterpoized. p. 59. l. 8. r. so as to. ibid. l. 28.
r: Abrahami. p. 63. l. 12. r. in it self. p. 65. l. 12. r. this is. p. 87. l.
3. r. as our. p. 97. l. 12. r. Assurance. p. 101. l. 2. r. chose. p. 102. l. 1.
r. rest a going. p. 104. l. 5. m. r. dominicum. ibid. l. 10. r. coelestem. p.
106. l. 17. r. ascertain. p. 107. l. 16. r. immerge. p. 111. l. 1. m. r.
poculum. l. 18. r. himself. l. 25. r. stave those. p. 112. l. 14. r. to do. p.
116. l 13. r is it. p. 120. l 18. r. fastening. p. 131. l. 20. r. and Tyranny
of. p. 145. l. 24. ra. r. abrupit. p. 150. m. r. arietino. p. 152. l 11. del.
of. p. 161 l. 14. r. the praise. p. 163. l. 6. r. and leaning. p. 164. l. 19.
r. for their. ibid. l. 24. r. and fiery. p. 166. l 20. r. it becomes. p. 167.
l. 20. r. thoughtful. p. 169 l. 8. r. purifying. l. 13. r. (...). p. 170. l. 9.
r. (...) p. 171. l. 27. r. inquinamentum. l. 30. r. (...). p. 175. l. 2. r.
Mal. 3. p 176. l. 24. r. fining-pot. p. 179. l 10. r. the Element. p. 182. l.
12. r. he here. p. 187. l. 15. r. I spoke. p. 192. l 31. r Segullah. p 200. m
r. fit to be. p. 204. l. 5. r. Absconditi. p. 211. l 4 m r. Apostolus. p 218.
l. 28. r. (...). p. 225. l. 8. r. (...). p. 228. l. 9. r. (...). p. 237. l. 23.
r. all thy. p. 246. l. 22. r. to a Disciple. p. 251. l. 14. r. (...), Zelus. l.
15. r. (...) ibid. m. r. Capessentem. l. 31, r. (...). p. 152. l. 13. r. it is
written. p. 256. l. 6. r. makes it p. 269. l. 7. r. from whence. ibid. m. r.
(...) p 270. l. 3. r. this service. p. 276. l. 19. r. to this. p 277. l. 11.
del. it. p. 287. l. 10. r. mocking of God. p. 295. l. 1. r. be drawn.

2. Treatise.
PAge 4 l 4. r. find him. p. 7. l. 21. del. and. p. 8. l. 5. r. in all. ibid l.
28. r. Thine they were (says our Savior -- p 11. l. 9. m r. hic cum affectu
l. 11. r. previous. p. 22. l. 8. r. profess. p. 31. l. 14. r. to the. p. 35. l.
26. r. may be. p. 47. l. 4. r. in the like.

Mr. Brinsley's Gospel-Marrovv.

GOSPEL-MARROW. THE Great God giving himself for the Sons of Men.
TIT: 2.14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity,
and purify unto himself ae peculiar people, zealous of good works.


IN the Verse next but one precedent to the Text, Coherence.
we have a practical Lesson, held forth in, and by the Gospel; a Lesson which
all those, who expect to have any share, or interest in that Grace of God which
brings Salvation, are to learn and take forth. This we have there set down,
first Negatively, showing them what they are to eschew, and abandon [That
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts,] then Positively, directing them what to
practice, how to live, [we should live soberly, and righteously, and Godly in
this present world.] And what is thence propounded, in the two verses following
we have prosecuted and pressed; and that by a double Argument, each serving as
an effectual Motive to put Christians upon, and to continue them in, such a
Godly and Religious course. The former taken from the second coming of Christ,
his coming in Glory, at which time they who so live shall receive the end of
their faith, even that blessed hope, eternal Salvation, which they not only
may, but ought to look for [ looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Crist, v. 13.] The latter
from his first coming, his coming in the flesh, and there doing and suffering
what he did; which as it was for them, for their benefit, their Salvation, and
so lays a great engagement upon them, so it was for this very end, that he
might redeem and deliver them, as from the guilt, and punishment, so from the
power and dominion of sin; as Justifying, so sanctifying of them. This you have
in the words now read [ who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us, etc.]

A passage, of which we may say, (as one has done before us) singula verba
singularem emphasin habent, Heming. Com: in Loc.
there is scarce a word to be found in it, which has not a special Emphasis,
somewhat that is well worthy the taking notice of. Division.
Reduce we the Particulars here held forth to these 4. Principals. 1. Donum or
Donativum, the Gift here said to be given, which is, Christ. 2. Donans, the
Giver and bestower of that Gift, which is also, Christ himself, [who gave
himself.] 3. Donati, the Persons on whom this gift is bestowed, us, [who gave
himself for us.] 4. Finis donationis, the end, wherefore this gift was thus
given, which is double, 1. Redemption, [That he might redeem us from all
iniquity,] 2. Purification, [And purify unto himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works;] These are the Principal Branches of the Text, each of
which we shall find yielding us some fruit well worth the gathering Deal we
with them severally; beginning with the first.

Donum, or Donativum, 1. Part. The Gift the great God and our Savior Jesus
Christ.
the Gift or Donative, the thing which is here said to be given, which is (as
we may learn from the verse foregoing, to which this relates,) the great God,
and our Savior Jesus Christ; i. e. the great God, even our Savior Jesus
Christ. So the particle [(...), And] (as I showed you in opening of those
words) is sometimes to be construed, not disjunctively, but exegitically; [And]
that is, [Even.] So our own Translation in some 1 Cor. 15.24. 2 Cor. 1.3.
places rightly renders it; and I know not why it might not have done so here.
He it is that is here said to be given. Tht great God, even our Savior Jesus
Christ, who gave himself.]

Quest. Quest. How God is said to give himself to death.
What then? did God, the Son of God, give himself after this manner that is
here spoken of? Did God suffer, Dye?

Answ. Answ. Communication of Properties in Christ. Observandum hoc loco
exemplum illius Tropi seu modi loquendi, qui a veteribus Ecclesiae doctoribus
nominatus est (...). Piscat. Obser. in loc.
Not so, the Godhead being impassible: But that Person who was truly God, did.
So Piscator here explains it, looking upon this as a Tropical manner of Speech,
known to the Ancients by the name of (...), a Communication of Properties,
which is, when that which is proper to one Nature in Christ, is attributed (not
to the other nature, as this is by some mistaken, but) unto his person
denominated from the other nature. Instances hereof are obvious, some of them
cited by him; where sometimes that which is proper to the Divine nature is
attributed to the person denominated from the Humane. Thus our Savior speaking
to Nicodemus, John 3.13. he tells him, No man has ascended up into heaven, but
he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man, which is in heaven. Not
that Christ as man was then in heaven, or before that time had been: But as God
he had been, and then was, filling heaven and earth with his presence; which he
there attributes to his Person denominated from his humane nature. And so
again, speaking to his Disciples, Joh. 6.62. What, and if (says he) ye shaell
see the Son of man ascending up where he was before? Not that Christ ever was
in heaven as man, before his Ascension, but as God he was. And thus on the
other hand, that which is proper unto the Manhood is sometimes attributed to
the Person denominated from the Godhead. So Acts 20.28. it is said, that God
(viz. the Son of God) purchased the Church with his own blood; And 1 Cor. 2.8.
it is said of the Jews, that they Crucified the Lord of Glory; that is the Son
of God, who is called the God of Glory, Acts 7.2. being as God, coequal with
his Father in Majesty and glory. Not that he suffered as God, but that Person
who was also truly God, suffered as Man. And so the aforesaid Author here
looks upon this Text, where it is said, [The great God gave himself,] viz.
unto death. This did he, Qui Deus, sed non Qua Deus; He that was God, though
not as God; this being a thing proper to the Humane Nature, thus to suffer and
Dye; Only here it is attributed to the Person of Christ denominated from his
other Nature, his Godhead; The great God gave himself; i. e. that Person who
was both God and Man gave himself as Man.

But I see no just cause why we should thus straighten the Text, The whole
Person of Christ the Gift given for the Sons of Men.
restraining that to one Nature in Christ, which here belongs to the whole
Person. So much the words clearly import [The great God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ;] that is, Jesus Christ God and Man; the former denoting his Divinity,
the latter his Humanity, both together his whole Person; which is properly the
Gift here spoken of; whole Christ.

Obs. Christ mediator according to both natures, as God-man.
Thus is he said to be Mediator betwixt God and Man, not only according to one,
but both his Natures; Not only according to his Humanity, as Maen (as
Romanists, and some others would have it,) but also according to his Divinity,
as (...), God-Man. So much may convincingly be inferred and concluded from
those forecited Texts, where it is said, that God purchased his Church with his
own blood; and that the Lord of glory was crucified. Plainly asserting the
Godhead of Christ, to have an interest in this great work of Mediatorship,
which if it had not had, the Human Nature, as it had not been par oneri, able
to stand under such a burden as was laid upon it, the sins of the world, so
much less par operi, able for such a work, to make satisfaction to an infinite
Justice. It was indeed the Manhood which suffered, but it was the Godhead that
supported it in those sufferings, and gave validity to them, making that blood
to be of such an infinite value. Divinitas sine Humanitate and humanitas sine
Divinitate non est mediatrix, sed inter Divinitatem solam and humanitatem solam
est humana divinitas and divina humanitas August. Homil. de ovibus, c. 11 The
Communion betwixt the two Natures in Christ. In tantam unitatem ab ipso
conceptu virginis Deitas and Humanitas connexa sunt, ut nec sine Homine divina,
nec sine Deo humana agerentur, Leo. Epi. 81. Objection from 1 Timothy 2:5.
answered.
So as we may safely conclude (what Augustine has long since done before us,)
that, as it was not the Divinity without the Humanity, so neither was it the
Humanity without the Divinity, that undertook and effected this great work of
Mediatorship betwixt God and Man. But betwixt the Divinity alone, and the
Humanity alone ( i. e. betwixt God and Man) was interposed the humane Divinity,
and divine Humanity, (i. e. Christ as God-man.) Each nature contributing what
was congruous and agreeable to it, for the effecting of this great work of
Reconciliation. Such a Communion there was betwixt the two natures from their
first union, that the one did not act without the other, not the Divine without
the Humane, nor yet the Humane without the Divine; (which some of our
adversaries in some cases are enforced to acknowledged.)

As for what is by them alleged from that obvious text commonly taken up in
this cause, 1 Timothy 2.5. where it is said, There is one Mediator betwixt God and
Man, the man Christ Jesus, it is soon and easily answered. True it is, Christ
who was truly Man is this Mediator, but not Qua homo, not only as Man. Even as
before it was said in that other Text, that God shed his blood, Deus, sed non
qua Deus; He that was God, but not as God. Both Natures being personally united
did mutually contribute to this great work: whilst the one properly suffered,
the other (as is said) supported it in suffering, and gave value to those
sufferings.

Let it then be concluded as a truth clearly and convincingly held forth by
this Text, that whole Christ, Christ God and Man, is the Gift here spoken of.
[The great God, even our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself.]

Lo here then the Gift of Gifts, Obs. The Gift of Gifts Jesus Christ.
the greatest Gift, that ever was bestowed upon any Creature. Such was the Lord
Jesus. Thence called by himself, the Gift of God, Joh. 4.10. If thou knew
the Gift of God (says he to the Samaritan woman;) (...), Donum illud (as Beza
rightly renders it) that Gift, Istud (...) accipiendum est pro exegesi: Beza
Gr. Annot. in Loc.
meaning himself, as the sequel explains it, [ And who it is thaet says unto
thee, etc.] which words are most fitly looked upon as exegetical, Expository to
the former, showing what Gift he there spoke of, viz. himself; who may well be
called that Gift, being (as I sald) the Gift of Gifts, a Gift not to be
parallelled.

R.
That it is so will easily and plainly appear, if we do but consider,

1. A gift in it self invaluable.
1. The value of the Gift it self; wherein it infinitely exceeds all other
gifts. As for other gifts, how rich soever, yet they are but Creature-gifts;
this gift is the Creator himself; The great God gave himself.

2. Most beneficial to others.
2. The great benefit which accrueth to those to whom this gift is given. As for
other gifts, they are oftimes (...), Gift-less gifts; though it may be of much
worth and value in themselves, yet of no great use to the parties that are
possessed of them; nay sometimes proving prejudicial to them, as the Preacher
says of Riches, which are often kept for the hurt of their owners, Eccl. 5.13.
So is it not with this Gift; which as it is of infinite value in it self, so of
unspeakable benefit to those to whom it is given, they being hereby made happy
for ever. Other gifts a man may enjoy and yet perish with them; As Peter said
to Simon Magus, when he offered him a gift, Thy money perish with thee, Act.
8.20. Not so where this gift is given and received. So God loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him should not
perish, but have everlasting life, Joh. 3.16. In this Gift, all other gifts are
as it were bound up; So as they who are interested herein shall not want any
other gift, which may any ways conduce to their happiness. How shall not God
with him (with Christ) also freely give us all things? (says the Apostle,)
Romans 8.32. all things necessary and expedient. Other gifts are but accessaries,
this the Principal.

Applic. Applica. All seek after this Gift.
O then let all of us look out for our share in this Gift! Gifts, if of value,
and profitable, they are things which nature inclines men to look after; and
that too often in an inordinate manner, and way. Every one loves gifts (says
the Prophet Isai concerning the Princes of Judah) Isai. 1.23. O that grace may
incline all our hearts to be in love with this Gift! As for other gifts, some
of them are not to be loved, but hated. He that hates gifts shall live (says
the wiseman) Prove. 15.27. speaking of Bribes, which oft-times prove baneful to
the receivers of them; whereas tbose upright Judges who refuse them, live in
grace and favor with God and men. And for other Gifts, gifts from men, though
happily they may lawfully be received, yet sometimes they are better refused
than accepted. So are those Gifts which Princes sometimes bestow upon their
favorites, upon whom they confer great Honors, and Dignities, and Estates;
All which when offered by King Belshazzar to Daniel, the story tells us they
were refused by him, Let thy gifts be to thy self O King (says he) Dan. 5.17.
But lo, here is a Gift, which whosoever receives, shall never have cause to
repent him of it. A Gift which alone is able to make him perfectly happy, and
that unto all Eternity. O let all of us look after this Gift; not contenting
our selves to hear that there is such a Gift given to, and for the Sons of men,
but every of us labor to assure our interest in it; to make this sure, that
Christ is given for us, and to us; which how it may be done, I shall (God
willing) show you hereafter. Such a Gift is Jesus Christ.

Quest. Quest. How Christ was given for the Sons of men.
But how was this Gift given? or how did Christ give himself for the Sons of
men?

Ans. To this it may be answered, given he was for them throughout his whole
course; Answ. He was through his whole course.
In his Incarnation, Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession.
All which were, and are for their sakes.

1. So was his Incarnation, 1. In his Incarnation.
wherein he gave himself to be made Man; The word was made flesh, Joh. 1.14.
that is, the Son of God, the substantial word of his Father, by whom he
declared his will to the Church, as our minds are made known to others by our
words, he was made man, by taking the nature of man into a personal union with
his Godhead. Thus was he given to us, as a man that gives himself in marriage
to another whom he loves. Thus did the Son of God, out of his love to the Sons
of men, he (as it were) married himself to their nature, taking it into an
indissoluble union with his Godhead. This he did in his Conception.

2. And (secondly) in his Birth. 2. In his Birth.
To us (or for us) a Child is born, to us a Son is given, Isai. 9.6.

3. And (thirdly) in his Life. 3. In his Life.
Being born for us, he lived for us, throughout the whole course of his life
devoting himself to the seeking of our good, our benefit. To which end he
willingly subjected himself unto that Law, whereof, as God, he was Lord. God
sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the Law, Gal. 4.4. that is,
subjected to it; which he was, as to the Moral, so to the Ceremonial Law; both
which were fulfilled in, and by him. It becomes us to fulfill all
righteousness, Mat. 3.15. I am not come to destroy the Law, but to fulfill, Mat.
5.17. So he did the Ceremonial Law, which had the full accomplishment in him.
And so he did the Moral Law, which was fulfilled by him, by his exact
observation of it, and perfect obedience to it: which was done, not only in
reference to himself, but others; that so, The righteousness of the Law might
be fulfilled in us, (as the Apostle has it, Romans 8.4.) though not by us,
(which it could not be, being now made weak through the flesh (as the verse
there foregoing has it,) not able to justify man before God, in as much as it
could not be kept and fulfilled by him in this corrupted state,) yet in us,
through the imputation of Christ's Active, as well as Passive obedience unto us.
Thus, as by one man's disobedience (viz. of the first Adam) many were made
sinners, so by the obedience of one (viz. Christ the second Adam) many are made
righteous, viz. by the Imputation, as of the sin of the one, so the
righteousness of the other (as we have it) Romans 5.19. Thus was he given for us
in his Life.

4. In his Death.
4. And so in his Death; He ossered up himself a sacrifice for us. Of which more
anon.

5. In his Resurrection.
5. In like manner in his Resurrection, he rose again for us. He dyed for all,
that they which henceforth live, should not live unto themselves, but unto him
which dyed for them, and rose again, 2 Cor. 5.15. Those for whom Christ dyed,
he also rose again for them. Being delivered for our offenses, he was raised
again for our Iustiflcation, Romans 4. last; thereby evidencing, and assuring
unto his people, the truth of that reconciliation, which by his death he had
purchased, and obtained for them.

6. In his Ascension.
6. So again in his Ascension, wherein he went before to prepare a place for
us, as he tells his Disciples, Joh. 14.2.

7. And in like manner in his Intercession. 7. In his Intercession.
Being ascended up into heaven, he there sits at the right hand of God his
Father, as our Advocate (as he is called, 1 John 2.1.) to plead our cause. It
is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right
hand of God, who also makes intercession for us, Romans 8.34. Thus has Christ
loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for
a sweet smelling savor (as the Apostle sets it forth) Ephesians. 5.2. An Offering
and a Sacrifice, (...), Christ an Offering and a Sacrifice.
alluding to those two kind of Altars and Offerings which were in the Temple,
the bloody sacrifice offered upon the Brazen Altar, and the Incense offering
upon the Golden. Thus did Christ give himself for his people, as a Sacrifice in
his death, so an offering in his Intercession, perfuming their prayers with
that sweet Incense, the precious odours of his merits, (as that Text is
commonly expounded, Rev. 8.3.)

All these ways may Christ be said to have given himself for us. Christ's
giving himself in his Death here properly intended.
Each of these tending to our good, our benefit. But there is one of them which
is here principally eyed and intended in the Text, viz. his giving himself a
Sacrifice, which he did in and by his death. This is the giving of Christ,
which we so frequently meet with in Scripture. Who gave himself for our sins,
Gal. 1.4. I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself
for me, Gal. 2.20. Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for it, Ephesians. 5.25.
All which (with many the like Texts) are to be understood of Christ's giving
himself to death. And so understand we it here in the Text, [who gave himself
for us,] viz. Dying for us, (as we have it; Romans 5.8.)

Christ's Death fitly called a giving himself for us. It being
Which may well be called a Giving himself for us; In as much as what Christ
herein did, he did it for us; (...); Nostro bono, and nostra vice, both for our
good, and in our stead.

1. For our good, (...); Jesus se morti devovit nostra causa Grot. in Text. The
Socinians sense of the Phrase.
1. For our good, our benefit. So much Socinians will readily yield us, that
Christ in yielding himself to the death, intended chiefly the good of mankind,
suffering for their sakes; viz. that he might first set them an Example; And
secondly, that he might the better know how to compassionate and succor them
in all their sufferings. These are the two principal (if not the only) ends
which they assign of Christ's dying. And there is a truth in each of these.

1. To set us an Example.
1. Christ dyed to set us an Example. So Saint Peter gives it us in express
words, 1 Pet. 2.21. Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we
should follow his steps; which Christians are to do, as in his Active
obedience, learning of him how to do the will of God, which he taught them in
his Life; so in his Passive Obedience, learning of him how to suffer that will,
which he taught them, as in his Life, so specially in his Death.

2. He dyed and suffered what he did, That he might be the more compassionate
to us,
that having experience of such sufferings he might the better know how to pity
and succor others in their sufferings. This also the Apostle clearly holds
forth in that known Text, Heb. 2.18. For in that he himself suffered being
tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted. Christ was tempted,
tried. So he was in his Life, having experiences of many Temptations from
Satan, and sufferings from his Instruments. Being then, as the Prophet calls
him, Is. 53.3. vir dolorum, a man of sorrows. But specially in his death. That
was to him an hour of temptation (as that troublesome time is called, Rev.
3.10.) a time of Trial wherein he was tempted both in Body and Soul, (as I
shall show you anon.) And having been thus tempted he is able to succor them
that are tempted. (...), potest anxiliari, pro potest moveri ad auxiliandum (as
Grotius well interprets it.) Able, that is, the more readily inclined
thereunto, in regard of that experience which himself has had in his own
person. Thus we read of every High Priest, (Cap. 5. v. 2. of that Epistle,)
that he is one who, being taken from among men, can have eompassion on the
ignorant, etc. for that he himself is also compassed with infirmity, (...)
potens, Beza Gr. Annot. in loc. (...) hic rursus ad affectus pronitatem
referendum est. Grot. ibid.
i. e. (...) (as Beza expounds it) aptus and idoneus, one fit and meet to take
compassion. And so is the Lord Jesus, our great High Priest, rendered by his
sufferings. Having in his own person had experience of them he is made more
compassionate toward others in like condition; as the same Apostle has it,
Heb. 4.15. We have not an High Priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling
of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without
sin. All this we acknowledge to be truth.

2: Christ giving himself in our stead, as our Surety:
But not the whole truth. Christ as he dyed for our good, so (secondly) in our
stead: (...); For us. Even as David lamenting the death of his Son Absalom is
said to have wished, would God I had dyed for thee, O Absalom, 2 Samuel 18. last.
that is, dyed in his stead; that so by his own temporal death, he might have
prevented the danger of his Eternal death. Thus the Lord Jesus Christ, out of
that wonderful love which he bare to mankind, he gave himself for them, dying
for them, that by his death he might prevent theirs, which otherwise he saw
them bound over to. In this sense Christ is said to have dyed for us, in that
Text, Romans 5.8. God commends his love toward us, in that while we were
sinners Christ dyed for us; that is, in our stead, as our surety; to save and
deliver us from death. So the verse there foregoing explains it, where it is
said, scarsly for a righteous man will one dye, yet for a good man some would
even dare to dye: (...), for a good man, that is, in his stead, to prevent his
death. And thus did the Lord Jesus give himself for his people, dying for them,
in their room and stead, so to free and deliver them from death. And so most
fitly and properly are we to understand the word in the Text. Who gave himself
[for] us: viz. as our Surety, making satisfaction to the Justice of God for our
sins. So the next words clearly explain it [who gave himself for us, to redeem
us from all iniquity] from the guilt and punishment of sin; of which (God
willing) more hereafter.

And in this way did Christ give himself for us (...), his whole self, Thus he
gave his whole self.
both Body and Soul (as was in part showed before) Both which were partakers in
his sufferings. Not only his Body, to which by a Synecdoche this is sometimes
attributed and referred. Thus our Savior speaking to his Disciples, Joh. 6.51.
tells them, The bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the
life of the world. And Heb. 10.10. we are said to be sanctified through the
offering of the Body of Christ; Not by presenting it in heaven (as Grotius
would expound it,) but offering it upon earth, upon the Altar of the Cross.
Which Texts (and the like) we are to understand Synecdochically; Not that only
the Body of Christ was interested in these his sufferings, but his soul also.
So it was before his Passion, having diverse conflicts, specially with the
apprehension of that death which he was to undergo. Now is my soul troubled,
(says he to his Disciples, Ioh. 12.27.) and what shall I say? Father save me
from this hour. And so again in the Garden he complains in the like manner to
some of them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, Matthew. 26.38.
And as before, so much more in his Passion, where conflicting with the wrath of
God, being under a cloud of spiritual desertion, he cries out in the anguish
of his soul, My Lord, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Matthew. 27.46. Thus was
his soul also made a partner in this suffering (as the Prophet Isai expresses
it) in the three last verses of his 53. Chap. When thou shall make his soul an
offering for sin, v. 10. He shall see of the travail of his soul, v. 11. He
has powered out his soul unto death, v. 12. Thus did he in his suffering give
himself wholly, his whole humane nature, both Body and Soul; The divine nature
in the mean time supporting of the Humane (as I said,) and seeming (as it were)
to suffer with it.

And thus you have seen this first Particular in the Text somewhat largely
opened and explained; wherein has been showed unto you both what this Gift
was, and how said to be given. Now (adjourning the Application till afterward,
not having as yet so full a rise for it as I desire) proceed we to the second;
which acquaints us with

2. Partic. The Giver of this Gift, Christ himself.
The Doner, who it was that thus gave this gift; which is, Christ himself. So it
is, the Gift and Giver here are both one. [ who gave himself. (...). So we find
it often elsewhere: Gal. 1.4. who gave himself for our sins: c. 2. v. 20. who
gave himself for me: Ephesians. 5.25. Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for
it: 1 Timothy 2.6. who gave himself a ransom for all. All speaking the same thing
with this in the Text. [The great God, even our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave
himself for us.]

Obj. Gave himself? But what, Obj. 1. God the Father gave his Son.
do we not elsewhere read that he was given by his Father? God so loved the
world (says that known Text, Ioh. 3.16. God the Father) that he gave his only
begotten Son. In this was manifested that love of God toward us, (says the
same Evangelist) because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world,
that we might be saved through him, 1 Ioh. 4.9. And again in the verse
following, Herein is love, not that we love God, but that he loved us, and sent
his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. It was God the Father that sent
his Son upon this errand. Him has God the Father Sealed, Joh. 6.27. given him
Commission to do what he did. Yea and sending him into the world he delivered
him up unto death. He spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all,
Romans 8.32. And the Prophet Isai describing his Passion tells us, Isai 53.10. It
pleased the Lord to bruize him, he has put him to grief; when thou shall make
his soul an offering for sin, (speaking of God the Father.) And so much we may
learn from Christ's own mouth, who speaking to the woman of Samaria; calls
himself, The Gift of God, Joh. 4.10. How then is he said to give himself?

Ans. Father and Son concurring in this Donation.
Ans. To this the Answer is obvious. God the Father gave his Son, yet his Son
gave himself, both concurring in the same Act. So it is in all those Acts which
they call ad Extra, works which God works out of himself, for, or upon his
Creature, they are all indivisa, common to all the three Persons, all
concurring in them. So was it in the work of Creation. In the beginning God
Created the Heaven and the Earth, Genesis 1.1. God essentially considered. Elohim,
a word of the Plural number, which being joined with Barah, a verb singular, is
commonly conceived to denote the Trinity of Persons in the unity of Essence.
Whether so or no, sure we are all the three Persons were interested in that
work. Not only the Father, to whom the Apostle ascribes it, 1 Cor. 8.6. Unto
us there is but one God, even the Father, of whom are all things. But also the
Son. All things were made by him, Joh. 1.3. seconded by Saint Paul, Col. 1.16.
By him were all things Created. And even so is it here in this work of
Redemption, the repairing of the Microcosm, the little world, Mankind. Here
was a concurrence of Persons. The Father gave his Son, the Son gave himself;
there being the same will, and the same work in both. The same will. I can of
my self do nothing, I seek not mine own will, but the will of the father which
has sent me, c. 5. v. 30. I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will,
but the will of him that sent me. c. 6. v. 38. And as the same will, so the
same work. Whatsoever things the Father does, these also does the Son likewise,
Joh. 5.19. So he does, and that not by way of imitation, but cooperation. Not
doing the like things, but the same. There being as one will, so one power of
working in both. And so was it in this great work of Redemption. Even as it was
in Abraham's offering up of his Son Isaac (a representation of this mystery,
Gods offering his Son Christ) there was a concurrence betwixt the Father and
the Son. The one not more willing to offer, than the other to be offered. So
was it here, God the Father gives his Son, and his Son gives himself. The
Father made his soul an offering for sin, yet he himself poured out his soul
unto death (as the Prophet Isai there sets it forth) Is. 53.10, 12. Being
therein obedient to his Father, Phil. 2.8.

Obj. 2. Obj. 2. Christ delivered up by others.
But we find him delivered up by others also, as, viz. by Judas who betrayed
him into the hands of the High Priests and Elders; and by them delivered unto
Pilate, and that bound. So we have it recorded, Matthew. 27.2. When they had
bound him, they led him away, and delivered him to Pontius Pilate, By whom he
was delivered into the hands of the Jews to be crucified, as we have it, v.
26. of that Chap. which was by them accordingly done. He being delivered to
their will (as Saint Luke has it) they led him away, Luke 23.25, 26. Thus was
he led as a Lamb to the slaughter (as the Propher Isai has it) Is. 53. How
then can it be said that he gave himself?

Ans. They herein but his Instruments.
Ans. To this the Answer is as obvious as the former. All these were
Instrumental in bringing him to the Cross, being therein subservient to the
great design of God the Father, and of Christ himself, concurring with them in
the same Action, though to different ends. What God the Father and his Son
Christ intended out of love to mankind, they executed out of base and sinister
respects, Judas out of Covetousness, Pilate out of Fear, the Highpriests and
Elders out of malice, the people many of them out of Ignorance. In the mean
time, as herein they did nothing but what the Father had before decreed and
determined to be done, as that known Text speaks it fully, Act. 4.27. Of a
truth against thine holy Child Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both Herod and
Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and people of Israel, were gathered
together, for to do whatsoever thy hand, and thy Council determined before to
be done. So they did nothing but what the Son was willing withal. Which had he
not been, it was not all their power that could have compelled him to it. So
much he gave them to take notice of, when the Highpriests Officers came to
attach him in the Garden, where with a word of his mouth he strikes them to the
ground (as we find it, Ioh. 18 6.) And when Peter in a forcible way began to
attempt his rescue, he tells him, Matthew. 26.53. Think thou that I cannot now
pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve Legions of
Angels? viz. to be a guard about his Person. So impossible was it for all the
power of Men and Devils to have brought him to the Cross, had he not
voluntarily yeeldded up himself to it. Which he expressly tells his Disciples
that he did, Joh. 10.17, 18. I lay down my life. No man takes it from me, but
I lay it down of my self; I have power to lay it down, etc.

Obs. Thus then was this Offering of Jesus Christ's a freewill Offering, Obs.
Christ's Sacrifice, a Freewill-Offering.
[ who gave himself (says the Text,) importing a voluntary Act. Such are Gifts
properly, things freely bestowed. And such was this Offering of Christ's, a free
will Ossering. So it may be said to be upon a double account, in reference both
to Compulsion, and Merit. Where either of these two are, that a man is
compelled to do what he does, or that it is a thing demerited and deserved at
his hands, it cannot properly be called a Gift. But such was Christ's giving
himself for us, a Gift, a free gift.

1. Free as to Compulsion. 1. Free as to Compulsion.
What herein he did, he did it not as compelled thereunto. Whether by his
Father; to whom he was in all things obedient. Obedient to death (as we have
it, Phil. 2.8.) willingly complying with his will. Lo I come to do thy will, O
God, Heb. 10.7. This was his Meat, (as he tells us, Joh. 4.34.) a thing which he
desired more than his bodily food. Or yet, by his Enemies. Which as it has
been already showed, so if need were, it might be further cleared.

Mr. Tho. Tailor Com. in Text Christ's d^a^h voluntary, declared in diverse
particulars.
And indeed (as one well notes, writing upon the Text) it is a thing well worth
the observing, how the Holy Ghost throughout the whole History of our Saviors
Life and Death has set forth diverse circumstances, serving to confirm and make
good this truth, that this was in him a voluntary Act. Take we notice of some
of the most obvious. As,

1. His going up to Jerusalem.
First, His going up to Jerusalem, notwithstanding that he knew what he should
there expect. So much he acquaints his Disciples with, Mat. 16.21. From that
time forth began Jesus to show unto his Disciples, that he must go to
Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the Elders, and chief Priests, and
Scribes, and be killed. Yet he undertaketh the journey. Yea, though Peter, as a
friend, took him aside, and advised him to the contrary, saying, Be it far from
thee, Lord, this shall not be unto thee (as it there follows in the next
verse) yet he still persisted in his resolution; giving Peter a tart check for
that his well-meant, but ill-advised Counsel, bidding him, Get thee behind me
Satan, for thou art an offense unto me, v. 23; So not enduring to hear any
thing that might tend to the taking him off from prosecuting of that design.

Secondly, Being come to Jerusalem, 2. His going into the Garden.
though he well knew that the Jews lay in wait to apprehend him, and that
Judas had made a compact with some of them to deliver him into their hands, yet
does he not think of withdrawing himself. Which we read that at another time he
did, viz. when a Crown was offered him, Joh. 6.15. when he perceived that they
(the Jews) would come and take him by force to make him a King, he departed
again into a mountain himself alone. And surely had he pleased, he could as
well have withdrawn from the Cross, which he knew was intended for him. Yea,
and this we find before he had done, when the Pharisees held a Council against
him, how they might destroy him, when Jesus knew this (says the Text) he
withdrew himself from them, Matthew. 12.15. But now, the hour being come (as he
says) which then it was not, the time appointed by his Father, now he is so
far from withdrawing, that he goes to meet those which were sent to apprehend
him, retiring into the garden, his usual place of prayer, whither he knew Judas
would bring his rout of Officers for that purpose.

Thirdly, Being come into the Garden, 3. Yielding himself to the Officers.
had he pleased, he could easily have resisted them there, which he let them
know by casting them down to the ground with a word, (as I showed you;) or else
have withdrawn himself from them, or else have hid himself, and gone through
the midst of them, as the story tells us, that in a miraculous way, he did
through the midst of those who had taken up stones to cast at him, Joh. 8.
last: But he instead thereof, goes to meet them, calling unto them (as Saint
John has it, cap. 18.4.) Jesus therefore knowing all things that should come
unto him, went forth, (that is, from that part of the Garden where he was,
toward them that came to apprehend him) and said unto them, whom seek ye? To
which when they, not knowing him, made answer, Jesus of Nazareth, he replyeth
to them, I am he, (as the next verse has it.) And again, v. 7. after that he
had raised them up by the same power, that he cast them down, he propounds
the same question to them again, whom seek ye? To which when they make Answer,
(as before) Jesus of Nazareth, he replyeth again, I have told you that I am he,
v. 8. All which clearly evidenceth that he did willingly offer and yield
himself unto them.

4. Making a bold Confession.
Fourthly, to go on, Being brought first before the Highpriests, and then
before Pilate, he uses no subterfuges or evasions, to decline their malice,
but (as the Apostle says) He witnessed a good Confession, 1 Timothy 6.13.
acknowledging and asserting that he was a King, and the true Son of God, though
he knew that Attestation would be capital unto him, (as you find it) Matthew.
26.64. 5. Not appealing, nor deprecating the sentence.


Fifthly, Having there received his sentence, he makes use of no Appeal;
(which Paul did in a like case, who appealed from Festus to Caesar, Act.
25.11.) nor yet Deprecation, so as to sue for favor, but willingly submitted
to the Judgment passed upon him.

Sixthly, And being led to execution, 6: Making no resistance.
he showed no reluctance, but was led as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a
sheep that is dumb before the shearers so opened he not his mouth, Isai 53.7.

Seventhly, 7. Not using any means to abate, or shorten his sufferings.
And lastly in his Passion upon the Cross, he was still the same; not willing
to use any means that might abate the sense of his Torment; to which end it is
conceived, that stupifying potion of Vinegar, and some other ingredients, was
offered to him, which, till his suffering was finished, he refused to taste of
(as the story sets it forth, Mat. 27.34, 48.) Thus did he willingly yield
himself to the drinking of, and drinking off that bitter Cup, which was given him
by his Father, according as he had told Peter, he was resolved to do, The Cup
which my father has given me, shall I not drink it? Joh. 18.11. Drinking even
the very dregs of it. Not ceasing to suffer until he could say, what he did,
Consummatum est, it is finished; (viz. the work of Man's Redemption;) and then
(as the Evangelist has it) he gave up the Ghost, Joh. 19.30. pouring forth his
soul unto death (as the Prophet expresses it in that Text forecited, Isai. 58.
v. last.) Thus then was the suffering of Christ free as to any Compulsion.

2. Christ's death Free as to merit.
2. And so it was also as to any Merit or desert, in, or from those for whom he
suffered. So Gorrhan (not amiss) here expounds the word (...), He gave himself,
sc: gratis and sine meritis nostris, freely, and without any merit on our
parts. For alas! what was there in Man that could any ways deserve such a
favor at the hands of this his Creator? yea, or any favor? Man being then an
Enemy to God. When we were Enemies we were reconciled unto God, by the death of
his Son, Romans 5.10. So as we may well conclude this for an unquestionable
truth, that this offering was every ways a free-will-offering. [Christ gave
himself for us.]

Appli. Christ herein propounded as a pattern for imitation.
Applic. And did he so? (to make some Application before we proceed any
further, as not willing so to overcharge your heads, as not to lay in fomewhat
into your hearts,) Let him then herein be propounded as a Pattern for our
Imitation. This was one end (as I showed you) wherefore Christ gave himself,
that he might be a Pattern. So he was in his Life, in the ordering of his
Conversation. Learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart, (says he to all
that come to him) Matthew. 11.29. I have given you an example, that ye should do
as I have done unto you (says he to his Disciples, when he had washed their
Feet,) Ioh. 13.15. so teaching them to be ready to do all offices of love each
to other. And as in his life, so in his Death. He suffered for us, leaving us
an example, that we should follow his steps, (as we have it in that forecited
Text) 1 Pet. 2.21. And this let us do, all of us learning of him, willingly to
comply with the will of our heavenly Father, yielding up our selves to him (as
he did) to be disposed of by him according to his good will and pleasure. 1.
Christians to give up themselves to the Lord.
So did those believing Macedonians, of whom Paul gives that Testimony to his
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 8.5. They first gave their own selves to the Lord. Before
they gave of their goods to the poor, they gave their Persons unto God,
dedicating themselves to his service. And the like let us do every of us. Give
our selves to the Lord. Which do we,

1. Wholly. 1. Wholly:
So did our heavenly Pattern (as you have heard,) our blessed Savior; he gave
himself, his whole self, both Body and Soul, And the like do we, give our
selves to the Lord, our whole selves, both Soul and Body. This is the Sacrifice
which the Apostle calls for, Romans 12.1. I beseech you therefore Brethren, that
ye present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, etc. (your Bodies, i. e. your
selves, one part by a Synecdoche put for the whole). Under the Law men offered
up the Bodies of other creatures; now they must offer their own Bodies,
themselves. And this do we, All of us dedicating and consecrating our selves
wholly to the service of God, to be at his command, his ordering and disposing.

2. And doing this wholly, do we it also willingly. 2. Willingly.
So did our blessed Savior also (as you have heard.) He gave himself, offering
up himself as a freewill offering. And the like do we; what ever service we do
unto God, or to our Brethren, do it willingly. So Peter exhorts Ministers in
special to do their Ministerial service, (...), Not by constraint, but
willingly, 1 Pet. 5.2. And the like let all Christians be exhorted to in
general; whatever service they do unto God, or to their Brethren, let them do
it willingly.

1. Not by constraint.
1. Willingly, not by constraint, not by compulsion. Such is the service of
slaves, who do what they do for fear. Let not Christians do the like; who being
the servants of Christ, are the Lords freemen (as the Apostle calls them, 1
Cor. 7.22.) (...); Being by Christ set at liberty, delivered out of the hands
of all their spiritual Enemies. And being so, let their service to him be a
free-service, serving him without fear (as Zacharias has it, Luke 1.74.) that
is, without servile and slavish fear.

2. Freely.
2. And again, freely, not out of any by, base and sinister respects, not for
self ends. Not for filthy lucre, (says Peter there to Elders) 1 Pet. 5.2. In
such services men do not serve God, but themselves. Would we have our services
accepted? let them be such as this service of Christ's was, all
freewill-offerings. Giving our selves, not selling, which all Mercenaries may
be said to do. It was that which the Devil fasly charged upon Job, cap. 1. v.
9. Does Job fear God for naught? Intimating, that he did not serve God as a
Child, but as a Mercenary servant, not out of pure love, but with an eye to an
ample reward. Let not the like be justly charged upon any of us, that we should
thus serve God, Only for Reward. Whether Temporal, because this our service may
be outwardly advantageous unto us, as to our estates, or reputations. Yea, or
yet Eternal. Not but that Christians may have an eye at both these. At those
Temporal rewards, How Christians may look at Reward.
which God has promised to those that fear and serve him. Wherefore else
should David take up this as an Argument, to excite and stir up Gods Saints
hereunto? which he does, Ps. 34.9, 10. O fear ye the Lord ye his Saints, for
there is no want to them that fear him. The young Lions do lack, and suffer
hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing; viz. If good
in it self, and good for them. And our Savior himself, to encourage his
followers to be willing to part with any thing for him, he first makes promise
to them, of an ample retribution in this life, Matthew. 19.29. He shall receive
an hundred fold, viz. secular goods in this life, if good for him. And the
Apostle exhorting Timothy to exercise himself unto Godliness, 1 Timothy 4.7. he
sets before him the profit, and advantage of this course, telling him in the
next verse, that Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise
of the life that now is; this present life. Christians in serving their God,
may have an eye at a Temporal reward. Much more Eternal. So had Moses, of whom
the Apostle tells us, He had a respect to the recompense of reward, Heb. 11.26.
And it is said of our Savior in the Chapter following, v. 2. that, for the Joy
that was set before him he endured the Cross, etc. But not only at these.
Reward, as it is in it self, so it both may and ought to be unto Christians an
encouragement to serve their God, but not the only motive. No, were it so that
there were no such recompense to be expected, whether here, or hereafter; yet
Christians should do what they do; Accounting it, as their Duty, so their
Honor and Happiness, that they may serve such a Master. Thus then, let us
give up our selves to the Lord, every of us, serving him willingly, freely.

2. Christians to give themselves to, and for others.
2. And thus also give we our selves unto others. It is that which Paul there
says of those Macedonians, 2 Cor. 8.5. They gave their own selves to the Lord,
and to us by the will of God; to the Lord, as their Master, and to his
Apostles, as his Servants. And the like let all Christians do. Giving up
themselves first to the Lord, let them also give themselves to his servants, as
to his Ministers in special, so to all other their Brethren: Being ready to
perform all good offices to them, and for them, so serving one another in (or
by) love; (...), (as Paul wills his Galatians to do,) Gal. 5.13. And this let
them in Imitation of Christ, Do willingly and freely. And thus (among other
things) let them contribute to the necessities of the Saints; Doing what they
do out of a willing and ready mind. This the Apostle would have Timothy put
rich men in mind of, (whom in a special manner it concerns,) 1 Timothy 6.18.
Charge them thaet be rich in this world, that they do good, that they be rich
in good works ready to distribute, willing to communicate;] Not doing what they
do by compulsion. Not only paying what they are rated, and so cannot withold;
But giving freely. And that as without Compulsion, so without any self ends.
Not out of any by and sinister respects, as having an eye to Retribution, or
yet Reputation. Thus our Savior in some cases requires those who are able, to
lend unto their Brethren, Luke 6.35. Do good, and lend, looking for nothing
again: Not only the use and interest, but not the Principal. So free, so ready
and willing should Christians be in their services, as to God, so to their
Brethren; therein imitating their heavenly Pattern, the Lord Jesus; who, in
obedience to God his Father, Gave himself. And that for Them. So it follows
in the third Particular; To which I shall now pass.

Donati, 3. Partic. The Persons for whom Christ gave himself.
The Persons for whom Christ thus gave himself. For us (says the Text;) (...).
So we find it elsewhere, and that often; as Romans 5.8. Christ dyed for us. 1
Cor. 5.7. Christ our Passover is slain for us. Gal. 3.13. Being made a Curse
for us. Ephesians. 5.2. Christ has loved us, and given himself for us. 1 These. 5.10.
Who died for us. 1 Pet. 2.21. Christ also suffered for us. And 1 John 3.16. He
laid down his life for us. All speaking one and the same thing with this in
the Text, [Who gave himself for us.]

Quest. Quest What to be understood by Us.
But what, or whom shall we understand hereby?

Ans. Answ. Mankind
For us,] that is, for us Men. So it must be here looked upon, as excluding all
other Creatures. So much we may take notice of from that which we meet within
the fourth verse of the Chapter following, where Gods love in sending and
giving his Son Christ, is called by the name of (...), the love of God our
Savior toward man. Such is this Gift, proper unto mankind There is one
Mediator betwixt God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. For their sakes
it was, that Christ came into the world, taking their nature upon him. Verily
he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the Seed of
Abraham, (so our Translation renders that Text, which is commonly understood of
Christ's taking the nature of man into a personal union with his Godhead,) Heb.
2.16. In which nature also he suffered; Being put to death in the flesh (as
Saint Peter has it,) 1 Pet. 3.18. that is, in his Humane nature; so suffering
for mankind. This is a truth agreed at all hands.

Quest. Whether all Mankind, or no.
Quest. But whether for all mankind, or no, Here is the Question. A Question
which, as heretofore, so of late times, has occasioned not a little trouble,
and disquiet to the Church of God; and that as elsewhere, so in this Nation,
and I wish I might not say in this place at this day. For the seeling of your
Judgments, and stablishing of your hearts, that you may not be carried away
with that wind of doctrine, which has of late broke in among you, whereby some
unstable souls have been turned aside, to the renouncing of that truth, which
they had been formerly taught, and therewith of that Communion, which
heretofore they embraced, give me leave now, having so just an occasion offered
for it from this Text, to spend a little time upon it. Wherein I cannot make
promise of much (if ought,) which you may not (upon enquiry) receive from other
hands. This being a point which has been already sufficiently agitated and
discussed, and (I suppose) as much said in it pro and con, as can in an
ordinary way be expected. Only I shall affect all possible plainness, speaking
(as near as may be) to the apprehension of the meanest Capacity.

Begin we then with the Text we have now in hand, Ans. The word in the Text
(us) examined.
(and so those other forenamed,) where it is said, that Christ gave himself for
us, dyed for us; How shall we understand this us? Whether of all men
universally considered. So the Arminian looks upon it, taking the word [us]
here in the greatest latitude that may be; from hence concluding their
plausible Doctrine, (so eagerly sucked in by many who understand it not,) of
Universal Redemption, that, Christ dyed for all and every one, and that alike.

Us, here restrained to the Elect.
But herein I find them, more confident tban some of the Romanists dare be.
Estius, the Professor at Doway, writing upon this Text, professes himself to
be dubious in it, expounding this [us] with a Sive. Estius Com: in Text.
Pro nobis, sive omnibus hominibus, sive spectatim Electis. For us] that is, In
quorum persona Paulus saepe lequitur. Ib.
either for all men, or specially for the Elect, In whose person (says he) the
Apostle often speaeketh. And surely so we may justly conceive him here to do,
where he restrains this [us] to a peculiar people, a people redeemed from all
iniquity, and purified, a people Justified, and Sanctified. And who are these,
but the Elect? such as God has from the beginning chosen unto Salvation
through Sanctification of the Spirit (as Saint Paul describes believers,) 1
These. 2.13. Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through
Sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ, (as Saint Peter has it,) 1 Pet. 1.2. For such Christ gave
himself, for all such: So much we yield may demonstratively be concluded from
this Text, but no more.

Quest. Quest. Whether Christ dyed only for his Elect:
But what then, did Christ dye only for them? did he not dye for others also?
yea for all alike? the good and benefit of his death being by his Father and
himself intended as as well to one, Ans. Difference of opinions about it.
as another? So some Romanists, Lutheranes, and Arminians, would have it.
Therein differing from some others (some of them such as upon whose memories I
shall write nothing but Blessed,) who out of a pious intention for the healing
of this Breach, the compremizing of this difference, have with much study
sought (I cannot say found) out a moderate and middle course, viz. The middle
way sought, but not found. Arch. B. B. of Armagh, in Dr. Barnards vindication.
that Christ dyed in a general way for all, to purchase a possibility of
Salvation for them, which he did by making satisfaction to the Justice of God
for the sins of the whole world, and so opening a door for the exercise of his
Grace and Mercy toward and upon whom he pleases, which before was shut. It
not being a thing consistent with the Justice of God to receive sinners to
mercy till such time as satisfaction was made. But this being done, now the
nature of man (say they) became salvable, a subject capable of, and fit for
mercy, which the Angelical nature in those that were fallen, for want of such a
Mediator, is not, cannot be. Thus did God (say they) set forth his Son to be a
propitiation, through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness, that he
might be just, aod the justifier of him, which believes in Jesus, (as the
Apostle sets forth the end of Christ's death, I confess my self to hold fully
with them who said, Etsi Christus pro omnibus mortuus est, tamen specialiter
pro nobis passus est, quia pro Eclesia passus est: Idem ibid. p. 20 Qui morte
sua omnibus sufficientissime promeruit vitam aeternam donandam utique omnibus
ex pacto Evangelico, si crederunt, is aliquibus ex peculiari meritorum suorum
applicatione promeruit efficacissime ut crederent etc. D. Davenant de morte
Christi, in sine. Quamuis meritum Christi aequaliter se habeat ad omnes quoad
sufficientiam, non tamen quoad efficaciam; quod intelligendum est, non tantum
ex part effectus, qui in imo sit and non in alio, sed etiam ex part
voluntatis, qua ipse Christus meruit, and diverso modo obtulit sua merita pro
diversis. D. Davenant, ibid. Christus omnibus per mortem impetravit
reconciliationem and remissionem peccatorum. Collat. Hag p. 183. Christum
omnibus peccatorum remissionem impetrasse n^stra est sententia: Ib d. p 172.
The Arminian Doctrine of Universal Redemption discla^med.
Romans 3.25, 26.) Justice and Mercy here meeting together, and sweetly embracing
each other. But in a more special way, (say they) he dyed for some amongst
mankind, even Gods Elect people, who were given to him by his Father, to be his
purchased possessions, For them he gave himself, that he might (as our Text
has it) actually redeem them frem all Iniquity, and purify them to be a
peculiar people unto himself, applying to them the merit of that his death,
making it effectual for their Justification, Sanctification and Salvation. Or,
as others express it, Christ dyed for all Conditionally, meriting for them
Salvation upon the condition of their believing, but for some ( viz. his Elect)
absolutely, meriting for them that they should believe. Which in effect
speaks the same thing with that, which others of our Divines (following the
Schools) have unwarily yielded, that Christ dyed sufficiently for all, but
Effectually only for his Elect. Thus have some endeavored to qualify this
Doctrine. But as for others, those with whom I have now to deal (conceiving
that error which has entangled some among us, not to be spun with so fine a
thread,) they spare not to assert (what the followers of Arminius have done
before them) that Christ dyed alike for all, as well for Cain and Judas, as for
Peter and Paul, and that he purchased and obtained Remission of sins, and
reconciliation with God, as well for the one, as the other; Man's own fault, in
not receiving and believing on him, being the only cause, why this
Reconciliation is not applied unto all* which otherwise, as it was alike
intended for all, so it would be alike effectual unto all. This is the Doctrine
which is by some, (and not a few,) with great zeal held forth at this day, as
if it were main the basis and principal Pillar of Christian Religion, and that
which I suppose does (among some other) infect this place at this day. But as
for this Doctrine, as upon a due trial, it has sometime since been sensured
and condemned by a Synod, Synod. Dordrec: Anno, 1618.
(as truly venerable, as pious and learned as any the world has seen for some
hundreds of years bypast, convocated for that purpose (I mean that of Dort,)
so we must profess that we cannot assent unto it. Which that we may not seem to
do without just warrant, give me leave, (as briefly as I may,) to bring it to
the test, first examining the grounds whereupon they assert it, and then
declaring the Reasons, why we reject it.

For the former, Arguments for Universal Redemption examined.
the grounds whereupon those of this persuasion build this their faith, they
are reducible to two heads, Scripture, and Reason. Begin with the former.

Scripture; 1. From Scripture; reduced to 4. heads.
wherein there are many Texts which they make use of; and those some of them
such as (at the first hearing) seem to speak much for them. Select we the
choycest of them, which we may reduce into these four Ranks; Such as affirm
that Christ dyed for the world, the whole world, for All men, for Every man.
Examine we them severally, and briefly.

First, Arg. 1. Christ given for the world.
Christ is said to be given for the world. So we have it in that Text, which is
looked upon as the Palmarium, the Prime and principal evidence in this cause,
so much insisted on by all that are Advocates for it, viz. Joh. 3.16. God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. As also in that
other of no less note, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself. In which, and other Texts of like nature, the Doctrine of Universal
Redemption (as they conceive) is clearly held forth.

Ans. The word world taken in diverse senses:
Ans. For answer whereunto let that word be examined, which sounds so loud in
the ears of the vulgar, [world.] A word diversely used, (as in common language;
so) in Scripture phrase; where we find it

1. Sometimes put for the whole Creation, 1. For the whole Creation.
the whole frame of Heaven and Earth, with all the Creatures in them. So it
properly signifies The world was made by them, Joh. 1.10. that is, All things,
(as the third verse has it.)

2. Sometimes it is used more restrainedly for the chief Inhabitants of it, the
world of Reasonable Creatures, Angels and Men. 2. The Reasonable world, Angels
and Men.
So we find it, 1 Cor. 4.2. where Paul says of himself, and other of his
fellow laborers, we are made a spectacle to the world, that is (as the next
words expound it,) to Angels and Men: This is the Reasonable world.

3. Sometimes (in the third place) it points at one part of this world, the
world of mankind universally considered, 3. The world of mankind universally
considered.
even all the Sons and daughters of Adam. So the Apostle uses it, Romans 5.12.
where he tells us, that by one man sin entered into the world; And again in the
verse following, until the Law sin was in the world: meaning that All men were
involved in the Sin of their first Parent, sinning in him, (as the 12th. verse
explains it self.)

4: The Reproate world.
4. Sometimes again (in the fourth and fifth place) it is put for a part of this
world; which is divided into two, two worlds in one, The Elect world, the
Reprobate world; Each called the world. So we find the latter, and that
undeniably, in many Texts. As Ioh. 7.9. where our Savior declares that he
prayed not for the world: So again, Ioh. 14.17. where speaking of the Spirit of
truth, he says, The [world] could not receive it: And again, v. 22. where
Judas, (not Iscariot, not the Traitor, but another of the Apostles so named)
puts the Question to his Master, Lord (says he,) how is it that thou will
manifest thy self to us, and not unto the world? In which, and diverse other
Texts of like kind, we are to understand, the unbelieving, wicked, reprobate
world, which are the greatest part of the world.

And if there be a Reprobate, there must be also an Elect world. 5. The Elect
world.
And in this sense (though Arminians are loath to see it) we shall find the
word, more than once used in Scripture. As, Ioh. 17.21. where our Savior
makes this his request to his Father, [That the world may believe that thou
have sent me.] And again, v. 23. [That the world may know, that thou haw sent
me, and have loved them, as thou have loved me.] Now what world was this? Not
the reprobate world, for that he had plainly declared before that he did not,
would not pray for, v. 9. But the Elect world, even those which were given to
him by his Father. So the 24. v. does clearly explain it. Father I will, that
they also whom thou have given me, be with me. This is the world, which there
he speaks of, even the Elect world, the Believing world. And so much Tolet
(though a Jesuit, Attend Mundum hoe in loco, non malos and Incredulos, sed
credentes de Mundo vocatos significare Tolet: Com. in Joh. 17.21. and 23.
and a Cardinal) writing upon it, does freely acknowledge, declaring that the
word there cannot be taken in any other sense. To these add those other known
Texts, Ioh. 6.33. where our Savior, speaking of himself, says, The Bread of
God is he, which eometh down from heaven, and gives life unto the world. What
world? why, the Elect world. So he elsewhere explains himself, Ioh. 10.27, 28.
where speaking of his sheep; I know them (says he) and I give unto them
eternal life. Now who are these sheep, but Gods Elect? So much Arminians
themselves will not deny. This is then the world there spoken of.

And in this sense most fitly and properly may we understand the latter of
those Texts alleged, viz. 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world
to himself; that is, the world of his Elect, who only are actually reconciled
to God, not having their sins imputed to them (as it there follows.)

The word. world, Joh. 3.16. by some expounded of the Elect world.
And so is that other Text also looked upon by some, and many, Ioh. 3.26. God so
loved the world; that is (say they) the world of his Elect, whom he loves, not
only with a Common love, wherewith he loves all his Creatures, willing their
conservation, Thou love all things that are, and hate none of them whom
thou have made (says that Apocryphal Author) Wisd. 11.21. but with a special,
a peculiar love, loving them to Eternal life; which love is proper to Gods
Elect, as we may learn from the Apostle, who puts these two together, Elect of
God, and beloved, Col. 3.12. And should we, herein concur with them, so
construing the word in that place, I do not see any such absurdity to follow
upon it, as the Adversaries imagine. God so loved the world, the world of his
Elect, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him
should not perish; (...) says the Original) every one believing, that is,
every one of them. So the word (...), Every one, or whosoever, may there,
without any violence, be construed; not as being Distributive, but Collective,
Not as dividing the world of Gods Eled into two Ranks, some of them believing,
and having everlasting life, and others not; but only as distinguishing their
two fold state; their state by nature, what they were when he first loved them,
and gave his Son for them, viz like the rest of the world; and their state by
Grace, what they are when he bestows eternal life upon them, viz. believers,
believing on the name of his Son. That Exposition not adhered to. The world of
mankind indefinitely considered.


But I shall not adhere to this Exposition, there being another to be found,
which may be fully satisfactory. God so loved the world, that is, the world of
mankind; but how? Not Universally, but Indefinitely considered; not as
comprehending every individual, every particular person in the world, but the
several sorts and conditions of men, some in all ages, all Nations, of all
ranks and estates. In this sense are we to understand the word in some other
places: As Ioh. 1.29. where John espying of Jesus, makes that Proclamation,
Behold ihe Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. And so in that
verse following the Text alleged, John 3.17. God sent his Son into the world,
not to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved. Not
that Christ intended an universal Salvation of all, of every particular person
in the world, but of some in all Nations, not only of Jews, but of Gentiles.
And thus may God be said to have loved the world, though he never intended to
save all in it, nor to give his Son for every particular person; yet that he
had such a gracious purpose toward any, so as not to suffer the whole world of
mankind being fallen, to perish, (as he did the Angels, which were in the like
estate,) this may be called his love to the world, the world of mankind. Let
it then be concluded as to these Texts, which the Adversaries look upon as
principal Pillars, and main supporters of their cause, that, however they may
be taking with vulgar apprehensions, yet being rightly weighed, they do not
speak what they would have them.

Arg. 2. 1 John 2.2. Christ the Propitiation for the sins of the whole world.
But (say they) if these do not, yet there is one other that does, which speaks
more home than the former; viz. that which we meet with, 1 John 2.2. where we
read expressly, that Christ is the Propitiation for the sins of the whole world,
(...); Than which what can be more plain and full?

Answ. 1. The whole world, the world of Gods Elect.
So indeed it may seem at the first hearing, but let it be examined, and we
shall find it speaking no more than the former Texts did, and so admitting the
same Answers, viz. 1. that by the whole world there we may understand the whole
company of Gods Elect collectively considered, all believers in all ages of the
world. So the sense may fitly be given. He is the Propitiation for our sins;
And not for ours only, that is, us who are now alive, and believe already, but
of the whole world, of all believets, which have been, shall be, from the
beginning of the world to the end of it.

Repl. Repl. Gods Elect the least part of the world.
But is not this strange, that those whom we look upon comparatively as a small
number, a little, little, flock, (as our Savior calls them, Luke 12.32.
where there are two diminutives put together, (...), to show the exceeding
littleness of this Company,) a small part of the world, should be called the
whole world?

Ans. Ans. But the chief and principal part of it.
And why more strange than that unbelievers and Reprobates should be so called,
which we find them to be, 1 John 5.19. where it is said, The whole world lies
in wickedness, (...), meaning the unregenerate world, all men out of Christ.
Now if they be so called because they are the greater part, why may not Gods
Elect be so, in as much as they, though they be the lesser, yet they are the
better part? Thus we find the Roman Empire called, Rev. 12.9. where it is said
of the great Dragon, the Devil, that he deceived the whole world, (...),
meaning that he drew all the Roman Empire into Idolatry, which being a great,
and the most considerable part of the world, is there called the whole world.
And so Colos. 1.6. Synecdoche, significans illustrissimas ^orbis parts; Grot.
Com: in loc.
Paul tells his Colossians, that the Gospel was come unto them, as it was in
all the world, (...), meaning the most eminent parts of it, (as Grotius
expounds it.) In which sense also it is used (as he notes) Romans 1.8. where the
same Apostle tells his Romans, that their faith was spoken of throughout the
whole world. (...), meaning the chief parts of it. And thus may Gods Elect, In
Electis and praescitis specialis quaedam censetur universitas, ut de toto mundo
to^us mundus liberatus, and de omnibus hominibus, omnes homines videantur
assumpti: Prosper de vocat. Gent. Lib. 1.
being the flower, and choycest part of the world, be called the whole world.
There being among them (as Prosper says) a kind of special universality, a
world in the world.

Ans. 2. The whole world, all Nations, Jews and Gentiles.
Ans. 2. But (secondly) if this satisfy not, by the whole world there we may
understand all Nations in the world, both Jews and Gentiles. Christ is the
propitiation for our sins, (who are Jews) and not for ours only, but for the
sins of the whole world, that is, of the Gentiles also. Thus does Saint John
there (as Christ, and other of the Apostles often did) cross that high conceit,
which the Jews had of themselves, who looked upon themselves as the only
people beloved of God, and thought that the promise of the Messia, belonged
only to them. Not so (says this our Apostle,) for how ever the Gentiles in
times past had been over-looked, yet now he would have them to know, that they
were called to the participation of the Covenant of grace, as well as
themselves, and that the benefit of Christ's death and Intercession belonged as
well to them, as any other.

Ans. 3. Ans. 3. Christ the only Propitiator for the whole world.
Yet (in the third place) if this content not, Christ may truly be said to be
the Propitiation for the sins of the whole world, in as much as he is the only
Propitiator, there being none made partakers of that benefit, to have their
sins remitted, but by and through him. In such a sense it is, that Saint Paul
says, 1 Cor. 15.22. In Christ shall all be made alive, that is, all those who
are so made alive, quickened up unto that eternal life, shall be made alive by
him. And so Saint John speaking of Christ, says, This is the true light which
inlightneth every man that comes into the world, John 1.9. that is, every man
that is enlightened. And in such a sense may he fitly here be said to be the
Propitiation for the sins of the whole world, in as much as all who are
reconciled unto God, they receive that benefit by and through him, and no
other. Thus (to make use of a plain Illustration) he who was the first Founder
of some Invention (as of Printing or Guns,) may be said to have taught the
whole world that Art; not that every man in the world has learned it from him,
but that all who have learned it, they are beholding to him for it. Even thus
may Christ be said to be the Propitiation for the sins of the whole world, not
that all persons have their sins pardoned, but that all those who are partakers
of this benefit, they have it by and through him.

But they go on, (in the third place) telling us, that Christ is said to dye
for all men. Arg. 3. Christ dyed for All men.
So Scripture speaks it expressly and frequently, as Romans 8.32. God spared not
his own Son, but delivered him up for us all. So 1 Timothy 2.6. Who gave himself a
ransom for all; (...). Than which what can be more full for a Universal
Redemption?

Ans. The word All diversely taken in Scripture.
Ans. So indeed it may seem at the first hearing, but not so upon more advised
thoughts; which will let us know, that this word [All] is not always to be
taken in such a latitude as it sounds, and as vulgarly apprehended, viz. as a
note of universality, taking in every particular person in the world. But
sometimes restrictively, with limitation and determination to some kind of
Persons. And sometimes Indefinitely, for some of all sorts and kinds. Now in
the former of these senses may the fnrmer of those Texts be most fitly
understood. Restrictively for the Elect.
He delivered him up for us all; (...); Not for All, but for us all; us
Believers, or us, and all other the Elect people of God. So the next verse
there expounds it, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? Romans
8.33. These are the All there spoken of, for whom God delivered up his Son,
viz. his Chosen ones. Those for whom Christ makes Intercession. So the verse
next following has it, v. 34 It is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for
us. Now this is a favor which Arminians themselves will not allow to all
universally (at least not all alike,) that Christ should perform that part of
his Priestly Office for them, to intercede for them, but only for his Elect,
such as believe on him. So as we may well conclude them to be the All there
spoken of, for whom Christ was delivered up.

In the latter sense understand we the word in that other Text. Indefinitely,
for all sorts and kinds of men.
Christ gave himself a ransom for all;] that is, All kinds and sorts of men.
So the word All is elsewhere frequently used, Pro generibus singulorum, not
singulis generum, for some of all sorts. So we find it, Joel 2.28. where the
Lord promises, I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, that is, upon all
sorts of persons. So the words following explain it. And your Sons and
daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall
see visions, And also upon the servants, and upon the handmaids in those days
will I pour out my Spirit, v. 29 that is, upon all sorts and conditions of
persons. So again, Luke 3.6. Our Savior citing the Text of the Prophet Isai,
c. 40.3. says, All flesh shall see the Salvation of the Lord; that is, all
sorts of men, some of all Nations, to whom Christ the Savior of the world
should be revealed. And in such a sense must we understand that passage, Matthew.
3.5. where it is said, that There went out to John the Baptist, to hear him
preach, Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the Region, round about Jordan. Not
that all the people wenr forth, but great multitudes, some of all sorts, from
all places. And so that of Peter, Act. 10.12. where he tells us, that in the
sheet which he saw in his Vision, there were All four-footed beast of the
earth, and wild beasts, etc. (...), All, that is, some of all kinds, All manner
of beasts (as our Translation explains it.) And in this sense is the word most
fitly to be understood in the Text alleged. Christ gave himself a ransom for
all. (...), For all sorts of men, of all Nations; Gentiles as well as Jews. So
the Apostle clearly explains his own meaning in the verse there next following;
v. 7. Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time;
Whereunto I am ordained a Preacher, and an Apostle, a Teacher of the Gentiles;
plainly intimating what there he meant by All, viz. Gentiles as well as Jews.
And so are we to understand the fourth verse of that Chapter, where it is said,
God will have all men to be saved; Not all particular persons, but some of all
sorts. So much is convincingly collected from the verses there foregoing, where
the Apostle exhorts that Prayers and Intercessions, and giving of thanks be
made for all men; (...). What? for all and every particular person? Not so.
There being some whom Saint John will not allow Christians to pray for, 1 Ioh.
5.16. But all kinds of Men, Jews and Gentiles, Christians or Infidels, Public
or Private persons. So the next verse explains it, instancing in one rank of
men; whom he would have in a special manner remembered, For Kings and for all
that be in Authority. And in such a sense we yield it; Christ gave himself a
ransom for all, all sorts of men, some of all Nations; herein joining in
Consort which that heavenly Quire, who are brought in singing this Halelujah
unto the Lamb, Rev. 5.9. Thou wast slain, and have redeemed us unto God by thy
blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and Nation. Here is the
All, which Christ has redeemed; not universally all particular persons, but
some of all Nations, all Conditions. In which sense the Apostle tells us, Gal.
3.28. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is
neither male nor female, for we are all one in Christ Jesus.

Repl: Yea but (says the Adversary) though these Texts may seem to be thus
eluded, Repl. Romans 5.18. and 2 Cor. 5.14. explained and vindicated.
yet some other there are, which will not be so evaded; as viz. that which we
meet with, Romans 5.18. and that other which answers to it, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. In
the former of which we read, that, As by the offense of one Judgment came upon
all men unto condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one the free gift
came upon all men unto Justification of life. In the latter, We thus judge,
that if one dyed for all, then were all dead, And that he dyed for all. Hence
they infer, that as all men were dead in, and by sin, so Christ dyed for all,
all that were so dead.

Ans. But neither will these Texts carry it. Ans.
Not, the former, where, by All men upon whom that free Gift of Justification
is bestowed, we are to understand, not all universally, (...)] Intellige omnes
qui ipsi sicut oportet, credunt: Grot. Com: in loc.
but all those who are given unto Christ, and are ingrafted into him by Gods
decree before time, and by faith in time, even all true believers. So much the
learned Grotius, (no back friend to the Remonstrants,) does freely there
acknowledge. And it must needs be so understood, in as much as no others are
made partakers of that Gift. Nor yet the latter, which clearly admits the same
Exposition. Christ dyed for all. Not all that were dead in the first Adam, but
all who did belong unto him, and were by Gods decree ingrafted into him (as
aforesaid,) who by nature were in the common condition of mankind, dead in the
first Adam, as well as others. For them, All them, he dyed and rose again, (as
it there follows) which Arminians will not say, that he did for any but his
Elect, intending the Application of his death only to them.

Those Texts counterpoizes. Christ said to dye for Many.
Thus you see also these Text cleared, which speak of Christ dying for all men.
For the counterpoizing whereof (if need were,) we might yet cast into the
opposite Balance, that which is no less remarkable in Scripture than this,
viz. that whereas in some places it is said Christ dyed for all, in others
again it is said that he dyed for many. So we find it Isai 53. Where the
Prophet having first said (speaking of Christ,) The Lord has laid on him the
iniquity of us all, v. 6. in the two last verses, he restrains that universal
particle, by putting Many for All. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities, v. 11. He bare the sin of
many, v. 12. Which latter may be looked upon as an Explication of the former;
showing what before he meant by All; not generally the whole world, but the
decreed number of the Elect, (as Diodate there expounds it.) And so we find it
elsewhere; as Matthew. 20.28. where it is said, The Son of man came to give
himself a ransom for many. And Cap. 26.28. Christ blessing the Sacramental
Cup, This (says he) is my blood of the New Testament, which was shed for many,
for the remission of sins. Which Texts to an unprejudiced spirit, seem to put a
limitation upon this All, restraining it to some amongst mankind; viz. to Gods
Elect.

Repl. I am not ignorant what the Adversary does hereunto reply; that this word
Many, Repl. Many sometimes put for All.
is sometimes put for All; as Dan. 12.2. Many of them that sleep in the dust of
the earth shall awake, that is all. And so Romans 5.15. Through tht offense of
one many are dead. Which, (...), i. e: fere omnes, excepto Enocho, and si forte
fuere alii de quibus id scriptum non est. Grot. Com: in Loc.
however Grotius qualifies it with a fere omnes, Almost all, except Enoch, and
some other, who were translated without seeing of death, yet it seems rather
to relate to all the posterity of Adam, all which were through his sin become
liable unto death. Of whom also the 19th. verse there speaks in the same
language. By one man's disobedience many were made sinners, that is, All, as the
verse foregoing explains it. And so in some other places.

Ans. But letting this be yielded, Ans. All as often put for Many.
(which cannot be denied) that the word, [Many] is sometimes so used, yet still
it will serve to that end, for which it was made use of, viz. as a Counterpoize
to that Argument, which is taken from the word All. Which is as often put for
Many, as Many for All. And that it is so to be taken in those places before
alleged cannot be proved, but rather the contrary, as (God willing) shall be
demonstrated afterward. For the present pass we on.

Arg. 4, Christ tasted death for every man.
To these Texts prealleged, there is one more made use of, which seems to
speak more punctually and expressly than any of the former, and that so fully,
as it admits of no contradiction, viz. that which we find, Heb. 2.9. where it
is said of Christ that he tasted death for every man.

Ans.
Ans. A Text which I confess at the first sight seems to make much for the
Adversary, more than any other that I know. Yet let it be examined, we shall
not find what is expected from it.

1. For all sorts of Persons. (...): Beza, Gro. in loc. Et ita forte in Graeco
legendum est, Lapid: ibid.
1. For the word there rendered, Every one, it is not (...), pro unquoque, or
quolibet, fot every individual person, but (...), pro omni, for All, (...)
being there put for (...), (as Beza, and Grotius note upon it, and (as Lapide
conjectures) possibly mistaken for it.) So the vulgar Latin, as also our
former English Translation, with all others whom I meet wit, here render it,
Pro omnibus, for all men. And so looking upon it, we shall find no more in this
Singular, than was before in that Plural. And so may fitly expound it. Either,
of all sorts of Persons. So we find this word (...), All, every one, elsewhere
used: As in those Texts commonly alleged for this purpose; viz. Matthew. 9.35.
Where it is said, that Jesus went about healing every sickness, and every
disease among the people. (...) (...), Omnem morbum, Not that he cured every
one that was sick, but some or other of every kind of sickness. Sicut ergo hic
omne olus, omne olerum genus, ita and illic omnes homines, omne hominum genus
intelligere possumus. August. Enchirid. Cap. 103.
And so Luke 11.42. (which Augustine takes notice of) where it is said of the
Pharisees, that they tithed Mint and Rue, and all manner of Herbs, (...), Omne
olus, every herb, that is, of every kind. And in such a sense may the same word
there very fitly be understood. He tasted death for every man, (...), not for
every particular person, but for all sorts of Persons. Or, For every one, that
is, of those that were given to him, of his Elect. 2. Every one of his Elect.
Hic rursus anno^andum particulam universalem non complecti singulos homines,
sed omnia Christi membra in unum corpus conjungere. Beza. Gr. Annot. in loc.
All which making up one Body, they are (as Beza notes upon it) fitly put
together by this Collective particle, (...), Omni, a word of the singular
number, denoting the union, and conjunction of all the members of Christ in one
mystical Body, for all which Christ dyed. (...), for the All, the whole, the
whole Body, or company of his Elect.

Now take we either of these Expositions* which we will, or rather put we them
both together (which I find Estius to have done for us,) and we shall have the
full intent of that Text. Christ tasted death, (dyed) for all his Elect, being
some of all Nations, in all ages, for them, all, and every of them.

Quest. But what warrant have we thus to restrain that universal particle
there? Ths restriction of the universal particle there warranted by diverse
particulars in the sequel of that Chapter.


Ans. Besides what we have from other Texts of Scripture, which so limit the
extent of Christ's death (wherewith, God willing, I shall afterward acquaint
you) we shall find that in the sequel of that very Chapter which will be
sufficient; where we have it plainly expounded, who those all and every one
were, for whom Christ dyed; viz. the Sons of God, Ver. 10. Christ dying to
bring many Sons unto glory.
v. 10. It became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in
bringing many sons unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect
through sufferings. Where we have an account of what Gods design was in giving
his Son Christ to dye, viz. that by that means he might bring many Sons unto
glory, even all his Elect people, those whom in his secret council he had
predestined to the adoption of Sons by Jesus Christ unto himself (as the
Apostle has it, Ephesians. 1.5.)

Again in the next verse, they are said to be such as are Sanctified by Christ.
Ver. 11. Such as are sanctified by him.
For both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified are all one, v. 11.
Those who are sanctified by Christ, freed and delivered both from the guilt and
power of sin, justified in their persons, and purified in their natures, they
are they, all and every of them, for whom Christ dyed.

Ibid. His Brethren.
Again, in the close of that verse, they are said to be such as Christ owneth
for his Brethren, [ For which cause he is not ashamed to call them Brethren.]
So he did his Disciples after his Resurrection, Go tell my Brethren, Matthew.
28.10. Ioh. 20.17. And so he looks upon all his Saints, all true believers,
himself being the first born among many Brethren (as he is called, Romans 8.29.)
meaning all Gods Elect, who being the Sons of God by Adoption and Grace, they
came to be nearly related unto Jesus Christ, made his Brethren.

Again, v. 13. Verse. 13. His Children.
they are those whom Christ calls his Children. Behold I, and the Children
which God has given me; pointing at his Elect people, who were given to him by
his Father to be redeemed and saved by him.

Again, v. 16. Verse. 16. The Seed of Abraham.
they are said to be the seed of Abraham. For verily he took not on him the
nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham. A Text which, being
narrowly looked into, will be found to speak more in this cause, than at the
first it is apprehended. Christ took not on him the nature of Angels, etc.] So
our Translation renders it, and so most Interpreters expound it. But the
Original admits another sense, the words properly running thus. He takes not
hold of the Angels, but the Seed of Abraham he takes hold of. So the word
there used, (...), properly signifies, not Suscipere, or Assumere, to Assume,
or take upon one, but apprehendere, or manum injicere, to take hold of one* as
one lays hold of one that is flying away, or falling into a pit, or the like
danger, taking hold of him to recover and save him. So we find this word
elsewhere used, As 1 Timothy 6.12. where Paul bids Timothy, Lay hold of Eternal
life. (...). And Heb. 8.9. Where Gods delivering his people Israel out of Egypt
is expressed by this word, When I took them by the hand to lead them out of the
Land of Egypt; (...). And so in that Text, Matthew. 14.31. where when Peter
walking upon the Sea was ready to sink, it is said, That Jesus stretched forth
his hand, and caught him. (...). Gror. Com: in Text. C. Lap. ibid. Dr. Hammonds
Practic. Catec. p. 20. The Seed of Abraham, who.
And in such a sense (as Grotius and some other learned Expositors conceive of
it) may the word most fitly be taken in this place. Christ took not hold of the
Angels, (to save and redeem them;) But the seed of Abraham he (thus) took hold
of. The Seed of Abraham. But who are they? what all mankind? Not so. Not the
Seed of Adam (mark it,) but the Seed of Abraham. An expression which certainly
carries a special Emphasis with it; restraining the end of Christ's undertaking
unto a peculiar people; the Seed of Abraham. But whom shall we undestand
thereby? what the Seed of Abraham according to the flesh? So indeed Grotius,
therein following Chrysostom, Hebraeis scribens satis habet de illis loqui. De
Gentibus alibi loquendi locus. Grot. Com: in loc,
and some other Greek Expositors, (as he says) here looks upon it, as
relating to the Jews, the Hebrews, to whom this Epistle was written, and to
whom Christ was sent and given after a special manner, as he himself tells
his Disciples, Mat. 15.24. I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel. This being his Fathers will, that during his abode here upon earth, he
should apply himself chiefly (if not only) unto that people: which accordingly
he did, conversing only with them, and in an ordinary way distributing his
favors only unto them. But others, more fitly, by the Seed of Abraham there
understand his spiritual Seed; Abraham's spiritual Seed.
viz. Gods Elect, true believers, such as are of the faith of Abraham, and
under that Covenant which God made with him. These we find sometimes so called,
the seed of Abraham, As Romans 4.13. and 16. and elsewhere. Yea in a Gospel
sense, only, these are owned for the true seed of Abraham. (...) Intellige
pleno jure, ita ut haeredes sint. Gro. Com. in loc.
So much we may take notice of from that Text of the Apostles, Romans 9. v. 7.
Neither because they are the seed of Abraham (according to the flesh) are they
all Children (viz. pleno jure (as Grotius expounds it,) so also have right to
the inheritance,) but in Isaac shall thy seed be called. And again in the verse
following. [The Children of the promise are counted for the seed;] the true
seed of Abraham; that seed to which that Promise was made; I will be thy God,
and the God of thy seed: (So runs that Covenant which God made with Abraham,
Genesis 17.) What seed? Not that after the flesh, for then Ishmael should have
come in; but that after the Spirit, the spiritual seed, they that are of the
faith of Abraham (as the Apostle there explains it, Romans 4.16.) And this seed
it is that Christ is there said to take on him, or take hold of. He took hold
of the seed of Abraham, that is, his Elect people; such as were under that
Covenant made with Abraham, whereof Christ is the Mediator. Semen Abrahae, i.
e. veram hominis naturam and quidem ex Abrahamis familia ne quis ex eo colligat
servandos esse omnes homines, quoniam naturam omnibus hominibus communem
assumpsit. Itaque haec naturae societas ad solam Ahrahae sobolem restringitur,
i. e. ad Electorum eatum, qui Ecclesia nomine, censentur: Beza. Gr. Annot. ad
loc. Semen Abrahae] non Adae, quia Christus solos eos apprehendit, and salvat,
qui sunt semen Abrahae, non secundum carnem, sed secundum Spiritum: C. a Lapid.
Com: in loc.
So Beza there looks upon it, conceiving this expression there purposly used.
[Not the seed of Adam, but the seed of Abraham] to intimate that Christ in
taking the nature of man upon him, and therein doing and suffering what he did,
he did not do it as a thing in common for all the Sons of men, as intending the
Salvation of all, but in special for his Elect. And so Lapide the Jesuit gives
us the sense of it; as do all the generality of Orthodox Expositors.

By all which you now see it cleared up unto you, what we are there to
understand by that All, or Every one, for whom Christ is said to have tasted
death. Not every individual, particular person, but the Elect of God, those
whom he had given to his Son Christ, for that purpose, that he might redeem and
save them. And so you have all the principal Darts which Scripture may be
conceived to furnish the Adversary with, fairly put by, some of them also being
returned and retorted upon themselves, to the wounding of their own cause.

Some other Texts yet there are, which they make use of, for the backing of
these. Give me leave to take notice of some of the most obvious of them; as
briefly as I may.

Arg. 5. Christ dyed for some that may perish.
One of them we meet with, Romans 14.15. Where the Apostle giving a Caveat to the
strong Christian concerning the abusing of his Liberty, to the scandalizing of
his weak Brother: Destroy not him with thy meat (says he) for whom Christ
dyed. To which is joined that other, which speaks the same thing, and that
(as is conceived) somewhat more fully, 1 Cor. 8.11. And through thy knowledge
shall the weak brother perish, for whom Christ dyed. So that it seems that
Christ dyed for some, who yet may perish.

To this it is Answered. Ans. Perish actually they shall not, though
Actually perish they shall not. For this we have our Saviors own word, Ioh.
10. where speaking of his Sheep, (his Elect) for whom he laid down his Life,
v. 11. he afterward subjoyns, I give unto them eternal life, and they shall
never perish, and no man is able to pluck them out of my hand, v. 28. Perish
Actually then they shall not. Yet,

1. Others may attempt their Perdition. 1. Others may attempt their perdition.
So did Satan by Job, Job 1.11. and 2.5. And so by Peter, whom he desired to
sift (as his Lord and Master tells him,) Luke 22.31. to subvert his faith, and
so utterly to overthrow him. And the like may the Instruments of Satan do, they
may attempt the destruction of their Brethren, doing what in them is. And upon
that account they may be said to destroy them, though actually they be not
destroyed. Even as our Savior says of an unchaste man, who looks on a woman
to lust after her, he has committed adultery with her already (says he,)
though she remain chaste, Matthew. 5.28. Even thus may the Person, who through the
abuse of his Christian liberty scandalize^h his weak Brother, be said to
destroy him, viz. quantum in se est, as much as in him lies; thereby laying a
stumbling block in his way, for him to break his neck upon.

2. And (secondly) as hereby his perdition is attempted, 2. Their Salvation may
be endangered.
so his Salvation may be much endangered; he being thereby brought into a
perishing state, put upon some Rock which threatens a Shipwreck to his soul,
drawn into some sin (as viz. Idolatry,) which in it self is destructive. And so
in this respect he may be said to perish; Peccando peribit, i. e. a salute
excidet in aeternum periturus, quantum est ex part peccati: Estius Com: in 1
Cor. 8.11.
As, ex part scandalizantis, on his part who gives that offense to him, so ex
part peecati (as Estius well expounds it,) in regard of the sin which he is
drawn into, which in it self is mortal, and damnable. Thus may the abuser of
his Christian liberty be said to destroy his weak brother, and he to perish,
for whom Christ dyed: that is,

3. In the Judgment of Charity, Christ said to dye for those that perish.
3. (In the third place,) for whom in the Judgment of Charity, he is bound to
hope and believe that Christ dyed, as well as for himself. So those words may
there fitly be looked upon, as spoken Charitative, in a Charitable way, as
hoping the best of every one that makes a profession of Religion, that Christ
dyed for them. Thus you see also that these Texts, which seem to speak very
home to the point, admit of a fair solution.

Arg. 6. 2 Pet. 2.1. False Prophets said to deny the Lord that bought them.
And so does that other which is made much use of in this case, 2 Pet. 2.1.
Where certain false Prophets are said to deny the Lord that bought them, and so
bring upon themselves swift destruction.

Ans. Ans. The word Lord, (...) commonly understood of God the Father.
Which, yielding that by the Lord there, whom they are said to Deny, and who is
said to have bought them, is to be understood Christ, and the purchase of his
blood (which yet, that Text does not assert, where the word [Lord] is not
(...), but (...), which is commonly given unto God the Father, who in some
other sense, may be said to have bought all those whom he calls to a visible
Communion with himself; Ames Coronis Artic. 2. Cap. 3.
nor yet is there any mention there made of the death, or blood of Christ (as
our learned and judicious Ames observes) yet admits a fair construction no
ways advantageous to the Adversary. As,

To let that pass which some here make use of, Christ paid a price in it self
sufficient for All.
that Christ may be said to have bought them, in regard of the value of the
price which he paid, which was it self sufficient for the Redemption of them,
and all others, were it rightly and effectually applied unto them, which
however in a right sense it is true, yet it is subject to be misconstrued.
Answ. 1. Christ by his death purchased a dominion over all. Vt mortuis ac
viventibus Dominaretur] i. e. ut imperium in universos sibi acquireret, atque
teneret. Pareus ad loc.

Per mortuos and viventes universi quidem homines intelligi possunt, quia
universi huic Domino sunt subjecti. Pareus Com: ad loc. Christus per mortem and
Resurrectionem suam jure, meritoque hunc sibi dominatum comparavit: P. Martyr
Com: in loc.




1. Christ may be said in some sense to have bought them, viz. to have
purchased a Dominion over them: which was a consequent, yea and one of the Ends
of his death (as the Apostle tells us, Romans 14.9.) To this end Christ both
dyed, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living;
which however it be properly intended of believers, over whom Christ has a
special and peculiar Jurisdiction, yet (as Pareus notes) it may be extended
unto all, over whom as God and Man, as Mediator, he has an universal dominion,
which he obtained by his death. He humbled himself, and became obedient to the
death, the death of the Cross; wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and
given him a name above every name, Phil. 2.8, 9.] Supreme Authority and
Dominion over all Creatures. In such a sense, Christ may be said to have bought
those who by denying of him, bring everlasting destruction upon themselves, and
so in this sense to have dyed for all men.

2. Those false Prophets in their own opinion Christ's Redeemed ones.
2. Or (secondly) we may look upon them as being such as laid claim to this
Privilege, such as having been Baptized, professed themselves the servants of
Christ, and gloryed in their Redemption by him, hoping and expecting to have a
share in the merit of his death as well as any others.

3. Such in the opinion of others.
3. And (thirdly) they were such also in the Opinion of others, looked upon as
in the number of Christ's redeemed ones, being dedicated to him by Baptism,
where the Blood of Christ was sacramentally sprinkled upon them; whereby he
came to have the Right and Title of their Lord and Master. And thus they went
for such as were redeemed; though they were never truly owned by him. Thus
Scripture sometimes speaks of things, not as in truth they are, but as they
seem to be. From him that has (says Saint Mark) shall be taken away that
which he has, Mark. 4.25. which Saint Luke reporting explains, That which he
seems to have, Luke 8.18. Thus it is said of Ahaz, that he Sacrificed to the
Gods of Damascus, that smote him, and that the Gods of the Kings of Syria
helped them, 2 Chro. 28.23. Not that their Idols, (which are called by the name
of Gods,) did either hurt him, or help them, but such was the Opinion of him
and other Idolaters concerning them. And thus it may there be said of those
Apostates; they were such as the Lord had bought, so looked upon and accounted,
both by themselves and others.

Thus have you those Scripture Texts (at least the chief and principal of them)
which seem to speak for such an Universal Redemption, fairly examined. Every of
which I hope has received a full satisfaction.

From Scripture, Arguments from Reason: Arg. 1. Every man bound to believe that
Christ dyed for him.
the assertors of this Doctrine come to Reason, arguing after this manner. That
which every one is bound to believe, must needs be true. But is this a thing
which every man is bound to believe, that Christ dyed for him. Therefore this
is true. This is the Argument which is taken up at all hands by the
Adversaries, and cried up as unanswerable. But upon a due weighing of it, it
will be found to be but a shadow without a substance.

For Answer, let the Minor, the Assumption, Ans.
be examined, viz. Whether every man be bound to believe this, that Christ dyed
for him, This they assume, and take for granted. But this we deny. Taking
notice,

1. That there are some, 1. Not Heathens who never heard of Christ.
yea the greatest part of the world, who never heard of the name of Christ. And
not having heard of him, how is it possible that they should thus believe in
him? (as the Apostle concludes it, Romans 10.14.) So then, all and every man is
not bound to believe this, that Christ dyed for him.

Repl. Yea but (say they) all those to whom the Gospel is Preached are. 2. Nor
yet all Christians, absolutely.


Ans. Not so neither; not to believe this absolutely, and without Condition.
True it is, all those to whom the Gospel is Preached, are bound to believe,
that Christ is the Savior, the only Savior of the world, the Savior of all
that shall be saved. Neither is there Salvation in any other, etc. Act. 4.12.
This they are bound to believe. As also that he is an All-sufficient Savior,
that he has paid a price in it self sufficient for them; and that he is able
perfectly to save all those that come unto God by him; And that upon their
coming to him, receiving of him as their Savior and Lord, he will do this for
them, applying the merit of his death unto them, for their Justification and
Salvation. But that all should believe that these benefits of Christ's death
belong unto them, we find no where enjoined. Nay, for some to believe this,
viz. wicked and ungodly persons, continuing in their sins, and resolving so to
do, it were no other but a groundless presumption, a thing which they have no
warrant to do. As for such let it be said to them, as Iehu once spoke to Ioram,
when he enquired of him concerning Peace, Is it Peace Iehu? What have thou to
do with Peace (says he) so long as the whordoms of thy Mother Iezabel, and her
witchcrafts are so many? 2 King. 9.22. So say I concerning this Prince of
Peace, the Lord Jesus, who has shed his blood to make peace betwixt God and
man, what have you to do with him, or with his blood, to lay any claim to the
merit of his death, to believe that this blood was shed for you, whilst you
thus trample it under your feet by your continuing and going on in your sinful
provocations? So then, all are not bound to believe this, that Christ dyed for
them. Not they who thus daily crucify him afresh (as the Apostle speaks,
Heb. 6.6.) Nay thus continuing in their impenitency, they are rather bound to
believe the contrary, that Christ never intended to spend any drop of his blood
for them, that any benefit of his death should redound unto them, and so that
he dyed not for them. Thus to apply the death of Christ, and bring it home to a
man's self, is a thing which is peculiar to some, viz. to brokenhearted,
humbled sinners. Such Christ calls to come unto him. Come unto me ye that
labor and are heavy laden. For such it was Christ gave himself, whereof they
may rest assured; Not so others.

Repl. Yea, but it may be said, upon repenting and believing they may.

Ans. True, herein we shall close with them, concluding it as an undoubted
truth, that Christ dyed for all such, and consequently that if all were such,
Christ dyed for all. But this I shall have occasion to deal with more fully
afterward. For the present pass it by,

Taking notice of another Argument as trite and common as the former. Arg. 2.
Christ offered to all in preaching of the Gospel, and all required to believe
on him.
[If Christ did not dye for all and every one, why then is he offered to all
and every one to whom the Gospel is Preached, and they required under the
penalty of eternal condemnation to believe on him?] This is his Commandment,
that we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 3.23. We,
All, and every one, to whom the Gospel is Preached. He that believes not is
condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only
begotten Son of God, Joh. 3.18. Now if Christ did not dye for all, to what
purpose is this offer, this command? or what justice in this doom?

Ans. 1. Christ offered to all for the Elects sake.
For the former, first Christ is thus offered unto all for the Elects sake. Thus
many things are done in the world, and in the Church, for their sakes. For
their sakes it is that the Gospel is Preached. For their sakes it is that God
sends forth his Ministers. Even as at the last day he shall send forth his
Angels, to gather together his Elect from the four winds, from one end of the
heaven to the other, Matthew. 24.31. So to bring them into his Kingdom of Glory:
even so now he sends forth his Ministers, the Angels of the Churches, to
gather together his Elect, to gather them out of the world, and to bring them
into his Kingdom of Grace: So as, were it not for their sakes, the Ministers of
Christ should not be sent forth, neither should the Gospel be Preached at all.
This was the Reason which the Lord gives unto his Servant Paul, why he would
have him abide at Corinth, and Preach the Gospel there, For (says he) I have
much people in that City, many who belonged to his Election of grace, whom he
intended to bring home, effectually to call by his Ministry, Act. 18.10.
intimating, that had it not been for their sakes, Paul should not have Preached
there. And upon this ground it was that Paul himself both did, and suffered,
what he did. Therefore (says he) I endure all things for the Elects sake, that
they may also obtein the Salvation which is in Christ Jesus; (so he tells
Timothy,) 2 Timothy 2.10. And for their sakes it is, that in the Preaching of the
Gospel Christ is offered unto all, and every one. In as much as the Election of
God is secret, known only to himself. The Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy
2.19. Not so to others, not to Man. And therefore is it that the Ministers of
Christ must Preach the Gospel to every creature, as their Commission runs, Mark
16.15. Offering Christ to all, and every man, that so Gods Elect may be
gathered out of all.

2. To which might be added, 2: That others may be left without excuse.
this is done also for the sake of others, that they who believe not may be
left without excuse. If I had not come and spoken unto them (says our Savior
concerning the Jews) they had not had sin (comparatively, their sin had not
been such as now it is; or they might have excused themselves by their
ignorance) but now they have no cloak (no excuse) for their sin, Joh. 15.22.
Christ coming and Preaching of the Gospel among them, and so tendering himself
to them, rendered them inexcusable. And so does the Preaching of the Gospel,
and the offering of Christ to those that reject him, will not believe on him,
it leaves them without any (...), without any pretense or excuse, renders them
inexcusable. And upon this account again, is the Gospel preached unto all. So
as it cannot be inferred from this universal offer, that Christ dyed for all.

Ans. 2. Unbelievers refusing the offer of grace justly condemned.
For the latter, how can this stand with the Justice of God that they should be
condemned for not believing on Christ, for whom he did not dye? We Answer, Yes,
in as much as they do resist the Holy-Gbost, putting the word from them, and so
judge themselves unworthy of everlasting life, (as the Apostles Peter and Paul
charge it upon the Jews, Act. 7.51. and 13.46.) refusing that Salvation which
is offered and tendered to them. Which they do, not upon any such account,
because Christ dyed not for them, which is a thing that they are no ways privy
to, no more than others for whom he did dye. And upon this ground, viz. their
refusing to accept of what is offered to them, they fall under a just
condemnation.

Repli. They cannot receive this offer.
Repl. Why, but they cannot receive this offer, though tendered unto them. So
says our Savior himself concerning the Spirit of truth whom he promised to
send, The world cannot receive him (says he) Ioh. 14.17. And even the like may
be said concerning himself, though he be tendered in the preaching of the
Gospel, yet the Reprobate world cannot receive him, cannot of themselves
believe on him, Faith being the Gift of God.

Ans. 1. This impotency is from man himself.
Ans. 1. Suppose it that they cannot of themselves do what is required from
them, yet whence is that impotency and inability? Not from God, but from
themselves, who in Adam lost that ability which God had once given, and is not
now bound to restore unto them being lost.

Secondly, 2. Unbelievers wilfully obstinate.
Here is not only a simple impotency, but a wilful obstinacy. Not only
Negative, but also Positive Infidelity. As of themselves, they cannot, so they
will not receive Christ, and believe on him. And for this voluntary refusing of
him, being offered and tendered unto them, they are justly condemned.

Repl. Repl. This Grace belongs not unto all.
Yea but still this Grace does not belong unto all. And therefore why should
any be condemned for refusing that which does not belong to them?

Ans. Answ. Gods secret will no plea for those who obey not his Revealed.
True, did they know that this Grace belonged not to them, and that Christ did
not, in his own and his Fathers intention, dye for them, now indeed, this might
plead some excuse for their non-acceptance of this offer. But this (as I said)
is to them a secret. And therefore can be no warrant for what herein they do,
who are to attend only to the revealed will of God. Secret things belong unto
the Lord, but those things which are revealed belong unto us, and to our
Children, Deuteronomy. 29.29. So it is, the Gospel holds forth Christ unto them,
wherein God commands them to believe on him; promising life to all who obey
that command. Now they voluntarily rejecting that offer, refusing to obey that
command, they justly fall under the Censure of Eternal Condemnation. Arg. 3. In
receiving the Sacrament all are told that Christ died for them.


To these add one Argument more, a trivial one. If Christ did not give
himself, and that alike for all, how is it that in administering of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper it is told all those that receive it, that Christ
dyed for them, that his Body was broken for them, his Blood was shed for them?

Ans. This is spoken according to the Judgment of Charity.
To this it is soon answered. Thus the Ministers of Christ according to their
Masters direction speak, looking upon those, to whom they hold forth that
Ordinance, as Believers, (which they all ought to be to whom that Sacrament is
dispensed.) And so looking upon them, they reach forth unto them this Seal of
the Covenant to assure them of their interest in the death of Christ, that the
merit thereof does appertain unto them.

To proceed no futher. Ye now see what can be said for and on the behalf of
this plausible Doctrine of Universal Redemption, by the Patrons and defenders
of it, Which finding insufficient to maintain it,

Arguments against Universal Redemption.
Come we now (in the second place) briefly to see what may be said against it.
Where I shall proceed in the very same Method. First Arguing from Scripture,
then from Reason. Begin with the former,

From Scripture.
Scripture. Where we shall frequently meet with some restrictions, limiting and
restraining the death of Christ, as intended in a peculiar way for some among
mankind. The death of Christ restrained to some amongst mankind.
So are we to understand those Texts forenamed, where it is said of Christ,
that he bare the sins of many, Is. 53.12. Heb. 9.28. that he gave himself a
ransom for many, Matthew. 20.28. Not Universally and Indifferently for all, but
for some among all; Even his Elect people, who being simply considered, are not
a few, but Many. So much may be demonstrated from some other Texts, which do
clearly and convincingly hold forth this truth, that God the Father in giving
his Son, and Christ in giving himself, had a peculiar eye upon a select
company, whom God having set his love, (a peculiar love) upon, chosen out of
the world, gave unto his Son to be Redeemed, Justified, Sanctified, Saved by
him.

For this begin with the Text we have now in hand, Arg. 1. From the Text. Those
for whom Christ gave himself he Justifies, and Sanctifies.
which plainly sets forth to us the Ends of Christ's death, for what he dyed,
and consequently for whom he dyed. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem
us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people.] Mark it,
This was Christ's design in giving himself, that he might Redeem, Justify, and
Sanctify those, for whom he gave himself; that Redeeming and delivering them
from the guilt and power of sin, he might purify unto himself a peculiar
people. (...), a people exempt and separate from the rest of the world, (...).
Populus acquisitionis; vocatur autem sic Ecclesia Dei respectu, qui eam
acquisivit per sanguinem suum, id est, per mortem cruentam filii sui. Gror, ad
loc.
whom he might make his special favorites. A privilege which he intended not
to all, but to some, even those whom his Father had given him, his Elect
people; who are elsewhere called a peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2.9. Ye are a chosen
generation, etc. a peculiar people. (...), Populus ad acquisitionem, a people
for purchasing, that is, a purchased people, the peculiar purchase of the blood
of Christ. Such are Gods Elect, who being given to Christ were redeemed by him,
and so are called, (...), the Purchase, or Purchased possession, Ephesians. 1.14. But
of this (God willing) more hereafter in the sequel of the Text.

Arg. 2. Caiphas's Prophecy.
To this join we that other Text, which in effect speaks the same thing, even
that Prophecy of Caiphas, which we meet with, Ioh. 11.51, 52. where it is said,
that he being High Priest that year prophesied, that Jesus should dye for that
Nation, and not for that Nation only, but that also he should gather together
in one the Children of God that were scattered abroad.] A Text which deserves
to be taken special notice of, as in regard of the speaker, who spoke what he
meant not, God making use of his tongue to utter and pronounce an Oracle,
besides, nay contrary to the intentions of his heart, so of the matter there
uttered and declared. Which does plainly set forth what was the great design of
God the Father in giving his Son, and of his Son in giving himself, viz. that
he might gather together in one (in one body) the Children of God, the whole
company of his Elect, scattered abroad throughout the world, whether Jews or
Gentiles. So are we there to understand those words, [The Children of God] not
such as had a filial inclination in them, were of themselves aptly disposed to
become the Children of God (as Grotius and other Arminians would have it,
(...)] id est, qui animo sunt apto ut Dei filii fiant, Grot. Com: in loc.
Filios Dei] Loquitur per Anticipationem, aut ex divina praedestinatione.
Maldonar. Com. in loc.
) but Children by Election, such as God had purposed to make his Children by
the grace of Adoption, praedestinated to the Adoption of Children (as the
Apostle has it) Ephesians. 1.5. and in order thereunto had given them unto his Son,
that by him they might be gathered, and brought into that rank. These are they
then for whom Christ gave himself, having at least a special and peculiar eye
upon them (as it is confessed at all moderate hands,) even the Children of God,
his Elect people.

To this Prophecy (in the third place) join we those words of our Savior
himself in that obvious Text, so frequently, Arg. 3. Christ's giving himself for
his sheep.
and no less deservedly, insisted on, which we find in the Chapter foregoing,
Ioh. 10. where he, (who best knew what his own design and meaning was,) plainly
declares for whom it was that he laid down his life; viz. for his Sheep. I am
the good Shepherd, and the good Shepherd gives his life for the Sheep, v.
11. I lay down my life for the Sheep, v. 15. And who were these Sheep? why
surely Gods Elect people and no other ( Eos nempe hic dici Christi oves, qui
propter probitatem aliquam quae in ipsis fuit, ad credendum apti, and
accommodati erant. Socin-Praelect. Theolog. c. 12. Oves intellige eos qui miti
erant animo, ac tali ut spes esset eos Evangelium sibi patefactum non
repudiaturos. Grot. Com. in v. 16.
as Augustine and Beda rightly expound it;) Sheep, not by disposition, (as
Socinus, and after him Grotius and other Arminians would have it,) such as
being of a mild and gentle temper, better disposed than others, were readily
inclined and disposed to receive the Gospel when offered unto them, but Sheep
by Election. So the verse following plainly expounds it, where there is mention
made of other sheep. Other sheep have I which are not of this fold, v. 16.
meaning the Elect among the Gentiles. Praedestinatos nondum congregatos (as
Aquinas cites it out of Augustine;) such as were predestined unto Eternal
life, but not yet called; which afterward they should be, as it there follows.
Them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice. By the preaching of the
Gospel they should be brought home to Christ, to believe on him, and so be
brought into the same fold, incorporated into the same mystical Body, the
Church. For these then it was that Christ gave himself. Not for all Jews and
Gentiles, but for a peculiar and select company to be gathered out of both.
Such as being given to him by his Father before time, should in time come unto
him, believing on him. So we have it afterward explained, v. 26. where he
tells the malicious Jews [ Ye believe not (says he) because ye are not of
my sheep.] They were not in the number of those that were given to him by his
Father, that they might be saved by him; which if they had been, they would
have believed on him; A thing which all his sheep in time come to do. So it
there follows. v 27. My sheep hear my voice.] Those who are ordained to
eternal life, and so given unto Christ to be saved by him, they hear and
believe and obey the Gospel. And for these, and only these, it was that Christ,
as the good Shepherd, gave himself; Even for those to whom he gives eternal
life. So again it follows in the next verse; And I give unto them Eternal
life, and they shall never perish, etc. v. 28. And who are they, but Gods
Elect? those who were given to Christ by his Father. So the next verse has it,
My Father which gave them me is greater than all, v. 29. These then are the
sheep there spoken of, for whom Christ says he laid down his life. I lay down
my life for my sheep. Those sheep which at the last day he shall set on his
right hand, Matthew. 25.33. for them it was that he dyed. Not for the Goats on
his left hand. Not for wicked and ungodly men, who live and dye in their
impenitency and unbelief. To them shall he profess at the last day, that he
never knew them, as he tells them, Matthew. 7.23. He never looked upon them as
his. And shall we think that he would give himself, lay down his life for those
whom he shall so disclaim, professing never to have known them? So clear and
full then is this Text alleged, that were there no other to second it, yet it
may be thought sufficient to carry this cause, that Christ in giving himself
had an eye peculiarly to his Elect: Neither do I know what is, or can be
replied to it, which is worth the Answering.

As for that Distinction which is commonly made use o^, of Impetration, and
Application, Impetration and Application not to be severed.
that Christ dyed to impetrate and obtein Salvation for all, but not intending
to apply it to any but to his sheep, such as should believe on him, I am loath
to trouble you with it; it being a distinction that finds no footing in
Scripture, dividing also these two things which are not to be severed. For so
it is, Application does always follow Impetration; All those for whom Christ
has obtained Redemption, they shall in due time have the Benefit thereof
applied unto them; Christ having also obtained for them that they should
believe; without which his blood would have been spilt in vain. But to pass on.

Arg. 4. Christ saves his People from their sins.
To these add one or two Texts more, which speak the same thing, and that
somewhat more plainly. As that known one, Matthew. 1.21. where the Angel giving a
Reason of imposing the name Jesus upon Christ, Thou shall call his name Jesus
(says he, speaking to Joseph,) for he shall save his people from their sins.]
His people; (...). And who were they? why, not only the people of the Jews,
(to whom yet in a special way he was sent, and so they might upon that account
be called his people, as Calvin and some others expound it,) but all Gods
Elect, Periphrasis Electorum: Piscat. Sohol. in loc.
who were given to Christ by his Father. These the Apostle calls Gods people,
Romans 11.2. God has not cast away his people, whom he foreknew; meaning his
Elect among the Jews, whom he loved, and chose from everlasting; and decreed
to save before the foundations of the world were laid. How ever the Body of
that people was for a time laid aside, yet there was a people among them, whom
God looked upon as his people in a peculiar manner. And them he neither had,
nor would cast off. And these elsewhere Christ calls his people; as in that
Text forecited, Populus hic dicuntur qui facile Christi populus fieri poteramt,
ut Oves, Joh. 10.16. Grot. Com: in loc.
Act. 18.10. I have much people in this City, (says he to Paul.) Such as not
only with a little pains might be made his people, (as Grotius, and other
Arminians would blanch that Text, as they do also that other about Christ's
sheep, Joh. 10.16.) but such as were then his people, related to him by the
grace of Election, given to him by his Father, though not as yet brought home
to him (as they should be) by an effectual vocation. And thus most genuinely
understand we the word there, He shall save his people; his Elect, whose
Salvation he intended in giving himself.

So again in those other Texts, Arg. 5. Christ's giving himself for his Church.
where Christ's giving himself is appropriated to his Church; as we find it,
Act. 20.28. God purchased the Church with his own blood. And Ephesians. 5.25.
Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for it.

Repl. True (says the Arminian) he did so, but not only for it. Repl. But not
only for it.
So they go about to elude this Text (as also that other forecited, of Christ's
giving himself for his sheep.)

Ans. Ans. Ames Coronis de Redempt. Cap. 3. Christ loved his Church as Husbands
their wives.
But to this our judicious Ames returns a fitting Answer. This is even as if an
Adulterer, who bestows his love upon other women as well as upon his wife,
should return Answer to the Apostles injunction there in the former part of
that verse, where he requires Husbands to love their wives, that he does not
enjoin them to love them only, but so as they may with the like love, love
others besides them. Surely the Reason is alike in both. Husbands love your
wives, as Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for it. Now Husbands are so
to love their wives, as not to love any other with the like love. And so did
Christ love his Church with a peculiar love, which he expressed in giving
himself for it, which he did not for others.

Repl. Repl. In the Church many Reprobates.
Why, but (it is said) in the Church there are many Hypocrites, and Reprobates.

Ans. Not so in this Church, which Christ is said thus to love, and to have
given himself for: Ans. Not so in the Church invisible, which Christ gave
himself for.
which he did (as the next verse has it,) that he might sanctify and cleanse
it with the washing of water by the word; That he might present it to himself,
a glorious Church, not having spot or wrincle,] plainly showing what Church he
there spoke of, viz. the Church invisible, which is called his Body, whereof he
is said to be the Savior, v. 23. of that 5 Ephesians.

Thus we see how Scripture restrains the death of Christ; holding it forth as
proper and peculiar to some among mankind, viz. to Gods Elect people, those
whom God his Father had given to him, to be redeemed and saved by him, his
Sheep, his People, his Church, his Body. For them Christ gave himself in a
peculiar way, intending at least the chief benefit of his death only to them.
For this I presume these alleged Texts to be so clear and convincing, as that
they may give full satisfaction to any who desire to receive it, or are willing
to accept it.

Arg. 6. Christ sanctifying himself for his Elect.
To which add but one more, viz. that, Ioh. 17.19. where our Savior plainly
declares for whom it was that he Sacrificed himself. For their sakes (says he)
I sanctify my self. For their sakes,] that is, for those whom he had before
spoken of through the whole course of the Chapter, viz. those whom his Father
had given him out of the world, v. 6. those for whom he says he prayed, not so
for the world, v. 9. those who were not of the world, v. 14. for their sakes
(says he) I Sanctify my self; that is, I consecrate and offer up my self a
holy and unblemished Sacrifice for their Redemption; Omnes prorsus auctores,
quos ego legerim, interpretantur, pro eis ego me in sacrificium offero: nec
dubium est qui^ id verba significent. Maldon. Com. in loc. (...) hic idem valet
quod (...). Grot. ad loc.
so the Fathers generally (all whom the Jesuit Maldonate had met with, as
himself professes) with one consent do interpret that word there. And
questionless (as he concludes) so it must be there understood. So as we have
there a clear account for whom it was that Christ gave himself. Not for all,
but for his Elect. Thus have we heard what Scripture speaks in this Cause.

To which (in the next place) for further conviction, subjoyn we some other
Arguments, or Reasons, Arguments from Reason.
such as by Orthodox Divines are commonly made use of, all founded upon
Scripture. I shall only single out some of the most obvious.

Taking the first of them from the expression here in the Text, Arg. 1. Christ
gave not himself for all, as their surety, dying in their room and stead:
in the words which I have now in hand: where it is said, Christ gave himself
for us. (...), pro nobis, for us, that is, (as before I explained it,) not only
nostro bono, but nostra vice, not only for our good and benefit, but in our
room and stead. In such a sense is this Particle (...), For, sometimes used. So
it is looked upon, (and that, as I conceive not amiss) in that obscure Text of
the Apostle, one of the most obscure that we meet withal in his Epistles, 1
Cor. 15.29. where bringing many Arguments to convince his Corinthians of the
Resurrection of the dead, (which some of them denied, v. 12.) among other he
makes use of this. Else what shall they do which are Baptized for the dead? If
the dead rise not at all, why are they then Baptized for the dead? (...), Pro
mortuis (as the vulgar Latin has it,) For the dead (says our Translation,)
that is, (as Grotius, and some others, explain it) ipsorum vice, ac nomine. In
their Name, in their room and stead. For so it seems such a custom there was,
(whereof there is mention made in Antiquity, by Tertullian, Ambrose,
Chrysostom, Si quis in statu (...) esset mortuus, erat qui ipsius vice ac
nomine baptizabatur, sic mortui fidem apud Ecclesiam obsignans. Grot. Com. in
loc.
etc. as he observes,) that when any one dyed in the faith of Christ being
unbaptized, some one of his kindred or friends was wont to be Baptized for him,
thereby testifying and sealing up the faith of the deceased, whereupon he was
registered among those that dyed in the faith. A Custom of which Diodate says,
that however it was never altogether good and laudable, and in process of time
was foully and superstitiously abused, yet at the first it might be tolerable.
However, being in use among these Corinthians (as is conceived) and possibly
first instituted by them, it served as an Argument ad hominem, a good Argument
against them, who denied the Resurrection of the dead. If so that there were no
Resurrection, to what purpose did they make use of such a Rite, such a
Ceremony, in the behalf of the dead, for any to be thus Baptized for them? And
in such a sense (as I told you) the phrase must be understood in that forecited
Text, To. 5.7. where to dye for a righteous man, for a good man, (...), is to
dye in his room and stead. And thus is Christ here said to Give himself for us,
(...), as our sponsor, our surety, in our room, in our stead, undertaking and
engaging for us. Now who is there that will say, that Christ thus dyed for all?
that he stood in the room of Judas that betrayed him, of Pilate that condemned
him, of the Jews that crucified him, and so of all other Reprobates? that he
took upon him their sins, and suffered the punishment due unto them, that he
Redeemed them, was a Savior to them? As for Judas in particular, Christ looked
upon him as lost, as a Son of Perdition, so he calls him, Ioh 17.12. (...),
not only one that had deserved destruction (as Grotius and Arminians would
construe it, Qui dignissimus erat ob suam perfidiam exitio. Grot. Com. in loc.
) for so have all men done, and upon that account may be callen Sons of
perdition, but one that for that foul fact of his, which he had designed
against his Lord and Master, was destinated and appointed to everlasting
destruction. And shall we then imagine that Christ so looking upon him, should
yet in this sense give himself for him, undertake for him, one whom he knew to
be for ever lost? And the like may we say of those who were then in Hell
already. Shall we say that in this sense Christ dyed for them?

To which add, that if Christ as a surety did undertake for all, and make
satisfaction for all, then how is it that God should require satisfaction from
any of them again? Their debt being by their surety discharged, it could not in
justice be demanded of them again. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that
dyed, Romans 8.34. But to proceed.

Arg. 2. Christ working from his Father. As in his Prophetical,
Let a second Argument be taken from that Order of working, which is betwixt the
Father and the Son. The Son works from the Father. So he did in his
Prophetical office, only declaring the mind and will of his Father* speaking
all and only that which his Father had put into his mouth. I have not spoken of
my self (says he) Ioh. 12.49. but the Father which sent me, he gave me a
Commandment what I should say, and what I should speak. And again, in the
verse following, whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said unto me,
so I speak. And as to the matter which he spoke, so to the Persons to whom he
spoke. He imparted and made known this mind and will of his Father not
promiscuously to all, but to all and only those whom his Father would have him.
This is the Reason which our Savior gives unto his Disciples, when they
demanded of him, why he spoke to the people so obscurely as he did, in
Parables, and not so plainly and intelligibly as he did unto them, Matthew.
13.11. Because (says he) it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the
Kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given. Herein what he did, was in
compliance with the will of his Father, doing what he would have him to do,
making his will known to them whom of his free grace he had appointed
thereunto, not so to others. I gave unto them the words which thou gave me,
Joh. 17.8. viz. To them which thou have given me.

And so in like manner in his Priestly Office, So in his Priestly office,
suffering, for those whom his Father had Elected.
in the executing thereof he did nothing but what his Father would have him to
do, doing his will. In the volume of thy Book it is written of me, Lo I come
to do thy will O God, Heb. 10. This was his Meat (as he says) to do the will
of him that sent him, and to finish his work, Joh. 4.34. Thus he acted in his
Life. And thus he suffered in his death: Drinking the Cup which his Father had
given him, Joh. 18.11. suffering what he would have him. And as what, so for
whom he would have him, viz. those whom he had given him. So he expresses it,
Ioh. 17. v. 2. As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life to as many as thou have given him. These they were whom Christ had
such a peculiar eye upon in what he did and suffered; even those that were
given him by his Father, given him by his Decree of Election. Them he had a
care of living, and for them he dyed, giving himself for them, to redeem them,
save them. For their sakes, I sanctify my self (in the Text before made use
of) Ioh. 17.19, Thus did the work of the Son in Redemption exactly answer to
the work of the Father in Election, the one not exceeding, or falling short of
the other, whom the Father Elected, them the Son Redeemed. Whence it is, that
Believers are said to be Chosen in him, Ephesians. 1.4. in as much as the decree of
Election is executed in, by and through him.

To which (in the third place) subjoyn we the work of the Spirit in
Sanctifying; Arg. 3. The work of the Spirit in sanctifying answers to the
work of Christ in Redeeming.
which in like manner answers to the two former, to the work of the Father in
Electing, and the Son in Redeeming, being of the same extent, not coming short
of them. Thence is it that we find all these three put together by Saint Peter,
1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father through
Sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ. Thus do Election, Justification, Sanctification, like so many
Linkes in a Chain, follow one upon another, all belonging to the same persons.
Those whom God the Father Electeth, the Son Reconcileth, and the Spirit
Sanctifies. Now the Spirit does not undertake the sanctifying of all; No more
did the Son the Redeeming and Reconciling of all, but only of those whom he
intended (as my Text has it) to purify unto himself to be a peculiar people.

Arg. 4. Christ interceding for all those for whom he dyed.
Let a fourth Argument be that which is commonly made use of in this cause.
Those for whom Christ performs one part of his Priestly Office, for them he
also performs the other. Those for whom he offered himself upon earth, for
them he intercedes in heaven. So much we may collect from that Text forecited,
Ephesians. 5.2. where the Apostle sets forth how Christ is said to give himself for
his people, viz. as an Offering and a Sacrifice: In which two words (as I told
you) there seems to be an allusion to the two Altars, and two kinds of
Sacrifices in the Temple, the Brazen Altar, which was for bloody Sacrifices,
the Golden, for the offering of Incense. The former of which (at our own new
Annotator there observes) was a Type of Christ's bloody offering upon the
Cross, the other of his Intercession. Now those for whom he gives himself in
one kind, he also gives himself in the other. Those for whom he offered that
his bloody Sacrifice upon the Altar of the Cross, for them he offers up the
sweet Incense of his Merits, interceding for them in heaven. And so much may be
collected from that of Saint John, 1 John 2.1, 2. where he also puts these two
together. We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. And
he is the Propitiation for our sins,] Mark it, those for whom Christ is a
Propitiatour, for them also he is an Advocate; Interceding for those for whom
he suffered. For which most express is that Text commonly made use of in this
cause, Romans 8.34. It is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen again, who
is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. Now this
last he does not for all. Christ not Interceding for all.
He did it not when he was upon earth. I pray not for the world (says he) Ioh.
17.9. Not for the Reprobate world. For whom then? why for those, all those,
only those, whom his Father had given him. [But for them whom thou have given
me,] His Apostles and Disciples, which did then already believe on him, as also
those who afterward should do the like; As we have it, v. 20. Neither pray I
for these alone (his Apostles) but for them also which shall believe on me
through their word; that is, for all his Elect, who should believe on him in
after ages. And if Christ as Mediator did not make Intercession for all
whilst he was upon earth, much less does he now do it being in heaven. And not
interceding for them, surely he dyed not for them. He that would not breath out
a prayer for them, surely would not spend his blood for them.

The Distinction of General and special Intercession unscriptural.
Repl: Yea but (says the Arminian) there is a twofold Intercession of Christ;
the one General for all, the other special for Believers.

Ans. So they indeed have found out a distinction, but where they found it they
tell us not. Surely not in Scripture, nor yet in any approved writer, whether
Ancient or Modern. Neither can they well tell us what they mean by it. And
therefore I shall forbear to trouble you with the examination of it.

Repl. Christ made Intercession for the Jews that crucified him.
Repl. Why, but (say they) do we not read that Christ made Intercession for
others besides his Elect? what means that of the Prophet Isai, cap. 53.12. He
made Intercession for the Transgressors? which he did in his Passion, when he
prayed for them that crucified him (as the Story tells us) Luke 23.34.

Ans. To this it is answered. True, Christ does make Intercession for
Transgressors, viz. such sinners as have interest in him, and belong unto him.
And he did pray for those that crucified him. But how did he this?

Ans. 1. Ans. 1. This he did out of a humane Affection.
Why, this he did either humano affectu, out of a humane Affection, wishing
that to them as Man, which as God he knew would not be granted to all of them,
Thus weeping over Jerusalem, as man he wishes for them, that they had known in
that their day the things which belonged unto their peace, which yet as God he
knew were then hid from their eyes, Luke 19.42.

2. Or else this he did as an act of Obedience, 2. As an act of Obedience.
(as he did many other things) that he might fulfill all righteousness, which
(as he says) it became him to do, Matthew. 3.15. Herein doing that himself which
he had taught his Disciples to do, to pray for them which despitefully used
them, and persecuted them, Matthew. 5.44. Which accordingly, in imitation of this
his Lord and Master, the Martyr Stephen did, Act. 7.60.

3. 3. Not for all, but those who did it ignorantly, among whom were some Elect.
Or (thirdly) supposing him to put up this prayer as Mediator, yet will it not
hence be concluded, that he made Intercession for all those who had a hand in
bringing him to the Cross; but only those who did it ignorantly. For so runs
his prayer. Father forgive them, for they know not what they do, Luke 23.24.
Amongst whom there were some that belonged to the Election of grace, and so
received the benefit of that prayer, being soon after converted to the Faith
(as the Story tells us, Act. 2.37.) Here is a fourth Argument, taken from
Christ's Intercession, which does not alike extend to all, no more does his
death. To which add a fifth.

If Christ dyed for all alike, Argn. 5. Christ not loving all alike with his
greatest love.
then must he love all alike, love all with his greatest love.

For such was that love which he showed in thus giving himself. So he himself
looked upon it. Greater love has no man than this, that one lay down his life
for his friends, so he tells his Disciples, whom he calls his friends, Joh.
15.13. A higher expression of love there cannot be than this, for one to dye
for another. This was that which we find those two Pythagoreans, Damon and
Pytheas so much cried up for among the Heathens, that the one was so willing to
yield himself an (...), a surety for the other, to dye for him in case he
returned not. So then, if Christ thus became a surety for all, dying alike for
them, then must he bear and express a like love to all. As much to Judas, as to
Peter; as much to the damned in Hell, as to the Saints in Heaven. An Argument,
which, whatever Evasions are sought out for to elude it, will never be answered.

Repl. As for that which by way of Reply is told us, that Christ's bestowing of
Salvation is an act of greater love than his meriting of it, Christ's bestowing
of Salvation not an act of greater love than his meriting it.
As it is directly contrary to what our Savior himself there affirmed, and to
the truth it self, there being greater love shown in suffering much for the
obteining of a thing for one, than in conferring it upon him afterward; So it
makes nothing to the purpose intended, in as much as these two cannot be
severed, the meriting and bestowing of Salvation. Meriting and conferring not
to be severed.
Those for whom Christ has obtained it by his death, he will actually estate
them in it. If when we were enemies we were reconciled unto God by the death of
his Son, much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his life, Romans 5.10.

Repl. Neither will that distinction, which is here made use of, ought avail,
viz. of an Antecedent and Consequent love; Christ's Antecedent and Consequent
love.
a love wherewith Christ loves men before they believe, and after, The former
of which is said to be alike unto all, but not so the latter, in as much as
still that Antecedent love (as they call it,) that love which Christ showed
unto his people in dying for them, and so purchasing Salvation for them, is the
greatest act of love. Christ's dying for his people the greatest act of love.
So the Apostle looked upon it, Romans 5.8, 9. where comparing these two
together, that love which goes before Justification with that which follows
after, makes the former of these the greater. God commends his love toward
us ((...), that his love, his transcendent and surpassing love) in that while
we were yet sinners Christ dyed for us. Much more then being justified by his
blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. This was the highest
demonstration of love, that ever God showed to the Sons of men, in giving his
Son to dye for them; and so of Christ in thus giving himself for them. Neither
are these two distinct kinds of love in Christ, Christ's Antecedent and
Consequent love the same Love.
to be willing to save before, and after faith. But they are only two effects
and issues of one and the same love, which (as I said) manifests it self more
in the former of these, which is also the ground of the latter. So as still the
Argument holds firm. If Christ dyed alike for all, then did he bear and
express alike love to all, which how derogatory it is to that love which he
bare to his Elect, I shall God willing) show you afterward. To this add but
one more.

If Christ dyed alike for all, then why is not this alike made known to all?
Arg. 6. Christ not made known to all, but to a few.
that they might take notice of what is done for them. Without which the blood
of Christ may seem to be spilt in vain as to these who never heard of him, who
are hereby made altogether incapable of receiving any benefit from him, in as
much as they are not capable of believing on him. How shall they believe on him
of whom they have not heard? Romans 10. But this is a secret, made known but to a
few. So it was before the coming of Christ, A mystery that was hidden from ages
and generations (as the Apostle says of it) Col. 1.26. A mystery which from
the beginning of the world was hid in God (as elsewhere he has it) Ephesians. 3.19.
A secret hid in Gods own breast and bosom, made known but to a few. And so it
is still in a great measure since the coming of Christ, there being many parts
of the world, yea the greatest part of it, which scarce ever heard of the name
of Jesus, which that it is done by a divine providence so disposing of it, is a
thing not to be questioned. Now if Christ dyed alike for all, and so merited
Salvation alike for all, why then is this kept secret from so many? If
Reconciliation and Salvation were alike purchased by him for all men, why is
not this declared and published, that all those who will (to speak in their
language) might take the benefit of it? Why is this grace of God hidden from so
many, to whom it belongs as well as others? and without the knowledge of
which there is no possibility of their Salvation?

Repl. To this it is replied, This grace is not alike held forth to all,
because many show themselves unworthy of it. Repli. Some show themselves
unworthy.
That is the Reason which Paul gives of withdrawing the Gospel from the
Jews, Act. 13.46. Seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of
everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles. And upon the like ground it may
be withheld from some of the Gentiles.

Ans. Unworthy? Ans. Such are all when Christ is first offered to them.
Alas! who is not so when this Grace first meets with him? should not Christ
be made known but to such as are worthy, he must never be made known to any.
Surely when the Gospel was transplanted from the Jews to the Gentiles, it was
not because they were in themselves more worthy. Oftimes so it is, that the
Gospel is preached, and Christ made known to those that are most unworthy.

Repl. Repl. The Apostles to enquire who were worthy.
But does not the Commission, which our Savior gave unto his Disciples when he
sent them forth to preach, run thus, Into whatsoever City or Town ye shall
enter, enquire who in it is worthy, and there abide, Matthew. 10.11. And again v.
13. If the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it?

Ans. Ans. Yet to preach the Gospel to others also.
True, such they were to enquire for, there taking up their lodging where they
had hopes of a courteous reception and kind entertainment for their persons and
Doctrine; which finding, they were to abide with them, preaching the Gospel of
peace unto them; Yet not so, but that they were to preach it unto others also.
The Lord sending his Prophet Exekiel to the people of the Jews, he tells him
aforehand, what ones he should find them, Ezekiel. 2.3. Son of man, I send thee to
the Children of Israel, to a rebellious Nation. And v. 4. They are impudent
Children, and stif-hearted, I do send thee unto them, and thou shall say unto
them, Thus says the Lord God. And they, whether they will hear, or whether
they will forbear, (for they are a rebellious house) yet shall they know that
there has been a Prophet among them. And such did the Apostles also find that
people when they were sent by their Master to preach the Gospel unto them; yet
they were sent to them. And being so sent, they were not to decline that
service. It was necessary (says Paul) that the word of God should first have
been spoken to you, Act. 13.46. necessary in regard of Christ's Command. So then
it is not the worthiness or unworthiness of a people that is the sole cause why
the Gospel is preached unto some, and not to others. Sometimes, yea oftimes,
where sin abounds grace superaboundeth, Romans 5.20. There must then be some
higher cause which puts this difference betwixt Nation, and Nation. And what
shall that be? Surely where God has a people that do belong unto his Election
of grace, he will reveal and make known his Son to them some way or other. Paul
must continue preaching the Gospel at Corinth, because the Lord had much people
in that City, Act. 18.10. And were it only men's own unworthiness that hinders
the making known of Christ unto them, and of that reconciliation which was
obtained for them by him, the same unworthiness should much more have hindered
the obteining of that Reconciliation. If it now hinder Christ's making known
himself to them, it should much more have hindered his giving himself for them.
But I shall proceed no further.

You now see the sum of what is, and may be said Pro and Con, for and against
this doctrine of Universal Redemption. Which if you shall but rightly consider,
duly weighing the Arguments on both sides, I shall not doubt of the success.
Which that it may be answerable to my desire, give me leave to propound one
Question unto you: which I shall desire you seriously to consider before you
give any entertainment to this Doctrine, viz.

Quest. What is to be got by it? Quest. What to be got by receiving the
Doctrine of Universal Redemption
This do all wise traders, before they bargain for any Commodity, they first
propound to themselves what they shall gain by it. And this do you, before you
receive this new Doctrine, see what you shall get by it, what spiritual
advantage is to be made of it, more than of the Doctrine formerly received?

Repl. O yes (will some say,) very much. Here is a ground of Comfort for poor
sinners, Repl. A ground of Comfort for poor sinners.
which is not to be found in any other way. For if Christ did not dye alike for
all, and every one, how shall any be assured that he dyed for them, and that
they shall receive any benefit from him? Yea what do they know, but that coming
unto him they may find the like intertainment from him, that some of those who
take acquaintance of him at the last day are said to meet with, whom he
dismisseth with a Nescio vos, Depart from me, I never knew you, Matthew. 7.23.
Even so may he say unto them coming to lay claim to the merit of his Death;
Depart from me, I never knew you; never knew you for mine, never intended you
any benefit by my death. So as it is but in vain for them to look after that
which they have no right unto. This is the great and plausible Argument, which
is most taking with honest and simple hearts.

Ans. Ans. The promise full to them that believe.
But to this let the Answer be returned in one word, Only Believe. So doing,
now the promise is full; God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes on him shall not perish, but have everlasting
life.

Repl. Yea but (it will be said) how can a poor sinner do this? how can he
believe on Christ, unless first he believe that he dyed for him? Repl. How
shall a man believe on Christ unless he first believe that he dyed for him?
which he cannot do upon any good ground, unless he first intertain this
Doctrine, and believe that Christ dyed for all.

Ans. Ans. To believe on Christ the direct, and first Act of Faith.
So it is looked upon indeed, and that not only by Arminians, (who take this
for one of the best shafts in their Quiver,) but also by some other more
moderate spirits, who thus conceive of it, that a man must first believe that
Christ is his Savior, and that he gave himself for him, dyed for him, before
he can believe on him, resting upon him for Salvation. But herein, upon a more
narrow search into it, we shall find them unwarily mistaken. As will soon
appear if we do but look upon these two Acts of Faith in their right order. The
one of which, viz. to believe on Christ, to take hold of him as a Savior, is
the Direct Act, the other, to believe that he dyed for me; and that he has
obtained reconciliation for me, the Reflex act, an act of Assucame, arising
from the souls reflecting and looking back upon its own act of believing.
Which, if rightly considered, will be of great use and importance, as for the
clearing of this scruple, so for the quieting of doubting souls: who by their
believing on Christ may be assured of this that he dyed for them, and that the
merit of his death does belong unto them. This I shall (God willing) speak to
somewhat more fully hereafter. Where I shall show you that there is more true
solid comfort to be found in the other, the old way, than in this. For the
present only take notice, that you cannot assign any spiritual advantage that
is to be made of this Doctrine and consequently cannot give any good Reason why
you should give intertainment to it.

Quest. Quest. The Doctrine of Universal Redemption how disadvantageous.
Which seeing you cannot do, cannot tell me what you may gain by it, let me (in
the second place) briefly on the other hand show you what you shall loose by
it, what disadvantage will be made of it, if entertained. Which take in three
or four particulars.

1. This is a Doctrine which derogates much from the Grace of God, in giving
his Son. Ans. 1. It derogates from the love of God the Father in giving his Son.
So in truth it does; However it is vulgarly otherwise looked upon, as a
Doctrine that does elevate and magnify this grace far more than the other, and
that by extending and enlarging of it, yet really it extenuates it, and
derogates much from it, whilst it asserts it to be alike extended to, and
intended for all. Which if so, where is then that special, that singular love
of God to his Elect, which is every where so highly extolled in Scripture? In
comparison of which that love which he bears to others is little better than
hatred. And therefore so called by the Apostle, Romans 9.13. Jacob have I loved,
Esau have I hated; that is, not loved the one with the like love that I did the
other. Certainly, whatever may be conceived of it, to make Gods intention in
giving his Son to be alike toward all, it derogates not a little from that
great love wherewith he loved his Elect people, which far exceeds that love
which he bare to the rest of Mankind.

2. And as it derogates from the grace of God the Father, so also from the love
of God the Son. 2: It derogates from the love of God the Son in giving himself.
Which certainly toward his Church, his Body, was a peculiar, and transcendent
love. Thence is it that the Apostle compares it with the love of a Husband to
his Wife, Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands love your wives even as Christ loved the Church,
and gave himself for it. Now that love which Husbands bear and show to their
wives is, (or ought to be,) greater than that which they bear and show to any
others. For this cause shall a man leave his Father and Mother, and cleave unto
his wife, Matthew. 19.5. There being the nearest relation betwixt them, there
ought also to be the dearest affection. And so was it betwixt Christ and his
Elect, there being a nearer Relation betwixt him and them than any other, they
being given to him by his Father; and made one with him, he bare a singular and
peculiar love to them. As the Father has loved me so have I loved loved you
(says he to his Disciples) Ioh. 15.9. Now what love like that which God the
Father bare unto his Son Christ? who is therefore called, The beloved, Ephesians.
1.6. and Gods beloved Son, Matthew. 3.17. And such was that love which Christ
showed to his Elect people in giving himself for them. Who loved us and gave
himself for us, Ephesians. 5.2. Certainly, to make the love of Christ alike unto all,
is no small derogation from that love which he bare to his Elect. And this do
they who will have him to give himself alike for all, in dying for them. Which
was (as I have shown you) the greatest act and highest expression of love that
ever Christ showed to any.

3. This Doctrine as it derogates much from God and Jesus Christ, so it
arrogates too much unto Man, in as much as it lays the ground of his
differing from others in himself. 3. It arrogates too much unto Man, laying the
ground of his differing from others in himself.
For so it runs. As for Christ, what he has done he has done it alike for
all. How is it then that some are saved by him, others not? What is it that
makes one to differ from another? Why only because the one receives what the
other rejects. So as by this Doctrine it must be left merely to the liberty
of man's own will to difference and distinguish himself from others. Which runs
directly cross to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.7. For who makes thee to
differ from another? And what have thou that thou did not receive?

Repl. Yea (but (it will be said) this is from the grace of God that any one
comes thus to receive what is offered, to apply what is tendered, to believe on
Christ.

Faith a fruit not of Common, but special Grace.
Ans. But what Grace is this, which they speak of? Not any special grace which
Christ merited or intended for one more than another, but a common grace, such
as is indifferently reached forth to all, to whom the Gospel is preached. Now
how is it that this Grace is effectual to one, not to another? Why this is not
any thing that Christ has done, or intended more for the one than the other;
not that he has merited faith for them, that they should believe rather than
others, but merely from the liberty of their own will. So as the Efficacy of
the death of Christ is by this Doctrine, in the ultimate resolution of it, made
wholly to depend upon the will of man. A Coar which will stick in the throats of
who ever they are that shall swallow this Doctrine of Universal Redemption in
such a sense as it is vulgarly held forth; a Consequence which they will never
be able to free it, or themselves from. Which I desire that it may be taken
special notice of, that so it may appear, that it is not without just and
weighty Reason that we are so averse unto this Doctrine, which draws such a
train after it, upon which follow such mewtable inconveniences. A Doctrine
which derogates so much from God and Jesus Christ, and arrogates too much to a
man's self. Both which Christians ought to be very wary of.

4. To this might be added (what also is considerable) that this Doctrine
breaks in pieces that Golden Chain of Salvation. 4. It breaks in pieces the
Golden Chain of Salvation.
The first Link whereof (Election,) if it be not hereby wholly broken of, yet is
it disordered, made to come after Redemption. For so it runs. God did first
intend to give his Son for the redeeming and saving some among mankind, viz.
those which should believe on him. And then foreseeing who they were that would
believe, and persevere in so doing, he choose them unto Salvation. Which how
does it pervert that Order which Scripture holds forth in the Causes of man's
Salvation, the first whereof is Election. Whom he did predestinate them he also
called, etc. Romans 8.30. God first chooses some out of mankind, whom
predestinating and appointing unto eternal life, he gives unto his Son Christ
( All that the father gives me shall come unto me, Joh. 6.7.) that he might
execute that his gracious purpose concerning them. Which accordingly he does by
Redeeming, Justifying, Sanctifying, Saving of them. Now this being the first
and great wheel, which sets all the rest a rank, if this be disordered (as by
this Doctrine it is) it must needs breed a dangerous confusion.

5. And again this Doctrine (what ever may be conceived of it) is not a little
prejudicial to the Comfort and confidence of a Believer; 5. Prejudicial to the
Comfort and Confidence of a Believer.
who being hereby left to himself, to stand upon his own legs, left to the
liberty of his own will, thus to work out his own Salvation in his own
strength, can have no assurance of it. This being all (according to this
Doctrine) that Christ has merited for him, that upon his believing and
persevering he shall be saved, not that he shall believe and persevere unto
Salvation. So as however he be in a state of grace for the present, yet he may
fall away totally and finally, and so perish for ever, as Millions of others
have done, for whom yet Christ dyed as well as for himself. And if so, where
then is Paul's Triumph, which he makes in that forecited Text, Romans 8.34. Who
is he that condemns? It is Christ that dyed.

But to proceed no further in this Controversal way, let these considerations
be seriously weighed and applied, and I hope they will serve as a preservative
against the Infection of that Doctrine, which some are so earnest to instill
into unwary souls among you. This has been my design in this large handling
of this point after this manner, which otherwise I should not have spent so
much time upon, not being willing to trouble the Pulpit with debates of this
nature, unless where a pressing necessity requires it.

The Doctrinal part being thus Explicated and cleared by showing you whom we
are to understand by this Us for whom Christ is here said to have given
himself, viz. All true Believers, come we now to (what I know you think long
for,) to make some improvement hereof by way of Application.

Which (in the first place) I might direct by way of Information, from hence
giving you to take notice, that Christ in dying did not seek himself. Appli. 1.
Information: Christ in dying did not seek himself.
This he did not do in his life. I seek not mine own glory (says he) Ioh.
8.50. No more did he in his dedth. True it is, there was an honor, which was
not only a consequent of his sufferings, but it was due to him, and conferred
upon him upon the account of them. So much is held forth unto us in those
Texts, which are by Papists somewhat overstrained, and so abused. As that of
the Prophet Esai, Cap. 53. v. last; where God the Father makes this promise to
his Son Christ, Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he
shall divide the spoil with the strong, because he has powered out his soul
unto death. Because Christ had shown himself so obedient unto God his Father in
his sufferings, therefore his Father would confer a singular honor and dignity
upon him. So the Apostle speaks it more fully in those Texts formerly made
use of, Romans 14.9. To this end Christ both dyed, and rose, and revived, that he
might be Lord both of the dead and living. (...). Thus was this Dominion due
unto him by his Fathers Decree, who therefore suffered him to dye that he might
raise him up again, and raising him up give unto him eternal life, with a
Sovereign power over his Church, and over all things for his Church, Debetur ei
hoc dominum ex Patris decreto, qui ideo eum mori sivit ut suscitaret,
suscitavit ut vitam ei caelestam daret, conjunctam cum regia potestate in
Ecclesiam, and pro Ecclesia, Grot. Com. in loc.
(as Grotius well explains that Text.) And so, Phil. 2.8, 9. He humbled
himself, etc. wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name
above every name; etc. Transcende^t, honor and dignity, as a recompense for
that his abasement. And so again, Heb. 2.9. We see Jesus for the suffering of
death, crowned with glory and honor. Where that particle (...), For, may be
conceived to import more than that the Glory of Christ was a bare consequent of
his sufferings (as our Divines commonly look upon it,) viz. that God his Father
looking upon him as worthy (for so he was, and that upon that account, as the
24. Elders acknowledge it in their Song, Rev. 5.9. Thou art worthy, etc. For
thou wast slain, and have redeemed us unto God by thy blood) conferred it upon
him. But in the mean time this was not Christ's aim, his design in giving
himself, thus to merit for himself. So much may plainly be collected from the
scope, and the very words of that Text even now named, which Papists make use
of to a contrary sense, Phil. 2. where the Apostle willing Christians not to
look at their own things, v. 4. Look not every man on his own things, ((...),
Do not make this your mark, so as to aim only at your selves, your own honor
and profit, etc.) but every man also look on the things of others, (seeking the
welfare of your Brethren, especially their eternal welfare, though it be with
some outward detriment and damage to your selves,) in the next verse he adds;
Let this mind be in you which also was in Christ Jesus; who being in the form
of God, etc. made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
Servant, etc. He humbled himself and became obedient to the death, the death of
the the Cross. Thus did he humble himself not for himself, that he might merit
for himself. True indeed (as it there follows) hereupon God did exalt him,
crowning him with that deserved reward of his obedience. Yet still this was not
his design in humbling himself. He did not therein seek his own things, in
whole, or in part aim at himself. Which if he had done, his love which he
pretended to his Church would thereby have been much obscured and diminished.
For now it should not have been a whole and entire love to others, but a
divided, a half love, partly to them, and partly to himself; Love and
self-love: which to imagine is no small dishonor unto Jesus Christ, that he
under a pretense of seeking others should seek himself; dying for himself. A
Tenent directly contrary to what Scripture so frequently holds forth, which
is (as you have heard) that he laid down his life for his Sheep, for his
Church, gave himself for us. But not to dwell upon this. More usefully.

In the second place do we hear that Christ gave himself for some amongst
mankind, Use. 2. Exhort. Labor to make sure that Christ gave himself for us.
why then let it be the care and endeavor of every of us, to make this sure to
our selves that we are of this number. Not contenting our selves with that
general and unsound notion, that Christ dyed for all, and so for us, but that
he dyed for us in particular, that we may be able upon good grounds every of us
to take up the Apostles words, and say, as he does, Gal. 2.20. that Christ has
loved me, and given himself for me. This it is, and only this, that will speak
comfort unto the soul of a poor sinner. Not such a general apprehension of an
universal Redemption, that Christ dyed for all, to open a door of hope for all,
by making their Salvation possible upon the condition of their believing, in
the mean time not meriting faith for them, that they should believe, and so not
intending that the merit of his death should be made effectual to all of them.
But labor to evidence, and ascerting this to our selves that Christ gave
himself for us in such a peculiar and efficatious way, as our surety, in our
room and stead, undertaking for us, making Reconciliation for us, and so that
we have interest in the merit of his death.

Quest. Quest. How shall this be done.
I but how shall we be able to do this? This is a secret. A thing known to God.
The Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. his by Election. And so does Christ
also. I am the good Shepherd, and know my Sheep, Joh. 10.14. his sheep, not
only by effectual Vocation, (of whom he speaks, v. 27. My sheep hear my
voice, and I know them,) but also by Election. I know whom I have chosen, Joh.
13.18. Chosen to eternal life. And thus he knew who they were to whom he
intended the benefit of his death. I lay down my life for the sheep (says he)
Ioh. 10.15. viz. those sheep whom in the verse foregoing he says he knew, took
special notice of, and had set a peculiar love upon. I, but how shall this be
made known to us? How shall we be assured that we are in this number?

Ans. 1. Answ. 1. Gods secret will not to be consulted with.
For answer hereunto let me first inform you what you are not to do. Do not
attempt what you shall never be able to compass. Do not think of ascending up
into heaven, there to search the Rolls and Records of Eternity, to see whether
your names be written in that Book of life, whether you be in the list of Gods
Elect, or no. I mean do not trouble your selves about Gods secret will, which
belongs not to you. Do not immenge and plunge your selves into those
unfaddomable depths, where you shall never find the bottom, I mean those
mysterious doctrines of Predestination, Election, Reprobation; Which the great
Apostle having discoursed of Romans 11. closes up all with an (...), O the
depth! v. 33. So admiring what he could not comprehend. No nor yet of
Redemption. Of which Hemingius (writing upon the Text) says truly, that it is,
Venerandum potius quam serutandum mysterium. A mystery rather to be adored than
curiously pried into. But here (as in all other mysteries of like nature)
content your selves with what God has revealed. Hic conquiescat caro (says
he,) Here let flesh and blood rest, in what the word clearly holds forth. And
this do you. Harkening to such Counsels, and applying your selves to such ways
and courses, as you are there directed to, that so you may be sure to have a
share in all those benefits which Christ by his death has purchased for his
Elect. Which what they are let me (in the second place) come to show you, which
I shall do as plainly and briefly as I may, binding up all in this one general.

Ans. 2, Ans. 2. Come unto Jesus Christ.
Would you be sure to have benefit by the death of Christ, then Come ye unto
him. This is that which renders the death of Christ in effectual to the
greatest part of those to whom he is made known, they will not come unto him.
So our Savior charge it upon the unbelieving Jews, Ioh. 5.40. Ye will not
come unto me that ye might have life. And even so is it with the greatest part
of the world, those among whom Christ is crucified (as the Apostle speaks,
Gal. 3.1.) before whose eyes he is evidently set forth in the preaching of the
Gospel, and so offered and tendered unto them, they will not come unto him,
that they might be made partakers of what he has merited by his death. Let not
the like be charged upon any of us. Hearing of Christ, and of what he has
done, how he has given himself, now come unto him, that we may partake of what
he has purchased for all that shall so do.

Quest. But the question runs on, How shall we come unto him? Quest. How come
unto him.


Ans. Ans. As to a Prophet, Priest and King.
A question well worth the Answering, to which let me beg the best of your
attentions. Would you so come unto Christ as to be sure to receive benefit from
him, Come unto him then as to a Prophet, as to a Priest, as to a King, owning
and acknowledging him in every of those Offices and Relations.

1. As a Prophet, hearing him. 1. As a Prophet, hearing, and believing him.
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him (says the
voice from heaven) Matthew 17.5. And this do you, who ever would receive any
benefit from Christ, hear him, hearken to him, yielding up your selves to be
taught by him. This is the ear-mark of Christ's sheep; My sheep hear my voice,
Joh. 10.27. Those whom God the Father has given to his Son Christ to be
redeemed and saved by him, they hearken to his voice, hearing and believing the
Doctrine of the Gospel. And this do you who ever desire to have Christ for your
Priest, take him first as your Prophet. Yielding up your selves (as I said) to
be taught and instructed by him concerning the great mystery of Salvation by
and through him; that you may know it, and knowing it believe it. Know and
believe Jesus Christ to be what he is, even the great God and our Savior (as
the words before the Text describe him,) the Eternal, only begotten Son of God.
And how he was sent by his Father upon this arrand, for the Redeeming and
saving of lost Mankind. Without this knowledge and belief, you are not capable
of receiving any benefit by the death of Christ. This is is a Character which
Christ gives of his sheep; those for whom he says he gave himself, in that
Text forenamed, Ioh. 10.14. I know my sheep, and am known of mine. They are
such as know and believe him to be what he is. I am come out from thee, and
they have believed that thou did send me (says he of his Apostles) Ioh.
17.8. And thus must they be in measure qualified, who ever expect any benefit
from the death of Christ. They must be such as know and believe the Doctrine of
the Gospel. Repent ye, and believe the Gospel, (so our Savior begins his
preaching) Mar. 1.15. Thus receive Christ as your Prophet, learning of him,
harkening to him, Believing him.

2. Come unto him as your Priest, believing on him. 2. As a Priest believing on
him.
Ye believe in God, believe also in me, Joh. 14.1. Not contenting your selves
with a general a bare speculative knowledge, or dogmatical faith, to know and
believe what Christ was, what he has done, and to what end, but Believe in
him. (...), Believe on me. He that believes on him shall not be confounded, 1
Pet. 2.6. He that believes on him is not condemned, but he that believes not
is condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only
begotten Son of God, Joh. 3.18. This it is, and only this, which must make the
death of Christ to become effectual unto you, (so it is agreed at all hands,)
even your applying the merit thereof to your selves by faith. Be a plaster or
potion never so sovereign, yet if it be not applied, if it be not drunk; it
will never do the Cure which it is proper for. Even so is it with the blood of
Christ, which in it self (as we find the Ancients, often comparing it) is such
a Sovereign Medicine, of virtue sufficient to cure all sin-sick souls in the
world, yea were they ten thousand times more than they are, so as if all did
take it, Populum hoc immortalitatis habet quidem in se ut omnibus prosit, sed
si non bibitur, non medetur. Prosper Resp. 1. ad Object. Vincent.
all should certainly be recovered. But (as Prosper adds) Si non bibitur non
medetur, If it be not drunk it cures not. Not being applied by faith it becomes
in effectual. And therefore, as ever you desire to receive any benefit from the
death of Christ, see that you apply it, by believing on him, receiving him as
your Savior, resting and relying on him for the obteining of what he has
merited, Remission of sins, and eternal Salvation.

Object. Obj. How can they thus come unto Christ who are not assured that he
dyed for them.
I, but here a poor soul (taking a shaft out of the Arminian quiver to wound it
self with) will hapily reply. How can I do this? How can I thus believe on him
when as I do not know whether he intended this for me, whether he gave her self
for me or no? This being dubious and uncertain what warrant or encouragement
have I thus to come unto him? thus to lay my hand upon the head of that
sacrifice, which I know not whether it was offered for me or no? Thus do the
Patrones of Universal Redemption by this Argument of theirs stane those off
from coming to Christ, who are not of their persuasion.

But herein let them not be hearkened to. Ans. All sin-sick souls invited and
encouraged to come unto him.
Neither let this discourage or dishearten any from coming to him and believing
on him. Art thou only such a one as feel the needs thou have of him, see
thy self lost without him? One that feel the weight and burden of sin, and
art weary and heavy laden under it, so as thou earnestly desire to be
Redeemed from all iniquity, and to be Purified to be freed and delivered from
the guilt and power of sin, now come, and come boldly unto Jesus Christ, laying
hold on him by faith as thy Savior, Arguments inducing poor sinners thus to
come unto Christ.
as one who has given himself for thee, so applying the merit of his death
unto thy self. In order whereunto, to put thee upon this attempt of so great
concernment, take into consideration these few particulars.

1. Thine own pressing necessity, the need thou have of a Savior, 1. Their
absolute Necessity of a Savior.
being in thy self a lost creature, and without a Savior for ever lost, not
being able to any thing of thy self for thy self, for thy recovery out of this
lost estate. Such is the condition of all men by nature. They are all (...),
Impotent, without strength (as the Apostle has it) Romans 5.6. When we were yet
without strength Christ dyed for us. Not able to do any thing for the
reconciling of themselves unto God. And it must needs be so; Being all dead in
sin (as the same Apostle sets forth man's natural state, Ephesians. 2.1. and
elsewhere.) Now what can a dead man do for the raising up of himself? No more
can a poor sinner do for the freeing of himself from that wretched, accursed
state and condition wherein he is by reason of sin. So as there is an absolute
necessity of a Savior.

2. And (secondly) thus seeing and feeling thy self to stand in need of a
Savior, now take notice that there is but one Savior, no other Savior but
Jesus Christ, 2. No other Savior but Jesus Christ.
no other way or means of Salvation but by and through him. Neither is there
salvation in any other, for there is none other name under heaven given among
men whereby we must be saved, Act. 4.12. No other Mediator, whether of
Redemption, or Intercession, but only Jesus Christ. There is one God, and one
Mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. No hope in any
other way of obteining reconciliation with God. Now this thy condition being so
desperate, as that there is but this one way left to save thee, what should
hinder thee from putting thy soul upon this way? Should a Shipwrackt man
floating among the waves of the Sea, ready to perish, espy a raft cast forth,
and seeing no other way whereby he can possibly be saved but by that, he should
not need to be persuaded to take hold of it; he would not spend time in
demurring whether it was cast forth for him, or whether it would save him or
no, but he would forthwith cast himself upon it, and there hang. Thus stands
the case, all men by nature are in a shipwrackt condition, all plunged into a
Sea of misery by reason of sin, all in a perishing state, ready every moment of
time to sink into the bottom of hell. Now lo, Jesus Christ is cast forth as
such a Plank, to such an end. Him has God set forth to be a Propitiation
through faith in his blood, Romans 3.25. And other way or means of salvation
there is none. What then should hinder poor sinners, who see themselves in this
condition, to put themselves upon this way? Not standing to reason whether this
Plank was cast forth for them; whether Christ was given for them, and whether
they shall be sure to be saved by him; but to take hold of him, casting
themselves upon him; as knowing that if this way save them not, they must
perish, and that for ever. Such adventures men often make in desperate cases,
they put themselves upon any ways which may give them any hopes of succor.
And such is the case here. Poor sinners are in a desperate condition, as to
whatever themselves, or any Creature, whether Man or Angel, is able to do for
them. Only in this way, it cannot be denied, there is hope for them. And why
then should they not put themselves upon the adventure? It was the
encouragement, which Shecaniah gave unto Ezra to set upon a work of Reformation
among the people, for the diverting of Gods judgments from them, Ezra 10.2. We
have trespassed against the Lord (says he,) yet now there is hope in Israel
concerning this thing. And so upon the like ground it is that the Prophet Joel
exhorts the people to turn unto God by Repentance, For who knows (says he)
if he will return, and repent, and leave a blessing behind him? Joel. 2.13, 14.
They were not sure that upon their Reformation and Repentance the Lord would
presently free them from those temporal judgments, which then lay upon them.
Yet knowing that there was no other way for the obteining of such a mercy, but
this, and that there was hope in this way, therefore they will have them put
themselves upon it. So stands it with all poor sinners; be their state and
condition whatever it will be, yet there is hope in Israel concerning this
thing. God has provided a means of Salvation for such as they are. And who
knows but that he intends, upon their coming to his Son Christ, to apply it
unto them? So as were there nothing else, yet this alone should be sufficient
to put poor sinners upon this way of coming unto Christ, and believing on him.

3. But to this add (in the third place) the All Sufficiency of this
Sacrifice. 3. The Al-sufficiency of his Sacrifice.
The death of Christ is sufficient for all. Mark it; Though we do not say what
has commonly, (but unwarily,) been received from the Schools, and so asserted
by many Orthodox Divines, that Christ dyed sufficiently for all, for that
intimates that there was a purpose and intention in God the Father in giving
his Son, and in Christ giving himself, that he should dye for all, and so
become a surety for all, dying in their room and stead, which will not be safe
in any sense to yield; Yet we affirm (what I suppose will not be denied, or
questioned,) that his death was and is in it self sufficient for all. So it
must needs be. This Blood being the blood of God, as the Apostle calls it in
that Text formerly made use of. Act. 20.28. God purchased the Church with his
own blood.] And so Saint John, 1 John 3.16. God laid down his life for us,
that is, that person who was truly God as well as Man. Hence it is that the
death and passion of Christ was, and must needs be of an infinite value and
virtue, being the suffering of an infinite person. Thus was it sufficient for
all men, for the whole world, yea for thousands of worlds. Now were it so, that
there were such a receipt as would cure all diseases, who is there but being
sick would make trial of it? not standing to question whether it was prepared
for him, or no. Thus stands the Case here. All men by reason of sin are sick,
sick unto death. Now the Blood of Jesus Christ is such a Panacea, a (...), a
true Catholicon, The Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin: 1 John
1.7. How it is then that any poor sinners, who are sensible of this spiritual
aylement, should make any demur about the drinking of this blood, the applying
of the merit of Christ's death unto themselves by faith?

4. The experience of all who have thus come unto Christ.
4. To this (in the fourth place) add the experience which others have had,
those who have put their souls upon this way, of whom never any one miscarried.
All have found cure who have rightly applied this remedy. And why then should
not others do the like? As it was with the Brazen Serpent, set up in the
wilderness as a cure for the stinging of the fiery Serpents there, however at
the first erecting of it, happily some might look upon it as a mere Pageant,
having no such virtue in it, and so would not trouble themselves to go up to
it, yet when once they saw by experience that all who came unto it received
benefit from it, now we may suppose that none should need to persuade those who
felt themselves stung to repair unto it. Thus stands the case here. For such
an end was the Lord Jesus (of whom that was a Type) lifted up upon the Cross,
that whosoever believes on him should not persh, but have eternal life (as our
Savior himself explains the mystery of it) Ioh. 3.14, 15. And of the virtue of
this mystical Brazen Serpent the Saints in all ages have had experience. Those
before Christ, after. The one looking upon him as to come, the other as already
come, Yet believing on him they were all saved by him. Even as the Israelites
which looked upon that Serpent, whether it was before, or behind, or on which
side soever, we do not find but they were all cured. Thus have the Ages before
Christ and since, the Fathers under the old Testament, and Saints under the
New, both alike found benefit by coming unto Christ, and looking up unto him by
faith. We believe (says Peter) that through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
we shall be saved, even as they, Act. 15.11. We Jews, as they Gentiles. None
that ever came to Christ in a right way, but have been saved by him. So was it
when he was here upon earth. None came to him for cure of their Bodies, but
received it. And so has it been since his removal to heaven. None ever came to
him for the Cure of their souls, but have found what they came for. And what an
encouragement then should this be to all poor sinners to take the same course,
to come unto him upon the same account?

These are all strong inducements to put Christians upon this way. But behold
yet more, yea and stronger Arguments, drawing more forcibly, as viz.

5. Gods purpose in giving his Son.
5. In the 5th. place, consider what is the Intimation which we have of God the
Fathers purpose in giving his Son, which we have in that Text before insisted
on, Ioh. 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes on him should not perish, etc. Now then, taking notice what
is the Condition, whereupon depends the benefit of Christ's death, and which
being performed it shall undoubtedly be made effectual, what remains, but that
without any overcurious enquiry concerning the former part of that verse, what
is there meant by the world which God is said to have loved, or how he may be
said to have loved that world, you apply your selves to the latter, to the
performance of what is there required? Which shall you, (through the grace of
God inabling) make good on your parts, do not doubt but God will make good unto
you what he has engaged on his part.

6. Christ's serious Invitation.
6. To which add the Sons Invitation, Christ's calling you to come unto him,
which you may hear him doing in that known Text, Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me ye
that labor and are heavy laden, viz. under the burden of sin, seriously
desiring (as I said) to be freed from the guilt and power of it. As also in
that other, Ioh. 7.37. Where Christ himself being on earth makes this open
Proclamation in the hearing of the Jews, If any man thirst, let him come unto
me and drink. And that there is the same mind in him still, being in heaven,
you may take notice from the like Proclamation, Rev. 22.17. Let him that is
athirst come, and whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely. Thus
does he set open that Fountain spoken of, Zach. 13.1. Offering all the benefits
of his death, Graee, and Glory, to all that will come unto him for it.

7. 7. Assurance of a gracious reception and Intertainment.
And what he so offers he will certainly make good, receiving and intertaining
all that come unto him. For this you have that known promise to assure you,
Ioh. 6.37. Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. (...), I will
not at any hand reject him, but receive and embrace him, giving unto him what
he comes for, (there being a (...) in the Phrase (as you lately heard,) more
intended than said,) I will bid him welcome, giving him a gracious reception,
and bountiful entertainment, communicating unto him what ever I shall merit.
Come unto me ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.
(...), I will secure you against the guilt and power of sin, against Hell and
Death, and all the enemies of your Salvation, giving you abundant satisfaction
in what ever you do or can desire. Now had poor needy beggars in a Town such an
Invitation to a Feast, with such an assurance of welcome, which of them is
there that would refuse to come upon this account, because he is not invited by
name?

8. The Command of God the Father.
8. To this yet add that which may serve to silence all reasonings, even the
Command of God the Father concerning this. This is the Commandment, that we
should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 3.23. (...), that
Commandment of his; the great Commandment of the Gospel. Now who is there
that questions whether he ought to yield obedience to any Commandment of the
Law? And why then to any Commandment of the Gospel? Especially to this, which
is (as I said) the great Commandment, that which the Lord requires from all
those to whom the Gospel is preached; And that under the penalty of Eternal
Condemnation.

9. Not to receive Christ offered the condemning sin.
9. Which let it be the last nayl, fasting all the rest. This is a Condemning
sin, Not to receive Christ being thus offered. Nay this is the condemning sin.
He shall convince the world of sin, because they believe not on me, Joh. 16.8,
9. This is the sin, the great sin, and the condemning sin under the Gospel. He
that believes not is condemned already, because he has not believed in the
name of the only begotten Son of God, Quid non crediderunt,] i.e. Sola
incredulitas sufficiens causa est condemnation^s: Aret. Com. in Loc.
Joh. 3.18. Had a man no other sin, yet this alone of incredulity were enough
to condemn him; And on the other hand, were i^ not for this sin, all other sins
should not condemn him. But who so stands guilty of this sin, refusing to
believe on Christ being tendered to him, as he is in a state of condemnation
already upon the account of other sins, Original and Actual, so continuing in
this sin, under this unbelief, he shall as certainly be condened as if he were
in hell already.

Put these considerations together, and now see what it is, that can have any
color to keep you off from coming to Christ, from receiving him as a Priest,
believing on him.

Only (in the third place,) whilst you thus receive him in the two former
Relations, 3. Come unto Christ as a King.
forget not the third; whilst you receive him as a Prophet and a Priest,
receive him also as a Prince. Him has God exalted with his right hand to be a
Prince and a Savior, Act. 5.31. And so let him be to every of you. Would you
have Christ to be your Savior, let him also be your Prince, your King, ruling
not only over you, but in you. Thus yield up your selves to his Government,
that he may set up his Scepter in your hearts, governing of you by his Laws,
his word, his Spirit. So doing, now doubt not to take up the Apostles words
here in the Text, applying them to your selves, saying; The great God and our
Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us. Being assured that what Christ
has done he has done it for you, and that the merit of his death does belong
unto you.

Which being assured of, Use. 3. Admire the love of God and Jesus Christ in
thus giving himself for us.
now stand and admire that love which was expressed and shown unto you herein.
The love of God the Father, and the love of God the Son; which was the only
ground and motive of bestowing this Gift. The love of God the Father. So God
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son.] The love of God the Son.
Hereby perceive we the love of God toward us, because he laid down his life
for us, 1 John 3.16. And what love like this love? Circumstances herein
considerable.
So it will appear, if we do but ponder and consider these few circumstances
formerly touched upon.

1: The Person giving and given.
1. Who it was that gave himself. Even, the Great God our Savior Jesus Christ
(as you have heard.)

2. For whom 2. For whom given.
it was that he gave himself. For us. Wherein diverse particulars.

1. For us Men. 1. For us Men.
Not for the Angels; some of which stood in as much need of a Savior, as we
did: Yet he took not hold of them, but suffered them that were fallen to lie
and perish everlastingly. But he took hold of us, Heb. 2.16. gave himself for
us.

2. Us Sinners.
2. For us Sinners. Herein God commends his love toward us, that while we
were yet sinners Christ dyed for us, Romans 5.8.

3. Us Enemies.
3. For us Enemies. Greater love has no man than this, that a man should lay
down his life for his friends, Joh. 15.13. Yet behold here greater love than
this. When we were Enemies, we were reconciled unto God by the death of his
Son, Romans 5.10.

4. Us rather than others.
4. And fourthly, for us rather than others. When the world of Mankind lay in
the same condition of sin and misery, Christ laid hold on us, giving himself
for us, whilst he has passed by many others of equal, nay (it may be) of far
better deserts than our selves.

3. How given.
3. To which I might add, How he gave himself. Not only to be born, and live,
but to dye for us; to dye that painful, shameful, accursed death, the death of
the Cross.

4. As also to what end 4. To what end.
he thus gave himself. That he might Redeem us; Save us.

And O what love was this? Every of us who can evidence our interest in it,
stand for ever admiring, and adoring of it.

And admiring it let us now endeavor to answer it. Answering love with love.
Use 4. Answer this love with love.
Loving the Lord Jesus. Which who so does not, how well does he deserve that
Anathema denounced by the Apostle against all such? If any man love not the
Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema Maranatha, let him be had in execration for
ever, 1 Cor. 12.22.

And loving him, Use. 5. Express our love to Jesus Christ.
let us express our love to him. And that,

1. By giving up our selves to him, 1. Giving our selves to him.
to live unto him. He dyed for all (says the Apostle) that they which live
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which gave himself for
us, 2 Cor. 5.15. Live according to his Prescripts, to his Honor and Glory. Ye
are bought with a price; wherefore Glorify God in your Body, and in your
Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.20.

2. And thus giving our selves to him, 2. Being ready to give our selves for
him.
be we also ready to give our selves for him. I am ready not only to be bound,
but to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus, such was Paul's
resolution, Act. 21.13. And let the like be ours. Not thinking our dearest
blood too dear for him, who thought not his too dear for us.

3. And thus giving our selves to him, 3. Giving our selves to, and for his.
and for him, in imitation of him, do we the like to, and for his. Being ready
to do all offices of love to them. Walk in love, as Christ has loved us, and
given himself for us. And as to do, so to suffer for them. I endure all things
for the Elects sakes (says Paul) 2 Timothy 2.10. Yea and if need be, refuse not
to lay down our lives for them. Because he laid down his life for us, we ought
also to lay down our lives for the Brethren, 1 John 3.16. viz. if their
necessity requires it, and our calling binds us to it. Especially for the
procuring of their eternal happiness and welfare. For this it was that Christ
laid down his life for us. And for this we should not think our lives too dear
for others. Paul who tells us that he could even have wished himself an
Anathema, accursed from Christ for his Brethren, his kins-men according to the
flesh, (as we have it, Romans 9.3.) being not unwilling (if it had been possible)
to have redeemed and saved the souls of those his Contrymen the Jews with
the utter loss of his own, would much more have been willing to have shed his
blood for them. I will very gladly spend, and be spent for you, says he to his
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 12.15. And the like he tells his Philippians, cap. 2. v. 17.
Yea, and if I be offered upon the Sacrifice, and service of your faith, I joy,
and rejoice with you all. And the like let all of us in conformity to our
heavenly pattern be ready to do. Christ's giving himself for believers a ground
of strong Consolation.


Many other uses and improvements might be made of this great Gospel Doctrine.
As viz. that of Consolation to all true believers. Has Christ thus given
himself for them, then who shall lay any thing to their charge? Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifies; who shall
condemn? It is Christ that dyed, Romans 8.33. So may they upon this ground
triumph over Hell and death, and all the Enemies of their salvation. Christ
having engaged for them, given himself for them as their surety, he has made a
plenary satisfaction unto the Justice of God for all their sins; so undertaking
for them, as that they shall certainly be delivered both from the guilt and
power of them, being justified and sanctified, and consequently saved by and
through him. So it follows in the Text, Who gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all iniquity, etc. To which I now pass.

That he might redeem us from all Iniquity]
WE are now come to the 4th. and last main part of the Text, Finis donationis,
Part 4. The ends of Christ's giving himself, Redempton and Purification.
the End or fruit of Christ's thus giving himself. Of which there are many. Two
of them we have here assigned, as serving the Apostles purpose, viz. Redemption
and Purification. Of which severally, beginning with the former.

That he might redeem us from all Iniquity] Wherein we may take notice of three
Particulars. The Redeeemer, The Redeemed, End. 1. Redemption. Whete 3.
particulars.
and from What they are redeemed.

1. The Redeemer. 1. The Redeemer.
The great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, Two sorts of Redeemers in
Scripture.
who gave himself that he might redeem]. Two sorts of Redeemers we meet withal
in Scripture. Principal, and Instrumental.

1. Instrumental Temporal Saviors.
1. Instrumental, such as God made use of as his Instruments in working of
temporal salvations for his People. Such a one was Moses, whom we find so
called Act. 7.35. Him did God send to be a Ruler and a Deliverer, (...) (says
the Original) which Erasmus (following the vulgar Latin) renders, according to
the proper signification of the word, Redemptorem, a Redeemer; an Instrument
which God made use of for the working of that great deliverance for his people
Israel in bringing them out of Egypt. In which sense other of the Judges are
called by the name of Saviors, Neh. 9.27. Thou gave them Saviors, who saved
them out of the hands of their Enemies. Instrumental Saviors and Redeemers.

2. Principal, Jesus Christ.
2. Principal, this is only Jesus Christ, whom we find sometimes so styled. I
know that my Redeemer lives (says Job) Job 19.25. The Redeemer shall come
unto Sion (says the Prophet Isai.) Isa. 59.20. pointing at Christ, as the
Apostle (citing that Text) applies it, Romans 11.26. Christ the Redeemer.

The Author of all deliveracees.
And well may he be so called, being the Author of all such deliverances as his
people are made partakers of ( The Angel which redeemed me from all evil (says
Jacob speaking of Christ, Genesis 18.11.) both Temporal and Spiritual deliverances.

1. Temporal. 1. Temporal.
Wherein whoever be the Instrument, he is the principal agent. So he was in
that deliverance of the Israelites out of Egypt, wherein Moses was only his
Instrument, a staff in his hand. So much is held forth in that Text forenamed,
Act. 7.35. Where it is said that God sent Moses to be a Ruler and a deliverer
(or Redeemer) by the hand of the Angel which appeared in the Bush. (...)] Hoc
referendum est ad (...) Mandata ei per Angelum dedit. Grot. Annot. in loc.
(...), in the hand, that is by the hand; which is to be referred not only to
the word [Sent], that Moses was sent by this Angel, receiving his Commission
from him (as Grotius looks upon it) but also to the word [Redeemer or
Deliverer]; God sent him to be a Redeemer by the hand of the Angel, the Angel
of the Covenant, Jesus Christ, in whose strength he acted, and by whose power
he was enabled to that great work.

2. And as of Temporal, 2. Spiritual.
so of Spiritual deliverances. Wherein however others again may be
Instrumental, and so upon that account may be called by the name of Redeemers
or Saviors, as we find the Ministers of the Gospel styled in that Text, Obad.
21. Saviors shall come upon Mount Sion; which however literally (as Diodate
notes upon it) may be understood of the Machabees, who subdued the Idumeans, of
which we read 1 Match. 5.3. yet spiritually it is to be reserved to the Apostles
and other Ministers of the Gospel, who were to preach the Gospel for the
salvation of Gods Elect: He that converteth a sinner from the error of his way
(says Saint James) shall save a soul from death, Jam. 5. last, in so doing.
(says Paul to Timothy, viz. in taking heed to his Doctrine and Life) thou
shall both save thy self and them that hear thee, 1 Timothy 4. last. But these are
but Instrumental Saviors, sent by Christ, and working by his power. The Proper
and Principal Savior and Redeemer is Jesus Christ, the only Author of eternal
salvation (as the Apostle calls him) Heb. 5.9. (...), the Principal Efficient
cause of it.

Christ the fittest person to undertake the work of Redemption, to which he had
a double right* of Propriety, of Propinquity.
And who so fit to undertake this work, the work of Redemption, as he? To which
he had a double right. Ius Proprietatis and Propinquitatis, a right of
Propriety, and a right of Propinquity. Of Propriety as God, the Sons of men
being his Creatures, made by him, and for him, as the Apostle tells us, Col.
1.16. Of Propinquity as Mau, being near akin unto mankind, whose nature he had
taken into a personanal union with his Godhead. Now such was the Law of
Redemption, it belonged properly to the quondam Owner, or else to the nearest
of kin, as we find it Lev. 25.25. Which Hanameel having an eye at, speaks to
Jeremy after that manner, when he proffered him his field to sale? The right of
Inritance is thine, (says he) and the Redemption is thine, Jer. 32.7, 8. And
with such a right was Christ invested; Being near akin to the Sons of men, and
the Inheritance being his by his Fathers grant, I will give thee the Heathen
for thine Inheritance, etc. Psalm. 2.8. who then so fit to undertake this work
of Redemption as he? [He gave himself that he might Redeem].

Redeem whom? There is the second thing. [Redeem us] that is his people, his
Elect. 2. The Redeemed, Gods Elect.
Those whom he gave himself for, to them he intended this benefit of his death.
He gave himself for us that he might Redeem us]

So it was. Such was the condition of all the sons of men by nature, they were
all Captives. Obs. All men by nature captives. (...) talem liberationem
significat, quae captivitatem and oppressionem praesupponit: Chemnit. Harm.
Luke 1.68.
So much is here plainly intimated, and necessarily implied. Redemption
presupposes Captivity, Bondage. And such was, and is the state of all men by
nature, even of Gods Elect, before the grace of God meet with them, a state of
Captivity. Like as it was with Israel in Egypt before Moses wrought their
deliverance, so is it with all men. Even Gods Elect people, as well as others,
they are a Captived people. So much we may learn from that Text of the Prophet
Isaies, Is. 61.1. Where giving an account of his Commission, wherefore he was
sent to Preach, he says it was to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the
opening of the Prison to them that are bound. Which Text, however literally it
may have an eye at the temporal freedom of the Jews by Cyrus from their
Babylonish Captivity, (of which we find express mention afterward, Cap. 45.13.
where the Lord speaking of Cyrus says, He shall let my Captives go) yet
mystically and principally it is to be understood of that spiritual deliverance
which is wrought by Christ for his Elect people; whose condition by nature is
like unto that of the Jews in Babylon. They are all Captives, Prisoners. So we
find them called Cap. 49. of that Prophecy, v. 8, 9. where the Lord designing
to send forth his Son Christ upon the great arrand of his Mediatorship, unto
the Gentiles, I will (says he) give thee for a Covenant of the people. (the
Mediator of the new Covenant betwixt God and his people) That thou may say
to the Prisoners go forth; both procure and proclaim a spiritual liberty for
his Elect, who of themselves were no better than others, Captives, Prisoners. A
Doctrine which our Savior applies to and inculcates upon the Jews. Joh. 8.32.
where he tells some of them who professed to believe on him, that if they so
continued, If ye continue in my word (says he) ye shall know the truth, and
the truth shall make you free] (...), liberabit, set you at liberty, make you
freemen. Thereby giving them to take notice, that of themselves, (what ever
they thought) such they were not. A thing which indeed they could not digest,
and thereupon reply unto him in the next verse, we be Abraham's seed, and were
never in bondage to any man, How say thou then, ye shall be made free? Thus
did they stand upon their native privilege, looking upon themselves as the only
free people in the world, being descended from Abraham, and so from Jacob, of
whom, it was foretold, The Elder shall serve the Younger, Genesis 25.23. the
posterity of Esau should be subject to the posterity of Jacob. Thus did they
look upon themselves as the freest people upon Earth. Yet our Savior
persisteth in what he had said, inculcating it again, v. 36. If the Son shall
make you free ye shall be free indeed; giving them to know that unless they
were set at liberty by him, and made partakers of his Redemption, what ever
they were in their own opinion and persuasion, they were nothing less in truth
than freemen, they were not (...), free indeed. As they were not at that time
Corporally free, being then vassalls to the Romans, so much less spiritually.
And such is the conditition of all men without Christ, what ever they may think
of themselves, or what ever their outward condition be, they are no better than
slaves and vassals, all under a spiritual Captivity and Bondage, Captives all.

Q. Captives, to whom, or How? Quest. Captives to whom.


A. Ans.
To this I may answer. They may be said so to be upon a diverse account, being
under the power Tyranny f many hard Masters.

1. The first and chief whereof is Sin, 1. Under sin.
under which all men are. An unquestionable truth, which the Apostle sets down
with a Probatum est, Romans 3.9. we have before proved both Jews and Gentiles
that they are all under sin, So again Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has concluded
all under sin. declared them so to be; (...), as under the guilt, so under the
power of sin. God be thanked (says the same Apostle to his Romans) ye were the
servants of sin. Romans 6.17. And again v. 20. When ye were the servants of sin
ye were free from righteousness. Such is the condition of all men before the
grace of God meet with them to set them at liberty, they are all servants of
Corruption, (as Peter says of those Saduces, 2 Pet. 2.19) Serving diverse
Lusts and Pleasures (as Paul says of himself and other believers before their
conversion) Tit. 3.3.

And what greater slavery can there be in the world than this? No drudgery like
that of Sin. If the Law of God be (what it is) The perfect Law of liberty (as
Saint James call it) Iam. 1.25. Then the Law of sin must needs be a perfect Law
of servitude and slaverie. And under this slavery are all men by nature. Even
sold under sin. So says regenerate Paul of himself, in regard of the
remainders of Corruption which he found in himself, Romans 7.1. I am Carnal, sold
under Sin. So he was, so far forth as he was Carnal. What are they then who are
wholly such? nothing but Carnal? they must needs be no other but perfect
slaves, such as Ahab was, of whom it is said, that He sold himself to work
wickedness, 1 King. 21.22.

2. And being thus under the Tyranny of sin, 2. Under the power of Satan.
they are also under the power of Satan. Paul being sent to the Gentiles, he
was sent upon this errand, to turn them from the power of Satan unto God, Act.
26.18. Such is the condition of all men by nature, they are under the power of
Satan; that God of this world, who blinds the minds of them which believe not
(as Paul speaks, 2 Cor. 4.4.) Being in the snare of the Devil and taken Captive
by him at his Will (as the same Apostle says of impenitent sinners) 2 Timothy 2.
last.

3. To this add, they are also under the Law, Ye are not under the Law, but
under Grace, (says aul to his believing Romans) c. 6.14. 3. Under the Rigorous
exaction of the Law.
Intimating that before they were under Grace they were under the Law. And so
are all men, before the Grace of God meet with them, to put them under another
Covenant, they are under the Law, the Law and Covenant of works. Which like an
Egyptian Taskmaster, requires that from them, and that under the penalty of
eternal condemnation, which of themselves they are no ways able to perform. By
reason whereof they ly under the lash, and Curse of the Law. As many as are of
the works of the Law they are under the Curse, Gal. 3.10.

4. And to this add, 4. Under the fear of death.
they are also in bondage under fear of death, So the Apostle sets forth their
Condition, Heb. 2.15. They are such as through fear of death (death Temporal
and Eternal) are all their life time subject unto bondage, Heb, 2.15. Like
slaves who are ever afraid of being cast into the Dungeon. Such is the
condition of all men by nature.

Q. But how comes it so to be? Quest. How comes man into this Captivity.
What did God make man in this estate?

A. Not so. Man at the first was made a freeman, in an honorable estate; Lord
over the rest of the Creatures, and over himself, Ans. By falling from his God.
a servant to none but to his God, whose service is perfect liberty. But in
this estate he continued not. Man being in honor abides not, Psalm. 49.12. But
falling from his God by his disloyalty and disobedience, he fell from his state
of Perfection, forfeiting and losing that freedom which he had, and so
inslaving himself and all his Posterity: who being then in his loins, and
sinning in him, are made justly liable to the punishment of that his sin. Thus
did Man at the first sell himself and all his Posterity, even as Esau did, who
by selling his Birthright for a mess of Pottage, made himself a servant to his
younger Brother, accordidg to that forenamed Prophecy, Genesis 25.23. The Elder
shall serve the Younger, which as to spiritual privileges was made good in the
person of Esau himself, and as to Corporal in his Posterity, who were
afterward subdued, and brought into subjection by the posterity of Jacob, as
the story sets it forth, 2 Samuel 8.14. After the same manner did our first
Parent Adam sell himself and all his Posterity for an Apple, by the eating
whereof contrary to the command of his God, he forfeited all his privileges,
making himself, and all his posterity, Servants and Slaves in such manner as
you have heard.

Applic. All to be convinced of this Captivity and affected with it
Applic. A truth which I wish it might in a right serious way be brought home
to the hearts of all those whom it concerns, that they might be thoroughly
convinced of it. You who are yet in your natural estates, not changed and
renewed by Grace, know that this is your condition. Such slaves are you, in
bondage under all these Tyrants, Sin, Satan, the Law, Death. And O that you
might be truly affected herewith? This being the very first step to your
deliverance, so to see and feel this your servitude, as that you may groan
under it, and so be brought to seek after a Redeemer. Which till you do, never
look to be made partakers of this blessed Redemption here spoken of. Especially
labor to see and feel your selves to be under the Tyranny and Bondage of Sin,
unthe power of it, servants to it, sold under it. A condition how miserable?
Even regenerate Paul, though freed from the Dominion of sin, yet feeling the
workings of the remainders of Corruption in him, he thereupon cries out,
(...), O miserable man that I am! And did this make him look upon his present
condition as wretched? how wretched then must yours be, in whom sin rules and
reigns? who are not in any degree (as he was) freed and delivered from the
power of it. Most miserable is this your slaverie. So you look upon the
condition of the Israelites in Egypt, and the Jews in Babylon and so upon
Turkish Gallie-slaves. But alas! what is their servitude to yours? They might
be may be free in the midst of their slaverie, their servitude reaching only to
the outward man, the Body, yours to the inward, to the Soul, your souls being
hereby inslaved. Their servitude is temporary, but for a time, such as death
will put an end to, but so is not yours. Death shall not set you at liberty,
but let you in to a farther bondage, even the bondage of Hell, where you shall
for ever ly bound and fettered in those everlasting chains of darkness. O then
be excited, in the sense and apprehension hereof, to look out for your
Redemption, your deliverance, betimes. Which where you are to look for this
Text will inform you, pointing out unto you the one and only Redeemer, even the
Lord Jesus, who gave himself for us that he might redeem us.]

Quest. 3. From what the Lords people are Redeemed.
Q. Redeem us, from what? That leads me to the third Branch.

A. To which I might return Answer, from all the aforesaid Particulars, wherein
that our bondage consists, Ans.
Sin, Satan, Law, Death, From all these the Lord Christ redeemeth those for
whom he gave himself. As,

1. From death.
1. (To begin first with the last) from Death, though not from the Power, yet
from the fear of it. This was one end of his assuming the nature of Man, of
being made Man, as the Apostle tells us in that Text forecited, Heb. 2.14, 15.
That through death he might deliver them who through fear of death were all
their life time subject unto bondage. Which he did by conquering of death, and
taking away the sting of it, which was sin. So as they who believe on him now,
have no more cause to fear that enemy, which he has so conquered and
disarmed, as it shall not be able to hurt them, and from the power whereof in
due season they shall be fully delivered. Thanks be to God (says Paul speaking
in the person of all believers) which gives us the victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15.57. viz. both over Sin and Death.

2. From the Law.
2. And so for the Law. When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his
Son made of a Woman, made under the Law, to Redeem them that were under the
Law, Gal. 4.5. Christ being himself made under the Law by a voluntary
subjection, undertaking the fullfilling of it, for himself, and his Elect
people, he thereby has Redeemed them from that slavery wherein they were under
it, by reason of the rigorous exaction of it, requiring that from them which
they are not able to perform; as also from the Curse of it. Christ has
Redeemed us, from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us, Gal. 3.13.
undergoing that penalty which the Law had denounced against all the
Transgressors of it.

3. And the like for Satan. 3. From the power of Satan.
Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, Col. 1.13. that is, from the
power of Satan who is the Prince of darkness. Him did Christ destroy in and by
his death. Through death he destroyed him that had the power of death, the
Devil, Heb. 14. Here did that promised seed of the Woman bruiz and break the
serpents head, according as it was foretold Genesis 3.15. Christ trampled upon
Satan that old serpent; Him he conquered in his death; Which he manifested in
his Resurrection and Ascension, wherein he triumphed over him. Having spoiled
Principalities and Powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them,
Col. 2.15. When he ascended up on high, he led Captivity Captive. Ephesians. 4.8.
leading Captive all the spiritual Enemies of his Church, which before had held
his people Captive; Satan among the rest.

4. But I shall not insist upon any of these; 4. From Sin.
My Text directing and confining me to the first of them, Redemption from Sin.
Here begins all that servitude and bondage to which man is now subject. And
from this has Christ redeemed his people. He gave himself for us (says the
Text) that he might redeem us from all iniquity.] Christ's people Redeemed from
Iniquity, All iniquity.
From Iniquity, 1. From Iniquity.
from All iniquity, so I shall divide the words. In the one taking notice of
the substance of this benefit, in the other of the Extent of it. Deal with them
severally.

That he might redeem us from Iniquity] (...) that is, from Sin. Which is fitly
expressed by this word, properly signifying an Illegality, what ever is done
besides, or contrary to the Law. Such is Sin. So Saint John defines it, 1 John
3.4. Sin is the transgression of the Law, (...). Iniquity. And from this Christ
has redeemed his people. There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and he
shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob, so the Apostle cites that Text of the
Prophet Isaies, pointing at Christ, Romans 11.26. Which in effect speaks the
same thing with this in the Text, He gave himself for us, that he might redeem
us from Iniquity. Quest. How redeemed from Iniquity.
]

Q. And how is Christ said to have done, or to do this?

A. Here if we will hearken to Socinians Ans. The Socinians sense rejected.
(...)] Nempe per praedicationem Apostolorum fultam illo spiritu quem Christus
ipsis impetraverat Groti Annot. ad loc.
(whom Grotius herein complyeth with) they will tell us (what he does) that
this was done by the preaching of the Apostles, who being supported and enabled
by that Spirit which Christ had impetrated and obtained for them, their
Ministry became effectual to such an end, for the turning of men from those
iniquities, those sinful ways and courses which formerly they were given over
to. But this I let go, as savouring of a spirit which is but too willing to
conceal and darken the truth, whilst it holds forth but a part, a small part
of it.

A. Ans. The word Redemption opened.
For a more full and satisfactory Answer, consult we the word which is here and
elsewhere made use of. That he might Redeem us. To Redeem, in common use, we
know what it is, to procure the liberty of a Captive. Now this may be done two
ways. By Price, or Power. Which is by price or Power.
By price, paying a Ransom for him. By power, freeing him by a strong hand.
Both of these in Scripture we find called by the name of Redemption. The former
most commonly and properly. So the word in the Text naturally signifies,
(...), that he might Redeem, viz. by paying of a Price. That is the proper
signification of the word (...), which coming of (...), which signifies (as
the Latin word Solvo, answering to it, also does) both to pay, and to loose, it
properly imports a Ransom, the Price which is paid for the Redeeming of one.
This is (...), Redemptionis precium. And so (...) it is properly a Redemption
in such a way, by the paying of a price. Of such Redemption we often read. As
elsewhere, so in that Chapter, Lev. 25. where we read of the Redeeming of land
that is sold or morgaged, v. 25. and of Persons who have sold themselves for
slaves, by paying the price of their Redemption, v. 51, 52. Sometimes we find
it in that other way, Redemption by Power. In this sense God is said to have
been the Redeemer of his people Israel, whom by a strong hand he brought out of
Egypt. They remembered that God was their Rock, and the high God their Redeemer,
Psalm. 78.35. And in such a sense God is said to Redeem the lives of men, by
working temporal deliverances, and salvations for them. Who redeemeth thy life
from destruction (says David of himself) Psalm. 103.4. He redeemed them from
the hand of the enemy; (it is spoken of Gods delivering Israel from the hands
of the Egyptians at the red sea) Psalm. 106.10.

Christ redeeming his people both these ways.
Q. Now in which of these senses shall we take the word here in the Text?

A. Why take it which way we will, we cannot take it amiss, both suiting well
with the matter in hand. Both these ways may Christ truly and fitly be said to
Redeem his people from their Iniquity. This he has done, and does, by Priee
and Power; by the one, freeing them from the Guilt, by the o-from the Dominion
of sin. Consistebat ea servitus in duobus, affectu and Reatu. Estius Com. in
Text.
In these two consists the servitude and bondage of men under sin, that they
lie under the Guilt and Power of it. And from both these Believers are freed
and delivered by Christ.

1. 1. By Price, freeing them from the Guilt of sin.
Begin with the former. Christ's freeing and delivering his people from the
guilt and punishment of sin. This he has done, and that by paying a Price for
them, the Price of his own Blood. So the Apostle clearly sets it down in that
known Text, Ephesians. 1.7. repeated in the same words, Col. 1.14. In whom we have
redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins. Christ thereby making
satisfaction unto the Justice of God, has merited and obtained the Remission
of sins for his Elect. In this way it was that he put away sin, as the Apostle
has it, Heb. 9.26. Now once in the end of the world has he appeared to put
away sin by the sacrifice of himself. To put away sin, (...), to the abolishing
of it, as to the guilt and obligation thereof, whereby it binds sinners over
unto eternal condemnation. This has Christ taken away by that Sacrifice which
he offered up upon the Cross, the Sacrifice of himself. Upon this account it is
that Christ is called the Propitiation, 1 John 4.10. God sent his Son to be the
Propitiation for our sins. 1 John 2.2. He is the Propitiation for our sins.
(...), a means to Propitiate, to appease the wrath of God due unto man for sin.
This has Christ done by that sacrifice of himself, by shedding his Blood. Him
has God set forth to be a Propitiation through faith in his Blood, Romans 3.25.
(...), A Propitiatory, Placatorie; alluding unto the Mercy-seat under the Law,
which covered the Ark of the Covenant, wherein the Tables of the Law were,
which is called by that name, The Propitiatory, being a token of Gods
Reconciliation to his people, and of his grace and favor toward them,
shadowed out by the Clouds sitting and resting upon it. This Propitiatory, this
Mercy-seat, was a type of Christ, the ttue Propitiatory, through whom God is
reconciled, and made propitious unto his people, by the shedding of his blood,
and their sins covered from his sight, as the Tables of the Law were covered by
the Mercy-seat from the eyes of men.

Christ gives himself a ransom for his peoplet
And thus has Christ redeemed his people by paying a Price, giving himself a
Ransom for them. So he himself sets down the end of his coming into the world,
Math. 20.28. The Son of man came to give himself a Ransom for Many, (...), the
price of their Redemption which is (as I said) the proper signification of that
word. And so in that other Text, 1 Timothy 2.6. Who gave himself a Ransom for all,
where the word is (...), (a word never elsewhere met with in the New Testament)
properly signifying a Counterprice, when one gives himself for another, body
for Body, engaging himself to do or suffer what he should have done for the
obtaning of his liberty, or saving his life. And such a Ransom did the Lord
Jesus give himself for all his Elect people, laying down his life for them,
that so making satisfaction to the Justice of God for their sins, he might
redeem them, free and deliver them from the Guilt and Punishment of them.

2. And as from the Guilt, so also from the Power and Dominion of them. This
benefit he merited for his people by his death. 2. Freeing them from the
Dominion of sin which he merited for them by his death.
Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, from your
vain conversation, but with the precious blood of Christ, (says Saint Peter to
the believers to whom he writes) 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Such was their Conversation
before their conversion, (...), a vain conversation; They then walked in the
vanity of their minds, (as Paul says of the unbeleeving Gentiles, Ephesians. 4.17.)
being given over to those unfruitful works of darkness, (as he calls sinful
ways and courses, Ephesians. 5.11.) doing those things whereof they had no fruit but
shame, (as he tells his Romans, Romans 6.21.) Such was their Conversation before
Conversion. A vain, yea and a wicked conversation. We also had our conversation
in times past in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh,
and of the mind (so he tells his Ephesians, Cap. 2. v. 3.) But from this
conversation they were redeemed by the blood of Christ, he having merited this
benefit for them, that they should be freed, as from the Guilt, so from the
Power and Dominion of of sin.

And what he has thus Merited for his Elect, he also effects in them,
Effects in them by his spirit.
which he does by the powerful operation of his Spirit, whereby he sets
them free from the service of sin. Being then made free from sin, ye became the
servants of righteousness, Romans 6.18. Now being made free from sin and become
servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, v. 22. Free, though not from
the in-being, in-dwelling and working of sin, yet from the power and dominion
fo it, so as though it did still abide in them, yet it did not rule over them.
And thus are all believers made freemen, and that by the spirit of Christ.
Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. Liberty, as
from the yoke of the Ceremonial, and Rigor of the Moral Law, so much more from
the Law of sin, Libertatem hic intellige a vitiis Grot. Annot. ad loc.
which no longer rules in the believer. The Law of the Spirit of life which is
in Christ Jesus has made me free from the Law of sin (says Paul of himself)
Romans 8.2. Thus does Christ set his Elect people at liberty from those sins
wherein they were before entangled. Such were some of you (says the same
Apostle to his Corinthians, viz. fornicators, Idolaters, etc.) but ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. 1 Cor. 6.11. As they were justified, by
his Merit, so sanctified by his Spirit. Thus is Christ made unto all true
believers, as Righteousness, so Sanctification, (as the same Apostle tells them,
1 Cor. 1.30.) Righteousness by his Satisfaction and perfect obedience for
their Justification. Sanctification by the gift and work of the Spirit of
Regeneration; whereby he subdueth Corruption in them, So Purifying them to be a
peculiar people to himself, as it follows in the Text. Of which (God willing)
I shall speak more fully when I come to handle that latter Branch, to which
this part of Redemption more properly belongs.

2. Thus you see how Christ may be said to Redeem his people from Iniquity. 2.
Christ Redeeming his people from All iniquity.
And this he has done and does from All Iniquity. There is the Extent of this
Benefit, of which but a word. This Redemption reaches to all Sin. (...), From
all Iniquity. Iniquity, or Sin, is twofold Original, and Actual, Original,
Adams sin imputed, with Natural Corruption inherent. Actual, accursed fruits
springing from that Root, sinful thoughts, words, Actions. Every of which is
(...), a Transgression of the Law, and so sin, Iniquity. Now from all these
does Christ Redeem his people. The blood of Jesus Christ, cleanses us from all
sin, 1 John 1.7. from Original sin, Actual sin. Taking away the guilt of it. He
has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his blood, Rev. 1.5. Yea and the
filth and pollution of it. If the blood of Bulls and of Goats, etc. sanctified
to the purifying of the flesh, how much more shall the blood of Christ, who
through the eternal spirit offered himself without spot unto God purge your
consciences from dead works to serve the living God? Heb. 9.13.14. Such virtue
there is in the blood of Jesus Christ, being applied to the Soul by faith; Now
it both satisfies, and sanctifies; freeth both from the guilt and power of sin.
And that of All sin. He shall save his people from their sins Matthew. 1.21. Not
from one, or many, but all sins. To this end he gave himself for his people,
that he might Redeem them from All iniquity.

R. And so it must be, otherwise his Redemtion had been an imperfect
Redemption. R. This Redemption a perfect Redemption.
One debt not discharged is sufficient to keep a prisoner in the goal. One foot
in the snare is enough to detain the entangled bird. But Christ is a perfect
Savior, a perfect Redeemer; And therefore, those whose Redemption he
undertaketh, he redeemeth them from all iniquity, from the Guilt and Power of
all sin.

Thus have you the Doctrinal part opened, with a touch of Application by the
way; which come we now to prosecute.

Applic. Directing it (in the first place) by way of Confutation. Here taking
up a stone to cast at a threefold Adversary, Applic. Confutation of a
threefold Adversary.
Socinians, Papists, Arminians.

1. Begin with the first and worst, Socinians Socinians opposing Christ's
satisfaction.
who will not endure to hear of any such Redemption, properly so called, that
Christ should thus Redeem his people by paying a price for them, making
satisfaction unto the Justice of God for their sins. Against them we take up
this word in the Text, (which we often meet with elsewhere) where Christ is said
to give himself for his people, (...), that he might Redeem them, which word
(as you have heard) properly signifies such a Redemption, viz. by paying a
price. And that it must be so taken in this, and the like places, not
Metaphorically (as they would have it) but properly, we may learn from the
Apostle, who plainly expounds this phrase in that known Text, 1 Cor. 6.20.
repeated Cap. 7. v. 23. where he shows us how Believers are said to be
Redeemed. Ye are bought with a Price (says he) (...), viz. with the precious
blood of Jesus Christ, Sensus est: Christus vos a peccatis redemt^s sibi
manci-pavit, sed magno ei statis, morte ipsius cruenta. Grot. Annot. in 1 Cor.
6.90,
as St. Peter explaines it, 1 Pet. 1.19. A Text so clear, that Grotius, though
but too willing to evade all Texts of that nature, is enforced to interpret it
in such a sense, To which might be added the Context here, He gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us. Where the Apostle plainly shows how and in what
way Christ Redeemed his people, viz. by giving himself for them, giving himself
a Ransom, a Counterprice for them, (...), as we found it it these forecited
Texts, Matthew. 20.28. 1 Timothy 2.6. But as for this pernicious and damnable
doctrine of theirs, I have so fully discussed it heretofore among you; in
handling of that Text, Obj. The One and Only Mediator, printed Anno 1651.
1 Timothy 2.5. (whereof I have also given an account to the world, as that I hope
I shall not need to insist upon it again. To leave them.

2. 2. Papists, who teach that.
In the next place come we to the Papists. Did Christ thus give himself for his
people, to Redeem them from all iniquity, How is it then that they they tell us?

1. That though the sin be forgiven, yet the punishment may remain? 1. The sin
being pardoned, the punishent may remain.
Though not Eternal, yet Temporal. The former being satisfied for by Christ,
yet the other may be left for us to undergo and suffer, either in this Life or
in Purgatory. Which if so, then must Christ be but a partial Redeemer, not
having redeemed his people, (...), from All, and the All of Iniquity. Which how
does it derogate from the merit of his death?

Obj. But why then was David punished in the death of his Child, Obj. David
punished in the death of his child.
notwithstanding the Prophet had assured him that God had forgiven his sin? as
we find it, 2 Samuel 12. v. 13, 14.

A. This was not to him any ways a satisfactory, but Castigatory punishment. A
Chastisement rather than a Punishment, Ans. A chastisement rather than a
punishment.
as many of the trials and afflictions wherewith God exercises his people,
are. Propter hoc imponit nobis poenam. Propter hoc imponit nobis poenam, non de
peccatis sumens supplicium, sed ad futura nos corrigens. Chrysostom. Hom. de
Penit.
For this cause (says Chrysostom) does God inflict punishments upon his
people, not to take vengeance for their sins past, but to correct and instruct
them for the future.

Obj. Obj. Death being the punishment of sin still remains.
But how is it then that death, which is the proper punishment of original sin,
still remains alike to all?

A. Ans. The quality altered by Christ.
To this it is Answered (as to the former.) True it is, Death at the first came
in by sin, and in it self it is a punishment of sin, but not so to those that
are in Christ, to true believers. To them it is Medicinalis, non poenalis, not
properly penal, but Medicinal. Death remains, but the sting is pulled out,
which is sin. Even as it is with sin it self, that remains in the Regenerate as
to the being of it, whilst the guilt and power are taken away. So it is with
Death. That remains as to the power of it, Gods Saints being subject to it as
well as others; but the poison, the bitterness is taken away. To them it is no
longer a punishment of sin, from which, all which, Christ has Redeemed them.

2. That man is bound to make satisfaction for himself.
2. Again, If Christ has Redeemed his people from all Iniquities, how is it
that they tell us, that they are yet bound to make satisfaction for themselves?
Redeeming and delivering themselves from Temporal; yea from Eternal punishment
by their own doings or sufferings, by their good works, prayer, fasting,
alms-deeds, by inflicting corporal punishments upon themselves, or undergoing
what Penances are enjoined them by the Priest. Which what is it still, but to
derogate from this work of Redemption, as if Christ had done it but by halves.
He satisfied for some sins, and left us to satisfy for others, and so in part
to be our own Redeemers, to Redeem our selves from our Iniquities.

Obj. But how is it then that Daniel gives this Counsel to King
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.27. Dan. 4.27. explained. Peccata tua Eleemosynis
redime. U. L.
Redeem thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing mercy to
the poor?

A. So indeed the vulgar Latin, as also Montanus, and other their Expositors
read that Text; but Tremellius (whom our own Translations therein follow)
renders it more properly, Abrumpe, Break off thy sins. That is the proper
signification of the word, Parach; Rupit, abrac. (...) pit. etc.
which we find so used and rendered, Genesis 27.40. where Isaac speaking to his
son Esau, tells him, When thou shall have the dominion, thou shall break the
yoke from off thy neck; [Vparacta] and franges (...) franges.
jugum (says Montanus;) Excutias and solvas (says the vulgar Latin) thou
shall break off, shake off. And thus Daniel there advises that cruel Tyrant,
that he should break off his former sins of Tyranny and Oppression, by
betaking himself to the practice of Righteousness and Mercy. Which doing with
an upright heart, he might thereby hope to divert those judgments of God which
hung over his head. Divert them, though not by way of merit; no, It is not one
good work, or yet many, being all but Duties, that can make satisfaction to the
Justice of God for the least sin: But by a way of a gracious Remuneration, God
being free in rewarding what ever services are done to his name.

3. That one may satisfy for the sins of another One may bear the burden, and
discharge the debt of another, etc. And it was a ridiculous heresy of
Wickleffe to deny the same. Rhem. Annotat. (...) 1 Col. 24.
Yet again (in the third place) If Christ have redeemed his people from all
Iniquity, how is it then that they affirm that one may satisfy for the sins of
another? So the Rhemists in express terms lay it down in their Annotation upon
Col. 1.24. Censuring it for a ridiculous heresy in Wickleff that he denied it.
But what is this again but to make others sharers with Christ in this great
work of Redemption? As if he had not given himself to this end, to redeem his
people from all iniquities? As for us, know we no other Redeemer but him. As
for Man, not being able to Redeem himself, how shall he redeem another? A thing
which we may hear the Psalmist in express terms disclaiming, Psalm. 49.7. No man
can redeem his Brother, nor give unto God a ransom for him. Not redeemed him
from Temporal death, much less from Eternal. But I shall not any longer detain
you in the refutation of these Errors, which having been so fully discovered by
many hands already, I hope there is no fear of any infection from them.

A word (in the third place) for those whom at present you are in more danger
of, Arminians. 2. Arminians, who teach a universal Redemption.
Whose Doctrine is (as you have heard) that Christ dyed, and dyed alike for
all, earnestly contending for an Universal Redemption. Universal Redemption!
This in a good sense we readily grant, viz. in that which the Text holds
forth, that Christ gave himself to Redeem his people from all iniquity. But not
so in their sense, that he dyed alike for all, impetrating and obtaining the
like benefits for all. Which if so, then must all be Redeemed from all
iniquity, All not redeemed from all iniquity.
not only from Original sin, which they look upon as wholly discharged by the
death of Christ; so as none are condemned for it, but from all Actual sins,
Commissions, Omissions. And if so, how is it then that they are not all made
partakers of this benefit, to have their sins actually pardoned, and persons
reconciled unto God.

A. To this I know they will readily Answer. The Cause of this is only the
want of faith, Ans. Want of faith the cause of this.
because men do not believe on Christ who dyed for them. This is it that
renders his death ineffectual unto them.

Repl. But to this we rejoyn; Is this Infidelity of theirs an Iniquity Repl.
Infidelity an Iniquity.
or no? Surely this they will not deny. And if so, how is it that they are not
redeemed by Christ from it? both from the Guilt and Power of it. Both these did
Christ merit (as you have heard) for all those for whom he gave himself: Giving
himself to this end, that he might redeem them from all iniquity, not only
from sin against the Law, but sins against the Gospel; Christ's people redeemed
from sins against the Gospel, as well as against the Law. Christ meriting faith
for his people.
In particular from this of Unbelief, from which Christ has merited and
obtained that those for whom he gave himself should be freed, having (among
other things) merited faith for them; and that not only a power to believe,
that so they may believe if they will, (as they would have it) but also the
Habit and Act of faith, that they shall believe. To you it is given on the
behalf of Christ, not only to believe an him, but also to suffer for his name
(says Paul to his Philippians, Cap. 1.29. To believe in Christ it is a Gift, a
Gift of God given to his Elect, in the behalf, or for the sake of Christ (as
that may be expounded; (...), for Christ, for his Cause, or for his Sake.) Thus
are all spiritual blessings given to Gods Elect in Christ (as the Apostle has
it) Ephesians. 1.3. Vobis donatum est pro Christo; V L. i. e. Per Christum, Cajetan:
Propter Christum; h. e. per and propter merita Christi, Anselm.
(...), id est, Per Christum (as Grotius expounds it) by and through Christ.
And that as the Meritorious Cause of them. Now among these blessings Faith is
one, and that a prime one, it being the Mother-blessing, which brings forth
all the rest, According as his divine power has given us all things that
pertain to life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that has called us
to glory and virtue, 2 Pet. 1.3. that is, through faith in Christ made known to
us. So then, he who has merited the rest, must also have merited this; without
which the rest are not conferred. And if so, why then are not all made
partakers of this grace?

A. Ans. Unbelievers reject this grace.
To this they will and must answer, be cause some refuse it, will not believe.

Repl. But to this we again rejoyn. Is this refusal of theirs an Iniquity?
Repl. This refusal an iniquity.
If so, Christ gave himself to redeem them from this also. And so we may pursue
and follow them whithersoever they go. An Argument which I desire it may be
taken special notice of, as being alone sufficient to stop the mouth of
whatever adversary. But I shall hold you no longer in Controversals. More
usefully.

Has Jesus Christ thus given himself to Redeem poor lost sinners, Use. An
acceptable Doctrine to lost sinners.
let this Doctrine then be hearkened to by all those who see and feel themselves
to be in this number. So would the like tidings be by poor Prisoners and
Captives. Should the news be brought unto them, that one had undertaken their
Redemption, and he such a one as was able to effect it, how welcome, how
acceptable would this be unto them? Even so let this Doctrine be unto you,
which brings you the like tidings of a Redeemer, one that has undertaken this
work for you, and has given himself for that end. This has the Lord Jesus
done. He has given himself for a Ransom, a Counterprice for such as you are,
having paid a price in it self sufficient for your Redemption, made a full and
plenary satisfaction unto the justice of God for all your sins. Now let the
hearing hereof be welcome and acceptable unto you. Such was the fiftieth year
to the Jews, being a year of general releasement, wherein all bondages and
morgages were to be freed, it was to them a year of Jubilee. A Iubilee shall
that fiftieth year be unto you (says Moses) Lev. 50.11. A time of great
solemnity and festivity, proclaimed by the sound of the Trumpet. And from thence
called Iubilee, (...) Buccina ex cornu erietino.
from Iobel, which signifies a Ram, because that feast was proclaimed with
Trumpets of Rams-horns, which it was through all the Land, as you may there
read it, v. 9. Such a year was that to them, the most welcome time, the most
acceptable year, which they celebrated (as I said) with greatest solemnity,
abstaining from their ordinary labors, neither sowing nor reaping that year.
And such a time let that be wherein the Grace of God bringing salvation has
appeared unto poor sinners, in giving his Son for their Redemption, which is
proclaimed by the sounding of the silver Trumpet, the Preaching of the Gospel;
let this be to them a welcome, an acceptable year. So the Prophet Isay calls
it in that Text formerly made use of, Isa, 61.1, 2. The Lord has sent me to
proclaim liberty to the Captives, etc. To proclaim the Acceptable year of the
Lord. A Text which our blessed Savior falling with in the Synagogue, Luke
4.17. tells the Jews, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears, v.
21. So it was in his preaching of the Gospel, wherein he declared and held
forth unto them that full Redemption which poor sinners might expect by and
through him who was to give himself for that end, to Redeem them. And this it
is which is there (with an eye to that year of Iubilee, which was a Type
hereof) called the Acceptable year. So it was in respect of God, being the time
wherein he was pleased to exhibit and tender his grace and favor, to show his
good will toward the sons of men, Shenath Catzon, Annus voluntatis, (...)
Annus voluntatis. Montanus. Annus Benevolentiae. Tremell. (...) est (...), id
quod gratum acceptumque est. Grot. Annot. in Luke 4.21.
or Benevolentiae (as the Hebrew word signifies, The year of good will. And so
it was to his people, (...) (as St. Luke has it) Annus acceptus, a welcome and
acceptable year; the joyfullest time that ever the world heard of. So the Angel
represented it to the shepherds, when he brought them tidings of the Birth of
Christ. Behold (says he) I bring you tidings of great joy that shall be unto
all people. For unto you is born this day in the City of David a Savior, which
is Christ the Lord, Luke 2.10. And so let the tidings of his death be unto you.
Taking notice how therein he gave himself for the Redemption of poor lost
sinners, let this be to you tidings of great joy, welcome tidings. So (I say)
let it be to all of you who are made truly sensible of your spiritual
Captivity, see and feel your selves sold under sin, lying under the tyranny of
Satan, under the rigorous obligation of the Law, bound over unto eternal death,
Lo, here is tidings of a Redeemer, one that has undertaken your Redemption,
having given himself for that end. And who is that? Why one that is able to
effect what he has undertaken. I have laid help upon one that is mighty (says
the Lord, Psalm. 89.19. speaking Typically of David, mystically of Christ, who
is a mighty Savior, a mighty Redeemer, wanting neither Price, nor Power. His
Blood being precious blood, (...), as Saint Peter calls it 1 Pet. 1.19.
infinitely more worth than all the silver and gold in the world, a price
sufficient for the Redemption of ten thousand worlds. And such as the Price was
which he paid, such is his power, no less than Omnipotency. Their Redeemer is
strong, Jer. 50.34. And he must needs be so, being what the Prophet there says
of him, The Lord of hosts is his name. Even the great God of our Savior Jesus
Christ (as our Apostle here describes him;) God as well as man. Such a
Savior, such a Redeemer have you.

Lost sinners excited not to despair, but to come unto Jesus Christ the
Redeemer.
And therefore what ever your condition be yet do not desponde, do not despair.
Remember who it is that is your Redeemer. This it was that bore up the hearts
and spirits of the Isralites, when they were in their greatest straits reduced
to the greatest extremities, They remembered (says the Psalmist) that God was
their Rock, and the high God their Redeemer. Psalm. 78.35. And the like do you,
whatever your condition be, never so sinful, never so miserable, yet remember
who it is that is your Redeemer, even the great God, and your Savior Jesus
Christ. He has given himself for the redeeming of such as you are. And
therefore let not the Guilt of sin, nor yet the Power of it be any
discouragement unto you. Only come ye unto this your Redeemer, that so you may
be made actual partakers of this benefit which he has purchased, and obtained
for all those, who being truly sensible of the need they have of it, shall come
unto him for it.

Q. But how shall we come unto him? Quest. How come unto him.


A. Take the Answer in one word, come to him as to a Redeemer. Ans. As to a
Redeemer.
Which I shall explain in two. Come to him as to a Savior, and as to a Lord.

1. Come to him as to a Redeemer, a Savior, 1. As a Savior, taking hold of
the promise.
applying the merit of his death unto your selves by faith, laying hold upon
the Promise of Redemption. Even as the story tells us of Jeremiah, Jer. 38.11,
12, 13. how being a Prisoner in the dungeon he made use of those Cords which
were let down by Ebedmelech the Ethiopian to draw him up with; taking hold of
them he put them under his arms, applying them in such a way as Ebedmelech
directed him, by which means he was drawn up, and freed from that noysom Cel.
The like do you. Being Captives lying under the guilt and power of sin, as
Prisoners in that Dungeon* lo your Abedmelech, the Lord Jesus having obtained
from God his father (as Ebedmelech there did for Jeremy, from the King, his
Master, v. 9 of that Chapter) a grant for your Redemption, now he lets down
cords to you for the drawing you forth, even the sweet Promises of the Gospel
holding forth this benefit to you. Now then what remains but that you put those
Cords under your Arms, taking hold of these Promises apply them to your hearts
by faith, so resting upon the merits of the Lord Jesus, as your only Savior
and Redeemer. By such a means it was that Ebedmelech himself was delivered from
the Babylonish Captivity, when the rest of his Companions the Jews were carried
away.

Thy life shall be for a prey unto thee, because thou have put thy trust in me,
says the Lord to him, in the Chapter following, Ier. 39. And the like way do
you put your souls upon, that you may be freed and delivered from that
spiritual Captivity, under which all the Sons of men by naturely, put you your
trust and confidence in this your Lord, the Lord Jesus, resting and relying
upon the price which he has paid, the satisfaction which he has made, the
all sufficiency of his merit, for the pardon of your sins and eternal
salvation. This do that you may be freed from the Guilt of sin.

2. And coming to him as a Savior believing on him, come to him also as a
Lord, yielding up your selves to him, 2. As a Lord, yealdidg up themselves to
his service.
as his servants Such you are upon the account of this your Redemption. Being
Redeemed by Christ, now you are no longer your own so much you may learn from
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 19.20. Ye are not your own, ye are bought with a price. No,
nor yet any others, so as that you should be their slaves, or yet their
servants, as to your Consciences. Ye are bought with a price be ye not the
servants of men (says the same Apostle in the next Chapter) 1 Cor. 7.23. But
you are his, who has redeemed you. Thus says the Lord that created thee O
Jacob, etc. I have Redeemed thee, and called thee by thy name thou art mine,
Isa. 43.1. So is it with you, who look upon your Lord Christ as your Redeemer,
now know that you being called by his name, Christians, are his. His, and that
upon a double account As of Creation, which all men and other Creatures are* so
of Redemption, which being intended for you, gives him a peculiar right to
you, and interest in you. And being so, give up your selves to him; upon this
account coming, returning unto him. So the Lord presses it upon the Jews, Isa.
44.22. Return unto me for I have redeemed thee. Not only formed thee (as the
verse foregoing has it) that is Created thee, but also Redeemed thee; and so
have the best right in thee. And therefore Return unto me. The like, upon the
like account, do you unto this your Redeemer. He having not only formed,
created, but also Redeemed you, and so having a double right unto you, now come
ye unto him, give up your selves unto him as his servants: begging it from him
that he would declare and put forth his power in and upon you, in freeing you
from the servitude of sin, delivering you from the power of it, that it may no
longer rule and reign in you; induing and upholding you with that his free
Spirit, which David prays for Psalm. 51.12. Spiritu spontaneo, that spirit of
Grace, which making you free, setting you at liberty, from the thraldom of all
sinful and inordinate lusts, may incline your hearts to serve him freely and
willingly; so as being by him Redeemed and delivered out of the hands of all
your Enemies you may serve him without fear in righteousness and holiness all
the days of your lives, (as you have it Luke 1.74, 75.) Thus come ye unto
Christ as your Lord, that by him (as I said) you may be made freemen, set at
liberty from the service of sin, from the power of it, which being through his
Spirit, now assure your selves of your interest in his merit, that you are
Redeemed from the Guilt of it. This from the first Branch. To pass on.

Use. 3. The Redeemed of the Lord excited to.
Is it so that Christ has given himself to Redeem us, and can we evidence this
to our selves that we are in the number of those for whom he thus gave himself,
and to whom he intended this Benefit of his death, now

1, Rejoice we in this our Privilege. 1. Rejoice in this their privilege
This is that which the Prophet says of the Jews Isa. 51.11. when they should
be delivered from their Babylonian Captivity. The Redeemed of the Lord shall
come with singing unto Sion, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads,
they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away.
And thus be we affected with the apprehension of this unspeakable benefit
obtained for us by Jesus Christ, our spiritual Redemption, let it affect our
hearts with joy and gladness. Rejoicing in this more than in all our other
Temporal inioyments; herewith drowning all our carnal fears and sorrows Fear
not for I have redeemed thee Isa. 43.1.

2. And rejoicing in it, give unto our Redeemer the Glory of this his work. 2.
Give unto their Redeemer the Glory hereof.


1. Admiring the love 1. Admiring the love of Jesus Christ.
which the Lord Jesus has herein expressed to us;) that he should thus engage
for us, giving himself to Redeem us purchasing our Redemption at so dear a
rate. Not with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold but with his own precious
blood, (as Saint Peter there has it, 1 Pet. 1.19.) O what love was this! So a
poor Prisoner would look upon it, Should another come and freely engage for
him, for the payment of his debt, though it were but some small sum of ten or
twenty pound, which himself was no ways able to have paid, he would never
forget this love What cause then have we to admire and adore this love; which
the Lord Jesus has herein showed unto us, in this giving himself to redeem us?

2. Admiring it, 2. Giving thanks to him.
return unto him the promise which is due unto him for it. This David calls
upon himself to do for his Temporal Redemption; Psalm. 103.1, 2, 4. Bless the
Lord O my Soul, and all that is within me bless his holy name; Bless the Lord
O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits; Who Redeemeth thy life from
destruction. And was he so thankful for a Temporal, O how thankful should we
be for this Spiritual, this eternal Redemption, which we have obtained by Jesus
Christ? For this let our Souls for ever bless him, giving thanks unto him. O
give thanks unto the Lord for he is good, etc. Let the Redeemed of the Lord say
so (says the same Psalmist) Ps. 107.1 2. acknowledging his goodness in their
temporal deliverances. And this do we much more, who are the Redeemed of the
Lord Jesus give we thanks unto him for this so unspeakable a benefit.

3. And giving thanks to him let it be our in devour to express this our
Thankfulness. 3. Express their thankfulness to him.
Which do we.

1. 1. By loving of him.
By answering this love with love, loving him who has expressed such love to
us. This it was, and only this, that induced him to undertake this work for us,
his Love. This it was that moved God to work that Redemption for his people
Israel out of Egypt; In his love and in his Pity he redeemed them, Is. 63.9.
And what else was it that moved the Lord Jesus to undertake this work of
eternal Redemption for us? He loved us, and gave himself an offering for us,
Ephesians. 5.2. He loved the Church and gave himself for it, v. 25. who has loved
us, and washed us from our sins in his blood Rev. 1.5. O then let us labor to
answer this love with love, loving this our Redeemer, who thus merely out of
his love has given himself to Redeem us,

2. And loving him Live to him. 2. Living to him.
Let this love of Christ constrain us, etc. That seeing he dyed for us, to
Redeem us, we who live do not henceforth live unto our selves, but unto him who
thus dyed for us (as the Apostle applies it) 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Living unto him,
according to his Prescriptions, and to his Glory (as you heard that phrase
opened before.)

3. And living to him, let us also Dye to him 3. Dying to him.
Whether we live we live unto the Lord, or Whether we die we die unto the Lord,
Romans 14.8. In both dedicating our selves unto him. As in life so in death. As
living to him, so dying in him. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, even
so says the Spirit, Rev. 14, 13. that is in the faith of Christ. Thus dyed the
Patriarch All these dyed in the faith, Heb. 11.13, in the faith of the promised
Messiah. And so see that we Die. Not only in the Profession of the doctrine of
faith, the Gospel, but in the practice and exercise of it; Resting and learning
upon this our Redeemer. Even as Jacob is said to have done upon the top of his
staff, Heb. 11.21. Bequeathing and commending our spirits unto him, as the
Martyr Stephen did, who breathed out his Soul with these words, Lord Jesus
recieve my Spirit, Acts 7.29. Thus living, thus dying, now doubt not but that
in due time we shall be made partakers of that full and perfect Redemption,
which Christ is said to be made unto all Believers, 1 Cor. 1.30. Even that
Redemption of our Bodies, of which the same Apostle speaks, Romans 8.23. Our
Souls being here Redeemed from the Guilt and power of sin, both Souls and
Bodies shall be hereafter freed from all the Consequents of it.

4. Has Christ given himself to redeem us from Iniquity. Use 4. The Redeemed
of the Lord not to inslave themselves by returning unto sin.
O then far be it from any of us which are so Redeemed to return to this
Bondage again, by inslaving our selves to any base lust. Which who so shall do,
they thereby show themselves unworthy of such a Benefit. So we would think of a
Captive, who being redeemed out of the hands of his Enemies by a great ransom,
should (being in his right wits) put himself under their power again, returning
to his former slavery, who but would judge him worthy there to remain, unworthy
of such a second favor? And truly such a Judgment has the spirit of God
passed upon wilful Apostates, whose doom we may read in those two known
terrible Texts. The one, Heb. 6.4, ^, 6. It is unpossible for those who were
once enlightened (with the knowledge of the truth) and have tasted of the
heavenly gift of Christ, that gift of God, and of this great benefit of
Redemption by him, having a general knowledge thereof, and made some particular
application of it to themselves, not without some delight) If they shall fall
away, to renew them again unto repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves
the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame. If they return to to their
former estate, there is little or no hope of such, in as much as by this their
wilful Apostasy they offer so high an affront to him whom once they owned and
acknowledged cor their Savior and Redeemer, treading him under foot; As that
other Text has it. Heb. 10.26. etc. If we sin wilfully after that we have
received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin,
but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment and fierce indignation. He that
despised Moses Law dyed without mercy; Of how much soarer punishment shall he
be thought worthy who hathtrodden under foot the Son of God, and counted the
blood of the Covenant an unholy thing? Now this in a degree do all presumptuous
Backsliders, who having been sacramentally washen in the blood of Christ, and
professed faith in him, to look for Redemption through him, do afterward
return with the Dog to the vomit, and with the Sow that is washen to the
Wallowing in the mire (as Saint Peter describes such kind of persons, 2 Pet. 2.
last;) what do they herein but trample upon their Redeemer? O take heed it be
not so with any of us? Take heed brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil
heart of unbelief, in departing (or to depart, (...) being put for (...), (as
Grotius observes) from the living God, Heb. 3.12. Such Apostacy beware of,
lest thereby we put our selves into a desperate and hopeless condition. As for
such how can they expect any benefit from the death of Christ, whilst they
thus directly cross the end for which he dyed? which was to redeem those for
whom he gave himself from iniquity, free them as from the guilt so from the
power of sin. Which let all those who expect to have any share in this benefit
have a special regard unto. Being Redeemed by Christ, bought with his blood (as
you believe) do not now sell your selves (as Ahab did) to work wickedness, so
as to give ovet your selves to any sinful way or course whatsoever. In so
doing what do you but sell your selves for naught; As the Lord tells his people
the Jews Isa. 52.3. By their sins they had sold themselves into the hands of
the Babylonians, for which they had not so much as thanks from those their hard
Masters. And truly so do all revolting and backslding Christians, by returning
to their former sinful ways they sell themselves for naught, yea that which
is worse than nouhht, for naught, for that which without spedy repentance will
bring them to naught, prove their utter ruin. Which far be it (I say) from
every of us. Is it so that we profess our selves to be in the number of these
Redeemed ones, now let this Grace of God bringing salvation, which has herein
appeared unto us, teach us, and that effectually, this great Gospel-Lesson here
held forth, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we live soberly,
Righteously and godly in this present world. This is our Apostles drift and
scope in the Text, where he makes use of this as an Argument to press and
enforce that Lesson upon Christians, that they should so live, in as much as
Christ gave himself for them for this end, viz. to Redeem them from Iniquity.
And such use let all of us make of it. Not turning this Grace of God into
wontonness, taking liberty to sin, because Christ has redeemed us from it, but
therefore deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, living soberlie,
righteouslie, and Godly. Such it becomed the Lords Redeemed ones to be. They
shall call them the holy people, the Redeemed of the Lord (says the Prophet
speaking of the Jews, when returned from their Babilonian Captivity) Isa, 62.
last. And such let all the Lords people be, such as lay claim to this Benefit.
Being the Redeemed of the Lord, let them be a holy people such a, are redeemed
from their vain conversation (as Saint Peter describes true believers, 1 Pet.
1.19.) so walking as becomes those who have interest in so great a mercy. Use
5. Comfort to all true believers, who are the Lords Redeemed ones.


To close up all, in the 5th. and last place, Has the Lord Jesus given himself
for his people to redeem them from All iniquity? Why then let me hear, for the
Comfort and Consolation of all true believers, take up the Apostles (...), who
is he that condemns? It is Christ that dyed. Romans 8.34. what though Satan the
great Accuser, do now bring against you many indictments, charging upon you
many and great sins, yet let none of them dismay or discourage you. Remember
what you heard from Saint John, that the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us
from all sin. Which in effect speaks the same thing with this in the Text.
Christ gave himself, to redeem us from all iniquity. Who then is it that shall
lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? Having such a Surety, who has
undertaken for them, and discharged their debt, to the uttermost farthing. True
indeed, had he made satisfaction in part, and left them to do the rest, (as
Papists would have it,) well might they the best of them, be thought full about
their condition. The least sum undischarged by the surety, and left upon the
account of the Debtor, who has nothing to pay it with, is enough to keep him
indurance. And so would the least sin left unsatisfied for be enough to detain
us under the Curse of the Law, which runs in that latitude, Cursed is every one
that continues not in every thing, Gal. 3.10. But here is the Comfort of true
believers. The Redemption which Christ has purchased for them is a full and
plenary Redemption, even from All iniquity, and the All of iniquity. And
therefore whilst blinded Papists busy themselves about their Labor in vain,
studying how to make satisfaction for their sins, let the Lords people only
study how to testify their thankfulness unto him who has taken this work out
of their hands, and done it for them. To this Great God and our Savior Jesus
Christ, who has thus given himself for us, to Redeem us from all Iniquity, To
him with the Father, and Eternal Spirit, be praise, honor and glory now and
for ever, Amen. Thus have I done with the former of those Ends wherefore Christ
gave himself, the first and immediate end, Redemption. Come we now to the
latter, which is a consequent following upon it, viz. Purification.

And purify unto himself a Peculiar people, etc.
Parts 3.
IN the handling of which words I shall propound these 3. things to be
considered. The Agent, Act, End. The Purifier, the Purification and the Design
therein. Who it is that does this, How he does it, and Wherefore he does it.
Deal with them severally.

1. The Agent, the Purifier, Part 1. The purifier Christ himself.
who it is that undertaketh this work, which is even he that undertook the
former. Redeemer and Purifier are both one, even the great God and our Savior
Jesus Christ. He it is that Purifieth those whom he has Redeemed. Of which
more anon.

Part 2. The Act, Purification.
2. But how does he do this? That is the second thing, the Act. To which Answer
may be returned. This he may be said to do two ways. Sacramentally, Really.
Christ said to purify his people two ways.


1. Sacramentally. 1. Sacramentally
Such were the Jewish Purifications under the Law, which were made by diverse
kinds of Offerings and Washings, Oblations and Ablutions, and other Ceremonial
observances. Of which the Apostle speaking, Heb. 9.13. tells us that they
sanctified to the hurifying of the flesh, making those who made use of them
externally and Ecclesiastically pure and holy. And thus are Christians now
purified under the Gospel, in and by the Sacrament of Baptism, which is (as our
Apostle is conceived to call it, Tit. 3.5.) (...), the Laver of Regeneration,
wherein Christians being washed, are Purified, Sanctified (as the same Apostle
has it, Ephesians. 5.26.) made Sacramentally, and externally pure and holy, such in
foro Ecclesiae, as to the Church, into which they are thereby incorporated. But
to let this pass.

2. The Purifying which here we meet with is an Inward and Real Purification,
2: Really.
the thing represented and signified by those signs. The Inward and Spiritual
washing and purifying of the soul. Which consists in two things, Which
consists in two things.
the taking away the Guilt and Power of sin; the one in Justification, the
other in Sanctification. Both which are the works of Jesus Christ.

1. The Purifying of his people in their Justification, by taking away the
Guilt of sin. 1. Taking away the Guilt of sin in justification.
Which is sometimes called a Purifying, or Purging. So we find it, Heb. 1.3.
When he had by himself purged our sins (speaking of Christ) (...), having made
a Purgation, a Purification (the word being the same with that in the Text)
that is, taken away the guilt of them, by making satisfaction to the justice of
God for them, which Christ did by the sacrifice of himself. And so understand
we that of St. John, 1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from
all sin, (...): And so again that of his, Rev. 1.5. To him that loved us, and
washed us from our sins in his blood; viz. from the guilt of them. This has
Christ merited by his death, by shedding his Blood; which being applied to the
soul through faith, now it becomes effectual for this end, for washing and
cleansing of the soul. This is that fountain of Purgation spoken of Zach. 13.1.
In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness; viz. Jesus Christ,
whose blood shed is as a living, ever-running fountain, for the washing of
believers from sinful impurities. This is the Washing, the Purging which David
makes such earnest suit for, Psalm. 51.7. Purge me with Hysop, and I shall be
clean; Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow. In such a way were Legal
Purifications some, of them effected by a Bunch of Hysop dipped in Lev. 4.4.
Blood, or Number. 19.18.
Water, wherewith the things or persons to be purified were sprinkled. And thus
are spiritual Purifications, the Purifying of the soul from sin, effected, by
sprinkling of the blood of Christ upon it, applying the merit of his death unto
it, which was the thing that David sought for. But this I shall not now insist
upon, having dealt with it already in the former Branch, which properly holds
forth to us the Doctrine of Justification.

2. There is a second way of Purifying, viz. by taking away the Filth and
Contagion of sin; which is done in and by Sanctification. 2. Taking away the
filth of sin in Sanctification.
And this we find frequently set forth by this word in the Text, called (...),
a Purging, Purfying.

But not more frequently than fitly. Sin being a spiritual Defilement, Obs.
1. Sin a spiritual defilement.
Pollution, Filthiness, Uncleanness. So we have it often set forth under
these terms. As by the Prophet Ezekiel, Cap. 36. v. 25. From all your
Filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you. And again, v. 29. I
will save you from all your uncleanesses. So by St. Peter, 2 Pet. 2.20. where
speaking of such sinful ways and courses as the men of this world are given
over to, he calls them (...), the Pollutions or defilements of the world. And
so St. Paul, 2 Cor. 7.1. where he exhorts Christians to cleanse themselves from
all filthiness of flesh and Spirit, making use of another word, (...),
Ingrimamentum, Defilement. And St. James the like, Iam. 1.21. Wherefore lay
apart all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness. Where the word is (...),
Sordes, Filth, Soil; fitly expressing the nature of sin, which defiles the
soul, and makes it loathsome in the eyes of God, as filth does the Body, or
Garments in the eyes of Man. This does all Sin. Original sin, which defiles
the Nature of man. Actual sins, which defile the Person. Every one being a new
blot or spot up on the soul. Like as some sins are in the eyes of men, so are
all in the sight of God. If any blot has cleaved to my hands, says Job, cap.
31.7, any act of injustice, which being a sin, is a blot in the sight of God.
Such is all Iniquity, all sin, Uncleanness.

Obs. 2. All men by nature unclean.
And with this Uncleanness are all the sons of men defiled and polluted. Even
Gods Elect as well as others, before the grace of God meet with them, they are
no better than others, they are Unclean. So much is plainly intimated and
insinuated in this word [that he might Purify.] Purifying presupposes
Pollution. Things which are pure already cannot be said to be Purified.
Purification imports a mixture of soil and filth. And such is the condition
even of Gods Elect before Christ comes to purify them, they are impure
creatures. Such they are by nature. So we have the Churches condition set
forth, Ezekiel. 16.6. When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thy blood, I
said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, live; Yea I said unto thee when
thou wast in thy blood, live. Such is the condition of Gods own people, before
the regenerating grace of God come to sanctify them, they are like a newborn
Infant weltring in the blood of its Nativity; impure, polluted creatures;
defiled with Original corruption, which overspreading the whole man, makes the
person unclean, and leaves a taint upon the best of duties that can be
performed by him. Such is the Churches acknowledgement in that other obvious
Text, Isa. 64.6. We are all as an unclean thing, All our righteousnesses are as
filthy rags. Their Persons and their actions were all contaminated with sin.
And so is it with all unregenerated persons, there is nothing but uncleanenss
in them.

Applic. Appli. Unregenerate persons to loath themselves.
Which let it be brought home to you, all of you, who are as yet in this
estate* being in a state of unregeneracy, having no more than what nature has
contributed to you, know that you are vile, loathsome creatures. And being
such, how do you think that you shall stand before that holy God, who is of
purer eyes than to behold evil, and cannot look upon iniquity; viz. without
detestation and abhorrences (as the Prophet Habakkuk says of him) Hab. 1.13. O
that you might come to be such in your own eyes as you are in his! That seeing
your own filthiness, you might come to abhor your selves. So did Job, though a
holy man, yet being convinced of his impatience, and other his errors, after
that God had so clearly revealed himself unto him: Now (says he) I abhor my
self, Job 42.6. What cause then have you to do the like, having nothing but
Corruption in you? You whose sins and iniquities testify against you (as the
Prophets Jeremy and Isai speak of the Jews, Isa. 59.12. Ier. 14.7.) Oh what
cause have you to abhor, to loath your selves? Which till you do, never look to
be made partakers of this Benefit which we are now speaking of. Christ never
Purifieth any, never freeth them from the guilt and power of sin, but he
brings them to such a loathing of themselves for it. So much we may learn
from that of the Prophet Ezekiel, cap. 36. where the Lord making promise to his
people, that he would save them from all their uncleanness, v. 29. free them
from the guilt and slavery of their sins, he subjoyns in the verse next but
one, v. 31. Then shall you remember your own evil ways, and your doings that
were not good, and shall loath your selves in your own sight for your
iniquities, and for your abominations. Never does God exercise his grace and
mercy upon a poor sinner in Justifying and Sanctifying of him, but he brings
him to such an abhorrence, such a loathing of himself for his sins, makes him
vile in his own eyes. Behold I am vile (says Job) Job 40.4. What did you never
yet see your selves to be such; surely such you are, and the more vile because
you see it not. Now the Lord, who opens the eyes of the blind, open your eyes
that you may see it! Which when once you come to do, then look up to your
Purifier, Then look up to their Purifier.
even the Lord Jesus, who gave himself to Redeem such as you are, that he might
purify them, free them, as from the Guilt, so from the Contagion of sin, from
the one by Justifying, from the other by Sanctifying of them. [Who gave himself
for us that he might Redeem us from all iniquity, and Purify.]

Lo, This is the work of Jesus Christ, thus to purify his people by way of
Sanctification. Obs. 3. Christ purifieth his Redeemed ones by way of
Sanctification.
Hence it is that we find him called by the name of a Refiner and Purifier,
Mat. 3.3. He shall sit as a Refiner and Purifier of silver, and he shall
purify the sons of Levi. A Refiner is one that purifieth metals, silver or
gold from the dross that is in them. And thus does the Lord Christ purify his
people from the Corruption of sin.

Quest. And how does he this? Quest. How does he this?


Answ. Why this he does properly and principally by his Word and Spirit. Answ.
By his Word and Spirit.
Even as Refiner works by his fire, so does Christ by his Word and Spirit,
both which we find compared to fire. Is not my word like as a fire, says the
Lord. Jer. 23.29, He shall Baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire, Mat.
3.11. That is, with the Holy Ghost, which is like unto fire. Both so called, as
upon other, so upon this account, in as much as they have a refining,
purifying, separating property in them. Even as the Refiners fire separates the
dross from the pure metal; even so does the Word, of which the Apostle to the
Hebrews says, that it is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged
sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the
joints and marrow. This does the Word being accompanied by the Spirit. Even as
the Refiners fire being blown up now it melts the Metals, and separates
betwixt the dross and it; even thus does the Lord Christ melt the hearts of
his people with godly contrition for sin, and so purge out Corruption out of
them by the work of his Spirit accompanying the Word.

Afflictions made use of in this work.
Other means there are, which also he makes use of often times in this work among
other of Afflictions and Trials, which are as his Fining pot, into which he
brings his people for this end. This course he took with his people the Jews,
as the Prophet Jeremie sets it forth Ier. 9.7. Therefore thus says the Lord of
Hosts; Behold I will melt them and try them, viz. as the finer does his Oar, in
the furnace and fire of Affliction. And so the Prophet Zachary expresses it,
Cap. 13. v. last, I will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine
them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried, Two parts of the
people being destroyed and consumed, the third part, the remainder, which the
Lord intended to make his peculiar people, he brings them through the fire of
affliction for the refining and purifying of them. So the Prophet Isai explains
the Metaphor, Isai 48.10; where the Lord speaking to the same people tells
them. Behold I have refined thee, but not with (or as) Silver, I have chosen
thee in the furnace of affliction. This is the Lords firing-pot, into which he
often times brings those whom he intends to make choice of so for his peculiar
people. He brings them into the furnace of affliction. Where though he do not
refine them with Silver, or as silver; which the finer uses to keep in the
fire till all the dross be wasted and wrought out of it, not refining them
exactly and perfectly, yet he begins and makes some progress in this work,
making their Afflictions subservient thereunto, as Preparatives to, and
furtherances in this their purging and purifying. By this therefore shall the
iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his sin,
Isa. 27.9. This is the end which God aymeth at in afflicting his people whom he
loves and intends good to, that he may thereby purge sin out of them.

But this is but an Occasion, as also the word is but an instrument, which God
is pleased to make use of in effecting of this work. In the mean time the
proper and principal efficient is the Spirit of Christ, The Principal efficient
herein, the Spirit.
concurring and working together with and by these means. Which is therefore
called the Spirit of holiness, Romans 1.4. And Sanctification is ascribed unto
it as its proper and peculiar work, being called the Sanctification of the
Spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. 1 Pet. 1, 2.

And by this Spirit it is that Christ purifieth his people. Christ having by
his death impetrated the holy Spirit for his people, conveyeth it unto them.
Having first impetrated and obtained it for them by his death, he then
communicates it unto them. Thereby first working Faith in them to apply the
merit of his death unto themselves, whereby they come to draw this purifying
virtue from him, their hearts being purified by faith (as Peter says of the
believing Gentiles, Acts 15.9.) faith in Christ; whose Blood is by this means
made effectual unto them for the purging of their consciences from dead works,
to serve the living God (as the Apostle has it, Heb. 9.14.) And then pouring
out other Graces upon them, the fruits and effects of the same Spirit; which is
the Clean water spoken of Ezekiel. 36.25. wherewith the Lord promises to
besprinkle his people. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall
be clean, from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse
you. Meaning that he would communicate his Grace and Spirit unto them, whereby
he would purge and purify them, as from the Guilt, so from the Filth of their
sins.

And this does the Lord Jesus do unto all those whom he has given himself
for. Redeeming them, he also purifieth, Obs. 4. The Redeemed of the Lord all
purified by him.
sanctifies them. Mark it, this is the Bird which I have been so long beating
the bush for. Those whom Christ Redeemeth he also purifieth. Redemption and
Purification, Justification and Sanctification are inseparable companions. So
we find them here joined together, the one as a Consequent of the other. [ Who
gave himself for us, that he might Redeem and Purify -- ] And so we find them
elsewhere; as 1 Cor. 1.30, Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who is made unto us
of God Wisdom and Righteousness and Sanctification. And so again Cap. 6. of
that Epistle, v. 11. Such were some of you viz. unrighteous persons, polluted
with diverse kinds of lusts) but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye
are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. Both
these ways were these believing Corinthians washed and purified, by the Blood
of Christ unto Justification, and by his Spirit unto Sanctification. Thus does
the Lord Jesus come unto those whom he intends to make his people, he comes
to them by Water and Blood. So St. John describes the manner of his coming, 1
John 5.6. This is he that comes by water and blood, even Jesus Christ, not by
water only, but by water and blood. Both these in a literal sense we find
issuing out of his side in his Passion upon the Cross (as the story has it,
John 19.34.) And both these we find Typically in the Sacraments of the New
Testament instituted by him, where in one Element is water, in another wine, a
Type of the Blood of Christ; the Mystery of both which is to show how Christ
comes unto his people by water and blood, by way of Sanctification as well as
Justification; as well washing away the filth of their sins by his Spirit, as
the Guilt of them by his Blood. This he does for all his Elect people, whom he
chooses and calls out of the world to be a peculiar people to himself. So
much we may take notice of from that of St. Peter, 1 Pet. 1.2. where he
describes those believers to whom he writes after that manner, Elect
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through Sanctification of
the spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. Thus
the Blood and Spirit of Christ go together, the one Justifying, the other
Sanctifying. To this end it was that Christ gave himself for his Church (as the
Apostle has it) Ephesians. 5.26, 27. That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the
washing of water by the word; that he might present it unto himself a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be
holy and without blemish. This was Christ's design in giving himself, that he
might procure this double benefit for his Church, of Justification and
Sanctification; washing them, as from the Guilt, so from the Filth of sin, the
one by his Blood, the other by his Spirit; both like unto water for the
cleansing property of them. Which in effect speaks the very same thing with
this in the Text. Who gave himself that he might Redeem and Purify.

Quest. Quest. Why Christ purifieth his people.
And why is Jesus Christ so intent about this work, the Purifying and
Sanctifying of his people?

Ans. For this diverse Reasons may be assigned.

1. One of which the Text holds forth. This he does that they may be a
Peculiar people to himself, Reas. 1. That they may be a peculiar people to
himself.
a people whom he may make his choice Treasure. Now men will not take base
Metal, Silver or Gold, to make their Cimelium, their choice Treasure of, but
they will have it refined, purified. But of this (God willing) more hereafter.

2. This Christ does, that he may conform his people to himself. 2. That they
may be conformable to himself.
This was the design of God the Father in giving his Elect people unto his Son
Christ. Whom he did foreknow (says the Apostle) he did also predestinate to be
conformed to the Image of his Son, Romans 8.29; made like unto him in their
Sanctification, as well as Glorification. And to this design Christ himself
was, and is subsernient, giving himself that he might execute and bring about
what his Father had decreed and determined, procure not only the Redemption but
the Sanctification of his people, that so they might be therein like unto
himself, resembling him in that his Perfection of holiness. A perfection
eminent in him. Whncee he is called by the Angel, that holy thing, (...), Luke
1.35. Such he was here upon earth, perfectly pure and holy, free from all sin,
Original, Actual. The Lamb without blemish and without spot, 1 Pet. 1.19. Who
did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth, Cap. 2. v. 22. Such was
Christ in his own Person. And such as himself, is such he will have those whom
he takes to be his people, his peculiar people, to be, in measure like unto
himself, that so it may be known to whom they belong. Upon this ground it is
that the Lord requires that his people should be a holy people; Be ye holy,
for I am holy, Lev. 11.44. etc. And upon this ground the Lord Christ makes his
people such, makes them holy, because he himself is holy.

3. 3 That he may bring them to glory.
This he does, that so he may bring them to Happiness, to which Holiness is the
way. Without which (as the Apostle tells us) no man shall see the Lord, Heb.
12.14. be made partaker of that beatifical vision, see the Lord Christ where he
is, so as to be with him in his Kingdom of glory. This is that which Christ
says he wills, Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me be with
me where I am that they may behold my glory, Joh. 17.24. Now we know what is
said of the new Jerusalem, Rev. 21. last. There shall in no wise enter into it
any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination. So it shall be
in a great measure upon earth. In the Church, before the coming of Christ,
there shall be a Discipline (o that our eyes might see it) so exact as that no
profane person shall be tolerated in it. But much more in heaven, where no
unclean thing shall enter. No unrighteous person shall inherit the Kingdom of
God. 1 Cor. 6.9. So then, Christ that he may in due season bring his people
thither, he there prepares them for it, by this his Purifying of them. Even as
it was with the Maids which were to go in to King Ahasuerus, to bed with him,
they were first to be purified for a certain time, for twelve months together;
which was to be done with Myrrh and other sweet Odours (as we may read the
manner of it, Hest. 2.12.) Thus must it be with all those who are to have
Communion with Christ in his Kingdom of glory, they must first be purified, by
way of Sanctification, by washing them, and pouring out the sweet graces of the
Spirit upon them. And in order hereunto Christ undertaketh and effects this
work. Having Redeemed his people by his blood from Death and Hell, and
purchased eternal life for them, now he purifyeth and sanctifies them by his
Spirit, that so they may be prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband (as we
have it) Rev. 21.2. made meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints
in light (as the Apostle has it) Col. 1.12.

Thus you see that it is so; and why it is so that Christ having Redeemed his
people he also Purifyeth, Sanctifies them. That which remains of this is
Application. Applic. Unsanctified sinners can have no assurance of their
Redemption.


Use. 1. Which (in the first place) let it be directed by way of Conviction. Do
these two thus go together? then may diverse from hence take notice that they
can have no assurance of any interest in the former, in as much as they have no
share in the latter. Not being purified let not them reckon themselves among
the Lords Redeemed ones. Not being freed from the filth of sin let not them
flatter themselves that they are freed from the Guilt of it. Not being
sanctified by the Spirit of Christ let not them persuade themselves that they
are justified by his Merit. Which let it take hold of all presumptuous sinners,
who not withstanding they live and go on in a course of sin, yet will call
Christ their Redeemer, pretending to rest securely upon him for Justification
and Salvation. Such was the security of the Princes, Priests, and Prophets, of
Judah, (as the Prophet Micah sets it forth) Mick. 3. v. 9, 10, 11. the one
abhorred Judgment, and perverted all equity, etc. the other taught for hire
and divined for money, the whole state both Political and Ecclesiastical, were
all corrupted, given over to Covetousness, Oppression, Bribery, etc. Yet (says
the Prophet) they will lean upon the Lord, and say, is not the Lord among us?
none evil can come upon us. Notwithstanding that they committed such horrid and
execrable sins yet they would presume upon the presence of God with them, and
his grace and favor toward them, that he would be a Savior unto them. And is
it not so with too many among us? who though they take liberty to indulge
themselves in their sinful ways and courses, not at all endeavoring any
Reformation in their hearts or lives; As for Purity, it is a thing they abhor,
the very name is odious to them, much more the thing, yet they will lean upon
the Lord, they will profess confidence in Jesus Christ, looking upon him as
their Savior, and their Redeemer. But as for such (whilst such) let them know,
that what ever acquaintance they may take of this their Redeemer, he will take
none of them; neither let them ever expect to receive any benefit from his
death. No, Christ will either be a Perfect Savior, or no Savior; where he
saves from the Guilt of sin he will also save from the Power of it, whom ever
he Redeemeth he Purifieth. Art thou then still an impure wretch, one that lie
and wallowest in the mire of an impure and filthy conversation, allowing thy
self in any sinful practice what ever, take this as an evidence that thou art
one who as yet have no part or portion in this great benefit of Redemption. I
will not say but Christ might intend it unto thee, might shed his blood for
thee, and that upon Repentance and Reformation the merit thereof may be applied
unto thee; But as yet I say unto thee, as Simon Peter once did to Simon Magus,
Act. 8.21. Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter.

Which that we may all of us have and be assured of, let us (in the second
place) be exhorted and excited to seek after this Purification, Use 2. All
excited to seek after Purification.
that the Lord Christ may thus wash us. It is that which our Savior told
Peter, when out of modesty he refused to let him wash his feet, If I wash thee
not (says he) thou have no part with me, Joh. 13.8. If we be not washen by
Christ, never look for any benefit from him. And therefore let all of us say
unto him, what Peter upon second and better thoughts there did, v. 9. Lord, not
my feet only, but also my hands and my head. Thus do we yield up our selves to
the Lord Jesus, that we may be washen by him, as from the Guilt of sin by his
Blood, so from the filth of it by his Spirit. This is David's prayer in that
Penitential Psalm of his, Ps. 51. v. 2. Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity,
and cleanse me from my sin. And such a through-washing let all of us seek
after, not only to have our sins pardoned, but mortified, that so we may not ly
under any defilement, but may be cleansed, not only from open but even from
secret sins (as he elsewere prays, Psalm. 19.12.) For which mercy look we up
unto the Lord Jesus by faith, that so we may receive this benefit from him,
which he has merited for his people; waiting upon him in the use of all holy
means for the obtaining of it, so seeking after an entire and perfect
sanctification, Perfect Sanctification to be sought after.
both the Negative and Positive parts of it.

1. The Negative part, 1. The Negative part of.
that we may be freed and delivered from the power of Corruption, so as there
may not be a sin left to reign or yet to bear any sway in us. Let not sin reign
in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof, Romans 6.2.
But that all may be mortified. In which work be we subservient to the design of
Jesus Christ; Washing and purifying our selves. Chsists people to wash
themselves.
This indeed is Christ's work which he works in his people, yet so as he does
not work it without them. Christ never purifieth a man but he makes him
willing to be purified. And having wrought his will to desire it, he works in
him suitable endeavors, setting him on work for the purging and purifying of
himself. And this let all of us in the fear of God seriously set about. The
washing of our hands. This David resolves upon, I will wash mine hands in
innocence, Ps. 26.6. And this the Lord calls for from his people. Wash ye,
make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, ceas to
do evil. Isai 1.16. And washing our hands wash our hearts also* wash thine
heart from wickedness that thou may be saved. Jer. 4.14. wash hands and
hearts* cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye double
minded, Jam. 4.3. Thus put away, not only sinful words and Actions, out of the
life, but sinful lusts, out of the heart. Let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and Spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. if a man purge himself from
these things he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and meet for the
Masters use, 2 Timothy 2.21. 2. The positive part of it.


2. But rest not in the Negative, that we are not so and so as some others are,
but seek after a positive Purification. He that has this hope in him (or on
him, (...), that is, on Christ, purifyeth himself as he is pure (says John) 1
Ioh. 3.3. All those who look for salvation by Christ, besides his righteousness
imputed, they must be made partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12.10. And this do
we all of us seek after. Cleanse our selves from all filthiness in of the flesh
and Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God (as it there follows, 2
Cor. 7.1.) that we may be adorned with all those graces, which may render us
such as becomes the Redeemed of the Lord to be a holy people. Those Virgins
which I speak of, which were to be brought into the King, they were not only to
be washen from Bodily defilements, but they were to be purifyed by Myrrh and
other fragrant spices. Thus think we it not enough to free our selves from
sinful lusts; which are the pollutions of the soul, but seek after such a
Positive purification; that our souls may be endued with all such graces as may
render us acceptable to our heavenly Husband the Lord Jesus and fit us for
Communion with him. In such a way Saint Peter speaking of believers, to whom he
writes, says that they had purified themselves, 1 Pet. 1.21. Seeing ye have
purified your selves in obeying the truth through the Spirit unto unfeigned
love of the brethren. Thus it is not enough to free the heart from rancour and
malice, but it must be purified to unfeigned love, love to God and Jesus
Christ, and love to his Saints for his sake. And so for other graces of the
Spirit, see we that our souls be adorned with every of them; so as what the
Apostle says of his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.7. it may be made good in us, That
we come behind in no gift, no grace.

Christians to express purity in their lives, in word and deed.
And being thus laid in with this inward purity of soul, being, as it is said of
the Kings daughter, the Church, Psalm. 45.13. glorious within, now let us
express it outwardly in the course of our lives and conversations,
endeavoring to approve our selves, as to God, so to the world, true (...),
pure and holy in word and deed. In word, having a pure language, which the Lord
promises to his people, Zeph. 3.9. In deed. This Paul presses upon Timothy as
a Minister, 1 Timothy 4.12. Be thou an example of the Believers in word, in
conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity. And so again in the
Chapter following, Cap. 5. v. 2. he bids him, that having to deal in the
instructing of young women, he should do it with all purity, so as his
carriage might not give ground for the least suspicion of levity. And thus let
all (as Public persons in special, who are herein to be exemplary to others,
so) all private Christians, carry themselves toward others in all their
dealings with them, with all purity; thereby showing themselves to be in the
number of those for whom Christ has given himself, which he did to this end,
that having Redeemed them, he might purify them.

Thus let all of us seek after Purity and Holiness, Negative and Positive,
Inward and Outward; purity of heart and purity of life, learning and practicing
this lesson which our Apostle here teaches us, v. 12. to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to live soberly and righteously and godly in this present
world. Which if we shall not do, what do we but therein cross the design of
Jesus Christ in giving himself? which was, that Redeeming his people from all
Iniquity, he might Purify them.

And Wherefore purify them? That is the last Particular in the Text, which
holds forth to us the End, or the Design, wherefore it was that Christ was,
and is at this Cost and Pains, as in Redeeming, so in Purifying of this
people. Branch 3. Christ's design in Redeeming and purifying his people.
This he has done and does, as with an eye to them, so to himself. So it
follows.

Purfie to himself] (...), sibiipsi, This was the design of Jesus Christ in
what he has done and does for the sons of men, in Redeeming, Purifying,
Justifying, Sanctifying of them, that so he might acquire unto himself a
people, Obs. That he might acquire unto himself a people.
a people who being serviceable to him here, might reign with him hereafter. So
our Apostle elsewhere sets forth the End of his giving himself for the
Church, sanctifying and cleansing it (which speaks the very same thing with
this in the Text.) This he did (says he) That he might present it to himself a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, etc. Ephesians. 5.27. (...), Present it
to himself,] Which he does first in his Kingdom of Grace, then of Glory. In his
Kingdom of Grace as serviceable t^ him, in his Kingdom of Glory to have an
everlasting Communion with him. Even as King Ahashuerus in causing those
Virgins to be separated and Purified, as they were, he did it that so they
might in due time be presented unto himself, and so Purified them unto himself,
Hest. 2.12. Even thus does the Lord Christ purify those whom he has Redeemed,
purify them unto himself, that they may be presented to him in his Kingdom of
Grace and Glory. It is the former of these which our Apostle here speaks of
in the Text: And Purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

Obs. Christ purifieth his Redeemed ones that they may be set to be his people.
Therefore it is that Christ purifieth those whom he has Redeemed, Sanctifies
those whom he Justifies, that so they may be a people fit for himself, fit for
him to own, and fit for him to use. To own as his People, to make use of in his
service. Neither of which they could be, were they not thus purified. Unclean
vessels are not meet to be brought into the presence of a Prince, neither are
they fit for any honorable service until they be washed and sweetened. And so
is it with impure sinners, till they be washen by the Blood and Spirit of
Christ, as they are not fit for his presence, so much less for his use. So much
we may take notice of from that forecited Text of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.21. If
a man therefore purge himself from these (viz. impure Doctrines and Practices)
he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified, and meet for the Masters use.
None are fit for the service of Christ, or for Communion with him, to honor
him or to be honored by him, but such as are purified, sanctified. But I shall
not insist upon this General.

Come we to the Particulars here assigned in this End. Which are two. Christ
purifieth this people to himself, 1. That they may be a Peculiar people. 2.
Zealous of good works. In the former we have their Appropriation, in the latter
their Qualification. Deal with them severally, beginning with the Former.

A Peculiar people.
SUch is the Church for which Christ gave himself, a Peculiar people. Obs. The
Church a peculiar people.
So we find the people of the Jews often called, Deuteronomy. 14.2. The Lord has
chosen thee to be a peculiar people to himself above all the Nations that are
upon the earth. So again Cap. 26. v. 18. The Lord has avouched thee this day
to be a peculiar people. All Nations they were a people; yea in a general sense
they were Gods people, his by Creation, and by a generel Government; but the
Israelites were his by a special Appropriation, a special people to him. So we
find the same word rendered, Cap. 7. v. 6. The Lord thy God has chosen thee to
be a special people to himself. (...) Populus peculii, seu, peculiaris.
A people whom God having Redeemed from their Egyptian Captivity, he had taken
into a special Covenat with himself, so as they were more nearly related unto
him than any other people in the world. What Nation has God so nigh unto them?
etc. Deuteronomy. 4.7. Now what the Apostle says of other things which befell that
people, 1 Cor. 10.11. we may also say of this, It happened unto them for a
figure; they being herein a Type of the true Church, which being by Christ
Redeemed from spiritual captivity, is to him a Peculiar people. So our Apostle,
alluding to those Texts of the Old Testament, where the Jews are so called,
here applies it unto Christians, true Believers, calling them Christ's peculiar
people. As also St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.9. where setting forth the Saints
privileges, among other styles which he gives them, The word Peculiat
explained. Saepe mecum considerans quid sibi vellet verbum (...), and a
sapientibus hujus soeculiinterrogans, si forte alicubi legissent; nunquam
invenire potui qui mihi quid significaret exponeret. Hieron. Com. in Text. Hoc
vocabulum finxerunt Graeci Interpretes. Beza Gr. Annot. in loc. Scultet ibid.
he calls them A Peculiar people.

A Peculiar people] (...) (says the Text.) A word concerning which Ierom in
his Commentary on this place tells us, that having with himself often
considered what should be the sense and meaning of it, he consulted with the
most learned of his time about it, whether they had met with it in any of their
Authors, but could not receive satisfaction from any of them about it.
Whereupon he concluded (as others after him have done) the Apostle to have
borrowed this word from the Old Testament; where the 70. Interpreters, not
finding a word fitly answering to the Hebrew, Segallah, they coined this (...),
which (as the Hebrew word also does) properly signifies a Choice Treasure;
somewhat which a man (for some apprehended excellency in it, sets a special
affection upon, and so severing it from the rest of his substance, lays it
up, reserving it for some other use and purpose. This is properly (...), which
being compounded of (...) and (...), signifies the choicest and most precious
part of a man's substance, a peculiar Treasure. So we find it used in the proper
signification of it, Eccles. 2.8. where Solomon sets forth how he gathered
unto himself Silver and Gold, and the peculiar Treasure of Kings and of
Provinces. Segullah, says the Hebrew, rendered by the 70. (...), the most
choice and precious Rarities wherewith Princes and Provinces did use to present
him. And such a peculiar Treasure is the Church unto Jesus Christ. As the
Israelites were unto God, his Segullah, his Peculiar Treasure (So our
Translation renders the word) Exodus 19.5. Ye shall be a Peculiar Treasure unto
me above all people. All people were his (as it there follows) All the Earth
is mine, that is, all the people of the earth, but they his Segullah, his
Peculiar Treasure: The Lord has chosen Jacob to himself, and Israel for his
Peculiar Treasure (says the Psalmist) Psalm. 135.4. (...), (say the 70.) Even
such is the Church for which Christ gave himself, even all true Believers, unto
him. Believers called a peculiar people upon a diverse account.
They are his Peculiar Treasure. (...), A Peculiar people.

And so they may be called upon a diverse account, Being

1. 1. Being chosen out of the world.
A Chosen Generation. The Lord has chosen thee to be a special (a Peculiar)
people to himself (says Moses to Israel in those Texts forenamed) Deuteronomy. 7.6,
14.2. Ye are a Chosen Generation, a Peculiar people (says Peter there of
Believers) 1 Pet. 2.9. Chosen out of the world, and so distinguished from
others by the grace of Election, whereby they are given unto Christ to be his
Peculiar people.

2. Being redeemed out of the world.
.2 As they are chosen, so they are Redeemed out of the world. Thou have
Redeemed us to God by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People,
and Nation (so sing the 24. Elders) Rev. 5.9. They are a people whom Christ
has paid a peculiar price for, a people which have cost him dear, more than
all the world besides. That cost him but a word of his mouth, He spoke, and it
was done, Psalm. 33.9. But these, the Blood of his heart. A dearly purchased
Possession. So the Apostle calls them, Ephesians. 1.14. To the Redemption of the
purchased Possession. (...). Such are true Believers, and upon that account
called by St. Peter, a Peculiar people, in that Text, 1 Pet. 2.9. (...),
Populus ad acquisitionem, or acquisitionis, A Purchased people, whom God (that
is, Christ God and Man) purchased with his own blood (as we have it) Act. 20.28.

3. Of high esteem with Jesus Christ.
3. A Peculiar people unto Jesus Christ, in regard of that esteem which he has
of them; they are his Segullah, his Jewels; so called, Mal. 3.17. They shall be
mine, says the Lord, in that day when I make up my jewels. Such account does
Christ make of his Saints; however others may esteem meanly and basely of them,
looking upon them as the dross and dung of the world, trampling them under
foot by a base undervaluing of them, yet Christ esteems highly of them,
looking upon them as his Jewels, as his Crown. Thou shall be a Crown of Glory
in the hand of the Lord, and a royal Diadem in the hand of our God (says the
Prophet, of the Church) Isa. 62.3.

4. Again, a Peculiar people in themselves, 4. A precious people.
being, through the Grace of God bestowed upon them, the preciousest people in
the world. If thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shall be as my
mouth (says the Lord to his Prophet Jeremy) Jer. 15.19. That is, in thy
teaching put a difference betwixt the godly and the wicked. The one of which
are vile; In whose eyes a vile person is contemned, Psalm. 15.4. That is, a
wicked man, who, how great soever he may be in the worlds estimation and
account, yet in the eyes of God, and in truth, he is vile, nothing worth. The
other Precious: However the world (which judges of things only by the
outside) accounts meanly of them, yet they are the precious ones. The precious
Sons of Zion, comparable to fine Gold, how are they esteemed as earthen
pitchers? (So the Church complains) Lam. 4.2. Such are the true sons of Zion,
the true sons and daughters of God, all true believers, though the world look
upon them as earthen pitchers, as things of no repute or worth, yet being
refined and purified from their sinful corruptions, and endued with the graces
of the Spirit, every of which is a precious stone, they are precious,
comparable to fine Gold.

5. Differing from all orher People.
5. A peculiar people differing from all other people in the World. So said
Balaam concerning Israel, Numb. 23.9. Lo the people shall dwell alone, and
shall not be reckoned among the nations; they should be severed from them as
Gods peculiar people. I am the Lord your God which have separated you from
other people, Lev. 20.24. And so may it be said of the Church and people of
God, all true believers, they differ from all other people. Which they do in
many particulars.

1. in their Laws, and Ordinances. So Haman told King Ahasuerus concerning the
Jews. There is (says he) a certain people scattered abroad, 1. In their Laws
and Ordinances.
and dispersed among the people in all the Provinces of the Kingdom, and their
Laws are diverse from all people. Hest. 3.8. And such they were, more righteous
Laws than any other Nation had (as we have it Deuteronomy. 4.8.) And so may it be said
of all true believers. They have such Laws, as no other people have, even the
Laws of God written in their hearts. So runs the tenor of the New Covenant,
Jer. 31.33. I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts. Other people they have their Laws, Civil Laws, written in Tables or
Books, which serve for the regulating of the outward man, the binding of the
hand and Tongue to the good behavour, but Gods people they have their spiritual
Laws, which being written by the finger of Gods Spirit upon the Tables of their
hearts, they serve for regulating of the inward man, the Conscience.

2. As they have peculiar Laws, so also peculiar promises, which belong only
unto them, 2. Having prculiar Promises.
even great and precious promises, as Saint Peter calls them, 2 Pet. 1.4.
There are given to us exceeding great and precious promises; (...), promises of
very great matters, of things of highest concernment. Promises not only of the
life that now is, (...), the present life, but also of that which is to come,
Temporal, Eternal promises, both which are made unto Godliness, as the Apostle
tells us, 1 Timothy 4.8. the former conditionally, if expedient for the persons,
the other Absolutely. In which respect it is that they are called the Children
of the promise, Gal. 4.28. Now we Breehreen (we believers) as Isaac was, are
Children of the Promise; having peculiar promises belonging unto them, which
others have nothing to do with.

3. As they have peculiar Laws and Promises, so they have a peculiar language.
3. A peeuliar language.
Being a purified people they have a pure language. This is that which the Lord
promises to his Church under the Gospel, Zeph. 3.9. Then will I turn to the
people a pure language. So is it with all that are Christ's people. Qui in
Christum credunt linguis loquuntur novis. True believers having new hearts,
they have also new Tongues, speaking a new language, the language of Canaan. So
it was foretold concerning those five Cities, Isai 19.18. In that day shall
five Cities in the land of Egypt speak the language of Canaan. A promise made
good under the Gospel, where Heathens being converted unto the faith, they come
to speak a Gospel language; their Communication is no longer profane, but pure
and holy. And so is it with all that are truly brought home unto Christ,
however before they were vain and loose in their language, it may be swearers,
filthy speakers, or the like, yet now it is otherwise with them. Now they are
observant of the Apostles rules, not suffering any Corrupt communication to
proceed out of their mouth, (which he charge Ephesians. 4.29.) But their speech is
with grace seasoned with salt, (as that other text Text has it, Col. 4.6.)
gracious and savory.

4. A peculiar carriage.
4. As they have a peculiar language, so a peculiar carriage and behavior. They
are such as walk after an other manner, by another Rule, than others do. They
are such as walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, (so the Apostle
describes them) Romans 8.1, 4. No longer walking according to the course of this
World, so as to have their conversation in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling
the desires of the flesh, Ephesians. 2.2, But their Conversation is Upright, Psalm.
37.14. Honest, 1 Pet. 2.12. Chaste, cap. 3.2. Good, v. 16. Such as becomes the
Gospel of Christ. Phil. 1.27. Thus have they in measure done what the Apostle
requires from all Christians, Ephesians. 4.22, 24. Put off concerning the former
conversation the old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts,
and being renewed in the spirit of their minds they have put on that new man,
which is created after God in righteousness and true holiness. Thus is their
Carriage Peculiar.

5. And such is their Attire, 5. Peculiar Garments.
they have peculiar Garments. As the story tells us of Joseph, that his father
bearing a pecular affection unto him, loving him more than all his Children, he
bestowed upon him a peculiar Garment, a Coat of many colors, Genesis 27.3. Even
thus the Lord Jesus loving his Church with a peculiar love, he puts upon it a
peculiar Garment, even that spoken of Rev. 19.8. To her was granted that she
should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white; for the fine linen is the
righteousness of Saints. A twofold Righteousness, the one of Justification,
the Righteousness of Christ imputed, the other of Sanctification, the graces of
the Spirit imparted, which render true believers beautiful in the eyes of God,
Angels and Saints. Peculiar Garments.

6. And so again a peculiar diet. I have meat to eat that you know not of
(says our Savior to his Disciples, Joh. 4.32. 6. A peculiar Diet.
viz. to do the will of him that sent him (as the 34. verse. explains it.) Even
so may it be said of all the true Disciples of Christ, they have meat which the
world knows not of; meat that perishes not, but endures unto life
everlasting, (which our Savior exhorts his hearers to labor for) Joh. 6.27.
meat which the Son of Man gives them (as it there follows) viz. the true
heavenly manna, Christ himself, his flesh. The Bread that I will give is my
flesh, v. 51. This is the meat which true believers feed upon by faith,
applying the merits of Christ unto themselves, whereby their souls are
nourished up unto eternal life. And as their meat, so their Drink, which is
true Aqua vitae, Water of life, Living water, which our Savior tells the woman
of Samaria, if she had asked it of him, he would have given it to her, Ioh.
4.10. meaning thereby the Grace and Spirit of Regeneration. Water not like
other Waters, which who so drinks of shall thirst again; But who so drinks
of this Water which Christ gives, he shall never thirst; But this water shall
be in him a Well of water springing up unto Eternal Life, (as it there
follows, v. 14.) such full satisfaction does the Soul of the Believer find
in, and from Jesus Christ. Thus, as the Israelites, being Gods peculiar people,
they had in the wilderness peculiar meat and drink, such as never any other
peole were fed with, their Bread coming from heaven, (as we have it Ioh. 6.31.
He gave them bread from Heaven to eat) and their Water fetched out of the Rock
in a miraculous way, so is it with all true Israelites, true Believers, being
unto Christ a peculiar people, they have peculiar meat and drink, even the
Body and Blood of Christ, whereof, (as the Apostle tells us 1 Cor. 10.3, 4.)
that Manna and that Rock were types.

7. A peculiar Country.
7. And Lastly (to name no more,) they are peculiar as to their Country, of
which they are and for which they seek. How ever they are, Upon the Earth, yet
are they not of the earth, but of a heavenly extraction, being born from above,
(as that word (...) may be rendered, Ioh. 3.3.) heaven born. Thus are they
Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem (as the Apostle has it, Heb. 12.22.) That
is properly their Country. Here they are but strangers and Pilgrims, (so the
Patriarchs confessed of themselves) Heb. 11.13. And therefore they desired and
sought for another Country, a better Country, that is, an heavenly (as it
follows v. 16.) And so is it with those that are Christ's; they look at heaven
as their home; where their hearts are, as also their Conversation. Our
Conversation is in heaven, Phil. 3.20. As they mind heavenly things, so their
(...), their chief trading and commerce is there; even in the new and heavenly
Jerusalem, where they converse and have communion with God and Jesus Christ,
with whom they hope to live and dwell to all eternity. To proceed no farther.

Thus may Believers upon a manifold account be fitly called, (what here they
are) a peculiar people, to which end Christ, having Redeemed, purifieth them.
Which being thus explicated as to the Doctrinal part of it, let it now be
brought home by way of Application. Applic 1. Comfort to believers.


And that (1.) by way of Comfort and Encouragement to all those who can approve
themselves to be of this number, such as Christ has purified, sanctified.
Being such, now are you Christ's peculiars. Which let it bear up your hearts and
spirits, 1. Against the contempt of the world.


1. Against the slight estimation and contempt, which you may meet with in and
from the World. What matters it what account that has of you, so long as you
are in esteem with Jesus Christ? So long as he accounts you his peculiar
Treasure, his Jewels, what matters it though the world look upon you as dross
and dung? So were the Apostles esteemed of, as Paul tells us in that known
Text, 1 Cor. 4.13. We are made as the filth of the World, and are the
of-scouring of all things unto this day, (...), the very offall and shreds of
the World. Such are the dearest and preciousest of Gods Saints often times made.
Thou have made us as the of-scouring and refuse in the midst of the people, (so
we may hear the Church complaining Lam. 3.45.) But let not this be any
discouragement. So long as Jesus Christ looks otherwise upon you (which he does
if Saints) let this be enough for you. Paul writing to his Corinthians, among
whom (as it seems) there were some who thought and spoke very meanly of him
(a lot which the Ministers of Christ often meet with) he tells them; with me
it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you or of man's judgment, 1
Cor. 4.3. (...), the least thing, a matter of no moment, what they or any other
judged of him. And how so? For he that judges me is the Lord, so he gives the
Reason in the next verse v. 4. And so look you upon the Worlds Judgment. Let
others censure you as they please, so long as your Lord and Master Christ, to
whom you must stand and fall (as the Apostle says, Romans 14.4.) has another
esteem of you, let this be enough to you. So long as a favorite is near and
dear to his Prince, highly esteemed of him, what cares he what opinion the
ignobile vulgus, the vulgar rout has of him?

2. And as against the opinion of the World, so against what ever wrongs and
injuries you are exposed to in it. 2. Against wrongs and injuries from the world
Being Christ's peculiar he will have a peculiar eye upon you, a peculiar care
over you. So will a man have of his peculiar Treasure, his choice pieces of
Gold or Silver, his Jewels, he will have a Cabinet for them, where he will keep
them under lock and key, having a more special regard unto them than to the
rest of his substance. And so has the Lord Christ over his Saints. They being
near and dear unto him, his peculiar Treasure, his Jewels, he will have a
special care of them, for the securing of them. He has a Cabinet for them, a
hiding place in the midst of whatever troubles. In the time of trouble he shall
hide me in his Pavilion, in the secret of his Tabernacle shall he hide me, so
says David of himself, Psalm. 27.5. And the like he says of all others who
truly fear the Lord, Psalm. 31.19, 20. O how great is thy goodness which thou
have laid up for them that fear thee? Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy
presence, from the pride of man, thou shall keep them secretly in a pavilion
from the strife of tongues. Such Repositories has Christ for his Saints, Such
as the Closets of Kings and Princes, which are looked upon as sacred and
inviolable, or as the Sanctum Sanctorum, the Holy of holies, the inward most
part of the Sanctuary, which was inaccessible, a place which none might enter,
or look into; and thereupon called Gods Secret or Hidden place, Ezekiel. 7.22.
Such Coverts, such Sanctuaries, such hiding places has the Lord for his
Saints; who are thereupon called his hidden ones, Psalm. 83.3. They have taken
crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy hidden ones. Gods
people they are his Abscondity, his hidden ones, whom he hides in the secret
of his Tabernacle, having a special care of them for their protection. And
therefore, though those who wish ill unto them take crafty counsel, consulting
against them, yet let them rest secure, committing themselves to the care and
custody of this their Redeemer, who having been at so much cost and pains with
them, as to buy them at so dear a rate, and to purify them unto himself a
peculiar people, will not be regardless of them. This by way of Encouragement.

Which that we may all of us have a right unto, Use 2. Christians to make sure
that they are of this number.
and take hold upon, see that we be of this number, in the number of Christ's
peculiar people. Where content we not our selves that we are outwardly and
visibly such. So were all the people of the Jews, they were all Gods people,
and his peculiar people, (as we find them often called) being all under an
outward visible Covenant, yet there were many among them who deserved nothing
less than to be so owned by God, being some, and many of them, Hypocrites, and
others openly profane. In so much as the Lord though he call them his people,
which he does Is. 1.3. My people, Yet in the verse following he calls them a
sinful Nation, a seed of evil doers, Children that were corrupters. And so may
it be said of all Christians, who are members of the visible Church, being
under a visible Covenant, outwardly purified by the Sacrament of Baptism,
having their Bodies washen with that clean water (as some understand that of
the Apostle Heb. 10.22.) they are hereby severed from Heathens and Infidels,
and so may be called Christ's people, being dedicated to him, and such as to an
outward profession. But see that we be such inwardly, really, such as are truly
washen by the Blood and Spirit of Christ, such whose hearts are purified by
faith, Act. 15.9. such whose Consciences are purged from dead works to serve
the living God, Heb. 9.14. Being such, now take we hold of this Privilege, of
being Christ's peculiar people indeed.

And being so, Use 3. Christians to walk after a peculiar manner.
now see that we walk answerably hereunto, approving and showing our selves to
be of this number by our peculiar walking. This is that which Paul presses
upon his Ephesians, Cap. 4. v. 17. This I say therefore, and testify in the
Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of
their mind, etc. And the like let me press upon you who lay claim to this
Privilege. See that you walk not as other Gentiles walk, that you no longer
walk after the course of this World. Remember that you are a peculiar people,
and therefore see that you walk after a peculiar manner, No longer living the
rest of your time in the flesh, but to the will of God (as Saint Peter there
presses it) 1 Pet. 4.2. Which while you do, regatd not what the men of the
world think of you. Though they think it strange (which they will be ready to
do) that you run not with them into the same excess of riot, and so speak evil
of you (as it there follows, v. 4.) branding you with opprobrious names of
Precisians, Puritanes, or what they please; yet hold you on your course, Living
Soberly, Righteously, and Godly, walking precisely, strictly, which Paul calls
for from his Ephesians, Ephesians. 5.15. See that you walk circumspectly, (...),
Exactly, Precisely, so much that word properly imports, which being compounded
of (...) and (...), (...) Graecis (...), id est, quod ab imo ad supremum
ascendatur, quod est exquisitae and prefectae diligentiae. Beza in Luke 1.3.
Gr. Annot.
signifies a proceeding and going to the height, the extremity of a thing. And
such let your walking be, therein endeavoring to go to the utmost of every
Commandment. Thus did that Religious pair, Zachary, and Elizabeth, walk. They
were both righteous before God; walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances
of the Lord blameless. Luke 1.16. They were persons of upright hearts, and so
accepted of God, and they were desirous of approving themselves both to God and
Man blameless, by the conscionable endeavor of an universal obedience, having
a regard to all his Commandments and Ordinances. And the like see that you do.
To this end it was that God took the people of the Jews to be a peculiar
people, that they should keep all his Commandments, as we find it in that Text
forecited, Deuteronomy. 26.11. And you, looking upon your selves as such, see that you
have a regard hereunto, now living in such a peculiar way, living to him who
has taken you into so near a relation, made you a peculiar people to himself.
Acknowledging the Lord Jesus for your Peculiar Lord, Christians to own Christ
as their peculiar Lord.
having a peculiar interest in you, which he has purchased with his Blood. Now
yield your selves up unto him whose wholly you are, serving him, glorifying of
him.

Serving him, not Men. Serving him.
So the Apostle presses it upon his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 7.23. Ye are bought
with a price, be ye not the servants of men; viz. so as to enslave your selves,
your consciences, unto them, to obey their wills in any thing that is contrary
to the will of your Lord and Master Christ, whose servants you are (as the
verse there foregoing has it.) And being so, serve you him. This is a true
Character of a true Believer, he is one that serves the Lord Christ, Col.
3.24. And this do you, serving him not only with the outward man, by
performing of external duties and services unto him, but with the Inward,
serving him in your Spirits (as Paul says he did his God, Romans 1.9.) doing his
will from the heart (as he exhorts servants to do, Ephesians. 6.6.)

And doing his work, Seeking his honor.
seek his honor and glory. Which do you also upon the same account, as being
his Peculiar people, bought by him for such an end, that you might be to the
praise of his glory (as the Apostle has it, Ephesians. 1.12.) and that in a peculiar
way. To this end it was that he made all things, and will make them all serve
to this end in a general way. See that you whom he has made his Peculiar
people, do this in a peculiar way. Live you to the glory of him who has
Redeemed, bought you. Ye are bought with a price (says the Apostle) Wherefore
glorify God in your Body and in your Spirit, for they are Gods, 1 Cor. 6.1.
Thus do you seek the glory of this your Redeemer, making this your chief
design. Being willing upon this account to do or suffer any thing for Jesus
Christ. Of this mind was the blessed Apostle, who tells his Philippians, cap.
1.20. that this was his Confidence, that whatever happened unto him, yet Christ
(says he) shall be magnified in my Body, whether it be by life or death. And
this let every of us seek after, that the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be
glorified in us, and by us (as the same Apostle prays for his Thessalonians,
2 Thessalonians. 1.12.) which whilst we endeavor, doubt not but (as it there
follows) we shall be glorified in him, and with him. Having thus as his
peculiar people, endeavored to glorify him upon earth, he will hereafter own
us as his peculiar people, glorifying us with himself in heaven. When the rest
of the world, as Goats, shall be set upon his left hand, as slighted, not
regarded by htm, then will he own us for his sheep, setting us on his right
hand, honoring us before God, Angels, and men, saying unto us, (as there we
have it) Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world, Mat. 25.34. When wicked and ungodly men, all
profane persons and hypocrites, who have only a show of Religion, shall be
cast forth as Chaff, and burned with fire unquenchable; then shall we, as
Wheat, be gathered into the Garner (as John the Baptist describes the
different conditions of Believers and others, Luke 3.17. Then will the Lord
Christ make it known to all the world what esteem he has of his Saints, that
he accounts them his Segullah, his peculiar Treasure, his Jewels; which he
will do by sending his Angels to gather them together from the four winds, from
one end of heaven to the other (as we have it, Mat. 24.31.) wherever their
bodies lie scattered; and so laying them up as his Jewels in the Cabinet of
Eternity, his Kingdom of Glory.

Many other uses might be yet made of this. Use 4. Christians to make Christ
their peculiar Treasure.
Has Christ taken us for his Peculiar people, esteeming highly of us above
others who have deserved as well, or better than we have done? Why then in
answer hereunto let us set the like Peculiar Affection upon him, taking him for
our peculiar Treasure, prizing and esteeming him above all, accounting all but
loss and dung that we may win Christ, and be found in him (as the Apostle
says of himself that he did, Phil. 3.8, 9.)

And making such account of him, Use. 5. Highly esteeming of the Saints.
next to him make the like account of his Saints. Taking heed of offending
them, which who so does, even the least of them, he may hear Christ telling
him, that it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck,
and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea, Mat. 18.6. Take heed of
wronging, injuring them by word or deed, knowing how dear and precious they are
unto Jesus Christ; even as the Apple of his eye. So we find them called, Zach.
2.8. He that touches you, touches the Apple of his eye. What is done unto
them, either for or against them, Christ takes it as done unto himself. In as
much as ye have done it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done
it unto me, Mat. 25.40. and 45. They are Christ's Peculiar people, his choice
favorites; therefore offend them not, wrong them not, nor yet slight them.
Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones, Mat. 18.10. But let
them be precious in our eyes; look upon them as the Jewels of the world, highly
esteeming of all those in whom we see aliquid Christi, any thing of Christ. The
more of Christ, the more precious they are. And therefore highly account of
such, looking upon them as the truly excellent ones, delighting in them, being
ready to do all offices of love unto them. Thus was holy David affected, as he
sets it forth, Psalm. 16.3. My goodness (O Lord) exeendeth not unto thee, but
to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all my
delight. And let the like affection be in every of us, which express we in the
like way, looking upon the Saints as the Excellent ones, delight we in their
society, and let our goodness extend unto them, communicating of our goods unto
them suitable to their Necessity and our Ability. Which who so does, he shall
have Christ himself for his Insurer. Whosoever shall give to drink unto one of
these little ones a cup of cold water only in the name of a disciple (do the
least office of love to him for Christ's sake) verily I say unto you he shall
not lose his reward, Mat. 10. last. Thus let the same mind be in us, which was
and is in Jesus Christ (as the Apostle presses it upon his Philippians) c. 2.
v. 5. Those whom he has given himself for, and purified to be a peculiar
people unto himself, let them also be a peculiar people unto us. But I pass on
to that which remains, the last clause in the Text.

Wherein we have the Qualification and Temper of this people whom Christ thus
appropriateth, being his Peculiar people, they are also a People zealous of
good works.

Zealous of good works.
A Clause fitly added and annexed to the former. Adjicit hanc partem Apostulus,
ut insinuet ita demum nos fore populum acceptabileus, and peculiarem Christo,
si bonorum operum studiosi fuerimus. Estius Comment. in Text. Veruntamen sicut
per gratiam Redemptionis ipse nos facit populum peculiarem, ita and facit
sectatores bonorum operum. Ibid.
Not to intimate unto us (what Estius would have (that in this way, and by this
means men become acceptable unto Christ, and his Peculiar people, by being
forward in good works. No, they are not any works of ours that can ingratiate
us, bring us into grace and favor with him, they being the fruits of his grace
in us. So much the same Author there, upon second and better thoughts, cannot
but acknowledge. As Christ himself (says he) by the grace of Redemption makes
us his peculiar people; so also he makes us followers of good works.

Obs. So it is, Good works are fruits and consequents of Justification and
Sanctification. So much we may fitly and truly collect from the Order of the
words here. Where first we hear of Redemption and Purification, and of a people
thereby appropriated unto Christ, made his Peculiar people; And then follows
their zeal for good works. So it is (as I said) Good works they are Fruits and
Consequents of Justification and Sanctification.

1. Of Justification. 1. Of Justification.
Bona opera non praecedunt justificandum, sed sequuntur justificatum. Good
works they do not precede, go before Justification, but follow after it. Being
not the cause but consequents of it. A graft or cions must first be ingrafted,
put into the stock, before it can bring forth fruit. And so must a Christian be
ingrafted into Christ by faith, made one with him, before he can be fruitful in
good works. Express to this purpose is that Text, John 15.5. where our Savior
making use of this similitude, comparing himself to the Vine, and his disciples
to the Branches, [I am the Vine (says he) ye are the Branches] he tells them,
Without me ye can do nothing.] Without me] (...), Extra me, Out of me, Ye can
do nothing; (...), ye can do nothing at all, nothing that is truly good, no
work that may be acceptable and pleasing unto God. The hand cannot move without
the head, from whence it receives those animal spirits, which are the
principle of motion; no more can a man without Christ, unless first he have
union and communion with him; which he comes to have by and through faith,
applying him and his merits to himself, whereby he comes to be actually
Redeemed from all iniquity, to be justified. Good works are Consequents of
Justification.

2. And fruits of Sanctification. 2. Of Sanctification.
If the founntain be impure and filthy, it cannot be expected that the streams
should be otherwise. And so it is with an impure sinner, who is not purified,
washed, cleansed from the guilt and filth of sin by the Blood and Spirit of
Christ, that is not Justified and Sanctified, it is not possible that he should
bring forth fruits of holiness. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?
(says Job) not one, Job 14.4. To bring a clear stream out of a dirty puddle,
this is above the power of nature. And so is it for a mere natural man lying in
a state of sin, under the power of corruption, to do works that are truly good,
pure, and holy. No, there must first be a change in the Person. First make the
tree good, and then his fruit good, Mat. 12.33.

Quest. But, what (it may be said) may not an unregenerate person do a good
work? Quest. Whether an unregenerate person may do good works.


Ans. Yes, Materially Answ. Materially, not Formally.
good he may. Quoad substantiam operis. It being a thing which the Law
requires; now the work in it self is good, but not so as it comes from him.
Under the Law, whatever the Leper, or polluted person touched, it became
thereby unclean, Lev. 15. And so do the best of works passing through the hands
of an impure and unclean sinner, they receive a taint thereby, which renders
them unclean ( Unto them that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure,
Tit. 1.15. and so unacceptable unto God. Such are all the works of unbelievers,
it being impossible without faith to please God, as the Apostle tells us, Heb.
11.6. (...). Be the work it self never so good, never so commendable, yet being
performed by an unbeliever, it shall never find acceptance with God. This it
was that put the difference betwixt Cains sacrifice and Abels. Both perform the
same duty, each sacrifices, but the one accepted, not so the other, as we find
the story, Genesis 4.4. The Lord had respect unto Abel and to his offering, but
unto Cain and his offereng he had not respect. And how so? what was it that
made the difference? Why, not any thing that we read of in the offering it
self, but the qualification of the Person. Abel was a Believer, not so Cain. So
the Apostle gives the reason of it, Heb. 11.4. By faith Abel offered unto God
a more excellent sacrifice than Cain. (...), a more full sacrifice, not in
respect of the substance of the thing sacrificed, as if Cain offered but a
little of his fruits, but Abel much of his flock (as some look upon it) but of
Gods acceptance. A sacrifice more acceptable to Ood than Cains was. And that
in regard the one was offered up by a Believer, a faithful godly person; not so
the other. Thus God first looks at the Person, then at the service. So run
those words there, Genesis 4.4. The Lord had a respect to Abel, and to his
offering. Mark it, first to Abel, then to his Sacrifice; first to his Person,
then to his Service. Abels person was accepted of God because of his lively
faith in the promised Redeemer; and for his persons sake, his Sacrifice.

Which taking notice of, let it be useful, Applic. Direction to
and that both to Ministers and People; to the one in their Preaching, to the
other in their Practicing.

1. To Ministers in their Preaching; 1. Ministers in their Preaching.
wherein let them from hence learn what method to observe. First to begin with
Christ, holding forth what he has done, laboring to bring their people unto
him, to seek for these benefits of Redemption and Purification by and through
him, so preaching and pressing the Doctrines of Justification and
Sanctification. Then put them upon the doing of good works, which if they shall
not do, what do they but build without a foundation? This is Paul's course in
that his Epistle to the Romans, as also that to his Galathians; first he
preaches Justification by Faith; then he presses good works. And this method
let the Ministers of Christ observe in their Preaching.

2. And the same let private Christians observe in their Practice, 2. To
Christians in their practice.
where let their first care be to get an interest in Christ, that they may
partake of these Benefits from him, be such as are Redeemed and Purified,
Justified and Sanctified by his Blood and Spirit. And then let them set upon
good works.

Quest. But what then, Quest. Whether unregenerate persons may expect a reward
for their good works.
may not unregenerate persons be put and pressed upon the doing of such works?
And doing hereof may not they expect a reward for them?

Ans. Ans. Temporal, not Eternal.
Yes, put upon good works they may be, and doing of them they may meet with a
Reward; but what? a Temporal reward. Hereby they may divert some temporal
judgments, and procure unto themselves or others, some temporal blessings. The
former of these Ahab did by his humbling himself in that manner, 1 Kin. 21.
last. Because he humbles himself before me (says the Lord to Elijah) I will
not bring this evil in his days. By his external and temporary humiliation he
obtained the deferring of a temporal judgment, and that so as himself felt not
of it. The latter Jehu got, whom the Lord tells, 2 Kin. 10.30. Because thou
have done well in executing that which is right in mine eyes, and have done
unto the house of Ahab according to all that was in mine heart, thy children of
the fourth generation shall sit upon the throne of Israel. Showing himself
zealous for God, in destroying of Idolatry, he obtained a temporal reward for
that his service, the intailing of the Crown upon his Posterity to the fourth
generation, which was accordingly performed and made good to him. Thus God will
not be indebted to any man for what ever service he does to him. Unbelievers
they may obtain a temporal reward for such services as they do unto God, to his
Church or People, by their acts of outward Piety, Charity, Mercy. But as for
that Eternal recompense of reward, that they will fall short of; This belonging
only to those that are in Christ, to those that are Redeemed, Purified,
Justified, Sanctified by him.

And therefore (to press what was propounded) let this be the first work that
you set about. Seek you out for your interest in the Lord Jesus, First seek
after an in interest in Jesus Christ.
that you may be made partakers of these benefits by him, and so become his
Peculiar people. Being such, thus made trees of Righteousness, now are you in a
capacity of bringing forth such good fruit, of being fruitful in every good
work. This I take up by the way, from the Order of the words. The words divided.


Which come we now to look upon in themselves. Therein taking notice of two
particulars, Res and Modus, the Action and Affection. The Action and Affection.
The Action, or service wherein this people is to be employed and occupied,
viz. the doing of good works. The Affe^tion or Disposition wherewith they are
to do them, viz. a holy fervor and zeal [Zealous of good works.]

Begin with the former, The service of Christ's people.
the service and employment which is expected from, and performed by this
peculiar people, whom the Lord Christ has thus Redeemed and Purified; They are
a people devoted and addicted to good works, to works, to good works. Obs.
Christ's people addicted to good works
So we may subdivide the words.

1. To works. 1. To works.
They are an active, stirring, working people. Such a one was Christ himself
when he was here upon earth. My Father works hitherto, and I work (says he)
John 5.17. And eswhere he tells his Disciples that he must work. I must work
the work of him that sent me while it is day, John 9.4. whilst I live here,
and whilst I have opportunity. Such was he. And such in measure are those that
are his. Not such as spend their time in doing of nothing, idle persons. Why
stand ye all the day idle? says the Husbandman in the Parable to those whom he
found in the Marketplace, Mat. 20.6. So is it with the men of this world, many
of which are (as St. Luke calls them, Acts 17.5.) (...), loose dissolute
persons, spending their time in doing of nothing, or of that which is as bad or
worse than nothing. But so is it not with those whom Christ calls to be his
servants. Those who are called into the Vineyard, are called to work there. Go
work to day in my Vineyard, says the Father to his Son, in that other Parable,
Mat. 21.28. Those whom Christ calls effectually into his Church, they are
such as are not loyterers but laborers. Workers all.

2. And that of good works. 2. To good works.
That was a Title which the Heathens gave unto some of their Kings and Princes,
they called them (as our Savior tells the Jews, Luke 22.25.) (...),
Benefactors, Well-doers. And such are all those whom Christ calls to be
Kings, true believers, they are all benefactors, doers of good works. Not
Evil-workers. So Paul calls the false Teachers of his time, Phil. 3.2. (...),
Beware of evil workers, being such as were very active, took great pains and
toil in preaching, but it was to the end that they might sow the Devils tares,
vent and spread their dangerous and damnable Doctrines. Such workers there are
ynow, and too many amongst us at this day. And such in some kind or other are
all wicked and ungodly men, they are all workers of iniquity, Luke 13.27. doing
the works of their father the Devil (as our Savior tells the Jews) John 8.44.
Being therein active and stirring. But such are not they whom Christ takes to
be his people. True it is, they are not altogether free from these works,
sinful works. There is not a just man upon earth that does good and sins
not, Eccles. 7.20. In many things we offend all, Jam. 3.2. But this is not
their (...), that which they make their work, that which they purpose and
design. This is to work the works of God. This was that which Christ made his
work whilst he was here upon earth, to work the works of him that sent him (as
we had it) John 9.4. This was his Meat, as elsewhere he tells us. My meat is
to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work, John 4.34. And
herein those who are his, are in measure conformable to him. They are such also
as work the works of God, workers of good works. Being created in Christ Jesus
thereunto.
To this end it is that they are regenerated, begotten and born anew, made new
creatures. We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
which God has before ordained, that we should walk in them, says Paul of
himself and other believers, Ephesians. 2.10. Like as a man puts grafts into a
stock, that they may bring forth fruit, and good fruit. Thus does God ingraff
his elect people into Christ, creating them, as it were, anew in him,
regenerating them by his Spirit, that so they may bring forth fruits in him;
Which also in measure they all do. He that abides in me, and I in him, the
same brings forth much fruit, Joh. 15.5. Believers having union and communion
with Jesus Christ, they are now made fruitful, and that in good works.

Quest. And what works are these which we call good work. Good Works* what.


Ans. In Answer hereunto it is not my purpose to dilate upon the Common place
of good works. Take it briefly. Good works, (...), in a Theological sense they
are all and only such works as are required and commanded by God in his word.
Such things as God commands.


Mark it, such things as God commands, and requires. He has showed thee O
man what is good (says the Prophet Micah,) and what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justice, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?
Micah 6.8. Such are the works which Christians are to look upon as good works;
such works as God requires to be done; such works as are consonant and
agreeable to his mind and will. So the Apostle explains it Heb. 13.21. where he
thus prays for those to whom he writes, That God (says he) would make you
perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in you that which is
well-pleasing in his sight. Est explicali^ ejus quod praecedit Grot. Annot. in
loc.
Where the latter words (as Grotius and some others rightly observe) are
Exegetical, and Expositorie to the former, showing what those good works were
which he desires they should be made perfect in, viz. such works as God
wills, and is well pleased with. And to the same purpose serves that other
Text, Romans 12.2. where Saint Paul exhorts his Romans, Be ye not conformed to
this World, (says he) but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind,
that ye may prove what is that good, that acceptable and perfect will of God.
The will of God being in it self perfectly good, it is the Rule of goodness,
and consequently what ever he wills must needs be good. God does not will
things because they are good, but they are therefore good because he wills
them. These then are those which we call good works. Such works as God wills
to be done. Not only permits (for so he does the worst of evils,) but
requires and injoyneth, wills. Which will of his he makes known in and by
his word. Which is his revealed will, whereby he shows unto his people what
is good. These are Good works, All these.

And only these. As for other works which are devised by men, Only such.
be the pretense or intention never so specious and fair; yet having no warrant
from the word, they cannot be called good works, much less being directly or
indirectly contrary to it. That act of the Peoples which Saul pleads by way
of excuse for himself, 1 Samuel 15.21. their reserving of the spoil, Sheep and
Oxen, the chief of the things which should have been utterly destroyed, to
sacrifice them unto the Lord in Gilgal, it had a very fair and spetious
pretense with it, seeming to savor of a great deal of piety, but what says
Samuel to it in the next verse, v. 22. And Samuel said, Has the Lord as great
delight in burnt offerings, and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the
Lord? Behold, to obey it better than sacrifice.] God having commanded that all
those things should be destroyed, they transgressing of that command, what ever
their pretense or intention was, this was a Capital sin in them, and proved
fatal to Saul, (who had the chief hand in it, however he would have put it upon
the people,) as Samuel tells him in the verse following, v. 23. Because thou
have rejected the word of the Lord, he has also rejected thee for being King.]
Good works are only such as God wills and requires. As for other works, how
promising so ever, they are but vain works. Such are Traditions and humane
inventions in the worship and service of God. In vain do they worship me,
teaching for doctrins the commandments of men (so our Savior cites that Text
of the Prophet Isai Math. 15.9. And Saint Peter speaking of that course and
manner of living which the Jews in his time had received by tradition from
their fathers: he calls it (...), a vain conversation. Good works are such,
all and only such as have warrant from the word.

Now these good works are of diverse kinds. Good works of diverse kinds.
Some Inward, others Otward. Inward, in the Heart and mind, good thoughts.
Outward in the Tongue and Hand, good words, and good Actions; All which are
comprehended under this general Head of good works, the word (works) being
hereto be looked upon in the latitude, the largest extent of it.

And again these good works of all these kinds they are reducible to two heads;
Reduced to two heads. Holiness and Righteousness.
even those two which our Savior himself reduces them to, Math. 22.37, 39.
Where he Epitomizeth, gives us the sum of the Law in those two comprehensive
Commandments, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, etc. And thy Neighbor as thy
self. On these two Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets, Two general
heads, under which are comprehended all those respects and duties which
Christians do ow and are to perform to the one and to the other. First, duties
toward God, whom they are to honor in their thoughts, words, Actions, works
of Holiness duties of the first Table: Then toward their Neighbor, to whom
they are to wish well, and do well, doing all good offices unto them, as they
have ability and opportunity, in reference to their Lives, Liberties, Estates,
good names, Bodies, Souls, works of Righteousness and mercy, duties of the
second Table. But I shall not go about to reckon up particulars, which are
many. So are evil works; for the kinds of them they are many, even all sinful
thoughts, words, and Actions. And so is it with good work; To which, all which,
those who are Christ's peculiar people, Redeemed and Purified, Justified and
Sanctified by him, are seriously devoted.

Not to dwell any longer upon the Doctrinal part; That which I aim at, being
chiefly Application.

Which let it be directed (in the 1 place) by way of Conviction. If this be the
Qualification of those who belong unto Christ, then may it hence be concluded
against many, that as yet they are none of this number, Diverse convinced not to
belong to Christ.
none of these Peculiar ones, whom Christ has given himself for. Alas, the
evidence is but too clear. Qui non tenentur serio studio honorum operum illi
hoc ipso significant se non esse in numero eorum quos Christus sua morte
redemit. Piscator Observe. in Text.
Their works testify against them, or at least do not testify for them. These
are the things which our Savior says testified of him, his good works. The
works which I do in my fathers name, they bear witness of me, Joh. 10.15. they
showed to whom he belonged, declared him to be what he was, the Son of God. And
so they do of every man. The tree is known by his fruits (says our Savior)
Math. 12.33. And so are men by their works, To themselves by their thoughts,
the workings of their hearts To others by their words and Actions; known what
they are, and to whom they belong, whether to Christ or Satan. What? are you
barren Trees, Barren trees none of Christ's planting.
bearing no good fruit? surely you are none of Christ's planting. Every plant
that abides in him, brings forth much fruit, Joh. 15.5. And what, have you
none of this fruit? have you no good works to speak for you? I mean to speak to
the World and your own consciences, so as to evidence the truth of your faith;
never reckon your selves in the number of true believers. For this Saint James
speaks fully and expressly in that known place, Jam. 2. Where he shows how
faith without works is but a mock-faith, a dead faith. Faith if it have not
works is dead being alone, v. 17. Being alone, (...), by it self, not being
accompanied with good works, works of Holiness and Righteousness, which are the
inseparable companions of a true justifying faith, it cannot be a true living
faith. Which if it were, it would be a working faith. True faith a working
faith.
So Paul describes it, Gal. 5.6. Faith working by love. (...), which word
being taken Passively, (as it proPerly signifies) it imports a faith actuated
by love, thereby quickened and moved to the doing of good works; or Actively (as
it is commonly understood) it denotes an active, operative faith, which puts
forth and shows it self in the exercises of love, love to God, love to his
Saints, in doing of good works, works of Piety and Charity. Hereby faith
shows it self to be a true living faith. So does the Body, by the Operations
of it, it shows it self to be a living body. And so does faith show it self
to be a living faith, by its works, which are Indicativa fidei. I will show
thee my faith by my works (says St. James) Jam. 12.18. No such sure and
certain token of a true saving justifying faith, as an uniform, impartial, and
universal obedience. Which where it is not in an unfeigned desire and
endeavor, it is a clear evidence of a dead faith. As the body without the
spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also (so that Apostle there
closes up that Chapter) Iam. 2.26. As the body without the spirit; (...). Not
that works are to faith as the soul is to the body, the form of it, and giving
life to it (which some would from hence infer) that were to stretch the
similitude beyond the staple, beyond the scope and intent for which it is here
made use of, which is only to illustrate what before was laid down, viz. that
Faith without works is dead. So is the body without the soul, or without breath
(as that word (...) may be rendered, which our new Translation in the Margin
minds us of.) Where there is no breathing, there can be no life; breath
being, though not a Cause, yet an Indication of it. And so where faith does not
breath forth and show it self by good works, the evidence is plain it is no
other but a dead faith.

Solitary faith not to be trusted to.
Which in the fear of God let it be brought home to you who reckon your selves
in the number of true believers, putting your confidence in Christ, hoping that
as you are Redeemed, so you shall be saved by and through faith. What? is this
your faith, fides solitaria, a solitary faith, faith alone, having no good
works to attend it? do not think that Christ will ever own you for his. True it
is, it is not for your works sake that he will own and accept you, but he will
not do it without them.

But what then shall we say to those evil workers, Evil workers none of Christ's
people.
whose works testify against them, showing to whom they belong? Good works
they have none to speak for them, but evil ones too many to speak against them.
Being such as our Apostle speaks of in the last verse of the Chapter
foregoing, Tit. 1.16. Such as profess that they know God, but in works they
deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate.
Such as it may be give over themselves unto all lasciviousness, to work all
uncleanness with greediness (as he says of the impure Gentiles) Ephesians. 4.19.
working the works of the flesh; which what they are, we may learn from the same
Apostle, who gives us a bedroll of them, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Now the works of
the flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery, Fornication, etc. And are
not these the works which some, and too many who bear the names of Christians,
are given over to? Evil works, which they live and lie in, and make a trade of.
A plain evidence that whatever acquaintance they may take of Jesus Christ,
calling him their Savior; yet they are in truth strangers to him. It is that
which Paul says of his Colossians before their conversion, Col. 1.21. They
were then alienated, and enemies in their minds by wicked works. And surely so
are all they who are workers of iniquity. Giving themselves over unto wicked
works, to the practice of them, whatever their profession be, this their
practice shows that they have no true acquaintance with God and Jesus Christ.
They are alienated from him, and enemies to him. So as whatever acquaintance
they may take of him (as I said) he will take none of them. Depart from me all
ye workers of iniquity. That is the answer which the Master of the house gives
unto some who would take acquaintance of him, as you have it Luke 13.26. We
have eaten (say they) and drank in thy presence, and thou have taught in our
streets (they had had familiar acquaintance with him) But he shall say to them
(as it follows) I tell you, I know you not whence you are, Depart from me all
ye workers of iniquity.] Workers of iniquity, such as make a trade of sin,
living in the practice of it, (for such are properly (...), not every one that
falls into sin, but such as live in a course of sin) they are workers of
iniquity. And being such, whatever outward visible communion they have had with
Christ in his Ordinances; in his Word and Sacraments, yet let not them think
that he will own them for his another day. No, those that are Christ's, are such
as have their Consciences purged from dead works to serve the living God (as
the Apostle describes them) Heb. 9.14. From dead works, that is, sinful works,
which are fitly so called, (...), in as much as they naturally proceed from a
man that is spiritually dead, and make him that does them liable unto death.
From such works true believers have their consciences purged, being freed, as
from the guilt, so from the habit and power of them; so as henceforth they do
not serve sin, which sometimes they did. God be thanked that ye were the
servants of sin (says Paul of his believing Romans) Romans 6.17. Such they were
before their conversion, but not such now. Now they served another Master. From
the time that they came to obey that form of doctrine which had been delivered
unto them, to receive and embrace the doctrine of the Gospel, now being freed
from sin, they became the servants of righteousness (as it there follows,
v. 18.) And so is it with all those who truly believe on Jesus Christ, and are
justified and sanctified by him, they do now serve the living God, working his
works, the works of God (as they call good works, John 6.28.) With their minds
serving the Law of God (as Paul says of himself, Romans 7. last.) However
sometimes the flesh, the corruption of their nature carries them another way,
to the serving of the Law of sin (of which he there complains) even as a
strong wind drives the vessel against the Tides and streams, yet the bent and
inclination of their hearts is toward the Law of their God. They are seriously
addicted, and constantly inclined unto good works.

And so see that it be with every of us. Use 2. Believers exhorted to have a
regard to good works.
Are we such as lay claim to an interest in Christ, and expect to receive any
benefit by his death? see that we be such as have a regard to good works, so as
to set upon the serious and conscionable practice thereof.

Obj. Obj. Christ has wrought what is needful for them.
But happily may some say, what need this be pressed upon Christians? for whom
Christ has wrought whatever is needful, so as there is no more required from
them in order to their Justification and Salvation, but only to believe on his
name. This is the Commandment (says St John) that we should believe on the
name of his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 3.23. And when the Iaylor demanded of Paul
and Silas, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? they return him no other answer
but this, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, Acts
16.30, 31. not making any mention of good works. And our Savior himself makes
this the only condition of obtaining eternal life, John 3.14, 15. As Moses
lift up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of man be lift up, That
whosover believes on him should not perish, but have eternal life. And again
in the verse following, God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting
life, v. 16. And again, v. last. He that believes on the Son has everlasting
life. So then, what need is there of works?

Ans. Answ. Needful in a meritorious way.
To this the Answer is obvious. 1. True it is Christ has wrought whatever is
needful for his Elect People in a meritorious way, having fulfilled the
righteousness of the Law for them. So much we may learn from the Apostle, Romans
8.4. where he sets forth this as one end wherefore God sent and gave his
Son, That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us.] The
righteousness of the Law, (...), that which the Law requires to the making of
a man righteous before God, might be fulfilled in us. (...), not by us, but in
us, viz. by the imputation of Christ's obedience unto us. By this means come
believers to stand as righteous before God; Believers not freed from obedience
of the Law.
yet are they not hereby freed from the obligation of the Law. However from the
Curse and rigorous exaction of it they are, yet not so from the obligation. But
the rather they are hereby engaged to it the more by this Example which Christ
has given them. What St. Peter says of the Passive obedience of Christ, 1
Pet. 2.21. Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow
his steps, being ready to suffer for him, as he did for us, we may say the same
of his Active obedience, his observing the Law in so strict a manner. This did
he, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps. And this do we.
Herein follow him, though it be as Ascanius the child is said to do Aeneas his
father, haud passibus aequis, not with a like stride or pace. This is not to be
expected from the holiest men upon earth, that they should follow Christ,
fulfilling the Law as he did. Yet this they are to endeavor, to walk exactly,
(...), to go up to the top of every Commandment (as before I expounded the
Apostles (...).) And this do we; Applying (inclining) our hearts to (perform)
fulfill the statutes of our God (as David says he did, Psalm. 119.112.)
Seriously desiring it, vigorously endeavoring it. This is an Evangelical
fulfilling of the Law, which by way of duty to their God is required from all
true believers. Fear God, and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole
duty of man, Eccles. 12.13. Thus then Christians are not taken off from the
practice of good works by what ever Christ has done for them.

Faith alone cannot justify.
Ans. 2. Neither (in the second place) is it faith alone that can justify and
save them. In the clearing of which, that known distinction will be useful, of
Fides sola and solitaria, faith only, and faith alone. True it is, it is faith
only that justifies, which it does not qua Fides as Faith, as a work, (as
Arminius would have it) but as an Instrument laying hold upon Christ, and
applying his Merit, by which we are justified. But not Faith alone, not a naked
faith, faith without works, which (as I have already shown you from Saint
James) is no other but a dead, a mock-faith, no true faith. And so, not being
able to justify it self, much less can it justify the person in whom it is.
Faith without works justifies not.

Obj. No? what say we then to that obvious Text of the Apostles, Romans 4.5. Romans
4. v. 5. cleared.
Where he seems expressly to determine the contrary, To him that works not,
but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness.

Ans. To this the Answer is soon returned. True it is, faith is counted for
righoeousnesse to such a one as works not, viz. upon such an account, as
looking to be justified and saved by his works. In such a way the true believer
renounceth works, not placing any affiance or confidence in them, knowing that
he is not able to perform the condition which the Law requires; And therefore
puts himself upon another way, for the obtaining of Justification and
Salvation, which is through faith in Jesus Christ. In the mean time not
renouncing works, as to the practice of them in way of obedience unto God;
without which a man can neither be Justified, nor saved. Upon this account it
is that Saint James joins works together with faith in the business of
Justification, in that known Text, (causlesly stumbled at by some, even to the
rejection of the whole Epistle) Jam. 2.24. Ye see then how that by works a man
is justified, and not by faith only. Not that works have any proper efficiencie
in, or influence upon the work of justification, which is proper unto faith, as
the only Causal Instrument therein, applying Christ with his merits unto the
Soul: But they are necessary attendants upon, and inseparable companions to
that faith which purifieth, which must be a working faith, (...) (as the
Apostle calls it in that Text forecited,) Gal. 5.6. An Energetical, an
operative, working faith, a faith working by love, showing it self in a ready
performance of all offices and duties both to God and man:

And therefore (to go on with the Exhortation propounded, Good works how
necessary.
let not any of us content our selves with such a faith, a solitary faith,
faith alone. But withal, Bona opera sunt necessaria ad salutem, vel potius in
salvandis (sic enim praestat loqui vitandae ambiguitatis causa Ursin. Catech.
Q. 91.
have a regard unto works, good works, which are no less necessary unto
salvation, (or, if we will speak more warily, (as some advise us to do) in
salvandis in those that are to be saved) than faith it self is. It it is but a
slander, and a groundless one, which they of the Church of Rome cast upon
those of the Protestant, Reformed Religion, that they cry up faith, decrying
works, at least not regarding, Extra statum Justificationis ^emo potest bona
opera satis magnifice commendare. Luther.
but flighting them, not looking upon them as in any kind necessary. Than
which what more false? Necessary we hold them to be; However not as they do,
who look upon them as meritorious causes of salvation yet upon a diverse
account, as

I. Necessitate praecepti, in regard of Gods command, 1. In regard of Gods
Command.
which requires them at the hands of his perple. Thou have commanded us to
keep thy precepts diligently, Ps. 119.4.

2. Necessitate Praesentiae, as necessary concomitants of faith, 2. As
Concomitants of faith.
without which a man cannot be justified and saved.

3. 3. As the way and means leading to salvation.
Necessitate Medii, as a necessary means to bring men to salvation; Via ad
Regnum, though not Causa regnandi, (as Bernard rightly) though not the cause of
reigning, yet the way to the Kingdom.

4. 4. As evidences of faith, and assurances of Election.
Necessary as to a man's self, for the justifying of his faith, and assuring
his election. Justifying of his faith. Faith justifies the Person, works
justify faith, evidence it to a man's self to be a true lively faith. As a man
by feeling his pulse beat regularly, he knows that his vitals are sound, so
by the working of his faith he takes notice that it is a true faith. And
assuring his election. Give diligence (says Saint Peter) to make your Calling
and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. And how shall this be done? Why, If ye do these
things ye shall never fall; those things which before he had spoken of, viz.
Adding to faith virtue, v. 5. meaning moral virtues, as Justice, and
Temporance, and Charity (of which he speaks afterward,) as also Godliness,
and so endeavor to perform all offices and Duties to God and Man. So doing,
hereby may Christians be assured of their Election, and so consequently of
their salvation, that they are in a state of grace, and shall never fall from
it.

5. 5. In regard of others for the gaining of some.
And so again, necessary in regard of others; For the winning of some. Upon
this ground Peter requires wives to be obedient to their Husbands, to do their
duties unto them, that (says he) if any obey not the word (being as yet
unbelievers) they also may without the word be won by the conversation of the
wives, 1 Pet. he 3.1. And in the Chapter foregoing, v. 12. requires the
believers to whom he writes, that they should have their conversation honest
among the Gentiles, that whereas (says he) they speak against you as evil
doers, they may by your good works which they shall behold, glorify God in the
day of visitation; when God shall in mercy visit them, calling them to the
fellowship of the Gospel. Thus sometimes unbelievers are won to a loving and
liking of Gods Religion by beholding those who make a profession thereof to
walk answerable to that profession, living soberly, righteously, and Godly.

And as some may be won, so others may be confirmed hereby, Confirming of
others.
who otherwise might be offended and scandalized, and brought out of love and
liking with that Religion whereof they see no fruits in the Professors of it.

However, the mouths of wicked men shall hereby be stopped, Stopping the mouths
of wicked men.
and themselves ashamed. Having a good Conscience (says the same Apostle Saint
Peter) that whereas they speak evil of you, as of evil doers, they may be
ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ, 1 Pet. 3.16.
Christians exhorted to be serious about good works.


In these and many other respects we look-upon good works, not only as
expedient, but Necessary. And so looking upon them, let all of us seriously
set about them. Being hearers of the Law, be we doers of it. Not the hearers of
the Law, are just before God, but the doers of the Law shall be justified, so
the Apostle tells the Jews who looked for salvation by the Law, Romans 1.13. It
was not their knowing but their doing that could benefit them in that way. And
so is it with Christians, who look for salvation by Christ. It is not their
Knowledge and Profession, but their Practice, must render them acceptable unto
him. And therefore let all of us up and be doing. Be ye doers of the word, and
not hearers only, deceiving your own Souls (says Saint James) Jam. 1.22. Not
every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven, (says our
Savior) Math. 7.21. Not every one that takes acquaintance of Christ,
professing himself to be his Disciple; and to look for salvation through him,
but such as bring forth the fruits of true Sanctification, and new obedience,
endeavoring to do what both Law and Gospel requires, They, and only they can
look for salvation.

Quest. Quest. What good works to be done, and how.
But what good works shall we do in order hereunto?

Ans. Ans.
That was the question which the Ruler put to our Savior, Math. 19.16. Good
Master (says he) what good thing shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?
But this he propounded in a Pharisaical way, with a wrong intention, dreaming
of a merit of works. But let the thought hereof be abandoned by all Christians
who propound the like question, And then I shall return Answer to it, as in
part I have already done, giving you some useful directions concerning what
works you are to do, and how you are to do them.

1. Good works to be performed by Christians are (as I have said) all such
works as God requires Dir. 1. All such works as God requires.
in his word, whether in the Law, or Gospel. All which Christians are to have
an eye and regard unto, so as not willing to over look or neglect any of them.
Such was David's obedience, I shall not be ashamed (says he) whilst I have
respect unto thy commandments, Psalm. 119.6. And the like we read of Zachary
and Elizabeth, They were both righteous before God, walking in the
Commandments of the Lord, blameless. Luke 1.6. And such must the obedience of
a Christian be, an universal obedience, such in desire and endeavor, so as not
willingly to balk or neglect any commandment. That Ruler which we speak of,
how strict soever he had been (as he said of himself) in observing of the rest
of the Commandments, yet withdrawing his obedience **** to that one, which our
Savior, for Probation or conviction sake, propounded unto him, that he should
go and sell all that he had, and give it to the poor, he thereby showed himself
to be no better than an Hypocrite. And so do they who pick and choose their
Duties, yielding a partial respect to the Law of God, obeying in some things,
not in other. For which that of Saint James is express, Iam. 2.10. Whosoever
shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all.
Suppose a man so exact as that he should strictly observe the whole Laws,
except only in some one particular therein required, or forbidden, yet allowing
himself in that one particular breach of it, that declares him not to be, what
he would be thought, a righteous person. That general Maxim holds true in
this case, A quatenus ad omne. He that yields obedience to one Commandment,
because it is a command of God, upon that account will yield the like obedience
to all. And this are Christians to do. And this, being sincere, they will do,
Being such as are truly Sanctified, now (as the Apostle says) they are
prepared to every good work, 2 Timothy 2.2. Ready to do what ever their God
requires fromt hem. And such see that your obedience be, (as to desire and
endeavor) an Universal obedience; doing that, all that, which the Lord
requires in his word. Here is the Matter of good works, which Christians are
to have an eye at in the first place.

2. And then (secondly) have an eye to the Order, first looking at the more
weighty duties. Dir. 2. Good works to be done in right Order.
It was that which our Savior charge upon the Pharisees, denouncing a woe
against them for it, Mat. 23.23. woe unto you scribes and Pharisees hypocrites,
for ye pay tithe of Mint, and Annise, and Cumin, and have omitted the weightier
things of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, Faith. To be careful in small matters,
but regardlesse in those of greater importance is a sure sign of an Hypocrite.
Not but that these things also are to be regarded; These things ought ye to
have done (says our Savior there to them) but not to leave the other undone.
Those (...), the weightier things of the Law, duties of greatest importance,
Christians must have an eye at in the first place Not slighting, not neglecting
them however. Yea and if it happen that there be any competition, these are to
have the precedence. First look at the more weighty duties, preferring them.

3. Doing these works in a right Order, that they may be truly good works, see
that they be done out of a right Principle, Dir. 3. Out of a right Principle:
viz. a threefold Principle, of Faith, and Love, and Obedience.

1. Of Faith, 1. of faith.
without which the Apostle tells us it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6.
Faith, as concerning the work which we do, that it is a thing required by God,
agreeable to his mind and will, of which the Apostle speaks, Romans 14. v. last,
where he concludes, whatsoever is not of faith is sin. What-soever is done
though the thing it self be indifferent or good, yet being done with a wavering
conscience, without assurance that the work is in it self well-pleasing to God,
and that it has good warrant from the Word, it is sin in him that does it; so
also concerning Gods acceptance of our persons and services, that he does and
will accept whatever we do in the name of Christ. Out of such a Principle did
the Patriarchs do those works for which they are commended, Heb. 11. What they
did they did it (...), in faith, by faith.

2. Of Love. 2. Of Love.
In this sense see that Faith work by love. What we are sure to be agreeable to
the mind and will of God, do it out of Love; Love to God; I will love thee, O
Lord (says David) Psalm. 18.1. And love to his Law; O how do I love thy Law?
(says he) Psalm. 119.97. Love to his Testimonies; I love thy Testimonies, v.
119. Love to his Commandments and Precepts; I love thy Commandments above
gold, yea above fine gold, v. 127. Consider how I love thy Precepts, v. 159.
And out of this love keep and observe them; My soul has kept thy Testimonies,
and I love them exceedingly, v. 167. And thus also what duties we do unto our
Neighbor, do them out of love, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Thus
what good works we do, do them out of a right Principle of Faith and Love.

3. And (Thirdly) Obedience. 3. Obedience.
Not out of any by and sinister respects, but in way of Obedience unto God. So
did Abraham when he went out to seek a Country, which he knew not where to
find; yet by Faith he obeyed (says the Text) Heb. 11.8. So do we, taking
notice what God would have us to do now, not standing to consult with flesh and
blood about it (which Paul says he did not, Gal. 1.16. in obedience to him, do
it. Thus did Peter, though he had fished all night and caught nothing, yet,
Nevertheless (says he to his Master) at thy word I will let down the Net,
Luke 5.5. Thus having a word from God, now in obedience to him, do what he
requires. Thus did our blessed Savior suffer what he suffered. He was
obedient to the death, Phil. 2.8. And thus let us do what we do. All our works
do them in obedience unto God; doing what we do to Man as unto God. So the
Apostle requires servants to do their duties unto their Masters, Ephesians. 6.5.
Servants be obedient to them that are your Masters according to the flesh, with
fear and trembling, in singlenenesse of heart as unto Christ; doing what they
did in obedience to their supreme Lord and Master Christ, in serving them,
serve him; Not with eye-service, as men-pleasers, but as the servants of
Christ, doing the will of God from the heart (so he goes on) v. 6. Mark it, In
doing their Masters work, they must have an eye at God, doing what they do, as
his will. [With good will, doing service as to the Lord, and not unto men, v.
7. Not looking only, or yet chiefly, at their Masters on earth, but at their
great Lord and Master in heaven, the Lord Christ, who requires from them what
they are to do. And this rule let all Christians observe, in whatever works
they do, whatever duties they perform, still do all with an eye to God, setting
the Lord always before them (as David says he did, Psalm. 16.8.) so walking
before him in uprightness and sincerity, which he requires Abraham to do,
Genesis 17.1. And which Hezekiah says he had done, Isa. 38.3. Here are the
Principles out of which we are to act in doing of good works, Faith, Love,
Obedience.

Dir. 4. In a right manner.
4. Then (in the Fourth place) have a regard also to the Manner, that doing good
works, we do them Willingly and Constantly.

1. Willingly.
1. Willingly. Thus does a man do what he does out of Love. That is as Oil to
the wheels, which makes them go glib. And thus do we perform what good works we
do. All kind of duties to God, or our Neighbor. Doing them out of a Principle
of love, do them willingly. Thus Paul would have Philemon to do what he
required from him, Not as of necessity, but willingly, Philem. v. 14. And thus
Peter requires Ministers to do the work of their Ministry, 1 Pet. 5.2. Feed
the flock of God which is among you, etc. Not by constraint, but willingly:
(...). And thus are Christians to perform what duties they do, as to God, so to
Man. Not grudgingly, but willingly. It is the Testimony which Paul gives to
the Churches of Macedonia, speaking of their charitable contributions, 2 Cor.
8.3. I bear them record (says he) that to their power, yea and beyond their
power, they were willing of themselves. And so should Christians be to every
good work; to works, as of Justice, so of Charity and Mercy. Every man
according as he purposes in his heart, so let him give, not grudgingly, or of
necessity, (so Paul advises his Corinthians, in the Chapter following) 2 Cor.
9.7. giving a reason for it. For (says he) God loves a cheerful giver.
Grudged services are not acceptable to men, much less to God. If there be first
a willing and ready mind, it is accepted according to that a man has (says
the same Apostle in that 2 Cor. 8.12.) It is so with God, who looks more at
the inward man, than the outward; at the Heart, than either Tongue or Hand; at
the Will, than the Work. Who also will reward all, and only such services as
are so performed. If I do this thing willingly (says he speaking of the work
of his Ministry) I have a reward; but if against my will, what is my reward
then? 1 Cor. 9.17, 18. It is not the work or service it self, be it what it
will, that will render the doer of it acceptable unto God, and capable of an
eternal reward from him, unless it be performed freely, willingly. And
therefore let me here do that to you, which I find Titus required to do to
those under his charge, in the verse next but one after my Text, Tit. 3.1. viz.
Put you in mind to be ready to every good work.

And among other, Works of Charity recommended.
let me here recommend unto you works of mercy and charity; which are looked
upon among the chief of good works; and therefore sometimes peculiarly so
called. Thus we read of that good woman Dorcas, that she was full of good works
and alms-deeds which she did, Acts 9.36. And thus the Apostle showing what is
required of one that is to be accounted a widow indeed, fit for the service of
the Church, he says (among other things) she must be one well reported of for
good works, 1 Timothy 5.10. And what are those good works? why, in the next words
he explaines it, If she have lodged strangers; if she have washed the Saints
feet; if she have relieved the afflicted, etc. These are the works which he
calls peculiarly good works. Works of charity peculiarly called good works, and
why.
And that not without good Reason, in as much as that Love, which is the sum of
the Law, and the (...), the fulfilling of it (as the Apostle says of it, Romans
13.10.) is in this way expressed and showed forth. Now to these good works be
you excited. And that specially you to whom God gives ability for such works,
be you willing and ready to do them. That is the charge which Timothy is willed
to hand to those that were Rich, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. Charge them that be rich in
this world, etc. that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to
distribute, ready to communicace. For such to give what they cannot withhold,
only what is extorted from them by rates and taxes, and that against their
wills, this is not thank-worthy. What is this way done, let it be done readily,
willingly.

2. Constantly.
And being willing with good works, be constant in them, not weary of them. This
Paul presses upon his Galathians, as also his Thessalonians, Be not weary of
well-doing, Gal. 6.9. 2 Thessalonians. 3.13. (...), faint not, give not over. Having
set upon a religious course, hold on, be constant in the duties of Piety and
Charity. Working whilst it is day (as our Savious says he did) so long as
life lasts. They who were hired into the Vineyard, must work till the Even.
Thus have an eye to the Manner of doing good works.

5. And lastly, Dir. 5. To a right end, the glory of God.
have an eye to the End also, that that be right and good, even the Glory of
God. This is the proper and chief end which a Christian should aim at in
whatever he does. So runs the Apostles direction, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whatsoever ye
do, do all to the glory of God. To this end serve good works. Being filled with
the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and
praise of God, Phil. 1.11. This is finis operis, the end of the work, let it be
also finis operantis, the end of the worker. If any man Minister (says St.
Peter) let him do it as of the ability which God gives, that God in all things
may be glorified, 1 Pet. 4.11. This is that which Christians should chiefly
look at in all their Ministrations, in all the services which they perform, as
to God, so to their Brethren, that God may be glorified in them and by them.

Not but that there are also other subordinate ends, Christians may have an eye
at the recompense of reward.
which a Christian in doing of good works may have an eye at. Among other he
may have an eye at himself, specially at his eternal Reward in heaven. This had
Moses an eye at in his sufferings for Christ, he had therein a respect to the
recompense of reward, Heb. 11.26. (...).] Mercedem illam Abrahamo promissam,
Genesis 15.1. terram illam excellentem. Grot. Annot. in loc.
Not only to that temporal reward which the Lord had promised to Abraham (as
Grotius expounds it) the land of Promise, the earthly Canaan, but the eternal
reward. And the like may Christians in their good works which they do, they may
have an eye to their (...), the Recompense of Reward, which God has promised
to such workers. And that both Temporal and Eternal reward. Therefore is it
that our Savior propounds this as a motive unto them, to put them upon the
practice of good works, setting their reward before them. Love your Enemies
(says he) and do good, and lend, looking for nothing again, and your reward
shall be great, Luke 6.35. And elsewhere he tells us that whosoever shall do
the least office of love Disciple in the name of a Disciple, but give a cup of
cold water unto him, he shall in no wise lose his reward, Mat. 10. ult. This
Christians may, yea and for their encouragement ought, to have an eye at, as in
their sufferings, so in their doings for Christ; By patient eontinuance in
well-doing, seeking for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality (as the Apostle
describes the true believer) Romans 2.7.

Gods glory to be eyed in the first place, not vainglory.
But the chief and main end which they are to aim at, is the Glory of God,
seeking that in the first place. Not their own glory. This was the Leaven which
sowred whatever duties or services the Pharisees performed. What they did, they
did it in an ambitious way, out of vainglory, that they might be seen of men^
and have glory from them. So our Savior charge it upon them, Mat. 6. v. 2.
where also he tells his Auditors what they must expect for such services.
Verily (says he) they have their reward, v. 2, 5, 16. All the reward they must
look for. They must look for none from God. Now this let us abandon. Take heed
that ye do not your Alms to be seen of men, that is our Saviors caveat in the
first v. there. Not seeking our selves, our own Glory. This we may hear our
blessed Savior disclaiming, I seek not mine own glory (says he) John 8.50.
But the glory of his Father he did, the glory of him that sent him, as he
intimates there in the Chapter foregoing, John 7.18. And this let us in
imitation of this our heavenly pattern seek after. In whatever we do, making
this our Alpha and Omega, our first and last* the chief of all our ayms, that
God may be glorified in us and by us. This was Paul's main design, in whatever
he did, or suffered, that God might be glorified in him, whether by life or
death (as he tells his Philippians, c. 1. v. 20. And this let us make the
main end of all our good works, that God (as I say) may be glorified in us and
by us. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works,
and glorify your Father which is in heaven (says our Savior to his
Disciples) Mat. 5.16. Let your light shine.] Manifest your inward graces by
your outward actions, which are as beams from the Sun. [Shine before men] who
cannot judge of your hearts but by your deeds. [That they may see your good
works,] not only hear your words, but behold your works. [And so glorify your
Father which is in heaven.] And let this be the main design of every of us, in
whatever works we do, that God may be glorified in us, as Paul says he was in
him, Gal. 1. last. So doing, now doubt not but our works shall be acceptable to
God, and profitable to our selves; of which more hereafter in the last
particular, to which I now come.

2. Partic. The inward Affection in doing good works.
The Modus, the inward Affection, or Disposition of this peculiar people in
performing of this service, doing of these works, and that is a holy fervor,
Zeal, [Zealous of good works.]

Obs. Christ's people Zelots.
Such the Redeemed of the Lord, Christ's people are, or ought to be, Zelots. Mark
it, this is the last Conclusion which the Text holds forth unto us. Christ's
people must be zelots. So was one of his Apostles surnamed, Quod Zelo ferveret.
Hieron. Epl. 53. ad Riparium.
Simon called Zelotes, Luke 6.15. Acts 1.13. Simon the zealous. And such ought
all his Disciples, to be, zelots all. Such were the Jews generally under the
Law, they were zealous of the Law. So James tells Paul concerning them, Acts
21.20. Thou see brother (says he) how many thousand of Jews there are which
believe, and they are all zealous of the Law: (...). And in the Chapter
following, Paul speaking to the Jews concerning himself, he tells them, how
that being a Jew born and bred, and taught according to the manner of the
Fathers, I was (says he) zealous toward God, as ye all are this day. Such
were they under the Law. And such Christians ought to be under the Gospel;
though not in the same way, yet zelots still. Not key-cold, nor yet tepid and
lukewarm in their Religion, but zealous. That is the Charge which the Son of
man gives to lukewarm Laodicea, Rev. 3.19. Be zealous, (...): which if she
were not, he threatens to spew her out of his mouth. Thus Christ will own none
for his people but such as are zealous.

Quest And wherein zealous? Quest. Wherein to be zealous.


Ans. Why, generally, in somewhat that is good. It is good (says the Apostle)
to be zealously affected always in a good thing, Ans. Generally, in a good
matter.
Gal. 4.18. (...). Zeal, in it self (as it is with Affections and Passions,
whereof zeal is only the Intension, the heightning of them) it is vox media,
indifferent; so as it may be taken either in good or bad part, according to the
nature of the Object, or matter whereabout it is exercised. So much we may take
notice of from that Apostle; who, as he there minds us of a good zeal, so in
the Chapter following he tells us of an evil one, Gal. 5.20. where speaking of
the works of the flesh, among other he reckons this for one, Emulations, (...),
Zeals, inordinate heats and contentions about matters not fit for Christians to
contend about. Thus then there is a double zeal, Spiritus and Carnis, the one a
fruit of the Spirit, the other of the Flesh, a spiritual, a carnal zeal. It is
the former of these we have to deal with, a spiritual zeal. Which, as it is
proper, so it ought to be common to those that are Christ's; They must be
zealous in a good way, in a good matter. This in the General.

In Particular.
In Particular, the good things whereabout they are to be zealous, may be
reduced to two heads, either Gifts, or Works; that they may receive the one,
that they may act the other.

1. For Gifts.
1. For Gifts. This the Apostle calls for 1 Cor. 14.1. Desire spiritual Gifts.
(...), (says the Original) be zealous of them, earnestly coveting them. So we
find the same word elsewhere more fully and fitly rendered, Cap. 12. v. last of
the same Epistle, where we meet again with the same Injunction. Covet earnestly
the best gifts. With such earnestness of affection are Christians to seek after
spiritual Graces and Gifts. Graces, which may be beneficial to themselves;
Gifts, whereby they may edify others; desire them with zeal and holy emulation.

2. Works.
2. And as Gifts, so Works. As to Receive, so to Do. This the Text points at. A
people zealous of good works. (...). Sectatorem bonorum operum; so the Vulgar
Latin renders it, A people that are followers of good works. A truth. Such
Christ's people must be, Followers of that which is good (as St. Peter has it)
1 Pet. 3.13. (...), Imitators (as that word properly signifies.) Imitating and
following of God. Be ye followers of God, Ephesians. 5.1. (...), Imitating him, in
doing good unto all. Zeal imports an intense Affection.
Thus ought Christians to be followers of good works. Followers after Charity,
1 Cor. 14.1.

But the word in the Text imports more. Vides (inquit Chrysostom) ut non
simpliciter opera virtutis a nobis exigantur. Ait enim, aemumulatorem, h.e.
magna cum alacritate, and ingenti, studio and animo vtrtutis opera crpessentem.
Esti ad loc.

(...) signifies to Boil; per Onomatopaeiam, because when liquor boyles it
makes an hissing noise. Vnde fortasse Anglicum Sees.


(...) zealous of good works. Giving us to take notice (as Chrysostom well
observes upon it) that it is not sufficient for Christians to do good works,
but they must do them with an intense affection; They must be Emulatores
bonorum operum, (as Jerome and Ambrose here render the Word, or (as Beza)
Studiosi, bearing a fervent affection to them, and earnestly striving to go
before others in them. This is the proper signification of this word, (...),
zealous, zeal, (the same in all three Languages) which coming from (...), a verb
which signifies to boil or sees, (a word answering it both in sound and
sense, and so may be conjectured to be taken from it,) or to make a hissing
noise, as water does when hot Iron, or burning Coals are cast into it, it
imports a fervent heat in the Soul, an earnest and vehement Affection. And with
such an affection are Christians to go about good works; to be zealous of them,
and in them; zealously to Affect them.

Thus are they to be affected toward their God, loving him with an intense
Affection. Christians to be zealous toward their God.
So the Law requires it. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine
heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength;
(...), (as Saint Mark and Luke have it,) Mark 12.30. Luke 10.27.

And being thus affected toward him, they are in like manner to be thus
affected for him. This is Phineas's commendation, He was zealous for his God,
Numb. 25.13. zealous for his sake (as the 11th. verse there has it.) He could
not endure to see such dishonor done to his God, (...). Zelando Z^latus sum:
Montan.
and therefore steppeth forth to execute Justice upon the offenders. And the
like says Elijah of himself, I have been very jealous (or zealous, for the
word is the same) for the Lord God of Hosts, 1 King. 19.10.14. And the like we
read of David, Psalm. 69.9. who was therein a type of Christ, of whom it
written, the Zeal of thine house has eaten me up, Joh. 2.17. Such was his Zeal
for the worship and service of God, that it was as a fire within him, burning
in his breast, and breaking forth as occasion was offered, as at that time it
did, when he whipped the buyers and sellers out of the Temple. And thus ought
those who profess themselves to be his people, to be affected toward their
God. Being zealous for his honor and glory in and about his worship and
service,

Zealous toward their Brethren.
And in like manner are they to be affected toward their brethren, being
Zealous of them. So Paul tells his Corinthians that he was for them, 2 Cor.
11.2. I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy, (...), I am zealous of you,
ardently affecting you, earnestly desiring your welfare. So ought the
Ministers of Christ to be affected toward the people committed to their
charge; desiring their good. That is the Testimony which Paul gives to his
Colossians concerning Epaphras (or Epaphroditus, for they are conceived to be
both one) a faithful minister of Christ (as he calls him Col. 1.7. Epaphras
idem qui Epaphroditus, contractione pronunciationis sic Demas est Demetrius
Grot. Annot. in loc:
) I bear him record (says he) that he has a great zeal for you, Col. 4.13.
And thus ought all Christians to be affected toward their brethren, earnestly
desiring their good, being ready to express their Affection to them, by being
forward to all good offices, ready to every good work, (as we have it in the
verse next but one after the Text,) Tit. 3.1.

With such Zeal are Christians to perform all duties, All duties to be
performed with Zeal
to do all kind of good works of Piety and Charity, works of Holiness and
Righteousness. Being good works, and proper for them, they are be zealous in
performing of them. So was our blessed Pattern, the Lord Jesus, in doing the
will of his father, of which he says, that it was his Meat, Joh. 4.34. My meat
is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. This he desired
more than his bodily food, which a hungry man makes haste to, feeding upon it
with an eager appetite, and with great complacency, and contentment. And thus
are Christians to go about Gods work, the doing of his will, making haste to
it. I made have and delayed not to keep thy Commandments (says David) Psalm.
119.60. making it their delight. I delight to do thy will O my God, (says he)
Psalm. 40.8. Thy Testimonies are my delight, Psalm. 119.16.24. and often in that
Psalm. And so is it with every truly godly man; he is one whose delight is in
the Law of the Lord (as David describes him) Psalm. 1.4. as in Meditating of
it, so in Practicing it, doing it with alacrity and cheerfulness, and some
spiritual vigor, desiring to run Gods ways. I will run the way of thy
Commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart (says that holy man v. 32. of
that Psalm) A Runner in a race is zealous in his way, putting himself forward
what he can, putting all his strength to the work that he is about. And so
ought Christians to be in Gods ways, being zealous of, and in good works.

R. This is.
R. And great reason they should be so, this being a thing both Good and
Necessary.

1. Good.
1. Good (...), It is good to be zealously affected (says the Apostle there)
Gal. 4.18. To be zealous in good works is a good thing. Good

1. In as much as it is acceptable to God. 1. Acceptable to God.
That is Paul's Argument which he makes use of to bring Christians upon their
knees, to pray for Magistrates, supreme, and subordinate, For Kings and all
that are in authority, For (says he) this is good and acceptable in the sight
of God our Savior, 1 Timothy 2.3. And so is such a zealous performance of duties,
it is (...), good and acceptable in the sight of God. So was Phinehas's zeal,
whereby he made an atonement for the people, and procured to himself and his,
the Covenant of an everlasting Priesthood, as the Lord tells Moses, Numb.
25.11, 12, 13. Phinehas has turned my wrath away from the Children of Israel
while he was zealous for my sake among them. Wherefore say, Behold, I give unto
him my Covenant of peace. And he shall have it, and his seed after him, even
the Covenant of an everlasting Priesthood, because he was zealous for his God,
etc.

Nothing more acceptable unto God than zeal for him. Which he has such a
regard unto, that for the sake thereof he often times overlooks many infirmities
in his people. So was it in that act of Moses, of which we read, Exodus 32.19.
When being transported with a holy zeal for God, and his glory, he cast the
Tables of the Law, which God had newly written with his own finger, out of his
hands and brake them. An Act however by some excused and defended, as being
done by a divine Instinct, and so rather out of deliberation than Passion, to
signify the Breach of Covenant betwixt God and his people, whom they had so
highly provoked by their Idolatry, yet it is more probably looked upon as
unadvisedly done. His spirit being exasperated by what he saw tending so highly
to the dishonor of his God, as thereupon he spakes unadvisedlie with his lips,
(which the Psalmist says he did, Psalm. 106.33.) so he also did unadvisedly
with his hands. But in as much as it was a holy zeal for the glory of God that
thus transported him, we do not any where find that God was angry with him for
it. So well pleased is God with such a Zeal in his people, a holy zeal, a
religious zeal, zeal for his glory, that where that is, he overlooketh any
imperfections and faylings in their performances.

And (secondly) as it is acceptable to God, so profitable to a man's self, being
very advantageous to a Christian in the course of his obedience.

1. Fitting him for good works.
1. Fitting him for it, preparing him to every good work. Of such use is Natural
heat in the Body, it makes fit for motion and Action, which otherwise, being
cold, it is indisposed to, and unfit for. And of like use is this Spiritual
heat, a holy fervor in the Soul, it fitteth and prepares it for well doing,
the doing of what ever service to God or Man.

2. And (secondly) preparing a man for it, it puts him upon it, 2. Putting
him upon them.
causes him not to delay but to make haste, to take every opportunity that is
offered for the doing of good Even as fire being in a flame, now it lays hold
of whatever combustible matter comes near it So does Zeal (which is nothing
but Love in a flame) it readily takes hold of all opportunities of doing good
works; making men not sloathfull but diligent in the work and service which
they have to do. Thus it is said of Apollos, Act. 18.25. that being fervent in
spirit he spoke and taught diligently the things of the Lord. Tuhs where there
is this zeal in the heart, it will set the head and hands on work, making men
(as I said) not sloathfull, but diligent in the service of their God. So much
the Apostle insinuates in the Text, Romans 12.11. where he conjoines those
Precepts, Not sloathfull in businesses, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.

3. Carrying him through them.
3. And (thirdly) thus putting a man upon good works, it will carry him through
them, not withstanding what ever difficulties he may meet with in his way. So
is it with the Traveller, having (as we say) a good will in his way, now he
goes through thick and thin, through all ways and weathers. And even so is it
with a Christian that is zealous in the service of God; this carries him
through whatever opposition or discouragements he may meet with. Such effect it
had in and upon the blessed Apostle S. Paul, who, notwithstanding he took
notice what rubs lay in his way, how that Bonds and Affliction did abide him,
(wait for him) as the Holy Ghost witnessed in every City (as himself tells
the Elders at Miletum) Acts 20.23. Yet (says he) none of these things move me,
neither count I my life dear to my self, that I might finish my course with
joy, and the Ministry which I have received of the Lord, v. 24. Being zealous
for his Lord and Master Christ, that carries him through the service which he
had to do for him, maugre all opposition. And so will it do the Christian in
whose heart it lodges. Thus is this zeal a good thing, acceptable to God, and
profitable to a man's self, preparing him to good works, putting him upon them,
and carrying him through them.

And not only good, but Necessary, Reas. 2. Zeal necessary
without which, good works cannot be done well, so done, as that they may be
acceptable to God. As it was before, and under the Law, the Sacrifices could
not be offered without fire. And therefore Abraham being to offer his son, he
carries fire with him, He took the fire in his hand* and went, Genesis 22.6. And
to this end was it that the sacred fire, which first came down from heaven, was
continually kept in upon the Altar, that they might always have it at hand to
offer their sacrifices with upon all occasions. Even of such use is zeal to the
Christian, who must himself be salted with fire. So our Savior expresses it,
Mar. 9.49. Every one shall be salted with fire; have his heart seasoned with
the fire of divine love and zeal, without which he cannot offer up a sacrifice
unto God. It was the fire which made the smoke of the Incense-offering to
asscend up unto heaven. And so it is the zeal of the person in doing good works
that makes them come up before God. As the Angel tells Cornelius, Acts 10.4.
Thy prayers and thine alms are come up for a memorial before God. How so? why
he was zealous of those good works, A devout man, and one that feared God, with
all his house, giving much alms to the people, and praying to God always (as
the second verse there describes him.) He was a true Zelot. And being so, his
services were accepted.

To proceed no further in the Doctrinal part. You see that it is so, and why it
is so. Christians ought to be Zelots, zealous of good works. This is Good,
Acceptable to God, and Profitable to themselves, yea Necessary, without which
no acceptance of their services. That which now remains for the finishing of
this Point, and this Text, is Application. Applic.


Which let it be directed (in the first place) by way of Conviction. Use 1.
Diverse, not such as becomes the Redeemed of the Lord.
If this be the Qualification of Christ's peculiar people, that they are Zelots,
zealous of good works, then what shall we say to many who account themselves to
be of this number, professing themselves the disciples of Christ, having his
name called upon them, they are Christians; but where is this Affection? where
is this holy Zeal? Alas! not a spark of that heavenly fire to be found upon
their hearths, in their hearts. Instance in three sorts of them. Three sorts.


1. Some there are who are Key-cold. 1. Such as are key-cold.
Not any the least warmth to be felt or found in them. As for the world, and
the matters thereof, they are fire-hot, zealous and forward enough, and a great
deal too much; none shall go before them. They are such as the Wiseman speaks
of, Prove. 28.20. They make haste to be rich. And for Honors and Promotions
they are ambitious enough, following them with an eager pursuit; but as for the
matters of God, there is not the least warmth to be found in them. They are
cold at the Heart, cold in the Mouth, cold in the Hand.

1. Cold at the Heart, Cold at the Heart.
bearing no true affection to God, to his worship and service. Alas! so far are
they from affecting of God, that they seldom or never think of him. God is not
in all their thoughts (as David says of the wicked man, Psalm. 10.4.)

2. And being thus cold at the Heart, no wonder if they be, what also they are;
cold in the Mouth, Cold in the Mouth.
not speaking either to God, or for him. Not speaking to him by prayer. They
are such as call not upon his name as the Prophet describes Heathens, Jer. 10.
last. Unless it be in the time of their affliction and distress. Then it may be
(as the Lord speaks of the Jews, Hos. 5. last) they will seek him early,
diligently, then they will cry unto him, but at other times he hears not of
them. A plain indication, that what therein they do, is not out of any love to
God, but self-love. And as they have no desire to acquaint them selves with God
by speaking to him, so they-have not a word to speak for him. Let his Religion,
his truth, his name, his cause, his servants suffer as they will, this moves
not them. They are herein of Gallio's mind, not caring for any of these things
(as it is said of him, Act. 18.17.)

3. And being thus cold in the Mouth, they are as cold in the Hand. Cold in the
Hand.
Not having a good word for God, they have not a good work for others. Works of
Charity and Mercy are things which they neither have, nor desire to have any
acquaintance with. What they do in this way, it is extorted from them. Being
herein like Wells, not Fountains. What comes from them must be drawn, letting
nothing go but what they cannot hold. Now as for such, let them not dishonor
Jesus Christ so much as to call him their Master. Which if they do, he will not
own them for his people.

A second sort there are, who, though they be not thus Key-cold, yet they are
at the best but lukewarm. 2. Such as are Lukewarm.
This was Laodicea's temper, Rev. 3.16. she was neither hot nor cold, but
lukewarm, (...), of a tepid, lukewarm temper, as to matter of Religion
indifferent, showing no zeal for God, for his truth, for his worship and
service. And is not this the very temper of too many among us at this day? who
would be thought to be such as that name imports, Laodiceans, that is, just and
righteous persons, and it may be, as to dealings in the world, such they are:
I, but what are they as to Religion? here, at the best, they are but lukewarm,
indifferent. Indifferent as to their Profession, whether Protestants or
Papists. That Religion which the State holds forth, is their Religion. Thus
do they, in stead of serving the Lord, which the Apostle requires them to do,
Romans 12.11. serve the time (which that Text, having been (as it is conceived)
corrupted or mistaken, (...), Tempori servientes. Erasmus.
in some Copies is made to speak) and that in an ill sense too. As for any true
love to one Religion more than another, they are not guilty of it; And so is it
in their Practice. They perform public duties, come to Church, join in prayer,
in hearing of the word, and it may be also in receiving of the Sacrament; but
this they do merely for custom and fashions sake, not out of any zeal that
they have to the worship and service of God. So much they plainly declare, as
by their neglect of preparation before they come, which is no other than if
they were to go to an ordinary meeting, a feast, which for civilities sake they
will grace with their best apparel, and other preparation they make none when
they are to come to the house of their God, so also by their demeanor being
come, where they give themselves to sleeping, or gazing, or talking, or eying
of the clock or glass, to see how the time passes, in the mean time little
intending the business they come about. Plain evidences that they bring no
fire with them for the offering up of their Sacrifices. Making the best of it,
they are but lukewarm in their Religion. Some duties they do (it may be) and
that not only in public, but in private, I, but they do them as if they cared
not whether they did them or no. And thereupon it is that upon every trivial
occasion they are taken off from them. Such lukewarm Christians there are too
many among us.

Lukewarm Temporizers.
Among whom it may be some of them are Professors, such as would seem to be
Religious. I, but it is not out of any true love which they bear to Religion,
but only as it may be some ways advantageous to themselves in point of honor
or profit. A disease which I fear many are sick of in these unsettled times;
which whilst they favor Religion, they will seem to embrace it. But if that
wind should turn, so would they. Which some misdeeming, their policy is to
stand Newters, not to appear for any way. In the mean time contenting
themselves with the neglect of some Ordinances of God, rs in particular that of
the Lords Supper. Too plain an evidence that they have not such a zeal to God,
and to his worship and service, as the Redeemed of the Lord, Christ's peculiar
people ought to have.

Thus many are, yea and some make it their design so to be, Lukewarm in their
Religion. Lukewarmness in some a politic design.
As for zeal, it is a temper which their policy approves not of. No, a middle
temper is the best, neither hot nor cold. But herein how are they mistaken? Of
all tempers Christ likes it worst: So he tells the Laodicean Church there,
Rev. 3.15, 16. I would thou were either cold or hot. So then, because thou art
lukewarm, etc. I will spew thee out of my mouth. Meats and drinks which are
lukewarm, are most offensive and displeasing to the stomach, apt to provoke
vomit. And such are all Newters, and Politic Time-servers, unto Jesus Christ,
loathsome and detestable, such as sooner or later he will cast out with
loathing and detestation. Here is a second sort, Lukewarm Christians.

Besides these, a third sort there are, who are zealous; I, but of what? Not of
good works. 3. Some zealous, but not of good works.
What then? Why either

1. Of things Indifferent, which they superstitiously doting upon, make
necessary, 1. Of things indifferent.
showing more zeal for humane inventions, than for any part of the instituted
worship and service of God. Such was the zeal of the Pharisees, who found fault
with the Disciples of Christ, and quarrel with him their Master about it,
because they did not observe their Traditions: Why do thy Disciples transgress
the Tradition of the Elders (say they?) For they wash not their hands when they
eat bread. Matthew. 1.2. Thus were they very zealous for those ceremonious
observances, which being in themselves indifferent, they putting a Religion in
them, made necessary; preferring them before divine Institutions and Commands.
So our Savior there charge it upon the v. 6. Thus have ye made the
Commandments of God of none effect by your Traditions. And such was Paul's zeal
before his Conversion (as himself acknowledges it) Gal. 1.14. I was then
(says he) (...), more exceedingly zealous of the Traditions of my Fathers. And
such a zeal may we see at this day among those great Zelots of the Roman
Church; who are transcendently, more exceedingly zealous than others. But
whereof is it? Why, of the Traditions of their Fathers, humane Inventions,
Rites, Ceremonies, such as have no warrant from the Word. And would to God
there were not too much of this zeal to be found amongst some Protestants at
this day, even amongst our selves, who are still so much addicted to old
Customs, and Rites, and Ceremonies, as that their zeal to them makes them
overlook the substance of Religion, and to neglect (as I said) some of the
Ordinances of God. Being zealous for Humane, they neglect Divine Institutions.

2. Of evil works.
2. Others there are, worse than these, who are zealous about things in
themselves evil: Such are persons openly wicked, who are zealous Actors of sin,
committing it with greediness. Such were some of the Gentiles, whom the Apostle
describes, Ephesians. 4.19. Being past feeling, they have given themselves over unto
lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness. Would to God there
were not some such to be found among Christians, amongst us, Riotous,
Intemperate, Luxurious persons, such as Run to all excess of Riot (as St. Peter
has it, 1. Pet. 4.4.) And such zeal shall we find amongst Idolaters, Those of
old whom we read of; among whom some thought nothing too dear for their Idols,
not sparing, some of them, to sacrifice their Children unto them. So did the
worshippers of Molech, or Baal, of whom the Prophet Jeremie speaks, Jer.
19.5. They have built also the high places of Baal, to burn their sons with
fire for burnt offerings unto Baal. And such are the prime Zelots of the Church
of Rome at this day; such as are zealous for their Idolatry and Superstition,
as Invocating of Saints, Worshipping of Images, Adoring the Sacrament, etc.

3. Another sort there are who are zealous against good works, 3. Against good
works.
speaking evil of them, and persecuting those that do them. Such was Paul's
zeal before his Conversion, as himself acknowledges it, Phil. 3.6. Concerning
zeal, persecuting the Church. Such zeal our Savior tells his Disciples they
should make account to meet with from those who liked not their way, John 16.2.
They shall put you out of the Synagogues; Yea, the time comes, that whosoever
kills you, will think that he does God service. And such zeal may we find
among Papists at this day, who care not what cruelties they exercise upon the
true Professors of Gods Religion. And would to God there were not some of this
zeal to be found among our selves, in such as are zealous against the ways of
God, and those that walk in them, not sparing to revile the Ministers of God
for doing their duty, and to rail upon his servants for being so forward, so
zealous as they are of good works. Thus their zeal is against zeal, which they
look upon as no better than folly and madness in those who express it in the
course of their lives and conversations, by being more forward and zealous than
others.

Now (to close up this Branch of the Application) as for all these, let them
here take notice, that being such, we cannot reckon them in the number of this
peculiar people, whom Christ has Redeemed and Purified, to this end, that they
should be zealous, and zealous of good works.

Use 2. Exh. Be zealous.
Which let all of us (in the second place) be exhorted and excited to. That we
may approve and evidence our selves to be of this blessed number, such as
belong unto Jesus Christ, be we zealous, zealous for God, in doing his will. Be
zealous (says the Spirit to the Laodicean Church.) And such let us be.

1. Motives and means for the kindling of this fire.
For the kindling of which fire in our hearts, do but consider (in the first
place) how zealous God has been and is for us, for his people, Thus says the
Lord of hosts, I am jealous for Jerusalem, and for Zion with a great jealousy,
Zach. 1.14. 1. Consider Gods zeal for us. (...)
Kinnethi (says the Original) zelatus sum, I have been zealous for them with a
great zeal. Such is Gods affection toward his Church and people, like that of
a most affectionate husband toward his beloved wife, whom he cannot endure to
see wronged. Such is Gods zeal for his people; Which as it induces him to
make, so to perform and make good his promises unto them. This it was that
moved him to give his Son Christ for them, to send him into the world to do
what he has done, and shall do for them. To us a child is born, to us a son is
given (says the Prophet Esaias, speaking of Christ, Isa. 9.6.) And what moved
God to do this? Why, The zeal of the Lord of hosts shall perform this (so the
Reason is rendered in the verse following.) Thus has God been zealous for us,
great reason then that we should be zealous for him.

2. And again consider how zealous Jesus Christ has been for us. 2. The zeal
of Jesus Christ in giving himself.
What affection he has shown to us in doing what the Text minds us of,
giving himself for us, and that to the Death, even that accursed death,
treading the winepresse of his Fathers wrath for our sakes. What zeal did he
herein show for us? How earnest was his desire of effecting the work of our
Redemption? This is that which he tells his Disciples, Luke 12.50. I have a
Baptism to be Baptized with, (says he) and how am I straightened till it be
accomplished? A Baptism, meaning his Death and Passion, whereby he was
consecrated to be the Savior of the world. And concerning this he says, he
was straightened, (...), earnestly desiring the accomplishment thereof, that so
the work of man's Redemption, which he made his grand design, might be effected.
A work which he was very zealous of. And hereupon it was that he was so far
from declining of that bitter Cup (as Peter would have had him to do) that he
even makes haste (as it were) to drink it, going into the Garden, where he
knew the High Priests officers would come to apprehend him, and there going
forth to meet them, offering himself unto them, not accepting of any attempt
for his rescue (as I showed you in opening the first Branch of the Text, how
Christ gave himself for us.) Such was his zeal for us, that he thought not his
dearest blood too dear for us. And oh how zealous then should we be for him?
Was he so zealous in suffering for us, how zealous should we be in doing for
him? Let these Considerations serve (as well they may) for the kindling of this
fire.

2. Considerations useful for the blowing up of this fire.
Which being in this way kindled, let our next work be to inflame and blow it
up. In which way (among other) make use of these Considerations.

1. The zeal of Angels in serving their God
1. Look upon the blessed Angels, considering how zealous they are in serving
their God and us. So much we are put in mind of by that name which is given to
some of them, who are called Seraphim: So we find them, Isa. 6.2. where the
Prophet describing the Majesty of God represented to him in a Vision as sitting
upon his Throne, with a guard of Angels about him, he says, About it stood the
Seraphims (or rather Seraphim, as the plural termination in the Hebrew requires
it should be;) Seraphim, a word coming from Saraph, which signifies to burn,
(...) a (...) ussit.
form whence they were so called, as to import their singular splendour, so also
their fervency of love to God, and zeal in his service; Who makes his Angels
Spirits, his Ministers a flaming fire, Psa. 146. Such are those glorious
Spirits. Whence it is that in the verse there following they are said to have
each of them six wings, two whereof were to fly withal (as also the Cherubins
in the Temple had, 1 King. 6.27.) intimating their promptness to, and swiftness
in executing the will of their God, doing whatsoever he puts them upon,
Doing his commandments, harkening to the voice of his word (as the Psalmist
describes those heavenly Spirits) Psalm 103.20.

And as they are zealous in doing service to their God, so to his people; In
serving his people.
Being Ministering Spirits unto them, sent forth to Minister unto them who shall
be heirs of Salvation (as the Apostle sets forth their office, Heb. 1. last)
how intent are they about this work? Take heed (says our Savior) that ye
despise not one of these little ones (the meanest of Gods servants;) For I say
unto you, that in Heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my Father
which is in heaven, Mat. 18.10. waiting for Gods command to be employed for the
meanest of his servants. And are they so zealous in his service? Why then
should not they who hope to be like unto them another day (which our Savior
tells us all true believers in the Resurrection shallbe, Matthew. 22.30.) strive
to be herein like unto them?

2. And as Angels, so the Saints of God 2. The zeal of Gods Saints.
upon earth, how zealous do we find many of them to have been? How zealous for
their God? So was Moses, and Phineas, and Elias, and David, of whom I spoke
before. And such was John the Baptist, A burning and a shining light, John
5.35. burning in his zeal for God, and shining in his doctrine and life before
men. And of the like spirit was Paul, who, when the Disciples, understanding
what troubles he was like to meet with at Jerusalem, dissuaded him from going
up thither, tells them, I am ready not to be bound only, but to die at
Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus, Acts 21.13. And how zealous for their
Brethren? So was Moses, who rather than Isreal's sin should not be forgiven
them, wishes that God would blot his name out of his book of life, Exodus
32.32. In like manner St. Paul, being transported with the like affectionate
zeal for his Countrymen the Jews, I could wish (says he) that my self were
accursed from Christ for my brethrens sake, my kinsmen according to the flesh,
Romans 9.3.

And like zeal we find in other of the servants of God. As in Mart. Luther, who
being dissuaded by his friends from adventuring his person at the Council at
Worms, took up that Heroic resolution, that though there were as many Devils
there as tiles to cover the houses, yet would he in the name of the Lord Jesus
present himself there. And the like we read of Mr. Calvin, how that bewailing
the sad differences amongst the Churches in his time, he professed, Ne december
quidem maria, that it was not the sailing over of ten Seas that would grieve
him, so he might but obtain an uniform draught of Religion. Now setting these,
and the like Presidents and Examples before us, let them be as so many
provocatives unto us. Such effect had the forwardness and liberality of the
Corinthians in their charitable Contributions; this their zeal provoked very
many (as the Apostle tells them, 2 Cor. 9.2. And of such use let the zeal of
Gods servants be unto us, serving to blow up this heavenly zeal in our hearts.

3. And such use make we of that zeal which we see betwixt Men upon Civil
interests. 3. Zeal betwixt men upon civil interests:
Thus when railing Shimei reviled and cursed the Lords Anointed, King David, in
that base and unworthy manner that he did, Abishai hearing it, he could not
endure it, but presently he tenders his service to his Master for the revenging
of his quarrel, by taking off the head of the dead dog (as he calls him) as we
have the story, 2 Samuel 16.9. And like instances we meet with many, of such as
having espoused the interest of some other, have been so zealous in the
maintaining of it, as that they have not spared to expose themselves to the
greatest of hazards, Sir Henry Slingsby, Dr. Hewet, beheaded on Tower Hill,
June 8. 1658.
even to the losing of their lives in the service: (Of which kind this week
last past furnishes us with two sad examples in this Nation.) Now shall men be
so zealous for men, and shall not Christians be as zealous for their God? Who,
as he is able to protect and bear them out in whatever they do for him, so he
will not be wanting in recompencing of them; Neither of which men are sure of
from whomsoever else they engage and undertake for.

4. And like use make we of the zeal which we see, or hear of in evil workers;
as viz.

1. In Satan, who cease not to compass the earth, as himself declares it, Job
1.7. The Question being put to him by God, Satan, whence come thou? he
presently returns Answer (which he does once and again, Cap. 2.2.) From
compassing the earth to and fro: or (as our new Translation has it) from going
to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it. Such is his zeal
to do mischief, that he is continually ranging to and fro, seeking
opportunities and advantages, Like a roaring Lion walking about, seeking whom
he may devour (as St. Peter expresses it) 1 Pet. 5.8. So greedy is he of his
prey, zealous to do mischief.

2. And the like zeal we may see in his Instruments. 2. His Instruments,
Seducers.
With what zeal do they serve this their Lord and Master? False Teachers,
subtle seducers, how zealous are they in propagating and spreading of their
pernicious errors. They compass sea and land to make proselytes (as our Savior
says of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23.15. And thus Saint Paul, speaking
of false Teachers which opposed him and his Doctrine, he tells his Galathians,
that they zealously affected them, Gal. 4.17. (...), they were very zealous in
seeking to gain them, and bring them over to their way.

And as Seducers, so Persecutors; Persecutor^*
How zealous shall we find them in persecuting the truth, and the sincere
professors of it. Concerning zeal, persecuting the Church (says Paul of
himself before his conversion in that Text forecited, Phil. 3.6. A Persecutor
he then was, and that a zealous one, Breathing out threatenings and slaughters
against the Disciples of the Lord (as it is said of him, Acts 9, 1.) So
vehement was the heat of his enraged heart against Christ and his followers,
that he discovered it both in his words, by his menacing and threatening
language, and also in his actions; taking upon him the office of an Apparitor,
and procuring a Commission from the High Priests, that if he found any of that
way (professed Christians) whether they were Men or Women, he might bring the^
bound to Jerusalem (as it there follows in the next verse) v. 2. So zealous
then was he against Christ, and against all that professed the name of Christ.
And what he was then against them, the like were others afterward against him;
some combining and banding themselves against him. So we read of those Jews,
Act. 23.12. They banded together, and bound themselves under a curse, saying,
that they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul. Such was their
zeal against the way which he then held forth. And may we not see the like
among those of the Romish Religion, who spare not to prosecute whoever they are
that dissent from them, with fire and faggot. Witness the Marian Persecution
in this Nation in the last Age, which spared neither Sex nor Age. So zealous
are the Devils Instruments in serving of him, in doing of his work.

3. His servants, false worshippers.
3. And like Zeal shall we find in his Servants, Idolaters, and false
worshippers, how zealous shall we find them in their way? So were the Ephesians
for their Diana, whom we may hear crying out for two hours together, Great is
Diana of the Ephesians, Acts 19.34. And so are the Papists at this day, for
their Superstitious and Idolatrous worship. And so are profane persons, Profane
Persons.
who willingly make themselves slaves to their lusts, serving diverse lusts and
pleasures (as the Apostle has it in the Chapter after the Text) Tit. 3.3.
(...), Addicti, Mancipati; Addicted, Mancipated, inslaved to them; which they
are in a spontaneous and voluntary way; selling themselves to work evil (as it
is said of Ahab, 1 King. 21.20.) giving over themselves to the committing of
sin, and that with greediness (as the Apostle speaks of the Gentiles, Ephesians.
4.19.) (...), with an unsatiable desire, or (as it were) striving how they may
do most evil. Thus are wicked men, in doing of wicked works, they are zealous,
resolved in their way, so bent upon their will in it, that nothing shall take
them off, or turn them aside. Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of
your father ye will do (says our Savior to those malicious Jews) John 8.44.
Being of the like temper and disposition with the Devil, and resembling him as
the Child does the Father, his lusts they would do. (...), quicquid collibitum
est (as Grotius explaines it) whatever he pleased. So forward are wicked and
ungodly men in serving of sin and Satan, in doing of wicked works, which they
do in a zealous way. Their feet run to evil (as the Wiseman says of them,
Prove. 1.16. And are all these so zealous in evil works? O then how zealous
should we be in good works! What, shall the servants of Satan be more zealous
in serving their Master, than we in serving ours? Let all these serve as
Incentives to our zeal, to stir and blow up this heavenly fire in our souls.

4. And whilst we make this use of their zeal 4. The zeal of wicked men
against zeal.
in and for evil works, make we the like also of their zeal against good works,
and against the Actors of them. Wicked men they cannot endure those that are
zealous of good works, they are a mote in their eye; they are ready to speak
evil of them, to revile them, and upbraid them with this their zeal. But let
this be so far from quenching, or yet cooling hereof, that let it rather be an
Incentive to it. Like as the wind is to the fire, or water to the Smiths forge,
which make it burn and flame so much the more; such use make we of the scorns
and obloquies which men of the world cast upon the zealous profession and
practice of Godliness, Let this make us so much the more zealous. Such use did
David make of that jeer which scoffing Michal put upon him for his zeal which
he showed in bringing the Ark of God into its place; when she saw him dancing
before the Lord with all his might (which the Text tells us he did) 2 Samuel
6.14. This she makes a jeer of, upon her next meeting with him, saluting him
in that scornful manner (as we find it there, v. 20.) How glorious was the King
of Israel to day, who uncovered himself to day in the eyes of the handmaids of
his servants, as one of the vain fellows shamefully uncovereth himself. But
what says David this? That we may read in the verses following, v. 21, 22. It
was before the Lord (says he) which chose me before thy Father, and before all
his house, etc. Therefore will I play before the Lord, and I will yet be more
vile than this. So far was this from quenching or cooling his zeal, that it
inflames it; so far from taking him off from such demonstrations of his
affection to his God, that it heightens his resolution that way. And of like
use let the reproaches and scorns which wicked men cast upon the ways of God,
and those that walk conscionably in them, be unto us, every one as a blast to
blow up this fire.

3. This fire to be kept in.
Which being thus kindled and blown up, then let our next care be to keep it in.
This was the Charge which God committed to his Priests under the Law concerning
the fire upon the Altar; That they should look to it, to keep it in by day and
by night, so as it should never go out, but be continually burning (as we have
the Law for it, Lev. 6.12, 13. And such care let all the Lords people have of
this heavenly fire, this holy zeal for their God. Being once kindled in their
hearts, let them be careful to keep it in. See that it do not die, and go out;
As knowing it, that they shall have occasion every day to make use of it. Upon
this account was that fire upon the Altar to be looked to in that manner,
Reason 2. Being of daily use.
in regard of the daily use which they had of it in offering of Sacrifices. And
upon the like account let all the Lords people have a care to keep in this
sacred fire in their hearts, in as much as they shall have a daily use of it:
Use of it in all the services which they do to God or Man; All which they are
to do with a holy zeal and fervor.

And (2ly) if it be not looked to, Reason 1. Subject to die.
it is ready to go out. So the Spirit tells the Church of Sardis concerning her
graces, Rev. 3.2. Strengthen the things which remain, which are ready to die.
So is it with Graces themselves; and so is it much more with zeal, which is (as
I said) not so much any distinct grace, as the intension and heightning of
other graces. Now this Christians are subject to lose. Though the fire be not
quite put out, yet the flame may. Though believers shall never fall from grace
it self totally and finally, yet from the degree they may. So was it with
languishing Ephesus, against whom the Son of Man, the Lord Jesus brings that
Action, Rev. 2.4. Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou have
left thy first love. Though not her Love, yet her first love, her zeal was
gone. This is a fire, which if not looked to, will quickly go out; especially
having so many Quench-coals as it meets with in and from the world, which
should make Christians (looking upon this as heavenly fire (as that upon the
Altar was, fire which came down from Heaven) to be the more careful of it.

Quest. How kept in.
Quest. What then shall we do for the keeping of it in? A needful Question in
these declining Apostatizing times, wherein how many may we see every where
sick of Ephesus's disease, having lost their first love? Times too like those
which our Savior foretold of, Mat. 24.12. Because iniquity shall abound
(says he) the love of many shall wax cold. Love to God, and love to man, shall
grow cold, not showing it self as before, in offices of Piety and Charity. A
truth, which we see too sad an experience of everywhere: So as this Question,
as it is useful at all times, so needful at this.

Ans. The Metaphor followed.
Ans. In Answer hereunto, I shall still follow the Metaphor which the word in
the Text leads me to; which, as I have shown you, is taken from fire. Now for
the keeping in of fire, there are three things principally useful and needful,
viz. the Stirring of it, Blowing of it, Feeding of it. And every of these let
us in a spiritual sense practice as to our zeal.

1. Stirring up this fire. Dir. 1. This fire to be stirred up.
That is the advice which Paul gives to Timothy concerning his Ministerial
gift, 2 Timothy 1.6. I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God
which is in thee. (...); A Metaphor taken from fire, which being ready to go
out, is revived by stirring it up. And this do we concerning those graces which
we have received, stir them up. And as all other, so specially our love,
whereof (as I said) zeal is the flame, the Intension of it. Stir we up this
Grace: Which do we, as by other means, so specially by working those aforesaid
considerations upon our hearts, touching the love of God and Jesus Christ to
us, manifested in giving himself for us; Which was Love in the height of it,
Zeal, love beyond all our Comprehensions. So God loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son, John 3.16. (...), So, so as cannot be paralleled, nor
yet expressed. Often call we to mind this Love, this Zeal of God and Jesus
Christ for us. This will be of singular efficacy in stirring up the like
intense affection in us toward them again. The love of Christ constrains us,
2 Cor. 6.14.

2. Stirring up the fire, blow it; Dir. 2. This fire must be blown by Prayer.
Which is done by Prayer. Prayer is as the Bellows for the blowing of this
fire, which Christians upon that account are every day to make use of. Pray
without ceasing, 1 These. 5.17. Begging from God not only Grace to do his will,
but Zeal in doing it. This course took Baals Priests, when they would have fire
to consume their sacrifice, They cried unto their God for it; They called on
the name of Baal from morning to evening, saying, O Baal hear us, 1 King.
18.26. What they did in an impious way to their deaf and dumb Idol, do we the
like in a Religious way to the true and living God, as Elias there did, v. 37,
38. Being every day to offer up the sacrifice of some good works or other unto
him; beg we from him this heavenly fire, that he would inflame our hearts with
affections suitable to the services which we are to do.

Dir. 3. This fire to be fed.
3. And then (in the third place) Feed this fire. This course took the Priests
for the keeping in of the fire upon the Altar, they fed it with wood every
morning, as we find them ordered to do, Lev. 6.12. And like course take we for
the keeping in of this holy fire in our hearts: By the Fuel of divine
Meditation. Three useful Considerations.
Feed it every morning, every day, and that by the fuel of Divine Meditation,
frequently meditating, as upon what has been already propounded, so also upon
these two or three other Considerations.

Whose work it is that we do. Even the work of the Great God. Such are all good
works. 1. Good works are Gods work.
(...), The works of God, Joh. 6.28. His works, because commanded by him, and
done for him. Which being duly considered, it cannot but quicken the soul up
to this service, wherein we serve so great, so good a Master. This we do in
whatever the work be, if a good work. Servants in serving their Masters they
serve the Lord (as I showed you) And so do Christians in whatever duties, as of
Piety, which immediately respect God, so of Charity. He that has pity upon
the poor, lends unto the Lord, Prove. 19.17. So God takes what is done for
his sake, as done unto himself. In as much as ye have done it unto one of the
least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me, Math. 25.40.

2. And being thus his work, consider how acceptable it is to him. Acceptable
to him.
So Paul tells his Philippians concerning their charitable contribution, Phil.
4.18. where he calls it an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable and
well-pleasing to God. And so is it with all other good works; being good, they
are acceptable. Thence is it that the Apostle puts these two together, 1 Timothy
2.3. This is good, and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior (speaking of
praying for Governors.) Now this is a thing which Christians in their whole
course should still have an eye at, Proving what is acceptable to the Lord,
Ephesians. 5.10. And knowing it so to be, this should make them forward and zealous
in doing it. To do good and communicate, forget not, for with such sacrifices
God is well pleased (says the Apostle) Heb. 13.16.

3. And being so acceptable to him, he will not forget it. Shall be rewarded by
him:
God is not unrighteous to forget (says the Apostle to the Hebrews, Heb. 6.10.
So unrighteous are men oft-times; what service is done unto them, they forget
it. But so is not God. Whatever service is done unto him, or to others in his
name, and for his sake, it shall not be lost: The assurance whereof should make
Christians more forward in his work. Finally my brethren be ye steadfast,
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know
that your labor is not in vain in the Lord (so Paul closes up that Chapter) 1
Cor. 15. last. Oft-times, as to men, men labor in vain; I have labored in
vain, and spent my strength for naught (says Isai) Isa. 49.4. But not so as to
God; who has promised, that if it be but a cup of cold water, yet being given
in his name, it shall not lose its reward, Mat. 10. last. A consideration which
cannot but be of special force to make men zealous of good works. This is that
which men generally have in their eye in going about any work: What they shall
get by it* what profit there is in it. Now of all things there is nothing so
profitable as Godliness. Of which the Apostle tells us it is (...), profitable
for all things, 1 Timothy 4.8. So false and groundless is that imputation which
those Hypocrites cast upon the service of God, of whom the Prophet Malachy
speaks, Mal. 3.14. Ye have said it is vain to serve God, and what profit is
it that we have kept his Ordinance? What profit in this service? Nay, what
profit is there in all other things besides it? As for the service which men do
unto this world, how unprofitable? What profit has a man of all his labor
which he takes under the Sun? (says the Preacher) Eccl. 1.3. and 3.9.
Whatever he thereby gets, at the grave it leaves him. But so do not good
works, they follow the doers of them. Blessed are the dead which die in the
Lord from henceforth, yea says the Spirit, that they may rest from their
labors, and their works do follow them, Rev. 14.13. follow them to Heaven,
where they shall receive the reward of them. Thus do men by doing of good works
lay up in store for themselves a good foundation for the time to come, so as
they may lay hold on eternal life (as the Apostle has it) 1 Timothy 6.19. Not
that Christians may so build upon their good works as Papists do, expecting to
receive eternal life by way of merit for them, this is a rotten foundation; but
yet they may make these a ground or argument of their hope which they have of
eternal life, in regard of the gracious promise which God has made to those
that practice them; who thus sowing to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap
life everlasting (as the Apostle has it) Gal. 6.8. This is their (...), their
Recompense of reward, which they may assuredly expect after they have done
their work. And this let all the Lords people continually have in their eye, as
Moses is said to have had, Heb. 11.26. setting it before them. This will be as
fuel to this fire, useful for the continuing and keeping in of this holy
fervor in the soul.

Which being thus kept in, now (in the next place) as occasion is, let us make
use of it. So did the Priests of their holy fire, which when ever they were to
sacrifice, or offer Incense, they took from the Altar. The like do we in all
the services which we do to or for God, in every good work that we do, make use
of this fire, make use of our zeal. Cold services yield but cold comfort, and
shall find but cold acceptance. Cold prayers bespeak their own denial; Qui
frigide rogat -- And cold Charity must expect but a cold reward. And therefore
whatever service we do, do it in a zealous way, with inward fervor of soul.
Being fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord (as the Apostle puts them together)
Romans 12.11.

In Duties of Piety.
Thus perform we duties of Piety. Thus Pray, bringing fire in our Censers,
without which the smoke of our Incense will never ascend up to Heaven. The
effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much (says St. James)
Jam. 5.16. (...), not a faint, languid prayer, made in a formal and perfunctory
way, which is no other but lip-labor, but a devout, a zealous prayer. Such let
our prayers be. Remember still to put fire under the Incense. And so in our
hearing, and receiving of the Sacrament, see that we perform not these duties
in a formal and perfunctory manner, contenting our selves with the bare Opus
operatum, the doing of the work; but have an eye to the manner of performance,
that there be a spiritual vigor in it; that we come to these Ordinances with
an eager appetite: As new born babes, desiring the sincere milk of the Word, 1
Pet. 2.2. hungring and thirsting after Jesus Christ, the eating of his flesh,
the drinking of his blood. And so hearing attentively, and receiving thankfully.

And such also let our works of Charity be. In duties of Charity.
Having a zeal for our brethren (as St. Paul says his Corinthians had for him,
2 Cor. 7.7. They had a fervent mind, (...), a zeal, toward him, earnestly
wishing his welfare. Thus be we affected toward our Brethren. See that ye love
one another with a pure heart, fervently ((says St. Peter, 1 Pet. 1.22. And
again, Cap. 4. v. 8. Above all things have fervent Charity among your selves;
(...); Intense Charity, so as earnestly to desire the good each of other: And
out of that affection taking all opportunities for the doing of good unto them:
Showing mercy with cheerfulness (as the Apostle requires it) Romans 12.8. So
doing good, as seeking to be Rich in good works, being ready to distribute,
willing to communicate (as he there wills Rich men) 1 Timothy 6.18. Thus put
fire to every Sacrifice, join zeal to every duty.

Only (in the last place, to draw toward a Conclusion) see that this fire be
right fire, Caution. See that our zeal be right zeal. Not strange fire-
this zeal, right zeal. Where have an eye to two things.

1. See that this fire be not strange fire. Such is that fire said to be
wherewith the sons of Aaron, Nadab and Abihu sacrificed, Lev. 10.1. They
offered strange fire before the Lord, which he commanded them not.] Strange
fire, not that fire which at first coming down from heaven was proper for the
Temple-service, but Common, Culinarie fire. Take we heed that our fire, our
zeal be not such, common fire, a carnal zeal, such as is to be found among too
many, who would (it may be) seem to be zealous. But whence is it? Out of some
by and sinister, Not carnal zeal.
some carnal respects, as of Credit or Profit, etc, But see that it be heavenly
fire; zeal from God, and zeal for God; wrought by his Spirit, and seeking his
Glory. Thus see we that it be right zeal, sincere, not Hypocritical. Not
hypocritical zeal.
A great deal of such zeal there is to be found in the world. Such was Jehu's
zeal, who meeting with Jehonadab, Come (says he) and see my zeal for the Lord,
2 King. 10.16. when as in truth it was rather for himself, than for the Lord;
his heart (whatever he pretended) not being right in what he did; which if it
had been, he would not (having destroyed Baal) have suffered the Calves at Dan
and Bethel to stand still (which the 29th v. there informs us that he did:) And
such was the zeal of the Scribes and Pharisees (as I have shown you.) Take we
heed that our zeal be not such; but such as the Apostle requires our faith and
love should be, 1 Timothy 1.5. Romans 12.9. (...), sincere, unfeigned, without
dissimulation. Which if it be not, what do we but mock God? whilst we seem to
be zealous for him, but are not? A thing which let all of us beware of. Is it
good that he should search you out (says Job to his friends) or as some man
mocketh another, do ye so mock God? Job 13.9. This God will do sooner or later,
he will search men out, discover them to be such as they are. And therefore
take heed of mocking him, who will not, cannot be mocked. Be not deceived, God
is not mocked (says the Apostle) Gal. 6.7. (...). However men may think to
mock him, yet he is not, cannot be mocked, deluded, deceived. Neither will he
suffer himself so to be, but will take vengeance upon them that attempt it. Now
what greater working of God can there be, than to pretend a zeal for him, and
not to be so in truth. This take we heed of. See that our zeal be a right zeal,
sincere, unfeigned, not Hypocritical.

Much less Diabolical. Not Diabolical zeal.
Such is that zeal which St. James speaks of, Jam. 3.14. calling it a Bitter
Zeal (so the Original has it, (...)) Bitter envying. Of this kind of zeal I
fear there is yet too much to be found in this Nation. Among those who seem to
be zealous for God, there is too much bitter zeal, Bitter zeal.
which shows it self in bitter invectives against those who are not every
ways of their mind and judgment, whom they are ready with all eagerness to
pursue as enemies. Such zeal let Christians beware of. Let all bitterness, and
wrath, and anger, etc. be put away from you (says the Apostle) Ephesians. 4.31. And
elsewhere we are warned to beware, lest any root of bitterness spring up
amongst us, Heb. 12.15. Among which, this Bitter zeal may well be reckoned as
one. But whilst we are zealous for God, be we meek and gentle toward our
Brethren. Such is that (...), the wisdom from above, heavenly wisdom (as St.
James tells us) it is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, Christians to be meek
and gentle toward their Brethren.
etc. Jam. 3.17. And this wisdom seek we after, that we may be such. A Lesson
which our Apostle requires our Evangelist Titus to press upon his Auditors in
the Chapter following, Tit. 3.2. Where having in the former verse minded them
of being Ready to every good work, he subjoynes, To speak evil of no man, to be
no brawlers, but gentle, showing all meekness unto all men.

Not that all persons are to be treated and dealt with after the same manner.
All not to be treated alike.
Paul, who there gives that charge to others, yet himself being to deal with
the obstinate Jews, who opposed his Doctrine, and blasphemed, He shook his
raiment (says the Text) and said unto them, Your blood be upon your own heads,
I am clean, from henceforth I will go to the Gentiles, so turning his back upon
them, Acts 18.6. And before, having to deal with Elimas the Sorcerer, who
withstood him in the course of his Ministry, seeking to seduce the Deputy,
whom he had converted to the faith, Paul being filled with the holy Ghost
(says the Text) set his eyes upon him, and said, O full of all subtilty and
all mischief, thou child of the Devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord? Acts 13.9, 10. Thus, as
the Ministers of God, so others, having to deal with obstinate sinners, or
dangerous seducers, now they both may and ought to show their zeal for God, in
treating them, in measure, according to their demerits. But not so with others,
whose errors and miscarriages, Doctrinal and Practical, may be looked upon as
Infirmities. For such, though we are not to comply with them, by giving
allowance to ought that is evil in them, Paul gives not place, no not for an
hour, to those that brought false doctrines into the Churches (as he tells his
Galathians) Gal. 2.5. And finding Peter complying too much with the Jews in
the observation of their then antiquated Ceremonies, he there says, he
withstood him to the face, v. 11. which he did, not only seemingly, in outward
show and appearance (as Jerome and some of the Greek Fathers there look upon it,
so construing the Greek, (...)) but (as Augustine determines it against Jerome,
betwixt whom there was a hot contest about it) he did it in earnest, for which
the Text also is expressed, noting, that Peter was to be blamed. Thus Christians
are not to close and comply with others, though brethren, in that which is
evil; yet looking upon them as sinning, not out of wilfulness, but weakness,
now they are to deal gently with them; so moderating their zeal, that it may
appear to be of the right kind, a true Christian zeal, true heavenly fire, not
strange fire.

Nor yet (in the third place) Wildfire. Such may we call that zeal, which
wants either Knowledge, or Discretion.

1. Knowledge. Such was that zeal which Paul took notice of in many of the
Jews. I bear them record (says he) that they have a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge, Romans 10.2. They had (...), a zeal of God, for God,
being earnest in doing service to him; I, but this their zeal it was (...), not
according to knowledge, they were not acquainted with the mind and will of God,
what he would have them to do. They were ignorant of his righteousness (as the
next verse has it) of his way for the justifying of sinners, viz. by faith in
Christ, through the imputation of his Righteousness, his Active and Passive
obedience unto them. And hereupon it was that they went about (as it there
follows) to establish their own righteousness, they were zealous about their
Legal observances, as hoping thereby to be justified before God. And so (as he
goes on) submitted not themselves to the righteousness of God, not putting
themselves upon that way which God had laid out for the justifying of sinners,
which is by and through faith in Christ. And such is the zeal of many; they
bear a good affection unto God, and seem (it may be) to be very zealous for
him; but alas! their zeal is not according to knowledge; no other but a Blind
zeal. Such was the zeal of the Pharisees, of whom our Savior gives that
character to his Disciples, Mat. 15.14. They be blind leaders of the blind.
Being, though great Zelots, yet ignorant of what the mind and will of God was.
And such Zelots may we meet with many in the Church of Rome at this day. Very
zealous they are in their devotions, very devout in the worship and service of
God, yet withal grossly ignorant; not knowing what it is that they do, much
less what God requires that they should do. Only yielding up themselves to
their Blind guides, their Priests (as the Jews did to the Pharisees) to be
led by them, doing what they will have them to do. And would to God there were
none of this kind of zeal, Blind zeal to be found among our selves! Whence is
it that some are so observant of Days and Times as they are? and others of
some other formal observances, which find no warrant in, and from the word?
Surely the best construction that can be made of it, is that which the Apostle
made of the like in the Jews; They have a zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge. A zeal they have, but it is but blind zeal. Such zeal be we aware of
Before we be zealous about any matter, be we sure that it is a good matter,
that it is according to the mind and will of God, that so we may do what we do
out of faith (as I have before pressed it.)

2. And (Secondly) with this Knowledge join Discretion. Such is true Christian
zeal, wise as well as warm. Two things there were required in every Sacrifice
under the Law, Fire and Salt. So much we may take notice of from that forecited
Text, Mark 9.49. Every one shall be salted with fire, and every Sacrifice shall
be salted with salt. Fire and Salt were of common use in all their Sacrifices.
Two fitting Emblemes, the one of Zeal, the other of Discretion (as they are not
amiss by some looked upon;) Both which must concur in those spiritual
sacrifices which Christians offer to their God. Fire and Salt, Zeal and
Discretion. Not the one severed from the other. Not Discretion without Zeal,
which the worlds Politicians are commonly guilty of, who in the service of God
affect Discretion, but care not for Zeal: Nay they look upon these two as
inconsistent things which cannot stand together. Where Men become zealous, now
they think they pass the bounds of Discretion. Nor yet Zeal, without
Discretion, which serves as a Bridle to a fiery metalled Horse, for the
guiding and ordering it, directing how, and where, and when this zeal is to be
exercised and put forth; Which is not to be alike in all Cases. A Wise Man puts
not all his strength to what ever he goes about to lift, but proportions it
according to the Weight of it. And so ought Christians to do by their Zeal;
Zeal to be proportioned to occasions.
which in in greater matters ought to be greater, in less lesser. This fire (as
one says of it, writing upon the Text, Tailor in Tit.
) it ought to be always kept burning in the Soul, as that fire did upon the
Altar, but in the use it must be proportioned according to the occasion. Even
as we keep fire on our hearths all the day long, but enlarge or lessen it
according to the uses which we have of it. Even so are Christians to deal with
their Zeal. Being truly zealous for God, carrying this fire in their hearts,
they are to proportion it to the uses they have of it. Where some great good or
evil is presented to them, somewhat which tends much either to the honor, or
dishonor of God, now they are to stir up this fire, heighten their Zeal;
Herein imitating Elias, who when he saw what horrid profanations there were
among the people, in forsaking the Covenant of their God, throwing down his
Altars, and slaying his Prophets, Now (as himself declares it) he was very
Jealous, (or Zealous,) for the Lord his God, 1 Kings 19.10.14. As also our
blessed Savior, who when he saw his Fathers house made a den of Thieves, the
Temple so profaned as it was, turned to an Exchange; Now the Lamb turns Lion,
he takes up the Whip in his hand, drives the Chapmen all out before him, John
2.17. Thus in matters of great importance, where the Glory of God, or the good
of his Church is much concerned, now blow up this fire, stir up this Zeal. In
causa Dei meminem patientem esse oportet. For Men to be patient in Gods cause;
where his honor lies at the stake; it is no other than an irreligious
stupidity. But now in small and minutial matters, here bound and bridle our
Zeal. A Wise Man will not call for a sword to kill a Fly, or a Beetle to break
an Egg. Zeal must be proportioned to the occasion. Thus a Wise Man orders and
manageth his Civil Affairs, as the Psalmist has it, Psalm 112.5. A good Man
will guide his affairs with discretion. And so let Christians order their
spiritual affairs, proportioning their Zeal, as Men do their fire, not putting
so much under a Pipkin as under a Caldron.

And thus moderating it as to the degree, so also order it as to Time and
Place, and other Circumstances. Specially having a regard allwaies to keep
within the compass of our Calling. This was that which made Peter's Zeal Zeal to
be ordered according to circumstances, Not to exceed a man's Calling.
which he showed for his Master in attempting his rescue, to be inordinate, and
so justly reproveable; in that he being a private person, no ways authorized,
should draw his sword, and make an assault upon the Officers, as he did. This
indeed he did out of a zealous affection to his Master, but yet this his Zeal
being inordinate, his Master instead of approving and commending of what he had
done, gives him a check for it (as we have the story) Matthew 26.52. And such
is the Zeal of those who ever they are that transgress the bounds and limits of
their callings. Be the Action it self never so good, and their Intentions in
doing it never so upright, yet having no warrant from God, mediate or
immediate, for which they do, it cannot be approveable, but reproveable. Such
had Phineas's Zeal, for which we find him so highly commended, Numbers 25.11,
13. been, had not he a Warrant from God, (which questionless he had) for what
he did. His doing execution in that manner upon those Offenders, slaying them
(...), in the very act of their wickedness, which he had no authority to do;
being a Priest, and not a Civil Magistrate, had not he had an extraordinary
call here into, it had been no better than Murder. And therefore let not this,
or the like instances which we meet with, be driven into president by any, who
have not the like Warrant. See we that our fire be kept within our Chimny, that
our Zeal be bounded within the verge and compass of our calling. Thus see that
this fire be neither strange fire, nor wildfire; that our Zeal be right for
the kind of it, A Zeal of God; and then rightly guided and ordered in the
exercise of it, as by Knowledge, so by Discretion: Which being, now know we
(what was before said) that there is nothing more acceptable to God, or
profitable to our selves.

And thus have I now at length (through a gracious conduct) passed through this
portion of Scripture (wherein (I confess) my self and you have been detained
longer than I made account of when I first entered upon it. But so as I hope
neither of us shall have cause to repent this our staying, where we have found
such free and liberal entertainment; there being so many precious and important
truths here held forth unto us, as I do not well know where in one verse
throughout the Scriptures to meet with more. Now that God, who has given this
seed to the Sower, vouchsafe to water it in the furrows of your hearts with the
dew of heaven, the efficacious influence of his Grace and Spirit, that so what
has been sown in weakness, may rise in power, bringing forth in every of you
those blessed fruits, the fruits of Holiness and Righteousness, which may be
by Jesus Christ to the praise and glory of God.

To the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, who has given himself for us,
to Redeem us from all iniquity, etc. be praise, honor, and glory, now and for
ever, Amen.

FINIS.
THREE LINKS OF A GOLDEN CHAIN: OR, Three of the Principal Causes of Man's
Salvation.

Viz. God giving his Elect unto Christ, their Coming unto him, his Receiving of
them.

Doctrinally Opened, AND Practically Applied.

As it was lately delivered unto the Church of God at Great Yarmouth.

By JOHN BRINSLEY, Minister of the Gospel there.

Luke 14.17. Come, for all things are now ready. London, Printed by S. Griffin
for Richard Tomlins, and are to be sold at the Sign of the Bible in Pye-Corner.
1659.

To all that call upon the name of Jesus Christ in the Town of Great Yarmouth.
(Dearly beloved of the Lord)
THis Text being by an unknown hand put into mine, with an earnest request that
I would in public handle the latter part of it, I not knowing what providence
there might be in this Motion, nor yet where to pitch upon a more useful
Subject, undertook the whole Verse, which having passed through in the audience
of some of you, I do now present to the view of you all. Whereunto I have been
induced, as for the furtherance of your faith, by pressing and directing that
greatest of Christian duties, your coming unto Jesus Christ, so for the
confirming and establishing of you in the truth against some of those Errors of
the Times, which having unhappily prevailed in some other places, begin also to
creep in amongst you, I mean those of the Universalists and Free-willers (as
they are vulgarly called.) Against these (as I have heretofore, and that
(through Grace) not without some success done against some other) I have here
(having a just occasion for it from the Text) born witness. And to this I
shall desire you to hearken, that so you may not be carried away with this wind
of Doctrine. So I presume to call that Doctrine, which is so much cried up at
this day by some (and those not a few) who understand it not, the Doctrine of
Universal Redemption. A Doctrine at the first hearing very plausible to vulgar
apprehensions (none more) whilst it pretends to elevate, to lift up and
magnify the Grace of God, and Merit of Christ, by such a boundless enlarging
of them. But upon stricter examen, it will be found guilty of what it is here
charged with, of Elevating this Grace, Qui statuunt Christum non magis pro iis
qui salvantur, quam pro iis qui pereunt, mortuum esse, quanquam videntur
extendere meritum Christi, reipsa tamen id adeo imminuunt, ut omnino nihil ipsi
relinquunt quod meritus sit. Joh. Cocceins de Foedere Cap. 90. Sec. 163.
and this Merit, in another sense, derogating from them, and extenuating of
them. Upon which (besides many other just grounds) let me persuade you to be
wary how you hearken to it, or give entertainment to those that bring it, Is it
not enough for you, or any other (what is here positively and clearly held
forth in this Text) that Whosoever they are that come unto Jesus Christ
(receiving him as their Savior and Lord) they shall be received by him,
obtaining from him that great benefit of his death? This do ye build your souls
upon, putting them upon this way, and then my soul for yours, they shall not
miscarry. In the mean time, as for any other latitude, or extent of the Fathers
or Sons Intentions, whether, and (if so) in what way, reaching to all, or
confined only to a select company, leave it (as safely you may) to the more
acute disquisition of the Schools, to which there is indulged a liberty of
disputing* what being not so easy for vulgar heads to apprehend, is not so
safe for them to determine. Blessed be God, you have so much of Christ, and of
Gods gracious purpose toward all repenting and believing sinners in and
through him clearly, and convincingly held forth unto you, as that you shall
not need to trouble your heads about any such dubious intricacies, as are by
some (who, it may be, would seem to be somebody) presented to you, and with
some color of zeal obtruded upon you under the notion of important truths. Let
it be my desire and earnest request to you, that you would make much of old
truths, those Doctrines, which you have received, not lightly and readily
receding from any of them, not without clear and strong convictions. And among
other not from those concerning Election and Redemption; which have been so
fully vindicated (as in former Ages, so in this last) by diverse eminent, both
for learning and true piety, as that it may well be wondered at, that the
Bucklers should still be held up against them. This that you may do (among
other) is one end of my putting this small Treatise into your hands: Which
commending to the blessing of him, who gave it to me, I rest

Great Yarmouth, June 1. An. Dom. 1657. Your servant in the Lord, JOHN BRINSLEY.

Three Links OF A GOLDEN CHAIN.
JOHN 6.37. All that the Father gives me shall come unto me; and him that
comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out.


THE words are part of a Sermon Preached by our blessed Savior to some of the
Jews in the Synagogue, Coherence
the public meeting place for religious worship in Capernaum. So much we may
learn from the 59th verse of the Chapter, [These things said he in the
Synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum.] In this Sermon he deals with these his
Auditors, as by way of Information and Instruction, showing them who, and what
himself was, and what their duty was in reference to him, viz. to believe on
him, so also by way of Objurgation and Reprehension, taxing and reproving them
(many of them) for not doing what was their duty, not believing, not
acknowledging him to be what he was, notwithstanding that they had seen him and
his works, been eyewitnesses of the admirable effects of his divine power, as
in that miracle which a little before he had wrought, the multiplying of loaves
and fishes, so in many other. This he charge upon them in the verse next
before the Text, v. 36. [But I said unto you, that ye also have seen me, and
believe not.] But how came this to pass, that they should be so blind, so
stupid, as seeing what they did, yet not to acknowledge him to be what he was,
not to believe on him? For this we have a Reason subjoyned in the words which I
have now pitched upon. Thus it was with them, Tantae contumaciae causam esse
dicit quod reprobi sint. Calvin in loc.
in as much as they were not in the number of those that were given to him by
his Father. Which if they had been, there would have been other terms betwixt
him and them than then there were: They would have come unto him after another
manner than now they did; non tantum pedibus, sed and affectibus, not only with
the feet of their Bodies, but also of their Souls, receiving and embracing
him; which if they had done, he would have been as ready to do the like to
them. [All that my Father gives me shall come unto me; and him that comes
unto me I will in no wise cast out. Quorsum hoc dicat omnes fere consentiunt,
reddi eausam, cur illi quibuscum loquebatur ad se non venirent, i. e. in se non
crederent. Maldonat. Com. in loc.
So Expositors generally, almost universally (as the Jesuit Maldonate, though
against his will, takes notice of it) conceive of the coherence and dependence
of these words with and upon the former.

Going along with them, Division.
take we notice in them of three particulars, three things worthy the taking
notice of, being (as it were) three of the principal hinges upon which our
Eternal happiness depends and hangs, three Links of that Golden Chain (as our
Mr. Perinks calls the Order of the causes of man's Salvation.) The First whereof
is Gods gracious Donation, his giving some amongst the sons of men to his Son
Christ [All that the Father gives me.] The Second, Man's effectual vocation,
his bringing home to Christ [All that the Father gives me, shall come unto
me.] The Third, Christ's ready Acceptance, his receiving and embracing those
who are thus given to him, and thus come to him [And him that comes unto me, I
will in no wise cast out.] Answerably to which Particulars we may draw forth
the Text into three Doctrinal Propositions or Conclusions. 1. There are some
among the sons of men given by God the Father unto his Son Christ. 2 All those
who are so given, shall come unto him. 3. Those who so come he will in no wise
cast out. Three Doctrines of great Importance: Let me crave your best
attentions whilst I deal with them severally. Begin with the first.

There are some among the sons of men given by God the Father unto his Son
Christ.] Prop. 1. Some given unto Christ by his Father.
All that the Father gives me (says the Text. So then, there are some that
are given to Christ by his Father.

Ob. Some (you may say) given to him by his father? what, were not all things
his before? How given to him.
Christ being the Son, had not he an equal interest in all things with his
Father?

Ans. Yes, he had so, as God. Upon this account we find them making claim to an
universal interest in whatever his Father had, John 16.15. All things that the
Father has are mine. Christ being the Eternal Son of God by generation, he
communicates with him, as in his Essence, so in all his Properties, and
Interests. All thine are mine, and mine are thine (says he to his Father) John
17.10. But here in the Text we are to look upon him as Mediator, as God-Man.
And so we shall find him in the capacity of a Receiver; receiving whatever he
has from his Father. Thus he is said to have received life from him, Joh.
5.26. As the Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have
life in himself; that is, to be the fountain and wellspring of eternal life.
And in like manner he has received Authority and Power from him. The Father
has given him authority to execute judgment, because he is the Son of man. (So
it there follows in the next verse) v. 27. As the Son of God he has
Authority in and of himself; but as the son of man he receives it from his
Father. The power which he has as Mediator, is a delegated power, given to
him. All power is given to me in heaven and earth, Mat. 28.18. Given to him by
his Father. Thou have given him power over all flesh, John 17.2. And thus
giving power and authority to this his Son, he also gives unto him some to be
his subjects, over whom he may exercise that Authority. All that the father
gives me (says the Text.) So then there are some who are given by God the
Father unto his Son Christ as Mediator.

Obj. But the Question still runs on; what, How only some given to him.
only some? Are not all so given to him as Mediator? all men, yea and all other
creatures?

Ans. Yes, in a general way they are so, given to him as to a Sovereign Lord,
to be ordered and disposed of by him as it pleases him. The Father loves the
Son, and has given all things into his hand: (So John the Baptist tells the
Jews) John 3.35. And our Savior himself takes notice of the same; Jesus
knowing that the Father had given all things into his hand, John 13.3. All
things are delivered me of my Father, Mat. 11.27. Thus, as all other creatures,
so all the sons of men are given unto him. But there are some among them who
are give to him in a more peculiar way, to special ends and purposes, that they
may be to him (...), a peculiar people (as they are called, Tit. 2.14.) given
to him not only as a Sovereign, but a Savior, not only to be governed, but
saved by him. Thus are all, and only Gods Elect given unto Christ by his
Father. They being first the fathers, he then gives them to his son Christ.
Mark it; Two particulars. The former of which here is employed, the latter
expressed.

1. They are Gods, God the Fathers, how else should he give them to another, ^
Gods elect his people:
to his son? So are all the sons of men in a general way. Being his Creatures,
they are in his hands to be disposed of as it pleases him. Clay in the hands
of the Potter. That is the similitude made use of by the Prophet Jeremy to set
forth the absoluteness of Gods power in disposing of Nations, Jer. 18.6.
Behold, as the Clay in the Potters hand, so are ye in my hand,, O house of
Israel. And the Apostle makes like use of it to set forth the same absolute
power of God in disposing of all particular persons, as to their Eternal
estates, Romans 9.21. Has not the potter power of his clay (says he) of the
same lump to make one vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor? to make
some vessels for honorable services, for state and ornament, or to eat and
drink in, others for base and servile uses. Gods absolute power over the sons
of men to dispose of them as to their eternal estate. Considered after the fall.
Such an absolute power has God over all the sons of men. They being all one
lump, all alike corrupted in Adam, equal sharers in his Transgression, and
alike heirs of his Corruption, God looking upon them in that estate, it was
now in his power, and at his choice to destinate and appoint them to several
ends, some to everlasting life, others to everlasting shame and contempt. Haud
secus quam si Princeps quisquam flagitiosos aliquot ac morte dignos carcere
concluso teneat, etc. Muscul. Com. in loc.
Even as a Prince (it is Musculus's comparison, writing upon the Text) having a
company of Rebels and Traitors in custody, all alike guilty of death, he
pardons some of them, receiving them (it may be) into grace and favor,
whilst in the mean time he leaves others to the Law, to receive the just
reward of their Rebellion. And who shall herein charge him with injustice? Even
such is Gods dealing with the sons of men in respect of their eternal estates.
They being all involved in the transgression of their first Parent, sinning in
him, and so alike guilty of death, he leaves some to receive their just
demerits, whilst he makes others the objects, not only of his Mercy, but also
of his grace and favor; which he has done merely out of his own will. I will
have mercy on whom I will show mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will
have compassion. So Paul cites that of Moses, Exo. 33.19. Romans 9.15. Thus has
God an absolute power and liberty to dispose of all the sons of men, as to
their eternal estates, looking upon them in that corrupt mass, that lapsed
condition.

Yea, shall we rise higher, Before the fall.
and with the Supralapsarians (as some at this day, from their difference in
judgment from others about this point, are called) and look upon man in his
pure naturals, as not yet fallen, merely as Gods creature, simply and
absolutely considered; yet here shall we find that which will sufficiently
vindicate God in his proceedings and dealings with him. It was the plea of that
Householder in the Gospel, when some of his laborers whom he had hired into his
Vineyard, quarrelled with him about the unequal distribution of their wages,
What (says he) is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Mat.
20.15. So do men look upon that which they have a Property in, they make
account they have power and liberty to dispose of it as it pleases them. And
so indeed they justly might, were that property absolute (which none of the
sons of men have in whatever they enjoy.) Now such is the Interest which God
has with all the sons of men, who being his Creatures, live and move, and have
their being in and from him, he has an absolute property in them; and
consequently an absolute power over them, so as he may dispose of them, not
only in regard of their temporal, but eternal estates, as it pleases him. And
out of this plenitude of power it is, that he electeth some, whilst he
rejects others; chooses some to be vessels of mercy, predestinating them to
obtain salvation, whilst he passes by others by a Negative Reprobation, or
Praeterition, leaving them to themselves, and by a Positive Reprobation
ordering them to just condemnation for sin. Therefore has he mercy on whom he
will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens (so the Apostle concludes it)
Romans 9.18.

Gods elect how called his people.
They are the former sort of these we have now to deal with, Gods Elect people,
who (as I said) may be called his people, and that upon a special, a peculiar
account. The Lord knows them that are his (his by Election) 2 Timothy 2.19.
(says our Savior, speaking to his Father of his Apostles) John 17.6. Thine,
not by a pious kind of disposition (as Grotius foully corrupts that Text) but
by a gracious pre-election. Pietatis quodam affectu: Grot. Annot. ad loc.
And such are all those who are given to Christ to believe on him, and to be
saved by him; they are Gods chosen ones, a chosen generation (as St. Peter has
it, 1 Pet. 2.9.) chosen by him out of the world before the world was. As he
has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1.4. And thus
are they his people. Even as the people of Israel were in an outward and
visible way, whom Moses tells, Deuteronomy. 7.6. Thou art an holy people unto the Lord
thy God; the Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a special people unto himself.
So are all Gods Elect ones, in an inward and invisible way. God having set a
special love upon them, and chosen them, they are his people.

And being thus his by Election, 2. Gods Elect given to Christ.
now (in the third place) in order to the executing and bringing to pass his
gracious purpose toward them, he gives them to his Son Christ. Thine they
were, and thou gave them to me, (says our Savior there of his Apostles)
Ioh. 17.6. And so is it with all those who are ordained to eternal life, being
God the Fathers by Election, he gives them unto his Son Christ. So we find
believers frequently described; as in the verse next but one after the Text, v.
39. This is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all that he has given
me I should lose nothing. And so in that 17. of John, the Disciples are diverse
times set forth under that Periphrasis [Those whom thou have given me] v. 9,
11, 12. And so all other believers, all that then did, or afterward should
believe on him; Of them speaks the 24th. v. Father, I will that they also
whom thou have given me be with me. All believers are given to Christ.

Quest. But how are they said so to be?

Ans. To this it may be Answered; they may be said so to be two ways,
Intentionally, and Actually. Intentionally before time; Actually in time.

1. Intentionally, before time.
1. Before time, in Gods eternal purpose and decree. In his Decree of Election.
God ordaining them to the end, to obtain salvation, ordains them also to the
means, giving them unto his Son Christ, choosing them in him. So says the
Apostle in that Text forecited, Ephesians. 1.4. As he has chosen us in him. (...).
In Christ, whom God his Father constituted and appointed to be (as it were) the
Head and Root of the Election, into whom his elect people were by his decree
(as it were) ingrafted (as all mankind by nature was into the first Adam) that
so they might be made partakers of those saving benefits by and through him, of
Grace here, and Glory hereafter, as before all men were of sin and death
brought in by the first Adam. Thus they are given to Christ before time.

2. Actually, in time.
2. In time, in the execution of that decree, when they are brought actually to
believe on Christ, to receive him as their Savior and Lord. Behold, I, and the
children whom the Lord has given me, says Christ speaking of his Disciples
(as that Text is by many expounded) Isa. 8.18. And upon this account our
Savior says of his Apostles in some of those Texts forecited, John 17.9, 11.
that they were given to him by his Father, viz. actually given to believe on
him, to follow him, to own and acknowledge him for their Lord and Master.

Quest. Now of which of these shall we understand our Savior here to speak in
the Text?

Ans. Here Expositors are not all agreed; The former here understood. (...) his
cum affectu aliquo intelligitur. Grot. ad loc. Tradit autem pater cum effectu
Christo eos qui pietati student. Idem ibid. Quos per inspirationem internam
inclinat ad me. Carthus. Com. in loc. Dari a Patre est docibilem esse Dei.
Maldonat. ad Text. Omne quod dat mihi pater per aeternam electionem, and
temporalem vocationem. Gorran. Enac. in Text. Donandi verbum perinde valet ac
si dixisset Christus, Quos elegit Pater, etc. Calvin in Text. Donat] viz. pro
aeterno suo decreto eligens in me ad vitam aeternam. Piscat. Schol. ibid.
Innuit hoc verbum, quod Deus ab aeterno aliquos elegerit, etc. Ferus ibid. Vel
quos ab aeterno elegit, and praedestinavit in me. Carthus. ibid.
Some understanding it of the latter of these. So Grotius, who interprets it of
an effectual giving, Gods preparing men for Christ, and working faith in them,
in such (says he) as have a precious disposition thereunto. And so Carthusian
conceives it may be here looked upon; All that he gives me] i. e. (says he)
such as by his secret inspiration he inclines to come unto me. And so
Maldonate, and some other Romish Commentators would have it. But this were to
confound these two parts of the Text, Gods gracious Donation, with man's
Effectual Vocation, his Giving with man's coming, which are here set forth as
two distinct acts, the one of them antecedaneous to the other, going before, as
in Order, so in Time. All that the Father gives me shall come unto me Gods
giving goes before man's believing. Others there are who put both together,
Gods Election before time, and his calling in time: So Gorran. But others, and
that more rightly, restrain it rather to the former of these, Gods giving
before time in his decree of Election. So our Protestant Divines generally look
upon it, not without the consent of some Romanists. And with them I shall
choose to go along, as I assure my self I warrantably may, hereby understanding
(as judicious Diodate, and our own Annotators have it) all Gods Elect; who are
given unto Christ by God his Father before they come to him, before they
actually believe on him. And hence it is that our Savior speaking of the Elect
among the Gentiles, he calls them his sheep, John 10.16. Other sheep have I
which are not of this fold, them also must I bring, and they shall hear my
voice, Though as yet they were not come into his fold, they did not own him for
their Shepherd, yet he had an interest in them, they were his sheep, given to
him by God his Father.

Wherefore God gave his Elect unto Christ.
Quest. And wherefore did God thus give his elect people unto Christ?

Ans. Here, for further illustration I might show you the several ends of this
Donation; the principal whereof is, that he might be a Prince and a Savior
unto them, saving and delivering them out of the hands of all their enemies,
Sin, Satan, Hell, Death, and bringing them to everlasting life. This is the
Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has given me I should
lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day, John 6.39. Thou
have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as
many as thou have given him, John 17.2.

These are the principal Ends, to which there are many other that are
subordinate: God gives his elect unto Christ, that he may perform unto them
that threefold Office, of a Prophet, a Priest, a King. A Prophet, to make
known to them the mind and will of his heavenly Father. A Priest, to reconcile
them unto God by his death, and to keep them in grace and favor with him by
his Intercession. A King, to govern them as his subjects in his Kingdom of
grace, and afterward to bring them to reign as Kings with himself in his
Kingdom of glory. But I shall not give way to any further inlargements upon
this subject, remembering that this first Proposition is here only employed. Make
some Application of it.

Which (in the first place) may be directed by way of Information. Applic.
Information touching the Doctrines.
In which way it may be useful to us for the rectifying and settling of our
judgments in some controverted points concerning those two great Doctrines of
Election and Redemption.

1. Touching Election, 1. Of Election.
we may here take notice of diverse particulars.

1. That it is not Universal, 1. That it is not Universal.
of all Mankind. Which if it were, it were no Election. The very word
[Election] imports and signifies a separating and culling of some from the
rest. Elegit qui e multis aliquos legit. To choose, is to take some out of
many. And such is Gods Election; his choosing of some out of the world of
mankind, and giving them to his Son Christ to be saved by him. All that the
Father gives me (says the Text) clearly intimating that all were not given
unto him, but a part, a select company, some out of mankind. Election is not
Universal.

True indeed, there is (as Augustine somewhere says) Inter electos specialis
quaedam universitas, a kind of special universality among Gods Elect, in as
much as they are gathered out of all conditions of persons, in all Nations,
through all the Ages of the world, out of which is made up this (...), this All
here in the Text. But yet this All is but some, some among mankind. Election is
only of some.

2. Not only indefinite.
2. And that (2ly) of some particular individual persons. This Arminians (at
least some of them) deny, making Election to be only Axiomatical, not Personal,
a choosing and designing of the means not of the Persons. God has (say they)
made choice of the way and means to bring men to salvation by, viz. by
believing on his Son Jesus Christ; and he has ordained, that who so they are
that shall apply themselves to the use of that means, they shall be saved. But
the Text here speaks more, All that the Father gives me.] clearly intimating
a Personal Election, a giving of some individual persons unto Christ. Hence was
it that some of these Capernaites, some among the rest, did not believe on him,
as some others did, because they were not given to him as those others were.
They were such as God had no such gracious purpose toward; they did not belong
to his Election of grace. Election is not Universal, nor yet only Axiomatical
and Indefinite.

3. Nor yet (in the third place) simply conditional. So again Arminians would
have it; 3. Nor simply conditional.
that men should be Elected upon the condition pf their believing and
persevering; so as it rests in their power to null and make void the decree.
But the Text here speaks it otherwise. Telling us that those whom God
electeth, he gives unto his Son Christ; gives them unto him, not if they
shall believe on him, but that they may believe on him, and so be saved by him.

4. Again, Election is not only to the End, but also to the Means. God
electing his people unto life, he by the same decree gives them unto Christ,
that they by believing on him, may be saved by him, so ordaining them to the
Means as well as the End.

This for Election, which being the first Link in the Golden Chain, the first
and main wheel in the work of man's salvation, the first in the order of the
Causes thereof, must be set right, rightly apprehended, otherwise the other
links or wheels, the subordinate causes will not rightly and orderly follow.

In the second place, make we the like Observation touching the Doctrine of
Redemption, 3. Of Redemption, which is not universal more than Election.
that it is not any more universal than Election. So indeed some, and not a
few, at this day would have it, who cry up this Doctrine, as if it were the
very Basis and groundwork of all Religion, That Christ died, and died alike
for all. But how will this comply and agree with this Text? where our Savior
speaks of a certain select company, which were given to him by his Father.
All that the Father gives me;] clearly intimating that there were some among
mankind whom God having a gracious purpose toward, gave them to his Son
Christ, that he should undertake for them, do what he did for them, that he
should be a surety for them, making satisfaction for them, redeeming them. Such
was the Fathers intention, his will; not that Christ should die for all; If so,
he would have given all to him, but for some. And this will Christ came to
perform. In the volume of thy Book it is written of me, Lo, I come to do thy
will O God, Heb. 10.7. I came down from heaven not to do mine own will, but the
will of him that sent me (says he in the verse after the Text, v 38.) That is,
to redeem and save those, all those, and only those, whom God my Father has
given me. Thus it is (as Divines justly determine it) The work of the Son in
Redemption, does not exceed the work of the Father in Election. Such is the
order of working betwixt the Persons in the Trinity, as of being; the Son being
from the Father, works from him. This he does as the Son of God; And the like
he does as the Son of man, as Mediator. His work was to do his Fathers work. I
have finished the work which thou gave me to do (says he to his Father) Joh.
4.17. Now what that work was we have seen, viz. he had employed himself for the
good and benefit of those whom his Father had given him, for whom he was now
ready to lay down his life. So then, Redemption is not Universal.

As for those Texts which seem to speak it so, Texts seeming to make Redemption
Universal how to be understood
they admit of a fair construction consistent with this truth. As that of the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.6. where it is said, that Christ gave himself a Ransom for
all. (...), that is, for this [All] here in the Text, All those whom his Father
had given him; who are elsewhere called many, Mat. 20.28. The Son of man came
to give his life a ransom for many; viz. his Elect: who are also elsewhere
called a world, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself; that is, the world of his Elect, made up of Jews and Gentiles. And so
look we upon the Text, which of all other (as our last Translation renders it)
seems to speak most fully for the Adversary, Heb. 2.9. where it is said of
Christ, that he by the grace of God tasted death for every man. (...), for all,
that is, still, for this (...), this All here in the Text, All and every one
whom his Father had bestowed upon him (as Diodate rightly expounds it.) Thus
does this word [All] here, as sometimes elsewhere, denote the universality, not
of Mankind, but of Gods Elect.

For them it was, Christ died intentionally only for the Elect.
and only for them that Christ intentionally died. I lay down my life for my
sheep, says the obvious Text, Joh. 10.15. Which (whatever evasions are sought
out to elude it) speaks this truth so clearly, so fully, as puts it beyond
contradiction, whilst it restrains the Intention of Christ, in laying down
his life, unto a select company, his sheep, viz. those that were given him by
his Father.

Which truth being thus bottomed, I desire you to take notice of, that you may
not be carried away with that wind of Doctrine, that plausible error which is
so taking with many at this day, who cry up the Doctrine of universal
Redemption as the most comfortable truth, and glorious Doctrine that can be
held forth, tending highly (as they apprehend) to the magnifying of the grace
and mercy of God, and merit of Christ, which are thus extended unto all. But
herein how are they mistaken? In thus extending this grace, how do they
extenuate it? Grace extenuated by extending it.
Of all Doctrines I know none that in truth more derogates from this grace of
God in Christ, than this; whilst it asserts alike respect to all, that all
being alike given to Christ by his Father, are alike owned by him; the
Redemption and Salvation of all alike intended by both, of Esau as of Jacob, of
Judas as of Peter, so as the one is not more beholding to God and Jesus Christ
than the other. This (whatever any may conceive) is in truth no small
derogation from, and extenuation of this grace, which being confined (as it
ought to be) to a narrower channel, rises higher. Being restrained only to a
certain number, a small number (comparatively) of Gods Elect, it is thereby
rendered the more glorious.

And so let it be in the eyes of all the Lords people, Use 2. The grace of
Election glorious grace.
to whom God has evidenced and made known this his gracious purpose, that they
are in the number of those whom he has thus given to his Son Christ, Let them
give unto him the glory of this his Grace, Free Grace. Such it was, as I have
shown you: All men being alike in Adam, in the same state and condition by
nature, all alike children of wrath, that God should single out some, some few,
to make them objects of his grace, ingrafting them into another stock, the
stock of the second Adam, giving them unto his Son Christ, to be reconciled,
redeemed, and saved by him, whilst he passed by others, the greatest part,
leaving them to themselves, to work out their own everlasting condemnation, and
to receive the just reward of their demerits; this he did merely out of his own
good pleasure, his free grace, there being no other motive out of himself that
might induce him to it: Let him then have the glory of it from all those who
apprehend their interest in it. Let them acknowledge the freeness. And as the
freeness, so the Greatness of it, admiring and adoring it, blessing and
magnifying God for it. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places (or things)
in Christ; According as he has chosen us in him, Ephesians. 1.3, 4. Endeavoring to
express their thankfulness unto him, by walking answerably thereunto, living to
the praise and glory of God and Jesus Christ. This is that which the Apostle
presses upon his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20 Ye are not your own, etc.
Therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods. And so
let me press it upon you, all you, who lay any claim to an interest in this
blessed privilege, of being thus given to Christ. Know you now that ye are no
longer your own, at your own dispose, so as to serve what Masters you please;
No, you are Christ's. So Paul tells those his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3.23. Ye are
Christ's. And so are all believers; and that by a double right, as of purchase
(of which he there speaks in that former Text, Ye are bought with a price,
the blood of Christ) so of Donation, being given unto him by God his Father.
And being thus his, now live to him. None of us lives to himself, and no man
dies to himself (says the same Apostle, Romans 14.7, 8. speaking de jure, what
Christians ought to do;) For whether we live we live unto the Lord, or whether
we die we die unto the Lord. And O that all of us may thus live and thus die;
not to our selves, but to Jesus Christ, showing our selves his loyal subjects,
and obedient servants in our lives, seeking his honor and glory, and then
yielding up our selves unto him in our death, being ready to die for him, if he
should call us to that service. This let all of us do who expect any benefit by
him, and that, as upon the account of what Christ himself has done for us, in
redeeming us, so of what God the Father has done for us, in giving us unto
him. Thus I have done with the first of these Propositions, which holds forth
unto us this gracious Donation, Gods giving of his Elect people unto Christ.
Come we now to the second, which informs us that

All those who are thus given unto Christ by his Father, they shall come unto
him.] Prop. 2. All who are given to Christ shall come to him.
Here is the second Proposition, which sets forth unto us Man's effectual
Vocation following upon Gods Election, as an undoubted consequent of it. So the
Apostle sets it forth in that known Text, Romans 8.30. Whom he did predestinate,
them also he called. Which in effect speaks the same thing with this of our
Savior here [All that the Father gives me shall come unto me.]

Quest. How come unto him?

Ans. For the explicating of the Phrase, we may take notice of a twofold
coming unto Christ (even as there is a twofold Calling) the one outward and
formal, A twofold coming to Christ.
the other inward and real.

1. There is an outward and formal coming 1. Outward and formal.
unto Christ, which is common to all that make a profession of his name. Thus
do Hypocrites and formal Professors come unto him, who being led and drawn by
some sinister respects, hold forth this profession. Thus did these Capernaites
here come unto Christ, they flocked to him, and followed after him. But
wherefore was it? Not out of any true respect they had to his Person or
Doctrine, but for some outward advantage which they expected from him, viz.
that they might be fed by him. So he himself, who knew their thoughts and
intentions, charge it upon them, v. 26. of this Chapter [Ye seek me not
because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves.] It was not
his Doctrine, or works, that they regarded, but their own bellies. And in such
a way there are many that come unto Christ, who were never given to him by his
Father; even all Carnal Gospellers, who professed themselves the followers of
Jesus Christ, take upon them the profession of his name, but it is not out of
any true inward respects which they have unto him, but out of some by and
sinister ends for their own Credit or Profit, or for fashion-sake. Such
followers Christ had many in the days of his flesh. And many such he has
wherever he comes, wherever his Gospel is preached. But let we these go as
they come; not owned by God before they come, nor any more owned for this their
coming.

2. In the second place there is a coming to Christ, which is Inward and Real.
2. Inward and Real.
When men come to him non tantum pedibus, sed and affectibus; not only with the
outward, but inward man; come to him with their hearts and souls, out of an
inward respect and entire affection which they bear unto him. Thus did some of
his followers, his Disciples, at this time come unto him, looking upon him as
the bread of life. And thus do all true Believers come unto him, who come to
him as a Savior and a Lord, receiving him, believing on him. This is the
coming of which our Savior here speaks in the Text. All that the Father
gives me shall come unto me] that is, Believe on me. So the 35th verse
explaines it. Coming to Christ, believing on him.
He that comes unto me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall
never thirst;] where the latter word is Exegetical and Expository to the
former. To come unto Christ, is to believe on him. Such is Faith; as it is the
Eye, and Hand, and Mouth, so also the Foot of the Soul. As the Eye, whereby the
soul beholds Christ, looks up unto him, as they did to their Brazen
Serpent; and the Hand, whereby it takes hold of him; and the Mouth, whereby it
feeds on him, eats his flesh, and drinks his blood; so the Foot, whereby
it comes unto him, comes to him as to a Savior and Redeemer, expecting
salvation only by and through him, desiring to have Union and Communion with
him. This it is to believe on Christ, and this it is to come unto him.

A Metaphorical expression, fitly setting forth the nature of Faith, saving,
justifying Faith. Faith, the coming of the soul unto Christ.
Which is (as I said) A coming of the soul unto Christ. Even as those Patients
of his of whom we read in the Gospel, feeling their own infirmities, and
hearing of his fame, and expecting to partake of the like benefit from him that
others had done, they come unto him, casting themselves down at his feet,
imploring his aid, some of them touching him, as that Haemorrhoisse, that woman
with the bloody issue is said to have done, who coming behind him touched the
hem of his garment (which she did, as with her finger, so with her faith) by
which means she drew from him that sanative virtue by which she was healed,
Mat. 9.20. Even thus does the soul come unto Christ by faith; being made
sensible of its own wretched condition by reason of sin, and apprehending the
fullness that is in Christ, fullness of Merit, and fullness of Spirit, whereby he
is able to work a perfect cure for it, by taking away both the guilt and power
of sin, and procuring eternal salvation for it, now, renouncing all other
confidences, it betaketh it self unto him as to an alone all-sufficient
Savior, laying hold upon him, resting upon him, that so it may be made
partaker of his Merits, his Benefits. This it is to come unto Christ, thus to
believe on him.

And thus do they come unto him who are given to him by his Father. They, All
they, and Only they, both comprehended in this word, [All] All that my Father
gives me shall come unto me.

Thus all Gods Elect shall come unto Christ. Omne] in Neutro genere exactius
Vniversitatem significat quam in Masculino. Tolet: Vt majorem significet
Vniversitatem, Maldon. Omne, ut ostendat ex variis gentibus venturos ad eum.
Ferus in loc. Cyrill. lib. 3. cap. 39. Insinuat etiam his verbis multos
credituros in Christum, Tolet; Com. ad loc.
[All that] (...), A word of the Neuter Gender, Omne, or Quicquid, All, or
whatever. Which some look upon as Emphatical, importing more exactly an
Universality than the Masculine Gender would. All, whatever] that is, not only
Jews, but Gentiles (whose Conversion Cyril conceives to be hereby insinuated)
and that not a few of them, but many. But we shall not need to stand upon this
Criticism. Look we upon the word, as the generality of Expositors do; the
Neuter Gender here put for the Masculine, (...)] Neutrum pro Masculino, aut
Communi. Grot ad Text.
which we shall find to be an usual Enallagie in Scripture. Grotius here gives
us two instances for it. The one, 1 Cor. 1.27. Where the Apostle speaking of
weak and unwise persons (such as the world accounts so) he calls them (...),
and (...), the foolish things, and weak things of the world. The other, Rev.
21. last, where, speaking of the New Jerusalem, it is said, There shall in no
wise enter into it any thing that defiles. (...), No common, or unclean thing,
i. e. no impure and unsanctified persons. So here, All that, or every thing,
that is, every person, of what Nation, Sex, Quality, and Condition soever;
whether Jew or Gentile, male or female, bond or free, rich or poor. Of such
extent is the Decree of Gods Election, as also of Christ's Redemption, though
neither of them Universal as to singula generum, all particular persons, yet
both of them so as to genera singulorum, All sorts of persons. There is neither
Jew nor Greek (that is, neither Jew nor Gentile) there is neither bond or free,
there is neither male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal.
3.28. These make some difference as to Men, not so to God and Jesus Christ. As
the Father has Elected, so the Son has Redeemed some out of all these. Thou
have Redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people, and Nation (so sing the 24. Elders) Rev. 5.9. Of such latitude and
extent is this [All] here in the Text, of which our Savior says, All that my
Father gives me shall come unto me. And that Certainly. Non dicit ad me venire
potest, aut ad me veniat, sed per affirmationem, Ad me veniet. Muscul. in loc.


Shall come] and that Certainly. So our Savior here lays it down, not as a
Probable, but as a Certain, an indubitable truth. (...), Ad me veniet. Not,
venire potest, or veniat; not He may come, or let him come, but he shall come;
asserting and concluding it as a most certain thing.

Quest. Quest. The ground of this certainty.
But how comes it so to be? How comes it to pass that there should be such a
certainty herein, that all and every of those who are thus given to Christ,
should thus come unto him, that all that are Elected should believe on him?

Ans. Ans. Not in themselves. Non est hoc naturali cuidam dispositioni dandum.
Muscul. ibid.
For Answer, Know that we are not to expect any ground or reason hereof in and
from themselves; as if there were any thing in their natural dispositions that
should incline them hereunto rather than others. As if they were of themselves
wiser than others to know what belonged to their eternal welfare. No, herein
all are alike. Gods Elect before their Conversion, are no wiser than others. We
our selves also were sometimes foolish (says the Apostle) Tit. 3.3. (...),
without understanding. Non intelligentes rerum divinarum (as Grotius well
explaines it) having no understanding in divine matters. So was it with the
then believing Gentiles, at whom the Apostle is conceived there principally to
have an eye. But not only with them, but with the Jews also. Paul (though
before his Conversion as intelligent as most of his time) yet he ranks himself
in the number. (...), We. And so is it with all the Elect people of God, before
his Grace come to put a difference betwixt them and others, there is no
difference as to their understanding in divine and heavenly mysteries. And as
for wordly wisdom, if there be a difference, commonly it lies on the other
side. God has chosen the foolish things of the world (says the Apostle in
that Text even now cited) 1 Cor. 1.27. (...), for (...), foolish things of the
world, that is, foolish persons, so accounted in and of the world. And in the
verse there foregoing he tells us, v. 26. Not many wise men after the flesh,
are called to believe on Christ, men worldly wise. Herein those who are given
to Christ, they sometimes, oft-times, fall short of others. How is it then that
they come unto him, whilst others keep off from him, being strangers or
enemies to him?

Ans. 2. Ans. 2. But in God the Father, and Jesus Christ.
The Ground and Reason hereof, being thus wholly out of themselves, we shall
find it partly in God the Father, and partly in his Son Christ.

In God the Father, who has

1. Decreed it, In God the Father, who 1. Has decreed it.
given them to Christ by his Eternal Decree. Now Gods decrees are (like as is
said of those Laws of the Medes and Persians) unchangeable, unalterable. I am
the Lord, I change not, Mal. 3.6. Men are mutable (the best and wisest of them)
they change and alter their purposes upon second thoughts. So does not God. His
Counsel shall stand, Isa. 46.10. So shall this his Eternal Counsel, his Decree
of Election. The foundation of God stands sure, Sicut qui palatia struunt
solent firma subjicere fundamenta, ita Deus moliens civitatem illam aeternam,
decreta quaedam substravit, velut fundamenta, quae manent inconcussa. Grot. in
loc.
says the Apostle speaking of this Decree, Which is the first groundwork of
Man's salvation laid by God himself, 2 Timothy 2.19. (...), a sure and steady
foundation, not to be shaken, much less overturned. Gods decrees being passed,
must come to pass. Thus it is, even in things wherein there is the greatest
contingencie as to secondary causes, yet if we look at this first cause, there
is a necessity in that contingencie. Things must happen as they do. All that
are given unto Christ by God his Father, must, and shall come to him; the
absoluteness of Gods decree requires it should be so.

2. And (2ly) as God has Decreed it, so he effects it. 2. Effects it.
Having elected some to salvation by Christ, he does not only propound and
offer Christ unto them, so leaving it to the liberty of their own will, whether
they will come unto him, believe on him, or no; but he causes them to come
unto him, drawing them. No man comes unto me (says our Savior) except the
Father, which has sent me, draw him, v. 44. of this Chapter; that is,
powerfully and effectually work upon him. For so we are to understand the word
there. Not as if God did offer any violence to any in bringing them to Christ,
in forcing them to come to him against their wills. No, as the will of man
cannot be forced (which if it should be, it should cease to be a will) so
neither does God work upon any in the work of Conversion in any such way; but
in a sweet and swasory way, congruous and agreeable to their liberty and
nature, Drawing them with the cords of a man (as the Prophet has it, Hos.
11.4.) yet powerfully and effectually, of unwilling making them willing. So
much the word in the Text imports, (...), shall come, viz. willingly. And thus
does God the Father work upon all those whom he has given to his Son Christ,
all his Elect people, making them willing to believe on him. Which he does by
revealing him unto them, and in them. Thus was Paul (that chosen vessel) as he
is called, Acts 9.15.) brought unto Christ. (...), i. e. (...). Hieron Erasmus,
Grot. in loc. Videtur eo dicendi genere significari dei gratiam coelitus in
animum ipsum illabi ut and Graeca etiam Scholia Annotarunt. Beza Gr. Annot. ad
loc.
When it pleased God to reveal his Son in me (says he) Gal. 1.16. (...), not
only by me (as some have construed it) or yet to me, but in me, that is, (as
Beza, after the Greek Scholiasts, explaines it) by an inward and effectual
Revelation, not only to his Ear, but to his Heart. The like does God to all his
Elect people, having by his decree given them to Christ before time; he thus
reveals him to them, and in them in time, teaching and instructing them by
his Word and Spirit. By his Word outwardly, by his Spirit inwardly. And so
teaching them, he draws them, sweetly overpowering their wills, making them
willing to come unto him. So our Savior himself gives the reason of it, v.
45. of this Chapter. It is written in the Prophets, And they shall all be
taught of God (All Gods Elect) Every man therefore that has heard, and has
learned of the Father, comes unto me. Gods Elect, whom he has in his Eternal
Decree given to his Son Christ, being thus effectually taught of him by his
Word and Spirit, revealing Christ to them and in them, now they come unto him.
This it is that makes the Decree to bring forth, even Gods effectual
operation, in calling those whom he has predestined, as the forecited Text
has it, Romans 8.30. Whom he predestined, them also he called.] Called, not
only outwardly by his Word, for so many are called who were never chosen (as
our Savior declares it, Mat. 20.16.) but inwardly, causing them to believe on
his Son. Thus does God call all those whom he has predestined, working faith
in them. Which is his Gift. By grace ye are saved through faith, and that not
of your selves, it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. It] as salvation it self, so
that faith whereby men are saved, it is the gift of God. Though it be in them,
yet not of them. Both Habit and Act are from God. To you it is given not only
to believe (says Paul to his Philippians, intimating that this was given them)
Phil. 1.29. This is his Gift, and his Work. This is the work of God, that ye
believe on him whom he has sent (so our Savior tells the Jews, v. 29. of
this 6th of John.) (...), The work of God, not only required and commanded of
him, but also wrought by him (as our New Annotator explaines it.) Which it is
in all his Elect; this being not only a Consequent, but a fruit, depending
upon, and issuing from their Election. As many as were ordained to eternal
life, believed, Acts 13.48. God ordaining to the End (salvation) he ordains
also unto the means, which is faith in Jesus Christ. And having ordained to
it, he works it; so bringing them to Christ whom he has given to him. And
thus you see how the certainty of this Event, of all Gods Elect coming to
Christ, depends upon God the Father, upon his Will and Work; his Will in
appointing them, his Work in causing them to believe on him.

2. And (in the second place) as God the Father has a special Efficiency in
this, 2. In Jesus Christ who executes his Fathers Counsels
so also has God the Son, his Son Christ, who being of Counsel with his Father
as God, as Mediator he sees to execution of his Counsels; specially of this
his great Counsel, touching the salvation of his elect people, who being given
unto Christ, they are known to him, 2 Timothy 2.19. The Lord (the Lord Christ)
knows them that are his; viz. by Election. So was Paul, though then a
Persecutor, yet he was known to Christ to be a chosen vessel. He is a chosen
vessel unto me (so he tells Ananias concerning him) Acts 9.15. And so are all
others, though before their Conversion not known to others, nor yet to
themselves that they are given to Christ, yet they are known to him. And being
known to him, he takes care of them, and that first to bring them home unto
himself, to bring them as subjects into his Kingdom, as sheep into his fold.
Other sheep have I which are not of this fold, and them also must I bring, and
they shall hear my voice, says he, meaning his Elect among the Gentiles, whom
he would in his time bring into his Kingdom of grace, causing them to believe
on him. And so deals he by all those who are given him by his Father. They
being by nature all of them lost sheep, wandering in the bypath of sin,
leading to destruction, not having so much as an animum revertendi, any
disposition, any inclination of returning, of coming unto Christ the shepherd
of their souls, he seeks them. The Son of man is come to seek and to save
that which is lost, Mat. 18.11. poor lost sinners. Such Jesus Christ came to
seek. And being in Heaven, he has now an eye to them, such among them as are
given unto him. Whilst they do not seek after him, yet he seeks after them,
drawing them to himself. This does God the Father, (as you have heard.) And
thus also does Christ. When I am lift up (says he) I will draw all men unto
me, John 12.32. Christ being lift up, first upon the Cross, then upon the
Throne, set at the right hand of his Father, he then says he would draw all
men to himself. What he had before done to the Jews, he would now do to Jews
and Gentiles, drawing his Elect out of both, bringing them to believe on him.
This he has in all Ages done. But now under the Gospel he does it more
vigorously than ever, by setting up his Standard, holding forth himself in the
preaching of the Gospel, and withal sending forth his Spirit, which
accompanying the Word, makes it effectual. Thus is Jesus Christ as the
Loadstone to the Iron, by a secret virtue, the virtue of his Spirit attracting
his Elect people; who being thus drawn by him, do now willingly come unto him.
Draw me, and we will run after thee (says the Church unto Christ, Cant, 1.4.
promising a willingness in all her members to follow him upon his putting forth
his effectual power in them.) And upon this ground also it may be concluded,
that All those who are given to Christ by his Father, they shall come unto him.
All they.

And (secondly) Only they. 2. Only Gods Elect come unto Christ.
So much is here employed: This being here rendered as the Reason why these
Capernaites did not come unto Christ, did not believe on him,) because they
were not given to him by his Father. Ye have seen me and believe not, How so?
why All that the Father gives me shall come unto me]. All they, and only they.
Of which number whilst ye are not, I cannot wonder that ye do as you do, stand
out against me, not coming into me, not believing on me. A thing which none but
those who are given to Christ by God his Father will or shall ever do.

Quest. And why not? Man cannot come of himself.


Ans. The ground hereof you have heard it already. This is Gods work, which man
cannot do of himself. No not so much as will to come unto Christ. It is God
that works in you both to will and to do (says our Apostle to his
Philippians.) Phil. 2.13. As the Act of faith, so much more the Habit, is Gods
work his Gift. And this gift he bestows only upon his Elect Thence is it
called their faith; The faith of Gods Elect. Tit. 1.1. So called, not because
thereby men are made Gods Elect, Per quam homines fiunt Electi Dei. id est, Deo
charissimi. Grot. in loc.
dear unto him (as Grotius foully perverts that Text) but because it is peculiar
unto Gods Elect, saving faith being wrought only in them, the Doctrine of
faith, the Gospel, being really embraced only by them. As for others, being
left to themselves, they will not, they cannot come unto Christ, believe on
him. No man comes unto me Except the Father that sent me draw him? Except he
put forth that effectual power of his, which he does not for any but those
upon whom he has set a peculiar love, his Elect ones. But I shall dwell no
longer upon the Doctrinal part come we to make some Application of this Truth.

Applic. 1. Information.
Which let it be directed (as the former) First by way of Information: And so it
may serve.

1. To confirm what was before declared touching those Doctrines of Election
and Redemption, that neither of them is Universal. So much Calvin 2. The former
Doctrines touching Election and Redemption confirmed. Calvin in Text.
rightly inferrs from hence. Quum dicit venire quicquid datur, inde colligimus
non omnes dari. Whereas Christ here says, that All that are given to him shall
come unto him. From hence we may conclude (says he) that all are not given to
him, Elected in him to be redeemed by him, in as much as all do not come to
him; which were they so given to him, they should certainly do. An Argument so
convincing, as I know not what can be more.

Predestination not upon the foresight of faith.
2. In the second place, take we notice from hence, that God does not
predestinate upon the foresight of faith. So Arminians would have it, that God
foreseeing who they are that will come unto Christ, receive him, believe on
him, he thereupon predestinateth them to obtain salvation by him. But this Text
speaks it otherwise, making their coming to Christ not the ground or cause of
Gods Predestination, but the fruit and consequent of it. All that the Father
gives me. (viz. by way of Predestination) shall come unto me, to believe on
me. Thus are Gods Elect predestined to believe, not because they believe.

3. Again (in the third place) take we notice from hence, 3. Faith not
contingent. Per hoc autem quod dicit. Quod dat mihi pater, ostendit quoniam non
contingens res est credere in Christum. Aquinas in Text. ex Chrysostom. Hom. 44.
Quibus verbis intelligit fidem non esse in arbitrio hominum, ut promiscue vel
fortuito hic and ille credant. Calvin ad Text. Hoc ipso innuit, fidem non oriri
ex viribus liberi arbitrii, sed ex gratuita Electione Dei. Piscat. Analys. in
Text.
that Faith is not left as a Contingent thing, left to the liberty of men's
will, whether they will believe or no. But it is determined who they are that
shall believe, viz. they, all they, and only they, who are given to Christ by
his Father: All, and only Gods Elect, who being given to Christ before time,
they shall certainly come to him in time, believe on him. All they, and only
they.

But here before I go any further, let me cover the pit which some may think I
have now opened* vindicating this Doctrine from some misconstructions This
Doctrine cleared from misconstructions.
which some possibly be ready to make of it. Of these I shall take notice of
two or three.

Obj. 1. Is it so that All and Only they shall come unto Christ, whom God his
Father has given to him? Does not this then excuse those who do not come unto
him? No excuse for unbelievers.
May not they justly take up this for their plea, that they were never given to
him?

Ans. To this I find diverse Answers returned (as by Chrysostom, (who moves
this doubt) so by some others, Vide Tolet Annot in Text.
which I shall not trouble you with. In brief (for I do not intend to enlarge
upon any of these Controversies) let it suffice. This can be no just plea for
those who shall take it up and make use of it, in as much as what herein they
do, they do it willingly. Their rejecting and refusing of Christ being offered
and tendered unto them, is in them a voluntary act, whereunto they are no ways
compelled, and so renders them without excuse. Neither is Gods Decree of
Reprobation, Reprobation not the cause of infidelity.
his not giving them to Christ, properly the Cause of this Infidelity and
Disobedience in them. True it is, it is an Antecedent to it, but not properly
the Cause of it. That instance, which I find made use of by some in this case,
illustrates it well. The absence of the Sun in the night-season, is an
Antecedent to, but not the proper Cause of the freezing of the water, which
comes from the coldness of the Air. Even so is it here. Gods Decree of
Reprobation (as it is called) his not giving some men to Christ, it is
Antecedent to their Infidelity, but not properly the Cause of it, which is
their own Corruption. Their not coming unto Christ, to believe on him, is
indeed a Consequent of Gods Non-election, his not giving them unto him, but not
properly the effect of it. So as this is no excuse for them, who in refusing of
Christ offered to them, do it voluntarily, and willingly.

Obj. But (in the second place) Is not this a dangerous Doctrine, No ground for
security and carelessness.
tending to make men careless and regardless of their spiritual estates? If it
be so that all that are given to Christ shall certainly come to him, all that
are within the compass of Gods Election shall be made partakers of such an
effectual vocation, why then should any trouble themselves about this? why may
they not take their course, and live as they list? If they be in the number of
those that are given to Christ, If they do belong to Gods Election; they shall
come to him, they shall be brought to him.

Ans. A desperate Inference, A desperate inference.
speaking terror and horror to all those who shall dare to take it up, and make
such use of it. Of all signs and evidences of a man that is not given unto
Christ, that is not within the compass of Gods Election, I do not know a more
fearful one than this, when any one shall thus turn this grace of God into
wantonness. And therefore take heed how you give way to such wretched
reasonings, how you give entertainment to any such a thought. Taking notice
that God does not bring men to Christ against their wills. And they who are not
willing to come unto him when he is offered and tendered to them, what know
they whether ever they shall have a second invitation? Just is it with God to
withhold his grace from those who thus reject it, and to harden their hearts,
confirming them in their infidelity, who have first hardened their own hearts
against the tenders of grace and mercy in Christ. This is that which our
Evangelist St. John says of the Jews, John 12.37. Though Christ had done so
many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him. And why not? how came
they to be so stupid? The reason is rendered, v. 39, 40. Therefore they could
not believe, because Isaias said, He has blinded their eyes, and hardened
their hearts, etc. They had first wilfully shut their own eyes against the
light of the Gospel, maliciously withstanding and rejecting of Christ. And
thereupon God in his most just and righteous judgment gives them over to a
reprobate sense, taking from them those abilities which they had of believing
unto salvation. O take heed that the like do not happen to any of you! which
you may justly expect, shall you dare upon this, or any other pretense
whatever, to reject and refuse the gracious offers of Christ tendered to you.

No ground of Despair.
Obj. 3. But (in the third place) may not this Doctrine minister matter of
despair to some drooping spirits, who may thus reason against themselves. If
only they shall come unto Christ who are given to him by God the Father, then
with what confidence can they come to him, not knowing whether they be of that
number, which they fear they are not; and if so, then all their attempts and
endeavors this way will be to no purpose. Hereupon they fear that they shall
never come to him, to receive any benefit by him and from him.

Ans. For Answer to this, A wrong way of reasoning to begin with Gods decrees.
know we that this is a wrong way of reasoning, to begin with Gods decrees,
which being secret to us, and hidden from us, until God shall be pleased to
make them known in and by the execution of them, may perplex and trouble, but
no ways profit or advantage any by their immediate enquiries into them. And
therefore let none attempt to unlock that Cabinet, to look into that Ark. Gods
revealed Will man's Rule.
Secret things belong unto the Lord, but revealed things to us and to our
children, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Now what Gods revealed will is, that all either do, or
may know, viz. that they should come unto his Son Christ, that they should
believe on him. This is the Commandment, that we should believe on the name of
his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 3.23. And to this command we have a gracious
promise here annexed. They who so come unto Christ shall not be rejected. [He
that comes unto me I will in no wise cast out.] Now then, wherefore should any
perplex and trouble their spirits in searching after that which they shall
never in any other way find whether they be given to Christ. Temeritatis est
velle pervestigare divini consilii arcanum. Hoc faciendum est quod praecipit
Deus. Praecipit autem credi in Christum. Ferus Annot. in Text.
Why do they not rather in obedience to that great Gospel-command, and in
confidence of so gracious a promise, put their souls upon this way, apply
themselves to the doing of what is so required of them? viz. To come unto Jesus
Christ.

Which let me now press upon all and every of you by way of Exhortation, Use 2.
Exhortation to all to come unto Christ.
that you would come unto Jesus Christ. This is that which he himself inviteth
all to do, Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, And
again, John 7.37. In the last day, that great day of the Feast, Jesus stood and
cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me. And let all hearken to
this Invitation, closing with it.

Many Arguments and Motives Motives to it.
might I make use of to press this Motion, to set on this Exhortation. In no
other way is life to be expected. Ye will not come unto me that ye might have
life (says our Savior to the Jews) John 5.40. They went to Moses, seeking
salvation by the works of the Law, but alas, it was not there to be found. I am
the way, the truth, and the life, John 14.6 Christ is the only true way which
leads unto eternal life. This is life eternal, to know thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, Joh. 17.3. To know God in Christ,
this is the saving knowledge. Cominh unto Christ, you shall find a fullness in
him, so as you shall not need to seek any thing out of him. He that comes unto
me shall never hunger (says the verse next but one before the Text) v. 35. he
shall find a full satisfaction in me. Here, and only here is true rest and
peace to be found. Come unto me ye that labor, etc. and ye shall find rest to
your souls. Here is that wine and milk to be had, which the Prophet Isai
speaks of, Isa. 55.1. whatever is requisite for the refreshing and nourishing
of the Soul.

But I shall confine my self to that one Argument which I have here put into my
hand. Coming to Christ, an assurance of being given to him.
Hereby shall you come to know that you are given to Christ by God his Father.
This is the one and only way whereby you may come to be assured of Gods
gracious purpose toward you, Adhaerens Christo certus es de praedestinatione
tua. Ferus Annot in Text.
that your names are written in the book of life, that you are in the number of
Gods Elect. A thing which it stands all Christians in hand to make sure unto
themselves. Give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. (So St.
Peter presses it upon those to whom he writes) 2 Pet. 1.10. And who is there
among you but would be glad to have this assurance? Now in what way may this be
obtained? Why, in vain it is to think of ascending up into Heaven, there to
search the Rolls and Records of Eternity. Only then put your selves upon this
way of coming unto Jesus Christ. Hereby may a Christian come to be undoubtedly
assured hereof. So much we may learn from the Text. All that the Father gives
me shall come unto me. So then, invert the words. All that do come unto Christ,
are given to him by his Father. Thus may Christians safely pass a Notiore ad
ignotum, from that which is known to what is otherwise unknown, reasoning from
their Vocation to their Election, from their coming to Christ to their being
given to him.

As for their coming unto Christ, Coming to Christ, a thing which may be known.
that is a thing which they may certainly know. The heart cannot be a stranger
to its own Affections, especially if they be intense. Quid enim cordi nostro
perspectius esse poterit, quam quod non nisi cord; eoque ardenti and cupido
geritur. Musc. Com. in Text.
If there be an earnest desire, a longing of the soul after Christ, an earnest
desire of Union and Communion with him, an intense love to him, so that the
soul is enamoured with him, a serious and fixed resolution in the heart to rest
upon him, to trust in him for the pardon of sins and eternal salvation (all
which accompany a true saving faith) the soul cannot be ignorant of it. This is
a thing which upon the enquiry every one may know of his own heart, whether he
has thus come to Christ, thus received him. How else is it that the Apostle
puts his Corinthians upon this trial? 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves
whether you be in the faith. Prove your own selves, know ye not your own selves
how that Jesus Christ is in you? And once knowing this, now may they conclude,
and that certainly, that they are within the compass of Gods gracious Election,
that they are by him given to his Son Jesus Christ.

Christians make sure their Election by coming to Christ.
Which let every of us (I say) labor in this way to make sure to our selves.
The world being divided into two parts, one part given to Christ, the other
part left to Satan, the Prince of this world, see we to which of these it is
that we belong, whether to Christ or Satan. Is it so that we have renounced
Satan, abandoned his service, and given our selves to the Lord Jesus, taking
him for our Savior and Lord, now may we conclude that we are in the number of
them whom God has given to him, appointed to salvation by and through him.

Only see that this our coming to him be Inward and Real. See that this Coming
be real.
Not such as the coming of these Capernaites was, who came unto Christ, but it
was (as I showed you) out of a by and sinister respect. And thus surely do the
greatest part of Christians at this day come unto him. They make a profession
of his name. But wherefore is it? why they do it pro forma, for fashion-sake,
or they expect some outward advantage by it: They follow Christ, Vix quaeritur
Jesus propter Jesum. August. in Joh. 6.26.
as these Capernaites did for the loaves. Take heed it be not so with us. If we
come unto Christ, see that we come with upright and sincere hearts, out of an
earnest desire of having Union and Communion with him. So coming unto him, now
take this as an evidence of Gods gracious Donation, that we are by him given to
his Son, as also of Christ's gracious reception. So coming unto him, we shall
not be rejected of him. So it follows in the last branch of the Text.

And him that comes unto me I will in no wise cast out.] There have we the
third and last Proposition, or Doctrine.

Those who come unto Christ he will in no wise cast out.] (...) (or (...))
(...). Prop. 3. Casting out, what.
Non ejiciam for as. To open the Phrase, To cast out, properly it imports an
Ejection, or Expulsion, a casting out of some place or company. Thus we read
how the Jews cast Stephen out of the City. (...), Act. 7.58. And our Savior
out of the Synagogue, John 9.34, 35. They cast him out (says the Text) (...),
viz. out of the Synagogue (as the 22. verse explaines it. Augustines
Interpretation not allowed. Quale est illud intus, unde non exitur for as;
Magnum penetrale, and dulce secretum August. Tract. in loc.
) And in such a sense do some here understand it. I will in no wise cast out.]
That is (say some) out of my Kingdom of Glory. So Augustine here looks upon
it. Hither it is that all those who are given to Christ, all Gods Elect, shall
come, they shall come unto him in his Chamber of presence, his magnum
penetrale, (as he calls it) that is, his Marriage-chamber, and being once
entered there, he shall never eject, never cast them out again. But this
Maldonate excepts against, as not being so proper to this Text, Cum dicit, ad
me venit, non significat ad se in coelo, ubi fides non est. Maldon. in Text.
where Christ's promise is unto those who come to him by faith. Now there is no
room for, no use of faith in heaven, where all shall live by sight. We walk by
faith, and not by sight, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.7. intimating faith to be
proper for earth, and sight for heaven, where faith and hope shall be swallowed
up of vision and fruition. And therefore let we that go, though in it self a
truth.

And not unlike is that Interpretation of Cyril, Nor yet Cyrils.
who understands this of the last Judgment, at which time all wicked and
ungodly ones, all unbelievers, shall be cast out. So our Savior tells the
unbelieving Jews, Math. 8.12. The children of the Kingdom (meaning them who
looked upon themselves as such, being the only people then under a visible
Covenant) shall be cast out into outer darkness. And so shall it be with all
other ungodly persons. Then shall Christ say to the Goats on his left hand,
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, Mat. 25.41. But so shall it not be with his Elect his Sheep, whom he
shall then set upon his right hand, speaking to them in another language, Come
ye blessed of my Fathtr, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, etc. v. 34. Then
shall not they be cast out, but admitted and received into those everlasting
mansions. Which is also there set forth in the same Chapter under the Parable
of the wise and foolish Virgins; the one of which are said to be kept out, the
other received into the Mariage-chamber, v. 11, 12. fitly representing the
different entertainment of believers and unbelievers at the day of the general
Judgment. A truth also, but liable to the same exception with the former (which
also the aforesaid Author puts in.) The coming which our Savior here speaks
of, is by faith. Non enim illuc homines ad Christum per fidem venient, de quo
adventu his loquebatur. Maldon. in Text.
But so shall not men come unto him at that day. The souls of Gods Saints being
once entered into their glory, living by sight (which they do being separated
from their bodies) they shall henceforth have no more use of faith. Now abides
faith (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.13. viz. whilst we live here; not so after
death, not so at the last Judgment, when men shall see and feel what now they
do, or will not believe. So then, what our Savior here says of his not
casting forth those that come to him, must be understood of this life. Those
who here come unto him by faith, believing on him, he will in no wise cast out.

Quest. But yet the Question runs on. How not cast them out here?

Ans. To this Grotius returns an Answer, Grotius's Sup. position rejected as
unsound.
that they being thus come unto Christ, he will not for his part cast them cut
of his Kingdom of grace, being entered as Scholars into his School (from whence
he conceives this Expression to be borrowed) he will not expel them. Thus
(says he) do froward Schoolmasters sometimes deal by their Scholars, Non
faciam ut morosi Magistri, non expellam eum, nempe si perpetuo voluerit meus
esse, per me non stabit quo minus fit. Grot. Annot. in Text.
expel them without any just desert. But so will not Christ deal by his
Scholars, those that come to him, being once his, they shall ever be so for
all him, continuing and abiding with him if they will. But this savouring
rankly of the Arminians, founding man's perseverance in Grace upon the liberty
of his own will, I reject it as unsound.

The true sense of the phrase here.
More solidly (to hold you no longer in suspense) by Casting out here understand
we rather a Rejection than an Ejection, a Repelling than an Expelling. Neminem
ad me venientem repellam, omnes admittam, omnes amplectar. Rupertus ad loc. and
Maldon, etc. Non repudiabo, sed benevole excipiam, and in aeternum servabo.
Piscator Schol. in loc. Two things comprehended under it.
[Him that comes unto me I will in no wise cast out.] Non repudiabo, non
repellam, I will not refuse and reject him, but will receive and embrace him,
bidding and making him welcome. So may we most fitly look upon the phrase here,
as having a (...), a (...) in it, intending more than it speaks, importing a
gracious reception, with a loving and lasting entertainment. Thus will the Lord
Jesus Christ receive all those that come unto him by faith, he will own them,
and entertain them as his, and that for ever. Two things conceived to be
comprehended under this Expression.

1. He will receive them, entertain them. [Him that comes unto me I will not
cast out.] 1. Christ will receive those that come to him. Quemadmodum si
publicus dicat Hospes, neminem qui ad hospitium venerit, ejiciam. Mald. ad loc.
] Even as a public Host (says Maldonate) should say the like terms, If any
man come to me, I will not cast him out, his meaning would be apprehended to
be, not I will not cast him out of my house having once received him in,
(whereof no man would make any doubt) but that he will not refuse any such
guests, but would readily receive them into his house, bidding them welcome,
giving entertainment to them, making provisions for them. And in such a sense
undestand we our Savior here, where he makes the like Proclamation, [Him that
comes to me I will in no wise cast out.] That is, I will not refuse nor reject
him, but will readily receive him into my house, my Church, where I will
receive and make him welcome, giving entertainment to him, providing for him
whatever shall be requisite in order to his salvation, applying to him the
merit of my death, making him a sharer in the benefit of my Intercession,
communicating unto him Grace here, and Glory hereafter. Such a Reception it is
that Christ here promises to all those that come unto him, that believe on
him. And this will he certainly perform to them. Whoever they are that come
unto him, they shall not be rejected of him.

So was it with those who came to him in the days of his flesh for the cure of
their bodily infirmities, we do not read that he refused, that he rejected any
of them, or that he sent them away without what they came for. Great multitudes
followed him, and he healed them all (says the Text, Mat. 12.15.) True indeed,
for that woman of Canaan, who came to him in the behalf of her daughter (of
which you have the story, Math. 15.) at the first he seemed to give her a
repulse, but it was only for the trial and exercise of her faith and patience,
wherein she persevering, he grants her request; Be it unto thee even as thou will (says he) v. 28. And the like may they expect who come unto him upon a
spiritual account, for the cure of their soul-maladies, for the taking away the
guilt and power of sin, and for the obtaining of eternal salvation by him, he
will not reject them. However he may for a time, for the like exercise of their
faith, hold them off, yet he will not cast them out; he will receive them, he
will embrace them.

Even as he dealt by those Infants And the Infants brought to them.
that were brought to him in the arms of others, presented to him for his
blessing, He took them up in his arms (says the Text) and laid his hands upon
them and blessed them, Mark 10.16. Not repelling them, as his Disciples did;
they looking upon it as a matter of trouble, and a thing beneath their Master,
not suitable to his excellency and greatness to meddle with young children,
they rebuked those that brought them; But (says the Text) when Jesus saw it,
he was much displeased, and said unto them, Suffer little children to come unto
me and forbid them not, v. 13, 14. thereby declaring his readiness to receive
all those whoever they are that shall come unto him to seek and receive any
spiritual benefit from him. Whoever they are that desire communion with him, he
will have communion with them. This is that which he tells the Laodicean Angel,
Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at the door, and knock, If any man hear my voice, and
open the door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me. Whoever
they are that hear Christ knocking at the door of their hearts and consciences,
by his Word, and the motions of his Spirit, if they shall open unto him,
receiving and entertaining him by faith, he will unite himself to them,
vouchsafing to them a sweet communion with himself. Him that thus comes unto
him, to have communion with him, he will not cast out.

Obj. But what say we then to the guest in the Parable? He came to the
Mariage-feast, The Case of the Guest in the Parable cast out from the
Mariage-Supper, resolved.
came to have communion with Christ, yet we find him cast out. Bind him hand
and foot, and take him away, and cast him into outer darkness; that is the doom
which the King there passes upon him when he came to see the guest, Mat. 22.13.

Ans. To this an Answer is soon returned by consulting the verse there next
following, which gives us an account of the ground of this his ejection. For
many are called, but few are chosen, v. 14. Many called outwardly to an outward
visible communion with Christ, who are not truly given to him are not in the
number of Gods Elect. And in this number was this guest, who here crowded in
for companies sake, a hypocrite joining himself to the visible Church, not
being that in truth which he made profession of. So much we may learn from the
11th verse, which informs us that he had not on the wedding garment; he was one
that was not regenerated, one that had not put on Christ by faith. And
therefore no wonder that he was cast out. So shall all Hypocrites be sooner or
later. But so shall not they who come unto Christ in sincerity. So coming to
him he will receive them.

2. Christ receiving those that come to him retains them with him.
2. And receiving them (in the second place) he will retain them. So much also
is conceived to be implied in this phrase, I will not cast him out] he shall be
with me, dwelling with me, having an everlasting communion with me. He that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him (says the
56. v. of this Chapter) whereof the Text is part. Those that receive Christ by
faith (for that is meant by eating his flesh, and drinking his blood) he will
not only come and sup with them, but dwell in them, having a constant and
continued communion with them. Non solum amanter ad se venientes suscipit, sed
susceptos ita constanter ac perseveranter complectitur, tuetur and conservat,
ut nunquam illos abjiciat. Aliud est Principum hujus seculi ingenium, etc.
Musc. Com. in Text.
Having once received them into grace and favor with himself (which he does
upon their believing on him) he will never cast them out of it. Herein (says
Musculus) does this our King differ from other Kings and Princes, who are often
inconstant in their affections, loving to day, loathing to morrow. What more
common with them than ^o cast their favorites out of favor? But so will not
the Lord Christ do by his favorites. Those whom he once affects, he never
rejects. Having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the
end (says our Eavngelist) Joh. 13.1. Not only his Disciples, but all his Elect
(who are there called his own, in as much as they were given to him by his
Father) having set a peculiar affection upon them, he continued it to them unto
the end, the end of his life, expressing it, as by taking care of them, keeping
them, Whilst I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy Name; Those that
thou gave me I have kept, John 17.12. so by dying for them. And like
affection does he still bear to all those, who being given to him, come to him,
believe on him. Loving them once, he loves to the end, to the end of their
lives, and to eternity; once affecting them, he will never cast them out of his
affection. Thus you see that it is so. Those that come unto Jesus Christ he
will not cast them out; he will both receive, and retain them as his.

Quest. And why will he do so?

Ans. For this take two or three Reasons, or Grounds.

1. This is his Fathers will, that he should thus receive those whom he gives
unto him. Reas. 1. This is the Fathers will.
This is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all that he has given me
I should lose nothing (v. 39. of this Chapter. Now with this will does Christ
perfectly and exactly comply. I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will,
but the will of him that sent me, v. 38. And hereupon it is, that he so readily
and constantly embraces all those who being thus given to him by his Father,
come unto him.

2. As this is his Fathers will, so his own disposition inclines him to it.
Reas. 2. Christ's clemency inclining him hereunto.
He being a gracious, a merciful, a tenderhearted Savior, he pitieth the
condition of poor perishing sinners. When he was here upon earth, the story
tells us, how when he beheld the City (of Jerusalem) he wept over it, Luke
19.41. Taking notice of the sad condition of it, what a dreadful judgment hung
over the head of that people, his heart melted into tears. And with such an eye
of tender pity and compassion does he look upon poor sinners lying in their
natural estate, and thereupon he readily receives those that come to him,
accepting the least beginnings of faith. This is that which the Prophet Isai
fore told of him, Isa. 42.3. A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking
flax shall he not quench. Such is the clemency of Jesus Christ in dealing with
poor sinners, that where he sees any good desires, any beginnigs of grace,
though never so weak and slender, he is ready to accept them. Being herein like
that Roman Emperor, of whom it is reported, that whoever came to him, he never
sent them away discontented. Thus whoever they are that come unto Jesus Christ,
come unto him in sincerity, such is his Clemency, his Gentleness, he will in
no wise cast them out.

3. Which if he should do (in the third place) it would be cross to the end of
his coming into the world, Reas. 3. To reject those that come, were cross to
the end of his coming.
his taking upon him the office of a Mediator, which was to seek and to save
that which was lost (as he tells Zacheus) Luke 19.10. Now coming to seek after
those that seek not after him ( I was found of those that sought me not, says
the Prophet Isay, setting forth Gods preventing mercy in calling of the
Gentiles, Isa. 65.1.) he will not reject those that come unto him. This being
his work, to bring in lost souls into his Kingdom of Grace (which it is, Other
sheep have I which are not of this fold, them also must I bring, John 10.16.)
He will not refuse them when they come unto him. But to dwell no longer upon
Doctrinal Confirmation or Illustration, Come we now to Application.

Where (in the first place) let me again take up that former Motion, Use 1. The
grand duty pressed, of coming to Christ.
pressing what before I propounded, exhorting and persuading all to come unto
Jesus Christ. This is the great and principal errand about which the Ministers
of Christ are, or ought to be employed. They are the servants sent forth to
call the guests unto that great Supper, their Master putting this word into
their mouths, Say unto them that were bidden, Come, Luke 14.17. their chief
work being to persuade men to come unto Jesus Christ, to have communion with
him. And this let me press upon all you this day. For which, what greater
encouragement can you have than that which Christ himself here holds forth to
you? even the assurance of a gracious Reception. Were subjects assured of the
like from their Princes, that coming to them they should not be rejected, but
graciously received, who is there but would have recourse to them as occasion
were offered? Now this assurance have all poor sinners from Jesus Christ, that
coming to him they shall have a gracious reception from him, he will bid them
welcome, Him that comes unto me I will in no wise cast out.

In no wise] So our last Translation does well express the Emphasis in the
Original. (...), two Negatives, which in the Greek do vehementius negare,
import a more earnest and vehement Negation. Nequaquam ejecerim, I will at no
hand, in no case, in no wise, cast him out. Which let it serve to confirm and
establish the hearts of poor sinnners in the assurance of a gracious
acceptance from Jesus Christ upon their coming unto him.

Obj. Objections answered.
I but (may some say) I am unworthy of any such acceptance, a poor, vile,
miserable, Obj. 1. Man's own unworthiness.
worthless creature, having nothing to commend me to the world, much less unto
Christ. Outwardly mean, nay and inwardly vile; a poor sinful creature, who see
nothing in my self but what may justly render me odious and abominable in the
sight of God and Jesus Christ. How then can I hope that I should find such a
welcome from him upon my coming to him?

Ans. Well, be it so as is alleged, yet be not discouraged; for which again
mark the Text. Him that comes unto me] (...), Him] the word is indefinite, yea
universal, comprehending all, excepting none. Be he what he will, of what
nation, sex, quality, or condition soever; Jew or Gentile, male or female, bond
or free, rich or poor, though a dog, scarce worthy to gather the crumbs under
the table, though not worthy of the least common mercies, much more unworthy to
have union and communion with Jesus Christ, yet coming to him they shall be
welcome to him. Herein does he differ from the Common Host which before I spoke
of, who, however he keeps open doors for all comers, yet unless they that
come bring money with them to pay for what they call for, they shall not be
welcome to him. It is otherwise with the Lord Jesus, who not expecting to be
any gainer by those that come to him, will make all that come welcome, though
they bring nothing with them to make them so. For this, that known Proclamation
is express, Isa. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and
he that has no money, come ye, buy and eat, yea come buy wine and milk without
money, and without price. Thus does Jesus Christ invite all poor sinners to
come unto him, to have a free communion with him. What though they have neither
money nor moneys worth? nothing to purchase their welcome, to make them worthy,
yet let them come unto him. Which doing, let them rest assured they shall not
be cast out.

The truth whereof many great sinners have found upon their own experience.
Experiences of great sinners coming to Christ.
So did that Woman of whom we read in the Gospel, Luke 7.37. (whether Mary
Magdalen (as it is commonly taken) or rather some other (as is most probable)
is uncertain.) Behold a woman in the City, which was a sinner (says the Text)
v. 37. that is, a great, a notorious sinner, a known strumpet, a harlot, whom
every one could point at; as the Pharisee, who had then invited Jesus to his
house did, wondering that Christ should not know what manner of woman she was,
This man, if he were a Prophet (says he) would have known who, and what manner
of woman this is that touches him, for she is a sinner, v. 39. A notorious
sinner, a lewd woman; yet coming unto Christ, and expressing her good affection
unto him, how welcome was she to him? receiving from him what she came for, the
forgiveness of her many and great sins; Her sins which are many, are forgiven
(so our Savior there tells Peter) v. 47.

Obj. I but (may some say) there was a Reason why Christ should bid her
welcome; Having nothing to bring to Christ.
she was one that loved him much (as it there follows) expressing her
affection to him by the Present which she brought him, A Box of precious
ointment, which she bestowed upon him (as the verse there foregoing informs
us.) But as for me, I have no such present to bring unto him, no Box of
Ointment for him.

Ans. But have thou tears for him as she had? truly penitent tears? Have thou
a broken and contrite heart to present unto him? a heart broken with true godly
sorrow for sin? If so, stand not upon any other present. Thou desire not
sacrifice, else would I give it; thou delightest not in burnt-offering, The
sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken and contrite heart O God thou will not despise (says the man after Gods own heart) Psalm. 51.16, 17. And have
thou such a heart in thy bosom? though thou have nothing in thy hand, yet come
unto Jesus Christ.

Obj. But I have done much against him.

Ans. And had not Paul done so? Having done much against him.
whom Christ himself from Heaven charge with persecuting of him; Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me? Acts 9. And so much he confesses against himself. I
was a Blasphemer, a Persecutor, etc. Whereupon he concludes himself to be the
chief of sinners, 1 Timothy 1.13, 15. yet coming unto Christ he obtained mercy
from him; which was done (as he there says) that he might be a pattern for
them who should after believe on him.

Obj. I, but I have rejected Christ, being Rejecting of him being offered.
and quenched the motions of his Spirit, refusing him when he came to me. And
may not I look for a just retaliation, that he should reject me when I come to
him?

Ans. Yet still consult the Text. Him that comes unto me] Be he what he will,
though a rebellious and obstinate sinner.

Obj. I, but I am an Apostate, who have cast after that I had received him,
Apostatizing from him.
and given entertainment to him, having returned to my former sinful ways and
courses which I had sometimes abandoned. Now does not the Apostle exclude all
such from any hopes of benefit by him? What else means that known Text, Heb.
6.4. where speaking of such, he says, It is impossible they should be renewed
again unto repentance, seeing they have crucified to themselves the Son of God
afresh, etc.

Ans. For this know, that it is spoken of a wilful and universal Apostacy, a
malicious and despiteful contemning and opposing of Christ and his Gospel, by
those who were once convinced of the truth thereof, which is properly the sin
against the Holy Ghost. Now as for such, who thus crucify Christ a fresh, and
put him to open shame, doing that in Affection and Conversation, which the Jews
did in Action, Treading under foot the Son of God, counting the blood of the
Covenant, wherewith they were sanctified, an unholy thing, and doing despite to
the Spirit of Grace (as the same Apostle further describes the same sin, Cap.
10. v. 29) As for such (I say) just it is with God to give them up to an
impenitent heart, to a reprobate sense, so as that they should never seriously
think of coming to Christ any more. But as for this, it is hoped it is not your
case.

Obj. Yea, but I do not know but it may be, and I fear it is.

Ans. But why do we fear so? The sin against the holy Ghost by some unjustly
charged upon themselves.
Be not wicked overmuch (says the Preacher, Eccl. 7.17. viz. in thine own
apprehension (as the Text may be expounded) which some are, whilst they make
their condition worse than really it is. So do not you. But for the cure of all
these fears, put your souls upon this way of coming unto Christ. Which if God
shall incline your heart to do, now take this as an evidence that you are not
under the guilt of that unpardonable sin, but rest assured that upon your
coming to him you shall find mercy from him. Him that comes unto me (though a
Backslider, an Apostate, (the worst of Christians, or of men) I will in no wise
cast out. The reason why desperate Apostates receive no benefit by Christ, is
not because he will not receive them, but because they will not come unto him.
Only come unto him, and fear not.

Quest. But how shall I so come unto him, Quest. How to come unto Christ so as
to be received of him.
as that I may be assured that I shall not be cast out, not rejected by him?

Ans. Ans.
A useful Question, which I wish were in the heart of every of you seriously to
propound to your selves. For Answer whereunto, in brief take these few and
plain Directions.

1. That you may come unto Christ, Dir. 1. Hear of him.
you must first hear of him. Incline your ear, and come unto me (says the
Lord) Isa. 55.3. And this must they do who would come unto Christ, they must
incline their ear, they must be acquainted with the Doctrine of the Gospel
concerning him. Every man therefore that has heard, and learned of the Father,
comes unto me (says our Savior) v. 45. of this Chapter. In this way it is
that God the Father brings men to his Son Christ, by teaching and instructing
them in the Doctrine of the Gospel. With out which there is no coming unto him,
no believing on him. How shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard?
Romans 10.14. A necessary preparation for the soul in coming to Christ; it must
first have the eye opened, the understanding enlightened with the knowledge of
him, to know who, and what he was, and is, what he has done, and what he has
suffered, and to what end, and what benefit they may expect from him, and in
what way they shall come unto him. Thus it is, God does not bring men blindfold
to Christ, but he first opens their eyes, and takes the vail off from their
hearts, making a discovery of him to them. As for ignorant souls, who know
nothing of Christ, they are not in a capacity of coming to him.

Dir. 2. Be convinced of the need of him.
2. Thus hearing of Christ then (in the next place) be convinced of the need you
have of him; which till a man be, he will never come unto him. This it was that
brought those impotent and diseased persons unto him in the days of his flesh,
even the sense of their own bodily infirmities. And this it is which puts
the soul upon coming to him, even the sense of its own sinfulness and misery.
Which labor you to be thoroughly convinced of, that you may see and feel your
lost undone condition without him; that you may be truly and thoroughly sensible
of the burden of sin. Such, and only such they are that Christ inviteth to come
unto him. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, Mat. 11.28.
viz. under the burden of sin, groaning under it, earnestly desiring to be freed
from it, both from the guilt and power of it.

3. Being thus in measure fitted and prepared for Christ, now hearken to his
Invitation and Command, Dir. 3. Hearken to his invitation and command.
calling you to him, requiring you to come to him. This it was that made Peter
so adventurous to come unto his Master upon the water; Lord (says he) Bid me
come unto thee upon the water, Mat. 14.28. Now, this word every poor sinner
which is in measure prepared, has; he has a command from Christ to come unto
him. Come unto me (says he) which is to be looked upon not only as an
Invitation, but an Injunction.

4. And hearing this Word, now forthwith apply your selves to yield a ready
obedience to it. Dir. 4. Yield a ready obedience to it.
So did Peter; No sooner did he hear that word from his Masters mouth, Come,
but presently leaving the ship wherein he was, he casts himself into the Sea.
And the like do you. Hearing this word of command from this your blessed
Savior, requiring you to come unto him, now stand not to reason with flesh and
blood, but renouncing all other confidences, betake your selves unto him,
resolving to break through all difficulties, come what will come, to make
toward him. Among other renounce your own righteousness. Man's own
righteousness to be renounced.
Like as the Story tells us of blind Bartimaeus, when sitting by the
high-way-side, and crying after Jesus then passing by, he heard him call him to
come unto him, he presently casting away his garments (says the Text) rose and
came to him, Mark 10.50. Even thus do you, hearing Christ calling you to come
unto him (which he does in his Word) now arise and cast away your garments,
even all impediments, as the garments of sinful lusts, the rotten rags of the
old Adam, so the garment of your own righteousness. This it was that Paul cast
overboard, made loss of his own righteousness, that he might come unto Christ,
that he might win him, Phil. 3 8, 9. The like do you, that you may be clothed
with that white garment, the righteousness of Christ, come naked unto him. That
you may be filled by him, come empty to him, That you may be enriched by him
come poor to him, bring no money with you' Remember that Proclamation
forenamed; Come, buy wine and milk without money.] They who come unto Christ
bringing money in their hands, I mean any thing of their own, whereby they may
think to purchase an interest in him and his benefits let them expect no better
welcome than what Simon Magus found from Simon Peter, when he came to him
proffering him money to buy the Holy Ghost with, Thy money perish with thee
(says he) Acts 8.20. Would you be welcome to Christ, so come to him, as to be
received of him; come empty to him, emptied of your own righteousness,
renouncing all confidence in whatever of your selves you have done or can do.

5. And thus making toward him then (in the last place) Cast your selves upon
him, give up your selves unto him, receiving him in that double relation of a
Savior and a Lord. Dir. 5. Take Christ as Savior and Lord.
Thus does God his Father hold him forth to all that will come to him. And thus
do you receive him, not only as a Savior, believing, resting upon the
all sufficiency of his merit for the pardon of your sins, and eternal
salvation, but also as a Lord, submitting to him, giving up your selves, as to
be saved, so to be governed by him. And so coming unto him, now be you assured
of a welcome, a free and gracious reception.

Only see (what I touched upon by way of Caveat before) that this your coming
be Real, Caveat. Make sure our coming to Christ be real.
not Formal. Remembering that forenamed Guest in the Parable, who coming to the
Marriage-Supper without a wedding garment, was cast out with disgrace. And so
shall all Hypocrites be sooner or later. However for a time they may pass for
members of the Church, mingling themselves among the people of God, enjoying
the same privileges, having Communion in the same Ordinances with them, yet he
who sees and knows them, will in his time discover them, and discovering,
eject them, to their everlasting shame and confusion. Take heed that none of
you be found in this number. If you come unto Christ, let it be in a
cordialway, in sincerity and truth. And so coming, now take up the Comfort
which our blessed Savior here lets fall.

Use 2. Comfort, comers to Christ shall be received by him.
You shall not be cast out, not by him. He will not reject, but receive and
embrace you, owning you for his, taking you into his protection and care, so as
you shall not miscarry. Committing your souls unto him, they shall be in safe
custody; and he will give entertainment to you, providing for you whatever
shall be requisite in order to your everlasting happiness.

Christ receiving, it matters not who rejects.
And will Christ thus receive you, What matters it then who they are that reject
you? will he take you in, what matters it then who they are that cast you out?
This (it may be) does the World. This is that which the Apostle complains of.
We (says he, speaking of himself and other the Apostles of Jesus Christ) are
made the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things, 1 Cor.
4.13. And such oft-times is the portion of Gods Saints here. They are the
worlds Off all, the worlds Outcasts (as the Psalmist and the Prophet Isai,
speaking of the dispersed Jews, calls them the Outcasts of Israel, Psalm.
147.2. Isa. 56.8.) Yet let not not this discourage, as long as they are not so
to Christ. He has received them, and having received them, he will not cast
them out.

And will not he cast them out? why then they may be sure his Father The Father
will not reject whom the Son receives.
will not. He having Committed all Judgment to the Son (as we have it, John
5.22.) he will not reverse what he does. Those whom his Son acquits, he will
not condemn. Those whom his Son receives and gives entertainment to, he will
not cast out. Being welcome to the Son, they shall for his sake be welcome to
the Father. And what matters it then what they are to others? though others
cast them out, out of Church? So did the Jews by all those that made a
profession of the name of Christ, they cast them out of their Synagogues, John
9.22. Excommunicated them. Causeless Excommunications not to be regarded.
Contra istam utrorumque tam Anabaptistarum, quam Papistarum temeritatem
communiendae sunt praesenti Christi oraculo eorum-conscientiae, qui vel ab
illis vel ab istis excommunicantur. Muscul. Com. in Text.
And the like does that man of sin, that Antichrist of Rome by all the true
Professors of the Gospel, he by his thundering Excommunications casts them
out of the Church. And the like do other Sects (as the Anabaptists, whom
Musculus here instanceth in) those that are not of their way, that will not
join with them, they pronounce them to be none of Christ's sheep, none of his
subjects, no true members of the Church. But let not Christians be scared with
these bruta fulmina, these mock-thunderbolts. So long as Christ himself owneth
them, let not them regard whoever they are that cast them out. Coming to
Christ, and believing on him, they have communion with him in his Kingdom of
Grace here, and shall have communion with him in his Kingdom of Glory
hereafter. This by way of comfort to all who do come to Christ.

Use 3. Terror to wicked men, they shall be cast out.
On the other hand (in the third place) here is a word of terror to all those
who will not come to him. All wicked and ungodly persons, such as have Christ
offered and tendered to them, and they are invited to come unto him, yet they
refuse and reject him. With those Guests in the Gospel, they have something or
other to take them off from him, so as they do not regard to seek out after
Union and Communion with him. For all such, let them make account of a just
retaliation, to be rejected by him. So much is here insinuated in the the Text.
Him that comes to me I will in no wise cast out. Intimating, that those who do
not come unto him, he will cast them out. Not coming to him here, he will cast
them out hereafter. At that last and great day, when they, and all others,
shall be brought before him, then shall he pass the sentence of a final
Rejection and Ejection upon them. Not owning them. This is that our Savior
gives the Jews to take notice of (as by the aforesaid Parable of the foolish
virgins, Mat. 25. so again) Luke 13.25. Where he shows them how vain a thing
it would be for them another day to plead those privileges which then they
stood so much upon. When once the Master of the house is risen up (says he)
etc. Then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and
thou have taught in our streets (so, as it were taking acquaintance of him. But
mark what follows.) But he shall say, I tell you I know you not whence you
are, depart from me all ye workers of iniquity. Though they should then court
him, yet he tells them he would take no acquaintance of them. And the like let
all wicked and ungodly men, whether openly or secretly such, not only profane
persons, but hypocrites, expect and look for. When the door of grace and mercy
is shut (as after this life it shall be to them) then may they knock, but in
vain; whatever they can plead for themseves will be to no purpose. All the
outward privileges which here they have enjoyed, will be no advantages to
them. That they have lived under Ordinances, wherein they have had an outward
visible Communion with Christ, not only hearing his Word, but partaking of his
Sacrament, there eating and drinking in his presence, this will make nothing
for them, but much against them. This is that which they must then make account
to hear from the mouth of Jesus Christ, I tell you I know you not, depart from
me ye workers of iniquity. Thus shall he then cast them out, who would not here
receive him in. They that would not here receive him into their hearts, that he
might rule there, he will not then receive them into his house, his Kingdom,
there to dwell and reign with himself, but he shall then cast them out into
that outer darkness, where shall be weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth.
And in so doing who shall charge him of injustice, or yet rigor? That wicked
men are excluded and cast out (as at that day they shall be) they can charge it
upon none but themselves. Not upon Christ. It was not he that first rejected
them, he offered himself to them, and was ready to receive them upon their
coming to him. That they are cast out they may thank themselves. Such was their
stubbornness, they would not come when they might; and therefore their
exclusion is just. Thy destruction is of thy self (says the Lord to Israel,
Hos. 13.9. And so is this their exclusion. Because thou have rejected the Word
of the Lord, therefore he has also rejected thee. (says Samuel to Saul) 1 Samuel 15.23. And so may it be said unto them. Because you rejected the Lord
Christ here, would not hearken to him, would not receive him; therefore he has
also rejected you. Here is terror.

Use 4. Christ a pattern for the Christians imitation.
In the fourth and last place, having heard what is the mind of Jesus Christ
here, let me now propound him as a pattern for imitation to all those who own
him, and desire to be owned by him, let them be like minded with him. Let the
same mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus (says the Apostle to his
Philippians) Phil. 2.5. And so say I to you, all of you, and whoever they are
that profess the name of Jesus Christ, Be you like-minded with him. And that,
as in other respects, 1. In receiving those that are given to him.
so 1. in this, of receiving and embracing those who are given to him, and come
to him, even all true believers, such as professing the faith of Christ, walk
answerably to that profession. Seeing Christ is pleased to own them, to receive
and embrace them, so do you. Do not you cast out any of those whom he says he
will not cast out, but receive them into your hearts, and, as occasion is, into
your houses, making much of them, delighting in them. So did David; My
goodness (says he) extends not unto thee, O Lord, but unto the Saints that
are in the earth, the excellent, in whom is all my delight, Psalm. 16.3. And so
let it be with us. However we converse occasionally with others, the men of
this world which cannot be avoided so long as we are in the world, as the
Apostle yields it, 1 Cor. 5.10.) yet let our delight be in the Saints. And let
our goods also (according to our abilities and their necessities) extend unto
them. They being near to Christ, let them be dear to us. Let us in no wise cast
them out; but let them have a room in our hearts; which let it be as an open
house to receive all those who have aliquid Christi, any thing of Christ in
them. Seeing Christ has received them, so do we.

It matters not what otherwise they be, Though outwardly mean.
though despicable as to the world, in regard of the meanness of their outward
condition, or inward abilities, yet let them not be so to us. Such they are
whom God oft-times makes choice of to give to his Son Christ. Has not God
chosen the poor of this world (says St. James) Jam. 2.5. God has chosen the
weak things of the world (says St. Paul) 1 Cor. 1.27. Homines de plebe,
persons weak as in estate, so in parts. And such they are whom ofttimes we may
see forwardest in coming to Christ. Such they were who most an end followed him
in the days of his flesh, to whom he Preached. Go and show John (says he to
those Disciples of his) the poor have the Gospel Preached unto them, Mat. 11.5.
Persons of inferior rank and quality, the vulgar, common sort of people. Them,
the Teachers of those times, Pharisees and Lawyers, contemned and vilified,
calling them Populum terrae, the people of the earth, having a Proverb in use
among them (a proud and a foolish one, Proverbium stultum and superbum, Grot.
Annot in Mat. 11.5.
as Grotius writing upon that Text justly censures it) Spiritum non requiescere
nisi super divitem, The spirit rests only upon the rich man's head; so as they
disdained to teach and instruct them. But so did not our blessed Savior. He
most commonly made choice of them for his Auditors, finding his Ministry most
powerful and effectual among them. And so did his servant the Apostle St. Paul
after him, who tells his Corinthians, Not many wise men after the flesh men
carnally and worldly wise) not many mighty, not many noble are called. And if
so, take we heed how we despise any of them upon the account of the meanness of
their outward condition, or inward abilities. If they be dear to Christ (which
they are, if they be such as are come to him, believe on him) let them be so
also to us.

Yea, though infirm and weak in grace. Though weak in Grace.
Though bruised reeds and smoking flax, yet do not break, do not quench them.
This will not Christ do, let not any other dare to do it. Who has despised the
day of small things? (says the Prophet Zachary, speaking concerning the
building of the material Temple) Zach. 4.10. This did not God, who favored and
intended to bless and prosper those weak beginnings: And therefore let not any
others do it. So say I concerning this spiritual Temple, which is built in the
hearts of those who are given to Christ, true believers, who are the Temple of
God (as the Apostle sometimes calls them, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17, etc.) Who shall here
despise the day of small things? This will not Jesus Christ do; this let not
any of us do. Where there is any thing of Christ, own it; making much of the
least beginnings of grace, where we apprehend them to be in truth and
sincerity.

Which, as it concerns all, In special applied to the Ministers of Christ,
who are not to reject any that come to him.
so in a special manner the Ministers of the Gospel, whom Christ has made (as
it were) his door-keepers in his house, his Church, having put the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven into their hands, as the key of Doctrine, so of Discipline,
let them see that herein they imitate their Master, not turning either of these
keys against any of those that would come to Christ. This it was (as I showed
you) that our Savior rebuked his Apostles for, their rebuking of those that
would have brought young children unto him, Mark 10.14. Let not the like be
charged upon any of the Ministers of Christ, that they should be any ways
instrumental in keeping back any that would come unto him, so as to discourage
them by their Doctrine, or repel them by their Discipline.

A Cavil answered about Ministers not receiving all to Sacramental Communion.
Obj. But how is it then that you do so, may some happily here say?) How is it
that you repel and reject those from coming to have communion with Christ in
the Sacrament of his Supper, who are willing to come?

Ans. But who are they? It may be such as are not fitting to come to that
Ordinance. Such was that Guest in the Parable forenamed, forward to come to
the Supper, but not fitting. And such it may be are they, persons whose lives
and conversations (being scandalous) do proclaim to the world, that they are
such as have not put on the wedding garment. And being such, if the servants
shall cast them out, the Ministers of Christ refuse and reject them, it is no
more than what their Master both allows and requires them to do.

Reply. Yea, but they are such as Christ himself will not cast out, being such
as the Father has given unto him, and such as are come to him, believing on
him, such as making a Profession of faith walk answerably to that profession.

Ans. Repelling of any fit for Communion not justly charged upon the Ministers
in this place.
But (if such) who is it then that casts them out? Sure I am, Sure I am, not
the Ministers in this place. If any such be kept from this Ordinance, it is not
they that have cast them out. No, their desire has been, and is, that all
those who are hopefully such, such as are come unto Christ in such a way,
should come to his Table, to have Communion with him in this Ordinance. Only
they desire they should come to it in an orderly way, not so as to make a gap
for others to break in upon it who have no right to it. So as if any so
qualified want this Ordinance, they must charge it upon themselves, not us, who
desiring to imitate our Lord and Master, shall not willingly cast out any to
whom he says, Come. But having lately had occasion to fall upon this
Vindication, I shall not insist upon it again.

In the second place, 2. Christians to receive what God gives to them, applied
in special.
whilst we receive those that are given to Christ, and come to him, let us
also (in imitation of him) receive those who are given to us, and come to us.
Which let it be applied in a special manner to those whom God has set over
others; to Magistrates, Ministers, Parents.

1. For Magistrates, 1. To Magistrates who are not to eject their subjects.
whether Supreme or subordinate, let them be like-minded toward those whom God
gives to them, by his providence putting them under their Government,
themselves also being willing to submit thereunto, let not them cast them out,
out of their protection, but receive them, and take care of them, improving
their Authority and Power for their security and welfare, both temporal and
spiritual, doing Justice to them. It was Absaloms insinuation to the people,
when he aspired to the Crown, O (says he) that I were made Judge in the Land!
that every man which has any suit or cause might come unto me, and I would do
him justice, 2 Samuel 15.4. What he politickly there promises, let all Rulers
and Governors really and cordially perform. Those who come to them for justice,
let them do it them, hearing their grievances, righting their wrongs, not
rejecting, not slighting them, though never so mean. This is that which the
Lord calls for from the Judges of Judah, Isa. 1.17. Seek judgment, relieve
the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow. And this let all
Magistrates and Rulers do; those that are in such a way given to them,
committed to their charge, and come unto them; submitting to their Government,
let them not cast them out.

2. To Ministers, who are not to neglect their people.
2. In like manner for Ministers; those whom God has given to them, put under
their charge, being such as come unto them, attending upon their Ministry,
professing a voluntary submission thereunto, let not them cast them out, or
cast them off, neglecting their duties toward them. It was that which Eliab
said to his brother David, when he came up to see the Battle; With whom (says
he) have thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? 1 Samuel 17.28. so
checking and reproving him for neglecting of his charge. What he spoke to him
by way of disparagement in scorn and contempt, let it be seriously hearkened to
by all the Ministers of Christ. He having made them his Shepherds, committed
his sheep, his people unto them; let them take heed how they neglect or cast
off the care of them, leaving them in the wilderness of this world, exposed to
so many dangers by reason of their spiritual enemies. This will not their
Master do, the Lord Christ the great Shepherd of the sheep, He calls his own
sheep by name, and leads them out (as he says of himself) John 10. v. 3.
that is (as Diodate explaines it) his care is not only for the general body of
his Church, but it extends it self also to every particular member, as need
requires, leading them forth into green pastures, providing for them spiritual
refection and comfort. And (as it there follows) when he puts forth his
own sheep, he goes before them;] that is, guiding and protecting them, being
always present with them, and vigilant over them, going before them in
Doctrine and Example, (as our new Annotation has it.) This Christ did when he
was here upon earth, therein setting a pattern for all his Ministers, his
under-shepherds, who according to their ability are to do the like to the
sheep, the people committed to them. Those whom God has given to them, coming
to them, let them not cast them out.

3. To Parents, who are not to cast out their children, specially if obedient.
3. And the like may be said for Parents, to whom God has given children, they
coming to them in a way of duty and obedience, let not them cast them out. This
David speaks of, as a thing possible and supposable (though himself had not
experience of it) Psalm. 27.10. When my father and my mother forsake me] that
is, though they should. And so it sometimes is, natural Mothers forget their
Children. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have
compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget (says the Lord, etc.
Isa. 49.15. A thing too frequent; but wherever it is found, most unnatural; a
shame to Heathens, much more to Christians, who looking upon their children as
given them of God, are not to cast them out, not to leave them as the Ostrich
does her eggs in the sand, forgetting that the foot may crush them, or that the
wild beast may break them (as the careless nature of that creature is
described) Job 39.14, 15. but to take care of them for their education and
subsistence, providing for them necessaries and conveniences, specially if they
be such as come unto them in the way of submissive obedience.

What to be done to those that are disobedient.
Obj. But what if they cast off their Parents?

Ans. Why yet both Nature and Religion obliges the Parent not wholly to cast
off them, but to look after them (as David did after his Absalom) seeking their
return to them. Which if they shall find, then are they to receive them. So did
the Father of the Prodigal, of whom the Parable tells us, When he was afar off,
his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran and fell on his neck and kissed
him, Luke 15.20. Such affections should there be in natural Parents to their
children. Being given to them by God, and coming to them, they are not to cast
them out.

Yet one word more, Christians in all things to comply with the will of their
heavenly Father.
and that for all Christians, who have here also a pattern for their imitation,
teaching them in all things to comply with the will of their heavenly Father.
This let them do in regard of their outward temporal estates. Being confidently
assured of what our Savior here says, that All that their Father gives them
shall come unto them, things shall come to pass according to his all-disposing
providence, Resting contented with what he gives them.
let them quietly and contentedly submit thereunto. Only serving that
providence in the use of lawful means, let them accept what he gives them,
reaches forth to them, resting contented with their Fathers portion. Not
greedily scraping and gathering they care not in what way, by what means, so
laying hold upon that which God never gave them.

A point which Musculus (writing upon this Text) applies in a particular way
to the Kings and Princes of the earth, Applied in special to the Rulers of the
world. Et utinam Principes nostri dictum hoc Christi usurparent, ac vera fide
quisque ipsorum diceret, Omne quod dat mihi Pater ad me veniet; ut modus esset
bellorumistorum, quibus inter se dilatandis regnorum suorum pomaeriis
tumultuantur, and orbem coedibus replent. Musc. Com. in Text.
for whom he wishes that they would all make use of these words, saying with
themselves what their Savior here does, that All that their Father gives them
shall come unto them. And thereupon rest contented with what they have, putting
up the sword into the sheath, not seeking the enlargement of their Territories
and Dominions (as too often they do) whereby they set the world on fire,
filling it with confusion and blood.

In general to all Christians.
And what he says to them in special, let me say unto all Christians in
general, wishing that every of them would make the like use of these words,
each one saying within himself, Whatever my Father gives me shall come unto
me; What portion my Father allotteth me I shall have, and so rest contented
therewith, be it more or less.

This Doctrine how abused by covetous persons. Cavendum vero ne animus (...)
avaritiae suae ac (...) praetextum ex hoc loco colligat, dicens; Quicquid ad me
venerit, non ejicio for as. Musc. ibid.
And making such use of the former part of this Text, let them take heed of
abusing the latter, which covetous persons (as Musculus notes upon it) will be
ready to do, who hearing that all that the Father gives them shall come to
them, they thereupon resolve to get what they can, but to part with as little
as they may* No, that which comes unto them they will in no wise cast out.
This was Nabals resolution, when David's messengers came to him for some relief
for their Master in his straits, what (says he) Shall I then take my bread and
my water, and my flesh which I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto
men whom I know not whence they be? 1 Samuel 25.11. Such Nabals there are too
many every where, whose resolution is, Men not to cast out their estates by
wasting of them. Christianus certe dona Dei non temere abjiciet* ut etiam hic
dicere queat; Quicquid ad me venerit non ejicio fords. Idem. ibid. Interea
tamen illa ex fide erga Deum in usus necessarios tam proximi, quam suos
dispensabit, contentusque illis ^rit, qualia qualia sint, Idem. Christians to
be contented with and thankful for their Fathers portion, though not answerable
to their desires.
whatever God gives them not to cast it out in such a way. True indeed (as the
same Author further notes) there is such a use which may lawfully and
warrantably be made of these words, viz. that those to whom God gives estates,
they are not to cast them out by prodigal and luxurious spending and squandring
of them, but in a provident way to preserve them; yet in the mean time, what
God calls for, either for pious or charitable uses, let them not be unwilling
to part with. So was Abraham with his son, whom God had given to him, yet he
was not unwilling to give him to him again. In like manner are Christians to
deal with their estates; where God calls for them, they are not to withold
them; so resting contented with, and thankful for their fathers portion.

Yea, though happily it be not every ways answerable to what they could
desire. It was a weakness in Abraham, who in the want of one blessing (a Son)
seemed to slight all other mercies. When the Lord by way of encouragement said
unto him, Fear not Abram, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward, he
presently and passionately replies, Lord God, what will thou give me, seeing I
go childless? Genesis 15.1, 2. Let there not be the like murmuring or repining
thought in any of the Lords people. In the want of some one desired mercy, let
them not cast out all others by a slighting and undervaluing of what they have
received. What they have, let them know it is that which their Father has
given them; and so looking upon it as their fathers portion, let them receive
it contentedly, thankfully.

Christians to comply with Gods will in their afflictions and sufferings.
And what they do as to mercies, let them do the like also as to Crosses and
Chastisements; taking notice that whatever their Afflictions be, they are no
other than what their Father has given them, laid out for them, let them
quietly submit to them. Herein also has their blessed Lord and Savior set
them a pattern, who, however he deprecated that bitter cup which he saw coming
toward him, praying again and again that it might pass from him, yet still he
resolves his will into the will of his Father, Nevertheless not as I will, but
as thou will, Math. 26.39. And again, v. 42. O my Father, if this Cup may not
pass away from me, thy will be done. And afterward, when Peter drew his sword
for his rescue, he takes him off, declaring what his own resolution was, The
cup which my Father has given me shall I not drink it? Joh. 18.11. And herein
let him be a pattern for us, every of us. Looking upon every Cup of affliction
which is put into our hands, as the Cup which our Father has given to us, let
us not cast it out nor refuse to drink it. Not seeking by any indirect and
unlawful ways and means to shut out, or shake off whatever trials the Lord
shall be pleased to exercise us with, but quietly and contentedly submit to his
dispensations, both in regard of the kind, and measure and continuance, not
choosing our own rod, but in all submitting to the will of our heavenly Father:
Thus suffering in an obediential way, as our blessed Savior did, now may we
comfortably expect the like issue that he had, even a gracious supportation
under it, and a happy deliverance out of it.

FINIS.

