A Congratulatory POEM, ON The Miraculous, and Glorious Return of that
unparalled KING CHARLES the II. May 29. 1660.

By ALEX. BROM.

Pers. -- Ipse Semipaganus
Ad Sacra Regum carmen affero nostrum.
LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy-Lane 1660.

To the Kings most Sacred Majesty.
NOw our Spring-royal's come, this ravished Land,
(That for twelve years did bring forth Tyrants, and
Traitors, in such abundance, that the King,
And Subjects were forgot, both name and thing)
Bears Kings again, a memorable Spring!
May first brought forth, May now brings home our King;
Auspitious twenty nineth! this day of Mirth
Now gives Redemption, that before gave Birth.
Hark, ho w the admiring people cry, and shout,
See how they flock and leap for joy; the Rout,
Whose Zeal and Ignorance, for many years
Devised those Goblins Jealousies and Fears,
And fighting blindfold in those puzling Mists,
Raised by the conjuring of our Exorcists,
They Beat, and Wound, and Kill each other, while
Their Setters-on did share the prey, and smile.
Now they are unhood-wink'd, they do plainly see
What once they were, what now they ought to be.
The warlike Trumpet, whose unhallowed breath
Inspired Rebellion, throws aside the wreath
Of ill-got Laurel, scandalized to be
Made instrumental to such Victory
As shames and beats the Conqueror, and lays
A Crown of the conquered, baffling the others Bays;
Tuned by your Fame with loud and loyal voice,
Contributes sounds and helps us to Rejoice.
The enlarged Bells, that, in these latter days,
Have been all silenced, and forbid to raise
Their Voice, but cross or backward from the steeple,
To proclaim Fire, or to amaze the people,
Or, if they chim'd, 'twas out of tune, and so
Did other grating tuneless Sounds forego:
Now, with their graceful discords, all proclaim
Your safe return, and celebrate your Name.
And the contiguous Bon-fires made the Nation
To apprehend a final Conflagration;
And made the ground, at midnight to appear
Like Heaven at noon, and in the heat of the year,
'Bout which rejoicing Neighbors friendly came,
And with fresh wood fed the devouring Flame.
Mean while, the old Subjects, who so long have slept
In Caves, and been miraculously kept
From Rage and Famine; while the only thing
That fed and clothed them, was the name of King,
Do all New-plume themselves, to entertain
Your longed-for Majesty, and splendid Train.
And (as in Jobs time 'twas) those Spurious things,
Who look like Subjects, but did never love Kings,
Appear among your Subjects in array
That Is undiscernable, unless more gay.
All with loud hallows pierce the smiling skies,
While brandished Swords please and amaze our eyes.
Why then should only I stand still? and bear
No part of triumph in this Theater?
Though I Am not wise enough to speak t'a King
What Is worth his ear, nor rich enough to bring
Gifts worthy his acceptance; though I do
Not ride in Buff and Feathers, which might show
Vain Ostentation, or a needless Pride,
Which some appland, while others do deride.
That Pomp I did industriously eschew,
The Cost being more to me, than the show to you.
Nor do I love a Soldiers garb to own,
When my own Conscience tells me I am none.
Yet I Will do duty too, for I Have a mind
Will not be Idle, but will something find
To bid my SOVEREIGN Welcome to his own
Long-widow'd Realm, his Scepter, Crown and Throne,
And though too mean and empty it appear,
If he afford a well-pleased Eye and Ear,
His power cannot by my Weakness be withstood,
Be It what it will, he will find, or make it good.
Hail long-desired Sovereign! you that are
Now our sole joy and hope, as once our fear!
The Princely Son of a most pious Sire,
Whose Precepts and Example did inspire
Your tender years with virtues, that become
A King that is sit to rule all Christendom.
Which your great Soul has so improved since,
Europe cannot show such an accomplished Prince.
Whose whole life's so exemplary, that you
Convinced those foes, which we could not subdue,
And those that did to your Court to abuse you come,
Converted Proselytes returned home.
Such strong and sympathetick virtues lie
In your great name, it cures when you're not nigh,
Like Weapon-salve; If fame can reach up to
This hight of Cures, what would your person do?
Your Subjects highest Ambition, and their Cure,
Bold Rebels terror, you that did endure
What e're the Wit or Malice of your foes
Could lay on you or yours, yet stoutly chose
To suffer on, rather than to Retort
Their injuries, and grew Victorious for it;
And by your patient suffering did subdue
The Traitors fury, and the Traitors too.
The great King-makers favorite, a Prince
Born to a Crown, and kept for it ever since.
From Open force, from all the Close designs
Of all your Foes, and all our Catalines,
From all the insatiate malice of that bold
Bloodthirsty Tyrant, from his sword, and gold
Which hurt you more; and from your own false Friends,
Who sacrificed to his Ambitious ends
Your Crown and people, and were kept in pay,
Your Cause, and Sacred Person to betray,
In which he every year expended more
Than your Revenues have been heretofore;
Yet you're deliverd out of all these things,
By your Protector, who is the King of Kings.
No more that proud Usurper now shall boast,
His partial Conquests, which more Money cost,
And Blood than they were worth, no more remember,
His thrice auspicious third day of September,
Which he designed to be redeemed from black,
And in Red letters writ in the Almanac.
Since he fought not for victories, but paid,
Nor were you conquered by him, but betrayed.
And now your May, by love, has gotten more,
Than his Septembers did, by blood, before.
Thanks to that Glory of the West; that Star,
By whose conductive influence you are
Brought to enjoy your own, whose eminent worth
These Islands are too small to Echo forth.
Whose courage bafled fear, whose purer soul
No bribes could ever seduce, no threats control,
But strangely crossed the proverb, and brought forth
The best of Goods from th'once-pernicious North,
To whose Integrity, your Kingdoms owe
Their restoration, and what thence does flow,
Your blessed arrival; with such prudence still
He managed these affairs, such truth, such skill,
Such valor too, he led these Nations through
Red Seas of Blood, and yet never wet their shoe.
Blessed be the Heavenly powers, that hither sent
This Noble Hero, to be the instrument
To 'enthrone your Royal Person, and to bring
To's longing subjects o^^ long absent King.
Welcome from foreign Kingdoms, where you have been,
Driven by hard-hearted Fate, and where you have seen,
Strange men and manners; yet too truly known,
Those far more Hospitable than your own;
From those that would not, those that durst not do
Right to themselves, by being kind to you;
From professed foes, and from pretended friends,
Whose feigned love promotes their sordid Ends.
"Kings treating Kings springs not from love, but state,
"Their love's to policy subordinate.
From banishment, from dangers, and from want,
From all those mischiefs that depend upon it,
You Are truly welcome; welcome to your throne,
Your Crowns and Scepters, and what ere's your own,
Nay to what is ours too, for we find it true,
Our wealth is gotten and preserved by you;
Welcome to your Subjects hearts, who long did burn
With strong desires to see your blessed return.
Welcome to your friends, welcome to your wisest foes,
Whose bought Experience tells them now, that those
Riches they have got by plunder, fraud, and force,
Do not increase, but make their fortunes worse,
Like Robbers spoils, just as they come, they go,
And leave the Robbers poor and wicked too.
They see their error now, and do begin,
(Could they but hope, youl'd pardon their Huge sin)
To think you the only means, and the only man,
That will restore our liberties, and can.
Since you're come out o'th fire, twelve years refined,
With hardened body, and Experienced mind.
Only that crew of Caitiffs, who have been,
So long, so deeply plunged in so great sin,
That they despair of pardon, and believe,
You cannot have so much mercy to forgive,
As they had villainy to offend, and sin,
And therefore to get out, get further in.
These never were, and never will be true
Unto your loyal Subjects, or to you;
The scum and scorn of every sort of men;
That for abilities, Could scarce tell ten,
And of estates proportioned to their parts;
Of mean enjoyments, and of worse deserts,
Whom want made bold, and impudence supplied
Those gifts, which art and nature had denied,
And in their practice perfect Atheists too,
(For half-wit, and half-learning makes men so)
These first contrived and then promoted all
Those troubles, which upon your Realm did fall;
Inflamed three populous Nations, that they might
Get better opportunity and light
To steal and plunder, and our goods might have,
By robbing those, whom they pretend to save,
Our new commotions new employments made,
And what was our affliction grew their trade.
And when they saw the plots, the had laid, did take,
Then they turned Gamsters, and put in their stake,
Ventured their All; their Credit which was small,
And next their Conscience which was none at all,
Put on all forms, and all Religions own,
And all alike, for they were all of none.
A thousand of them han't one Christian soul,
No oaths oblige them, and no Laws control
Their strong desires but paenal ones; and those
Make them not innocent, but cautelous.
Crimes that are scandalous, and yield no gain,
Revenge or pleasure, they perhaps refrain;
But where a crime was gainful to commit,
Or pleased their luct or malice, how they bit!
This did invade the Pulpit, and the Throne,
And made them both, and all that is ours, their own
Deposed the Ministers and Magistrates,
And in a godly way, seized their estates;
Then did the Gentry follow, and the Rich,
Those neutral sinners, by omission, which
Had good estates, for 'twas a lesser sin
To plunder, than to have ought worth Plundring.
And by religious forms, and shows, and paints,
They Are called the Godly party, and the Saints.
And as those men, that live ill lives, desire
To die good deaths, so these vile men aspire
To be reputed honest, and did style
Themselves so, but they were mere Cheats the while.
Yet, by their artless Oratory, they
Vent'ring to make Orations, preach, and pray,
Drew in too many silly souls, that were
Caught with vain shows, drawn on by hope and fear,
Poor undiscerning, all believing Elves,
Fit but to be the ruin of themselves;
Born to be cozened, trod on, and abused,
Loved to be fooled, and easily seduced.
These beasts they make with courage fight and die,
Like Andabates, not knowing how, nor why,
Till they destroyed King, Kingdom, Church and Laws,
And sacrificed all to that word, The Cause.
While those possess the fruit of all the toiles
Of these blind slaves, and flourish with their spoils,
Plumed with gay feathers stolen, (like Aesops crow)
They seem gay birds, but it was only show.
Now public lands and private too, they share
Among themselves, whose mawes did never spare
Ought they could grasp; to get the Royal lands,
They in Blood royal bathed their ravenous hands.
With which they shortly pampered grew, and rich,
Then was their blood infected with the itch
Of Pomp, and Power, and now they must be Squires,
And Knights and Lords, to please their wives desires
And Madam them. A broken tradesman now,
Peic'd with Church Lands, makes all the vulgar bow
Unto his honor, and their Bonets vail
To's worship, that sold Peticoates, or Ale.
In pomp, attire, and everything they did
Look like true Gentry, but the Soul, and Head,
By which they were discerned, for they were rude,
With harsh and ill-bred natures still endu'd;
Proud, and penurious. What Nobility
Sprung in an instant, from all trades had we!
Such the other things, crept into the other House,
Whose Sires heel'd stockings, and whose Dams sold sowse.
There Is Lord Protectors, but of such a Crew,
As people Newgate, not good men, and true.
There were Lord Keepers, but of Cowes and Swine,
Lord Cobblers, and Lord Drawers, not of wine.
Fine Cockney-pageant Lords, and Lords Gee-hoo,
Lords Butchers, and Lords Butlers, Dray-Lords too.
And to transact with these was hatched a brood,
Of Justices and Squires, nor great, nor good;
Raised out of plunder, and of sequestration,
Like Frogs of Nilus, from an inundation;
A foundred Warrier, when the wars did cease,
As nat'rally turned Justice of the Peace,
And did with boldness the office undertake,
As a blind Coach-horse does a Stalion make.
These filled all Countries, and in every Town
Dwelt one or more to tread your Subjects down.
And to complete this Stratagem of theirs,
They use Auxiliary Lecturers;
Illiterate Dolts, picked out of every Trade,
Of the same metal, as Jeroboams, made,
That never took Orders, nor e're any keep,
But boldly into others Pulpits creep,
And vent their Heresies, and there inspire
The vulgar with Sedition, who desire
Still to be cheated, and do love to be
Misled by the ears, by couzning Sophistry,
These sold Divinity, as Witches do,
In Lapland, Winds, to drive where e're you go.
The Sword no action did, so dire and fell,
But that some Pulpiteers pronounced it, Well.
With these ingredients, were the Countries all
Poisoned, and fooled, and awed, while they did call
Themselves the Cities, or the Counties, and
Did in their names, what they never understand
Or hear of. These did that old Drie-bone call
Up to the Throne, (if he were called at all)
And vowed to live and dye with him; and then
Addressed to Dick, and vowed the same again.
And so to Rump; but these vows were no more
Than what they vowed to Essex long before,
And so performed; they dyed alike with all,
Yet lived on unconcerned in their fall:
So as these Corks might swim at top, they n'ere
Care what the liquor is that them did bear.
These taught the easy people, prone to fin,
And ready to imbibe ill customs in,
To betray trusts, to break an Oath, and Word,
Things that the old English Protestant abhorred.
And lest these Kingdoms should hereafter be
Took for enchanted Islands (where men see
Nothing but Devils did inhabit, and
All virtuous people had forsook the land
And left it to these Monsters) these took care,
To make us match and mix our blood with their
Polluted issue; and so do, as when
Gods sons did take the daughters once of men.
To fright men into this, they did begin
To decimate them, for Original Sin.
Children that were unborn, in those mad times,
And unconcerned in what they Voted crimes,
If guilty of Estates, were forced to pay
The tenth to those, who took nine parts away.
The Law was made a standing pool, and grew
Corrupt, for want of current; thence a crew
Of monstrous Animals out daily crawled,
Who little knew, but impudently ball'd;
And made the Law the Echo of the Sword,
And with such Cattle were the Benches stored,
That made the Gown ridiculous, Now and then
The Malefactors were the wiser men,
Often times the honester; these did dispense,
And rack the Laws, against equity and sense,
Which way the Buff would have them turn, by which
They long continued powerful and Rich.
Now they'ld all wheel about, and be for you,
For (like Camaelions) they still change their hue,
And look like that that is next them; they will vow,
Their hearts were always for you, and are now.
It Is no new Wit, it is in a Play we know,
Who would not wish you King, now you are so?
But if to be of both sides be a Crime,
What is it to turn of all sides with the time?
Yet you can pardon all, for you have more
Mercy and love, than they have crimes in store.
And you can love, or pity them, which none
But you could do; you can their persons own,
And with unconquered patience look on them,
Because your Nature knows not to condemn.
You Will let them live, and by your grace convince
Their trech'rous hearts, that they have wronged a Prince
Whom God and Angels love and keep; whose mind
Solely to love and mercy is inclined;
Whom none but such as they would hurt, or grieve,
And none but such as you could ever forgive
Such men and crimes. Those feathers ne'rtheless
Plucked from your Subjects backs, their own to dress,
Should be repluck'd, or else they should restore,
They Will still be left Crows, as they were before.
But if you trust them, you will as surely be
Betrayed and ruined, as you now are free.
And now you are returned to your Realm,
May you sit long, and steadfastly at the Helm,
And rule these headstrong people: may you be
The true Protector of our Liberty.
Your wisdom only answers the expectation
Of this long injured, now reviving Nation.
May true Religion flourish and increase,
And we love virtue, as the ground of peace;
May all pretenses, outward forms, and shows
Whereby we have been gulled, give way for those
True acts of pure religion, and may we
Not only seem religious, but be.
Of taking Oaths, may you and we be shy,
But being taken think no necessity
Or power can make us break them! may we never
Make wilful breach of promises! nor e're
Basely betray our trusts! but strive to be
Men both of honor and of honesty!
And may those only that are just, and true,
Be always honored, and employed by you.
Next let our sacred Laws, in which do stand
The wealth, the peace, and safety of our Land,
Be kept inviolable, and never made
Nets to the small, while the great Flies evade!
May those that are entrusted with them be
Men of sound knowledge, and integrity,
And sober courage; such as dare, and will,
And can do Justice! We have felt what ill
Comes by such Clerks and Judges as have been,
For favor, faction, or design put in,
Without respect to Merit, who have made
The Law to Tyrants various lusts a Bawd,
Perverted Justice, and our Rights have sold,
And Rulers have been overruled by Gold.
Then are the people happy, and Kings too,
When, they that are in power, are good, and do.
On these two Bases let our peace be built
So firm and lasting, that no blood be spilt,
No Country wasted, and no treasure spent
While you and yours do reign; no future rent
Disturb your happiness; but we may strive
Each in his sphere, to make our Nation thrive,
Grow plentiful, and powerful, and become
The Joy or Terror of all Christendom.
And those, who lately thought themselves above us,
May, spite of fate, or tremble at, or love us;
May no incroaching spirit break the hedge
Between Prerogative, and Privilege.
And may your sacred MAJESTY enjoy
Delights of Mind, and Body, that never cloy!
Not only be obeyed, but loved at home,
Praised and admired by all that near you come!
And may your Royal Fame be spread as far
As valiant, and as virtuous people are!
And when you are Majesty shall be inclined
To bless your Realms with heirs, oh may you find
A Spouse that may for Beauty, Virtue, Wit,
And royal birth, be for your person fit!
May you abound in hopeful babes, that may
Govern the Nations, and your Scepters sway,
Till time shall be no more, and pledges be
Both of our love, and our felicity.
May you live long and happily, and find
No pains of body, and no griefs of mind:
While we with loyal hearts rejoice, and sing
God bless your Kingdoms, and
God save our KING.
FINIS.

