Five new PLAYS, VIZ. The ENGLISH MOOR, or The MOCKMARRIAGE. The LOVESICK
COURT, or The AMBITIOUS POLITIC. COVENT GARDEN Weeded. The NEW ACADEMY, or
The NEW EXCHANGE. The QUEEN and CONCUBINE.


By RICHARD BROM.

LONDON, Printed for A. Crook at the Green Dragon in Saint Paul's Churchyard,
and for H. Brom at the Gunn in Ivy-Lane, 1659.

Bromes Plays.

TO THE READERS.
OR rather to the Spectators, if the Fates so pleased, these Comedies exactly
being dressed for the Stage; and the often-tried Author (better than many who
can but scribble) understood the Proportions and Beauties of a Scene; But as
they are they will not deceive you; for the same hand (which formerly pleased)
now held the Pen. We suppose we bring what in these days you scarce could
hope for, Five new Plays We call them new, because till now they never were
printed. You must not think them posthumous Productions, though they come into
the world after the Author's death: they were all begotten and born (and owned
by Him before a thousand witnesses) many years since; they then trod the Stage
(their proper place) though they passed not the Press. They are all Comedies,
for (a man would think) we have had too many Tragedies. But this Book knew them
not. The ENGLISH MOOR here (what ever name or face it wears) is older than our
Troubles. The LOVESICK COURT, and the AMBITIOUS POLITIC are but one Play,
though strange those two should dwell together. This NEW ACADEMY concerns not
that which eight years since peeped up in Write Friars; and this NEW EXCHANGE
knows nothing of that which now is cleaving to the Great Church Wall. This
QUEEN is a mere stranger to our Island; Her Scene is Sicily, the Persons and
Action taste nothing of England. Thus the whole Book being free and ingenuous,
we hope the Author may have the same allowance, especially now since he is gone
to the great Wits, that is, dead. And yet there are a sort (one would wonder
there should be) who think they lessen this Author's worth when they speak the
relation he had to Ben. Johnson. We very thankfully embrace the Objection, and
desire they would name any other Master that could better teach a man to write
a good Play. The materials must flow from all parts of the world; but the Art
and Composition come only from Books and such living Masters as that our great
Laureat; And for this purpose we have here prefixed Ben Johnson's own testimony
to his Servant our Author; we grant it is (according to Ben's own nature and
custom) magisterial enough; and who looks for other, since he said to
Shakespeare -- I shall draw envy on thy name (by writing in his praise) and
threw in his face -- small Latin and less Greek; but also told Seldom himself
(as if Ben's conscience checked him for being too good natured in commending
others.)

Your Book (my Seldom) I have read --
Though I confess (as every Muse has erred,
And mine not least) I have too often preferred
Men past their terms, and praised some names too much,
But it was with purpose to have made them such;
Since, being deceived, I turn a sharper eye
Upon my self, and ask to whom, and why,
And what I write, and vex it many days
Before men get a Verse, much less a Praise.
-- I first salute thee so, and gratulats,
With that thy style, thy keeping of thy state.
-- I could take up (and nere abuse
The credit) what would ^urnish a tenth Muse*
But here is nor time nor place my wealth to tell;
You both are modest, so am I. Farewell.
It seems (what ere we think) Ben thought it diminution for no man to attend
upon his Muse. And were not already the Ancients too much trod on, we could
name famous wits who served far meaner Masters than Ben Johnson. For, none
versed in Letters but know the wise Aesop was born and bred a wretched slave;
Lucian a Stone-cutter, Virgil himself begotten by a Basket-maker, born in a
ditch, and then prefe^red to an under Groom in the stable; nay, (to instance in
our Authors own order) Naevius the Comedian a Captains man's man; Plautus
servant to a poor Baker, Terence a slave as well as Aesop; and (which for our
purpose is most of all) our Authors own Master handled the Trowel before he
grew acquainted with Seianus or Cataline. But enough of this, lest pleading for
the Author, make him seem to want an Apology. As for the Stationers, they bring
these Poems as they had them from the Author; not suffering any false or busy
hand to add or make the least mutilation; having been more watchful over the
Printers common negligence, than such work as this has usually obtained. And
if these new Plays fail your expectation, we openly profess we know not how,
where, or when we shall fit you.

To my old Faithful Servant, and (by his continued virtue) my loving Friend,
the Author of this work, Mr. Rich. Brom.
I Had you for a Servant, once, Dick. Brom,
And you performed a Servants faithful parts:
Now, you are got into a nearer room
Of Fellowship, professing my old Arts.
And you do do them well, with good applause,
Which you have justly gained from the Stage,
By observation of those Comic Laws,
Which I, your Master, first did teach this Age.
You learned it well, and for it served your Time,
A Prentiship, which few do now adays:
Now each Court. Hobbyhorse, will wince in Rhyme.
Both learned and unlearned, all write Plays:
It was not so of old; men took up trades
That knew the Crafts they had been bred in right;
An honest Bilbo Smith would make good Blades,
And the Physician teach men spue, and --
The Cobbler kept him to his Awll, But now
He Will be a Pilot, scarce can guide a Plow.
Ben. Johnson.

To my most ingenious friend, Mr. ALEX. BROM Upon his setting forth Mr. RICH.
BROMES PLAYS:
THis, Sir, is double Piety, and you
In this oblige the dead and living too.
As the last trumpet with one powerful sound
Raises forgotten Bodies from the ground,
And betters those that yet remain alive:
So you an equal happiness do give
Unto his dust, and us, at once engage
His sacred Ashes, and the present age.
Nor can I tell to whom we more are bound,
Or to his wit, or you that have it found.
When Thetis Son amongst the maids lay hid,
And for their softer wars the Trojan fled;
He that discovered him, did justly claim
An equal share in the honor of his name;
And da^^d to call Achilles victories,
All those exploits, and all those Trophies his:
So you that have this noble wit revealed
And made it be (which was before concealed)
Known and commended, may as well receive
Part in those Laurels we to him do give.
He made the oil, but you enlightened it,
He gave the salt, but you have made it white,
And dug it from the Pit where it once lay
Unseen, or by the eyes of men or day:
He made the branches of this Coral grow,
Hid in its private Sea untouched; but you
By drawing it into the open air,
Have made it turn more precious, and more fair.
He spoke with such a full and easy strain,
With such a soft, and such a flowing vein,
As if 'twere Nature all, yet there was Art,
Yet there was Skill in every limb and Part.
So gently came all that he thought or writ,
As if he made it not, but did repeat.
His fancy like the blood did always flow,
Yet full of life and full of spirts too.
His wit and Angels did in this a^^ee,
Their motion is most nimble, quick, and free,
And perfect too. And as the world was made,
(Which no delays of spring and summer had,
No ages or increases, but on all
At first a ripeness, and full growth did fall;
So all that from his happy Pen did come
Was ripe and grown at first, and left no room
For after change, no second hand could give
More strength to it, or it more strength receive.
When he does speak of love, himself he arms
With such resistless, and such conquering charms,
Acts such sweet hopes, such innocent fears, and joys,
That we or love his Mistress, or his voice,
As echo did. When he would make us smile,
Thousand Anacreons play about his style.
When he commands our sorrow, straight our eyes
Into salt streams, our hearts to sighings rise.
When he does laugh again, the clouds are gone,
Our minds ^^to a sudden calmness run:
He so disposed our thoughts, as when the hand,
Or eye of the chief General does command,
Whole Armies act what his example led,
Follow his postures with such willing speed,
Into obedience with such eafiness fall,
As if one soul and spring did move them all.
When he struck vice, he let the person go,
Wounded not men but manners; nor did do
Like him who when he painted heaven and hell,
Amongst the damned shades and those that fell,
Did draw his Enemies face, that all might say
Who there condemned by the Painter lay:
But as the Surgeon at once hides and cures,
And binds up the limb which most indures
The sore and pain: so he with gentle hand
Did heal the wound, and yet conceal the man.
His Scenes men's Actions, Tempers, Humors show,
And copy out what the great world does do.
His words are like the shapes which Angels take,
And for themselves of finest air do make,
That are so much like men, that clearest eyes
Cannot discern where the small difference lies.
(...) THE English Moor, OR THE MOCK-MARRIAGE.

A Comaedy as it was often acted with general applause by her Majesty's
Servants.

Innocens permit jocos cur ludere nobis
Non liceat? --
LONDON, Printed by J. T. for A. C. and Henry Broom, and are to be sold at the
Gun in Ivie-lane, 1658.

Prologue.
MOst noble, fair and courteous, to ye all
Welcome and thanks we give, that you would call
And visit your poor servants, that have been
So long and pitiless unheard, unseen.
Welcome, you will say your money that does do,
(Dissembling is a fault) we say so too.
And your long absence was no fault of your,
But our sad fate to be so long obscure.
Jove and the Muses grant, and all good Men,
We feel not that extremity again:
The thought of which yet chills us with a fear
That we have bought our liberty too dear:
For should we fall into a new restraint,
Our hearts must break that did before but faint.
You noble, great and good ones, that vouchsafe
To see a Comedy, and sometimes laugh
Or smile at wit and harmeless mirth, As thus
ye have begun to grace and succor us;
Be further pleased (to hold us still upright,
For our r^lief, and for your own delight)
To move for us to those high powers whom we
submit unto in all humility,
For our proceeding, and we will make it good
To utter nothing may be understood
Offensive to the state, manners or time,
We will as well look to our necks as climb.
You hear our suit, obtain it if you may;
Then find us money and we will find you play.
Drammatis Personae.
Meanwell. Two old Gentlemen and friends, supposed to have been killed in a
Duel. Rashley. Arthur, Meanwels Son, in love with Lucy. Theophilus, Rashleys
Son, in love with Milicent. Quicksands, an old Usurer. Testy, an old angry
Justice. Winlose, a decayed Gentleman. Vincent. Two gallants undone by
Quicksands. Edmund. Nath. Banelass, a Wencher. Host. Drawer. Ralph, Meanwels
servant. Arnold, Rashleys servant. Buzard, Quicksands servant. Dionisia,
Meanwels daughter. Lucy, Rashleys daughter. Milicent, Testys Niece. Phillis,
Winlose daughter. Madge, Quicksands servant.
The Scene London.

THE ENGLISH-MOOR or the Mock-Marriage.
Act. 1. Scene. 1.
Arthur. Dionysia. Ar. DEar Sister, bear with me.

Di. I may not, brother.
What! suffer you to pine, and peak away
In your unnatural melancholy fits;
Which have already turned your purer blood
Into a toad-pool dye. I am ashamed
(Upon my life) almost to call you brother
But nature has her swing in me. I must.
Therefore I crave you (as you are my brother)
To shake this dull and muddy humor off,
By visiting the streets, and quit your chamber,
Which is a sickness to you.

Ar. O my sister!

Di. I can say, O my brother too, to show you
How it becomes you. I have the same cause
Equally with your self, to spend my life
In sollitary mourning; and would do it,
Could it make good our loss: My honored Father!
A tear has escaped me there: But that is by th'by,
And more of anger against his enemy,
And his for ever cursed posterity,
That robbed us of a Father, then of sorrow
For what we know is unrecoverable.
But to sit grieving over his Memory
In a resolved silence, as you do;
Killing your own blood while a vein holds any
Proceeding from the flesh, that drew out his,
Is merely idle. Mingle then your grief
With thought of brave revenge: And do it not
In private Meditation in your Chamber;
But bear it out till it proceed to Action.

Ar. By pouring blood on blood?

Di. By quenching fire
Of high revenge, with base unmanly blood;
By stopping of our Fathers cureless wounds
(Which still bleed fresh in our vexed memories)
With the proud flesh of him that butchered ours.

Ar. We know he lives not that has slain our Father:
Or, if he lives, it is where I cannot reach him:
He nere saw English harbor since his sword
Unfortunately had the better of my father.

Di. But his son lives.

Ar. Good sister cool thy passion
With reasonable means

Di. O where is the spirit
That my slain father had. Have you no part often?
Must I now play the Man, whilst you inherit
Only my Mothers puling disposition?

Ar. I know thy drift, good sister Dionisia,
Is not unto revenge, or blood; but to stir up
Some motion in me, to prevent the danger
A sad retiredness may bring upon me.

Di. Be It as you think it, so you will abroad;
And make the house no longer dark with sighing.
Ent. Rafe Now Sir the news with you?

Ra. News worth your hearing,
Merely to laugh at: Good for nothing else.

Di. Is the old Ruffian taken, and hanged, that slew
My Father; or his son Brain-battered; or
His Daughter made a prostitute to shame?

Ar. How merciless are your wishes!

Ra. Lady, no.
But as I was hankring at an ordinary,
In quest of a new Master (for this, here,
Will never last to a new livory
'Less he were merrier) I heard the bravest noise
Of Laughter at a wicked accident
Of Marriage, that was chopped up this Morning.

Di. What marriage? Quickly.

Ra. Who do you think
Has married fair Mistress Millicent?

Di. Theophilus (I can name him, though his father
Was fatal unto mine) was sure to her.

Ra. Yes, but without a Priest. She has slipped his hold,
And is made fast enough unto another,
For which fine Mr. The. so whines and chafes,
And hangs the head! More then he would do
For's father, were he hanged, as you did wish
For laughing news eene now. There Is sport for you.

Di. It does me good to hear of any cross
That may torment their family. I wish
Joy to the man that did beguile him of her
What ere he be.

Ar. But who has married her?

Ra. Thence springs the jest. Old Mr. Quicksands, Sir,
The bottomless devourer of young Gentlemen;
He that has lived, till past threescore, a batcheler,
By threescore in the hundred; he that has
Undone by Mortgages and under-buyings
So many Gentlemen, that they all despaired
Of means to be revenged.

Ar. But where is your Jest?

Ra. The Jest is, that they now have found that means
(As they suppose) by making of him Cuckold.
They are laying their heads together in every corner,
Contriving of his horns, and drinking healths
To the success. And there were sport for you now,
If you were any body.

Ar. I Will abroad however.

Di. That Is nobly said. Take courage with you Brother.

Ar. And yet me thinks I know not how to look
The wide world in the face, thus on the sudden
I would fain get abroad, yet be unknown.

Ra. For that Sir (look you) I have here, by chance,
A false beard which I borrowed, with a purpose
To have worn't and put a jest upon your sadness.

Ar. Does it do well with me?
Ar. puts on the beard.
Ra. You Will never have
One of your own so good: you look like Hector.

Ar. Go fetch my sword and follow me.

Di. Be sure you carry a strict eye over his actions,
And bring me a true account.

Ra. I warrant you Mistress.

Di. Do, and I Will love thee everlastingly.
Why, now you are my brother.

Ar. Farewell Sister.
Exit. Ar. Ra.
Di. I hope he has some stratagem a foot
In our revenge to make his honor good:
It is not grief can quit a fathers blood.
Exit.
ACT 1. SCENE 2.
Nathaniel. Phillis. Not. Prithee be and answered, and hang off of me,
I have no more to say to you in the way
You wot on Phillis.

Phi. Nor do I seek to you
In that way which you wot on, wanton Sir,
But to be honest, and to marry me.
You have done too much the the other way already.

Not. I wish you were more thankful, Mrs. Phillis,
To one has taught you a trade to live upon:
You are not th'first by twenty I have taught it
That thrive well in the world.

Phi. There are so many
Such teachers in the world; and so few
Reformers, that the world is grown so full
Of female frailties, the poor Harlotries
Can scarce already live by one another,
And yet you would have me thrust in among'em.

Not. I do not urge you. Take what course you please,
But look not after me: I am not marked
For Matrimony, I thank my stars.

Phi. Should I run evil courses, you are the cause;
And may in time, curse your own act in it:
You Will find th'undoing of an honest Maid
Your heaviest sin upon your bed of sickness;
T will cost your soul the deepest groan it fetches;
And in that hope I leave you.
Exit.
Not. Farewell wag-tail.
Marry thee quoth a! That Is wise work indeed!
If we should marry every Wench we lie with,
'T were after six a week with some of us.
(Marry love forbid) when two is enough to hang one.

Vin. Not, we have sought diligently, for fear
Enter Vincent and Edmond. The news that is abroad should fly before us.

Not. What news? What flying fame do you labor with?

Ed. News that makes all the Gallants in the Town
Fly out o'their little wits: They are so eager,
Upon the joy. I mean such youthful Gallants
As have, or sold, or mortgaged; or been cheated
By the grave patron of Arch-cosonage,
Whose sad misfortune we are come to sing:
Shall I need to name him to thee?

Not. Who, the old Rascal Quicksands? speak good Vince,
What! has he hanged himself? speak quickly prithe.

Vin. Worse, worse by half man. Durst thou hear a news
Whose mirth will hazard cracking of a rib?

Not. I, and't be two. Here Is hoopes enough besides
To hold my drink in. Pray thee speak; what mischief
Is come upon him.

Ed. I pray thee guess again.

Not. Has somebody over-reached him in his way
Of damnable extortion; and he cut his throat,
Or swallowed poison?

Vin. Ten times worse then that too.

Not. Is he then hoisted into the Star Chamber
For his notorious practices? or into
The high Commission for his blacker arts?

Ed. Worse then all this.

Not. Pax, keep it to your self then,
If you can think it be too good for me.
Why did you set me a longing? you cry worse
And ten times worse; and know as well as I,
The worse it is to him, the better wel-come
Ever to me: And yet you tell me nothing.

Vin. He has married a young wife.

Not. Has he Cadzooks?

Ed. We bring you no comfort, we.

Not. Nere go fine sport, Ha, ha, ha. What is she?
Would he had my wench, was here e^ne now,
What is she he has married? quickly prithe.

Vin. One much too good for him.

Ed. The beauteous Millicent.
Driven by the tempest of her Uncles will,
Is like a pinnace forced against the Rock.

Not. But he will never split her, that is the b^st on it.
I hope she will break his heart first. Gentlemen,
I thank you for your news; and know what I
Will presently go do.

Vin. Pray stay a little.

Ed. And take us with you. What will you go do?

Not. That which we can all at once, Do not hold me.

Vin. We came to cast a plot w'ye.

Not. Cast a pudding -- How long ha'they been married?

Ed. But this morning.

Not. You Will ha'me come too late.
Never go it is a shame he was not Cuckolded
Before Dinner.

Vin. That had been a fine first course
At a wedding feast indeed. A little patience.

Not. Pray let me take my course before supper yet.

Ed. The business 'longs to us as much as you,
He has wronged us all alike. He has cozened us
As much as you.

Not. He has made me so poor
That my poor whore eene now claimed marriage of me.

Vin. The case is ours. His wrongs are common to us,
So shall his wife be, can we purchase her:
Did we bring you the news for you to run
And prevent us do you think?

Not. Pardon my zeal good Gentlemen; which only
Considered but the fitness of the Act,
And that it is more then time 'twere done in faith.
Enter Theophilus and Arnold.
Ed. And see here comes a fourth man that has lost
More on her part, then we upon the Bridegrooms.

Vin. He Is very sour and sad. It Is crept upon him
By this untoward accident.

Not. 'Twould anger any man to be nosed of such a match;
But I Will remove his sorrow --
Gentle Theophilus, you are well met,
Your sorrow is familiar with us all
In the large loss of your betrothed love;
But, sir, be comforted: you have our pity
And our revenge to ease you. It Is decreed
Her husband shall be instantly a Cuckold.

The. Most sinfully thou lie; and all that give
Breath to that foul opinion.
Draw and fight.
Not. What do you mean.

The. Give me that thought from you; nay, from you all,
Or I will rip you for it.

Not: Zooks what mean you.

Vin. Hold, Sir, forbear.

The. I Will have that thought out first.

Not. I say he does deserve to be a Cuckold;
Let him be what he will, a pox upon him.

Ed. Vin. So we say all.

The. What Is that to ill in her?
I stand upon that point. Man's evil merit's
No warrant for a woman's dishonesty.
I say had she a man forty degrees
Beneath his undeservings, twere more possible
For him to deceive her with a good Life,
Then she him with a wicked.

Not. I say so too.
But then I say again, The more's the pity.

The. Do and undo.
He hurts him.
Not. Zookes now your bitch has bit me,
I say he will be one, he shall be one;
I Will make him one my self.
Ent. Ar. in his false beard he sides with Theoph. Ext. Na^. Vin. Ed.
Ed. Vin. And weell both help him.

Arn. Why here is trim stuff. Help ho, Murder, Murder.

Art. This is oppression gentlemen; an unmanly one.

Not. What devils this raised? fall off, it is an ill business.

Arn. Have you no hurt Sir.

The. No I Am confident.

Arn. By your favor, I will see.
Arnold search s Theoph.
Art. What fortune's this,
I fought against friends to save mine enemy,
But I hope neither know me. I desire
To rest hid to my friends for my offense to them,
And to mine enemy, till I make him dearer.
Exit.
The. I told thee there was ^one.

Arn. I Am glad it proves so.

The. But where is the Gentleman?

Arn. Do you not know him sir?

The. Not I, it is the first time that ere I saw him;
To my remembrance; yet he fought for me.
Beshrew thy idler care that made me lose him,
What should he be that so could fight for me,
Yet care not for my company? beshrew thy heart.
Why should he use me thus? I shall be sick to think on it.
I Am made beholding now to I know not whom;
And I Am the worst to sue or seek to a man --

Arn. That scurvy, between proud and bashful quality,
You are famous for, as the other toy that haunts you.

The. What Is that?

Arn. Why, to be deadly angry, sir,
On least occasion, and friends as quickly.
Hot and cold in a breath: you are angry now
With him that fought for you I warrant you.

The. In troth I am, and friends with them I fought with;
He used me peevishly to leave me so,
Ere I could thank him.

Arn. So it is that I told you.

The. But did you mark th'humanity of my Gentlemen,
Cause she is disposed by her self willed uncle
On that unworthy Quick sands (Devil take him)
They thought twould sound like music in my ears
To hear her disgrace sung; when her fair honor
Is all I have to love, now she is took from me:
And that they would go about to rob me of.
Heaven grant me patience. O my slaughtered father!
I am thy son, and know by thy infirmity.

Arn. Me thinks, Sir, his example should allay you:
Impatience was his ruin.

The. Push, we see
Thieves daily hanged for Robberies; yet some
Go on still in the practice! What a fine
Is set upon the head of foul Adultery,
And yet our neighbors Wives can hardly escape us!
There Is Laws against extortion, and sad penalties
Set upon Bribes,
Yet great men's hands ha'their forefathers itch!
Prisons are filled with Banckrupts; yet we see
How cra^ty Merchants often wrong their credits,
And Lond^ners fly to live at Amsterdam!
Nothing can banish Nature: That Is the Moral.

Arn. It was indeed your Fathers known infirmity,
And ever incident to the noblest Natures.
But of your Father, is there yet no hope
Of better news?

The. No, certainly he is slain.

Arn. I have not heard a story of more wonder;
That two such men, of such estates and years,
Having lived always friends and neighbors nearly,
Should at the last fall out so mortally
On a poor cast at bowls! Where wast they sought?

The. It is uncertain. All we heard of them
Was, they rode sorth ('it is now a whole year past)
Singly to end their quarrel: But to what
Part of the kingdom, or the world they took,
We can by no inquiry find or hear
Of either of them. Sure they crossed the Seas,
And both are slain.

Arn. You speak poor comfort Sir.

The. I speak as my heart finds. She Is gone for ever too;
Her hearts desire be with her.

Arn. Now he is there again.

The. Then my poor Sisters sickness; that torments me,
Never in health since our dear Father left us.

Arn. And now there.

The. How shall I do to see these men again?
I shall not be at rest till I be friends with them.

Arn. Why here is the noble nature still. 'Twil show it self.

The. I Will seek'em out. Nathaniel always loved me.
Exit.
Arn. Here Is an unsettled humor. In these fits
Hel'e nere be mad, nor ever well in's wits.
Exit.
ACT 1. SCENE 3.
Testy. Quicksands. Millicent. Tes. Go to I say, go to; as y're my Niece,
And hope t'inherit any thing that is mine:
Shake off this Maiden peevishness. Do you whimper
Upon your wedding day? Or, do you think
You are not married yet? Did you not say
I Millicent take Mandevill? A ha!
Was it not so? Did not I give you too?
I that have bred you from the cradle up
To a fit growth to match with his fair years;
And far more fair estate.

Mil. I, there is the Match --

Tes. Love him I charge you.

Mil. I Will endeavour't Sir.

Tes. You will endeavour't! Is It no further yet?
Stand from her, Nephew! I Will so swinge her. Ha!

Quick. Let me entreat your patience. She Is my wife Sir.

Tes. Dandle her in her humor, do; and spoil her.

Quick. It Is but her modesty.

Tes. Her sullen doggedness,
I Will baste it out of her. You do not know her
As I do, Nephew.

Quick. I shall, Sir, before morning
Better I doubt not. Come we shall agree.

Tes. You will endeavour't! Come I Will see it done.
Marry a man first, and then endeavor
To love him will you? Ha! Is it but so?
I Will see you love him presently. So to bed.

Mil. What before Supper?

Tes. A posset and to bed,
I Will see it done. And cause you are so nice
(To bed I say) there I will see more done
Then I will speak. Tell me of your endeavor!

Quick. Be not so rough and stiff with her, good Uncle,
I know my supple tender dealing will
Get more upon her love then all your chidings.

Tes. Such tender dealers spoil young Brides; and get
Nothing of stubborness. Down with her I say
Now in her wedding sheets: She will be naught else.

Mil. Construe more charitably, I beseech you,
My Virgin blushes.

Tes. It Is your sullenness;
Would you have brided it so lumpishly
With your spruce younker, that fine silken beggar,
Whose Land lies in your Husbands counting house;
Or the most part.

Mil. O my Theophilus.

Quick. Indeed the better half; not without hope
To have the rest as he may want my money.

Tes. Would you have whin'd and pulled, had you had him,
To bedward think you? yet to speak the truth,
And that wherein she has vexed me a thousand times,
I never saw her laugh, nor heard her sing
In all my life: yet she could both, I have heard,
In company she liked.

Mil. It has been' mong Maidens then.
But honored Sir (I know what I will do)
To let you see and hear, since you desire
To have me show a cheerfulness unto
My reverend Husband: Look you Sir, I Will kiss him,
Clap him, and stroke him: Ha, my Joe, ha, ha, ha, etc.

Tes. H^y day.

Quick. She Will make me blush anon I think.

Mil. I Will sing him songs too.

Tes. Whoop, how is this?

Mil. That I will chick, old songs and over old ones,
Old as thy reverend self, my Chick a bird.

Quic. She calls me chick and bird: The common names
With wives that Cuck^ld their old cravend husbands.

Mil. (She sings) She made him a bed of the thistle down soft,
She laid her self under to bear him a loft,
And ever she sung sweet turn thee to me,
We Will make the new bed cry Jiggy Joggy.

Tes. What impudence is this.

Quic. She Is gone as far
Beyond it now as it was to it.

Mil. Now may you answer.
(She sings) Go to bed sweet heart I Will come to thee,
Make thy bed fine and soft I Will lig with thee. Ha, ha, ha.

Quic. Is this your bashful Niece.

Tes. What can thou mean by this? dos this become thee?

Mil. Pray do not beat me of my wedding might, but tell me
How this and half a dozen chopping Children may
Become an old man's wife some five years hence.

Quic. O intollerabl!

Tes. Is It possible thou can do thus?

Mil. Let women judge. It Is very possible
That a young Iusty wife may have six Children
By one at once in five years, Sir, and by
One Father too. I Will make him young enough
To Father mine.

Quic. She Will make a youth of me.

Mil. (She sings.) There was a Lady loved a swine.
Honey, quoth she, And will thou be true love mine.
Hoogh, quoth he.
Tes. Do you hear gentlewoman; are you in your wits?

Mil. Yes, and my own house I hope. I pray be civil.
Shall we to bed, Sir, supperless? you need
No stirring meats, it seems. I Am glad on'^.
Come, biddy, come away, will you see Uncle
How I will love him ^oed? come away.

Quic. My edge is taken off. this impudence
Of hers, has outfac'd my concupisence.
Dashed all quite out of Countenance! what a beast
Was I to marry? Rather, what a beast
Am I to be? * How now! O horrible.
A sowgelders horn blown.
Tes. What hidious noise is this.

Buz. I cannot help it.
Ent. Buzzard. While I went forth for the half pint of Sack
To make your prodigal posset; and the maid
(Watching the Milk, for running ore) sorgot
To shut the door, they all rushed in.

Quic. What they, what all?

Buz. Vizarded people, Sir, and odly shaped.
You Will see anon. Their tuning o'their pipes,
And swear they will gi'ye a willy nilly dance
Before you go to bed, tho'you stole your Marriage.

Quic. Outrageous Roysters.

Tes. Call and raise the street.

Mil. That were to let in violence indeed.
These are some merry harmeless friends I warrant.
I knew I could not be so ill beloved
Among the batchelers, but some would find
Way to congratulate our honored Marriage.

Quic. What, with horn music?

Tes. A new kind of flourish.

Quic. It Is a flat conspiracy.
This is ^our bash^ul modest whimpring Niece.

Tes. Then let them in. If they wrong us to night,
The Law to morrow shall af^ord us right.
Pray let us resolveto s^et. Here comes their Prologue.
flo^ish,
Mer At a late Parliment held by the Gods,
Ent. Mercury. Cupid and Hymen ^ell at bitter ods
Upon an argument; wherein each did try
To Advance his own 'bove tothers deity,
Out of this question, which might happier prove
Love without Marriage, or Marriage without love.
By the effects the trial must be made:
So each from others Office drew his aid;
Cupid no more of Hymen's matches framed;
Nor Hymen married those that love inflamed.
Now mark, the sad effects this strife begot,
Cupid his fiery darts and arrows shot
As thick as ere he did; and equal hearts
He wounds with equal love. But Hymen parts
Their forward hands (alas!) and joyneth none
But those which his new match-Maker brings on,
(Old greedy Avarice) who by his spells,
In breasts of Parents and of guardians dwells,
That force their tendelings to loathed beds;
Which uncouth Policy to sorrow leads
Thousands a thousand ways, of which the least
Is this with which we celebrate your feast.

Tes. A special drove of horn beasts.
Enter four Masquers with horns on their heads: a Stag, a Ram, and Goa^, a a^
Ox followed by four persons, a Courtier, a Captain, a Scholar and a Butcher.
Mer. These few are thought enough to show how more
Would appear horrible, the town has store.
The first's a Lawyer, who by strife prevailed
To wed a wife, that was by love entailed
Unto that Courtier, who had the hap
Soon after to adorn him with that cap.
The next a country cormorant, whose great wealth,
By a bad fathers will, obtained by stealth
That valiant Soldiers Mistress: ^or which matter
The Enginier his sconse with Rams did batter.
This an old Goatish Usure, that must
Needs buy a wretches daughter to his lust;
Doated, and married her without a groat,
That Herald gave this crest unto his coat.
And that is the Citizen, so broadly pated,
Which this mad Butcher, cuckold antidated.
Now by this dance let husband that does wed
Bride from her proper love to loathed bed
Observe his fortune. Music strike aloud
The cuckolds joy, with merry pipe and crowd.
They dance to music of Cornets and Violins. The Dance. Exit, Masquers.
Tes. How now! all vanished! The devil take the hidmost.

Qui. The foremost I say; and lay him a block
For all the rest to break their necks upon.

Tes. Who are they? Can you guess.

Mil. Truly, not I Sir.
Some of my husbands friends perhaps, that came
To warn him of his fortune.

Qui. Well considered.

Mil. Lock the doors after 'em, and let us to bed;
And lock our selves up, chick, safe from all danger.

Qui. We will to bed chick, since you will have it so.
This key shall be your guard: And here is another
Shall secure me. My house has store of beds in it.
I bring you not to an unfurnisht dwelling.

Mil. Be not afraid to lie with me, good man,
I Will so restore thee' gain with Cawdels and Cock-broths,
So cuckle the up to morrow, thou shall see --

Quic. O immodestie.

Mil. Thou have good store of goid, and shall not want it
In Cullises: in every broth I Will boil
An angel at the least.

Qui. I Will hang first.

Tes. I am quite out of wits; and yet I Will counsel
Thee, Nephew. Hark thee.
They whisper.
Buz. It Is like to be mad counsel.

Mil. But will you not lie with me then?

Tes. No marry shall he not.
Nephew, You shall not, till she bride it modestly.
It Is now too late, but I Will so rattle her up to morrow.

Buz. It Is too late now, and yet he'^ do it to morrow! good!

Tes. Will you to your lodging?

Mil. Where be my bride-maids?

Tes. They wait you in your chamber.

Buz. The devil o'maid's i'chis but my fellow Madg the Kitching maid, and
Malkin the Cat, or bachelor but my self, and an old Fox, that my master has
kept a prentiship to palliate his palsy.


Mil. Where be the maids, I say; and Batchelors
To disappoint my husband.

Qui. Mark you that?

Mil. I mean, to take your points. But you have none.
O thrifty age! My Bridegroom is so wise,
In stead of points, to hazard hooks and eyes.

Buz. She means the eyes in's head, I Will hang else.
My Master is like to make a blind match here.

Tes. Take up the lights, sirrah.

Qui. I hope she talks so idly, but for want
Of sleep; and sleep she shall for me to night.

Tes. And well said Nephew. Will you to your chamber, Mistress? --

Mil. Hey ho, to bed, to bed, to bed.
No Bride so glad -- to keep her Maidenhead.
Exeunt omnes.
ACT 2. SCENE 1.
Lucy. Phillis. Lu. You Are the first Maid that ere I entertained
Upon so small acquaintance. Yet you are welcome,
I like your hand and carriage.

Phi. It Is your favor.
But love, they say sweet Mistress, is received
At the first sight, and why not service then,
Which often brings more absolute returns
Of the dear trust imposed, and firmer faith
By Servants then by lovers?

Lu. Stay there Phillis.
I may, by that, conjecture you have been
Deceiv' by some false Lover.

Phi. Who, I Mistress?
I hope I look too merrily for such a one,
Somewhat too coursly too, to be beloved;
If I were sad and handsome, then it might
Be thought I were a little love sick. Pray
How long has this disease affected you;
This melancholy, Mistress? Not ever since
You lost your father I hope.

Lu. For the most part.
Thou said, me thought, that love might be taken in
At the first fight

Phi. There it is. I find her.
Love, Mistress? yes, a Maid may take in more
Love at one look, or at a little loop-hole,
Then all the Doddy poles in Town can purge
Out of her while she lives; she smothring it,
And not make known her passion. There Is the mischie*

Lu. Suppose she love an enemy to her house.

Phi. An enemy! Put case the case were yours.

Lu. But it is no case of mine; put by I pray thee.

Phi. I Will put it to you though I miss your case.
Suppose it were your house, and Master Arthur,
Whose father was your fathers enemy,
Were your beloved --

Lu. Pray thee no more.

Phi. Now I have struck the vein. Suppose I say,
All this were true; would you confound your self
In smothering your love, which, in it self,
Is pure and innocent, until it grow
To a pernicious disease within you;
And hide it in your bosom, till it work
Your kindled heart to ashes?

Lu. Thou have won
My patience to attention: Therefore tell me
If thou can find or think it honorable
In me to take such an affection?

Phi. Yes, and religious; most commendable,
Could you but win his love into a marriage,
To beget peace between your families.
How many, and what great examples have we,
From former ages, and of later times,
Of strong dissentions between furious factions,
That to their opposite houses have drawn in
Eithers Allies and F^iends, whole Provinces,
Yea, Kingdoms into deadly opposition;
Till the wide wounds on both sides have sent forth
Rivers of blood, which only have been stopped
By the fost bands of love in marriages
Of equal branches, sprung from the first roots
Of all those Hell-bred hatreds!

Lu. My good Maid --

Phi. Yes, I have been a good one to my grief.

Lu. Thou have given me strength to tell thee, and I hope
When it is told, I shall have yet more ease.

Phi. I warrant you Mistress. Therefore out with it.

Lu. I love that worthy Gentleman; and am confident
That in the time of our two fathers friendship
He' affected me no less: But since that time
I have not seen him, nor dare mention him
To wrong my brothers patience, who is so passionate,
That could he but suspect I bred a thought
That favored him, I were for ever lost.
For this sad cause, as well as for the loss
Of my dear Father, I have sighed away
Twelve Moons in silent sorrow; and have heard
That Arthur too (but for what cause I know not)
Has not been seen abroad; but spends his time
In pensive solitude.

Phi. Perhaps he grieves
As much for the supposed loss of you,
As of his Father too.

Lu. The best construction,
I make of his retiredness, is the blessed
Prevention (which I daily pray for) of
A fatal meeting 'twixt him an^ my Brother,
Which would be sure the death of one or both.
And now that fear invades me, as it does always,
My Brother being abroad; and such an absence
Has not been usual: I have not seen him
Since yesterday --

Phi. Fear nothing, Mistress. Now you have eased your mind,
Let me alone to comfort you. And see your Brother.

The. How is it with you Sister?
Enter Theoph.
Phi. Much better now then when you le^t me Brother,
If no ill accident has happened you
Since your departure; as I fear there has:
Why look you else so sadly? speak, dear Brother.
I hope you did not meet the man you hate.
If you did, speak. If you have fought and slain him,
I charge you tell, that I may know the worst
Of fortune can befall me: I shall gain
Perhaps a death by it.

The. You speak as if you loved the man I hate,
And that you fear I have killed him.

Phi. Not for love
Of him I assure you Sir; but of your self.
Her fear in this case, Sir, is that the Law
May take from her the comfort of her life
In taking you from her, and so she were
But a dead woman. We were speaking
Of such a danger just as you came in;
And truly, Sir, my heart even tremble-tremble-trembles,
To think upon it yet. Pray, Sir, resolve her.

The. Then 'twas your frivolous fear that wrought in her.
Good Sister be at peace: for, by my love to you,
(An oath I will not violate) I neither saw
Nor sought him, I. But other thoughts perplex me.

Lu. What, were you at the wedding, Brother?

The. Whose wedding, Sister?

Lu. Your lost love Millicents. Are you now sad
After your last leave taking?

The. What do you mean?

Lu. There may be other matches, my good Brother --

The. You wrong me shamefully, to think that I
Can think of other then her memory.
Though she be lost and dead to me, can you
Be so unnatural as to desire
The separation of a thought of mine
From her dear memory; which is all the comfort
My heart is married to, or I can live by.

Phi. Surely good Sir, in my opinion,
Sharp, eager stomachs may be better fed
With a'ery smell of meat, then the bare thought
Of the most curious dainties --

The. What piece of impudence have you received
Into my house?

Lu. Pray Brother pardon me.
I took her, as I find her, for my comfort,
She has by council and discourse wrought much
Ease and delight into my troubled thoughts.

The. Good Maid forgive me; and my gentle Sister,
I pray thee bear with my destractions.

Phi. A good natured Gentleman for all his hasty flashes.

The. And now I Will tell you Sister (do not chide me)
I have a new affliction.

Lu. What is it brother?

The. I am engaged unto a Gentleman,
(A noble valiant Gentleman) for my life,
By hazarding his own, in my behalf.

Lu. It was then against Arthur.
What villain was it durst take your cause in hand
Against that man?

The. You wrong me beyond suffrance,
And my dear fathers blood within your self,
In seeming careful of that man's safety --

Phi. His safety Sir? Alas! she means, he is
A villain that would take the honor of
His death out of your hands, if he must fall
By sword of man.

The. Again, I ask you pardon. But I had
A quarrel yesterday, that drew strong odds
Upon my single person; Three to one:
When, at the instant, that brave Gentleman
With his sword, sides me, puts'em all to flight --

Lu. But how can that afflict you?

The. How quick you are!

Lu. Good Brother I ha'done.

The. My affliction is,
That I not know the man, to whom I am
So much engaged, to give him thanks at least.
Enter Nath. O Sir you are welcome, though we parted somewhat
Abruptly yesterday.

Not. I thank you Sir.

The. Pray thee Not. tell me, for I hope thou know him;
What Gentleman was that came in betwixt us?

Not. If the devil know him no better, he will lose
A part of his due I think. But to the purpose,
I knew your wonted nature would be friends
With me before I could come at you. However, I
Have news for you that might deserve your love,
Were you my deadly enemy.

The. What is it pray thee?

Not. Sweet Mist^iss Lucy so long unsaluted?
Kiss.
Lu. My Brother attends your news Sir.

Not. My Wench become her Chambermaid! very pretty!
How the Jade mumps for fear I should discover her.

The. Your news good Not? what is it ready made,
Or are you now but coining it?

Not. No, it was coined last night, of the right stamp,
And passes current for your good. Now know,
That I, and Mun, and Vince, with diverse others
Of our Comrades, were last night at the Bride-house.

The. What mischief did you there?

Not. A Masque, a Masque lad, in which we presented
The miseries of enforced Marriages
So lively -- Zooks, lay by your captious countenance,
And hear me handsomely.

Lu. Good brother do, it has a fine beginning.

Not. But mark what follows;
This morning, early up we got again,
And with our Fiddlers made a fresh assault
And battery against the bedridden bride-grooms window,
With an old song, a very wondrous old one,
Of all the cares, vexations, fears and torments,
That a decrepit, nasty, rotten Husband
Meets in a youthful, beauteous, sprightly wife:
So as the weak wretch will shortly be afraid,
That his own feebler shadow makes him Cuckold.
Our Masque over night begat a separation
Betwixt'em before bed time: for we found
Him at one window, coughing and spitting at us;
She at another, laughing, and throwing money
Down to the Fiddlers, while her Uncle Testy,
From a third Port-hole raves, denouncing Law,
And thundering statutes against their Minstralsie.

Lucy. Would he refuse his bride-bed the first night?

Phi. Hang him.

Not. Our Horn-masque put him off it, (bless my invention)
For which, I think, you will Judge she will forsake him
All nights and days hereafter. Here Is a blessing
Prepared now for you, if you have grace to follow it.

The. Out of my house, that I may kill thee; Go:
For here it were inhospitable. Hence,
Thou busy vaillain, that with sugard malice
Have poisoned all my hopes; ruined my comforts
In that sweet soul for ever. Go, I say,
That I may with the safety of my manhood,
Right me upon that mischievous head of thine.

Not. Is this your way of thanks for courtesies;
Or is it our luck always to meet good friends,
And never part so? yet before I go,
I will demand your reason (if you have any)
Wherein our friendly care can prejudice you;
Or poison any hopes of yours in Millicent?

Lu. Pray brother tell him.

The. Yes: that he may die
Satisfied, that I did but Justice on him,
In killing him. That villain, old in mischief,
(Hell take him) that has married her, conceives
It was my plot (I know he does) and, for
A sure revenge, will either work her death
By poison, or some other cruelty,
Or keep her locked up in such misery,
That I shall never see her more.

Not. I answer --

The. Not in a word, let me entreat you, go.

Not. Fair Mistress Lucy --

The. Neither shall she hear you.

Not. Her Maid shall then: or I Will not out to night.

Phil. On what acquaintance Sir.
He takes her aside.
Not. Be not afraid: I take no notice o'thee,
I like thy course, Wench, and will keep thy council,
And come sometimes, and bring thee a bit and th'wilt.

Phi. I Will see you choked first.

Not. Thou art not the first
Cast Wench that has made a good Chambermaid.

Phi. O you are base, and I could claw your eyes out.

Not. Pray tell your Master now: so fare you well Sir.
Exit.
Lu. I thank you, Brother, that you promise me
You will not follow him now, some other time
Will be more fit. What said he to you, Phillis?

Phi. Marry he said (help me good apron strings.)

The. What was it that he said?

Phi. I have it now.
It was in answer, Sir, of your objections.
First, that you feared the old man, wickedly,
Would make away his wife: to which he says,
That is not to be feared, while she has so
Much fear of Heaven before her eyes. And next,
That he would lock her up from sight of man:
To which he answers, she is so endued
With wit of woman, that were she locked up,
Or had locks hung upon her, locks upon locks;
Locks of prevention, or security:
Yet being a woman, she would have her will;
And break those locks as easily as her Wedlock.
Lastly, for your access unto her sight;
If you have Land he says to sell or Mortgage,
He Will undertake his doors, his wife and all,
Shall fly wide open to you,

The. He could not lay so.

Lu. Troth, but it is like his wild way of expression.

Phi. Yes; I knew that: my wit else had been puzzled.

The. And now I find my self instructed by him;
And friends with him again. Now, Arnold, any tidings.

Ar. Not of the gentleman that sought for you. Ent. Arn.
But I have other news that's worth your knowledge.
Your enemy, young Arthur, that has not
Been seen abroad this twel'moneth is got forth
In a disguise I hear, and weapon'd well.
I have it from most sure inteligence.
Look to your self, sir.

Lu. My blood chills again.

The. Pseugh, I Will not think of him. To dinner sister.

ACT. 2 SCENE. 2.
Quicksands. Testy. Millicent. Qui. Here was a good night, and good morrow to
Given by a crew of Devils.

Tes. 'Twas her plot,
And let her smart ^or'c.

Mil. Smart, Sir, did you say?
I think 'twas smart enough for a young Bride
To be made lie alone, and gnaw the sheets
Upon her wedding.

Tes. Rare impudence!

Mil. But for your satisfaction, as I hope
To gain your favor as you are my Uncle,
I know not any acter in this business.
Ent. Buz. with a paper. Quick reads it.
Buz. Sir, here is a letter thrown into the entry.

Tes. It is some villainous libel then I warrant.
Sawst thou not who convai'd it in?

Buz. Not 1. I only found it, Sr.

Qui. Pray read it you. Not my own house free from'em!
The devil owed me a spite; and when he has plowed
An old man's lust up, he sits grinning at him.
Nay, I that have so many gallant enemies
On fire, to do me mischief, or disgrace;
That I must provide tinder for their sparks!
The very thought bears weight enough to sink me.

Mil. May I be worthy, Sir, to know your trouble?

Qui. Do you know your self?

Mil. Am I your trouble then?

Qui. It Is sworn and written in that letter there
Thou shall be wicked. Hundreds have taken oaths
To make thee false, and me a horned Monster.

Mil. And does that trouble you?

Tes. Does it not you?

Mil. A dream has done much more. Pray, Sir, your patience,
And now I will be serious, and endeavor
To mend your faith in me. Is It in their power
To destroy virtue, think you; or do you
Suppose me false already; it is perhaps
Their plot to drive you into that opinion.
And so to make you cast me out amongst'em:
You may do so upon the words of strangers;
And if they tell you all, your gold is counterfeit,
Throw that out after me.

Tes. Now she speaks woman.

Mil. But since these men pretend, and you suppose'em
To be my friends, that carry this presumption
Over my will, I Will take charge of my self,
And do fair justice, both on them and you:
My honor is my own; and i am no more
Yours yet, on whom my Uncle has bestowed me,
Then all the worlds (the ceremony off)
And will remain so, free from them and you;
Who, by the false light of their wildfire flashes
Have slighted and depraved me and your bride bed;
Till you recant your wilful ignorance,
And they their petulant folly.

Tes. This sounds well.

Mil. Both they and you trench on my Peace and Honor;
Dearer then beauty, pleasure wealth and fortune;
I would stand under the fall of my estate
Most chearefully, and sing: For there be ways
To raise up fortunes ruins, were her towers
Shattered in pieces, and the glorious ball
She stands on cleft asunder: But for Peace
Once ruined, there is no reparation;
If Honor fall, which is the soul of life,
It Is like the damned, it nere lifts the head
Up to the light again.

Tes. Niece, thou have won me;
And Nephew, she is to good for you. I charge you
Give her her will: I Will have her home again else.

Qui. I know not what I can deny her now.

Mil. I ask but this, that you will give me leave
To keep a vow I made, which was last night
Because you flighted me.

Tes. Stay there a little.
I Will lay the price of twenty Maidenheads
Now, as the market goes, you get not hers
This seav'night.

Mil. My vow is for a month; and for so long
I crave your faithful promise not to attempt me.
In the mean time because I will be quit
With my trim, forward Gentlemen, and secure you
From their assaults; let it be given out,
That you have sent me down into the country
Or back unto my Uncles; whither you please.

Quic. Or, tarry, tarry -- stay, stay here a while.

Mil. So I intend, Sir, I Will not leave your house,
But be locked up in some convenient room
Not to be seen by any, but your self*
Or else to have the liberty of your house
In some disguise, (if it were possible)
Free from the least suspicion of your servants.

Tes. What needs all this?
Do we not live in a well governed City?
And have not I authority? I Will take
The care and guard of you and of your house
Against all outrageous attempts; and clap
Those Goatish Roarers up, fast as they come.

Quic. I understand her drist, Sir, and applaud
Her quaint devise. Twill put 'em to more trouble,
And more expense in doubtful search of her,
The best way to undo 'em is to foil'em
At their own weapons. It Is not to be thought
The'l seek, by violence to force her from me,
But wit; In which we will overcome'em.

Tes. Agree on it twixt your selves. I see you are friends.
I Will leave you to your selves.
Hark hither Niece -- Now I dare trust you with him:
He is in years, it is true. But hear'st thou girl
Old Foxes are best blades.

Mil. I Am sure they stink most.

Tes. Good keeping makes him bright and young again.

Mil. But for how long.

Tes. A year or two perhaps.
Then, when he dies, his wealth makes thee a Countess.

Mil. You speak much comfort, Sir.

Tes. That Is my good Girl.
And Nephew, Love her, I find she deserves it;
Be as benevolent to her as you can;
Show your good will at least. You do not know
How the good will of an old man may work
In a young wife. I must now take my journey
Down to my country house. At your months end
I Will visit you again. No ceremony
Joy and content be with you.

Quic. Mil. And a good journey to you.
Exit Test.
Quic. You are content you say to be locked up
Or put in some disguise, and have it said
You Are gone unto your Uncles. I have heard
Of some Bridegrooms, that shortly after Marriage
Have gone to see their Uncles, seldom Brides.
I have thought of another course.

Mil. Be It any way.

Quic. What if it were given out you are run away
Out of a detestation of your match?

Mil. 'T would pull a blot upon my reputation.

Quic. When they consider my unworthiness
'T will give it credit. They Will commend you for it.

Mil. You speak well for your self.

Quic. I speak as they will speak.

Mil. Well; let it be so then: I am content.

Quic. We Will put this instantly in act. The rest,
As for disguise, or privacy in my house,
You Will leave to me.

Mil. All, Sir, to your dispose,
Provided still you urge not to infringe
My vow concerning my virginity.

Quic. It Is the least thing I think on,
I will not offer at it till your time.

Mil. Why here is a happiness in a husband now
exeunt.
ACT 2. SCENE 3.
Dionysia. Rafe. Dio. Thou tell me things, that truth never came near.

Ra. It Is perfect truth: you may believe it. Lady.

Dio. Maintain't but in one fillable more, I Will tear
Thy mischievious tongue out.

Ra. Fit reward for Tell-troths.
But that is not the reward you promised me
For watching of your brothers actions;
You said forsooth (if it please you to remember)
That you would love me for it.

Dio. Arrogant Rascal.
I bad thee bring account of what he did
Against his enemy; and thou reportst.
He took his enemies danger on himself,
And helped to rescue him whose bloody father
Killed ours. Can truth or common reason claim
A part in this report? My brother do it!
Or draw a sword to help Theophilus.

Ra. It Is not for any spite I ow my Master,
But for my itch at her that I do this.
I am strangely taken. Such brave spirited women
Have cherished strong backed servingmen ere now.

Dio. Why do not get thee from my sight, false fellow?

Ra. I Will be believed first. Therefore pray have patience
To peruse that.
gives her a paper.
Dio. My brothers charecter!
Theophilus sisters name -- The brighter Lucy
So often written? nothing but her name --
But change of attributes -- one serves not twice.
Blessed, divine, Illustrious, all perfection;
And (so heaven bless me) powerful in one place.
The worst thing I read yet, heap of all virtues --
Bright shining, and all these ascribed to Lucy.
O I could curse thee now for being so just
Would thou had belied him still.

Ra. I nere belied him, I.

Dio. O mischief of affection! Monstrous! horrid.
It shall not pass so quietly. Nay stay.

Ra. She Will cut my throat I fear.

Dio. Thou art a faithful servant.

Ra. It may do yet:
To you I am sweet Lady, and to my master
In true construction: he is his friend I think
That finds his follies out to have them cured,
Which you have only the true spirit to do.

Dio. How I do love thee now!

Ra. And your love Mistress,
(Brave sprightly Mistress) is the steeple top
Or rather Weathercock o'top of that
To which aspires my life's ambition.

Dio. How did thou get this paper.

Ra. Amongst many
Of his rare twelve-moneths melancholy works,
That lie in's study. Mistress it is apparent
His melancholy all this while has been
More for her Love, then for his fathers death.

Dio. Thou have my love for ever.

Ra. Some small token
In earnest of it. Mistress, would be felt,
He offers to kiss her, she strikes him.
Dio. Take that in earnest then.

Ra. It is a sure one.
And the most feeling pledge she could have given:
For she is a virago. And I have read
That your viragoes use to strike all those
They mean to lie with: And from thence it is taken
That your brave active women are called strikers.

Dio. Set me that chair.

Ra. The warm touch of my flesh
Already works in her. I shall be set
To better work immediately. I am prevented.
A way and be not seen. Be sure I love thee.
Enter Arthur.
Ra. A ha! This clinches. Another time I Am, sure on'c.
Exit.
Ar. Sister! where are you? How now! not well or
(She sits.
Dio. Sick brother -- sick at heart, oh -- (sleepy.

Ar. Passion of heart! where are our servants now
To run for doctors? ho --

Dio. Pray stay and hear me.
Here Is no work for them. They Will find a master here
Too powerful for the strength of all their knowledge.

Ar. What at thy heart?

Dio. Yes, brother, at my heart.
Too scornful to be dispossessed by them.

Ar. What may that proud grief be? good sister name it.

Dio. It grieves me more to name it, then to suffer't.
Since I have endured the worst on it, and proved constant
To sufferance and silence, twere a weakness
Now to betray a sorrow, by a name,
More fit to be severely felt then known.

Ar. Indeed I Will know it.

Dio. Rather let me die,
Then so afflict your understanding, Sir.

Ar. It shall not afflict me.

Dio. I know you will chide me for it.

Ar. Indeed you wrong me now. Can I chide you?

Dio. If you be true and honest you must do it,
And heartily.

Ar. You tax me nearly there.

Dio. And that is the physic must help me or nothing:

Ar. With grief I go about to cure a grief then.
Now speak it boldly, Sister.

Dio. Noble Physician -- It is --

Ar. It is! what is it? If you love me, speak.

Dio. It Is -- love and I beseech thee spare me not.

Ar. Alas dear sister, can thou think that love
Deserves a chiding in a gentle breast?

Dio. Do you pity me already. O faint man
That tremblest but at opening of a wound!
What hope is there of thee to search and dress it?
But I am in thy hands, and forced to try thee.
I love -- Theophilus --

Ar. Ha!

Dio. Theophilus, brother;
His son that slew our father. There Is a love!
O more then time 'twere looked, for fear it festers.

Ar. S^e has put me to it indeed. What must I do?
She has a violent spirit; so has he;
And though I wish most seriously the match,
Whereby to work mine own with his fair Sister,
The danger yet, in the negotiation
May quite destroy my course; spoil all my hopes.
I Will therefore put her off on it if I can.

Dio. Can you be tender now?

Ar. What! To undo you?
I love you not so slightly. Pardon me.
A rough hand must be used: For here is a wound
Must not be gently touched; you perish then,
Under a Brothers pity. Pray sit quiet;
For you must suffer all.

Dio. I Will strive to do it.

Ar. To love the Son of him that slew your Father!
To say it shows unlovingness of nature;
Forgetfulness in blood, were all but shallow
To the great depth of danger your fault stands in.
It rather justifies the act it self,
And commends that down to posterity
By your blood-cherishing embraces. Children,
Born of your body, will, instead of tears,
By your example, offer a thankful joy
To the sad memory of their Gransiers slaughter.
Quite contrary! How fearful it is to think on it!
What may the world say too? There goes a daughter,
Whose strange desire leaped from her Fathers ruin;
Death gave her to the Bridegroom; and the marriage
Knit fast and cemented with blood. O Sister --

Dio. O Brother.

Ar. How! Well? And so quickly cured?

Dio. Dissembler; foul dissembler.

Ar. This is plain.

Dio. Thou Have played with fire; and like a cunning fellow
Bit in thy pain o'purpose to deceive
Another tender touch. I know thy heart weeps
For what't has spoke against. Thou that dare love
The daughter of that Feind that slew thy father,
And plead against thy cause! unfeeling man,
Can not thy own words melt thee? To that end
I wrought and rais'd'em: 'T was to win thy health,
That I was sick; I played thy disease to thee,
That thou might see the loathed complexion on it,
Far truer in another then ones self.
And, if thou can, after all this, tread wickedly,
Thou art a Rebel to all natural love,
And filial duty; dead to all just council:
And every word thou mock'dst with vehemence
Will rise a wounded father in thy conscience,
To scourge thy Judgment. There Is thy Saint crossed out,
And all thy memory with her. I Will nere trust
She tears and throws the paper to him. Revenge again with thee (so false is
manhood)
But take it now into mine own powerfully,
And see what I can do with my life's hazard;
Your purpose shall nere thrive. There I Will make sure work.
Exit.
Ar. How wise and cunning is a woman's malice;
I never was so cozened.
Exit.
ACT 3. SCENE 1.
Quicksands. Buzzard. Madge. Quic. Out of my doors pernicious knave and harlot;
Avaunt I say.

Buz. Good Master.

Mad. Pray you worship.

Quic. You have all the wages you are like to have.

Buz. Nay, I dare take your word for that: you will keep
All moneys fast enough whose ere it be,
If you but gripe it once.

Quic! I am undone,
And shamed for ever by your negligence,
Or malice rather: for how can it be
She could depart my house without your knowledge.

Buz. That cursed Mistress that ever she came here!
If I know of her flight, Sir, may these hands
Never be held up, but to curse you only,
If you cashier me thus: because you have lost
your wife before she was well found, must we
Poor innocents be guilty?

Mad. For my part,
Or ought I know she may as well be gone
Out of the the chimney top as out o'door.

Quic. The door must be your way; and find her out,
Or never find my door again. Be gone.

Buz. Mad. O, you are a cruel Master.
Exit.
Quic. So, so, so.
These cries are laughter to me: Ha, ha, ha.
I will be Master of my invention once,
And now be bold to see how rich I am
In my concealed wealth. Come, precious mark
Of beauty and perfection, at which envy
Enter Milicent. And lust aim all their ranckling poisonous arrows.
But I Will provide they nere shall touch thy blood.

Mil. What, are your servants gone?

Quic. Turned, turned away
With blame enough for thy supposed escape:
Which they will rumor so to my disgrace
Abroad, that all my envious adversaries
Will, betwixt joy of my conceived misfortune
In thy dear loss, and their vain hopes to find thee,
Run frantic through the streets, while we at home
Sit safe, and laugh at their defeated malice.

Mil. But now for my disguise.

Quic. I, that, that, that.
Be but so good and gentle to thy self,
To hear me and be ruled by me in that,
A Queens felicity falls short of thine.
I Will make thee Mistress of a Mine of treasure,
Give me but peace the way that I desire it --

Mil. Some horrible shape sure that he conjures so.

Quic. That I may fool iniquity, and Triumph
Over the lustful stallions of our time;
Bed-bounders, and leap-Ladies (as they terme'em)
Mount-Mistresses, diseases shackle'em,
And spittles pick their bones.

Mil. Come to the point. What Is the disguise, I pray you.

Qui. First know, my sweet, it was the quaint devise
Of a Venetian Merchant, which I learnt
In my young factorship.

Mil. That of the Moor?
The Backamore you spoke of? Would you make
An Negro of me.

Qui. You have past your word,
That if I urge not to infringe your vow
(For keeping this month your virginity)
You Will wear what shape I please. Now this shall both
Kill vain attemps in me, and guard you safe
From all that seek subversion of your honor.
I Will fear no powdered spirits to haunt my house,
Rose-footed fiends, or fumigated Goblins
After this tincture's laid upon thy face,
'Twil cool their kidneys and allay their heats.
A box of black painting.
Mil. Bless me! you fright me, Sir. Can jealousy
Creep into such a shape? Would you blot out
Heavens workmanship?

Qui. Why think thou, fearful Beauty,
Has heaven no part in Egypt? Pray thee tell me,
Is not an Ethiopes face his workmanship
As well as the fairest Ladies? nay, more too.
Then hers, that daubs and makes adulterate beauty?
Some can be pleased to lie in oils and paste,
At sins appointment, which is thrice more wicked.
This (which is sacred) is for sins prevention.
Illustrious persons, nay, even Queens themselves
Have, for the glory of a nights presentment,
To grace the work, suffered as much as this.

Mil. Enough Sir, I am obedient.

Quic. Now I thank thee.
Be fearless love; this alters not thy beauty,
Though, for a time obscures it from our eyes.
Thou may be, while at pleasure, like the Sun;
Thou do but case thy splendour in a cloud,
To make the beam more precious in it shines.
In stormy troubled weather no Sun's seen
Sometimes a month together: It Is thy case now.
But let the roaring tempest once be over,
Shine out again and spare not.

Mil. There Is some comfort.

Quic. Take pleasure in the scent first; smell to it fearlesly,
And taste my care in that, how comfortable
He begins to paint her. It Is to the nostril, and no foe to feature.
Now red and white those two united houses,
Whence beauty takes her fair name and descent,
Like peaceful Sisters under one Roof dwelling
For a small time; farewell. Oh let me kiss ye
Before I part with you -- Now Jewels up
Into your Ebon Casket. And those eyes,
Those sparkling eyes, that send forth modest anger
To sindge the hand of so unkind a Painter,
And make me pull'c away and spoil my work,
They will look straight like Diamonds, set in lead,
That yet retain their virtue and their value.
What murder have I done upon a cheek there!
But there is no pitying: It Is for peace and honor;
And pleasure must give way. Hold, take the Tincture,
And perfect what is amiss now by your glass.

Mil. Some humbler habit must be thought on too.

Quic. Please your own fancy. Take my keys of all;
In my pawn Wardrobe you shall find to fit you.

Mil. And though I outwardly appear your Drudge,
It Is fit I have a Maid for private service:
My breeding has not been to serve my self.
Exit. Mil.
Quic. Trust to my care for that. One knock. In; in.
Is it to me your business?
Enter Phillis like a Cook-maid.
Phi. Yea, if you
Be Master Quicksands Sir; the Masters worship
Here of the house.

Quic. I am so. What Is your business?

Phi. It Is upon that, Sir, I would speak Sir, hoping
That you will pardon my presumptuousness,
I am a Mother that do lack a service.

Quic. You have said enough. I Will entertain no Mothers.
A good Maid servant, knew I where to find one.

Phi. He is a knave, and like your worship, that
Dares say I am no Maid; and for a servant
(It ill becomes poor folks to praise themselves,
But) I were held a tydie one at home.

Quic. O thou art a Norfolk woman (cry thee mercy)
Where Maids are Mothers, and Mothers are Maids.

Phi. I have friends i'th'City that will pass their words
For my good bearing.

Quic. Have thou?

Phi. Yes indeed, Sir.
I have a Cosen that is a Retorney
Of Lyons-Inn, that will not see me wronged;
And an old Aunt in Muggle-street, a Midwife,
That knows what is what as well's another woman.

Qui. But where about in Norfolk were thou bred?

Phi. At Thripperstown Sir, near the City of Norwich.

Quick. where they live much by spinning with the Rocks?

Phi. Thripping they call it, Sir.

Quic. Do thou not know one Hulverhead that keeps
An Innocent in's house.

Phi. There are but few innocents in the country Sr.
They are given too much to law for that: what should
That Hulverhead be a councellor, Sir.

Quic. No a husband man.

Phi. Truly I know none.

Quic. I am glad she does not. How knew'st thou I wanted
A servant.

Phi. At an old wives house in Bow-lane
That places servants, where a maid came in
You put away to day.

Quic. All, and what said she?

Phi. Truly to speak the best and worst, forsooth,
She said her fault deserved her punishment
For letting of her Mistress run away.

Quic. The nevves goes current. I am glad o'that.

Phi. And that you were a very strict hard man,
But very just in all your promises.
And such a master would I serve to choose.

Quic. This innocent country Mother takes me.
Her looks speak Wholesomness; and that old woman
That Bovv lane purveyor has fitted me
With serviceable ware these dozen years.
I Will keep her at the least this Gander month,
While my fair wife lies in of her black face,
And virgin vovv; in hope she is for my turn.
Lust, when it is restrained, the more tvvil burn.

Phi. May I make bold to crave your answer, Sir?

Quic. Come in, I Will talk with you.
Exit.
Phi. Prosper now my plot,
And hulk, thou art tvvixt vvind and vva^^r shot.
Exit.
ACT 3. SCENE 2.
Nathaniel. Vincent. Edmond. Buzzard. Boy. You Are welcome Gentlemen.

Not. Let Us ha'good wine, Boy, that must be our welcome.

Boy. You shall, you shall Sir.
Within. Ambrose, Ambrose;

Boy. Here, here, anon, anon, by and by, I come, I come.
Ex. Jerome, Jerome, draw a quart of the best Canary into the Apollo.

Buz. This is a language that I have not heard.
You understand it, Gentlemen.

Vin. So shall you anon master Buzzard.

Buz. Your friend and Jonathan Buzzard kind gentlemen.

Not. What excellent luck had we, friend Buzzard, to
meet with thee, just as thy Master cast thee off.

Buz. Just Sir, as I was going I know not whither:
And now I am arrived at just I know not where. It Is a
rich room, this. Is it not Goldsmiths hall.

Not. It is a Tavern man -- And here comes the wine.
Fill boy -- and here is to thee friend, a hearty draft to
cheer thee -- fill again boy -- There, drink it off.

Ed. Off with it man -- hang sorrow, cheer thy heart.

Buz. And truly it is the best cheer that ere I tasted.

Vin. Come taste it better, here is another to thee.

Buz. -- And truly this was better then the first.

Ed. Then try a third. That may be best of all.

Buz. -- And truly, so it is -- how many sorts of wine
May a vintner bring in one pot together?

Not. By Bacchus Mr. Buzzard, that is a subtle question.

Buz. Bacchus! whose that I pray?

Vin. A great friend of the vintners, and master of their company indeed.

Buz. I was never in all my life so far in a tavern before.
What comforts have I lost.

Ed. Now he begins to talk.

Buz. Nor ever was in all my two and twenty years under that Babilouian Tyrant
Quicks ands, so far as a Vintners bar but thrice.


Not. But thrice in all that time?

Buz. Truly but thrice Sir. And the first time was to fetch a jill of sack for
my Master, to make a friend of his drink, that joined with him in a purchase of
sixteen thousand pound.


Vin. I, there was thrist. More wine boy. A pottle and a beer bowl.

Buz. The second time was for a penny pot of Muscadine, which he drank all
himself with an egg upon his wedding morning.


Not. And to much purpose, it seemed by his wives running away.

Buz. The third and last time was for half a pint of sack upon his wedding
night, of later memory; and I shall nere forget it, that riotous wedding night:
when Hell broke loose, and all the devils danced at our house, which made my
Master mad, whose raving made my mistress run away, whose running away was the
cause of my turning away. O me, poor masterless wretch that I am. -- O --


Na. Hang thy master, here is a full bowl to his confusion.

Buz. I thank you. Let it come Sir, ha, ha, ha.

Vin. Think no more of Masters, friends are better then Masters.

Buz. And you are all my friends kind gentlemen, I found it before in your
money when my Master (whose confusion I have drunk) took your Mortgages; And
now I find it in your wine. I thank you kind gentlemen still. O how I love kind
Gentlemen.


Not. That shows thou art of gentle blood thy self, friend Buzzard.

Buz. Yes friend -- Shall I call you friend?

All. By all means, all of us.

Buz. Why then, all friends, I am a gentleman, though spoild i'che breeding.
The Buzzards are all gentlemen, We came in with the Conqueror. Our name (as the
French has it) is Beau desert; which signifies -- Friends, what does it
signify?


Vin. It signifies, that you deserved fairly at your masters hands, like a
Gentleman, and a Buzzard as you were, and he turned you away most beastly like
a swine, as he is. And now here is a health to him, that first finds his wife,
and sends her home with a bouncing boy in her belly for him to father.


Buz. Ha, ha, ha. I Will pledge that: and then I Will tell you a secret.

Not. Well said friend; up with tha^, and then out with thy secret.

Buz. I will friend. And the other two friends, here is upon the same.

Ed. I hope he will show us a way, out of the bottom of his bowl to find his
Mistress.


Vin. This fellow was happily found.

Buz. This was an excellent draught.

Not. But the seeret, friend, out with that, you must keep no secrets amongst
friends.


Buz. It might prove a shrewd matter against my mischevious Master as it may
be handled.


Not. Hang him cullion, that would turn thee away.
We Will help thee to handle it, fear it not.

Buz. Hark you then all friends. Shall I out with it?

Vin. What else.

Buz. I Will first take the other cup, and then out with it altogether -- And now it
comes -- If my Mistress do bring him home a bastard, she is but even with him.


Not. He has one I warrant. Has he cadzooks?

Buz. That he has by this most delicate drink. But it is the Arsivarsiest Aufe
that ever crept into the world. Sure some Goblin got it for him; or changed it
in the neast, that's certain.


Not. I vow thou utterest brave things. Is It a boy?

Buz. It has gone for a boy in short coats and long coats this seven and
twenty years.


Ed. An Idiote is it.

Buz. Yes: A very natural; and goes a thissen; and looks as old as I do too.
And I think if my beard were off, I could be like him: I have taken great pains
to practice his speech and action to make my self merry with him in the
country.


Not. Where is he kept, friend, where is he kept.

Buz. In the further side of Norfolk, where you must never see him. It Is now a
dozen years since his father saw him, and then he compounded for a sum of money
with an old man, one Hulverhead, to keep him for his life time; and he never to
hear of him. But I saw him within these three months. We hearken after him, as
land-sick heirs do after their fathers, in hope to hear of his end at last.


Vin. But hark you, friend, if your beard were off, could you be like him
think you? What if you cut it off, and to him for a father.


Not. Pray thee hold thy peace.

Buz. My beard, friend, no: My beard's my honor.
Hair is an ornament of honor upon man or woman.

Not. Come, come; I know what we will do with him. Mun, knock him down with the
other cup. We Will lay him to sleep; but yet watch and keep him betwixt hawk and
buzzard as he is, till we make excellent sport with him.


Buz. Hey ho. I am very sleepy.

Not. See he jooks already. Boy show us a private room.

Boy. This way, Gentlemen.

Buz. Down, Plumpton*parke, etc.
They lead Buz. out, and he sings.
ACT. 3. SCENE. 3.
Lucy. Theophilus. Lu. Indeed you were unkind to turn away
M^ maid (poor harmless maid) whose innocent mirth
Was the best cheer your house afforded me.

The. I am sorry sister, trust me, truly sorry,
And knew I which way to recover her
With my best care I would. Yet, give me leave,
I saw her overbold; and overheard her
Say, she foresaw that Arthur my sole enemy
Should be your husband. I Will marry you to death first.

Lu. Now you fly out again.

The. Your pardon again your sister,
And for your satisfaction I will strive
To oversway my passion. How now Arnold,
Ent. Arn. Me thinks I read good news upon thy face.

Ar. The best, Sir, I can tell is, the old Jew
Quicksands has lost his wife.

The. She is not dead,

Ar. It Is not so well for him: for if she were
He then might overtake her though she were
Gone to the devil. But she is run away:
But to what corner of the earth, or under
Whose bed to find her is not to be thought.
It has raised such a laughter in the town
Among the Gallants --!

The. And do you laugh too?

Ar. Yes; and if you do not out-laugh all men
That hear the joyful news, it is too good for you.

The. I am too merciful, I kill thee not.
Out of my doors, thou villain, reprobate.
He beats Arnold.
Ar. Hold, Pray Sir, hold.

The. Never while I have power to lift a hand
Against thee, mischievous Villain.

Lucy Is not this passion, brother?

The. Forbear, sister.
This is a cause turns patience into fury.

Lu. Arnold, forbear his sight.

The. And my house too.
Or villain, look to die, often as I see thee.
Ext, The. Lu.
Arn. Turned out o^ doors! A dainty frantic humor
In a young Master! Good enough for me though;
Because it is proper to old serving-men
To be so served. What course now must I take?
I am too old to seek out a new Master.
I will not beg, because I Will cross the proverb
That runs upon old serving creatures; stealing
I have no mind to: It Is a hanging matter.
Wit and invention help me with some shift
He kneels. To help a cast-off now at a dead lift.
Sweet fortune hear my suit.
Ent. Not. Vin. Edm.
Not. Why how now, Arnold! What, at thy devotion?

Ar. I Will tell you in your ear, sir, I dare trust you.
Not and Arnold whisper.
Vi. Could earthly man have dreamt this Rafcal
Quick sands. Whose Letchery, to all our thinking, was
Nothing but greedy Avarice and cosonage,
Could have been all this while a concealed whoremaster,
To have a Bastard of so many years
Nursled in the Country?

Ed. Note the punishments
That haunt the Miscreant for his black misdeeds;
That his base offspring proves a natural Idiot;
Next that his wife, by whom he might had comfort
In progeny, though of some others getting,
Should with her light heels make him heavie-headed
By running of her Country! And lastly that
The blinded wretch should cast his servant off,
Who was the cover of his villainy,
To show us (that can have no mercy on him)
The way to plague him.

Vin. Ha, ha, ha --

Ed. What do laugh at?

Vin. To think how nimble the poor uzzard is
To be revenged on's Master; How he has Shaped himself;
Cut off his beard, and practiced all the postures
To act the Changeling bastard.

Ed. Could we light
Upon some quaint old fellow now, could match him
To play the clown that brings him up to town,
Our company were full, and we were ready
To put our project into present action.

Not. Gentlemen, we are fitted: take this man w'ye
He is the only man I would have sought,
To give our project life. I Will trust thee Arnold,
And trust thou me, thou shall get pieces by it;
Besides, I Will piece thee to thy Master again.

Ar. That clinches Sir.

Not. Go follow your directions.

Vin. Come away then.
Ex. Vin. Ed. Arn.
Not. Sweet mirth thou art my Mistress. I could serve thee.
And shake the thought off of all woman kind
But that old wonts are hardly lest. A man
That Is entered in his youth, and thoroughly salted
In documents of women, hardly leaves
While reins or brains will last him: It Is my case.
Yet mirth, when women fail, brings sweet incounters
That tickle up a man above their sphere:
They dull, but mirth revives a man: who is here,
En. Art. The solitary musing man, called Arthur,
Possessed with seriours vanity; Mirth to me!
The world is full: I cannot peep my head forth
But I meet mirth in every corner: Ha!
Sure some old runt with a splay-foot has crossed him!
Hold up thy head man; what do seek? thy grave?
I would scarce trust you with a piece of earth
You would choose to lie in though; if some plump Mistress
Or a deft Lass were set before your search.

Ar. How vainly this man talks!

Not. Gid ye good den forsooth.
How vainly this man talks! speak but truth now,
Does not thy thought now run upon a Wench?
I never looked so but mine stood that way.

Ar. It Is all your glory that; and to make boast
Of the variety that serves your lust:
Yet not to know what woman you love best.

Not. Not I cadzooks, but all alike to me,
Since I put off my Wench I kept at Livory:
But of their use I think I have had my share,
And have loved every one best of living women;
A dead one I nere coveted, that is my comfort:
But of all ages that are pressable;
From sixteen unto sixty; and of all complections
From the white flaxen to the tawney-Moor;
And of all statures between Dwarf and Giants;
Of all conditions, from the Doxie to the Dowsabel.
Of all opinions, I will not say Religious:
(For what make they with any?) and of all
Features and shapes, from the huckle-back'd Bum-creeper,
To the straight spiny Shop-maid in St. Martins.
Briefly, all sorts and sizes I have tasted.

Ar. And think thou have done well in it!

Not. As well as I could with the worst of them tho'l say it.
Few men come after me that mend my work.

Ar. But thou nere think of punishments to come;
Thou dream'st not of diseases, poverty,
The loss of sense or member, or the cross
(Common to such loose livers) an ill marriage;
A hell on earth to scourge thy conscience.

Not. Yes, when I marry, let me have a wife
To have no mercy on me; let the fate
Of a stale dovting Bachelor fall upon me;
Let me have Quicksands curse, to take a Wife
Will run away next day, and prostitute
Her self to all the world before her Husband.

Ar. Nay, that will be too good: If I foresee
Any thing in thy marriage destiny,
'Twil be to take a thing that has been common
To the world before, and live with thee perforce
To thy perpetual torment.

Not. Close that point.
I cannot marry. Will you be merry, Arthur?
I have such things to tell thee.

Ar. No, I cannot.

Not. Pray thee come closer to me. What has crossed thee?
Is thy supposed slain father come again,
To dispossess thee for another life time?
Or has thy valiant sister beaten thee? Tell me.
It shall go no further.

Ar. Let your valiant wit
And jocound humor be supposed no warrant
For you to abuse your friends by.

Not. Why did tell me of marrying then? But I
Have done. And now pray speak what troubles you.

Ar. I care not if I do: For 'twill be Town talk.
My Sister on a private discontent
Betwixt her self and me has left my house.

Not. Gone quite away?

Ar. Yes, And I know not whither.

Not. Beyond Sea sure to sight with The Air, that took
Her fathers last breath into it. Went she alone?

Ar. No, No; My man's gone with her.

Not. Who, the fellow
That brags on's back so; the stiff strong chin'd Rascal?

Ar. Even he.

Not. The devil is in these young Tits,
And wildfire in their Cruppers.

Ar. Let me charm you,
By all our friendship, you nor speak nor hear
An ill construction of her act in this,
I know her thoughts are noble; and my woe
Is swollen unto that fullness, that the addition
But of word in scorn would blow me up
Into a cloud of wild distempered fury
Over the heads of all whose looser breath
Dare raise a wind to break me. Then I fall
A sudden storm of ruin on you all.
Exit.
Not. I know not how to laugh at this: It comes
So near my pity. But i will to my Griggs
Again; And there will find new mirth to stretch
And laugh, like tickled wenches, hand ore head.
Exit.
ACT. 4. SCENE 1.
Dionysia in man's habit, Rafe. Dio. How does my habit and my arms become me?

Ra. Too well to be a woman, manly Mistress.

Dio. Where Is the pistol you provided for me.

Ra. Here Mistress and a good one.

Dio. It Is too long.

Ra. No Lady would wish a shorter. If it were
'T would bear no charge, or carry nothing hotne.

Dio. I Will try what I can do. Thou think me valiant.
I Am sure I have often felt it.

Ra. All the virago's that are found in story,
Penthesilea and Symaramis
Were no such handy strikers as your self:
But they had another stroke, could you but find it,
Then you were excellent. I could teach it you.

Dio. I dare not understand thee yet. Be sure
As you respect my honor, or your life
That you continue constant to my trust,
And so thou can not know how much I Will love thee.

Ra. There is a hope as good, now, as a promise.

Dio. Here at this Inn abide, and wait my coming
Be careful of my guildings: Be not seen
Abroad for fear my brother may surprise you.
There Is money for you; and ere that be spent
It Is like I shall return.
Exit.
Ra. Best stars attend you,
Mars arm thee all the day; and Venus light
Thee home into these amorous arms at night.
Exit.
ACT. 4. SCENE. 2.
Quicksands. Millicent, her face black. Quic. Be cheered my love; help to bear
up the joy,
That I conceive by thy concealed Beauty,
Thy rich imprisoned beauty, whose in^ranchisement
Is now at hand, and shall shine forth again
In its admired glory. I am rapt
Above the sphere of common joy and wonder
In the effects of this our quaint complot.

Mil. In the mean time, though you take pleasure in it,
My name has dearly suffered.

Quic. But thine honor
Shall, in the vindication of thy name,
When envy and detraction are struck dumb
Gain an eternal memory with virtue;
When the discountenanced wits of all my jierers
Shall hang their heads, and fall like leaves in Autumn.
O how I laugh to hear the cozened people
As I pass on the streets abuse themselves
By idle questions and false reports.
As thus: good morrow Master Quicksands; pray
How fares your beauteous bedfellow? says another
I hear she is not at home. A third says no:
He saw her yesterday at the still-yard
With such a Gallant, sowsing their dried tongues
In Rhemish, Deal, and Back-rag: Then a fourth
Says he knows all her haunts and Meetings
At Bridgfoot, Bear, the Tons, the Cats, the Squirels;
Where, when, and in what company to find her,
But that he scorns to do poor me the favor:
Because a light piece is too good for me.
While a fifth youth with counterfeit show of pity,
Meets, and bewails my case, and says he knows
A Lord that must be nameless keeps my wife
In an enchanted Castle two miles West
Upon the River side: but all conclude --

Mil. That you are a monstrous cuckold, and deserve it.

Quic. Knowing my safety, then, and their foul errors,
Have I not cause to laugh? Yes, in abundance.
Now note my plot, the height of my invention
I have already given out to some,
That I have certain knowledge you are dead,
And have had private burial in the country;
At which my shame, not grief, forbad my presence:
Yet some way to make known unto the world
A husbands duty, I resolve to make
A certain kind of feast, which shall advance
My joy above the reach of spite or chance.

Mil. May I partake, Sir, of your rich conceit?

Quic. To morrow night expires your limited month
Of vowed virginity; It shall be such a night;
In which I mean thy beauty shall break forth
And dazzle with amazement even to death
Those my malicious enemies, that rejoiced
In thy supposed escape, and my vexation.
I will envite 'hem all to such a feast
As shall fetch blushes from the boldest guest;
I have the first course ready --

Mil. And if I
A side, one knocks. Fail in the second, blame my houswifery.

Qui. Away, some body comes; I guess of them
That have jeered me, whom I must jeer again.
Ex. Mil. Gallants you are welcome. I was sending for ye.
En. Not.
Not. To give us that we come for?
Vin. Ed.
Qui. What may that be?

Vin. Trifles you have o^ ours.

Qui. Of yours, my Masters?

Ed. Yes, you have in mortgage
Threescore pound Land of mine inheritance.

Vin. And my Annuity of a hundred Marks.

Not. And Jewels, Watches, Plate, and clothes of mine,
Pawned for four hundred pound. Will you restore all?

Qui. You know all these were forfeited long since,
Yet I Will come roundly to you, Gentlemen.
Ha'you brought my moneys, and my interest?

Not. No surely. But we will come as roundly to you
As moneyless Gentlemen can. You know
Good Offices are ready money Sir.

Qui. But have you Offices to sell, good Sirs.

Not. We mean to do you Offices worth your money.

Qui. As how, I pray you.

Not. Marry, Sir, as thus;
We Will help you to a man that has a friend --

Vin. That knows a party, that can go to the house --

Ed. Where a Gentleman dwelt, that knew a Scholar

Not. That was exceeding well acquainted with a Traveler

Vi. That made report of a great Magician beyond the Seas.

Ed. That might ha'been as likely as any man in all the world.

Not. To have helped you to your wife again.

Qui. You are the merriest mates that ere I cop'd withal.
But to be serious Gentlemen, I am satisfied
Concerning my lost Wife. She has made even
With me and all the World.

Not. What is she dead?

Qui. Dead, Dead: And therefore as men use to mourn
For kind and loving wives, and call their friends
Their choicest friends unto a solemn banquet
Served out with sighs and sadness, while the widowers
Blubber, and bath in tears (which they do seem
To wring out of their fingers ends and noses)
And after all the demure ceremony.
Are subject to be thought dissemblers, I
(To avoid the scandal of Hypocresie,
Because it is plain she loved me not) invite
You and your like that loved her and not me,
To see me in the pride of my rejoycings,
You shall find entertainment worth your company,
And that let me entreat to morrow night.

Not. You shall ha'mine.

Vin. To morrow night say you.

Quic. Yes gallants: fail not, as you wish to view
Your mortgages and pawns again. Adieu.
Exit.
Not. We came to jear the Jew, and he jears us.

Vin. How glad the raschal is for his Wives death.

Not. An honest man could not have had such luck.

Ed. He has some further end in it, could we guess it,
Then a mere merriment for his dead wives niddance.

Vin. Perhaps he has got a new Wife, and intends
To make a funeral and a Marriage feast
In one to hedge in charges.

Ed. He'il be hanged rather then marry again.

Not. Zooks would he had some devilish jealous hilding,
'Twould be a rare addition to his mirth,
For us to bring our antic in betwixt'em
Of his changling Bastard.

Vin. How ere we'll grace his feast with our presentment.

Not. When Is the Buzzard?

Vin. We left him with his foster father, Arnold,
B^sy at rehearsal practicing their parts.

Ed. They shall be perfect by to morrow night.

Not. If not unto our profit, our delight.
Exeunt omnes.
ACT 4. SCENE 3.
Theophilus. Lucy. Lu. Brother be comforted.

The. Let not the name
Or empty sound of comfort mix with the air
That must invade these ears: They are not capable,
Or, if they be, they dare not, for themselves,
Give the conveyance of a syllable
Into my heart, that speak not grief or sorrow.

Lu. Be grieved then, I Will grieve with you: For each sigh
You waste for Millicents untimely death
I Will spend a tear for your as fruitless sorrow.

The. That Is most unsuitable; you are no company
For me to grieve with if you grieve for me;
Take the same cause with me; you are no friend
Or sister else of mine. It is enough
To set the world a weeping!

Lu. So it is;
All but the stony part often.

The. Now you are right. Her husband's of that part;
He cannot weep by nature: But I Will find
A way by art in Chemistry to melt him.
At least extract some drops. But do you weep
Indeed for Millicent? What, all these tears?

Lu. All for your love.

The. She is my love indeed; and was my wife.
But for the empty name of marriage only,
But now she is yours for ever. You enjoy her.
In her fair blessed memory; in her goodness,
And all that has prepared her way for glory.

The. Let me embrace thee sister. How I reverence
Any fair honor that is done to her,
Now thou shall weep no more: Thou have given me comfort
In showing me how she is mine. And tears indeed
Are all too weak a sacrifice for her
But such as the heart weeps.
Enter Page.
Lu. Sit down brother.
Sing boy the mornful song I bad you practice.
Song.
The. Call you this mournful. It Is a wanton air.
Go you are a naughty child indeed, I Will whip you
If you give voice unto such notes,

Lu. I know not brother how you like the air,
But in my mind the words are sad, Pray read'em.

The. They are sad indeed* How now my boy, do weep?
I am not angry now.

Pa. I do not weep,
Sir, for my self. But there is a youth without
(A handsome youth) whose sorrow works in me:
He says he wants a service, and seeks yours.

The. Do thou not know him*

Pa. No: but I pity him.

The. O, good boy, that can weep for a strangers misery!
The sweetness of thy dear compassion
Even melts me too. What does he say he is.

Pa. It Is that Sir, that will grieve you when you hear it.
He is a poor kinsman to the gentlewoman
Lately deceased that you so loved and mourn for.

The. And do thou let him stay without so long?
Merciless Villain! run and fetch him quickly.

Lu. O brother --

The. Sister, can I be too zealous
In such a cause as this? For hark you, sister,
Enter Dionisia
Dio. There was no way like this to get within'em,
Now courage keep true touch with me. I Will vex
Your cunning and unnatural purpose, brother,
If I do nothing else.

Pa. Sir, here is the youth?

The. A lovely one he is, and wondrous like her,
O let me run and clasp him; hang about him,
And yoke him to me with a thousand kisses!
I shall be troublesome and heavy to thee,
With the pleased weight of my incessant love.
Youth of a happy kindred, which foreruns
A happy fortune ever. Pray thee, sister,
Is he not very like her?

Lu. If I durst
I would now say, this were the better beauty,
For it resembles Arthurs.

The, Is It not her face? you do not mind me sister:

Lu. Hers was a good one once, and this is now.

The. Why sister, you were wont to take delight
In any comfort that belonged to me;
And help to carry my joys sweetly: now
You keep no constant course with me.

Dio. This man
Melts me -- alas, Sir, I am a poor boy.

The. What, and allied to her? impossible!
Where ere thou liv'st her name's a fortune to thee.
Her memory amongst good men sets thee up;
It is a word that commands all in this house.

Dio. This snare was not well laid. I fear my self.

The. Live my companion; my especial sweet one,
My brother and my bedfellow thou shall be.

Dio. By lakin but I must not, though I find
But weak matter against it. -- This my courage!

The. She took from earth, how kind is heaven, how good
To send me yet, a joy so near in blood!
Good noble youth, if there be any more
Distres'd of you, that claims aliance with her
Though a far off; deal freely; let me know it,
Give me their sad names; I Will seek'em out,
And like a good great man, in memory humble
Nere cease until I plant'em all in fortunes,
And see'em grow about me.

Dio. I hear of none, my self excepted, Sir.

The. Thou shall have all my care then, all my love.

Dio. What make I here? I shall undo my self.

The. Yet note him sister.

Dio. I there is the mark my malice chiefly aims at;
But then, he stands so near, I wound him too.
I feel that must not be. Art must be shown here.

The. Come, you shall kiss him for me, and bid him welcome.

Lu. You are most welcome, Sir, and were her name
To which you are allied, a stranger here,
Yet, Sir, believe me, you in those fair eyes
Bring your own welcome with you.

Dio. Never came Malice among so sweet a people.
It knows not how to look, nor I on them.

Lu. Let not your gentle modesty make you seem
Ungentle to us, by turning so away.

The. That Is well said sister, but he will and shall
Be bolder with us, ere we part.

Dio. I shall too much I fear. --

The. Come gentle blessing,
Let not a misery be thought on here,
(If ever any were so rude to touch thee)
Between us we'll divide the comfort of thee.
Exeunt Omnes.
ACT. 4. SCENE. 4.
Millicent. Phillis. Mil. I have heard thy story often, and with pity
As often thought upon it, and that the father,
Of my best loved Theophilus, together with
His, then, friend Master Meanwell (who have since
Become each others deathsman astis thought)
By suits in Law wrought the sad overthrow
Of thy poor Fathers fortune; by which means,
Poor Gentleman he was enforced to leave
His native Country to seek foreign means
To maintain life.

Phi. Or rather to meet death.
For since his traval, which is now six years,
I never heard of him.

Mil. Much pitiful!

Phi. So is your story, Mistress unto me.
But let us dry our eyes; and know we must not
Stick in the mire of pity; but with labor
Work our delivery: yours is now at hand
If you set will and brain to it. But my honor
(If a poor wench may speak so) is so cracked
Within the ring, as 'twill be hardly solder'd
By any art. If on that wicked fellow,
That struck me into such a desperate hazard.

Mil. He will be here to night, and all the crew
And this must be the night of my delivery,
I am prevented else for ever, wench.

Phi. Be sure, among the guests, that you make choice
Of the most civil one to be your convoy,
And then let me alone to act your Mores part.

Mil. Peace, he comes.
Enter Quic.
Phi. I Will to my shift then.
Exit. Phi.
Quic. Where Is my hidden beauty?
That shall this night be glorious.

Mil. I but wait the good hour
For my deliverance out of this obscurity.

Quic. It Is at hand.
So are my guests. See some of them are entered.
Enter Not. O my blithe friend, Master Nathaniel, welcome.
Arthur. And Master Arthur Meanwell as I take it.

Not. Yes, Sir, a Gentleman late possessed with sadness,
Whom I had much a do to draw along
To be partaker more of your mirth then cheer.
You say here shall be mirth. How now, what is that?
Ha'vou a black coney berry in your house?

Quic. Stay Catelina. Nay, she may be seen.
For know, Sirs, I am mortified to beauty
Since my wives death. I will not keep a face
Better then this under my roof I ha'sworn.

Ar. You were too rash, Sir, in that oath, if I
Mav be allowed to speak.

Quic. It Is done and past, Sir.

Not. If I be not taken with yon'd funeral face,
And her two eyes the scutcheons, would I were whipped now.

Art. Suppose your friends should wish you to a match
Prosperous in wealth and honor.

Quic. I Will hear of none, nor you if you speak so.

Art. Sir, I ha'done.

Not. It is the handsom'st Rogue
I have ere seen yet of a deed of darkness;
Tawney and russet faces I have dealt with,
But never came so deep in blackness yet.

Quic. Come hither Catelyna. You shall see, Sir,
What a brave wench she shall be made anon
And when she dances how you shall admire her.

Art. Will you have dancing here to night.

Quic. Yes I have borrowed other Moors of Merchants
That trade in Barbary, whence I had mine own here,
And you shall see their way and skill in dancing.

Not. He keeps this Rie-loaf for his own white white tooth
With confidence none will cheat him of a bit;
I Will have a sliver though I loose my whittle.

Quic. Here take this key, twill lead thee to those ornaments
That decked thy mistress lately. Use her casket,
And with the sparklingst of her jewels shine;
Flame like a midnight beacon with that face,
Or a pitched ship a fire; the streamers glowing
And the keel mourning, (how I shall rejoice
At these prepostrous splendours) get thee glorious;
Be like a running fire-work in my house.

Not. He sets me more a fire at her. Well old stick breech
If I do chance to clap your Barbary buttock
In all her bravery, and get a snatch
In an odd corner, or the dark to night
To mend your cheer, and you hereafter hear on it,
Say there are as good stomachs as your own,
Hist, Negro, hist.

Mil. No fee, O no, I darea notta.

Not. Why, why -- pish -- pox I love thee,

Mil. O no de fine white Zentilmanna
Cannot a love a the black a thing a.

Not. Cadzooks the best of all wench.

Mill. O take -- a heed -- a my mastra see -- a.

Not. When we are alone, then will thou.

Mil. Then I shall speak a more a.

Not. And I Will not lose the Moor-a for more then I
Will speak-a.

Quic. I muse the rest of my invited Gallants
Come not away.

Not. Zooks the old angry justice.
Enter Testy.
Tes. How comes it Sir, to pass, that such a news
Is spread about the town? is my Niece dead,
And you prepared to mirth Sir, hah?
Is this the entertainment I must find
To welcome me to town?

Quic. She is not dead, Sir. But take you no notice
You shall have instantly an entertainment, that
Shall fill you all with wonder.

Tes. Sure he is mad;
Or do you understand his meaning sirs?
Or how or where his wife died?

Not. I know nothing;
But give me leave to fear, by his wild humor,
He Is guilty of her death; therefore I hope
He Will hang himself anon before us all
To raise the mirth he speaks of.

Art. Fie upon you.
Yet trust me, sir, there have been large constructions,
And strong presumptions, that the ill made match
Betwixt her youthful beauty and his covetous age;
Between her sweetness and his frowardness
Was the unhappy means of her destruction;
And you that gave strength to that ill tied knot
Do suffer sharply in the worlds opinion,
While she, sweet virgin, has its general pity.

Tes. Pray what have you been to her? I nere found you
Appear a suitor to her.

Art. I nere saw her,
Nor ever should have sought her, Sir; For she
Was only love to my sworn enemy,
On whom yet (were she living and in my gift
Rather a thousand times I would bestow her
Then on that man that had, and could not know her.

Tes. I have done ill; and wish I could redeem
This act with half my estate.

Not. This Devels bird,
This Moor runs more and more still in my mind.
Enter Vin. and Edm. O are you come? And ha'you brought your scene
Of Mirth along with you?

Vin. Yes, and our actors
Are here at hand: But we perceive much business
First to be set a foot. Here Is Revels toward.

Ed. A dance of furies or of Blackamores
Is practicing within;

Vin. But first there is to be some odd collation
In stead of supper.

Not. Cheap enough I warrant,
But saw you not a Moor-hen there amongst'em.

Ed. A pretty little Rogue, most richly decked
With pearls, chains and jewels. She is queen
Of the Nights triumph.

Not. If you ^h^nce to spy me
Take her aside, say nothing.

Ed. Thou will filch
Some of her jewels perhaps.

Not. I Will draw a lot
Enter Quicksands. For the best jewel she wears. But mum my Masters.

Quic. Enter the house pray Gentlemen: I am ready
Now with your entertainment.
Exit.
Tes. We Will follow you.

Not. N^w for six penny custards, a pipkin of baked
Pears, three sawcers of stewed prunes, a groats worth
Of strong ale, and two peniworth of Gingerbread.
Ext. 3.
Tes. If she does live (as he bears me in hand
She is not dead) I Will tell you briefly, Sir,
If all the law bodily and ghostly,
And all the conscience too, that I can purchase
With all the wealth I have can take her from him,
I will recover her, and then bestow her
(If you refuse her) on your so you speak of,
(whose right she is indeed) rather then he
Shall hold her longer. Now mine eyes are opened.
Will you walk in.

Ar. I pray excuse me, Sir,
Exi^, Enter Mili. white. faced and in her own habit. I cannot fit my self to
mirth.

Tes. Your pleasure.
Mil. Have I with patience waited for this ^ou^,
And does fear check me now? I Will break through all,
And trust my self with yon'd mildeGentleman.
He cannot but be noble.

Art. A goodly creature!
The Rooms illumined with her; yet her look
Sad, and cheek pale, as if a sorrow sucked it.
How came she in? What is she? I am fear*struck.
It Is some unresting shadow. Or, if not,
What makes a thing so glorious in this house,
The master being an enemy to beauty?
She modestly makes to me.

Mil. Noble Sir, --

Art. Speaks too.

Mil. If ever you durst own a goodness,
Now crown it by an act of honor and mercy.

Art. Speak quickly; lose no time then: say, what are you?
You look like one that should not be delai'd.

Mil. I am th'unfortunate woman of this house,
To all men's thoughts at rest. This is the face
On which the Hell of jealousy abused
The hand of Heaven, to fright the world withal.

Ar. Were you the seeming Moor was here?

Mil. The same;
And only to your secrecy and pity
I have ventured to appear my self again.

Ar. What Is to be done? Pray speak, and it is performed.

Mil. In trust and Manhood Sir, I would commit
A great charge to you, even my life and honor
To free me from this den of misery.

Art. A blessed tasque! But when you are freed Lady --

Mil. I would desire Sir, then to be convei'd. --

Ar. Whither? to whom? speak quickly: why do you stoop?

Mil. Pray let that rest. I will relieve your trouble
When I am freed from hence, and use some others.

Art. Nay, that were cruelty. As you love goodness tell me.

Mil. Why dare you bear me Sir, to one you hate.

Art. What Is that, if you love? It Is your peace I wait on.
I look upon your service, not mine own.
Were he the mortall'st enemy flesh bred up
To you I must be noble.

Mil. You profess --

Ar. By all that is good and gracious, I will die
Ere I forsake you, and not set you safe
Within those walls you seek.

Mil. Then, as we pass
I Will tell you where they stand, Sir.

Ar. You shall grace me.
Exit.
ACT 4. SCENE 5.
Quick sands. Testy. Nath. Vincent. Edmond. Qui. Now to our Revels. Sit ye, sit
ye gallants
Whilst, Uncle, you shall see how I Will requite
The masque they lent me on my wedding night.
It Was but lent Gentlemen, your masque of horns,
And all the private jears and public scorns
You Have cast upon me since. Now you shall see
How I Will return them; and remarried be.

Vin. I hope he will marry his Moor to anger us.

Not. I Will give her something with her, if I catch her,
And't be but in the cole-house.
Flourish enter Inductor like a Moor leading Phillis (black and) gorgeously
decked with jewels.
Tes. Attend Gentleman.

Ind. The Queen of Ethiop dreampt upon a night
Her black womb should bring forth a virgin white.

Ind. She told her king; he told thereof his Peers.
Till this white dream filled their black heads with fears:

Not. A whoreson blockheads.

Ind. Blackheads I sai'd. I Will come to you anon

Tes. He puts the blockheads on'hem grossly.

Quic. Brave impudent rogue. He made the speeches last year
Before my Lord Marquess of Fleet Conduit.

Ind. Till this white dream filled their blackheads with fear,
For it is no better then a Prodegy
To have white children in a black country.
So 'twas decreed that if the child proved white,
It should be made away. O cruel spite!
The Queen cried out, and was delivered
Of child black as you see: Yet Wizards sed
That if this damsel lived married to be
To a white man, she should be white as he.

Vin. The moral is, If Quicksands marry her,
Her face shall be white as his conscience.

Ind. The careful Queen, conclusion for to try,
Sent her to merry England charily
(The fairest Nation man yet ever saw)
To take a husband; such as I shall draw,
Being an Egyptian Prophet.

Ed. Draw me, and i will hang thee.

Ind. Now I come to you, Gentlemen.
He looks in Edmonds hand.
Qui. Now mark my Jeeres.

Ind. You must not have her: For I find by your hand
You have forfeited the mortgage of your land.

Ed. Pox o'your Palmistrie.

Ven. Now me.

Ind. Nor you: For here I plainly see
In Vin his hand. You have sold and spent your life's Annuity.

Vin. The devil take him, made thee a soothsayer.

Not. I find from whence your skill comes. Yet take me
For thy little Princess of darkness, and if
I rub her not as white as another can
Let me be hung up with her for a new
Sign of the labor in vain.

Ind. Nor you, sir: For
In Nats hand. The only suit you wear smells of the chest
That holds in Limbo Lavender all your rest.

Not. Would his brains were in thy belly that keeps the key on it.

Ind. This is the worthy man, whose wealth and wit,
To make a white one, must the black mark hit.
In Quic. hand
Qui. Your jeers are answered, gallants. Now your dance.
Enter the rest of the Moors. They Dance an Antique in which they use action of
Mockery and derision to the three Gentlemen.
Not. We applaud your devise, and you will give me leave
To take your black bride here, forth in a dance.

Quic. With all my heart, sir.

Not. Music, play a Galliard,
You know what you promised me, Bullis.

Phi. But howa can ita be donea.

Not. How I am taken with the elevation of her nostrils.

Not. Play a little quicker -- Hark you -- if I lead you
A dance to a couch or a bed side, will you follow me?

Phi. I will doa my besta.
Not. daunces vily. Quicks. and Tes. laughs and looks off.
Not. So, so; quick Music, quick.

Qui. O ougly! call you this dancing; ha, ha, ha.

Not. Do you laugh at me.
Enter Arnold like a Country man, and Buz. like a changling, and as they
enter, exit Not. with Phil. the Music still playing.
Arn. By your leave Gentlefolks.

Buz. O brave, o brave.

Quic. How now.

Tes. What are these?

Buz. Hack ye there, hack ye there,
O brave pipes. Hack ye there.
He sings and dances and spins with a Rock and spindle. Hay toodle loodle
loodle loo.

Qui. What are you men or devils?

Arn. You are advised enough: Sir, if you please
But to be short, I Will show you I am a Norfolk man,
And my name is John Hulverhead.

Quic. Hold thy peace.
Softly.
Arn. You cannot hear o'chat side it seems.

Qui. I know thee not, not I.

Arn. But you know my brother Matthew Hulverhead
Deceased, with whom you placed this simple child of yours.

Qui. I placed no child in Norfolk nor Suffolk nor any
Folk I -- say thou mistookst me: I Will reward thee. Go.

Arn. I cannot hear o'that ear neither, sir.

Vin. What Is the matter, Mr. Quicksands?

Ed. Ha'you any more jeeres to put upon us? what are these?

Buz. Hay toodle loodle loodle loo.

Qui. Get you out of my house.

Arn. I may not till I be righted. I come for right, and
I will have right, or the best of the City shall
Hear on it.

Vin. I swear the Rascals act it handsomely.

Tes. What art thou fellow? What do thou seek?

Vin. Tell that Gentleman: He is an upright Majestrate
And will see thee righted.

Arn. I am a poor Norfolk man, sir. And I come to ease myself of a charge, by
putting off a child natural to the natu^al father here.


Quic. My child! Am I his father? Dare thou speak it.

Arn. Be not ashamed on it, sir: You are not the first grave and wise Citizen
that has got an idiot.

Tes. Here Is good stuff toward.

Buz. Ha, ha, ha -- with a Hay toodle loodle loodle loo.

Qui. How should I get him. I was never married till this month.

Arn. How does other bawdy Batchelors get children?

Buz With a hay toodle loodle loodle loo, etc.

Tes. Have you been a bastard-getter and marry my Niece.

Vin. Now it works.

Tes. I^e teach you to get a bastard, sirrah.

Arn. He needs none o'your skill it seems.

Buz. Hay toodle loodle, etc.

Qui. Well, Gentlemen, to take your wonder off,
I will lay truth before you.
For a poor servant that I had, I undertook and paid
For keeping of an idiot.

Ed. Who, your man Buzzard?

Qui. Even he.

Buz. Hay toodle loodle, etc.

Qui. It Is like this is the child. But for a certain sum
Which I did pay, 'twas articled, that I should nere be
Troubled with it more.

Tes. Now what say you to that Sir?

Arn. It Is not denied Sir, There was such agreement,
But now he is another kind of charge.

Vin. Why, he gets something toward his living me thinks.
Buzzard spinns.
Ar. Yes, he has learned to thrip among the Mothers;
But Sir, withal, to do more harm then good by it,
And that is the charge I speak of: we are not bound
To keep your child, and your childs children too.

Tes. How Is that?

Arn. Sir, by his cunning at the Rock,
And twirling of his spindle on the Thrip-skins,
He has fetched up the bellies of sixteen
Of his Thrip-sisters.

Buz. Hay toodle, loodle, loodle, etc.

Tes. Is It possible.

Arn. So well he takes after his father here it seems.

Ed. Take heed o'that friend: you heard him say it was his man's child.

Arn. He shall not fright me with that, though it be
A great man's part to turn over his bastards
To his servants. I am none of his hirelings, nor
His Tenants I. But I know what I say; and I know
What I come about; and not without advise; And you
May know, that Norfolk is not without as knavish
Council, as another County may be. Let his man Buz.
Be brought forth, and see what he will say to it.

Buz. Hay toodle loodle, etc.

Qui. Wretch that I was to put away that fellow!
But stay! where is my wife? my wife, my wife --

Vin. What say you, Sir?

Qui. My Moor I would say. Which way went my Moor?

Vin. Your Ethiopian Princess.


Not. is gone to dance with her in private, because you laughed him out of
countenance here.

Qui. Mischief on mischief! worse and worse I fear.

Tes. What do you fear, why stare you? Are you frantic?

Qui. I must have wits and fits, my fancies and fegaries.

Ed. Your jeers upon poor Gallants.

Vin. How do you feel your self.

Buz. Hay toodle loodle, etc.

Arn. Ask your father blessing Timsy.

Buz. Hay toodle loodle, etc.

Arn. Upon your knees man.

Buz. Upon all my knees. A -- ah. Hay toodle loodle.

Not. What was it to you, you slaves?
Enter Not. and Phillis pulled in by the Moors. Must you be peeping.

Tes. What Is the matter now?

Not. What was it to you, ye Rascals?

Moor. It is to us Sir, We were hired to dance and to speak speeches; and to do
the Gentleman true service in his house: And we will not see his house made a
baudy house, and make no speech o'that.


Tes. What is the business?

Moor. Marry Sir a naughty business. This Gentleman has committed a deed of
darkness with your Moor, Sir; We all saw it.


Tes. What deed of darkness? speak it plainly.

Moor. Darkness or lightness; call it which you will.
They have lain together; made this same a baudy house;
How will you have it?

Qui. Undone, most wretched. O, I am confounded.
I see no art can keep a woman honest.

Not. I love her, and will justify my Act.

Phi. And I the best of any man on earth.

Not. Thou speak good English now.

Qui. O Ruin, ruin, ruin --

Buz. Hay toodle loodle, etc.

Vin. Why take you on so, for an ougly feind?

Qui. She is my wife, Gentlemen.

All. How Sir, your wife.

Ed. In conceit you mean.

Qui. I say my lawful wife; your Niece; and so disguised
By me on purpose.

Tes. I said he was mad before, ha, ha, ha.

Not. Now I applaud my act, 'twas sweet and brave.

Qui. I Will be divorced before a Court in public.

Tes. Now will I use Authority and skill.
Friends, guard the doors. None shall depart the house.

Not. Mun. Vin. Content, content.

Arn. Shall I, Sir, and my charge stay too?

Qui. Oh --

Tes. Marry Sir, shall you.

Buz. I fear we shall be smoked then.

Arn. No, no, fear nothing.

Tes. You know your Chamber huswife. I Will wait o'your Master
To night. We will not part until to morrow day,
Justice and Law lights every one his way.

Vin. Is this your merry night, Sir?

Qui. Oh -- oh -- oh -- o --

Ed. Why roar you so?

Not. It is the Cuckolds howl. A common cry about the City.

Qui. Oh o -- Buz. Hay toodle loodle, etc.
Exeunt omnes.
ACT. 5. SCENE. 1.
Meanwell. Rashly. Winlosse. Host. Mea. Now my good Host, since you have been
our friend
And only council keeper in our absence,
To you, before we visit our own houses
We Will render a relation of our journey,
And what the motive was that drew us forth.
It Is true, we did pretend a deadly quarrel
At a great bowling match upon Black Heath;
Went off; took horse; and several ways, forecast
To meet at Dover, where we met good friends,
And in one Barque past over into France:
Here 'twas supposed to fight, like fashion followers
That thither fly, as if no sand but theirs
Could dry up English blood.

Host. Now, by the way,
Suppose that supposition had been true,
And the supposed deaths of you, and you
Had moved your sons to combat in earnest,
And both been killed indeed, as you in jest,
Where had been then your witty subtilty,
My noble Meanwell, and my brave Rashly?
Ha! have I twight ye there?

Rash. Thou keepst thy humor still my running Host.

Host. My humor was, nor is, nor must be lost:
But, to the question, was it wisely done,
When each of you might so have lost a son?

Rash. We had no fear of that Sir, by the Rule,
The common Rule o'th'world. Where do you find
Sons that have lives and Lands, will venture both
For their dead Fathers that are gone and cared for?
Nor was it only to make trial of
What husbands they would be; how spend, or save;
How manage, or destroy; how one or both
Might play the Tyrants over their poor Tenants,
Yet fall by Prodigality into th'Compters:
And then the dead by pulling off a Beard,
After a little chiding and some whyning,
To set the living on their legs again,
And take 'em into favor; pish, old play-plots.
No Sir, our business runs another course;
Know you this Gentleman yet?

Host. Nor yet, nor yet;
Best wits may have bad memories; I forget.

Win. It is my part to speak. Mine Host, you have known me,
My name is Winloss; a poor Gentleman,
Yet richer, by my liberty, then I was
For six years space, till these good Gentlemen
In charity redeemed me.

Host. Master Winloss!
I thought I could as soon forgot my Chriss-Cross,
Yet (pardon me) you have been six years gone,
And all of them in prison saving one,
In Dunkerk as I ween.

Win. It is most true;
And that from thence these Gentlemen redeemed me
At their own charge, by paying five hundred pound,
Which was my Ransom.

Host. It Is a rare example.

Win. Worthy brass tables, and a pen of steel.

Mea. No more good neighbor Winloss. What we did
Was to discharge our conscience of a burden
Got (and 'twas all we got) by your undoing,
In a sad suit at Law.

Host. I do remember;
And, without ruin I Will tell you, That sad cause,
In which you joined against him, overthrew him
And all his Family: But this worthy act
Of yours in his enlargement, crowns your piety,
And puts him in a way of better Fortune,
Then his first tottering estate could promise.

Rash. Shut up that point. You have heard no ill, you say,
Among our sons and daughters in our absence.

Host. Not any Sir at all. But, Mr. Winloss,
You that have past so many sorrows, can
(I make no doubt) here one with manly patience.

Win. It Is of my daughter Phillis! Is she dead?

Host. It Is well and't be no worse with her: I fear
She Is gone the the other way of all flesh, do you hear?

Rash. Why do thou tell him this?

Host. To have him right
His daughters wrong upon that wicked beast
That has seduced her.

Rash. Who is it? can thou tell?

Host. Even the Ran^k-rider of the town, Sir, one
Master Nathaniel Banelasse, if you know him.

Mea. He has my sons acquaintance.

Rash. And mine is too.

Host. You may be proud on'^, if they escape his doctrine.

Win. But does he keep my daughter to his lust?

Host. No, Sir, it is worse then so. He has cast her off
To the common, as it is feared.

Win. Owretchedness!

Rash. How came thou by this knowledge.

Host. Sir, I Will tell you.
I have, i'th'house, a guest, was once your man,
And served your son, since you went ore I Am sure on'c,
Though now he has got a young spark to his Master,
That has a brace of gueldings in my stable;
And lusty ones they are. That Is by the way.

Rash. But to the point, I pray thee.

Host. Sir, the young gallant is abroad, the man
Scults closs i'th'^ouse here, and has done these two days
Spending his time with me in drink and talk.
Most of his talk runs upon wenches mainly;
And who loves who, and who keeps home, and so forth;
And he told me the tale that I tell you
Twixt Banelasse and your done and undone daughter.

Ra. Mine host -- cry mercy Gentlemen --
Enter Rafe.
Mea. Nay, nay, come on.

Host. I told you he was very shy to be seen.

Ra. My old master alive again? and he that he killed too?

Mea. Whom do you serve? was I so ill a master,
That, in my absence, you forsook my children?
Or how have they misused you? Why do look
So like an apprehended thief? I fear
Thou serv'st some robber, or some murderer,
Or art become thy self one. If the Devil
Have so possessed thee, strive to turn him out:
He add my prayers to help thee. What Is the matter?

Ra. O honored master! I Will keep nothing from you.
There is an act of horror now on foot,
Upon revenge of your supposed murder,
Of which to stand and tell the circumstance,
Would wast the time and hinder the prevention
Of your sons murder, and your daughters ruin.

All. O fearful!

Ra. Let not your amazement drown
Your reason in delay; your sudden have
Was never so required as now. Stay not
To ask my why, or whither. As ye go
I shall inform ye.

Rash. Go, we follow thee.
Exeunt omnes.
ACT. 5. SCENE 2.
Dionysia as before in man's habit, sword and pistol. What a fierce conflict
twixt revenge and love,
Like an unnatural civil war, now rages
In my perplexed breast. There, fight it out;
To it Pel-mel my thoughts. The battel's hot.
Now for the day! revenge begins to stagger,
And her destracted Army at an instant
R^uted and put to flight. All conquering love,
Thou have got the victory; and now I sue
(Like a rent kingdom by self-opposite thoughts)
Unto thy sovereignty, to be the liege-right.
Take me to thy protection, kingly love,
And having captivated my revenge,
O, play not now the Tyrant. A firm hope
Persuades me no: But when I shall
Reveal my self I shall obtain Theophilus love.
Which now is ten times sweeter in my thought
Then my revenge was, when 'twas first begot.
Ent. The. and Lucy. The. What, still alone? we have been seeking thee.

Dio. O it is the service that I ow you Sir.

Lu. Indeed you are too pensive: two whole days
And nights among us, and no more familiar?
Ent. Ar. in his false beard, ^eading in Mil. veiled. Pages they stand aloof.
Pa. May I crave your name, Sir?

Ar. That Is to little purpose,
My business is the thing -- yonder is the star!
What young Gentleman is that your Mistress arm
Appears so courteous too?

Pa. One she thinks well on Sir,
No matter for his name, as you said, neither.

Ar. He seems some well graced suitor. It Is my fear,
If he should now -- I must be just however.

Pa. Sir, a Gentleman desires to speak with you.

The. Do thou not know his name?

Pa. He will not tell it Sir.

The. You treacherous boy, do you bring you know not whom?
O it is the Gentleman I was so bound to, Sister:
The welcom'st man alive; Thanks my good boy.
What Is she he brings in veiled, and this way leads?

Ar. Sir, though I am still a stranger in my visit,
To works of gentleness, I am partly known.
There (if you chance t'enquire of me hereafter
(When I shall more deserve your inquisition)
I may be found, if not exact in service,
A least a poor pretender in my wishes:
And so presenting this white gift, (more modest
Then the most secret duty of man's friendship
Can ever be) I take my leave --

The. This man
Would breed, at every time ht's seen, a wonder!
Sir, leave me not thus lost: let me once know you,
And what this mystery means? This bears a shape
I may not entertain: I have set my vow
Against all woman kind, since Heaven was married
To my first love; and must not willingly
Discover a temptation with mine own hand.

Ar. How shie and nice we are to meet our happiness!
Like dying wretches, '^raid to go to rest.
Because you shall be guilty of no breach
I Will open the Casket for you.
He unveils her, and slips away.
The. Bless me, it is --
Warm, so Love cherish me and comfortable.

Dio. O death, my hopes are blasted.

Lu. How is it with you, sir.

The. Might a man credit his own senses now
This were my Millicent. How think you, sister?

Mil. Indeed I am so, my Theophilus.

Dio. She lives, and he is lost to me for ever,
I shall be straight discovered too. False Love
Thou have dealt loosely with me; And Revenge
I re-invoke thy nobler spirit: Now
Possess me wholly; let it not be thought
I came and went off idly.

Lu. Sir, something troubles you. See your kinswoman
My brother stands intranc'd too; Brother, brother*
Noble Lady, speak to him.

Mil. I was in my discovery too sudden.
Strong rapture of his joy transmutes him -- Sir,
Be not so wonder-struck; or, if you be,
Let me conjure you by the love you bore me,
R^turn unto your self again. Let not
A wandering thought fly from you, to examine
From whence, or how I came: If I be welcome
I am your own and Millicent.

The. And in that
So blessed a treasure, that the wealth and strength
Of all the world shall never purchase from me.
Heaven may be pleased again to take thee, but
I Will hold so fast, that we will go hand in hand;
Besides, I hope his mercy will not part us.
But where is the man now more desired then ever
That brought you hither?

Mil. You ask in vain for him.
I can resolve you all; but for the present
He will be known to none.

The. This is a cruel goodness: To put thankfulness
Out of all action. Sirah, how went he?

Pa. I know not, Sir, he vanished suddenly.

The. Vanished! good Lucy help to hold her fast
She may not vanish too. Spirits are subtle.

Mil. This was my fear. Will you have patience,
And fit but in this chair while I relate my story.

The. I Will be as calm in my extremest deeps
As is the couch where a sweet conscience sleeps.

Dio. It Is now determinate as fate; and so
At the whole cluster of them. Bless me ha!
As Dionisia presents her pistol. Enter. Rash. Mean. Win. Rafe. Arthur. My
father living! Then the cause is dead
Of my revenge.

Rash. What is he killed out right.
Or else but hurt? Theophilus! my boy!
Dead, past recovery. Stay the murdress there.
Look you, Sir, to her. I suspect your son too
Is not without a hand in it by the have
We met him in.

Lu. He is not hurt at all
My honored father, as I desire your blessing,
But stricken with an ecstasy of joy.

Rash. Look up my boy. How do?here is none but friends.

The. Sure, sure we are all then in Elisium
Where all are friends and filled with equal joy.
Earth can have no felicity like this.
If thisbe any thing.

Rash. Thou can not see nothing,
Look well about thee man.

The. I see, I feel, I hear and know ye all:
But who knows what he knows, sees, feels, or hears?
It Is not an age for man to know himself in.

Rash. He is not mad I know by that.

The. If I know any thing, you are my father --

Rash. Thou art a wise child.

The. And I beseech your blessing.

Rash. Thou have it. Millicont, I have heard your story,
And Lucy, you betwixt you sooth his fancy,
He will be well anon. Keep'em company Arthur,
And Lucy, bid him welcome.

Lu. More then life, Sir.

Rash. You Dionysia would be chid a little;
But, Sir, let me entreat her parden^

Mea. Dry your eyes: you have it.
Go instantly resume your sexes habit,
And with the rest be ready, if we call ye
To Quicsands house. The rumor of our coming
Already calls us thither to be assistant
To justice Testy in a pondrous difference.

Kash. How does he now?

Ar. He Is fallen into a slumber.

Rash. In with him all I pray.

Ar. etc. He shall have all our cares.
Exit with The. in the chair.
Rash. Come my friend Meanwell. Now to Quicksands cause,
To keep it out of wrangling lawyers jaws.
The face of danger is almost made clean
And may conclude all in a comic scene.
Exit.
ACT. 5. SCENE 3.
Vincent. Edmond. Testy. Rashly. Meanwel. Vin. Come, we will hear this cause
tried.

Ed. See the Judges
Have taken their seats, while we stand here for evidence.

Tes. My worthy friends, you are come unto a cause
As rare, as was your unexpected coming
From the supposed grave --

Rash. To the point I pray.

Tes. How quick you are! Good Mr. Rashly, know
(Though I craved your assistance) only I
Supply the chief place in Authority.

Rash. And much good do'c you. I have other business --
Your Niece Sir was too good for my poor son.

Tes. How Is that?

Mea. Nay Gentlemen, we came to end
A business: Pray begin no new one first.

Rash. Well Sir, I ha'done.

Mea. Pray Sir fall to the question.

Test. Bring in the parties.
Ent. Quic. Not. Phil. The first branch of the question rises here
If Quicksands wife, my Niece, be dead or living
Speak Gentlemen. What can you say to this?

Vin. Quicksands affirmed to us, that she was dead.

Edm. Though, since in a destracted passion
He says she lives.

Qui. She lives, and is that strumpet,
From whom I sue to be divorced.

Mea. That Moor, there?
Did you wed her since your fair wives decease?

Qui. Tha^ same is she, and all the wives I had
That black is but an artificial tincture
Laid by my jealousy upon her face.

Rash. This is most strange.

Not. Braver and braver still,
I aimed but at a cloud and clasped a June,
Will you be only mine?

Phi. I have sworn it ever.

Not. Then I am made for ever.

Test. Remove her, and let instant trial be made
To take the blackness off.

Qui. Then if her shame,
And my firm truth appear not, punish me.

Tes. However, your consent to be divorced
From Millicent is irrecoverable.

Qui. Before you all, I Will forfeit my estate
If ere I re-accept her.

Rash. Then she is free.

Tes. Now Mr. Banelass --

Not. Now for the honor of Wenchers.

Tes. Your fact is manifested and confessed.

Not. In fewest words it is.

Tes. Are you content
To take this woman now in question,
If she be found no Moor to be your Wife,
In holy marriage to restore her honor?

Not. Or else, before you all, let me be torn
To pieces; having first those dearest members,
In which I have most delighted, daubed with honey*

Tes. This protestation
Is clear, without respect of portion, now,
Or that she is my Niece: For you must know
She is no Niece of mine that could transgress
In that lean kind: Nor must she ever look
For favor at my hands.

Not. I am content, to take her as she is,
Not as your Niece, but as his counterfeit servant,
Hoping he will give me with her all about her.

Qui. My chains, and Jewels, worth a thousand pounds,
I Will pay it for my folly.

Not. 'Twil be twice
The price of my pawned goods. I Will put the rest
Up for your jeers past on my friends and me.

Mea. You are agreed.

Not. To take her with all faults.
Enter Philis white.
Phi. I take you at your word.

Qui. Hah --

Not. Hell and her changes.

Phi. Lead by the hope of justice, I am bold
To fix here fast, here to repair my ruins.

Not. The devil looks ten times worse with a white face,
Give me it black again.

Phi. Are we not one, you know from the beginning?

Not. Get thee from me.

Tes. Sirrah you have your suit and your desert,
It Is your best part to pass it patiently.

Rash. It Is Winloss daughter; we have found the error.

Qui. I am confounded here. Where is my Wife?

Tes. I, that is the point must now be urged. The Law
Asks her at your hands. Answer me, where is she?

Qui. I am at my joys end, and my wits together.

Mea. You have brought her fame in question: It Is revenged
Now you are in both for her life and honor.

Tes. S^eak villain, Murderer, where is my Niece?

Qui. I have snared my self exceeding cunningly;
That queen there knows.

Not. Take heed, Sir, what you say,
If she must be my wife. Hands off I pray,
These are my goods she wears. Give me'em, Phil.
For fear he snatch, I Will put'em in my pockets.

Phi. Sweet heart, my own will hold'em.

Not. Sweet heart already! we are soon familiar.

Phi. You know we are no strangers.

Rash. Well Mr. Quicksands: because you cannot answer
(To put you by the fear of halter-stretching)
Since you have engaged your word and whole estate
To be divorced: And you good Mr. Testy,
I^ you will be willing yet that my poor son
To wed your Niece, as I shall find it lawful,
I Will undertake her safe recovery.

Tes. I have in heart given her your son already.

Rash. And he has her already.
Ent. The. Mil. Ar. Lu. Dio. Winloss. As for example, see Sir.

Qui. See, see, the heaven that I am justly fallen from,
O may I yet find favor.

Mil. Never here.
Had thou not given thy faith to a divorce,
On forfeiture of thine estate, which thou
Do hold more precious; or could now redeem
That great engagement; and then multiply
Thy past estate into a tenfold sum.
Make me inheritrix of all; and last assure me
To die within a week, I Will not re-marry thee:
Adulterate beast, that brok'st thy former wedlock
In thy base lust with that thy servant there.

Not. What a pox no, I tro -- My wife that must be?

Phi. 'Twas your own doing, to put me to my shifts.

Not. The devil shift you, then you will be sure
Of change enough.

Win. O shame unto my blood.

Not. I will henceforward council all my friends
To wed their whores at first, before they go
Out o'their hands.

Tes. How can you answer this?

Qui. I utterly deny't upon my oath.

Phi. So do I, and safely for any act.

Not. That Is well again.

Phi. It was but in attempt, I told my Mistress,
Had it been done, sure I should nere have spoke on it.

Not. Those are the councels women can only keep.

Phi. Nothing in act I assure you.

Mil. In him 'twas foul enough though.

Mea. O hateful vice in age.

Tes. It Is an old vice grown in him from his youth,
Of which bring forth for proof his bastard there.

Buz. I fear we shall be whipped for counterfeits;
Ent. Buz. Arn. My long coats have a grudging of the lash.

Arn. I see my old Masters face again, and I will
Fear nothing.

Buz. Then I Will bear up again --
Hay diddy daddy, come play with the Baby
Dindle dandle on thy knee, and give him a penny,
And a new coat, o ho --

Qui. My grief and shame is endless.

Vin. Let not grief master you, Mr. Quicksands.

Ed. We are your friends, and pity your afflictions.
What will you give us now and we will release you
For ever of this changling charge of yours?

Vin. And prove he is not your bastard. Speak now roundly.

Qui. I Will cancel both your mortgages.

Vin. A match. Now look you Sir, your quandam servant,
All but the beard he wore; for loss of which
We Will recompense him.

Qui. O Buzzard, Buzzard, Buzzard.

Buz. O Master, Master, Master. Your servant and no bastard,
Nor father of your Idiot in Norfolk,
He Is there, and well Sir, I heard lately of him.

Qui. How could thou use me thus?

Buz. How could you turn me away so?

Tes. Ha, ha, ha. Come hither Buzzard. Thou shall not want a M^ster.

Arn. Nor I, I hope, while my old Master lives. You Are welcome home Sir.

Rash. And thou to me my good old servant Arnold.

Qui. Well fare a misery of a man's own seeking;
A tough one too will hold him tack to's end,
This comes with wiving at ^hreescore and three;
Would doting fools were all served so for me.

Tes. To shut up all: Theophilus, take my Niece,
We'll shortly find a Lawful course to marry ye.

Rash. I will take care for it. Arthur, take my daught^r well bestowed.
With a glad fathers blessing.

Mea. And mine with it, wishing my daughter were as

Dio. Sir take no thought for me, till my strict life
(By making man, and the world mere strangers to me,
In expiation of my late transgression
Against maiden modesty) shall render me
Some way deserving the honor of a husband.

Rash. Spoke like a good new woman.

Tes. How now! do you look squemish on your fortune,
Sir here is a Gentleman shall maintain her blood
As worthy as your own till you defile it,
It Is best you cleanse it again.

Not. Cadzooks I will --
Forgiv'me for swearing, and turn Precisian, and pray
I'che nose that all my brethren whoremasters spend no worse.

Phi. My father --

Win. O my child.

Not. Though Mr. Quickssands made a Mock-marriage with his English Moor,
I Will not mock thee.

Tes. Enough, euough. I hope all pleased at last
But Master Quicksands here.

Qui. I yield to fortune with an humble knee,
If you be pleased, your pleasure shall please me.

EPILOGUE.
Now let me be a modost undertaker
For us the players, the play and the play-maker:
If we have faild in speech or Action, we
Must crave a pardon; If the Commedy
Either in mirth, or matter be not right,
As 'twas intended unto your delight,
The Poet in hope of favor does submit
Unto your censure both himself and it,
Wishing that as you are judges in the cause
You judge but by the ancient Comic Laws.
Not by their course who in this latter age
Have sown such pleasing errors on the stage,
Which he no more will choose to imitate
Then they to fly from truth, and run the State.
But whether I avail, you have seen the play,
And all that in defense the Poet can say
Is, that he cannot mend it by a jest
In The Epilogue exceeding all the rest;
To send you off upon a champing bit,
More then the scenes afforded of his wit:
Nor studies he the Art to have it said
He sculks behind the hangings as afraid
Of a hard censure, or pretend to brag
Here Is all your money again brought in in the bag
If you applaud not, when before the word
'Twas parcel'd out upon the shearing-board.
Such are fine helps; but are not practiced yet
By our plain Poet who cannot forget
His wonted modesty, and humble way
For him and us, and his yet doubtful play,
Which, if received or but allowed by you,
We and the play are yours, the Poet too.
THE Lovesick Court OR THE Ambitious Politic.

A COMEDY

Written by Richard Brom:

Nil mea, ceu mos est, commendes carmina curo Se nisi comendent carmina
dispereant.

LONDON, Printed by J. T. for A. C. and are to be sold by Henry Broom, at the
Gun in Ivie-lane, 1658.

PROLOGUE.
A little wit, less learning, no Poetry
This Play-maker dares boast: It Is his modesty.
For though his labors have not found least grace,
It puffs not him up or in mind or face,
Which makes him rather in the Art disclame
Bold License, then to arrogate a Name;
Yet to the wit, the scholar, and the Poet,
Such as the Play is, we must dare to show it
Our judgments to but too: And without fear
Of giving least offense to any ear.
If you find pleasure in it, we boasting none,
Nor you nor we lose by' expectation.
Sometimes at poor men's boards the curious find
Amongst homely fare, some unexpected dish,
Which at great Tables they may want and wish:
If in this slight Collation you will bind
Us to believe you' have pleased your pallats here,
Pray bring your friends w'you next, you know your cheor.
Drammatis Personae.
King of Thessaly. Philargus, the Prince, supposed Son of the late slain
General. Disanius Two Lords. Justinius Stratocles a Politician. Philocles, A
young Nobleman son of the late General, and twin with Philargus. Euphalus, A
Gentleman belonging to the King. Geron, A curious Coxcomb and a Scholar.
Matho, A villain, servant to Stratocles. Tersulus, A Tailor, servant to
Philargus. Varillus, A Barbar, servant to Philocles. Eudina, The Princess.
Themile, Philocles Mother. Placilla, Her Daughter. Garula, An old Midwife.
Doris, Themilis Waiting Woman. 4. Rusticks.
The Scene THESSALY.

THE LOVE -- SICK COURT.
OR THE Ambitious Politic.
ACT. 1. SCENE. 1.
Disanius. Justinius. Meeting. DIs. Good morrow my good Lord. How fares the
King?

Jus. More sick in mind then body, by the opinion,
(Not only of the skilful Doctors, but) of all
That come about him.

Dis. I that have not seen him
Since he was sick, can guess, then at the cause
Of his distemper. He is sick o'th'subject;
Th'unquiet Commons fill his head and breast
With their impertinent discontents and strife.
The peace that his good care has kept'hem in
For many years, still feeding them with plenty,
Has, like ore pampered steeds that throw their Masters,
Set them at war with him. O misery of kings!
His virtue breeds their vices; and his goodness
Pulls all their ills upon him. He has been
Too long too lenetive: A thousand heads
(Or say a hundred, or but ten) cut off
Of the most gross ones, the prime, leading heads
Of theirs a month since, had preserved him better
Then all his doctors pills can purge him now.

Jus. You are too sharp Disanius. There Is a means,
As mild as other of the Kings clear Acts,
In agitation now, shall reconcile
All to a common peace no doubt.

Dis. What Is that Justinius?

Jus. Stay: Here comes Stratocles.
Ent. Strat.
Dis. I fear, in that
Ambitious pate lies the combustable stuff
Of all this late commotion.
They confer aside
Str. Why is man
Prescribed on earth to imitate the Gods,
But to come nearest them in power and action?
That is to be a King! That only thought
Fills this capacious breast. A King or nothing!

Jus. He Is deep in meditation.

Dis. On no good.
It is some divellish waking dream affects him.
I Will put him out -- And as I was about
To say my Lord.

Str. What? when Disanius?

Dis. About a month since,
It stick still in my jaws. Be not ambitious,
Affect not popularity. It Is the most
Notable break-neck in a kingdom.

Str. In whom?

Dis. I know to whom I speak; would Stratocles
As well knew who he is, and what he does:
It would be better for him. Thank me not,
I wish it for the king and kingdoms good,
Not yours I do assure you, my great Lord;
Yet mine own Peer, if you forget me not.

Str. You take your time Sir to make me your mirth.
A time may come --

Dis. When you may be my King,
And then up goes Disanius. Is It not so?

Str. Yes, upto Court, to be king Stratocles fool.

Dis. The Court now privileges thee, or I would change
A cuffe with your great Souldier-ship and popular greatness
With clowns and Citizens, and Gentry, sprung
By their late peaceful wealth, out of their dongue.
But let them thank our pious King, not you
That claim (as merit for your service done)
Their loves and voices.

Jus. Cease my Lords this strife.
The King may hear on it, whose perplexities
Already are too grievous. Pray be silent,
The king approaches.
Enter king and Eupathus.
Dis. We Will attend his entrance.

King. Upon those terms they are come then, Eupathus?
Eu. Four of the chief in the commotion,
Upon the engagement of my faith, that you
Had past your kingly word for their return
In safety, I have brought to Court, who wait
Your present will and pleasure.

King. Bring'em in.
Disanius, welcome. I thought well to send for you
To take a Counselors part of my late cares
Into your consideration.

Dis. I attend
Your Highness pleasure.

King. Nearer good Disanius.
They talk privately.
Str. Do you deal in secret king? The Commons sent for
To their examination, and this old
Antagonist of mine called to confront me,
And I prepared by no intelligence
To fit me for th'incounter? Let Them come.
I must not be denied to stand as fair
In competition for the Crown as any man
The King himself elects for his successor;
The people are mine own through all his parts:
He may command their knees, but I their hearts.

King. Stratocles, Justinius, Disanius sit.
My lords, altho'our Laws of Thessaly
To you, as well as to our self, are known,
And all our customs, yet for orders sake
I shall lay open one to you. That is, when
A king deceaseth without issue male
(As I unfortunately must) the Commons
Are to elect their King, provided that
He be of noble blood, a sculdier, and one
That has done public service for the Crown --

Str. That makes for me.

King. Or else the son of some
Great General slain in battle for his country
(As my Adrastus was.)

Dis. O my brave brother!

King. Twenty years sorrow for that Soldiers loss
Has not worn out his memory.

Str. Your grace
Forgets not then Soldiers of fresher fame.

King. Some other time to boast good Stratocles.

Dis. Twere good youl'd hear the king -- A general,
Or a Generals son may be elected. There
Your Majesty left.

King. Or if the sonless King
Yet has a daughter, and he match her in
His life time to a husband that is noble,
He stands immediate heir unto the Crown
Against all contradiction.

Str. Now think upon my service, Royal Sir.

Dis. Now think upon my Nephews, Royal Master,
The sons of brave Adrastus, who was slain
Twenty years since in fighting of your battle.

Str. Twere good you would hear the king. The husband of
Your daughter must be elected. There you left, sir.

King. It rests now that a speedy choice be made
Of a fit husband, one that may acquire
Eudynas love, and peoples approbation,
The people, (for whose noise I must not rest
Till my successor be appointed to them)
Are wild till this election be made:
They have, in arms, made their demand, and wait
Enter Eupathus My present answer.

Dis. O here they come. These be the principals 4 Rustiks.
The heads, the heads, forsooth they call themselves.
Head-carpenter, head-smith, head-plowman, and head-shepherd.

Kin. Nay, pray approach; and seem no more abashed
Here then amongst your giddy-headed rowts,
they all kneel. Where every man's a King, and wage your powers
Against mine in soul defiance. Freely speak
Your grievance, and your full demand.

1. Rus. It Is humbly all expressed in this petition.

2. Rus. By all means have a care that, to any question, we give the King good
words to his face; He is another manner of man here then we took him for at
home.


3. Rus. I sweat for it. I am sure I have scarce a dry thread in my leather
lynings.


4. Rus. They made us heads in the country: But if our head-ships now, with
all our country care should be hanged up at court for displeasing of this good
King, for the next Kings good our necks will not be set right a-again in the
next Kings reign I take it.


1. Rus. My head itches to be at home again.

2. Rus. My head itches to be at home again.

3. Rus. My head and heart both aches for fear. Would
I were honestly hanged out of the way to be rid on it.

King There you may read my Lords what we before
Found would be their demand. It Is for a King
That must succeed me.

Dis. And because you have
Governed them long in peace, by which they thrive
Their wisdom would have you intail that piece
On them for after times; and so they nominate
Ambitious Stratocles to be your heir.

Str. Envious Disanius, my merit is
Their Motive.

King. Cease your strife. -- You have stood, more inclined
To lay your choice on Philocles, or Philargus
The Twin-born sons of long since slain Adrastus.

1. Rus. May't please your Majesty we are informed
That in their travails unto Delphos, both
Of them are dead.

Dis. That information
Was merely by suggestion (I dare speak it)
Insinuated by Stratocles. They both live
And are upon return.

1. Rus. Would we knew that.
Lord Stratocles then should pardon us. He Is a man
Gracious amongst us. But --

2. Rus. Philargus! O --
Philargus, be he living.

3. Rus. I say Philocles.
Brave Philocles is the man.

Str. False, empty weathercocks.

4. Rus. I say Lord Stratocles is the man we know
And ought to honor.

Str. There lives yet some hope.

Jus. What strange confusions this? Or whither will
You run by several ways? Philargus one,
Another Philocles; a third cries Stratocles.
In this you say you will have no king at all.
This must be reconciled, or you pull ruin
Upon your selves. He, whom the king is pleased
To give his daughter to must be your King.

1. Rus. All that we crave (and that upon our knees)
Is, that the king will graciously be pleased
To make a speedy choice, and give us leave
With pardon to depart, and signify
His Royal pleasure to the doubtful countries.

King. Tell'em they shall expect, then, but a month,
In which short time my daughters marriage
Shall be consummate.

All Rus. The Gods protect your Majesty.
Ex. Rust.
King. And now, my Lords, the commons being at peace,
Let me prevail your private jarrs to cease.
Exeunt omnes.
ACT 1. SCENE 2.
Eudyna. Thymele weeping. Eud. Madam, the cause is mine; it is mine to mourn
In chief, if they be dead. They were your sons,
It Is true, and though they were your only comforts
Upon this earth, you but resign to heaven
The blessings that it lent you. But to me
They were a pair of equal lovers; and
By me so equally beloved; and by
The king my father so 'bove all men respected
That I by either had been made a Queen,
Which title I for ever will disclaim
If they be dead.

Thy. O my Philargus. O my Philocles!
Ye Gods I know they did not seek your Counsels
Nor dare to approach your altars, but with all
Due reverence and required ceremony.
And could your Delphian Oracle, when they
Were friendly competitioners for love,
Answer them but with death?

Eud. The rumor, Madam,
Carries so little show of truth, that you
Do ill to take so deep a sense of it;
Much worse t'expostulate, as if you had
An injury done you by the Gods. Have you
Been from mine infancy my governess,
And careful councel-giver; and must I
Find cause to chide you now? come dry these tears.
Enter Garrula.
Gar. Where Is my sweet princess?
Where Is my Lady governess?

Eud. O Garrula, welcome. I could never wish
Thy company more usefully: For thou bring'st
Some recreation on thy countenance always.

Gar. I am glad my countenance pleases you. It may:
For I have on it now (could you discern'em)
A thousand joys dancing within these wrincles
More then my feeble failing tongue can utter.
And that is a grief to me among all my joys;
The failing of the tongue, the tongue, the tongue
Is a great grief to any woman. But
To one in years, and well in years, as I am,
It is a grief indeed, more then the loss
Of any other member.

Eud. But I pray thee
Let not that grief deprive us of the hearing
Of, at least, one of thy whole thousand joys.

Gar. It Is a report of joy and wonder, princess;
Enough to make not only you, and you,
But King and kingdom glad, could I but utter't.

Eud. Thou do speak well enough, and enough too,
I pray thee tell it.

Thy. It Is some faign'd stuff
She hopes to palliate our sorrows with.

Gar. It Is a report, worth more then all the stories
That I my self have told in childbed chambers,
To restore spirit to the pallid flesh.
And I have been a woman as good at it
(Without vain boast be it spoke) as any she
In Thessaly, that ere durst undertake
The office of a Midwise: And that the queen
Your Mother knew, when I delivered her
Of the sweet babe (your self.) She is in bliss
Now in Elisium. But you, Madam Governesse,
Can yet remember good old Garrula,
That took into the light your twin-born sons,
And thereby hangs a tale --

Thy. What means this woman?

Eud. Good Garrula, thy news? thy present story?

Gar. It Is such a story, that could I but utter't
With volubility of tongue! -- But O
This tongue, that fails me now; for all the helps
Of Syrups, and sweet sippings. I still go
She sips often of a bottle ather girdle. Provided, as you see, to cherish it.
And yet it falters with me.

Eud. We shall have it
Anon I hope. Placilla, what is your news?
Ent. Placilla.
Pla. It Is excellent Madam. And I was ambitious
To bring you the first taste of it. But if
Garrula has in that prevented me,
I can with no less joy relate it yet.
My brothers are returned, and safe, from Delphos.

Thy. Be thou as true as th'Oracle.

Eud. Now, Madam.

Pla. Mother, it is true.

Gar. It Is that I would ha'told you
Had not my tongue failed me in the utterance.

Eud. Thy tongue ran fast enough, but lost its way.

Pla. Three minutes, Madam, brings'em to your presence.

Eud. How is it with you, Madam? Let not joy
Beget a worse effect then did your fears.
Thym. swounds Help, Garrula.

Gar. Ods pity, what dee mean.
Madam, look up, and speak up too you were best,
Do you know who talks to you? Speak; and speak well too.
I shall speak that will be worse for you else.
Madam, you know, that I know what I know.

Thy. I am well I thank you, Garrula.

Gar. O are you so?

Eud. I have observed that often in her language,
This chattring Midwife glanceth at the knowledge
Of some strange hidden thing, which like as with
A Charm, she keeps my Governess in aw with.
I guess it but some trifle: For I know
The Lady is right virtuous; yet it may
Be worth my inquisition at fit time.

Thy. You have felt the comforts of my friendship Garrula,
And had you common charity, you would forbear me.

Gar. I -- done Madam. Be secure. But yet,
Though I forbear to speak, I not forget.

Eud. You have not yet, Placilla, told the means
A shout and crying Philar. and Philocles, etc. Of your rich knowledge.

Pla. Nor shall I need now Madam
These shouts of joy that followed them to Court
Attend them to your presence.

Eud. O let us meet'em. Madam, come away.

Thy. O ye Gods, I thank ye.
Ex. omnes pret. Gar.
Gar. I have a son there too, as dear to me
As any Mothers only born can be,
Whose name's not voic'd with theirs. Yet by your favor
Great Madam Governess, he has discharged
The office of a Governor ore your sons,
As well as you have over the Kings daughter.
And they have sucked more of his Helycon
Then she has of your doctrine: which their breeding
sips he bottle. Together with their Travels through his care
Will testify (I doubt not) to my honor,
That have brought forth a son of such performance.

Dis. Did not I say, 'twas Stratocles that raised
Ent. Dis. Jus. Phila. Philo. Eud. Thy: Pla. Geron. That hideous rumor of their
deaths, among
His wild idolators, in hope to gain
Election by their ignorance and rudeness?

Jus. 'Twas well those factious heads were wrought to come
Before the King to find his clemency,
And probabilily that these were living.

Dis. And how they then shrunk in their necks from Stratocles!
It has so laid the flames of his ambition,
That these may safely now tread out the fire.

Phila. Welcome again my princely Nephews, welcome.

Phil. Thanks, courteous Uncle.

Thy. You interrupt me, brother.

Dis. Good woman, cry thee mercy. Mothers are such things!

Gar. Why, what things are we mothers?

Dis. O the old night-piece with her dark lantern by her.

Gar. You Will give us leave to take
The comforts due unto us in our age,
For which we suffered sorrow in our youth!
Our children are our children young or old.

Dis. So is my horse my horse.

Gar. You have replied,
As Whilome did a Counselor at Law,
Who said his adverse Advocate had pleaded
To as much purpose as a hen i'th'forehead.

Dis. Geron. thou art welcome. Thou still keepst thy humor,
Thy travels have not changed thee. Thou came home
As wise as thou wentst out.

Ger. So Whilome said,
A miser, having much increased his store,
He had as much still as he had before.

Dis. Enough, I Will give thee over.

Thy. O my dear offspring; every sight of you
Is a new recompense, and satisfaction
For all the pain and travel of your birth.
In you your fathers memory shall live
Beyond the malice of the grave and death:
And I, when my rejoicing shall be full,
And cannot take addition, freely yielding
My flesh to dust, shall yet be blessed by those
Who shall give testimony to your virtue.

Philar. Twere a sufficient spur to noble actions
To be rewarded but with your content,
Which to procure we make our business.

Thy. Philocles,
Your brow is clouded. Has the Oracle
Adjudg'd against you. Pray let us partake
The knowledge of the Delphian decree;
And which of you stands highest in the favor
Of wise Apollo, to be husband to
Princess Eudyna here the Kingdoms heir.
What speaks the Oracle?

Philoc. Such a Verdict, Madam,
Requires an O Edipus to construe it.
I neither know it, nor am solicitous
After the meaning.

Gar. Wisely spoken, Pupil.
So Whilome answered an Egyptian Porter
To one demanding what he bore concealed?
It Is therefore covered that thou should not know*
The cases are alike.

Eud. Pray let us hear it.
Cannot your Tutor Geron play the Hermes
T'interpret it?

Gar. I am not Aenigmatical:
But all for Apothegmes. Besides, I say
(As Whilome Aristippus of a Riddle)
It is not safe to loose what being bound
Does trouble us so much.

Gar. Let me come to it.

Dis. Yes by all means: For as one Whilome said
The blind are best in the dark.

Gar. My Lord, your trumps
Are ever shot at me. Blind as I am,
I perceive that. And make much of your Riddle,
I know both what it can and will come to,
Better without the sight of it, then all
You can, with all your wise constructions.
And so I leave you.

Thy. Not in anger, Garrula.

Gar. Madam, you know I know. I must take leave
To take a Nap*
Exit.
Dis. And Governor Geron, wait upon your mother,
Trust our cares with your charge.

Ger. So Whilome said
A School boy, when another raised his top,
Let me alone, my self can keep it up.
Exit.
Eud. And now let me entreat that we may hear
The hidden sentence. Happily so many
May guess at the intent.

Dis. She longs to hear
Which of the two is pricked to be her husband.

Phi. Here it is. If there be any thing.

Dis. Let me be Clerk. I hope at least to read it.
Contend not for the Jewel, which
Ere long shall both of you enrich.
Pursue your Fortune: For it is she
Shall make you what you seem to be.
Apollo, thy great wisdom has quite fooled mine.

Philo. Nothing but contradictions.

Thy. As how, Philocles.

Philo. He commands here.
Contend not for the Jewel -- we agree,
Eudyna is the Jewel. -- which shall both of you enrich.
How shall she enrichus both? Can she be wife to us both?
Then here he bids
Pursue your Fortune. -- And we both agree
Eudyna is that Fortune too: she is both
The Jewel we must not contend for; and
The Fortune we must both pursue. Then here
He says it is she shall make us what we seem to be.
What do we seem? we are no Hypocrites
In flesh or spirit; no fantastic bodies
Or shadows of humanity.

Philar. No, Delphos is but a den of jugglers, which profanely
Abuse divinity, and pretend a God
Their Patron to authorize their delusions.

Dis. Nephews, the Gods had need be cautilous
For what they speak if you may be their Judges.

Thy. What thinks good Justinius?

Jus. My Lords, here is two commands;
One, that you not contend to gain the jewel;
The other, that you both pursue your fortune.
Both these commands are thus to be obeyed;
Contend not for her as to violate
Your unexampled friendship, which you are
Renowned for ore all Greece; And both pursue
Your fortune in her without eithers grudge,
At tothers happiness in her choice.

Philar. Noble Justinius, thanks.

Philoc. This we can do.

Philar. And for the happiness which we both aspire to
We here confirm the friendship long since plighted,
Which never shall be broken by Philargus.

Eud. Noble Philargus.

Philoc. So vows Philocles,
It Is not the cloudy language of the Gods
Shall make our breasts tempestuous or stormy:
But with the same serenity and quiet,
As heretofore our hearts shall mingle still,
And fortify their truce. Let the event
Expound their Ridle. If good, it is our merit;
If bad, we know our virtue can correct it.
Mean time Philargus take the word of Philocles,
That though there be no happiness on earth
I can esteem above Philargus friendship,
But fair Eudyna's love, which only is
The treasure I can covet from Philargus;
And cannot look to live but to enjoy it
Rather then justle with his friendship, I
Will die to lose it.

Eud. Noble Philocles.

Philar. You have made my vow, my brother Philocles,
And friend, which is above it. I will seek
And rather die then fail to gain her love:
But that, and the whole kingdom in addition
Must divide our friendship or affection.
As we are Twins in birth, we will be in mind
Unto our latest breath. Let Greece hereafter
Forget to mention the Tyndarides
With their alternate Deities, and tell
Of two Thessalian brothers could refuse
A happiness (which only is not Heaven)
In detestation of priority;
Would not be happy, 'cause they might not share
An individual, both Time and Thing.

Eud. Love, and ambition (I have heard men say)
Admit no fellowship; It holds not here.
These will have neither wife nor crown alone.
They each desire my love; but neither can
Enjoy't unless he were the other man.
My love is doubly taken, yet must gain neither,
Unless I could enjoy them both together. O, ye Gods!
Why made ye them two persons, and assigned
To both but one inseparable mind?
Or, why was I marked out to be that one,
That loves and must embrace, or two, or none;
O my perplexity.
Sinks.
Dis. Look to the Princess.

Philar. Madam. How fares the life of goodness.

Philoc. She sinks. Dear Mother, Sister; bring your aids.

Philar. To keep the world alive give your assistance.

Jus. Ye Gods be now auspicious.

Dis. A love-qualm.
To bed with her and call for Cupids aid,
He best can cure the wound that he has made.
Exeunt omnes.
Explicit Actus primus.
ACT. 2. SCENE. 1.
Doris reading a Letter. Do. My Lesbia, my Cinthia, my Licoris
Or (which is best of names) my lovely Doris -- that^. I.
I still am thine and cannot commutate,
I am as certain to thee as thy fate.
It Is not my study, or my travails can
Make me to thee appear another man:
Thou may affirm of me as Whilom did
Xantippe of her husband whom she chid,
Grave Socrates regardless of his worth
He still returned the same that he went forth.
Before I visit thee, thus may thou hear on
Thine in the tribulation of love -- Geron.
Ha, ha, ha. Old Whilom Geron,! art thou come again?
Could Delphos not detain, nor the Sea swallow thee
But I must be in danger to be punished
With the porcupine bristles? Fate deliver me.
En. Placilla
Pla. Doris, you must be vigilant in attendance,
And see that no man pass this lobby, toward
Her graces lodging. It Is your charge: look to it.

Dor. Mistress you know your Mother laid that charge
On me before, and I am ready here
To answer every commer in his kind
Had you forgot it?

Pla. Pardon me, I had;
But my care hurts not. One thing more good Doris.
If my dear brother Philocles come to visit,
Prithe call me. Speak, will thou.

Do. -- help your head.
I must not stir from hence, yet I must come
To call you forth. Away, some body comes.

Pla. I trust unto thee Doris.
Exit.
Dor. What a sick Court is here? She Is love-struck too.
I can with half a sense find her disease;
But cannot guess the object of her love.
She keeps the fire so close up in her bosom,
That she will sooner perish by it, then suffer
A spark of it fly out to make discovery.
The Princess she is lovesick for two; and her
Despair of gaining either's her consumption.
But what think I of their loves, when mine own
Is trouble enough? Now the visitants;
My great Lords Howdies are upon the entry,
And the unwelcom'st first.
Ent. Matho.
Ma. Good morrow Lady.
May I crave admittance to the Lady Governess?

Dor. Yes, you may crave it Sir, But not obtain it:
Her nearness to the Princess at this time
Is by so strict necessity required.

Ma. May I prevail then, to impart the duty
I have in charge, unto the Ladies daughter?

Dor. That is the Mistress whom I wait upon,
Though now at remote distance: She attends
Her Mother at this instant, and her Mother
The Princess in much privacy. If I
May be thought worthy to receive the knowledge
Of what you have in trust unto the Princess,
It shall be orderly conveyed unto her Grace.

Ma. Lord Stratoeles, solicitous for glad tidings,
(Beseeching that her Grace be pleased to take
The tender of his service; and affirming
Upon his honor that no rest affects him
Until he shall receive a perfect knowledge
Of her recovery) prays to be advertised
In what condition of health she fares;
Or to gain leave to visit her himself.

Dor. Sir, you have lost much time: you might have said
How does the Princess? And I answer thus,
She is most dangerously sick; not to be seen
By him or any man.

Ma. Yet let her know
My Lords obsequious care for her recovery.

Dor. I Will tell my Mistress, who shall certify
Unto my Lady, who shall intimate
Unto the Princess what you have left in trust
With me, her Graces handmaid thrice removed.

Ma. I will acquaint my Lord; who for your care
Shall upon his advancement to the Crown
Give me command, who will give present order
Unto my man for your promotion.
Your diligence deserves it.
Exit.
Dor. My great Lords especially parasite. I am beholden to you.
Here comes another; an importunate,
Ent. Tersulus. Though impertinent suitor of mine own.

Ter. My beauteous Doris, first my love presented
Unto your self, my Lord Philargus craves
To know how fares the Princess.

Dor. This comes nearer
To my regard then the other; and deserves
A comfortabler answer. She Is not well Sir,
But much amended in her health. It Is like,
Your Lord (would he approach to visit her)
Shall find a fair admission to her Grace.

Ter. I dare not (to delay my Lord a minute
Of these glad tidings.) Stay to prosecute
My love-suit to your self.

Dor. No, no; away.
Away good Tersulus; and hazard not
Your Lords, for your own fortunes.

Ter. Yet my Doris --

Dor. Yet again man.

Ter. Be pleased to think of me.

Dor. I shall, and better of you when you are gone.

Ter. Winged with that hope, I fly.
Exit.
Dor. A pretty nimble fellow and a Tailor.
Ent. Varill. I could almost affect him, did not this
More supple handed Barber put him by.

Var. Sweet Doris! thus, by me Lord Philocles
Salutes the Princess.
Kiss.
Dor. This requires an answer
Of health indeed.

Var. How fares her highness?

Dor. Well. Exce^ding well, and longs to see your Lord.

Var. I Will have to tell him so

Dor. Nay, good Varillus,
I have not gained a conference with you
Since your return from Delphos.

Var. At more leisure
I Will tell thee wonders, Doris.

Dor. Something now.

Var. Ha'you seen your lover Geron, the old tutor,
Since our arival?

Dor. Here is an Epistle
Came from him to my hands this morning. Hang him.

Var. Well: he has been the whole mirth of our journey
In the discovery of his love to you.
His meat, his drink, his talk, his sleep, has all
Been Doris, Doris, nothing but your remembrance
Has been the trouble of his company;
I Will tell thee at large hereafter. The fair Princess
Is well you say.

Dor. She was well when I left her,
But subject to much passion: She is well
And ill, and well again all in three minutes.
Great Ladies may be so. But if I should
B^ sick and well, and sick again and well
Again as often as she; the world would say
I had it -- And had been a courtier, to some purpose.

Var. They would say the Handmaid had been handled so.
Would they?

Dor. Like enough, but great ones must not be talked on

Var. You have detained me to my undoing.
See, my Lord!
Enter Philocles.
Dor. I Will send his sister to appease him.
Exit.
Philo. You have done ill Varillus to neglect
A duty of that consequence, that I
Expected in your quick return, was this
A time to loyter?

Var. My good Lord, the princess
Is well again; restored to absolute health.

Philoc. It Is happy news. But why was I delayed
In this account? was it too precious for me?
Redeem your fault by some ensuing service,
Or you may lose a master, that has loved you.
Ex. Var. I must proceed to gain Eudinas love
From my Philargus or l loose my self.
And gaining it, I must sorgo Philargus,
And equally be lost. O sister, welcome.
Enter Placilla. I must request your aid.

Pla. In any thing
Wherein I may be useful, best of brothers.

Philoc. I would entreat you be my advocate
In love unto Eudina. -- O, but hold,
Shall I be treacherous unto my brother?
A brother! What Is a brother? A mere name;
A title which we give to those that lodged
In the same womb; so bedfellowes are brothers;
So men, inhabiting one town, or country
Are brothers too: for though the place containing
Be greater, the relation is the same.
A friend! I that is the thing I violate,
Then which, nor earth nor heaven has ought more sacred*
It Is my Philargus, nay my self I injure,
If I content my self.

Pla. Why, brother Philocles --
Did I say brother? How my tongue conspires
To torture me! If Brother be a naked
Title or name (as he suggests) I would
It had nor being, name, nor title. Philocles
You Are passionate.

Philoc. Fond reason I disclaim thee,
Love is a strain beyond thee, and approaches
The Gods estate: Friendship's a moral virtue
Fitter ^r disputation, then observance.
Eudina. O Eudina! In what price
Art thou with me, for whom I cast away
The Souls whole treasury Reason and Virtue?
Placilla, you must woe Eudina for me.
Do you startle at it? Pray do it, as you love me.

Pla. If I were she you should not need an advocate.

Philoc. I charge you by this kiss. --

Pla. Your wages
Corrupts your agent to be false. O whither;
Into what Sands will the rash Pilot, Love?
Drive this weak vessel? did I call it Love?
It Is sooty, hellish fire; unlawful flame:
Yet such as we may easier tax, then tame.

Philoc. What troubles you Placilla? O you are
Already entertained to mediate
For him you better love, Philargus, do:
He best deserves her; I Will woe for him too.
Enter Doris.
Dor. Madam, my Lady calls for you? My Lord
The Princess has taken notice of your visit
Exit Plac. And wishes you draw nearer if you please.

Philoc. I meet that wish with swift, but fearful feet.
My joys are bitter, and my woes are sweet.
Exit.
Dor. I have heard men say when they on gamesters look
(Though equally affected to both parties,
Or both were strangers to'em yet) they will yield
A secret inclination which should win.
I am for Philocles, now, against Philargus,
Who is as noble, and as free to me,
As ever Philocles was. But tarry Doris;
You have a bett upon the game I take it,
Your love unto Varillus. If his Lord
Rise to a Kingdom, you may hope to climb
The ladder of a Ladyship by the man.
But not too fast: Here Is one pursues the game
That is as like to win. Why if he does?
Enter Phlargus His follower Tersulus loves me past Varillus,
And may as much advance me. But I love not
Him, And the love of honor above husbands
Has been so common among Ladies, that
The fashions stale and ougly.

Philar. So't must be.
And so by transposition of my love
I shall be quiet, and Philocles doubly happy.
Doris, go seek my mother, and perceive
If I may see the Princess.

Dor. Yes my Lord.
Exit.
Philar. Love, thou art well compared to fire, which where
It does obey and serve being commanded
By higher powers of the soul, it fares
Like to the stone or jewel of a ring,
Which joins the orb, and gives it price and luster:
So glorious is that love, so necessary.
But, where it rules and is predominant,
It tiranizeth; Reason is imprisoned;
The will confined; and the memory
(The treasury of notions) clean exhausted;
And all the senses slavishly chained up
To act th'injunctions of insulting love,
Pearch'd on the beauty of a woman. Thou
Masculine love, known by the name of friendship
Art peaceful and morigerous: But that
Of woman, is imperious and cruel.
Why should I then lose Philocles for Eudina?
Ent. Eudina. Thymile Eudi. reading a letter. Why? Can I look on her and ask a
Reason?
O the divinity of woman! sure
There is no heaven without'em. If the Gods
Should thrust out Jove as he depos'*l his Father
And elect me to be their thonderer
I Would not drink Nectar to forgo Eudina.

Thy. Fie, fie Philargus, you are a ssugish Lover.
I have been careful for you, yea and partial
Against your brother Philocles, to prefer
Your love to his: And you to suffer him
A whole hour opportunity before you!

Philar. Has he been here?

Thy. And is. Only for you
I have beguiled him of her presence, that
Till you have made first presentation
Of love to her he shall have no access.

Philar. Now Philocles, I suffer in thy injury;
And to proceed in it were treachery.
I would retire -- But that magnetique beauty
To which are chained thousands of hearts and eyes
Has captived mine: nor must I seem to slight
A mothers care. She Is not the first (it is known)
That of two sons has best affected one.

Thy. Why move you not Philargus toward the Princess.

Philar. Madam, you see she is busy.
Eud. throws away the Letter.
Eud. Stratocles --
May thy ambition hoist thee into air;
And thy loose wings, like thy licentious paper,
There failing thee, let fall thy vicious body
To earth, as here thy name lies to be trod on.
Philargus, you are welcome.

Philar. Princely Madam,
That language from your gracious lips is powerful
To save him from the grave, that only lives
By your free favors.

Eud. Nay, my dear Philargus,
I thought me nearer to you, then that you
Should rove at me with Courtship. Stratocles
(The emblem of whose pride lies there in paper)
Shot from afar indeed; yet, like a Jove
(A self-conceited one) presumed to strike
Love by command into me by his Letters.

Philar. I cannot flatter pride, nor undervalue
Abilities. It Is true that Siratocles
Has been a useful servant to the State;
But, doubtless, he would make as ill a Master.

Eud. No more of him.

Philar. Nor more be thought of him.
And therefore Madam, by your fair command,
To avoid all Court-circumlocutions,
I tender thus my service, and crave hearing.

Eud. You have it freely.

Thy. To avoid all lets,
I will withdraw my self.
Exit.
Philar. The King has graciously been pleased, in lieu
Of my slain fathers services; and for love
To us his sons, (by us much undeserved)
To recommend unto your noble choice
My brother and my self. You standing doubtful
Whether to choose, we to avoid dispute
Of violating friendship, did implore
The Council of the Oracle to direct
You in th'election. But the hidden sense
In the dark sentence has perplexed both you
And us with more anxiety.

Eud. It is too true.

Philar. Yet you are not prescribed; your choice is free.
To take your lot in Philocles or me.
We both, by strong injunction must pursue
Your sacred Love, yet keep our friendship true.
Then thus illustrious Madam.
He kneels.
Eud. Not so low.

Philar. As low as future duty must compel me,
When you shall be my Queen, let me beseech
The favor that I seek and would obtain,
Equal with heavenly bliss, to shine on Philocles.

Eud. That he may be your King?

Philar. May he prove so.

Eud. Be all example lost.

Philar. Friendship, with favor, may
Hold between King and Subject: But one throne
Cannot estate two Kings; Love's number's one.

Eud. O my Philargus, you have opened now
The meaning of the Oracle. I have the sense
Most perfectly. You have beyond example
Preserved your friendship with your brother; and
In wooing for him have won me to your self.
I am your own.
She kisses him.
Philar. I am amidst the Gods.
The wealth o'th'world, the beauty of the Heavens,
And powers of both shall not redeem my interest.
-- Provided that I lose not Philocles.
Ent. Philo. Thy. Pla.
Eud. In that your constancy you win me more.

Thy. Your importunity has prevailed. See Philocles,
The Princeis, and Philargus.

Philoe. O, you are partial.
He sinks.
Pla. O help, my brother; speak, dear Philocles.

Philar. Ye Gods, how comes this? Let me raise him up,
Brother, and friend; speak, it is Philargus calls thee.

Philoc. Philargus, let me go. It Is your advantage.

Eud. Let me request the cause of your disturbance,
Good Philocles.

Philo. No other but my self.
Honored Eudyna: For, who feeds to danger
Upon a dish he loves, ought not to blame
The meat, but his unbridled appetite.

Pla. How do you now? What a cold moisture
Spreads ore his temples here.

Eud. Let me come to him:

Thy. I can read his grief.

Eud. What Is that to the redress?

Thy. The Delphian God, medcines inventor knows
That and not I.

Eud. His grief's a jealous passion
Upon my supposed favor to Philargus.
Shake it off Philocles, I am thine, as much
As ere I was, or his.

Philoc. It is no jealousy
Only a fear Philargus had broke friendship:
So, my souls better part exited, left
The other languishing.

Philar. Had you expired
In that belief, and I had understood it,
My shadow should have posted after yours
Unto the Elisian fields to vindicate
So causeless imputation.

Thy: And because
You charged my son with partiallity
Let us remove, Philargus, come Placilla.

Eud. You will not take him from me. Stay Philargus.

Thy. What would you do with both?

Philar. I may not stir,
When she, whose power above me countermands
The precepts of the Gods requires my stay.

Thy. What not to give you brother Philocles
An opportunity for equal hearing?
Your grace will not deney't him.

Eud. True, I may not.

Philar. That spell convinces all. Friendships above,
And must control obedience, and love.
Exit with Thym and Placil. It Is not to injure thee my dear Philargus,
That here I linger, to oppose thy love;
But to prefer it.

Eud. What says Philocles?

Philoc. To say I love you, Madam, with a zeal
That dares to meet the trial of Martyrdom,
And suffer't for your sake, might get a name,
A glorious one, and an immortal Crown:
Yet so I should forgo (in leaving you
On earth, a heaven on it) the bliss,
Which, grieving, I should in Elisium miss.
No, I will love you better then to die,
And be mine own chief mourner; yet must crave,
Under your gracious favor, leave to suffer
More then a thousand deaths, that is, to live
And part with my fair hopes in you for ever.

Eud. What means my Philocles?

Philoc. Princely Madam,
Consider the necessity, which now
By further search I gather from the hidden
Oraculous perduit; by which I am tied
Not to contend for you, that is, I must not
Wound friendship in Philargus: B^t pursue
My fortune, which is to gain love from you.
For whom it says not, but the meanings plain,
I for Philargus should your love obtain.
The Gods deal after as they please with me,
My suit is that you take Philargus.

Eud. O --
Philocles you have made a double conquest
For you have got the victory of me
Which was before assigned unto Philargus.
Your fortune thus embraces you
she kisses him
Philoc. This now,
And with Philargus friendship were to me
A fortune 'bove the envy of the Gods.

Eud. He cannot disallow't. He wooed me for you,
And won me to himself, as you have now
Suing for him.

Philoc. I must not hold you then.
His title, as his friendship precedes mine.

Eud. Yet still the choice is mine. I may take you
Without offense to him. But now he comes,
Ent. Philar. Thy. Pla. And has again an equal interest,
Strange love! In others absence I took either
And loved each best; Now both at once appear,
Neither is mine. Fate, let me die to one
Rather then live in this confusion.

Thy. Now Madam, whethers love do you approve.

Eud. Confound me not with question. They are each
Wedded to others friendship: Either is
More studious for the other then himself.

Philar. And ever must.

Philoc. And will be.

Eud. So will I
For both of you then for my self.

Thy. Alas.

Eud. Then let us continue thus with Maiden love,
With modest freedom, unsuspected joys,
As we had all been formed in one womb,
Till Heaven determine of us.
Ent. King and Eupathus.
King. To determine
Of you Eudyna, is by heaven committed
In present unto me. On you depends
The future glory and prosperity,
Both of my house and Kingdom. It Is besides,
Exacted of me by my near Allies,
And by my Subjects (whom I must secure)
To constitute a Successor: And no longer
Will I expect your answer, then five days.
By then you must declare who is your husband;
Or else expect one from my self; the man
Whose name I am as loath to mention
As you to hear, even Stratocles.

Eud. Nay, death first.

King. Be you obedient; and by the way,
Take my approvement of Lord Philocles,
Not that I slight Philargus.

Eud. Here Is a mystery too,
As dark as that from Delphos. He approves
My choice of Philocles, slighting not Philargus.

King. Come both you equal brothers; leave her to
Her thoughts a while.

Ambo. In all obedience.
Ex. King, etc.
Thy. What strange amazement has surpised you Madam?
No study, nor no strife can alter fate
Or the decrees, the Gods determinate.
A husband you shall have, be confident.
Be, as you were; secure of the event,
Till time produce it.

Pla. Madam, be your self.

Eud. Yet five days for love's war. Jove grant I have
By then, to end the strife, a peaceful grave.

Explicit Actus secundus.
ACT 3. SCENE 1.
Garrula. Geron. Gar. Would you thus offer, by your own disease
To shorten your Mothers days? Or can you pine
And I not grieve? or cannot grief kill me
Do you think?

Ger. A wise Philosopher Whilome did affirm,
That women who have past the fire of love
Have hearts, which grief can neither pierce, ne move.

Gar. Son, your Philosophy fails you, as your love
Blinds you: For Cupids fire I know may be
Quenched by old age: But grief's unquenchable.
Sips her bottle. My tongue still falters with me (there is my grief)
And there are not so many fadoms 'twixt
A woman's tongue and heart, but grief may find
The bottom, but for care to keep it up
By sending down an Antidote before it.
Sips again.
Ger. But Whilom did the lovesick Poet prove,
No antidote against the power of Love.

Gar. Forbear your Whiloms, and your old said saws,
And since you are in love, and by that love
Grown sick with the concealment.

Ger. As Whilom
The Athenian boy who stole a fox did hide
Under his coat his theft from being descried
Until it tore his Gentals -- his intrals
I should have said.

Gar. No more I say
Of your disease, but to the cure, which is
The love of Doris. How ha'you tried her, son.

Ger. By oratory, Epistles, and by gifts
Which Whilome Ovid said were best of shifts.

Gar. Yes, such a gift it might be, and so fastened.

Ger. But she, as Whilom said Anominus
Retorteth all with scorn injurious.

Gar. Yet will you leave your Whiloms? And go seek
My Lady Governess? say I would speak with her.

Ger. But Whilome said Diogenes (it is true)
To one that would, I will not speak with you.

Gar. Will you say as I say; and do as you are bidden?
It is not her great Lady-ships daughters handmaid
Shall scorn my son while I know what I know.
If you love Doris, run and tell her so.

Ger. For Doris love, as Whilome Daedalus.
I will take wing. But see I am prevented.
Ent. Thymil.
Thy. O Garrula! well found, I was in quest of you.

Gar. And I was eene a sending for you, Madam.

Thy. What an imperious beldam's this. But I
Must humor her. Sending for me do you say?
For what, good Garrula.

Gar. Sending for you? Yes Madam, so I said,
And sai't again. What, what, I know what I know.
You know I do; and that there is no such
Distinction 'twixt the honors of your birth
And place; and mine of age and knowledge, but
You might vouchsafe the summons when I send.

Thy, What needs this Garrula? I am here you see.

Gar. You know I know, and have deserved some favors,
I do not bost for what. You know.

Thy. O me!
Who trust those secrets whereon honor rests
To custody in Mercenary breasts
Do slave nobility; and though they pay
A daily ransom, nere redem't away.
Pray let us be more private, though indeed
I love your son for his great care of mine.

Gar. O, do you so? Go forth son Geron, till
I call. All shall go well I Will warrant thee.

Ger. Whilom, so
Said a Physician, meaning to restore,
And killed the Patient was but sick before.
Exit.
Thy. Why Garrula do you maintain a strife
Still in my grieved mind 'twixt hope and fear?
Cannot so many years of my known kindness
Win yet a confidence of secrefie.
You are as deeply bound by oath too as my self.

Gar. I do confess my oath, and would not break it;
Yet, Madam, as you are a woman, you
May know a broken oath is no such burden
As a great secret is; besides the tickling
A woman has to in and out with it. Oh
The tongue itche is intolerable! And were I
A woman of tongue, as most are of my calling
(Though Midwives ha'been held the best at secret
Co^ncel keeping) it had been out I fear.

Thy. But still take heed dear Garrula.

Gar. Yes Madam.
Yet there are kindnesses required on your part.

Thy. Have I not still been kind?

Gar. My memory serves me; and but that my tongue
Now falters with me -- I could recount
Sips. All the rewards I have had from time to time,
Since you translated me from a Country houswife,
Into the Midwife Royal; what in Gowns,
In Gold, in Jewels, Chains and Rings; and (which
I prize'bove all) my syrrops and my sippings.
Sips.
Thy. Your place of honor in the Court --

Gar. What, what?
I hope I had that before i'che Kings favor,
As his Queens Midwife. She is in Elisium.
Sip.
Thy. Then Garrula your learned sons preferment,
Tutor and Governor to my Sons.

Gar. Thereby
Hangs a tale, Madam. Now I come to th'point;
My son affects your daughters handmaid Doris,
Who slights his love. I must now by your power
Obtain her for my Son.

Thy. Be confident,
Though I confess I hold her worthless of him.

Gar. I tell him so: But love has blinded him.
Ho Geron, I say Geron, come and hear.
Ent. Geron.
Ger. So Whilome prisoners have been called to come
From dungeon deep to hear a blacker doom.

Thy. Geron, be comforted. By all my power,
Doris shall be your own.

Ger. Then Whilome, as
Ovid his Corynna sweet, said o --
Ent. Doris. She comes, she comes. My joys do overflow.

Thy. Now Doris, what portends your have? Speak Maid,
Is it to Geron, or to me, your business?

Dor. His ill looks, had almost made me miscarry'c.
Madam, the Princess instantly desires
Your company.

Thy. But by her Graces favor,
And your leave, Doris, I will trench so far
On both your patiences, and for your good,
As to be witness of an interchange
Of some few words twixt Geron and your self.
Why look you from him so? he loves you, Doris.

Dor. That Is more then I ere knew, or read, by all
He speaks or writes to me. He clothes his words
In furs and hoods, so, that I cannot find
The naked meaning of his business, Madam.

Thy. Speak plainly to her, Geron.

Gar. To her Son.

Ger. My business is the same, that Whilome drew
Demosthenes to Corinth, some repentance,
So I pay not too dear.

Dor. Lo you there, Madam.

Gar. You must speak plainer, Son.

Thy. And be you kinder, Doris.

Dor. But not so kind, good Madam, as to grant
I know not what.

Ger. O forfeit not the praise
That Whilome Aristotle gave your Sex,
To be enriched with piety and pity.

Dor. I know not what to pity, but your want
Of utterance. It is some horrid thing
That you desire, and are ashamed to speak it.

Ger. No, gentle Doris, nothing but the thing,
Whereby great Alexander Whilome said,
He knew himself a mortal, and no God,
Coition --

Dor. Be it what it will; I cannot
Give what I understand not. You Are too aloof.

Gar. There Is comfort, Son. And I Will give thee instructions
To come more close to her.

Thy. I Will ease your care,
And be my self his Agent. He Is too learned,
Geron, you speak too learnedly, as if
You wooed a Muse: And Doris understands not,
But by your posture, what you would have. I Will put
Your meaning into woman's words; and such
As shall be sure to speed. But first I Will wait
Upon the Princess. Garrula, will you go?

Gar. And thank you for my Son: But still -- I know.

Thy. Nay, I will do it Geron, be confident.

Ger. I thank your Ladyship as much as they
Who Whilome -- Whilome --

Dor. Knew not what to say.

Gar. He Is overjoyed.

Thy. Go Geron, lead the way.
Exeunt. omnes.
ACT 3. SCENE 2.
King. Stratocles. Disanius. Justinius. King. Pray trouble me no further. I
have said,
That if in five days space she make not choice
Of one of those whom (I must tell you Stratocles)
She loves, and I prefer before you, then
I Will weigh your suit, and reasons; and till then
I say it again, you are a trouble to me.

Str. A trouble Sir? That were a time that knew me,
A trouble to your enemies, not you,
When this same lump of earth (which now is a trouble)
Stood a sole Bulwark of your Realm; repelling
Arms of foes; shrowding your fearful Subjects
Under my shield; guarding your fields and Vineyards
From desolation; your Palaces from ruin;
And am I now a trouble?

Dis. Stratocles,
You lose the glory of your deeds by blazing
Your own renown. He that commends himself,
Speaks upon trust, and is his hearers slave.

Str. Peace, envy, and be thankful for thy life
Which thy tongue forfeits.

Just. Let my mildness tell you,
You are irreverent before the King,
Who has not been forgetful of your worth,
Nor slow in your reward. Then moderate
Your heat with counsel; and be first assistant
Unto the public good: So shall you merit
The first regard in honors and affairs
Of private nature.

Sra. So.

King. This Oracle
Troubles me not a little. I had thought
Thereby to have declined this weighty care
From my declining shoulders, and have given
My country satisfaction, and my self,
In choosing of a son and successor.
But I am prisoner in the Labyrinth
Of the Gods verdict.

Just. Their sublimity
In matters of the future seldom stoops
To humane apprehension; yet vouchsafes
To answer our demands: but chides withal
Our too much incenss with obscurity.
Your grace however may presume, where they
Shall deign to spend a word, and take an offering,
It is a certain augury of good.

King. Thou have allayed my fear. Justinus come,
Lead me thy brains assistance. For in thee
I find a temper that accords with me.
Exit King Just.
Dis. Souldler, I dare yet tell thee thou art rash;
Foolish as valliant; and as easily may
For all thy lostiness be undermined
As the base bramble: Boasting weakness, thee
And promising Ambition leads thee up
An earthly exhalation into the air;
Where with a little borrowed light, one moment,
Thou shin'st the mark and wonder of all eyes;
But soon consumed and darted to the Center,
Becom'st the scorn of men and sport of Children.

Str. You are oath sect of Cinicks, and have learned
To bark Philosophy.

Dis. Then shall you hear
Your now adorning multitude upbraid
Your insolence and pride, and gain the name
Of Prophets by your downfall, while one swears
He had foretold it long; Another dreampt it;
All jointly cry we never could endure him;
See what a look he has; what brawny lips;
What poisonous eyes; and what an impudent front!

Str. You will outrun your privilege of prating
And suffer for it.

Dis. I am too prodigal
Of seed upon so flinty soil as thou.
Be as thou art, and perish.
Exit.
Str. Ignorant wretch,
That out of all thy bookish Theory
Knows not the soul to be Aerial
And of a soaring nature; not unlike
The noble Falcon that will never cease
To work 'bove all that tops her. The supreme
Estate on earth, and next unto the Gods
Is majesty; and that is my present gain,
Though I have all but that, yet wanting that
All is as none to me: And since my way
Must be upon the Ruins (sour Disanius)
Of thee, and of thy glories in thy Nephews
The Kings dear darlings, for whose precious sakes
I must attend five days (yet be a trouble)
I Will travail through your bloods: Thy self has gi'n me
The quicker motion by thy timely envy.
Thou have set spurs to the pale horse of death,
That into dust shall trample all those lets
Which stand twixt me and the Thessalian Crown,
Enter Matho. Upon whose back I Will set this Rider.

Mat. My sovereign Lord.

Str. I like that compellation:
Thou stil'st me as thou wishest me, on whom
Depends thy consequent advancement, Matho.
But we but dream of sovereignty and sleep
To the Achievement: something must be done
With waekful eyes and ready hands my Matho.

Mat. Now my King speaks himself. Let but your eye
Find out the way these ready hands shall act
The strength of your designs. I can perceive
That now the labor of your Jove-like brain
Is bringing forth the Pallas, shall inspire
Me, to perform the work of my advancement.

Str. It Is not yet ripe for the delivery,
But thou shall quickly have it. Follow me.
Exit.
ACT 3. SCENE 3.
Eudina. Thymele. Placilla. Eud. Good Madam, let me be excused. The mirth
You offered to allay or quench my sorrows
Might have been well received at former times:
But now it is unseasonable.

Thy. Yet think on it, Madam,
How gravely Geron goes, and with what scorn
The wanton Girl recoyles.

Eud. Good, speak no more on it.

Thy. Then Beldame Garrula's reasons urging Doris*
Showing how either of his pupils grace
In your electing Philocles or Philargus,
Though to them doubtful, is a sure advancement
To her by Geron.

Eud. Still you move like those
That do in merry tales mis-spend their breath
To those that are that day marked out for death.

Thy. You may not say so (Madam) it is in you
By taking one, to give new life to two;
Your self, and if you will give me leave to name
The other, be it Philargus: or, if chance
Shall favor better, Philocles or him,
Let it be him that gives you the first visit.

Eud. That were to fancy in our selves an Oracle;
Or to give fortune power, to execute
The judgment of the Delphian God.

Thy Who knows
But that his Oracle would have it so.

Pla. Was it for that you now sent for Philargus.
Aside
Thy. Say, shall it be so Madam; or suppose so?

Eud. This pleases better yet then Gerons wooing.
Praythee Placilla sing. And may thy voice
Attract him that may prove the happier choice.

Pla. I Will try my best in notes, and what they want
I Will strive to make effectual in my wishes.

Eud. Thanks kind Placilla. -- But the leaden weights
Of sleep oppress mine eyelids, and I shall not hear thee.

Thy. Yet sit, and let her sing: you will sleep the better.
Placilla Sings. After a strain or two, Eudina sleeps, and enters, as a vision
at the several doors, Philargus and Philocles; They meet and embrace
affectionately: then whisper a while: Then sudenly start off, and draw their
swords: menace each other, and severally depart. The song ended, Eudina
affrightedly starts up.
Eud. Stay Philocles, stay Philargus. Let not fury
Lead you to end that difference with your swords,
Which only fits my life to satisfy.

Thy. What means your Grace.

Eud. Pursu'em, with prevention,
Before they meet again, or one or both
Must perish; did you not observe their challenge,
And eithers daring other to the field?

Thy. Who Madam, where? and when?

Eud. Now; here; your sons.
How can you ask?

Thy. Because we were awake
And saw nothing.

Pla. Collect your spirits Madam: you slept.

Eud. It was an omenous dream then.

Thy. And of good,
I dare divine it Madam. And now see
Enter Philargus. Whom fortune first has sent to be your choice.
Philargus, you have won the glorious prize.

Philar. But dos the glory of the world, Eudina, grant it.

Eud. My affrightment shakes me still --
O my Philargus, I am now inspired
Sure by a vision from the Gods, with knowledge,
That, in my choice of you, or Philocles,
I shall become the ruin of you both.

Philar. It Is not in fate to wound our common friendship.

Eud. It Is better in my self to kill the danger.

Philar. The Gods avert such purposes. If you
Deprive the world of your fair self, then we
Both fall by necessary consequence.
But what are we? This Thessaly must suffer.
The King must yield, to see a new and strange
Successon appointed to his Crown;
And by his subjects, not himself.

Eud. It Is that
Deters me: yet let me prevail Philargus
(To quit me of my fears) that ere I pass
My faith unto a husband, your and Philocles,
Before the Gods, your Mother, and my self,
Once more, do celebrate your vow of Friendship.
And let me be excused in this: for I
Must tell you, dear Philargus, that though now
My love be fixed on one of you (albeit
I name not which) I will not take him with
Least scruple of a fear of losing him
Again by the others spite; nor leave that other
Less loved by me, then now he is, for ever;
And tho but one can be possessed of me
One friendship, yet, must marry us all three.

Philar. The Gods have spoke it in you; it is their
Divine injunction; Madam, I obey it,
And dare engage as much for Philocles.

Thy. This is most fair: now, till you meet, it is fit
You fall on lighter purposes for your health.
Son, here was mirth to day; although the Princess
Relished it not.

Philar. I heard of Gerons love
To his fair Doris. We are now become
His Tutors, Madam, to be amorous.

Thy. Placilla, come you hither. I observe
A change in you of late; and do suspect
The Reason. What! Do you blush at my suspicion?
Nay then you mak'^ my knowledge. You are in Love.
I Will yet come nearer you. I guess with whom:
And at fit time I Will school you for'^.

Eud. Come Madam;
Now if you please we will take some air.
Philargus Craves leave to seek his brother.

Philar. Yes Madam.

Thy. I wait o'your Grace. Nay, do not look displeased:
I tell you Girl, there is danger in it.
Exit Eud Thym.
Philar. Stay Placilla.
What! has my Mother chid you. I Will not question
Her Reason, nor your fault; but pray thee sister
If Philocles approach to see the Princess
Ere my return, tell him I stay at's lodging,
First, to confer with him.

Pla. I will my brother.

Philar. In Troth thou weepst. Therefore to comfort you,
Because I know by some infallible signs,
You are more tender of his Love then mine.
He stands in equal competition yet
With me for fair Eudina. And if Fortune
Allots her me, I Will be as kind a brother
And still the same to you as Philocles.
I pray thee dry thine eyes.
Ent. Matho disguised with a letter.
Mat. If a disguised face and a counterfeit hand
Ever prevailed, may these in this plot speed.
Philarg. reads My Lord, I had this in charge to render to you.
Ex. Matho
Pla. I am discovered in my lawless love.
Remember, Cupid, whom thou make thy Anvil;
A poor weak virgin. If thou art a God,
Be just and reasonable: It savours not
Of justice, to provoke incestuous flames,
Nor Reason to enforce an Ardency
Of things impossible. Let me not burn
With neighboring fire, which, to enjoy, I must
Therefore despair because it is so near.

Philar. Ha! where is this fellow? is he gone?

Pla. Yes, brother.

Philar. It Is Philocles his hand! An eager challenge!
A challenge, and to me, his friend and Brother.
Now Oracle, where is your Riddle? Answer me,
Apollo's fiddle-stick. O ye Delphian Priests,
You hang religion up, like painted clothes
Before unseemly walls, to cloak their filth
And palliate their wicked mysteries.

Pla. How do you brother?

Philar. Sick in Philocles.
You Will hear more of his kindness to you shortly.
Exit.
Pla. He suspects too, with much displeasure, my
Unreasonable Love to Philocles.
But why should we be Reasons followers
With loss of liberty? which of the Creatures
Allayes his heat toward any of his kind,
'Cause the same belly gave them being? They
Observe no difference of Sire, or Dam,
Brother, or Sister, being mature for love.
Ah, whither am I going? Bestial thoughts
Forth of my bosom; Leave me not my Soul,
Or my souls better part, my reason. Oh
It was returning but a flaming shaft
Enter Philocles. Of love has set it is Mansion afire
And frights it back again.

Philoc. Placilla. Sister.

Pla. That name of Sister, like a violent cold
Upon an extreme heat, fevers my blood
To death.

Philoc. Me thinks you are sad and troubled sister.
Why thus alone? Or have you entertained
That troublesome companion, Love? Come tell me
I can advise you very learnedly:
For Cupids Scholars are more exquisite
In giving council then in using it.

Pla. How shall I answer him? I dare not look on.

Philoc. Why are you sad.

Pla. Out of conformity
Unto the present garb: I have assumed
Only a veil of sadness.

Philoc. Thou art only happy,
Whose sorrow is but outward, as a stranger
Called to be present at a funeral
Clads himself like the rest, is serious,
And silent with a countenance dejected,
And Testudineous pace; but has not tears,
No groanings for a loss to him unknown:
The Obsequies performed uncloaths himself
Of grief and weeds together. But my sister,
You are not pleased to talk upon this subject.
Where is the Princess?

Pla. He'has given me now a Color for my sadness.
The Princess is retired; She has been troubled
With a most fearful dream of a Duello
Betwixt you and Philargus to be fought.

Philoc. With friendly Courtesies?

Pla. Nay, with swords she said.

Philoc. Ha, ha, ha.

Pla. Philargus has been with her, and to him
She told her fears, enjoining him, that both
Of you should come, and jointly before her
Declare your constant friendship.

Philoc. That Is soon done.

Pla. But trust me Sir, I fear Philargus took not
All as she meant it; for at his departing,
He looked displeasedly; and, when I demanded
His healths condition, he said he was sick
In Philocles.

Philoc. In Philocles his absence,
As I am in his. That was his meaning sister.

Pla. Pardon my fear; which is, that he is not friends w'ye.

Pheloc. Away, your fear has made you idle.

Pla. No.
It is my love, in that black horror clad,
Which will, before it leaves me, make me mad.
Exit.
Philoc. I Will seek him out.
Enter Matho disguised, a Letter.
Math. My Lord, I was commanded
To convey these into your Lordships hands.

Philoc. By whom were you employed?

Math. My Lord 'twas not
The man that moved me. For I know him not;
But the reward. I humbly take my leave.
Exit
Philoc. My brother write. Ha! Are we at such distance?
Thou art no Prophetess, Placilla, art thou?
He Reads. Brother Philocles, we are the laughing stock of the Natition; and
injurious both to the King, our Country, the divine Eudina, and our selves, by
our childish love. The time is short, meet me, (I conjure you by our
Friendship) within three hours, in the North vale of Tempe; where it shall be
the Gods election to take one of us, and leave the other for Eudina.
Expostulate not with your self, much less with me otherwise then by weapon, or
never expect to see your Brother Philargus. O Gods and men! where shall we go
to find
Friendship and truth? Be It so: For in the event
We may be happy both: But with this ods;
One with Eudina, the other with the Gods.
Exit.
Explicit Actus Tertius.
ACT 4. SCENE 1.
Varillus. Tersulus. Var. We should love one another, brother Tersulus,
More inwardly, and be in friendship true
As our Lords are. Prithee let their example
Piece up all difference betwixt us.

Ter. Piece up,
I know your meaning and your jear Varillus,
In your piece up.

Var. Fie on thy jealousy. 'Cause thou art a Tailor,
How ere a Gentleman by place, thou think
I jear thy quality.

Ter. You should not. For
Look back unto the worlds beginning; there
Youl' find a Tailor was before a Barber.

Var. Nay if you go to rip up old Antiquity.

Ter. Rippe! there he is again.

Var. You may as well
Collect, that the first man (who you suggest
Was his own Tailor) was his own Barber first.

Ter. As how?

Var. Do you think he did not scratch his head
In casting how to fashion out his breeches?
And that is in part, you know, the Barbers office.

Ter. The scraching of the head.

Var. And still
In use amongst Tailors on themselves. But note
The foul corruptions brought in by Time;
Of old they did but rub invention up,
How to contrive their work: But now their heads
Wrists, fingers, all have got an itch by it, which
Nothing but stealing can allay; though that
Can never cure it.

Ter. Lying and stealing went
Of old together: now they are shared it seems
Between the Barber and the Tailor.

Var. Sharp.

Ter. Your instruments are sharp as mine, Sir Barber,
And you can pick more out of your Lords ears
Then I take from his Garments with my sheers.

Var. Agree good brother, or would we had Doris
To stickle twixt us.
There you are before me too.

Var. But come, Lords followers are their Apes in most things,
Why should not we be as friendly Rivals, now
In Doris Love, as are our Lords in the
Princess Eudinas. We will take up a fashion.
Enter Doris
Dor. Varillus, where is your Lord?

Var. I know not Doris.

Dor. Tersulus, where is yours?

Var. I know not Doris.

Dor. You Echo one another. You Are commanded
Both by the Princess and the Governess
To seek'em out.

Both. Your love commands our stay.

Dor. Coupled together? Go yet one of you.
You I can spare best.

Var. Why him?

Dor. You then.

Ter. Why him?

Dor. Do you conspire? I will return your care.

Ter. Nay gentle Doris stay. For, it is in vain
To seek our Lords. They are both rod singly forth
To take the Air. Mine an hour since.

Var. Mine even now. I came but since to call
My brother Tersulus.

Dor. Your brother Tersulus?

Ter. As deeply vowed in friendship as our Lords are.

Var. It is with us as it is with them: we both
Are brothers, friends; yet Rivals in your love.
Can you now, as the Princess is to them,
Be equally affected to us both?

Dor. Do you stay me to abuse me.

Var. Nay, dear Doris.
We love our Lords? and as you love the Princess,
Who loves them, love you us. You are Eudina,
I Philocles, and he Philargus is.

Dor. Are the men mad.

Ter. Suppose so Gentle Doris.

Var. The King commands you to make present choice
Of one of us, or else ambitious Stratocles
(That Is Geron) must enjoy you. Now sweet Princess
Be speedy in your choice. The kingdoms good
Depends upon it. And in your Election,
O make Philargus blessed: He best deserves you.

Ter. Admired friend, and brother Philocles,
Your courtesy ore-comes me: I must sue,
Though my heart aches the while as much for you.

Dor. This is fine sooling --
Good Barber Philocles, and Tailor Philargus,
You shall not need to trim up his Affection,
Nor you to stich up his with your forced courtesies.
I know, in this, each wooes but for himself,
And my Affection runs as even betwixt you,
As nothing but your sizors, or your sheares
Had parted.

Var. See Stratocles, alias Geron.
Enter Geron.
Ger. So Whilome did contend two warlike Princes
For a fair ^and, till a powerful King
Subdued them both and it. Doris, take heed,
Be wary in your conversation
(As Whilom Tully warned his tender son)
With such Pl^beians, least their vulgar breeding
Corrupt your education.

Var. Must she be
Your pupil learned Geron.

Ger. And my self
Her only study; such as Whilome was;
Ulysses to Penelope.

Var. Take heed Doris
How you become his wife: For he will love you
So by the book, as he will never lie with you
Without an Author for it.

Ger. Sir, she shall be
More precious to me then Homers Iliads,
Whilome to Alexander, which he made
His mighty bedfellow: But why stand I
To render this account? The Princess sent you,
Doris, to call their Lords to walk with her,
And take the air of Tempe.

Ter. They are gone to take the air already, sir.

Ger. Come you with me then, Doris.

Dor. And why with you
Antiquity? I have heard you all this while,
And though you boast you have an interest in me,
We are not yet one volume, both bound up
And clasped together.

Var. She speaks in his Element.

Dor. No, I am yet loose paper; and 'twere good
To keep me so; for when I Am bound I must
Obey, be searched, examined and corrected.
Yet this I Will do, and now be serious,
If you will all obey my rule; and try
Your fortunes who shall have me.

Var. Ter. We agree.

Ger. Their merits bear no aequability
With mine.

Var. A very Stratocles.

Dor. You boast your worth, and stand on confidence
In powerful advocates: But what are all
Unto my Love, and (which is more) my will?
If you will hear my proposition, hear it.

Var. Ter. We are agreed. Pray hear't.

Ger. Lets hear it then.
The Gods, in Love, Whilome have stooped with men.

Dor. That you all love me, I believe; and am
Content that every one of you do think
Himself prime man in my Affection:
And one of you I Will take. But yet my choice
Must wait upon Eudina's. Therefore mark
If your Lord wins the Princess, and becomes
The Kings immediate Heir, I will be yours;
If your Lord, yours.

Ger. Therein the odds is mine,
For they are both my Lords.

Dor. Then if both have her, I Will be yours: not else.

Ger. As Whilome said, None of the wisest Clerks,
When the Sky falls we shall have store

Dor. Of Whilomes: Ha, ha, ha.

Var. Ter. Ha, ha, ha.

Ger. Your Mistress, Lady, Princess, and my Mother
Shall know your.

Dor. Away, old Whilome.

All. Ha, ha, ha.

Ger. Your Lords too I Will acquaint.

Dor. Away, old child,
Go tell it Mother, do.
If you had spent, in the Philosophers school
Your time no better, then in Cupids Lectures,
What a strange dunce you had been. Tell her, Love shows
In you, as Whilome -- she knows what she knows.

Ger. Your Love I will forget; your scorn remember
In black revenge, and so --

Dor. Farewell December.

Var. He Will to his Mother now. But tell me, Doris,
What means that Beldame in she knows, she knows:
She Is often up with it to the Governesse.

Dor. It has relation to some uncouth passage
Betwixt them, in my Ladies youth I guess,

Var. It Is some smock-secret I believe. But Gentlemen,
You know how I have laid my self out to you.

Ter. That, as the Princess shall bestow her self
On eithers Lord; you will embrace his man.

Dor. Right.

Var. And to that you will hold?

Dor. Yes
This for a Creed, That heaven must make its choice and hold you
Of one of them, before she take the other.
You understand me; and now cease your strife:
When th'ones Lord's dead, I Will be the others wife.
So farewell Gentlemen. I have staid too long.

Var. She has given us both a hint now, would we take it.

Dor. You did not hear me say, Kill you his Lord,
Nor you kill his.
Exit.
Var. But she has laid a ground
To end a strife, that I should nere ha 'found.

Ter. Varillus, come, our Lords may be returned:
And we be shent for loytering.

Var. I must think on it.
Exit.
ACT 4. SCENE 2.
Matho in his disguise. Mat. Now for my Combitants. The Appointed ground
Is here; the time draws on; and the event
Foreseen in my imaginary light
Of every pass projected in their fight.
In the first passage, each shall wound the other;
Then shall they give, lend, pay, change wound for wound,
Till both of them lie fainting on the ground.
Holding between their teeth their doubtful lives:
When I, to end the question, friendly come in,
And with an equal hand dispatcht'em both.
Ent. Philarg. And so into my ambush. One approaches.
Exit.
Philar. This is the place. What is it that urges me
So promptly to deed, which being acted,
Will be th'astonishment of Heaven and earth?
Applauded no where but in Hell. Fair Tempe,
Let it not be derived to after Ages,
By any uncouth mark upon thy face,
Let not thy grassy locks, that shall receive
The drops of blood, wither and die, condemning
The place that bore them to continual baldness;
Let not the impress of our laboring feet
Hold it is proportion; nor that part of earth,
Whereon the slain shall measure out his length,
Reserve the stamp, and make it monumental,
By a perpetual spring of more procere
And bigger bladed grass: And, when my soul
Has found an Exit (which my purpose is
My Brothers sword shall open) let the valley
(When he is departed) sink and undermine
The bordering hills that they may cover me.
Ent. Philoe.
Philoc. He has prevented me in have: In death
I shall prevent his happily expected
Labor and toy'l, who for no other end
Am here arrived but to be sacrificed
For expiation of his discontent.

Philar. Let all the eyes of heaven be hooded, only
One star to guide his point unto my heart,
Which instantly shall fall, and be extinct
In my distilled blood; that so the Gods
May not behold him. May some magic spell
Instruct his arm and weapon how to slay
My name and memory, that of me, there be not
Any desire; on him no Imputation.

Philoc. My cure is only how my breast may swallow
His point, without revealing mine intent.

Philar. I so't shall be: a violent assay
For provocation; and then spit my self
Upon his steel.
They epsy one another draw, and pass at each other, instantly both spread
their arms to receive the wound.
Philoc. Philargus. What! so quick,

Philar. What Is meant by this?

Philoc. That should be my demand

Philar. Are you so changeable?

Philoc. Not I Philargus.

Philar. This was my resolution;
Will you stain
The reputation raised of your high valor.

Philoc. I came to make experiment of none
But what consists in suffering.

Philar. That Is my part.

Philoc. My self
If you deny me that last friendly office.

Phila. Brother you dally with me. Therefore I conjure you
By fair Eudina let your anger loose;
Break up this cask of blood, and give the earth
A draught unto her health.

Philoc. By the same Beauty
(Then which no greater subject of an oath)
I swear to be your nuptials sacrifice,
Be you the Priest. I Will suffer without noise
In my displayed bowels you shall read
An augury of bliss unto you both.

Philar. This is hard measure, Philocles, to mock
Ere you destroy.

Philoc. I Will mock no more. Adieu.
He offers to kill himself, Philargus closes with him.
Philar. Hold, hold, and be not prodigal of that blood,
More precious then Pactolus golden streams.
They strugle, and both fall down, still striving to hold each others sword.
etc.
Philoc. Was then your challenge but totry me only?

Philar. Yours was, it seems; but none went out from me.

Philoc. Then are we both ensnared by treachery.
Enter Matho.
Math. This I foresaw 'twould come to. 'Save ye lordings.
And whither travail ye? Do you not want a guide
To help ye on your way?
Matho draws they start up and disarm him.
Philar. This is the villane
That summoned me.

Philoc. And me. Villane, what art thou?

Math. Unhappily gues'd. I pray inquire no further.

Philar. What monster art thou?

Philoc. Unworthy on thy face to bear man's ensign.
Who has subborn'd thee? See it is Stratocles man.
He unbeards him.
Philar. Die villane, die. And were thy master in thee,
The thirst of whose ambition sought our bloods;
His flesh with thine should here become a prey
Unto the Ravens.

Math. O, be pitiful
And spare my life, my Lords, and I Will reveal
Matters of weight and wonder; which, concealed,
Will yet cost both your lives, and make the Princess,
If she not answer my Lords fierce desires,
Subject to rape and murder.

Philoc. How can she
So fall into his power.

Philar. We shall abuse
The trust the Gods have put into our hands
If we neglect to execute justice on thee.

Math Let me but warn ye of Eudina's danger,
Whereby her virgin Innocence may not suffer,
And then inflict your furies on me.

Philoc. That charms our ready hands and steel. Speak quickly.

Math. This very hour she is to be surpised
By my Lord Stratocles, here, on Tempe plains,
Where she is come to walk, slenderly guarded
To take the air. He with a strength will seize her
And hurry her hence unto his Mansion house,
To yield to his desire, or death, if suddenly
Prevention be not made.

Philar. It Is worth our care.

Math. Preserve me from his vengeance, and I Will bring you
Unto his enterprise.

Philoc. We must not trust him,
He may have laid an Ambuscado for us.
Enter 6 Rust. with Weapons
Philar See brother, stand upon our guard.

Math. Help, help, aid me good people, help.

Philoc. What means the villan now.

1. Rus. What Is the complaint?

2. Rus. What is your grievance, speak?

Math. I am a servant to Lord Stratocles
Who has preserved your Countey and your lives.

1. Rus. We are the more beholding to him; on.

2. Rus. 'Twas more his gentleness then our deserving; on.

Math. These two are his malignant enemies;
And finding that my Lord is in these parts
Together with the Princess, fair Eudina
(Who has made him her choice) they lie in wait
To murder him, as they had me, had not
The Gods sent you to rescue me.

1. Rus. 'Twas more their Gentleness, then your deserving, on.

Math. I have no more to say, but that you take'em
On your allegiance to safe custody,
And let me pass.

1. Rus. Un'ch, That would be more
Our gentleness then your deserving too. on, on.

Philar. Dear friends --

1. Rus. Good, interrupt us not we'll hear ye in order.
On you, Sir, ere you go; and come not back
For any thing unspoke you left behind.

Math. I thank you, Sir, I had like to ha'lest my sword deserving,
Behind, which they disarmed me of.

1. Rus. That was their Gentleness more then your
(They having three swords, and you none to guard you)
They killed you not indeed, yet on again.
W^^t further do you charge'em with.

Math. No more, nor you, less you detain me longer.

1. Rus. Now you grow bold, and saucy I must tell you.

2. Rus. Now you are a knave, a villane and a Traitor,
Lest you no more behind you but a sword?
I saw a scabberd on your face of late,
A false one: Seek it out.

3. Rus. O here it is.
Takes up the false beard.
1. Rus. Put it him on again. On with it, on.
Resist and we will hang thee. Now my Lords,
My Princess I may say: For one of you
Must be our King. We know you though you know
Not us; you may perhaps hereafter know us
More by your Gentleness then our deserving.

Phil. Phil. O worthy Country men.

1. Rus. We are the heads of Tempe; and the chief
Swain heads of Thessaly (the King has known us)
And here we came to lay our heads together
For good of common wealth. Here at the verge
Of this adjoining Thicket is our Bower
Of consultation; and from thence (regardful
Ever with eye and ear for common good)
We saw a beard pulled off; and heard that mouth,
(Which now is dumb) open a plot, unlike
The pitiful compl^int he made to us.

Philar. But saw you not some passages before?
Of his attempt upon our lives?

1. Rus. Good Gods.

2. Rus. No we came in but then. Those are enough
To hang the man, and turn his Lord out of
Our Country favor: If we find he has
That plot upon the body of the Princess
Of Rape and Murder. He can be no King
For us: for, sirrah, we have wives and daughters.
En. Stra. Eud. Soul.
1. Rus. Stand close. See who comes here.

Stra. So, now go back my friends. There Is some reward.

Sol. Thanks to the noble bounteous Stratocles.
gives a pur's
Srat. Lady your tears are bootless.
Exit Soldiers
Eud. Help ye Gods.

Str. Your cries as unavailable. The Gods
(To whom your friendly foolish lovers
Have sacrificed each other) have given you up
To me the only worthy of you.

Eud. No they are both sublimed into one star,
Yet of a double influence, that shall
Strike death into thy purposes, and give
Me light by which t'ascend with them to live
After my present death.
She offers to kill her self with a knife, he holds her.
Str. Your have to death shall not prevent my lust.

Philoc. She must outlive thy Lust and the false Traitor

Rus. Hold, hold, disarm, but kill him not.

2. Rus. We Will keep him tame.

Str. You have ods of me.

Eud. I am in heaven already.

Philar. Live wonder of the heavens, a star on earth
Out shining theirs.

Eud. What a short journey it is
For heavenly minds to reach unto the Gods!

Str. B^tray'd!

1. Rus. No not betrayed. You Are but well meet my Lord,
But that is our Gentlen ess more then your deserving.

Str. Am I become the shame and scorn of pesants.

1. Rus. Or if you will have it betrayed, then blame your own
Overmuch policy and want of Beasts
To carry it to Market. We nere lay
More burden on a Ass, then he can bear
Here in the country: what is done at court
We know not. Here perhaps is one can tell,
Know you this bearded Satyr?
Pull off Mathos beard.
Str. Coward, slave,
Thy faintness has betrayed me.

Math. No, 'twas ods,
Such as men meet that sight against the Gods.

1. Rus. The fellow has some Grace; he weeps: But come
Princess and Princes, what is now your pleasure
We do unto these men?

Eud. For me, I have learned
By mine own sufferings in my afflictions
To be compassionate. I wish their pardon.

Str. That mercy wounds me deeper with remorse
Then all my lost designs, and their derision
Have done with indignation.

1. Rus. There is some hope these yet may prove new men.

Eud. Lord Stratocles,
Those wounds that pierce the heart with true contrition
Do bring the precious balm in'em that cures it.

Philar. We wish yours may be such.

Philoc. And that this shame
May guard you innocent of future blame.

2. Rus. Here Is sweetness upon sweetness.

1. Rus. Now it remains, that we advise our selves,
Brethren of Tempe, that since these delinquents
Are fallen into our hands, that we discharge
Our Country loyalty with discretion,
And not release him from our power, but by
The power above us. (that is the kings) we will wait
On you to court. On you for your new loves,
And you for old acquaintance.

Eud. I Will acquaint my father with your care,
He shall be witness of our bringing in
The ambitious Politic trapt in his own gin.

ACT 4. SCENE 3.
King. Disanius. Justinius. King. Bereft of all my joys and hopes at once!
Is there no comfort, nor no counsel left me?
Why stand you gazing thus with sealed lips?
Where is your counsel now, which you are wont
In trifling matters to pour out in plenty?
Now, in the peril of my life and state
I cannot get a word. Give me my daughter,
Or take my Kingdom too. Where is she? Tell me.

Dis. All we can say or hear is, she was taken
Out of her private walks by violent hands,
Only we guess the master of the plot
Was Stratocles, who now is missing in the Court.

King He asked my leave to leave the Court, and had it.

Dis. It Was a fit gloss for his fowl treachery.

King But what have you said for her recovery.

Just. We have dispatched a hundred several posts
To every coast and angle of your Kingdom:
No way of finding her is left unsought.

Dis. Could we find Stratocles, she might be found.

King Still upon him? Where Is Philocles? where is Philargus?
They are missing too.

Dis* Hell has not in it a thought
That can detract their honors.

Jus. Yet a Rumor
Is spread about the Court; they are gone to fight.

Dis. Against whom?

Jus. Against themselves. Nay more, that they
Have fought, and both are slain.

Dis. You may as soon
Believe the Artick and Antartick poles
Can meet it opposition, amidst
The firmament, and jointly in a fall
Extinguish both their lights in Neptunes bosom.

King Whence springs this Rumor.

Dis. Stratocles is the head
We may be confident; and his men the pipes
That have dispers't it.

Kin. Still you judge Stratocles.
Ent. Thym. weeps. What purpose can he have in it.

Dis. O my sister
Has heard the news too. Weep not tender sister,
Your sons are safe.

Thy. Yes they are with the Gods.

King. And, had they taken Eudina with them too,
My doubts and fears were over, well as yours.
Ent. Garr. weeping
Dis. Here Is one that makes a face, an ugly one,
And would weep too, had she but moisture in her.
How now! Whose Mare's dead, Garrula? Take thy bottle
And turn that into tears. Or do thou wring
Thy face because that is dry? Gi'mee't, I Will fill it.

Gar. My son, oh, oh my son is at deaths door.

Dis. And is death so unkind to keep it shut
Against him? Out upon him churl.

Gar. My liege
And Madam (it shall out) you might have saved
My sons life in your servants love, whose scorn
Will be his death, except the King divert it,
And I shall tell him what you know I know --

Thy. O me undone.

Gar. And open such a secret
Unto his majesty --

King. Yet forbear me now.

Gar. Do you slight me in the care of my sons life?
Do you scorn my secret too, that may be worth
More then your kingdom to you?

Dis. Away old fool.

Gar. Now you shall never know it.

Dis. For thy good will
The king would thank thee, in offering at some mirth
To cool his grief, but that it is too hot
Yet to be touched.

Jus. Indeed you do not well
To move the King, or to perplex the Lady
Now in their sorrows fullness.

Gar. What Is their sorrow
To mine? My sons a dying.

Jus. Her sons are dead,
And the Kings daughter lost.

Gar. But I pray, say,
Is my Lord Philocles and Philargus dead?

Jus. It Is said so.

Gar. Then I say my son shall live.

Dis. And so will thou while thou can lift thy bottle
To that old Mazer.

Gar. Hem! A hem! a ha!

Dis. Do you rejoice, and show the rotten half tooth
You have left that they are dead.

Gar. No I rejoice
That the advancement that the giglet gaped for
In one of their fine followers is lost,
In hope of which she scorned my son. But now
He shall scorn her and live.

Dis. Out envious trot

Gar. I Will comfort him with the news.

Dis. away you Hag,
Exit Gar. Here comes one merry look.

Eup. Joy to the king.
Enter Eupathus. Eupa.
Dis. Well said, speak up and home good

Eup. Your daughter's safe returned so is your son, Madam,
For which you are to thank the Gods: This is
Their true relation.
He gives the King a paper.
Dis. Where is Stratocles?

Eup. Caught in the snares of his foul treachery.

Dis. Bravely and honestly spoken Eupathus.
He reads to Thym. aside.
Eup. And by their hands whose voices he had once
For his election.

Dis. What his country heads?

Eup. They all turn head upon him now.

Dis. Brave heads
Observe my judgment now, my king: Those heads
I will so souse in our best Greekish Wines,
That they shall be such heads! O heads, heads, heads!

King. I do approve your judgment good Disanius,
But wish you not insult ore man's dejection.
We find that Stracocles is much Penetent
And troubled at his trespass.

Dis. A halter still him
For an ambitious hypocritical Traitor.

King. The time for my Eudina's match draws near,
And I no longer will attend on fortune,
I have decreed it past recall, regardless
Whether against the oracle, or with it.

Thy. Yet am I consident in your assertion
You priests of Delphos.

Dis. He Will bestow her yet
On Stratocles, if she stand longer doubtful
In a fair choice.

Eup. Fear not my Lord. That doubt
Your Country heads will clear. He has lost them
For ever.

Dis. O brave heads! I will so ring
Their ears with jewels of praises and preferment
That they shall glare like direful comets at him.

King. One she shall choose of them: If not, I Will put
A third upon her.

Thy. With your pardon Sir,
Why are you (for I find it is so) stronger
For Philocles?

King. No reason urges me;
And yet I find an inclination in me
That pleads for him. I can perceive you too,
Are partial toward Philargus. Can you yield
A reason for it?

Thy. Yes, Sir, he is my eldest.

King. Alas, But not an hour. Well, I Will remit
My power propounding, and accept
Her choice of either, made within the time.

Thy. I, there my hopes do anchor; else they were
Certain of Shipwreck: yet the perilous waves
My vessel rides on seems so many graves.

Explicit Actus Quartus.
ACT 5. SCENE 1.
Philocles. Philargus. Philoc. Brother, and friend, I Am deaf to all deswasion.
I charge you by Eudina's love, our friendship,
And (if there be) ought that you hold more sacred,
Move not to alter my fixed resolution.

Philar. That resolution's mine; And I conjure you
By the self-same respects, and all that are
Or may be hollowed, to let me depart.
I will remove but for some few days journey
Whence you shall duly hear from me. But rather
I Will travail to the Antipodes, then here
Linger the vain impediment of your joys
In your Eudina.

Philoc. Travel's my design.
Eudina must be yours. She is a bliss
Which heaven created for you.

Philar. Can a bliss
Be purchased with your absence? No: 'Twil torture
Equally in fruition as in want.
Were it a Kingdom only, we could part it
Without the quarrel of the Thebean brothers;
Or, were it heaven it self, Castor and Pollux
Should have our imitation. But Eudina
Is only indivisible.

Philoc. Add to it this,
Their sentence is erroneous, that deny
Partition to the soul: For ours do witness,
Friendship can give her a division,
And make reciprocal community
Of all her faculties. But still Eudyna
Is indivisible. Why name I her,
Whom to forget must be my only tasque?
Brother adieu.

Philar. It Is I that must take leave.
Enter Disan.
Dis. Is it even so?

Philoc. I fear we are prevented.

Dis. Nephews, why left you so the presence? I
May justly fear you were ill advised in it.
The King expects your quick return, and will not
Let pass this peremptory day, set down
For matching of his daughter; to preserve
Life, State, or Kingdom. Have you a purpose,
First having begged that villain Stratocles pardon,
To give him up your interest in the Princess?
The Kingdom too, to boot? will you compel
The King to give him all?

Philar. Not so good Uncle.

Dis. What do you less in flying from the presence,
When that affair is now in agitation?

Philoc. Uncle, you saw withal the great destraction
We left the Princess in. How when she looked
Upon Philargus, she inclined to him;
And when on me to me; when on us both
How extasied she fell!

Philar. A strong necessity
There is that one of us absent.

Dis. Therefore
You both fly off to travel several ways!
Come, let me tell you your courtesy is foolish,
And you unworthy to have such a fortune
Hang like a pregnant cloud over your heads
Ready to be dissolved in showers upon you,
While your own madness conjures up a wind
To blow't away.

Philar. Uncle, you are unjust,
I would remove to let that golden shower
Light upon Philocles.

Philoc. I upon Philargus.

Dis. I could even swadle'em both for a brace of Babyes.
Your folly makes me mad: will you return
Yet to the presence, both of you?

Philoc. Uncle, you know
To be both there, is neither to be there,
But to breed more perplexity in Eudyna.
Pray take Philargus.

Dis. Nephew, come, be wise:
It is a crown that Courts you; and the name
Of friend, or Brother ought to stand aloof,
And know a distance, where such dignity
Is tendered. Take your opportunity,
I find you coming, come.

Philarg. I pray take Philocles.

Dis. I Will take him for the wiser man then. Nephew,
Come, and embrace your fortune, and forget not
To thank the Gods your Brother has no more wit.
A Kingdom and a beauteous bed*fellow
(There Nephew, there!) Do not those bare a sound
'Bove friend and Brother, ha?

Philoc. not in mine ears.

Dis. What frost has ceiz'd their blood, and brains, which neither
Beauty nor dignity can thaw? Go travel.
What stay you for? young Gentlemen sometimes
Wait for a gale of gold to blow'em out
O'th'harbour; Stratocles will furnish you,
And thank you more then for his forfeit life.

Philoc. Stratocles can gain nothing by my abscence,
While her Philargus stays.

Philarg. No, nor by mine,
While Philocles remains.

Dis Shall I make a motion,
Will one of you remain?

Both. One must and shall.

Dis. Then yield to take your lots for it. (I will make'em)
As you respect my love; your mothers life;
The kingdoms good; Eudynas love and life,
Let it be so. Pause not upon it, but do it.
See, here is ink and paper. I am inspired,
Apollo, with thy wisdom. Love. -- and friendship.
See, here is a pass for one, and a plantation
He writes two lots. For the other. Love and friendship Gentlemen.
Love shall abide at home, and friendship walk,
According to the custom of the world.
Let it be so. *Come study not, but draw,
I Will draw upon ye both else.
They drew the lots.
Philar. Friendship for me then.

Philoc. See here I have it brother. And yours is love.
My love be prosperous to you. My horse, my horse.
Enter Varillus
Var. All Is ready, Sir.

Philoc. In the first place then bring
A parting cup, that by the grapes Elizar
As Jove by Acheron, I may protest
My constancy and zeal unto my purpose.

Var. And now is my time to act thy purpose, Doris.
Exit.
Dis. Kick not your heels against the Gods, Philargus,
It is most evidently their decree
That you abide and Philocles remove.

Philoc. I do obey my Lot. And noblest brother.
Be you as free in love, as I from envy.

Philar. But how can you forgo that equal interest
You have with me in Thessaly, and Eudina?

Diss. Why should that trouble you? you see he does
Forgo't; and is a going. Would he were gone once.

Philar. Can love allow't?

Philoc. Variety of objects
Like Nails abandon one a another. So
May I, by novelties of Travail, lose
The thought of Love; and cheerfully return
Both hers and yours in a more just relation.
Enter Varillus with a bowl of wine. Give me the bowl. Now brother to that love
You owe the fair Eudina, unto which
I give th'addition of mine own, and all
The joves that ere I wished my self and her,
And to that friendship, which nor Time, nor absence
Shall ever end or alter.
He drinks and gives Varillus the bowl.
Var. Now the service that may redeem my faults
Is to be done.

Philar. Give it me full, Varillus.

Var. I Will give you more then you expect by this.
He puts in a powder.
Philar. You have the victory in friendship, brother,
Who, by your resolute absence will enforce
And drive me to a happiness; wherein
I must not cease, in all the strength of prayers
Of sacrifice, and vows; in all my goods
Of fortune, mind and body to be yours:
Which that you may return to repossess
With the more speed, this health to auspicate
And expedite your travails.

Var. They are done
Already if my Pothecaries skill fail not.

Philoc. With this embrace my brother, and my last
Of present ceremony, I now wish you
In th'arms of your Eudina --
And may my better part of soul, which now
I leave in trust with you, by you be breathed
Into her breast; that she may lively find
She has my love in yours; and that in you
She has us both.

Dis. So, so, enough. Ha'ye done yet?

Philoc. How is it with you brother?

Philarg. As it is
With souls that leave the world in peace.

Dis. For shame
Leave womanish ceremony. Will you part
Before it be too late?

Philoc. Too soon I fear.
Philargus! Brother! Friend! Ye Gods, how comes this?

Dis. What is he dead? I see then how it comes.
You or your man, or both ha'poyson'd him.

Philar. No, 'twas my self.

Dis. Thou will not go out o'th'world
With a lie i'thy mouth? Speak yet again,

Var. He has said well for me already,

Philoc. Gone, past recovery, but he shall not pass
Without my company.

Dis. Will thou die mad too?
He offers to kill himself. Dis. snatcheth his sword away. Come, Sir, let go
your whiblin. He has yet
Some breath. Run for Physicians -- No, Sir, stay.
I will not quit you so. I can read guilty lines
Palpably on this villans visnomy.
Is there no more i'th'house? some help here! ho!
Nephew forbear. As you will have me think
Philocles offers again to kill himself. You guiltless of your brothers blood,
forbear.
How am I tortured! Ho! Philargus; rub him,
Rub him, he may live yet.

Philoc. O that the world
Might be so happy!

Dis. So, well said: A box
Or two in kindness will not do amiss.
Stir not you sirrah. O, Sir, you lay hold
Enter Tersulus. On that same traitor.

Var. I Will not stir my Lord.

Dis. I Will hold you to your word, Sir, run, Sir, you
And fetch Physicians.

Ter. O my Lord, fallen dead!

Dis. Stay but to look upon him, and I Will swear
Thou art his murderer. Fetch the Kings Physicians,
Exit Tersulus If not to cure him; yet to rip the cause
Out of his sudden death. I guess they will find
Your handiwork in's maw.

Var. You heard him say
It was himself that did it. I am cleared.
Enter Eupathus.
Eup. My Lord, the King, impatient of your stay,
Has sent ^.

Dis. What has he sent. Has he sent means
To call this man from death, or that from falling
After him into th'grave?

Eup. O heavy spectacle!

Dis. But, come I will not cry though. Pray assist me,
In with this body, Charity commands
When grieved necessity entreats your hands.
Exeunt omnes.
ACT 5. SCENE 2.
Geron. The four Rusticks. Ger. My Rustici amici, your Council and
Your virtue have restored me. And it is true
As Wholom said the good Antisthenes
Virtue is armor against the very fates.

1. Rus. We told you for your good, good Mr. Geron,
Fond love became you not.

2. Rus. It sat upon your coat like burs or briars
Stuck in the hindlocks of our fleecy sheep;
Who shake their heads; figgle, and writh their tayls,
And bleat for woe; sprinkle the ground behind'em
Sometimes I wisse: Twould make one laugh and pitty'em
And all at once, but all remediless.
Til we with helping wit and hands release'em

Gar. A wise man then in love is like a sheep
l'th' briars. As Whilome said

3. Rus. But (by the way)
What was that Whilome, Sir, you speak much of him,
But what was he pray.

Ger. An ancient Britain, whom I have affected
As idly as my love. But I Will forget it
And use that word no more. The clowns have found me.

4. Rus. But will you now proceed upon your plot
For the honor of Tempe plains, and Tempe swains.

Ger. You can all dance.

2. Rus. After our country guise.

3. Rus. Like so many light horses.

1. Rus. So can our wives
Who have followed us up to Court we thank'em
Pray Juno we get them honestly home again.

Ger. There is no doubt. However fear you nothing
As why -- It Is hard to leave off an old custom.

2. Rus. The why was out, but lome stuck in your teeth.

Ger. It Is well it did so. You can dance you say.
A dance I have projected for the Princess
Who ever marries her it shall serve. As why --

1. Rus. Again 'twas eene a coming.

Ger. You are as quick as why --

2. Rus. And there again.

1. Rus. Nay we are heads, I tell you Master Geron,
And should have wit; and shew't we can in th'countrey,
In the head vein, though hear at Court, like courtiers
We'll show it in our heels. Pray therefore on.

Ger. On, let us then to practice. King and court
Shall see, to crown their joys, some country sport.
Exeunt omnes.
ACT 5. SCENE 3.
King. Justinus. Eudina. Thymele. Attendants. King. No answer, no return? Must
I entreat,
Yet have my undeserved favors slighted?

Thy. Yet, Sir, your Kingly patience.

King. Stupid folly
'Twere longer to attend. My vow is past
And registered in heaven; the minute is
Athand, that calls down thonder on me, which
No tear, or prayers can mollify or aver'^,
If I upon so long deliheration
Shall falsify. So, call in Stratocles.
Exit. Attendants.
Eud. O my dread father. Yet one hours patience
Till Eupathus or Disanius return.
One short, short hour: I may not live so long.
His wife you named; though you may force me take him.

King I Will leave that to the Gods.

Eud. They will forgive. Give them your imitation
In mercy, as in power on earth. I know Disanius
Went not in vain to call'em to your presence.
And him that he brings first into this room
O Philocles or Philargus I will take,
Though he precede the other but one foot,
I have it by inspiration from the Gods.

King You are full of dreams.

Thym. This cannot, Sir, be long
In trial. King Yet I am not bound to wait
On those ungrateful men. O Stratocles,
Enter Strato. You have from your late Errors, which your then
Headstrong ambition hurried and cast you in
With that humility purged your self, that I
Conceive you now a temperate Man; and am
Instructed by the clemency of the Gods
To cherish and reward your virtue. Therefore
From their divine appointment, as my hands --

Eud. (O mighty, Sir --

King Dare not to disobey me)
Receive Eudina.

Str. Royal King and Master,
Mistake not so the pleasure of the Gods.
My forfeit life you have forgiven me:
Your Kingly power and grace might do it. You
Have given it freely: but I took't with caution,
By future service to make good your gift:
But for my forfeit love to fair Eudina,
And my lost honor to the twin-born brothers,
There can be no redemption, if I add
By acceptance of your bounteous offer
A second trespass, greater then the former.

King Do you refuse her then.

Str. In hope she will plead
My pardon to your grace.

Eud. The Gods have wrought
Effectually for me.

King Strangely, unexpected
Are you become a suppliant Placilla?

Pla. In the behalf, Sir, of your loyal subjects,
Ent. Pla. with a petition. The Swains of Tempe.

King. I expected, rather,
News from your unkind brothers. See Justinius,
The Commons, rather then I shall bestow
kneels. My daughter upon Stratocles, do beseech me
To take a further time.

Just. You Are happy, Sir,
In his refusal and in their request.
They are fair predictions of ensuing joys
To you, your daughter, and the Kingdom, If
I may be worthy to divine so much.

King How ere thy divination proves, thy wish
Is worth our thanks. And we may have
Enter Eupathus Glad tidings presently. Now Eupathus
Where is Disanius, Philocles, and Philargus?
Why come they not?

Eup. They are all at hand my liege.
This paper may excuse their stay.

King O do
The K^reads the paper. They plead excuse then?

Thym. I am full of fears.

Eud. And I of sudden joy.

Plac. Pray all be well.
The King has struck his breast, and seems perplexed.

King Justinius, Stratocles, read here this Paper.
Go Eupathus, and let them enter. Stay.
Yet go, bring them in their prescribed manner.
I Will send the woman off, whose sudden grief
May be a bar to our proceedings. Madam --

Thy. I fear that Garrula has detected me.

King I must entreat a while your absence, Lady.

Thy. May I presume to ask your reason, Sir.

King My will has been above your question. Pray,
Let me request you go.

Thy. I know obedience.

King And go Placilla, send old Garrula to me.

Thy. Now it is most evident. O mighty, Sir,
Conceive not worse of me then Garrula.
Let us appear together.

King What means this?

Thy. You may be pleased to hear me first.

King Pray pull not
More weight upon your breast then you can bear,
By your impertinent stay. Go I command you.

Thy. I must obey. However it is too late
To change the resolution of my fate.
Exit. Thym. Pla.
King I have not known her thus. I fear destraction
Fore-runs the voice of grief, as to prevent it.
Heaven knows I called for Garrula, but to send her
With best directions to prepare and arm
Her tender soul against the sting of sorrow
Before it should approach her. But Eudina
You must be valliant; and not let the sight
Of death in others shake your confidence.

Eud. How means your majesty?

King Suppose that both
Your fatal lovers, Philocles and Philargus
Slept in the caves of death.

Eud. I should not live then;

King Suppose his desteny had cut off one,
And, in him, all the impediments, that crossed
You in the enjoying of the other, say
Which could you wish surviver? But you have
Declared your constant purpose to possess
The first Disanius brings into this presence.
Come; one is dead. There is a strict necessity
You know it. Now collect your Reason: For it is not
Your passion for the dead; nor your dislike
Of Stratocles; no though my subjects yield you
A longer time, shall make me tempt the Gods
Recorders. Ent. Disanius before a hearse. Philocles after. Varillus manacled
and led by Tersu^us. Euputhus supports Philocles, as ready to sink with grief.
By breaking of my vow. Be steadfast then,
As you respect a father; and take courage.
See Philocles lives.

Eud Philargus then
Is brought in dead before him by Disanius;
And unto him the first to be brought in
My faith was vowed; and he is now my choice.

King What being dead? Could you affect'em so
Equally, both alive, that you forbore
To choose, because you could not have'em both;
And now seek only him cannot be had?
The hearse set down. Eudinae kneels to it. Philo. kneels What Love, what
madness call you this? good Gods,
Throw not your wrath upon me in destruction on the other

Just. Nor let your passion Master you great, sir, side,
As sudden grief does her. But give a little
Scope to her sorrow. She will soon return
And meet her Reason in obedience
To your desires.

King. I thank thee good Justinius.
A Song. During which Disanius etc. discourse with the King. Disanius seems to
acquaint the King with the manner of Philargus death, pointing at Varillus. The
King seems much troubled; but at the end of the song, (as by the Kings
appointment Disanius raises Philocles, and Justinius raises Eudina, and bring
them to the King while Eupathus with the Attendants go forth with the hearse,
the Recorders playing. which done,
King. Your virgin tears and vows ore your lost love
I did attend with pardon, my Eudina,
I^ hope you are now compliant to my will.

Dis. Grieve not your father Madam.

Eud. I ha'done;
And as the Gods direct him to command me,
I must and will obey.

Dis. So that is well said.

King. The Gods have pleased Eudina to determine
Your doubtful choice, reserving Philocles
Unto your love without competitor:
Therefore it now remains that he be taken
Into your liking; whom I have decreed
My successor.

Eud. His merits are above
Me and this land; In which what interest
My birth has given me I resign to him.
Only let me beseech a further respite.

King. For what? the celebration? I consent;
But for the contract, this imediate hour
Shall see it knit beyond all dissolution.

Dis. I that I thirst to see.

King. Give me your hands.
Eudina gives her hand. Yours Philocles.

Dis. Why give you not your hand,
Dare you not trust the King with it? should he now
Show a jades trick and fly back.

Philoc. I beseech
Under your highness Pardon, yet, a respite.

Dis. More respits yet? Was ever hopeful match
Driven so round about?

King. Why this delay?

Philoc. My brothers blood cries in me for your justice
Which must be executed on his murderer
Before I safely can, or dare possess
His interest in the faith of fair Eudina.

Dis. O, is that all? that may be soon dispatched.
Come forwards Poysoner. Good your Majesty,
For expedition, make me his judge,
And hangman too (I care not) rather then
Suffer this match hang of the tenters thus.

King Has he confes'd the fact?

Dis. Yes, yes to me.
I beat it out of him. Quickly good King.

King Your patience good Disanius Sirrah speak.

Var. It was my act. But may your mercy look
Upon my love in it unto my Lord.

King Your Lord shall be your j^dge then.

Philoc. I adjudge him
To sharp but lingering tortures (for his death
Alone can yield no satisfaction)
Tortures that may draw in, by his confession,
As accessaries with him, all the homicides
That are in the Kingdom.

Dis. A hard matter that.

Philoc. Nor can I think his only brain and hands
Composed the poison.

Dis. Hang him, he is a Barber,
And uses Aqua fortis, oil of Vitriol,
Mercury, and such like, to cleanse his Rasors.

Just. It Is good that you Varillus clear your conscience
And, if you had confederates in the fact,
Give up their names.

Ter. Varillus, I suspect
Doris joined hand with you in my Lords death.

Dis. What Is that you mutter?

Ter. It shall out my Lord;
The handmaid Doris put him on it; I know it
By what she said to us both we being her lovers.

Dis. The Tailor proves an honest man: because
He cannot have the wench himself, he will hang her.

Var. Of her I had the poison, it is confessed.
Exit Tersulus
Dis. O that whore. King. Find her and drag her hither.
Enter Thymele.
Thy. Where Is my Philargus? Give me yet his body,
That with a mothers tears I may imbalm it.

Dis. You have heard the wosul news then; but my sister
Could grief recall Philargus, we would weep
A second deluge for his reparation;
Renew his breath by sighing, and awake him,
With groans out of his Sepulcher.

Thy. Already
Have you interred him then? you made strange have.
Was it your subtlety to send me hence,
Fearing my cries might have revived him, king?
And so again delayed your daughters marriage?
I have enough to cross it yet Philargus

Dis. What Is that?

Str. Destraction sure.

King My fear foresaw't.

Thy. You are deceived, for from my depth of so^row,
Through this thick film o^ tears, I can perceive
You are about to join the hands and faiths
Of Philocles and Eudina,

King. Is not that
Enough to dry your tears, and show, you that
The Gods were rather merciful in leaving
This son, then rigorous in taking ^other?

Dis. Or would you now, cause you have lost Philargus,
Kill Philocles too by crossing of this contract?

Thy. It is the pleasure of the Gods I cross it.
Ent. Gar.
Dis. Of devils it is. What can she mean? Go sleep.

Gar. King by your leave.

Dis. What says old suckbottle now?

Thy. Nay I am here before you Garrula,
And now will tell the long hid secret for you.
And if I err in it, disprove me.

Gar. Tell't then.
My faltring tongue will fail me. I can hear though.
Drink^
Thy. This contract must not be.

King You then must yield
More reason then I find you have.

Thy. Your self
Can never make it. You will sooner join
The Wolf and Lamb. Falcon and Dove together.

King No trifling I command you Thymele.

Philoc. If you be serious, Mother, hold us not
In this suspense.

Thy. Let not the royal blood
Of Thessaly be stained with an incestuous match.

King How!

Gar. She says right. They are both your lawful children
By your own virtuous Queen now in -- Elisium.

King What dreams are these of your distemperd heads,

Thy. This is no dream or fable. But unfain'd
Sip. As truth it self: Which with your gracious leave
I shall demonstrate, humbly craving pardon
For my so long concealment, as I Will yield
Due reason for it.

King. Freely speak, you have it.

Thy. You may remember in your civil wars,
(Those cruel wars, as I may justly stile' em)
In which my husband fell --

Dis. O my brave brother!

Thy. When open Rebels and domestic Traitors
Pursued your Crown and life; your gracious Queen
To have been brought to bed; and was believed
To have miscarried by an abortive birth.

King. True: In her flight she was constrained to take
A neighboring cottage; and use the help
Of the Swains wife.

Gar. That swain-ess was my self,
Though my deserts have glorified me since:
And by my help (and somewhat of the Gods)
She then made you the Father of that Prince.

Dis. Take up thy bottle -- Sister, speak you on.

Thy. The Affrighted queen (yet wise in that extremity)
Suspecting that the innocence of her babe
Born to a Kingdom, could not be secured
In those combustions from apparent danger,
Sent him to me in private, then in travel
Of my Philargus -- Charging me to fain
A second labor, with the Midwifes aid,
For Philocles: I did, and was reputed
Mother of both.

King I cannot think our Queen
Would keep us ignorant of so good a Fortune.

Thy. I moved her often to tell you. But she answered,
All is not sound, There Is danger, yet; And when
After Eudyna's birth she felt her self
At point of death, she strictly did enjoin
Me and this woman, only conscious with her,
By oath of which she had prepared this copy
A paper. In her own hand, to keep it silent, till
Philocles should be able to secure
Himself from treachery; or that your term
Of life expiring, or some accident
Of no less consequence required detection.
For further proof --

Kin. My joy forbids more questioning
Give me my ^lesh and blood into my bosom.
Thrice happy Fathers if your Children were
Borne to you thus of perfect Age. But where
Is now a Match for my Eudina. I
Have here a successor.
A shout within and crying Philargus, Philargus. etc.
King. Hah! Voices in the Air that cry Philargus?

Eud. Voices that do tell me, I must follow him
Up to the heavens, and there be married to him.

Des. Here Is the She-Devil now.
Ent. Turs. with Dor.
Dor. You need not pull me
For that man's love, I laid thy Lord to sleep:
Had I loved thee best, then his Lord had slept.

Dis. How does he sleep? speak impudent baggage, how?

Dor. How? With a powder, Sir, which my own father
A skilful pothecary prepared; who, if
Philargus dye, shall hang with us for Company.

Dis. Your father?

Dor. Yes, But now the perils past.
See, if he sleep, it is walking.
Enter Philargus Eupathus.
Philoc. Ha! Philargus.
Or but the shade; the spirit of my friend.

Philar. Be not amazed, as at an apparition.

Thy. Does my son live? O then I have enough.

Dis. Come hither. come hither you three. I will discharge
The scene of you* Thy love unto thy Lord
(Though somewhat unadvisedly employed)
Deserves reward; I Will see it given thee,
Thy Lord and King shall thank thee: take thy wench,
She has love in her wit, and wit in her anger.
I like the luck of things; that ill intents
Should bring forth good events. Thy faithfulness
To thy Lord too was happy. Go, I*le see you
Ext. Var. Ter Dor. All royally rewarded. How now Geron?

Ger. My Lord I see here is joy toward, as why --
Ent. Ger.
Dis. 'Slife, stand not Whiloming now man:but be brief.

Ger. Cry mercy. I had left it. But my Lord
To celebrate the flowing joys in Court,
I and my Country heads have framed a Masque,
Rather an antic dance, rather a country toy,
Rather a Rustic round; rather a --

Dis. Hoy day!
Thy Rather's worse then thy Whilom. Do know
What time o'day it is.

Ger. It Is a rural thing
To be presented at the Princess wedding
And, if you think it meet, I will induce
The practice of it presently. As why --

Dis. Go fetch the heads and heels, I Will stay the King,
To see and laugh at'em. That Is grace enough.
Exit Geron.
King Philargus you have much to know; the which
We will Eudina tell you, now she is yours.
Receive her and our blessing.

Philar. Were I dead
(As I was thought to be) your name pronounced
Over my grave, beyond all Necromancy,
Would call fresh blood into my veins again;
Strengthen my nerves, to break the Iron gates
Of death; and force my joyful spirit from
The Elisian Paradise to live with you.

King You shall not be a looser Thymele:
Philocles shall be yours, and in exchange
Placilla mine.

Philoc. To me my beauteous spouse
Thou art as Juno to her Jupiter,
Sister and wife.

Thy. Your highness may be pleased
Now at so happy leisure to perpend
The Oracle; which truly has effected
Each word of the prediction.

King Who can repeat the answer, I ha'lost it.

Dis. I have it.
Contend not for the jewel, which
Ere long shall both of you enrich.

Philoc. Eudina does so: me in a dear sister.

Philar. Me in a Peerless wife.

Dis. Pursue your fortune: for it is she
Shall make ye what you seem to be.

Philoc. She has done that too: For now indeed we are brothers

King Apollo thou have filled us all with joy,
But has our joy already filled our Court
Loud Music is here. With Music?

Dis. Will your Majesty yet sit
And see the practice of a presentation,
Against the Marriages by your Swains of Tempe
With thanks; and give it all the grace we may?

Ger. From Tempe plains, the Tempe Swains
Enter Geron and the Swains and Nymphs for the dance. With mirth and Melody,
With Dance and Song do hither throng
To greet your Majesty.

Gar. O there, look there, Madam my Son, and all
My old Temperian Neighbors.

Ger. We cannot hope in all our scope,
To gain much praise for skill,
But it shall be enough, if ye
Accept of our good will.
The Dance.
King. My thanks to all.

All Heaven bless your Majesty.
Exeunt.
King. Thanks to Apollo. Let his temple be
The place of our solemnity. His Altars
Let them be laden with Arabian spices;
Let his Priests lead, in a devout procession,
The horned Sacrifice, mantled with Ghirlonds
And we (our Temples crowned with Laurel) follow
With Music, sounding Hymen and Apollo.

FINIS.
EPILOGVE.
It Is not the Poets art, nor all that we
By life of Action can present unt'ye
Can justly make us to presume a Play
Is good till you approv't: which that you may
It cannot mis-become us, since our gains
Come by your favor more then all our pains.
Thus to submit us unto your commands
And humbly ask that favor at your hands.
THE WEEDING OF THE COVENT GARDEN.

Or the Middlesex-JVSTICE OF Peace.

A Facetious COMEDY.

A POSTHUME of RICHARD BROM, An Ingenious Servant, and Imitator of his Master,
that famously Renowned Poet Ben. Johnson.

Aut prodesse solent, aut delectare Poetae.

LONDON, Printed for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at the Green Dragon in
St. Paul's Churchyard: And Henry Broom at the Gun in Ivy-lane. 1658.

Upon AGLAVRA printed in Folio.
Br this large Margent did the Poet mean
To have a Comment writ upon his Scene?
Or is it that the Ladies, who never look
On any but a Poem or Play-book,
May, in each page, have space to scribble down
When such a Lord, or Fashion comes to Town.
As Swains in Almanacks account do keep,
When their Cow calv'd, and when they bought their sheep?
Ink is the life of Paper: it is meet then,
That this which escaped the Press should feel the Pen.
A Room with one side furnished, or a face
Painted halfway, is but a fair disgrace.
This great voluminous Pamphlet may be said
To be like one that has more hair then head;
More excrement then body. Trees, which sprout
With broadest leaves, have still the smallest fruit.
When I saw so much white, I did begin
To think Aglaura either did lie in,
Or else took Penance. Never did I see
(unless in Bills dashed In the Chancerie).
So little in so much; as if the feet
Of Poetry, like Law, were sold by th'sheet.
If this new fashion should but last one year,
Poets, as Clerks, would make our paper dear.
Does not the Artist err, and blast his fame
That sets out pictures lesser then the frame?
Was ever Chamberlain so mad, to dare
To lodge a child in the great Bed at Ware?
Aglaura wo^ld please better, did she lie
In The narrow bounds of an Epitomie.
Pieces that are weaved of the finest twist,
(As Silk and Plush) have still more stuff then list.
She, that in Persian habit made great brags,
Degenerates in this excess of rags;
Who, by her Giant-bulk this only gains,
Perchance in Libraries to hang in chains.
It Is not in Book, as Cloth; we never say
Make London-measure, when we buy a Play:
But rather have them paired: Those leaves be fair
To the judicious, which more spotted are.
Give me the sociable Pocket-books.
These empty Folio's only please the Cooks.
R. B.

A SONG.
A Way with all grief and give us more sack.
It Is that which we love, let love have no lack.
Nor sorrow, nor care can cross our delights,
Nor witches, nor goblins, nor Buttery sprights,
Though the candles burn dim while we can do thus,
We'll scorn to fly them: but we'll make them fly us.
Old Sack, and old Songs, and a merry old crew
Will fright away Sprights, when the ground looks blew.
A PROLOGUE.
HE that could never boast, nor seek the way,
To prepare friends to magnify his Play,
Nor rail at's Auditory for unjust,
If they not liked it nor was so mistrust.
Full ever in himself, that he besought
Preapprobation though they liked it not.
Nor ever had the luck to have his name
Clap't up above this merit. Nor the shame
To be cried down below it. He this night
Your fair and free Attention does invite.
Only he prays no prejudice be brought
By any that beforehand wish it naught.
And that ye all be pleased to hear and see,
With Candor suiting his Integrity.
That for the Writer. Something we must say,
Now in defense of us, and of the Play
We shall present no Scandal or Abuse,
To virtue or to honor. Nor traduce
Person of worth. Nor point at the disgrace
Of any one residing in the Place,
On which our Scene is laid, nor any Action show,
Of thing has there been done, for ought we know.
Though it be probable that such have been.
But if some vicious persons be brought in.
As no new Buildings, nor the strongest hold
Can keep ou^ Rats and Vermin bad and bold.
Let not the sight of such be ill endured;
All sores are seen and searched before the are cured.
As Ruffian, Bawd, and the licentious crew,
Too apt to pester Scituations new.
Another Prologue.
It Is not amiss ere we begin our Play,
TO entreat you, that you take the same surveigh
Into your fancy, as our Poet took,
Of Covent Garden, when he wrote his Book.
Some ten years since, when it was grown with weeds.
Not set, as now it is, with Noble Seeds.
Which make the Garden glorious. And much
Our Poet craves and hopes you will not grutch
It him, that since so happily his Pen
Foretold its fair emprovement, and that men
Of worth and honor should renown the place.
The Play may still retain its former grace.
To my LORD of Newcastle, on his PLAY called THE VARIETY. He having commanded
to give him my true opinion of it.
My Lord,
I Could not think these seven years, but that I
In part a Poet was, and so might lie,
By the Poetic License. But I find
Now I am none, and strictly am confined
To truth, if therefore I subpaena'd were
Before the Court of Chancerie to swear.
Or if from thence I should be higher sent,
And on my life unto a Parliament
Of wit and judgment, there to certify
What I could say of your VARIETY:
I would depose each Scene appeared to me
An Act of wit, each Act a Comedy,
And all was such, to all that understood,
As knowing Johnson, swore By God 'twas good.
R. B.

The Actors Names.
Rooksbill, a great Builder in Covent Garden. Crossewill, a Country Gentleman,
Lodger in his Buildings. Cockbrain, a Justice of Peace, the Weeder of the
Garden. Nicholas. Young Gentlemen. Rooksbills son. Gabriel. Crossewills elder
son. Mihil. Cross. younger son. Anthony. Cockbraines son. Mun Clotpoll, a
foolish Gull. Driblow, Captain of the Philoblathici. Belt, Crossewills Servant.
Ralph, Dorcas Servant. A Citizen. A Parson. A Tailor. A Shoemaker. A Vintner. A
Drawer. Pig, Damaris Servant.
Women Actors.
Lucie, Rooksbills daughter. Katharine, Crossewills daughter. Dorcas, alias
Damaris, Croswills Niece. Margerie Howlet, a Bawd. Bettie. Two Punks.
Francisca. A Laundresse.
THE COVENT GARDEN Weeded.
ACT. I.
SCENE I.
Cockbrayne, Rookes-bill. Cock. I Marry Sir! This is something like! These
appear like Buildings! Here Is Architecture expressed indeed! It is a most sightly
situation, and fit for Gentry and Nobility.


Rook. When it is all finished, doubtless it will be handsome.


Cock. It will be glorious: and yond magnificent Piece, the Piazzo, will excel
that at Venice, by hearsay, (I never traveled). A hearty blessing on their
brains, honors, and wealths, that are Projectors, Furtherers, and Performers
of such great works. And now I come to you Mr. Rookesbill: I like your Row of
houses most incomparably. Your money never shone so on your Counting-boards, as
in those Structures.


Rook. I have pil'd up a Leash of thousand pounds in walls and windows there.


Cock. It will all come again with large increase.

And better is your money thus let out on red and white, then upon black and
white, I say. You cannot think how I am taken with that Row! How even and
straight they are! And so are all indeed. The Surveyor (what e're he was) has
manifested himself the Master of his great Art. How he has wedded strength to
beauty; state to uniformity; commodiousnesse with perspicuity! All, all as't
should be!


Rook. If all were as well tenanted and inhabited by worthy persons.


Cock. Phew; that will follow. What new Plantation was ever peopled with the
better sort at first; nay, commonly, the lewdest blades, and naughtypacks are
either necessitated to 'hem, or else do prove the most forward venturers. Is
not lime and hair the first in all your foundations? do we not soil or dung
our lands, before we sow or plant any thing that is good in 'hem? And do not
weeds creep up first in all Gardens? and why not then in this? which never was
a Garden until now; and which will be the Garden of Gardens, I foresee't. And
for the weeds in it, let me alone for the weeding of them out. And so as my
Reverend Ancestor Justice Adam Overdoe, was wont to say, In Heavens name and
the Kings, and for the good of the Commonwealth I will go about it.


Rook. I would a few more of the Worshipful hereabouts, (whether they be in
Commission or not) were as well minded that way as you are Sir; we should then
have all sweet and clean, and that quickly too.


Cock. I have thought upon a way for it, Mr. Rooksbill: and I will pursue it,
viz. to find out all the enormities, yet be my self unspied: whereby I will
tread out the spark of impiety, whilst it is yet a spark and not a flame; and
break the egg of a mischief, whilst it is yet an egg and not a Cockatrice.
Then doubt not of worthy tenants for your houses Mr. Rooksbill.


Rook. I hope, Sir, your best furtherance.


Cock. I had a letter bur last night from a worthy friend, a West-countrey
Gentleman, that is, now coming up with his family to live in Town here; and
desire is to inhabit in these buildings. He was to lie at Hammersmith last
night, and requested an early meeting of me this morning here, to assist him in
the taking of a house. It is my business hither; for he could never do it
himself. He has the oldest touchy, wrangling humor. -- But in a harmless
way; for he hurts no body, and pleases himself in it. His children have all the
trouble of it, that do anger him in obeying him sometimes. You will know him
anon. I mean, he shall be your Tenant. And luckily he comes.

Enter Croswill, Gabriel, Katherine, Belt.
Cross. It is not enough you tell me of obedience. Or that you are obedient. But
I will be obeyed in my own way. Do you see --

(to Gab. and Ka.)
Cock. My noble friend Mr. Croswill, right happily met.


Cross. Your troublesome friend Mr. Cockbrayne.


Cock. No trouble at all, Sir, though I have prevented yours in finding a fit
house for you.


Cross. You have not have you, ha?


Cock. Actum est Mr. Croswill. But Civility pardon me, Is not this your
daughter?

Kiss.
Cross. All the Shee-things I have: and would I were well rid of her too.


Cock. Sweet Mrs. Katherine, Welcome -- Mr. Gabriel, I take it.


Gab. Gabriel Croswill is my name.


Cock. But where is your younger son Mihill? There Is a spark!


Cross. A Spark! A dunce I fear by this time like his brother Sheepshead there.


Gab. Gabriel is my proper name.


Gros. I have not seen him this Twelve-moneth, since I chamber'd him a Student
here in Town.


Cock. In town, and I not know it?


Cross. He knows not yet of my coming neither, nor shall not, till I steal upon
him; and if I find him mopish like his brother, I know what I will do.


Cock. Have you not heard from him lately?


Cross. Yes, often by his letters, less I could read more comfort in 'hem. I
fear he is turned Precisian, for all his Epistles end with Amen; and the-matter
of 'hem is such as if he could teach me to ask him blessing.


Rook. A comfortable hearing of a young man.


Cross. Is it so Sir? but I Will new mould him if it be so. -- I Will tell you Mr.
Cockbrayne; never was such a father so crossed in his children. They will not
obey me in my way. I grant, they do things that other fathers would rejoice at.
But I will be obeyed in my own way, dee see. Here Is my eldest son. Mark how
he stands, as if he had learned a posture at Knights-bridge spittle as we came
aloug while-eare. He was not only borne without wit, but with an obstinate
resolution, never to have any. I mean, such wit as might become a Gentleman.


Cock. Was that resolution borne in him think you.


Cross. It could never grow up in him still as it does else. When I would have
him take his horse, and follow the dogs, and associate Gentlemen, in hawking,
hunting, or such like exercises, he will run you a foot five mile another way, to
meet the brethren of the separation, at such exercises as I never sent him to
(I am sure) on worky days. And whereas most Gentlemen run into other men's
books, in hands that they care not who reads, he has a book of his own
Short-writing in his pocket, of such stuff as is fit for no man's reading
indeed but his own.


Gab. Surely Sir. --


Cross. Sure you are an Ass. Hold your tongue.


Gab. You are my father.


Rook. What comfort should I have, were my son such.


Cross. And he has nothing but hanged the head, as you see now, ever since
Holiday sports were cried up in the Country. And but for that, and to talk
with some of the silenced Pastors here in town about it, I should not have
drawn him up.


Rook. I would I could change a son w' you Sir.


Cross. What kind of thing is thy son? ha! do thou look like one that could
have a son fit for me to father, ha? And yet the best take both, and to
please you at all adventures, ha?


Rook. I am sure there cannot be a worse, or more debauched reprobate then mine
is living.


Cross. And is the devil too good a Master for him, think thou, ha? Wherein
can I deserve so ill at thy hands, fellow, whatever thou art, that thou
should wish me comber'd with a worse burden, when thou hear me complain
of this, ha? What is this fellow that you dare know him, Friend Cockbrayn? I
will not dwell within three parishes of him.


Rook. My tenant! Bless me from him. I had rather all my Rents were Bawdy
houses.


Cock. Think nothing of his words, he will forget all instantly. The best natured
man living.


Cross. Do thou stand like a son now that hears his father abused, ha?


Gab. I am praying for the conversion of the young man he speaks of.


Coek. Well said, Mr. Gabriel.


Cross. But by the way, where is your son Anthony? have you not heard of him
yet?


Cock. Never since he forsook me, on the discontent he took, in that he might
not marry your daughret there. And where he lives, or whether he lives or not,
I know not. I hope your davghter is a comfort to you.


Cross. Yes, in keeping her chamber whole weeks together, fullenning upon her
Samplery breech-work, when I was in hope she would have made me a Grandfather
ere now. But she has a humor, forsooth, since we put your son by her, to make
me a match-broker, her marriage-Maker; when I tell you friend, there has been
so many untoward matches of Parents making, that I have sworn she shall make
her own choice, though it be of one I hate. Make me her match-maker! Must I
obey her, or she me, ha?


Cock. I wish, with tears, my son had had her now.


Kat. Wherein Sir, (under correction do I disobey you?


Cross. In that very word, under correction, thou disobey'st me. Are you to be
under correction at these years? ha! If I have not already taught you manners
beyond the help of correction, go, seek a wiser father to mend 'hem.


Kat. Yet give me leave, dear Sir, in my excuse. --


Cross. Leave out correction then.


Kat. If I were forward as many Maidens are,
To wish a husband, must I not be sought?
I never was a Gadder: and my Mother,
Before she died, adjur'd me to be none.
I hope you will give me leave to keep your house.

Cross. La there again! How subtly she seeks dominion over me! No, huswife, No;
you keep no house of mine. I Will nestle you no longer under my wing. Are you not
fledge; I Will have you fly out I, as other men's daughters do; and keep a house
of your own if you can find it.


Gab. We had a kinswoman flew out too lately, I take it.


Cross. What tell thou me of her; wise-acres? Can they not fly out a little,
but they must turn arrant whores, ha? Tell me of your kinswoman? It Is true,
she was my Niece; she went to it a little before her time? some two years
since, and so fled from Religion; and is turned Turk, we fear. And what of
that in your precisiancial wisdom? I have such children as no man has. But (as
I was saying,) would ye top me husvvife, ha! Look you, now I chide her, she
says nothing. Is this obedience, ha?


Kat. Perhaps, I might unfortunately cast my affection on a man that would
refuse me.


Cross. That man I would desire to know; show me that man; see if I svvinge
him not dares slight my daughter.


Cock. Still the old humor, self-vvill'd, cross, and touchie; but suddenly
reconciled. Come, Mr. Croswil, to the business.


Cross. Oh, you told me of a house you had found for me.


Cock. Yes Sir. And here is the Landlord.


Cross. Does he look, or go like one could let a house worthy of me.


Cock. Sir, we have able Builders here, that will not carry least show of
their buildings on their backs. This is a rich sufficient man, I assure you,
and my friend.


Cross. I cry him heartily mercy, and embrace him. And now I note you better,
you look like Thrift it self.

Enter Dorcas above upon a Bellconie. Gabriel gazes at her. Dorcas is habited
like a Curtizan of Venice. I cannot think you will throvv away your houses at
a cast. You have a son, perhaps, that may, by the commendations you gave of
him. Lets see your house.


Cock. Come away Mr. Gabriel.


Cross. Come Sir, what do you gape and shake the head at there? I Will lay my
life he has spied the little Cross upon the new Church yond, and is at
defiance with it. Sirrah, I will make you honor the first syllable of my
name. My name is Will. Croswill, and I will have my humor. Let those that
talk of me for it, speak their pleasure, I will do mine.


Gab. I shall obey you, Sir.


Cross. Now you are in the right. You shall indeed. I Will make your heart ache
else, dee see.


Gab. But truly I was looking at that Image; that painted idolatrous image
yonder, as I take it.


Cock. O heresy! It is some Lady, or Gentlewoman standing upon her Bellconey.


Belt. Her Bellconey? Where is it? I can spy from her foot to her face, yet I
can see no Bellconey she has.


Cock. What a Knave's this: That Is the Bellconey she stands on, that which jets
out so on the forepart of the house; every house here has one of 'hem.


Belt. It Is very good; I like the jetting out of the forepart very well; it is
a gallant fashion indeed.


Cock. I guess what she is, what ere I have said. O Justice look to thine
office.


Cross. Come now to this house, and then to my son Mihil, the Spark you spoke
of. And if I find him cross too, I Will cross him: Let him look to it* Dee see.


Cock. I Will see you housed; and then about my project, which is for weeding of
this hopeful Garden. Ex. omnes.

Gabriel stays last looking up at her.
Dam. Why should not we in England use that freedom
The famous Curtezans have in Italy:
We have the art, and know the Theory
To allure and catch the wandering eyes of Lovers;
Yea, and their hearts too: but our stricter Laws
Forbids the public practice, our desires
Are high as theirs; our wills as apt and forward;
Our wits as ripe, our beauties more attractive;
Or Travelers are shrewd liars. Where Is the let?
Only in bashful coward custom, that
Stoops in the shoulders, and submits the neck
To bondage of Authority; to these Laws,
That men of feeble age and weaker eyesight
Have framed to bar their sons from youthful pleasures.
Possets and Cawdels on their queasie stomachs,
Whilst I fly out in brave rebellion;
And offer, at the least, to break these shackles
That holds our legs together: And begin
A fashion, which pursued by Cyprian Dames,
May persuade Justice to allow our Games.
Who knows? I Will try. Francisca bring my Lute.
Enter Fran. with Lute. while she is tuning her Lute: Enter Nich. Rookesbill,
Anthony in a false beard, Clotpoll.
Clot. Troth I have a great mind to be one of the Philoblathici, a Brother of
the Blade and Battoon, as you translate it; now ye have beat it into my head:
But I fear I shall never come on and off handsomely. I have metal enough
methinks, but I know not how methinks to put it out.


Nich. We Will help you out with it, and set it flying for you never doubt it.


Clot. Obotts, you mean my money metal, I mean my valor metal I.


Ant. Peace, hark.


Clot. The Other flies fast enough already.


Nic. Pox on ye peace.

Song.
Nic. O most melodious.


Clot. Most odious, Did you say? It is methinks most odoriferous.


Ant. What new devise can this be? Look!


Nic. She is vanished. Is It not the Mountebanks Wife that was here; and now come
again to play some new merry tricks by herself.


Clot. A botts on it, I never saw that Mountebank; they say, he brought the
first resort into this new plantation, and sowed so much seed of Knavery and
Cozenage here, that it is feared 'twill never out.


Nic. Nay but this creature: What can she be?


Clot. And then again, he drew such flocks of idle people to him, that the
Players, they say, cursed him abhominably.


Ant, Thou ever talk of the wrong matter.


Clot. Cry mercy Brothers of the Blade and Battoune: Do you think if I give my
endeavor to it, I shall ever learn to roar and carry it as you do, that have
it naturally, as you say.


Nic. Yes, as we'll beat it into you. But this woman, this musical woman, that
set her self out to show so, I would be satisfied in her.


Clot. And she be as able as she seems, she has in her to satisfy you, and you
were a Brother of ten Blades, and ten Battounes.


Nic. I vow -- Peace. I Will battoune thy teeth into thy tongue else; she bears a
stately presence. Thou never saw her before: Did thou Toney?


Ant. No; but I heard an inkling at the Paris Tavern last night of a
She-Gallant-that had traveled France and Italy; and that she would --


(Clot. Battoun thy teeth into thy tongue.)

write table.
Ant. Plant some of her foreign collections, the fruits of her travels, in
this Garden here, to try how they would grow or thrive on English earth.


Nic. Young Pig was speaking of such a one to me, and that she was a Mumper.


Clot. What Is that a Sister of the Scabberd, brother of the Blade?


Nic. Come, come; we will in, we will in; it is one of our fathers buildings; I Will see
the Inhabitants. Some money Clot. furnish I say, and quickly. -- I vow --


Clot. You shall, you shall.


Nic. What shall I?


Clot. Vow twice before you have it.


Nic. I vow, and I vow again, I Will coin thy brains. --


Clot. Hold, hold, take your powl money; I thought I would have my will; and
the word I look-for, I Will coin thy brains. --

write. I do not love to give my money for nothing, I have a volume of words
here, the worst of 'hem is as good as a blow; and then I save my Crown whole
half a dozen times a day, by half a crown a time, there is half in half saved by
that.


Nic. Come let us appear civil, till we have our entrance, and then as occasion
serves --

Knock. Enter Fran. Who would you speak withal?


Nic. Your Mistress, little one.


Fran. Do you know her Sir?


Nic. No; but I would know her, that is the business: I mean the musical
Gentlewoman that was fidling, and so many in the What-doe-call't even now.


Fran. What-doe-call her Sir, I pray?


Nic. What-doe-call her; it is not come to that yet, prithee let me see and
speak with her first.


Fran. You are disposed I think.


Nic. What should we do here else?


Fra. You wont thrust in upon a body whether one will or no.


Ant. Nic. Away you Monkey.


Fra. O me, What do you mean?


Clot. O my brave Philoblathici. --

Ex. omnes. Enter Dorcas, alias Damaris, Madge.
Dam. What Is the matter the Girl cries out so?


Ma. I know not: I fear some rude company, some of the wild crew are broke into
the house.


Fran. Within. Whether would you go, you wont rob the house will ye?


Nic. Will ye be quiet Whiskin?


Ma. O me it is so: Hell's broke loose; this comes of your new fingle-fangle
fashion, your prepostrous Italian way forsooth: would I could have kept my old
way of pots and pipes, and my Strong-water course for customers: The very first
twang of your fiddle guts has broke all, and conjured a legion of devils among
us.

Enter Nic. Ant. Clot.
Nic. Nay, there is but a Leash of us. How now?
Who have we here? Are these the far traveled Ladies?
O thou party perpale, or rather parboild Bawd.

Mad. What shall I do? Dam. Out alas; sure they are devils indeed.


Nic. Art thou traveled cross the Seas from the Bankside hither, old Countess
of Codpiece-row?


Clot. Party perpale and parboild Bawd. --

Write.
Ant. And is this the Damsel that has been in France and Italy? Clot.
Codpiece-row.


Mad. Peace ye roaring Scabs: I Will besworn she supt at Paris Tavern last night,
and lay not long ago at the Venice by Whitefryers Dock.


Nic. Prithee what is she Madge?


Mad. A civil Gentlewoman you see she is.


Nic. She has none of the best faces: but is she warrantable; I have not had a
civil night these three months.


Madge. Nor none are like to have here, I assure you.


Nic. O Madge how I do long thy thing to ding didle ding.


Mad. O Nick, I am not in the humor, no more is she to be of the merry pin now;
I am sure her case is too lamentable. But if you will all sit down, I Will give
you a bottle of wine, and we will relate her story to you, so you will be civil.
Nic. Well for once, I care not if we be.

A Table bottle, light, and Tobacco stales. Let us set to it then; sit down
brother Toney, sit down Gentlewoman, we shall know your name anon, I hope it
will fall in your story; sit down Clotpoll.


Clot. You will call me brother Clotpoll too when I have taken my oath, and
paid my entrance into the faternity of the Blade and the Battoun.


Nic. It Is like we shall. Now Lady of the Stygian Lake, thou black infernal
Madge, begin the dismal story, whilst I begin the bottle.


Mad. This Gentlewoman whose name is Damyris.


Nic. Damyris stay. Her nickname then is Dammy, so we may call her when we
grow familiar: and to begin that familiarity, Dammy here is to you. -- drink.


Dam. And what is your nickname I pray Sir?


Nic. Nick: only Nick, Madge there knows it.


Dam. Then I believe your name is Nicholas.


Nic. I vow-witty. Yes Dammy, and my Surname is Rookesbill, and so is my
Fathers too: and what do you make o'that?


Dam. Nothing not I Sir: sure this is he.


Nic. And I would he were nothing, so I had all he has: I must have the other
glass to wash him out of my mouth, he furs it worse then Mondongas Tobacco.
Here old Madge, and to all the birds that shall wonder at thy howletship, when
thou rid'st in an Ivy-bush, called a Cart.


Mad. Well mad Nick, I Will pledge thee in hope to see as many flutter about the
tree, that thou shall clime backwards.


Nic. A pox thou will be stifled with Offal and Carret leaves before that day.


Dam. Fie, fie, what talk's this? it is he I am consident.


Mad. These are our ordinary complements, we wish no harm.


Nic. No Dammy I vow, not I to any breathing.


Mad. But your Father Nick. -- Is he that Rookesbill. --


Nic. But my Fathet; Pox rot ye, why do ye put me in mind of him again, he
sticks i'my throat, now I Will wash him a little further. -- Here Brother Toney


Ant. Gramercy Brother Nick.


Clot. And to all the brothers that are, and are to be of the Blade and the
Battoun.


Nic. There said you well Clotpoll: Here it is --

Drink. Mad. sets away the Bottle.
Mad. I would but have asked you whether your Father were that Rookesbill that
is called the great Builder.


Nic. Yes marry is it he forsooth; he has built I know not how many houses
hereabout, though he goes Dammy as if he were not worth a groat; and all his
clothes I vow are not worth this hilt, except those he wears, and prays for
fair weather in, on my Lord Mayors Day; and you are his Tenant, though perhaps
you know it not, and may be mine; therefore use me well: for this house and the
rest I hope will be mine, as well as I can hope he is mortal, of which I must
confess I have been in some doubt, though now I hope again, he will be the
first shall lay his bones in the new Church, though the Churchyard be too good
for him before it is consecrated. So give me the to-the cup, for now he offends
my stomach. Here Is to thee now Clotpoll.


Clot. And to all the Sisters of the Scabberd Brother in Election. Dee hear,
Pray talk of his father no more, for the next brings him to the belly-work, and
then he will drink him quite through him.


Mad. And so we shall have a foul house.


Ant. No he shall stick there. Now to the story Gentlewoman, 'twas that we sat
for.


Nic. I to the story, I vow I had almost forgot it; and I am the worst at Sack
in a morning: Dear Dammy to the story.


Dam. Good Sir my heart's too full to utter't.


Nic. Troth and my head's too full to hear it: But I Will go out and quarrel with
some body to settle my brains, then go down to Mich. Crossewill to put him in
mind of our meeting to day; then if you will meet me at the Goat at Dinner,
we will have it all at large.


Dam. Will you be there indeed Sir, I would speak with you seriously.


Nic. Dammy if I be not, may my father out live me.


Ant. We both here promise you he shall be there by noon.


Clot. 'Lady, it is sworn by Blade and by Battoun.


Nic. This will be the bravest discovery for Mihill, the new Italian Bona Roba
Catsoe.


Mad. Why so sad on the sudden Niece.


Dam. But do you think he will come as he has promised.


Mad. He never breaks a promise with any of us' though he fail all the honest
part of the world: But I trust you are not taken with the Ruffian, you will nere
get penny by him.

Exeunt Nic. Anth. and Clodp.
Dam. I prithee peace, I care not.

Enter Rafe.
Ra. But Mystris, rhere is a Gallant now below, a Gingle boy indeed, that has
his pockets full of, crowns that chide for vent. Shall I call him up to you.


Dam. I will see no man.


Mad. How Is that? I hope you jest.


Dam. Indeed, I hope you jest.


Mad. You will not hinder the house, I hope. Marry heigh. This were a humor
and 'twould last. Go fetch him up.


Dam. I Will fly then out at window. Nay, by this steel it is true.


Mad. What Is the matter? have I got a mad woman into the house. What do you go
about to break me the first day of your coming, before you have hansell'd a
Couch or a Bedside in it. Were you but now all o'th heigh to set your self out
for a sign with your fiddle cum twang, and promise such wonders, forsooth, and
will not now be seen. Pray what is the Riddle.


Dam. I Will tell thee all anon. Prithie excuse me. I know thy share of his sins
bounty would not come to thus much, take it, I give it thee. And prithee let me
be honest till I have a mince to be otherwise, and I Will hinder thee nothing.


M^d. Well, I Will dismiss the Gallant, and send you, Sirrah, for another wench.
I Will have Besse Bufflehead again. This kicksy wincy Giddibrain will spoil all
I Will no more Italian tricks. --

Ex. with Rafe Thus some have by the frenzy of despair
Fumously run into the sea to throw
Their wretched bodies, but when come near
They saw the billows rise, heard Boreas blow,
And horrid death appearing on the Maine,
A sudden fear has sent them back again.

Act. II.
Scaen. I.
Enter Mihill. Tailor. Shoemaker. Mi. NAy, but honest Shoemaker; thy honest
price.


Sho. I tell you intruth, Sir, it is as good a boot as ever you pulled on in
your life.


Mi. A little too straight, I doubt. What do you think of my boots honest
Tailor.


Tay. They do exceeding handsomely, never trust me Sir.


Mi. Never fear it Tailor, you shall trust me, and please you.


Tay. You are pleasant Sir.


Mi. And what do you think of my suite Shoemaker? can you say as much for the
Tailor as he for you.


Sho. A very neat suite, Sir, and becomes you excellent.


Mi. Honest men both, and hold together; one would little think you were so
near neighbors. Well, you, have fitted me both, I must confess. But how I
shall fit you, now there is the point.


Tay. There Is but one way for than and please you.


Sho. With paying us our money Sit.


Mi. Still both in a tale, I can not but commend your neighborhood, I muse my
Laundresse stays, I sent her three or four ways for moneys. But do not you
stay for that. I have ways enough to pay you. I have ploughes a going that you
dream not of.


Tay. No indeed, Sir, we dream of nothing but ready money, sleeping or waking.


Mi. I shall be rich enough never fear't. I have a venture in the new soap
business man.


Tay. We are but servants, Sir. And our Masters themselves have no faith, in
flippery projects.


Sho. Besides, the women begin to grumble against that slippery project
shrewdly, and, it is feared, will mutiny sho tly.


Mi. Burlakin, and they may prove more troublesome then a commotion of Sailors.

Enter Laundresse. O welcome, Laundresse, where is the money.


Laun. Not a penny of money, Sir, can I get. But here is one come to town has
brought you enough, and you can have grace to finger it.


Mi. Who Is that I prithee.


Laun. Your father, your father Sir. I met his man by great chance, who told me
his Master means to steal upon you presently, and take you as he finds you.


Mi. Is he come up with his cross tricks. I hea^d he was to come. And that he
means to live here altogether. He has had an aim these dozen years to live in
town here, but never was fully bent on it until the Proclamation of restraint
spurred him up. It Is such a Crossewill. Well, he is my father, and I am utterly
undone if thou help'st me not now at a pinch, at a pinch, dear Laundresse. Go
borrow me a Gown, and some four or five Law Books? for, I protest, mine are in
Duck-lane. Nay, trudge, sweet Laundresse, trudge. -- Ex. Laun. Honest Tailor
and Shoemaker convey your selves away quietly, and I Will pay you to morrow, as I
am a Gentleman:


Shoe. As I am a Shoemaker, and that is a kind of a Centleman, you know, I Will
not stir till I have my money, I am not an Ass Sir.


Mi. No body says thou art.


Shoe. I have had too many such tricks put upon me in my days.


Mi. A trick! as I hope for money it is no trick.


Shoe. Well Sir, trick or no trick. I must have my money or my boots, and
that is plain dealing.


Mi. A pox of the boots, so my legs were out of 'hem. Would they were i'thy
throat, spurs and all, you will not out.


Shoe. No marry will we not.


Tay. Well-said Shoemaker, I commend thee, thou have a better heart then I,
though my stomack's good.

Enter Laundresse.
Mi. O well said, my good Laundresse. How am I bound to thee; yet all this
wo'not do it Laundresse. Thou must bestir thy stumps a little further, and
borrow me a couple of Gowns more for these Rascals here that will not away.


Laun. How! wo'not away? And they were well served, they would be thrust out of
doors for saucie companions. Your Masters would not put a Gentleman to his
trumps thus.


M;. Nay, svveet Laundresse, restrain thy tongue, and stretch thy feet. A
couple of Govvns, good Laundresse, and forget not caps. Ex. If I do now
furnish you like Civil Lawyers, and you do not keep your countenances; if ever
you do but peep in at the Hall-door at Christmas to see the revels, I Will have
you set in the stocks for this believe it.


Sho. If you do, Sir, I may hap be even with you before the year comes about,
and set you in our stocks for it.


Tay. But will you make Lawyers of us.


Mi. Have you a mind to have your money you unbelieving Rascals.


Shoc. I see your drift, and hope you will prove an honest Gentleman.


Mi. Thou have some hope, though no faith nor trust in any man.


Shoe. Alas, Sir, our Masters sit at grear rents, and keep great families.


Mi. I cry you mercy, they are removed into the new plantation here, where,
they say, are a tribe of Infidel-tradesmen, that have made a Law within your
selves to put no trust in Gentlemen. But bear your selves handsomely here you
were best. I am acquainted with a crew that haunts about your habitations,
with whom I will join, and so batter your windows one of these nights else.
-- O welcome, Laundresse, how do thou toil for me.


Laun. Your fathers talking, as I am a woman, below. -- As thou art a woman
below, well-said. Come on with these Gowns, and lets see how yow'll look. If
we had time, the Shoemaker should wash his face; but seeing there is no remedy;
pull the cap in your eyes, and good enongh. Now Laundresse, set us stools, and
leave us.


Laun. I hear him coming up.

Ex.
Mi. Now let him come, we are ready for him. Shoemaker, keep your hand
underneath the book, that the pitch do not discover you.


Sho. I warrant you, Sir.


Mi. And Tailor, be sure you have no Needle on your sleeve, nor thread about
your neck.


Tay. I warrant you too for me, Sir.


Mi: He Is enrred.

Enter Croswill, Belt, and stand aside.
Mi. Remitter, I say, is where a man has two titles, that is to say, one of an
elder, the other of a later. And he comes to the land by the later title; yet
the Law adjudgeth him to be in by the force of the elder title. If the tenant
in the tail discontinee the tail, and after he diseaseth his discontinue, and
so dies seized, whereby the tenants descend to their issue, as to his Cousin
inheritable by force of the tail. In this case the tenants descend, who have
right by force of the tail, a Remitter in the tail taken for that in the Law,
shall put and adjudge him to be in by force of descent. Pox on ye, speak
something good or bad, somewhat.


Sho. The Remitter, you say, is seized in the tail.


Mi. Excellent Shoemaker, I say so, and again, I say, that if the tenant in the
tail in feoffe his son, or his Cousin, inheritable by force of the tail, the
which son or cousin at the time of the feoffment is within age, and after the
tenant in the tail dierh, this is a Remitter to the heir in the tail to whom
the feoffment is made, now Tailor.


Tay. Think you so, Sir.


Mi. Look either Fitzherbert, Perkins, or Dier, and you shall find it in the
second part of Richard Cordelyon. So much for Remitter. Now I Will put a plain
homespun case, as a man may say, which we call a moot-case.


Sho. I pray do Sir.


Cross. Some father might take joy of such a son now. This takes not me. No,
this is not my way.


Mi. The case is this

(aside) pull up your grounds closer and behang'd, you are a Tailor, and you: a
Shoemaker.


Sho. And you owe us money.


Mi. I put the case, I do, to you for a suit of clothes.


Tay. Well.


Mi. And to you for a pair of boots.


Sho. True.


Mi. I have broke my day with you both. Suppose so.


Both. Very well, we do.


Mi. You clap a Sergeant of my back. I put in bail, remove it, and carry it up
into the upper Court, with habeas-Corpus; bring it down again into the lower
Court with procedendo; then take it from thence, and bring it into the Chancery
with a Certiorari; I; and if you look not to ^t, bring it out of the Chancery
again, and thus will I keep you from your money till your suite and your boots
be worn out before you recover penny of me.


Sho. S^ly'd but you shall not, your father shall know all first.


Mi. S'foot Shoemaker will thou be an Ass. I do but put a case, Have you not
feen it tried.


Tay. Yes, very often.


Cross. Away with books. Away with Law. Away with madness. I, God bless thee,
and make thee his servant, and defend thee from Law, I say. Take up these
books, sarrah, and carry them presently into Paul's Churchyard dee see, and
change them all for Histories, as pleasant as profitable; Arthur of Britain,
Primalion of Greece, Amadis of Gaul, and such like de see.


Mi. I hope he does but jest.


Cross. And do you hear, Sirrah.


Belt. I Sir.


Cross. Get Bells work, and you can, into the bargain.


Belt. Which Bell, Sir? Adam Bell, with Clim ^'th' Clough, and William of
Cloudesley.


Cross. Adam Bell you Ass? Valiant Bell that killed the Dragon.


Belt. You mean St. George.


Cross. Sir Jolthead, do I not. I Will teach you to chop logic, with me.


Mi. Sfoot, how shall I answer my borrowed books? Stay Belt. Pray Sir, do not
change my books.


Cross. Sir, Sir, I will change them and you too: Did I leave thee here to learn
fashions and manners, that thou might carry thy self like a Gentleman, and
do thou wast thy brains in learning a language that I understand not a word
of? ha! I had been as good have brought thee up among the wild Irish.


Mi. Why alas Sir, Had I not better keep my self within my Chamber, at my
Study, then be rioting abroad, wasting both money and time, which is more
precious then money? if you did know the inconvenience of company, you would
rather encourage and commend my retired life, then any ways dehort me from it.


Cross. Why Sir did not I keep company think you when I was young? Ha!


Ml. Yes Sir; but the times are much altered, and youth more corrupted now,
they did not drink and wench in those days, but nay, o it is abominable in
these.


Cross. Why this is that I feared, the boys turning meacock too, after his
elder brother, 'twas time to look to him.

Nick. Rookesbill. Ant. Clotp.
Nich. Why Croswill Mich. What, not up yet and behang'd. Or ha ye a wench a bed
wye. Is this keeping your home. Mihil runs to the door and holds it.


Mi. Sfoot the Rogue Rooksbil and his crew, I feared as much.


Nic. Break open the door, let me come to it.


Mi. Forbear, or behang'd, you will undo me, my father's here. I Will meet you
anon as I am honest.


Nic. Your father's a Clowterdepouch. Nay, I will come then, what Mademoiselle
do you call father.

They Enter.
Mi. You would not believe me. Pray be civil.


Ant. It Is so, we will Cry mercy, you are busy, we will not moote to day then?


Mi. I hope you may excuse me, I Will be w'ye anon.


Nic. Come to the Goat Capricorn. We have the bravest new discovery.

Ex.
Cross. How now! what are these?


Mi. They are Gentlemen of my standing, Sir, that have a little over-studied
themselves, and are somewhat --.


Cross. Mad; are they not? And so will you be shortly, if you follow these
courses. Mooting do they call it? you shall moote nor mute here no longer.
Therefore on with your cloak and sword, follow me to the Tavern and leave me
such long-tail'd company as these are, for I do not like them.


Mi. No more do I, Sir, if I knew how to be rid of 'hem.


Cross. I think thou have never a sword, have thou, ha?


Mi. Yes Sir.


Cross. Where is it, Sir, let me se't Sir.


Mi. It Is here, under mybed, Sir. -- Reach it.


Cross. Why there is a Lawyers trick right, make his weapon companion with his
Pisse-pot. Fie, fie, here is a tool indeed. There Is money, Sir, buy you a good
one, one with the Mathematical hilt as they term it.


Mi. It would do better in Mathematical books* Sir, offer me no money, pray
Sir, but for books.


Cross. Go to, you are a peevish Jack, do not provoke me: do not you owe me
obedience? ha!


Mi. Yes Sir, I acknowledge it.


Cross. It Is good you do. Well, take that money; and put your self into
clothes befitting your rank, Do so. And let me see you, squirting about
without a weapon, like an Attorneys Clerk in Tearm-time, and I Will weapon you,
What, shall I have a Noddie of you. This frets him to the liver. Go to, never
hang the head for the matter. For I tell thee I will have it so, and herein be
known what I am.

[Aside
Mi. You are known sufficiently for your cross humor already; in which I Will
try you if I can make you double this money, for this will not serve my turn.


Cross. What have you told it after me, you had best weigh it too.


Mi. No Sir, but I have computed that for my present use, here is too much by
half, pray Sir, take half back.


Cross. Body of me, what a perverse knave is this, to cross me thus! Is there
too much, say you? ha^


Mi. Yes truly, sir.


Cross. Let me see it. Go thy ways, take thy musty books, and rhy rustie whittle
here again. And take your foolish plodding dunci-coxcomely course, till I look
after you again. Come away sirrah.

Ex. with Belt.
Mi. Sfoot, who is the Gull now? Tailor, Shoemaker, you may go pawn your Gowns
for any money I am like to have.


Shoo. We have all played the Lawyers to pretty purpose, in pleading all this
while for nothing. Well sir, to avoid further trouble, I am content to
withdravv my action, that is, pull off your boots again, and be jogging.


Tail. And for my part, sir, I can do no less then take you by default and
nonsuit you.

Enter Belt.
Mi. Very good Lawyers both, Is my father quite gone Belt?


Belt. Gone in a tempest of high displeasure, sir: And has sent you here all
the money he had about him; and bids you refuse it if you dare, it is above
twice the sum he offered you before; but good sir, do not refuse it. He
svvears he will try whether you or he shall have his will. Take heed you
cross him not too much.


Mi. Well at thy request, because thou shall not have anger for carrying it
back again, I will accept.


Belt. I thank you Sir. Consider, he is your father, sir.


Mi. I do most Reverend Belt. and would be loath to cross him, although I may
as much in taking his money as refusing it, for ought I know, for thou
knovv'st it is his custom to cross me, and the rest of his children in all we
do, to try and urge his obedience; it is an odd way: therefore to help my self
I seem to covet the things that I hate, and he pulls them from me; and makes
show of loathing the things I covet, and he hurles them doubly at me, as now in
this money.


Belt. Are you so crafty?


Mi. Yes, but do thou put it in his head, and I Will pick out thy brains.


Belt. You never knew an old Serving-man treacherous to his young Master: what?
to the hopes of the house; you will be heir, that is questionless: for to your
comfort, your elder brother grows every day more fool then the other. But now
the rest of the message is, that you make haste, and come to my Master to the
Goat in Covent Garden, where he dines with his new Landlord to day.


Mi. He has taken a house then.


Belt. O, a most delicate one, with a curious Belconee and all belonging to it
most stately.


Mi. At the Goat does he dine, say thou.


Belt. Yes sir.


Mi. My crew are gone thither too. Pray Mars we fall not foul of one
another. Well, go thy way, present my duty to him, I Will follovv presently.
Tell him I took his money with much unvvillingnesse.


Belt. As Lawyers do their fees. Let me alone sir.

Ex.
Mi. Well Tailor and Shoemaker; you have put me to it, but here is your money.


Shoo. 'Twas for that we did put you to it Sir.


Mi. Let Us see your biil Tailor


Tai. Here it is, sir, as ready as a Watchmans.


Mi. Then good words will pass it, 7 li. 4. sh. tell your money; yours is 14
sh. boots and Galloshes. There it is and 12. d. to drink.


Shoo. I thank your worship.


Mi. Are you right Tailor.


Tai. Yes and please you Sir.


Mi. There Is a shilling for you too, to spend in bread.


Shoo. He knows both our diets. We'll make bold to take leave of your worship.


Mi. Not so bold as I Am glad I Am too well rid of you, most courteous Gentlemen.

Ex. Ta. Sh. To see what money can do; that can change men's manners, alter
their conditions: how tempestuous the slaves were without it. O thou powerful
metal! what authority is in thee! Thou art the Key to all men's mouths. With
thee a man may lock up the jaws of an informer, and without thee he cannot the
lips of a Lawyer.

Ex.
Scoen. II.
Enter Crossewill, Rookesbill, Gabriel, Katherine, Lucy. Cross. Down boy, and
bid the Cook hasten dinner.


Dra. What will you please to drink in the mean time, sir.


Cross. I will not drink in the mean time, sir, Get you gone.


Dra. A fine old humorous Gentleman.


Cross. Hold up your head, Sirrah, and leave your precise folly. I Will leave you
to the wild world else, dee see. Is the name of a Tavern so odious to you? Ha.
Your brother has vexed me sufficiently already, and perhaps he will refuse to
come too! If he dares let him. Welcome Mr. Rooksbil, welcome Landlord, and your
fair daughter, welcome pretty one. Trust me a pretty one indeed, pray be
acquainted with my daughter there. In your Maiden-company, I hope she will not
think the Tavern such a bugs neast as she did. I had much ado to draw my
rebellious children to the Tavern after me.


Rook. And truly, sir, it is the first to my knowledge that e're my daughter
came into.


Cross. All in good time, she may increase in virtue. But if it be a fault, (as
in my conscience in his thought it is a great transgression) my unsetlednesse,
and unprovidednesse else, where or how to entertain a friend, or feed my self,
may well excuse us all, dee see.


Rook. O Sir, I cannot enough admire that virtue in your son.


Cross. It is a vice, as much a vice or more, as is your sons, your cast-aways
as you call him, that sucks no other ai^e, then that of Tavernes, Taphouses,
Brothels, and such like. I would their extreme qualities could meet each other
at halfway, and so mingle their superfluities of humor unto a mean betwixt
'hem. It might render them both allowable subjects, where now the one's a
firedrake in the air, and the other a mandrake in the earth, both mischievous,
see how he stands like a mole-catcher. What dirty dogged humor was I in when
I got him troe?


Rookes. Hovve're his carriage seems distasteful unto you, I could afford
(with your allowance, to make conditions of estate agreeable) to give all
that is mine to him with my daughter.

[Aside
Cross. What a mechanic slave is this, to thank a son of mine, hovve're I
under-rate him, a fit mate to mingle blood with his moore-ditch breed. True,
his estate is great, I understand it, but of all foul I love not Moor-hens.
Such another motion would stir me to roar him down the tavernstairs.


Rooks. What do you think on it sirs.


Cross. Heaven grant me patience.


Rooks. Will you consider of it Master Crossewill.


Cross. I was never so put to it. I wish we had a stickler. I muse that Master
Cockbrayne stays thus.


Rooks. You do not mind my motion sir.


Cross. Uds precious I mind nothing, I am so crossed in mind thar I can mind
nothing, nor I will mind nothing, dee see. Why comes not Mr. Cockbrayue, Ha!


Rooks. Yet you mind him it seems. But he, sir, cannot come, and desires you
to hold him excused. He Is gone about some special undertaking, for the good of
the Commonwealth, he says.


Cross. Fart for his undertaking; all the world is bent to cross me. What is my
young Master come? ha!

Enter Belt.
Belt. My young Master Mr. Mihil will be here presently, he said he would
follow me at heels, sir.


Cross. And why not come before you, sir. Does he not think that I have waited
long enough, sir? sure I Will cross some body under that knaves pate of yours,
d'y'fee.


Belt. Thus when any body angers him, I am sure to hear on it.


Cross. So now my spleen is a little palliated, let me speak with you Mr.
Rooksbill. Get you down, Sirrah; and bring me word, dinner is not ready, and
I Will give you as much more, do you see.


Belt. That Is his way to his stomach.


Kat. And is your brother that your father says is so ungracious, so well
acquainted with my brother Mihil, say you.


Luc. Oh all in all, he is not so familiar with any man, if Mihil Croswill be
your brother, as it is manifest.


Kat. I would not that my father knew it, for all I can expect from him but his
blessing, but does your father know it?


Luc. No, I would not he should mistrust it for all he has, blessing and all;
and now that I have found you love your brother fo well, I will make over my
reason and my counsel in trust with you, hoping you will not wrong that trust.


Kat. If I do, may the due price of treachery be my reward.


Luc. I love your brother, Lady, and he loves me. The only good act that ever
my brother did, was to bring us acquainted, and is indeed all that he has to
live on. For I do succor him with many a stolen piece for the felicity he
brought me in your brothers love. Now, my father, whose irreconcilable hate
has for ever discarded my brother, should he but dream of their acquaintance,
would poison all my hopes.


Kat. But let me ask you, is there an hope betwixt you and my brother ever to
come together?


Luc. Yes, and a way he has for^t, which I understand not yet.


Kat. Trust me, I pity you both, your case is very dangerous.


Luc. Love's above all adventures, the more hard the achievement is, the
sweeter the reward.


Kat. I like her spirit well.


Cross. You Sir, come hither, what is hammering in your head now?

Is It not some Synodical question to put unto the brethren, concerning
Whitsonales and Maygames? ha!


Gab. Surely sir, I was premeditating a fit thanksgiving to be rendered before
meat in. Tavernes, according to the present occasion which the time and place
administreth, and that as the spirit shall enable me, shall be delivered before
you in due season.


Cross. I am glad I know your mind; for that trick, my zealous son, you shall
come in at half-dinner, like a Chafing Dish of coals, when the sauce is cold,
to make use of the heat of your spirit; d ye see. I love not meat twice dressed.


Rook. Good sir, put the Proposition to him, that I made my affection to him,
urges it more and more, I never was so taken with a man.


Cross. But what is that to your daughter? ha!


Rook. The same affection governes her, she is not mine else.


Cross Well, hold your peace, and was that your spiritual meditation?


Gab. Yes, verily.


Cross. Come Sir, at this Gentleman's request I will now put a question to you
concerning the flesh. What, think you of yond Virgin there his daughter? can
you affect her so well as to wish her to be your wedded wife?


Gab. You mean, elpoused in holy Matrimony.


Cross. Yes, I mean so.


Gab. hum hum hum Psalm tune. How happy.


Cross. But do thou say, yes verily to that, and as I hope to have peace in my
grave. I Will break the Kings peace on thy pate presently.


Gab. It is a weighty question, and requires due premeditation in a religious
answer, pray give me leave to take advice --


Rook. What says he, Sir?


Cross. He says he will talk with a cunning man about her.


Rook. Sure you mistake him, sir.


Vint. You are welcome, Gentlemen. Will. Harry, Zachary.

Goat names.
Gab. Zachary is a good name.


Vint. Where are you? he (rings the bell) show up into the Phoenix. Is the
Checque empty?


Cross. Hoyday, here is a din.


Draw. A pottle of Canarie to the Dolphin, score.


Vint. Y' are welcome, Gentlemen, take up the lillie-pot.

[Knock
Draw. Half a dozen of clean pipes and a candle for the Elcphant. They take
their own Tobaccho.

Pots fly clink.
Vint, Whose room do they foul Sirrah, Harry, Harry?

(Bell)
Gab. Do Elephants take Tobaccho?


Vint. Carry up a Jordan for the Maidenhead, and a quart of white muskadine for
the blew Bore.

Run down the stairs.
Cross. Now me thinks, the muskadine for tht Maidenhead, and the Jordan for the
Bore were better.

Fiddlers below tuning. Knock above, and a pot thrown. Why boys, drawer,
rogues, take up, (below) By and by, by and by, (above) Wine, Tobaccho.


Cross. What variety of noises is here? and all excellent ill sounds. (Above)
Call up the Fiddlers, Sirrah.


Gab. Such cries as these went forth before the desolation of the great City.

[Fidling rude tunes. O profane tinkling the cymbals of Satan; that tickle the
care with vanity, to lift up the mind to lewdness. Mine ears shall be that of
the Adder against the Song of the Serpent.


Rook. O rare, in a young man!


Gab. I will roar out aloud to drown your Incantations. Yea, I will set out a
throat even as the beast that belloweth.


Rook. Most happy youth!


Cross. Hold your peace, Sirrah, or I Will make you bellow for something.

Enter Mihil, Nick.
Mi. Sfoot-back, Nick to your own room. Thy father's here too, as I breath.


Nick. I vow?

Ex.
Mi. My Lucie too, as I live. How the devil got they acquainted? Sure he is his
Landlord It Is so.


Cross. Dare you come, sir, you should have stayed now till you had been sent
for.


Mi. Verily, sir.


Cross. Are you at your Verilies too? ha!


Mi. But for di^pleasing you, I had rather have grazed on Littletons Commons,
or have fasted this fourtnight, then come for my repast into this Wilderness;
but you will have it so


Cross. You are in the right Sir, I Will have it so indeed, I Will know why I shall
not else. What do you know no body here?


Mi. I cry them mercy, my good brother, -- and my loving sister.


Rook. But what virtuous men has this man to his sons, and how they thrive in
grace against his will, it seems.


Mi. What Gentlewoman is this of your acquaintance, Sister?


Luc. It Is well dissembled brother, but I know your cunning.


Mi. Have you betrayed me?


Luc. Mum Mr. Mihil, mum.


Vint. Harry, Harry.

Enter Drawer hastily.
Draw. By and by.


Draw. What devil art thou that roarest in mine ear so.

[Beats the Drawer.
Draw. Hold, I beseech you, I come to wait upon you.


Cross. What, with a By and by, that strikes into my head as sharp as a
Stellatto.


Draw. I come to tell you, sir, that your table's covered in a fairer Room, and
more private, your meat is ready to go up, and all in a readiness.


Cross. Now thou art an honest fellow, there is a couple of shillings for thee.
Have us out of thy windmil here, I prithee, and thy By and by's.

Exeunt omnes.
Act. III
Scoen 1.
Enter Captain Driblow, Clotpoll, Nick, Anthony, Drawer, A Table, Pot and
Glasses. GO Sirrah, make your reckoning for our dinner. Leave us this wine, and
come when we call you. We have business.

Draw. I shall, sir, by and by.


Capt. Well, sir, you will be of both you say, the Blade and the Battoon?


Clot. Of both, sir, by all means, both Philoblathicus and Philobatticus, I.
I Will now have all that belongs to your order, or all my money again, that is for
a certain.


Capt. Your money again? lo you there. You bring me a fit man, Gentlemen to be
sworn, do you not? that talks of money again, when it is a main Article in the
Oath, never to look for money again, once disfinger'd.


Nick. You will not spoil all now it is come so far? will you?


Clot. Well sir, when I have my Oath, and that I am sworn one of you. I Will do
as you do, and care as little for money as he that has least.


Capt. Well, to the Oath then, for both the Bsade and the Battoon you say?


Clot. I by all means, Captain, for both. S'lid the Battoon may stick to me,
when the Blade may fly out of the Hilts.


Ant. Yes, to the Brokers.


Capt. Lay your hands on these Hilts, sir. The Articles that you depose unto
are these, To be true and faithful unto the whole Fraternity of the Blade and
the Battoon, and to every member thereof.


Clot. As ever faithful member was.


Capt. That at no time, wittingly or ignorantly, drunk or sober, you reveal or
make discovery of the Brother, or a member of the Brotherhood, of his lodging,
haunts, or by-walks, to any Creditor, Officer, Sutler, or such like dangerous
or suspicious person.


Clot. I defy them all.


Capt. That if any of the Brotherhood be in restraint or distress by
imprisonment, sickness, or whatsoever engagement, you make his case your own,
and your purse and your travel his; and that if a brother die or finish his
days, by end timely or untimelie, by Surfeit, Sword, or Law. You wear the sable
order of the Riband in remembrance of him.


Clot. A convenient cheap way of mourning.


Capt. That your purse and weapon to the utmost of your strength, be on all
occasions drawn to the assistance or defense of a Brother or Brothers friend,
be it he, be it she.


Clot. I understand you, and shall be as forward to fight for a She-friend, as
ever the best man in the mirror of Knighthood was for an honest woman.


Capt. That you be ever at deadly defiance with all such people, as Protections
are directed to in Parliament, and that you watch all occasions to prevent or
rescue Gentlemen from the gripes of the Law brissons. That you may thereby
endear your self into noble society, and drink the juice of the Varlets
labors for your officious intrusions.


Clot. And that will go down bravely.


Capt. You must rank your self so much the better man, by how much the more
drink you are able to purchase at others costs.


Clot. Excellent.


Cupt. You are to let no man take wall of you, but such as you suppose will
either beat you or lend you money.


Clot. Better and better still.


Capt. The rest of your duties for brevity sake you shall find specified in
that copy of your Order. Kiss the book.


Clot. I Will swear to them whatsoever they be.

So, now I am a Blade, and of a better Row then those of Tytere tu, or Oatmeal
hoe, and so an health to our Fraternity, and in chief to our Noble Captain
Driblow.

[Drinks.
Nick. Ant. Agreed, Agreed.


Capt. Now are you to practice or exercise your quality on the next you meet
that is not of the Brotherhood.

Enter Mihil.
Clot. Are you one of the Brotherhood sir, of the Philoblathici.


Mi. I had else lost much sir, I have paid all dues belonging to it.


Clot. So have I as I hope to gain honor by it 40 li. thick at least; yet I
have this left, please you command the half sir.


Mi. Another time, your reckoning is not yet paid perhaps.

[Clot. puts his money in his pocket.
Clot. It Is the first money of mine that was refused since my coming to Town. I
shall save infinitely.

I see now that I am sworn. How would I swear to get by it.


Capt. Take heed of that, Come hither son.


Mi. How have you screwed this youth up into this humor, that was such a dry
miserable Clown but two days since.


Nick. The old way, by watching of him, and keeping him high-flown a mattet of
forty eight hours together.


Ant. Men are apt to believe strange fancies in their liquour, and to entertain
new opinions.


Mi. I have fastened three or four cups upon my precise brother. I would 'twere
as many pottles, so it would convert him into the right way of good fellowship.


Nick. I would we could see him, to try what good we could do upon him.


Ant. Perhaps we might convert him.


Mi. He Is above still with the old men. I stole from him, but to see if your
Italick Mystresse were come yet. Your Madam.


Nick. No, she comes anon; but is my affliction above still.


Mi. Thy father? yes


Nick. Ptithee do not call him my father less he took better courses.


Mi. And so is thy Sister; the little Rogue looks so squeamishly on me, and I
on her, as we had never seen before; but the foolish Ape out of a present
affection she has taken to my Sister, has discovered to her the whole discourse
of our love, and my familiarity with thee, which were enough to spoil all, if
it were discovered to the old folks, befote my cards were played.


Nick. Well, remember Mr. Mihil, you have promised me half, if the old dogged
fellow give her all, and you marry her.


Mi. Thou can not doubt me.


Nick You know I can spoil all when I list, but to show my countenance in your
cause.


Mi. Such is your virtue, Sir. Well, I Will up to 'em again before I be mist; and
when they part, I am for you again.

Ex.
Capt. I have given you all the rudimenrs, and my most fatherly advices withal.


Clot. And the last is that I should not swear, how make you that good? I
thought now I was sworn into this Brotherhood, I might have sworn what, and
as much as I would.


Capt. That Is most unnecessary, for look you son, the best, and even the
leudest of my sons do forbear it, not out of conscience, but for very good
ends; and in stead of an Oath furnish the mouth with some affected
Protestation. As I am honest, it is so. I am no honest man if it be not. Ud
take me, if I lie to you. Nev'rgo, nev'rstirre, l vow, and such like.


Clot. Or never credit me or let me never be trusted.


Capt. O take heed of that, that may be spoken in so ill an hour, that you may
run out of reputation, and never be trusted indeed; the other will gain you
credit, and bring you into good and civil estimation with your Hostesses; and
make 'em term you a fair conditioned Gentleman if he had it; and truly I
never heard worse word come out of his mouth.


Clot. Nev'r-go, nev'r-stir, I vow. l'le have, I vow then.


Ant. I vow, but you shall not, that is mine.


Clot Cannot you lend it me now and then brother? I Will have, I swear then, and
come as nigh swearing as I can.


Nick. I swear but you must not, that is mine you know.


Clot. I protest then, I Will have I protest, that is a City-word, and best to
cozen with.


Clot. Come boys, fall to some practice, Let me see about at the new French
balls, sprung out of the old English vapors


Clot. I protest come on. I Will make a third man.


Ant. Whose man are you?


Nick. Whose man is not to be asked, nor scarce whose subject, now he is of our
Brotherhood.


Clot. Yes, by your favor he may ask.


Ant. I ask no favor, sir.


Nick. That may be granted.


Clot. You can grant nothing in this kind.


Ant. I vow he may grant any thing of any kind.


Nick. I swear, I neither can, nor will grant that.


Clot. That, I protest, may bear exception indeed.


Ant. Exceptions amongst us? nay, then I vow. --


Nick. I swear.


Clot. And I protest --

[Up with their Battoons
Capt. Part fair my boys; it is very well performed; now drink a round to
qualify this bout.

Enter Cockbrain.
All. Agreed on all parts.


Cock. Look upon me ye Commonwealths men now, like a State-Surgeon, while I
search and try

The ulcerous coare of foul enormitie.
These are a parcel of those venomous weeds,
That ranklie pester this fair Garden-plot.
Whose boisterous growth is such, that I must use
More policy then strength to reach their root,
And hoist them up at once.
This is my way to get within 'em.

Ant. So, it is gone round.


Nick. I muse these Mumpers come not.


Clot. Best send a boy.


Nick. Drawer, ha! where be those Rascals? (Within) By and by.


Nick. Are you one of 'em, sir?


Cock. I am one that has the favor of the house, sir?


Nick. To intrude into Gentlemen's privacies? ha!


Cock. To seek a poor living and 't please you, by picking up the crumbs of your
liberality, for the use of my rare qualities.


Nick. And what is your quality?


Cock. It is to speak or sing ex tempore upon any Theme, that your fancy or
the present occasion shall administer.


Nick. Can you drink before you lay your lips to it

[Glasse in's face.
Cock. O my weak eyesight.


Clot. Or can you eat a crust without chawing, made of the Flower of Battoon.


Cock. O good Gentlemen, forbear, I beseech you.


Clot. The flower of Battoon. I protest a good jest, and 'twas mine own before
I was aware, for he had the Maidenhead or first-blow of my Battoon. Nay, it
shall down.


Cock. I will not yet desist; but suffer private affliction with a Roman
resolution for the public welfare, with full assurance that my fortitude shall
at last get within 'em.


Nick. You are not satisfied, i^ seems, you Rascal, get you gone.

[Kicks him.
Ant. Phew! beat not the poor fellow so.


Clot. Let me come to him again, and flesh my self upon him. I will not only
flesh my self, but tire upon him.


Cock. Enough, enough, good Gentlemen, you have beaten me enough of conscience.
Was ever good Patriot so rudely handled? but the end crowns all.


Capt. Forbear him sons. What can thou be, that can not be satisfied with
beating? speak, art a man or a Ghost?


Cock. I have been, Sir, a man, and of my hands, however misfortune humbles me
under your manhoods. But I have seen the face of war, and served in the
Low Countries, though I say it, on both sides.


Clot. Then it is impossible this fellow can be beat out of countenance.


Mick. We'll leave him in his qualiry for that constant virtue.


Capt. Sure, it is Fenner or his Ghost. He was a riming soldier. Look, do his
eyes stand right?


Cock. They had a dish e'ne now, sir.


Nick. Of sack, it is true here, take another, and wash the inside of your
Throat. And let us hear your pipes in their right tune.


Cock. Give me a Theme Gentlemen.


Nick. The praise of sack. Sing the praise of sack.


Ant. Let it be of the Blade.


Clot. And the Battoon, I beseech you.


Draw. Do you call, Gentlemen?


Nick. I vow, I will have sack.


Draw. The Other quart of Canarie? you shall.

[Takes pot.
Nick. Are your ears so quick? I vow, I Will dull 'em.


Draw. Anon, anon.


Nick. I say, a song of Sack.


Capt. I, let it be of Sack.


Nick. Now you pump, do you?


Cock. No, sir, but think of a tune.


Clot. If he can pump us up a spring of Sack, we'll keep him, and break half
the Vintners in Town.

(Song. Now B. and Clot. asks Gabriel, Are you a b^other. They fall in the
burden.)
Nick. I vow, well-said.


Ant. I swear, 'twas well.


Clot. I protest the best that I have heard in this kind. I wonder at his
ability. I prithee, art not acquainted with my two Poetical Drury Lane Writers?
the Cobbler and the Tapster.


Cock. No sir, not I, I work not their way. What I do is ex tempore after the
Theme given.


Cock. But they run quite before you. Their Works are in print sometimes* and
ready to be sung about streets, of men that are hanged before they come to the
Gallows.


Ant. But did not Mihil say he would come again.


Nick. I marvel at his stay.


Clot. I, and the Mumpers, when come they? I long to see the Sisters, now I am
a brother sworn and entered.

Enter Pig.
Nick. O here comes news. How now pig?


Pig. You must all presently to the Paris Tavern.


Nick. Must? at whose suit!


Pig. Mr. Mihil bade me tell you so.


Ant. Is he gone from hence?


Pig. He is, and all his gone and dispersed.


Nick. Then the old Jew my father's gone.


Pig. Only there is one delicate demure Gentleman with Mr. Mihil. traveled
along with him toward Paris. I believe he means to make a mouth of him.


Nick. O, it is his precise brother. But where is thy Mystresse, and Madama
Damaris? that they come not.


Pig. They desire to meet you there too, it is more private.


Ant. Away we will follovv thee.


Clot. Pig, how does thy father Hog, the Turkey Merchant?


Pig. I am in haste, Sir.

Ex.
Ant. Why Turkey Merchant?


Pig. Because he trades in nothing but Turkey commodities; Eggs and
Concubines; 'tvvere well to geld him, and send him to the Grand Seignior, to
vvait in his Seraglio.

Enter Dravver.
Nick. Thou have such a wit in this Clotpoll of thine. The Reckoning Drawer.


Draw. Here, here, Sir; here is your bill.


Capt. Let see the sum. What is it Drawer? 40. sh. and 3. d. Si, your dinner,
and what you had since, in all, sir.


Capt, It Is very reasonable, Commend me to thy Master. Son Clotpoll pay't. It
is your duty.


Clot. Yes, for my Brothership.


Capt. Boys, I must leave you.


Cock. 40. sh. for four men's dinners, note that, yet he says it is reasonable.


Draw. Good Captain, He was ever the fairest Reckoner, though he has never the
luck to pay any thing.


Ant. Fare you well, father.


Nick. When we have further occasion, we'll repair to your lodging.


Clot. At Bloomesbury. Father, I know.


Cock. Bloomsbury? good, I note it.


Capt. Sirrah, look to the second Article of your Oath.


Clot. Against discovery of lodgings, haunts, or by-walks, I am warned.


Capt. Look that you be so.

Ex. Capt.
Nick. 40. sh. and 3. d. you will bate the 3. d. will you not?


Draw. We'll not much stand for that Sir, though our Master sits at dear rent.


Nick. Give me your two pieces.


Ant. Pray let me see the bill before you pay it.


Nick. Well, I can hold it then.


Ant. Bread and beer, 1. sh. 4. d. I do not think we four could eat 3. d. of
bread, and for my part, I drank but two glasses of beer.


Nick. And I but one, Ivow.


Clot. And my father and I but one betwixt us, I protest.


Draw. Have you no men below?


Nick. Below the earth do mean? I am sure we have none above-ground.


Draw. I know not, Gentlemen, there is so much reckoned at the bar, and you
please you may see it.


Ant. Nay, an't be at the bar, it stands for Law. Well, wine 5 sh. 9. d. I
think we had no less. A Shoulder of Mutton stuff't with Oysters 8. sh. that
cost your Master very near ten groats, a brace of Partridge 5. sh. a couple of
Cocks 4. sh. 6. d. a dozen of Larks 20. d. Anchovis 6. sh. I swear but a Sawcer
full.


Draw. I Will be sworn they are so much reckoned in the Kitch^n.


Ant. All Is law, I tell you, all is law in Tavernes. But I hope there will be a
law for you one o'these days. Then is their Fruit and Cheese, Tobaccho, Fire,
and I know not what, is it right cast.


Cock. There is more hope of that young man, then of all the rest, indeed it is
a sore abuse, another very weed in the city. I do note that also.


Nick. Sirrah, before you have your money, fetch me a glass of Beer. But
can thou sing this upon any subject.


Cock. Any sir, any, an't be till midnight.

Ex.
Nick. But you have strange helps to your invention. I did note the rolling of
the eye, and rubbing your Brows sometimes.


Clot. So did I, I protest, and therefore, I tell you what. If he can sing such
another Song, and look steadfastly the while upon any thing, and hold his hands
behind him. I Will give him half a crown; if not, he shall have nothing for the other.


Cock. Agreed Gentlemen, give me your Theme.


Ant. You shall give it him.


Nick. And withal, watch him if he stir hand or eye, especially the eye.


Clot. I will I protest, and set mine eye against his, that he shall not twink,
but I Will perceive it, and lay him over the pare.


Cock. Well Sir, your Theme.


Clot. In praise of the Battoon, and if you miss it you shall be sure on it.


Cock. You Will help me with the burden, Gentlemen.


Nick. Yes, yes, for the more grace of the Song.


Clot. Take you no care for that. Set your eyes and begin.

SONG.
To prove the Battoon the most noble to be.
Of all other weapons observe his degree,
In Field to be Leader of all other Arms,
To conquest and honor, through hazard and harms.
The Gallant and Peasant, the Lord and the Lowne.
Must move by the motion of the Leaders Battoon.
O give me the Battoon.
The Pike and the Halbert are subject to it.
The Ensign, the Partizan, all must submit,
To advance, or retire, fall back, or come on.
As they are directed by the Leaders Battoon.
Then it is to the Soldier the greatest Renown,
To purchase by service to bear the Battoon.
O give me the Battoon.

Clot. Marry, and take it Sir, why do you stare about? though you have broke
Covenant, I have not.


Cock. Where be the Gentlemen?


Clot. Ha! they are not gone, I hope, where be my brothers Drawer.

Enter Drawer.
Draw. Gone sir, and have sent me to you for the reckoning.


Clot. I protest you jest, do you not? I gave 'em the full sum, and all the
money I had, I protest, I swear, I vow, now they are not here, I may make bold
with their words. They have my money, I am sure.


Draw. If you have no money, pray leave a pawn, sir.


Clot. Take him there, put him in a cage, and let him sing it out.


Draw. We know him not, sir.


Clat. No? he said he had the favor of the house to sing to Gentlemen.


Cock. I fear I shall be discovered, sir, I can give your worship credit for a
piece till you come to your lodging.


Clot. Protest, thou art generous; nay, I know where to finde'em; and thou
shall go with me to 'em, we will not part now, we will shoune 'em. I vow, (the
words out) here, I Will leave my sword for the other piece.


Draw. Your sword will not serve, sir, I doubt.


Clot. Take my coat too, a friend and a Battoon is better then a coat and a
sword at all times.


Cock. I am glad my fear is over. And after all my sufferings, if at last
Cock brain crow not these roaring Lions down,
Let him be balladed about the Town.
Ex. omnes.
Scoen. 2.
Enter Lucie, Katharine, Belt. Luc. Let me now bid you welcome to my fathers
house, where till your own be fitted, though my father keep too private a
family to express large entertainment, yet I hope at worst you shall have
convenient lodging.


Kat. Indeed, I am glad that my father yielded to your fathers friendly request
in it; and the more, in regard he is so hard to be entreated to any thing; but
especially for your societies sake, sweet Sister. Indeed I Will call you Sister
always, and I hope you shall be shortly in my brother Mihils right.


Luc. I have laid open my heart to you, which indeed is his, but your father, I
fear, will never be won.


Kat. Why you would not have him too, Sister, would you?


Luc. His consent I would, and my fathers, I hope, would easily be wrought. You
saw he was willing your other brother should have me at the first sight, merely
for his reservednesse, and Mihil methought carried himself as civil to day as
he; I mean, as civilly for a Gentleman, that should not look like one fathers
of the Dutch Church at five and twenty.


Kat. He was put to it to day. The noise of the Tavern had almost wrought his
zeal in^o fury, it is scarce out of my head yet.


Luc. But you were about to tell me how he first fell into this vein, this
vanity indeed.


Kat. I Will tell you now, and in that something worth your observation.


Luc. I will observe you.


Kat. My father has an humor, not to like any thing at first, nor accept best
courtesies of friends, though presently he finds 'em most commodious to him;
things that he knows not how to be without, and oftentimes desires with the
same breath the things he vilisied, and scorned them the last syllable he spoke
before. You saw when your father offered him the use of his house here, till
his own be furnished, he cried, hah ^ are all the houses in the Town yours Sir;
and yet presently entreated for it, and thanked him.


Luc. That shows the best nature, they say.


Kat. But that is seldom attended by the best fortune. Nay, in us, I mean, his
children, he will like nothing, no, not those actions which he himself cannot
deny are virtuous; he will cross us in all we do, as if there were no other
way to show his power over our obedience.


Luc. It Is a strange fatherly care.


Kat. Now, note the punishment that follows it. There Is not a chil^e he has,
though we all know what we do, that make any conscience of crossing him, we
have so much of his good nature in us.


Luc. And that is as odd a duty in children.


Kat. I must confess it is a stubbornness.

Yet for the most part we do nothing, but that which most Parents would allow
in their children: and now for my brother Gabriel, with whom I must bring in
the story of another Kinswoman of ours, my father had at home with us.


Luc. So.


Kat. Nay, mark, I pray you, as I would entreat an Auditorie, if I now were a
Poet to mark the Plot, and several points of my play, that they might not say
when it is done, they understood not this or that, or how such a part came in or
went out, because they did not observe the passages.


Luc. Well on, I pray.


Kat. My brother Gabriel, when he was a boy, nay, till within these two years,
was the wildest untamed thing that the country could possibly hold.


Luc. So he is still for ought I know, for I think no man of his Religion in
his wits.


Kat. I mean in outvvard conversation, he was the Ringleader of all the
youthful Fry, to Faires, to Wakes, to May-games, footbal-matches, any thing
that had but noise and tumult in it; then he was Captain of the young
train-band, and exercised the youth of twenty parishes in martial discipline.
O he did love to imitate a soldier the best, -- and so in every thing, that
there was not an handsome maid in an whole County could be quiet for him.


Luc. He may be good at that sport still, for there is almost none of his sect
holds any other game lavvful.


Kat. Yet did he bear the civillest and the best ordered affection to our
Kinsvvoman I spoke of.


Luc. Yes, I remember.


Kat. So loving to her person, so tender of her honor that nothing but too
near affinity of blood could have kept them asunder.


Luc. And she did love him as well!


Kat. O dearly, virtuously well; but my father fearing what youth in heat of
blood might do, removes my brother Gabriel from home into the service of a
Reverend Bishop to follovv good examples.


Luc. But he learned not to be a Puritan there I hope.


Kat. You shall hear, Sister, soon after came a Gallant into the country from
London here, and as we after found, a Citizens son, though he shevved like a
Lord there. Briefly, he grevv acquainted with my brother Mihil. Then vvoo'd
and vvonne my Cousin so secretly, my father never suspected, nor he nor I e're
knevv whose son he was, nor of what occupation my old lord his father was;
but he promised her marriage, clap't her, you may guess where, and so like
the slippery Trojan left her.


Euc. O divellish Rascal!


Kat. And foolish creature, she who soon repented it, and with her shame is
fled to what part of the world we know not.


Luc. In truth it is pitiful, that villain would be hanged.


Kat. Now upon this, my poor brother that loved her so, fell into discontent,
forsook his lord, and would have left the Land, but that he was prevented and
brought home.


Luc. And ever since he has been thus religious.


Kat. Thus obstinate, for I think verily he does it but to cross my father,
for sending him out of the way when the mischief was done.


Luc. I will not then believe it is Religion in any of the gang of 'em, but
mere willful affectation. But why, or wherein do you or Mihil. cross your
father.


Kat. I tell you Sister we must. He is so cross himself, that we shall never
get any thing of him that we desire, but by desiring the contrary.


Luc. Why then do you desire him to get you an husband?


Kat. Because he should get me none. O Sister, both he and Mr. Cockbrayne, can
vvish now that I had had his son.


Luc. There Is another youth now gone on love's pilgrimage, e're since your
father crosthim in your love not to be heard of.


Kat. Hush! the old men.

Enter Rooksbill, Croswill.
Rook. In good truth sir, I am taken with your conversation. I like it now
exceeding well.


Cross. I Am glad it pleases you.


Rook. It Is very fair and friendly, I find we shall accord.


Cross. I am glad I have it for you Sir, I pray, make bold with it.


Ro^k. Then pray sir, let me urge my motion a little further to you.


Cross, What is it? you cannot utter it so easily as I shall grant it, out with
it man.


Rook. That you will be pleased to accept my daughter for either of your sons,
your youngest if you please, now I have seen him, I Will give him with her
presently, either in hand a thousand pound, and five hundred pound a child as
fast as he can get 'em. And all I shall die seized of.


Cross. What a Dogbolt is this to think that I should get a child for him.


Rook. I hope you do think well on it.


Luc. Pray love he does. I hope so too.


Kat. I mark his Answer.


Luc. I could find in my heart to ask his good will my self.


Kat. And that were a sure way to go without it.


Rook. How say you, sir, is it a match?


Cross. I will not stay a minute in thy house, though I lie in the street for^t.

Huswife, I Will sort you with f^tter companions, Come, follow me quickly.


Rook. H^aven bless me and my child too from matching with such a disposition.


Kat. Truly, sir, I longed to be out o the house before.


Cross. Before you came in it did you not? ha!


Kat. These new walls do so stink of the lime methinks.


Cross. Marry fough, Gooddie Foyst.


Kat. There can be no healthie dwelling in 'em this twelve-moneth yet.


Cross. Are you so tender bodied?


Rook. Even please your selves then where you can like better, and you shall
please me.


Cross. Why you will not thrust me out of your house, will you? ha!


Rook. There Is no such haste, sir.


Cross. Indeed there is not, nor will I out for all your haste neither. I Will
have look to my bargain.


Rook. With all my heart, sir.


Cross. But no more of your idle motions, if you love your ease in your house,
your ^^n here.

Enter Belt. Here Is a letter, sir, from Mr. Cockbrayne.


Cross. Is the earer paid, or give him that an't please you.


Belt. Some body has angered him, and I must suffer.


Cross. I sent you to seek my sons, good sir, have you found 'em? ha!


Belt. I cannot find 'em sir. They went out of the Tavern together, they say,
and I have been at Mr. Mihils chamber, and there they are not. I went to the
Tavern again, and there they were not. ^hen I beat all the rest of the bushes,
in this four est of foo es and mad men, and cannot find em I, where e're they
be.


Cross. Sirrah, go find em me where e're they be, any where, or no where, find
'em, and find 'em quickly; I Will find 'em in your Cockscombe else, d' ye see!
and bring my sons Sanctity home before it be dark, lest he take up his lodging
in a Church Porch; and charge Mr. Mihil that he come not to me till I send for
him. Here Is danger in the house. There was a match-motion indeed.


Rook. Good sir, either like my house well, or be pleased to please your self
with some better.


Cross. Pray Sir, be quiet in your house, lest I send you out of it to seek
another. Let me see my chamber.


Rook. He must have his way, I see.

Ex. omnes.
Act. IV.
Scoen. 1.
Enter Bettie, Frank, with swords drawn make fast the doors. Bett. NAy, you
perpetual Pusse, I Will fetch him out of the very bowels of thee.

Fran. He never came so deep himself yet with all that he could do, and I
scorn the threatening of a She Marmaset.


Nick. (Within) why Bettie, Frank, you mankind Carions you. I vow, open the
door, will you both kill one another, and cozen the Hangman of his fees?


Bett. Thou had been better have bit off the dugs of thy Damme, thou
pin-buttock Jade thou, than have snapt a bit of mine from me.


Fran. Here Is that shall stay your stomach better then the bit you snarle for.
Thou greedy Brach thou.


Nick. (Within) why wenches, are ye wild? break open the doors.


Bett. That I could split that divellish tongue of thine!


Fran. I have as good a spite at as ill a member about thee.

Enter Nick, Anthony.
Nick. Hold, what is the devil in ye.


Ant. Are ye so sharp-set ye Amazonian Trulls?


Belt. Let me but make one pass at her.


Fran. Pray let me go, and let her come.


Nick. Can no blunter tools then these serve to take down your furies?


Bett. Let me come but within nails reach of het.


Fran. Let me but try the strength of my teeth upon her.


Nick. As Hector 'twixt the hosts of Greece and Troy,
When Paris and the Spartane King should end
Their nine years wars, held up his brazen lance.
In signal, that both Armies should surcease,
And hear him speak. So let me crave your audience.
Dear Bettie be advised, and Frank, forbear
Thy thirst of Sisters blood. Whilst I rip up
The folly of your strife. Your cases both
Have been laid open to me. You contend
For love of a lewd Citizen, that sleights,
Nay more, disdaines, nay more, desies you both.
Tony can tell, Mun Clotpoll also knows
The words he spoke, that you were both poor whores,
Not poor alone, but foul infectious harlots.
And that he wears your mark with pain and sorrow,
Hopeless to claw them off. With constant purpose
Never to see you more, unless to greet.
Your bumpin buttocks with revengeful feet.

Bet. Did he say so?


Fran. And must we two fall out for such a slanderous Villain?


Ant. No, agree, agree.


Nick. Busse and be friends. Busse, or I Will baste ye both, I vow.


Bet. Come Sister we'll be in for ever now.


Fran. For my part, Sister, sure I was not out with you.


Bet. But did he say he would kick us?


Ant. Lo here, the man that dares it not deny.

Enter Citizen, Drawer.
Cit. But do ye hear, Gentlemen. I hope you will use me kindlier then so.


Nick. Than how, Sir?


Cit. Then to win all my money, and leave me at stake for the reckoning. Pray
do you pay the Drawer for me, though I pay it you again.


Ant. What is it Drawer?


Draw. The Gentlewomen and he had 14. sh. in before you came.


Nick. It Is a plain case, your cloak must answer it at the bar, Sir. Drawer,
away with it.

Exit Drawtr with Cloak.
Cit. Nay, but Gentlemen.


Nick. I vow, do but look after it, till we be gone, and these shall claw thine
eyes out.


Cit. Well sir, I hope this quarter will not be always lawless.


Ant. Do you grumble? Mr. C^ffelesse.


Nic. I vow you shall have cu^^es.


Bet. Yes, that you shall.


Fran. Cuts and slashes too before we part, Sir.


Cit. You will not murder me, will you?


Nick. Damsels forbear; and you, forbear your noise. I vow, I Will slit your
wistle else. You shall give him due correction civilly, and we will make him
take it civilly. Sit you down Sir.


Cit. What will you do with me?


Nick. I vow, mum.

Enter Clotpoll, Cockbraine,
Clot. O, are ye here! was it a brotherly trick do ye think, to leave me to pay
one reckoning twice? or did I think never to be made a mouth more, after I had
paid my swearing dinner, and am I now a greater mouth then e're I was?


Nick. Mum, hold your tongue still in your mouth, lest I halifax it with your
teeth.


Clot. Halifax my tongue. And listen to a business.


Nick. Do yon know this man?


Clot. Yes, the City mouth we had the other night.


Nick. These are the Sisters that his lavish tongue so lewdly did deprave.


Clot. I cry them heartily mercy Are you of the sweet Sisterhood? I hope to
know you all, all the pretty Mumpers in the berrie here, before I have done.
It Is true, I protest, he spoke words of you, that such flesh and blood could
not bear. He could not have spoken worse of mutton of a groat a quarter.


Bet. And were we so fond to fight for him?


Fran. But now we'll both be revenged upon the flesh of him.


Cit. Pray let me speak with you.


Nick. No, they shall beat you first. And mark me well. Do thou but stir an
hand or foot, or raise a voice that may be heard to the next room, well cut thy
weasand. Now wenches take your course.


Bet. Nay, you slave, we'll mark you for a Sheepbiter.


Fran. We'll teach you how to scandalize.


Bet. Have I given you that you cannot claw off, you Mungrel.


Clot. Rare, I protest.


Ciot. -- oh -- oh -- oh.


Nick. There, there.


Fran. We'll claw thine ears off rather.


Cit. -- oh -- oh -- oh.


Clot. O brave.


Cock. O outrage, most insufferable, all this goes into my black book.


Nick. To him Bettie, at him Frank; there whores, there.


Ant. Fie, fie, forbear, enough, too much in conscience.


Cock. That young man has some pity yet.


Ant. I swear you shall no more.


Cock. Alas, good Gentlemen, it is enough.


Nick. I vow, do you prate? you shall have as much. Come, take the Chair, Sir,
the breeches shall bait him too.


Cock. O good Gentlemen.


Nick. I vow, they shall. To him and claw him, I Will clapperclaw your sides else


Cock. O me! what mean you?


Bett. Heyday! his beard comes off.


Ant. And his head too What rotten scab is this?


Clot. I protest, they have pulled my pieced brother in pieces here.


Nick. I vow, some disguised villain, and but for doing the State so good
service, we would hang him presently without examination.


Ant. I know him. And you shall not touch him. Best is, he knows nor me. Good
Heaven, what Braintrick has possessed him.


Nick. I vow, what can thou be?


Ant. Come, it is an honest fellow, that is only ashamed to run so base a course
for his living in his own face. Poor man, I warrant his fear threatens his
breeches shrewdly. But let us away, and quickly, our stay is dangerous. Come, we
forgot Mich. Croswil and the wenches.


Nick. Come all away then, Sirrah, thank this Gentleman, and pray for him at
the end of your Songs hereafter.


Clot. Farewell, friend Piece. I Will know you better now, before you have't again.

Ex. omnes but Cock. and Cit.
Cock. What monsters in mankind? what hell hounds are they? only as Ovid
feigned among the Getes. A friend at need, I with a friend was blessed, Whom I
may gratify, and plague the rest. How is it with you, Sir?


Cit. O, I am very sore.


Cock. Indeed you are sorely handled. This may warn you out of such
caterwaling company. You look like one more civil. And in hope you will be so,
I Will bring you to a Barber.


Cit. Alas, my Cloak.


Cock. I Will help you to that too, so you with me, Will in an honest plot
Assistant be.


Cit. O Sir, in any thing, and thank you too, Sir.

Exeunt Ambo.
Scoen. 2.
Enter Mihil, Gabriel, Boy, Wine, etc. Mih. A Paris ill ya ben veni- Here Is no
bush at this door, but good wine rides post upon it, I mean, the sign-post. Boy,
get you down, and if Nick Rooksbill, or any of his company ask for me, bring
'em up, do you hear.


Boy. I will, I will, Sir.

Ex.
Mi. You are welcome to Paris brother Gabriel.


Gab. It is nevertheless a Tavern, brother Mihil, and you promised and
covenanted with me at the last house of noise and noisomnesse, that you would
not lead me to any more Tavernes.


Mih. Lead you brother? men use to be led from Tavernes sometimes. You saw I
did not lead you nor bring you to any that was more a Tavern then the last, nor
so much neither; for here is no Bush you saw.


Gab. 'Twas that betrayed and entrapped me: but let us yet forsake it.


Mih. Pray let us drink first brother. By your leave here is to you.


Gab. One glasse-full more is the most that I can bear. My head is very full,
and labors with that I have had already.


Mi. There Sir, I Will undertake one good fellow, that has but just as much
Religion as will serve an honest man's turn, will bear more wine then ten of
these giddy-braind Puritanes, their heads are so full of whimseys.


Gab. It Is mighty headie, mighty headie, and truly I cannot but think that the
over much abuse of these outlandish liquors, have bred so many errors in the
Romish Church.


Mih. Indeed brother, there is too much abuse made of such good creatures. Wine
in it self is good, you will grant, though the excess be naught; and Tavernes
are not contemptible, so the company be good.


Gab. It is most true, we find that holy men have gone to Tavernes, and made
good use of 'em upon their Peregrinations.


Mi. And cannot men be content to take now and then a cup, and discourse of
good things by the way. As thus. Brother, here is a remembrance (if she be
living, and have not lost her honor) to our Cousin Door as.


Gab. O that kinswoman of ours. She was the dearest loss that e're fell from
our house.


Mi. Pledge her, good brother.


Gab. I do --


Mi. I hope 'twill maudlenize him.


Gab. But have you never seen that miscreant that wronged her, since he did
that same, they say you knew him.


Mi. Alas, suppose I had, what could be done? she is lost we see. What good
could she receive by any course against him.


Gab. It had been good to have humbled him, though into the knowledge of his
Trans^ression. And of himself for his souls good, either by course of Law, or
else in case of necessity, where the Law promises no relief, by your own
right hand you might have smote him, smote him with great force, yea, smote him
unto the earth, until he had prayed that the evil might be taken from him.


Mih. This is their way of loving enemies, to bear 'em into goodness. Well,
brother, I may meet with him again, and then I know what to do. If he knew him
as I do now, what a religious combat were here like to be at Nicks coming.

Enter Boy. Sir, here is a Gentlewoman asks for Mr. Rooksbill.


Mih. The traveled Gallant, is it not.


Boy. Yes sir, and the old black party, her Land lady with her. But they ask
for no body but him, sir.


Mih. Say he is here by all means, and bring 'em up.

Ex. Boy.
Gab. Women! pray brother lets avoid the place, let us fly it. What should we
do with women in a Tavern?


Mih. No harm assure your self, cannot we govern ourselves?

Enter Dorcas and Madge, and start back.
Nay, Lady, stay, he will be here presently, that you look for.


Gab. I will not glance an eye toward temptation.


Mih. I am amazed sure, I have seen this face, however your habit and the
course of time may give't another seeming.


Dorc. Good Angels, help my thoughts and memory. It is my Kinsman Mihil. What Is
the other that hides his face, so?


Mih. Do you turn away?


Dorc. It is my Cousin Gabriel, strangely altered.


Mih. Come hither you. I^le make a little bold with you. Thou that have been a
concealer of more sins in women's actions, then thou have grizled hairs.


Dorc. Sure I will speak to him, he always loved me.


Mih. Reveal a truth to me on my demand, now instanrly, without premeditation.
I Will cut thy tongue out else.


Mad. What Is here to do? do you think I am a devil? that you make such
conjurations over me.


Mih. I think thou art as true a servant of his as any Bawd can be. But he now
if thou dare. How long have you known that Gentlewoman? and what do you know
by her?


Dorc. Sir.


Mad. Here Is a stir about nothing. I know nothing by her, not ^. Nor whether
she has any thing or nothing, that a woman should have by the report of
knowledge of man, woman or beast, not I. She came to me but this morning, with
a purpose to set me up in my new house as I hoped. But she has taken a course
to make it honestly spoken of already, to my utter undoing, but she never comes
within my doors again, as I hope to thrive by my Trade hereafter.


Dorc. Pray look upon me, sir.


Mih. Was she so resolutely bent, and so soon altered?


Mad. Upon the very first fight of the very first man that came into my house,
the very first hour of my setting up in it.


Mih. What man was that?


Mad. A shame take him, your roaring friend, Nick. I think she is enamoured of
him, or of something she guesses he has; and would feign play the honest woman
with him, that never played honest man with woman in his life.


Mih. It Is she, and it is most wonderful.


Dorc. If you knew who I were, you would not be so strange to me.


Mad. And here she comes me a hunting after him, like a fondling, whilst half
a dozen pieces might have been gotten at home by this time, and she have had the
halfes of it in her purse by this time; if she would have done, as I thought,
she would have done by this time.


Mih. Alas, poor Howlet.


Mad. I sent whooping after the best guest that haunt my house, to have taken
the first fruits of her conversation, and she would not see a man of 'em, to my
undoing.


Mih. Well leave thy hooting, Madge, and hold thy peace. thou shall get by it.


Mad. Yes, I shall get a good name shortly, and this gear hold, and turn
beggar, I shall.


Dor. Pray sir, but one word.


Mih. Speak to her, brother, it is our Cousin Dorcas.


Gab. Will you abuse me too? is she not lost?


Mih. And will not you give her leave to be found again? his wine and her
sudden apprehension works on him at once. Cousin, I Will speak to you, though I
confess the miracle of our meeting thus amazes me.


Dorc. O Cousins both. As ye are Gentlemen, and of that noble stock, whose mere
remembrance, when he was given up, and at the brink of desperate folly, stroke
that reverend fear into my soul, that has preserved my honor from further
falling. Lend me now your aid, to vindicate that honor by that man, that
threw me in the way of loss and ruin.


Mih. All shall be well, good Cousin, you shall have both hands and hearts to
re-estate you in him. So that in fact you have not wronged that honor, since
he forsook you.


Dorc. On my soul I have not.


Mih. Infants then shall be pardoned. Brother speak.


Dorc. You were wont still to be my loving'st Cousin.


Gab. What a strange dream has wine wrought in my head.


Mih. I hope it will work out his superfluous zeal.
And render him civil Christian again.

Dor. It is no dream, good Cousin, you are awake,
And I, that Dorcas, for whom you have wished
Affinity of blood might be dispen^'d with. And you to be my choice. So well
you loved me.

Gab. And will above my life affect you still. But you must leave these gauds
and profane dressings.


Mad. Bawds did he say? how comes he to know me troe?


Dorc. How came my Cousin Gabriel thus translated.
Out of gay clothes long hair, and lofty spirit,
Stout and brave action, manly carriage;
Into so strict a Reformation?
Where is the martial humor he was wont so to affect.

Mih. His purity and your disgrace fell on you both about a time, I faith.


Gab. Do you swear by your FAITH?


Mi. He Is falling back again.


Boy. Some more wine. You will drink with our
Cousin, brother, will you not?

Boy. What wine is it, Gentlemen?


Gab. Yes, in a cup of sincere love.


Boy. What other wine you please, Gentlemen, we have none such i^th' house.


Mih. Of the same we had, sir.


Dorc. Call not for wine for us, Cousin.


Mad. Assuredly, we are no profane wine-bibbers, not we.


Gab. Modest, and well-spoken verily, she should be a Sister or a Matron.


Mih. Yes, yes, we'll all drink for the good of the house.

It Is upon putting down, they say, and more o'th neighbors. But Cousin, he
knew you not to day.


Dor. No, nor dreams of me.


Mih. And the old one knows nothing, does she.


Dorc. No, by no means.


Mih. She can bewray nothing then. My brother knows not him. I only do for his
fair Sisters fake, of which you may hear more hereafter; in the mean, bear
your self fair and free, as if you knew him not, and I Will work him to your
end, never fear it.


Dorc. You are a noble Spokesman.

[Bawd and Gabriel confer devoutly the while.
Mad. Truly, you speak most edifyingly.

Enter Boy with Wine.
Mih. Well-said, give it to my brother. Drink to our Cousin, Brother.


Gab. I will, and to that virtuous Matron, whose care of her, I hope, tends
unto good edification. -- Truly the wine is good, and I was something thirsty.


Mad. Best drink again then, Sir.


Gab. I will follow your motherly advice.

[Drinks.
Mih. 'Twill work, anon, I hope.


Gab. And you have traveled Cousin. I may suppose you brought this
well-disposed Gentlewoman from Amsterdam with you. And this unto your welcome,
hoping I shall be informed by you how the two zealous brethren thrive there?
that broke in St. Hellens.


Mad. Of that or any thing sir, pray drink again, sir.


Mih. You Jade you, hold your tongue.

Enter Nick, Anthony, Clotpoll, Bettie, Frank.
Nick. O, are ye here Gallants! I made all the haste I co^^^, but was stayed, I
vow, by the bravest sport, baiting of a fellow or two with our Pusse-cats here.
I could e'ne sind in my heart to marry 'em both for their valors.


Dorc. Those words are daggers.


Mih. I pray dissemble your passion.


Nick. What? are you acquainted already?


Mich. Did not I tell thee she was a brave Madona?


Mih. How long have you had acquaintance with her, Nick?


Nick. Never saw her before this morning, I, standing upon her Belconee.


Gab. Truly Cousin, I think 'twas you that I saw to day too, standing upon a
Bellconee.


Nick. You spell very modestly, sir. Your brother
I take it. But did you call her Cousin, sir.

Gab. Yes sir, she is my Cousin.


Mih. 'Twill out too soon. Why Nick, thou know these kind of creatures call
and are called Cousins commonly.


Nick. Yes, in their tribe. But I thought he had been too holy for them. But
Dammy --


Gab. O fearfully profane!


Nick. You said you had a story to relate, of dire misfortune. and of unquoth
hearing. I come to hear your story, what stop you your ears at? sir.


Gab. I dare not speak it but in thy reproof. Thou swearest Gee o Dee, Dee a^m
thee, as I take it.


Nick. I vow thou lie, I called her Dammy, because her name is Damyris,


Gab. I say thou lie, her name is Dorcas, which was the name of an holy woman.


Nick. Shall we have things and things? I vow.

[Draw.
Clot. And I protest.

[Draw.
Mih. This will spoil all. Brother, I pray forbear.


Gab. I may not forbear, I am moved for to smite him; yea, with often stripes
to smite him; my zealous wrath is kindled, and he shall fly before me.


Dorc. Let me entreat you, sir.


Bet. Frank. What furie's this?

[Mihil holds up Gabriel
Nick. Great Damboys shrink, and give a little ground.

Ex.
Gab. I will pursue him in mine indignation.


Dor. O me!


Gab. And beat him into Potsheards.


Mad. Now he has banged the Pitcher, he may do any thing.


Mih. Pray, brother, be persuaded.


Clot. A brother to be so controuled?


Mih. You sir, put up your Steel-stick.


Clot. I desire but to know first, if he be a brother.


Mih. Yes marry is he, sir.


Clot. Sir, I am satisfied. So let him live.


Gab. Pray give me leave to ask you, do these men take part with the brethren?


Mih. Yes, and are brothers a little disguised, but for some ends.


Gab. Some State-occasions.


Mih. Mere Intelligencers, to collect up such and such observations, for a
great Separatist that is now writing a book against playing at Barlibreak,
moulding of Cocklebread, and such like profane exercises.


Gab. Truly such exercises are profane exercises, that bear the denomination
of good things ordained for man's use, as Barley, Cockles, and Bread are such
things to be made sports and play-games? I pray you let me see these brethren
again, to make my atonement with them. And are those Sisters too, that were
wi^h them?


Mih. O, most notorious ones, and are as equally disguised to be as rank Spies
as the other. S'lid man, and they should be taken for such as they are, they
would be cut off presently. They came in this mad humor to be merry with you
for my sake.


Gab. Pray let 'em come again, I shall not be well until I have rendered
satisfaction.


Mih. You must do as they do then, or they will think you are a Spy upon them.


Gab. I will be as merry as they, let wine be given unto us.


Mih. More wine, Boy, and bid 'em all come in.

Ex. Boy.
Dor. Alas, Cousin, let him drink no more.


Mih. Fear nothing, Cousin, it shall be for his good and yours, as I will order
it.

Enter Nick. Anthony, Clotpoll, Bettie, Frank, Drawer with wine
Mih. All welcome, not any repetition, but begin a new


Gab. I will begin it, two glasses: it shall be a faithful Salutation to all
the Brothers and Sisters of --


Clot. The Blade and the Scabberd.


Nick. It shall go round.


Ant. I Will swear you do not well to let him drink so.


Mih. Well said civil Roarer.


Gab. Let it go round, go to, you are a wag. I know what you mean by the Blade
and the Scabberd.


Clot. Who could have thought this had been such a brother.


Gab. Nay, who could have thought you had been of the brethren.


Nick. Brethren sir, we are the Brothers.


Gab. Yea, the disguised ones.


Nick. How? disguised ones?


Mih. Do not cross him again. If thou do, and I do not maul thee. Yes,
brother, these are virtuous men however they seeeme.


Nick. I vow, I have so much virtue as to rebuke thee for lying. But we are
brethren, sir, and as factious as you, though we differ in the Grounds; for
you, sir, defy Orders, and so do we; you of the Church, we of the Civil
Magistrate; many of us speak in the nose, as you do; you out of humility of
spirit, we by the wantonness of the flesh; now in devotion we go beyond you,
for you will not kneel to a ghostly father, and we do to a carnal Mystresse.


Mih. I Will stop your mouth, you said you came to be merry.


Nick. Yes, I vow, and brought Fiddlers along, but they must play in the next
room, for here is one breaks all the Fiddles that come in his reach. Come fir,
will you drink, dance, and do as we do?


Gab. I Will drink, I Will dance, I Will kiss, or do any thing, any living thing
with any of you that is Brother or Sister. Sweetheart let me feel thy Coney.


Mih. I now he is in. Play Fiddlers. Dance.
All bravely performed, admirably well done, etc.

Nick. I vow, thou art a brother after my own heart.

[To Gabriel.
Women. We cannot commend you enough, sir.


Gab. This done in civil fort among our selves, I hope, will prove no scandal
to a brother.


Nick. 'Twill prove an honor to our faction.


Gab. I thirst to do it honor.


Clot. Give him some wine, he thirsts.


Mih. Thou little dapper thing, thou, hold thy peace.


Ant. Thou see he can scarce stand.


Gab. No, my religious brethren, no more wine.
Enough's a feast, and little does suffice.
I thirst to do some honor to our cause. To lead forth legions to fight a
battle against our. malignant adversaries.


Nick. Brave.


Gab. Such an employment now would make me famous, for my sufficiency of At in
Arms.


Nick. I vow, this man has hidden things in him.


Mih. He has as brave a warlike spirit, man, before his precise humor tainted
it, as ever breathed in Hector.


Nick. I vow then, a good orderly diet of nothing but sack for a week together,
would revive it in him, and bring it to good again.


Mih. I hope, it is done already.


Ant. How do you, sit?


Gab. I fear some Jesuitical fumes have invaded my Brain pan. All me thinks
goes whirley, whirley, whirley.


Ant. Best lie down upon a bed. Drawer!


Gab. Soldiers must not be curious. A Bench or any thing.


Draw. The Gentleman may have a bed here, an't please you. But sir, there is an
old angry Gentleman below, that asks for you, and by all description for that
mortified Gentleman. And will by all means press into your room here.


Mih. It is my father.


Dorc. O me! What shall I do?


M^d. Bet. Fran. We shall be all clap't up.


M^. Fear nothing, veil your face a little; Who is with him?


Draw. No body but his old Servingman, that it seems discovered you. You may
put this Gentleman into this inner room, and keep the Key your self. I know
not what charge he has about him.


Mih. Admirable honest fellow.


Draw. And you may tell your father he is gone, for he is gone you see.


Nick. I vow. a wit.


Draw. Now if you will be civil, I may bring him up to you, if not, because he is
your father, we'll thrust him out of doors, an't please you.


Mi. Notable rascal, well sir, let him up. I know how to fit him.


Dorc. But this delays my business, Cousin, and will, I fear, frustrate my
hopes.


Mi. Nor hinder any thing, I Will warrant thee, he is thine. Play Fiddlers, the other
dance.


Nick. I vow.


Clot. Will you! protest.


Ant. You are not wild?


Mad. Come Wenches, if he venture in his fathers sight, shame take us and we
blush.

[Dance. Enter Croswill, Belt.
Cross. Belt. And I had not sold all my land to live upon my money in Town
here, out of danger or the Statute, I would give thee a Copihold for this
discovery.


Belt. I thank your worship, and truly it is a goodly sight, me thinks, an't
please your worship.


Cross. I Am glad it likes you. Heigh, excellent good again. Heigh, Heigh, what
an happiness may fathers boast, that can bring their children up to this.
(Dance ended) I cry ye mercy, Gentlemen all. Ha! I am sorry I interrupted your
serious private occasions.


Nick. Would you speak with any here, sir?


Mi. It is my father, Gentlemen?


Cross. Tny father? hold thy peace; dare thou use thy father thus? to spend
thy time thus! ha! Is this place fit for the son of a Geatleman of quality? ha!
why do not answer me, does this company sort with thy reputation? ha!


Mih. Sir, the company. --


Cross. Hold thy peace, I say, or are these exercises allowable for a
Gentleman, that ever said or heard Grace at his fathers Table? answer me that.


Mih. An't please you, Sir.


Cross. Hold thy peace when I bid thee.


Nick. The company, sir, offends not you, I hope; you see the worst of us.


Cross. In good time, sir, you are the distracted Gentlemen, I take it, that
ask't him if he would moot to night? Is this your mooting? do you put cases to
your Wenches, or they to you?


Nick. I vow thy father talks too much.


Cross. Which are the better Lawyers? ha!


Mad. But that you are his father, sit, and an old man, and he an honest young
Gentleman, and our friend, we would tell you.


Cross. I thank you for him, yes truly, heartily; and for your good opinion of
him, heartily. Pray keep him amongst you while ye have him, for I'^e ha^ no
more to say to him, I. Is your Invectives against drinking, wenching, and the
abomination of the times come to this? is this your spending of time more
precious then money? is it you that knows not what to do with money but to buy
books; and were drawn with such unwillingnesse to a Tavern? ha! you shall graze
upon Littletons Commons, or eat nothing but books, an't please you, for any
exhibition thou ever get'st from me -- And in that faith thou have lost a
father. Come sir, you have brought me to a goodly sight here; would any Villain
but thy self have showed his Master light to see so much woe! Thy Coxscombe
shall yet pay fot't.


Belt. O sir, O.


Cross. This was your trim sight, was it?


Belt. O.


Cross. But well remembered. Pray where is your brother? my son I would say; for
I know no brother or father thou have. Where is Gabriel?


Mih. He is not here, sir.


Cross. Did you not tell me, Sirrah, he was here?


Belt. I told you then too much. I feel it here.


Cross. He was here, sir, but he is gone, sir.


Cross. So, so, he is lost. He must be cried, or we shall never find him.


Mih. I Will warrant you, I Will find him yet to night, sir. Pray Gentlemen pay you
the Reckoning, I Will wait upon my father home.


Cross. Was that spoke like a son of mine? must others pay your reckoning, and
I in place; take that, and do not make me mad. And why should you home with me?
I pray, sir.


Mih. Because sir, it grows dark, and it is the worst way as it is about the
town; so many odd holes a man may slip into; pray take me with you, sir.


Cross. Pray take no care for me, sir, and let the way be as it is. Do not
think me worse at it in the dark then your self, I beseech you. But you talked
of the Reckoning, pray let not the want of money for that hinder the search of
your brother. There Is toward your pains for that; and so for a farewell to you
and your friends here, till I hear thou keep better company, let me hear no
more of thee.

Ex. Cross. and Belt.
Mih. There was no way to get this money, and be rid of him, but to offer him
my service He would have driven me out before him else. But come, let us see my
brother that went to sleep in so warlike a Passion. I hope he will wake in a
better.


Nic. Mun Clotpoll, thou art dull.


Clot. No, I protest, but struck with admiration at the old Blades humor.


Nick. Come, Dammy and the rest, be merry. I vow, we'll sup together, and so at
last hear all thy dismal story.


Nick. I mean he shall, and such an Audit make,
As shall restore her honor from the stake.
Ex. Omnes.
Act V.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Crossewill Solus. Cross. WHat has this Coxscombe Cockbrayne writ me
here? That he desires his absence be excused. What have I to do with him? when
I send for him, let him come to me. That he is upon a point of discovery in a
most excellent project for the weeding of this Garden? what Garden? what
project? A project he says here for the good of the Republike, Repudding. This
fellow has in stead of brains, a Cob-web in his Noddle, with little strawes,
feathers, and wings of dead Butterflies hanging in it, that having motion by
his aerie fancy, there dance and keep a Racket; it is to teach women silence, or
some such foolish impossibility. He is ambitious to be called into authority by
notice taken of some special service he is able to do the tate aforehand. But
what great service he is able to do it, or which way to undertake it, falls not
in the reach of my imagination. But good Mr. Croswill, by your favor now, what
reason have you to slight or wrangle at this man? this honest Cockbrayne? that
has always been a constant friend to you, and officious in many good ways,
and is a Gentleman, not only of good descent and estate, but of a good
disposition. And you two, Mr. Crossewill, by your leave, have always agreed
like neighbors children. I, the devil was in it, and now he vexes me again; we
agreed in one point so well, that we have undone a couple of our children by
it, and hindered the getting of I know not how many more. His son and my
daughter should have married. And on a sndden he and I both consented to a
dislike of the match and broke it, and have both repented it an hundred times
since. We agree very well in that point; and now is his son irrecoverably lost,
and my daughter resolutely bent to be an Ape-leader in Limbo. But what is all
this to the affliction I suffer in my sons now? that one of them from a riotous
boy. should grow into a Puritanical Woodcock; and the the other from a civil
well-qualified fellow, turned absolute Ruffian. There, there, I there is the
devil in it. I could beat my self for getting such children.

Enter Belt. See, see, my Master for want of other company fallen out with
himself, and it please you, sir.


Cross. It does not please me, nor thou please me, nor any thing pleases me.
The world's bent to cross me, and thou shall feel it.


Belt. O good sir.


Cross. Is it not so, sir, was not that dunce Gabriel, a most notorious wild
thing

Before he steered a Religious course? but then he run so full a sail, that he
passed and was beyond the line of Religion before he was aware; and as he
passed it under the torrid Zone of Zeal, the Calenture took him of the pate,
that he is mad with it, and as far beyond Religion now as it is to it.


Belt. Sir, there is hope that he may he fetched half way back again, by your
fatherly advicement, and become a sound man.


Cross. And then was not Mihil so civil, that he made me even sick to see him.
And now is he flowen out as far into rior the other way.


Belt. But he, sir, will appear a present comfort to you, he is reclaimed
already; you shall never see such a Reformation in a Gentleman.


Cross. What Is this you tell me? ha!


Belt. He has cast off his long-curl'd hair and all.


Cross. He had been better have cut his head off.
Where is he!

Belt. Below sir, and a Gentlewoman with him, but very much afraid to appear to
you. I never saw a man so timoursome.


Cross. Do you think it fit I should go down to him, or he come up to me, fir,
ha!


Belt. I Will fetch him, here is a life!

Ex.
Cross. I charged he should not come at this house too, for fear he might be
caught with this mechanic fellows daughter, though her portion be around one.
And let him take heed he look not at her.

Enter Mihil and Madge. Bless me! what changeling is this? he is in his
Brothers cut.


Mih. Sir, -- Sir. --


Cross. Would you speak with any here, sir, do you know me. I know not you, I
assure you.


Mih. The sense of your late displeasure, sir, has so humbled me into the
knowledge of my self, that on the wings of true obedience, I flew after you to
make a childs submission at your feet, to crave your pardon for my riotous
transgression, and to ask your blessing.


Cross. A delicate speech, pray take it for fashion-sake. But if I know how to
look toward thee.


Mih. Pray sir, bestow it really upon me.


Cross. God bless thee, I say, and so much many honest men bestow daily on
sons that are none of their own, if thou be mine, how came thou thus like
a fellow that had narrowly escaped the Pillorie, and bragged in the publication
of his ears? not an hair left to hide them.


Mih. To show my readiness to reform my life, sir. And yet a willingness
withal to live, as well, as civilly, in which I am in all humility to prefer
a suit to you. You know, sir, I am but a younger brother.


Cross. What will this come to?


Mih. Here is a widow, sir, a Gentlewoman of great estate, and of a well-known
life. Ancient she is, and has had husbands. How many?


Mad. Four truly, sir.


Mih. Four sir, I would not lie. Of which the worst spoke well of her on's
deathbed.


Mad. What Is that to me or thee? come to the point.


Mih. I have all would and won her, sir, and crave but your good will to marry
her. I have brought a Churchman and a Kinsman to give her.


Cross. Why so, what needs two words then? do you think I can deny you?


Mih. If he does grant it, it is the first request that e're he granted in his
life. Sure the old Match-maker the devil thinks I am in earnest to marry this
beast. And puts a readiness in his hand to forward it.


Cross. Widow, you are welcome. Why call you not your Priest? or tarry sir, let
me question you but a little, Do you think seriously you love this widow?


Mih. Better then many men love their wives, I am persuaded.


Cross. It Is very well, what children have you widow?


Mad. Never had any, Sir.


Cross. Very well still.


Mi. Nor ever like to have any, fir, that's the comfort. We shall live at the
less charge.


Cross. Thou art a covetous and a preposterous Knave. Would thou bury up thy
youth in barren ground? do seek after wealth, and not after issue? do
love to feed on other men's leavings? or travel only in a beaten path? ha!


Mih. A man goes certainest on his journey so, sir, and less trouble it is you
know to go in at a great gate, then a narrow wicket.


Cross. You have said enough, sir, and delight to cross me; but I Will cross
you for once, and lay a cross upon you, shall perhaps carry you to your grave.
Go, fetch your Priest.


Mih. I Will face it as far as I dare. I hope I shall have the grace to pull my
hand from the book when it comes so far.

Ex.
Cross. Widow, you are resolved to have him too.


Mad. Before all men in the world by your fair leave, 1.


Cross. You shall not have him.


Mad. Without your free consent, I will not.


Cross. I am resolved I Will do it. And 'twill be the best cross trick that e're
I did in my life. Pray let me speak in some more private wirh you.


Mad. If I but 'scape Bridewell, I care not.


Scoen. 2.
Enter Mihil, Anthony, Katharine, Parson. Mih. Now Tonie, she 's thine own,
Now Sister Kate; he is thine. The Priest has pronounced it. I say, Amen to it.
And heaven give you joy.


Kat. Now you have done the best brotherly office that ever made a Sister happy.


Ant. And the friendliest to a friend. We have been casting for it, Sweet, this
Twelve-moneth, and Heaven pardon me. I vowed never to take acquaintance of my
Father, till 'twere effected. Although I know of late he has been willing.


Kat. And so is mine, I know, but yet he swore, that I should match my self
before he knew't, or I should never marry.


Mih. You Will find him of another mind toward me, and force me into wedlock
presently.


Kat. You have taken the likeliest course that could be. But what is your
disguised woman, Brother.


Mih. What you shall never know, Sister, I hope.

Enter Crossewill, Rookesbill, Lucie, Madge.
Cross. Come sir, I have broken off the match with your widow; and she is
content to leave you as she found you. And now take me this pretty, simpring,
plump-lip't, ruddie-cheek't, white-neck't, long-finger'd Virgin in hand, or I
will swindge you, Sirrah, look to it. If you cannot live civilly with a young
wife, you cannot but be mad with an old, I think. Besides, she is a friends
daughter of mine, and prepared by her discreet father here to love you. Come,
and kiss her, quickly, Sirrah.


Mih. I cannot do it for all the wealth in the world.


Cross. How Is that?


Mih. Kiss a Maid I never saw above twice in my life.


Cross. He will have me think him a bastard, do I what I can. Can thou see a
Maid twice, and not kiss her?


Mih. Yes, twenty times, sir, and not kiss her, or if once, not above, sir.


Cross. But you shall kiss her above and below, sir, and in every room of the
house, sir, before you part. Stand fair pretty one.


Luc. I know not how to do it.


Rook. You were not best let me instruct you. I can be angry too.


Luc. His back side's toward me.


Cross. Turn your self, Sirrah, or I Will turn you. Go to, bend your body a
little and be hanged. So, now come your way, and say after your little Sir John
here, I Mihil take thee, Lucie, etc. As learning shall enable him to proceed
without book.


Rook. Pray let them do it in the next chamber, they are too bashful before us.
There are witnesses enough. Go all in, I pray you.


Mih. Widow, will you give me leave to obey my father?


Mad. With all my heart, and say Amen to the marriage.


Cross. I think I shall have my will at last upon one of my rebellious
offspring.


Rook. And now, pray give me leave sir, to let you know how happy I do hold my
self in this marriage. I did like this Son better then the other before. And
now I like him better then I did at my former view of him, by some Reformation
that I do observe in him. And I do not a little rejoice in the honor I may
have to call you brother.


Cross. That very word brother out of his mouth, has turned my stomach. I must
pull all in pieces again. And yet let me see these young bloods when they are
set on it; if they do not marry, they will do worse. Let em e'ne go on now.


Rook. You may easily conceive, sir, what a comfort it will be unto me, that I
now growing old, and having (I give praise for it,) wealth enough, and no child
that I make account of but this one daughter, may, before I die, see
Grandchildren that I may have by her sufficiently provided for, be they more or
less in number, they may have enough.


Cross. There he is again, he calls my Grandchildren that shall be, his
Grandchildren. Am I a Gentleman, and can hear this? if it be not too late,
I Will spoil the getting of your Grandchildren.

Enter all again.
All. Heaven give you joy. Heaven give you joy.


Cross. What, are you married?


Pars. I do pronounce them man and wife.


Ant. Mad. Kat. And we are witnesses.


Cross. What remedy?


Mih. Luc. We are, and crave your blessings.


Cross. Rook. All blessings be upon you, (all salute).


Cross. But you, sir, Mr. Bridegroom.


Mih. I Will only gratify the Minister.


Cross. Do so, and pay him well, it is, perhaps, for the dearest fault that
e're thou did.


Mih. There Is for your pains, sir. Madge, there is for you. Enough to purchase
thee a License to sell Ale, Tobaccho, and Strong-water again in Godpiece-Rowe,
for here will be no dwelling for thee, I see that.

Now, brother Anthony, go you all back to the company we left, and see that my
Instructions be followed concerning my brother Gabriel, Nick, and his Dammie,


Ant. All, all.


Kat. Shall he go from me?


Mih. Yes, but you shall follow him presently, trust to me Sister. Go, take no
leave of 'em. I Will bring 'em upon you presently.


Cross. Are you at leisure now, sir, to tell me of your brother.


Mih. Yes, to my grief, sir, praying you may have patience.


Cross. To your grief, sir, he is not dead then? Younger brothers seldom
grieve for their Elders death.


Mih. Pray bear it as you may, sir I left him in an heavy plight. And let me
speak it with sorrow, he lay speechless.


Rook. Alack-a day, good Gentleman, my son in-law, perhaps, is heir already.


Cross. And have thou been here all this while fooling or wiving (all is a
matter) and left thy brother in danger? ha!


Mih. He Is well attended, sir, and looked unto. Nor would I wish you see his
weak estate.

It can but grieve you, sir, my wife and sister, together with my self, will
go. Or if

It please my father Rooksbill here, because his power in this quarter is
available.


Cross. Co, show the way. I Will go in person, I. My son's my son.


Mih. Nay, pray sir.


Cross. Yes, 'cause you have a wife, you shall control me. Will you go on, sir.


Mih. Well, I Will bring you to him, sir.


Luc. What was your widow, sir, she stunk of Aquavitae, fearfully.


Mih. I Will tell thee as we go. Kiss.

Exeunt.
Scoen. 3.
Enter Clotpoll, Dorcas, Nick. Nick. What a drunken sot was I, that knew thee
not all this while? I vow, thy story pities me. I Will marry thee, and turn thee
to thy friends, for I am sure I have none that will keep thee for my sake.


Dorc. I ask no further satisfaction of you, then to be honested by marriage.
I Will work for a poor living.


Nick. Prithee Mun seek me a Priest.


Clot. I have no acquaintance in their function, I.


Dorc. My Cousin Mihil said he would bring or send one.


Nick. There Is no starting, that Mihil has a fist over me. I vow, and thou were
not his Kinswoman, thou should to the Common yet.


Clot. Father, how come you hither?


Capt. Did not the company send for me?


Nick. I vow, not we.


Capt. The City-mouth, that peck't us at my lodging last night, came to me with
an abominable scratch't face, and warned me on a business hither.


Nick. I smell some trick.


Clot. Some treachery upon the brotherhood, perhaps.


Nick. Timorous thing! what in our own Quarter?


Capt. If you doubt any thing, it is best remove.
The fellow was sorely handled.

Nick. I would but see the carcass of authority prance in our Quarter, and we
not cut his legs off. Welcome Tonie, what have thou brought the word here to
pass for the Reckoning.

Enter Ant. Parson.
Ant. Come, you must make a wedding-night on it Nick, Mihil will go no less.


Nick. My Vow is passed, and before you, sir, I confirm it. This is my wife.
Anon, you shall perform the holy Ceremony,


Ant. It Is well, pray sir, retire your self to the next room there a while, and
stay you with him, Lady.

But what do you with Gabriel? Is it not time to wake him yet?


Clot. It Is now upon the point, h'as slept two hours.


Nick. Father, you will see a brave experiment upon a Gentleman that has been a
youth.


Clot. And of the Philoblathici, as we are now.


Nick. And since was grown one of the reformed, and we are now in practice to
retrive, and bring him back to his first condition.


Ant. Have you followed all Mihils directions?


Nick. Hitherto we have. First, you saw he was laid defunct in Sack, next in
his sleep, we have accoutred him in martial ab liments, and now we mean to wake
him with alarmes shall affright the silly humor out of him, and render him his
warlike faculty, or our Art fails.


Ant. Where be the Wenches?


Clot. The Sisters of the Scabberd, there is the sport on it. They have their
parts to play upon him too. But for his drink now when he wakes, you said you
would have a bottle of the woman's what do you called yonder? the Medea.


Capt. What? the charmed liquor that Medea brewed to make old father Aeson
young again?

Must that renew his youthful spirit in him?


Nick. No, Sack will do bette^. When he wakes he will be very dry, then a
quart-draught of good Canarie will so screw him up. It Is time 'twere now in
practice. So, softly, softly. We must but half wake him at first.

A Bed put forth, Gabriel on it, Bettie and Frank.
Gab. O some small drink.


Nick. Here, drink it off, sir, (Drinks) D^um and Trumpet. An Alarm.


Gab. Surpised by the enemy, whilst we have played the Sluggard in our Tents.


Capt. Nick. Clot. Hold Captain, hold, we are your soldiers.


Gab. You Are Mutineers, and have disturbed my rest. And I Will do Martial Justice
on you all.


Nick. I vow, hold, are you mad?


Gab. Know you not discipline? or are you grown rebellious in the Camp. I Will
teach you warfare.


Capt. You have conjured a fury into him to beat us into fitters.


Clot. My pate bleeds for it; I protest.


Gab. I Will make you know command.


Ant. Noble Commander, hold thy furious hand, and hear thy soldiers speak.


Gab. What have we women for our Martial Music?


Clot. None but the She-Trumpet, a neighbor here, and her Sister, that was
Drum-ma^or to my Countrey-Amazons, that pulled up the Enclosures to lie all in
Common.


Gab. Is the enemy in the field?


Nick. Upon their march, Captain, and we your officers: But roused you up to be
in readiness.


Gab. You are my Lieutenant, you my Ancient, and you two my Sergeants; and you
must know the Commander you serve under, to be none of those Letter-carriers
that know not so much as the terms of discipline, what a Flanker is, Nor a
Raveling is. Nor a Petarre is. Nor a Curtain is. Nor a Bulwark is. Nor a
Bastile is. Nor a Counterscarp is. Nor a Casemate is. A Gabion is: Nor any left
word of fortification. How can such fresh water Captains command?


All. Right noble Colonel. He shall be our Colonel.


Clot. One soldier made up of Sack, is worth as many as would drink a fresh
water river dry.


Gab. I knew, men of abilities should at last be put in action.

Valiant men and wise,
Are only fit for weighty enterprise.

All. O noble Colonel.


Gab. What would an upstart Militaster now, That knew no rudiments of
discipline, nor Art of war, do in a sudden service? or say, when I know how
to have my Ordnance planted here, my Cavalrie mounted here, my
Battery-discove^er on such a point, my Trenches cut thus, my Mine carried thus,
my Gabions raised thus. Here my Parapet, there my Pallisadoe o'th'top of that.
The enemy made saltable six hundred paces there. And I draw out my Musketeers
to flank 'em in their Trenches here, while my Pikes and Targeteers advance to
the breach there. What would Captain, my Lords man, or Sergeant-major, my
Ladies Kinsman, sent in by honorable favor, do or say in such an expedition?


All. Braver and braver still.


Clot. This goes beyond the Blade and the Battoon.


Gab. Or how would their brains lie in their breeches, when the able Captain
leads up his men in the Head of a Troop bravely, charges with his shot, makes a
stand with his Pikes, does execution with his Sword, the Cannon playing, the
Drum beating, the Shot thumping, the Ensigns waving, the Arms clashing, the
Air rending, Dust and Smoke clouding, Blood raining. And then to bring up such
a Division to fight, make good such a Ground, relieve such a Squadron, fetch
off such a loss, r'enforce the Ranks that are broken. March on, Come off. Beat
the Bessognes that lie hid in the Carriages. O the renowned life of a worthy
Commander.


Nick. Sound Drum and Trumpet.


All. A Colonel, a Colonel.

Enter Croswill, Rooksbill, Mihil.
Cross. Whither have thou brought me? does thy brother lie speechless in this
house? ha! what in the name of tumult can these be?


Mih. Pray sit, attend, you will be pleased anon.


Gab. A still march now. So, I have lost a great many of my men. But courage
yet, you poor remainder of my scattered Troops. Stand. Qni vala. An Ambuscado
of the enemy. Alarm. Lieutenant, charge in with your Shot. Now Gentlemen, for
the honor of Covent Garden, make a stand with your Pikes; in to the short
sword; well fought, take Prisoners. Sound a Retreat now. Fair, fair in the
coming off. So, 'twas bravely performed.


Clot. Must we not fall to rifling now, Colonel.


Mih. Part fair on all sides, Gentlemen.


Gab. What Is this, a vision, sure I do aile something.


Cross. Is It possible it is thou? art thou run mad as far as hell the the other
way now.


Rook. My wicked, caitiffe, reprobate son is here too.
Pray let me flee, I am but a dead man else.

Mih. You shall receive no harm, sir Lay by your Arms my Masters. I bring none
but friends.


Nick. I hou can not make that good, my father's there.


Mih I Will make him friends with thee. Go and di patch within.


Ant. I Will see it done, and take our new made Brides with us for witnesses.

Ex. Nick. Ant. Kat. Luc.
Rook Has his shame yet taught him to shun my sight.


Mih. And shall return him instantly your comfort.


Rook. Unpossible, unpossible.


Mih. Attend the event.


Cross. I rather thought I should have found you, sir, disputing with the
Pastors, and the Elders; yet to say truth, this is the better madness. What
can this mean? how came he thus translated? what Charms, or what Enchantments
are upon him?


Gab. What Babel was a building in my brains?
But now it turns, and I can recollect
The knowledge of a father, brother, Sister.
And that a thousand vain imaginations,
Like scatterings of light things upon the earth,
Rushes, loose leaves, sprigs, straws, and dust
Contracted by a whirlwinde, were blown up,
And lodged in the rich Seat of Contemplation,
Usurping there the room of virtuous thoughts.
Honor awake me from this Lethargy.

Cross. What can those women that appear like furies be in this action?


Mih. They were but used as properties to give new motion to his mortified
condition.


Cross. I know not what to say to any thing; there is some Spell upon me too. My
anger has forsook me. What are those men that bear a countenance. As if they
stood indifferently affected to Bedlam and Bride-well.


Clot. Meaning by us, sir. If our sight offend you,
Know we are men that dare forbear the place.

Capt. I son, let us go, our stay is dangerous.
They look like Peace-maintainers, we^ll fall off.
Enter Vintner.
Vint. O tarry, Gentlemen, we are all undone else. If you make not your peace
before you stir, both you and I must suffer.


Capt. What Is the matter?


Vint. The Magistrates and Officers with their Bill-men have taken us by
surprise. They are in the house.


Bett. O me! the blew Gown College.


Fran. Wheels and whips. I feel what we must go to. Did not I say our stay was
dangerous?


Clot. Did not I say there was some subtle practice upon the Philoblatici? and
that we were betrayed hither?


Vint. There Is no escaping forth. And Gentlemen, It will but breed more scandal
on my house, and the whole plantation here, if now you make rebellious uproar.
Yield your weapons, and welcome Justice but like subjects new, and peace will
follow.


Clot. But where is Nick? where is Tonie?


Mih. They shall yield up their weapons. So do you.


Capt. Yes yes, it is best.


Clot. Shall we, sir, shall we?


Mih. Yes sir, you shall.


Clot. So, sir, I will then, not the Blade alone. But for your more security,
the Battoon, There see my Arms forth coming.

Exeunt.
Mih. Say they shall have fair welcome, What are they married?

Enter Nick. Dorcas, Ant. Kat. Luc.
Ant. Yes, as fast as troth and holy words can bind 'em.


Mih. It Is well. Now sir, let me entreat your favor.
It Is my first suit to you since I was your son,
That before others entrances distract our troubled
Scoene, these may be reconciled.
Down. Brother Nicholas.
Nick. Even unto the earth, sir, and humbled with as true a penitence, as son
can be for wronging of a father, I beg your pardon and blessing.


Cross. Give it him, Brother Rooksbill, I dare say 'twill make him a good man.


Rook. Heaven make him so. My blessing and my prayers shall not be wanting.


Cross. What? my Niece Dorcas made an honest woman?


Gab. Was that the man that wronged my Cousin Dorcas?


Mih. Yes, and has now made ample recompense.

Enter Cockbrayne, Cit. Watch. Madgeo
Cit. Here they are altogether, sir.


Cock. Lay hands on all. First, on that old Ruffian, the Incendiarie, that sets
the youthful bloods on fire here with his Infernal discipline. Next, take his
sons, there is one, that young Blade there, Have I now got within ye, Gentlemen?
will you have Songs ex temporc? know ye me now? a ha! I Will be can'd the Weeder
of this Garden. Take up those She weeds there. I have the rank one here. I took
her straggling in my Round e'ne now.


Rook. My Tenant, I take it, Mrs. Margerie Howlet.


Cross. Your widow sir, I think.


Mih. But for a shift sir, now you know my aim.


Mad. O good your worship, as you came of a woman.


Cock. Peace Circes, cease thy charms. What cluster have we here now. O here is
another of the sons of noise.


Rook. That Is my son now, sir, by your leave, and I Will bail him.


Cook. What Mr. Rooksbil, are you here? what woman's this?


Cross. My Niece, sir, his sons wife. And I Will bail her.


Cock. What Mr. Croswill, you among this Ginge too?

How will you 'scape commitment?


Cross. Why, Mr. Cockbrayne? how his brains crow now?


Cock. Who Is here? your daughters too? but what are these?


Cross. I hope they will prove my sons, and be indifferent men in time, sir, by
that time their hair may grow, or be reduced to an indifferent length.


Mih. That Is done on me already, sir.


Cross. Now he looks as like a Rogue as e're he did again.


Gab. And sir, for me, now that my Cousin is restored, and the wild fury of my
wine abated.

I do you the obedience of a son, acknowledging my former formal habit was more
of stubbornness then true devotion. For which I beg your pardon.


Cross. There Is more deceit under these half Footballs, then in whole
Pudding-bags. Well boys, be you indifferent sons, neither too hot nor too
cold. I have found a fault in myself, I confess. I will reform it, and be an
indifferent father.


Cock. O here is the man I sought, whom, I confess, I am half sorry to commit
with the rest, because I found him civiller.


Ant. Hoping you will not stake that good opinion, I Will now come nearer to you.
And since here is such a convention of love and joy. I hope my offering of a
sons true duty may sinde I dulgencie.


Cock. What? my son Antonie?


Cross. How? how? your son that should have had my daughter? Come hither Kate,
now if thou love him, take him. Are you content, friend Cockbrayne.


Cock. O sir, most happily.


Cross. Why run you not together?


Ant. It is too late, or needless now for me to marry her.


Cross. Is It come to that? and if I do not swindge him --.Are you too good, sir,
for my daughter?


Ant. I do not say so, sir.


Cross. Huswife, do you like him?


Kat. No more then he does me, sir.


Cross. Get you together, or I Will swaddle you both into one, you perverse fools.


Ant. Sir, the truth is, we are married already.


Kat. It Is so, indeed, sir.


Cross. Heyday! who am I trow? how durst you do it without my consent?


Kat. I had your consent, sir, you commanded me to take my choice in whom I
pleased, before you would take notice.


Cross. I cannot abide this wrangling. Give you joy.


Cock. Joy and my blessing on you. Why I know not whom to commit now.


Cross. You have done the Commonwealth a special piece of service the while
with your State-braines. But let us make a night of this, I pray.


Cit. Sir, the parties have given me satisfaction, and I am content they be
released.


Cross. There Is an honest fellovv now, and looks like one that would be beaten
every day for ready money. Go now, while ye are well, and be seen no more in
this Precinct.


All. Never and't please your worships, never.


Cross. 'Tvvas built for no such vermin. Hence away.
And may the place be purged so every day.
It Is no unvvorthy member may be found,
To pester or to vilify this ground.
That as it was intended, it may be
A Scoene for Virtue and Nobility.

EPILOGUE.
It Is not the Poets Art, nor all that we
By life of Action can present on it, ye
Can or ought make us to presume a Play
Is good, it is you approve't. Which that you may
It cannot misbecome us, since our gains
Come by your favor, more then all our pains.
Thus to submit us unto your commands.
And humbly ask the favor at your hands.
Another.
It Is done. And now that Poets can divine,
Observe with what Nobility does shine
Fair Covent Garden. And as that improves,
May we find like Improvement in your Loves.
FINIS.
THE NEW ACADEMY, Or, the NEW Exchange.

By RICHARD BROM.

LONDON, Printed or Andrew Crook, at the Green Dragon in Saint ^auls
Churchyard: And Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy-lane. 1658.

The Actors Names.
Sir Swithin Whimlby, a melancholy Widower. Suitor to the Lady Nestlecock. Old
Matchil, a Merchant that married his Maid. Gabrialla's Guardian. Young Matchil
his son. Old Lafoy a French Gentleman, Guardian to young Matchil. Young F.
Lafoy his son. Mr. Hardyman, Captain Valentines Father-in-law. Hannah's
father. Strigood, half brother to Matchil. Valentine Askal, son-in-law to
Hardiman. Hannah's half-brother. Erasmus a young Gentleman, his Companion and
Friend. Cash, Matchils Prentice. Nehemiah Nestlecock, a foolish Gentleman, the
Ladies son. Ephraim, the Lady Nestlecocks Servant. Rafe Camelion an uxorious
Citizen. A Footpost. Papillion Two Monsieurs, alias Philip Matchils and Lafoy's
sons Galliard Frances
Women.
Lady Nestlecock, a fond Mother. Joyce, Ma^chils Daughter. Foster Sisters.
Gabriella, Lafoy's Daughter. Mrs. Blithe Tripshort, Sir Swithin Whimlbies
Niece. Hannah, Camelions wife, Captain Hardimans daughter. Maudlin, Matchils
Maid and Wife.
THE NEW ACADEMY, OR, THE NEW EXCHANGE.
Act. I.
Valentine, Erasmus. IS this the entertainment you promised me in the Jovial
Merchants house? Is this the great interest you have in his huge hospitality?
when by half an hours attendance and entreats, we cannot obtain the sight of
him.

Er. I wonder at it; Sure some strange disaster has suddenly befallen him. He
was, last night the merriest man alive, drank healthes; told tales; sung
Catches; Trowle the Bowl; Toss the Cannykin; and what not! and all for joy,
that his son, he said, was upon his return, whom he has not seen these dozen
years, since he sent him a little Lad into France, to be bred there.


Val. I heard he did so; and that in lieu, by way of Exchange, he brings up the
daughter of the Parisien that breeds his son.


Er. Right.


Val. But is that daughter so exquisite a creature, as is this Merchant
Matchills own whom you so much extol?


Er. They are both so equally handsome, and virtuous, that, be their dowries
so, and their consents alike, I Will take my choice of cross and pile for
either, with such a friend as thou art.


Val. Troth, and that is friendly spoken, Mus.


Er. It is so Val. yet not with some policy do I wish thee a fortune: for,
insooth. young Gentleman, though I like your person, and some of your
qualities, yet by reason of your wants, I find you something heavy on my
purse-strings; and my self scarce able to supply you. And, if we fail of good
matches, I must even turn you over shortly to the hopes you host of in your
City-Mystresses and Tradesmens wives --.


Val. Peace, prithee hold thy peace.

Enter Cash. Friend Cash! Is your Master, Mr. Matchill yet at leisure (...) be
seen?


Cast. He much desires, sir, to be held excused. It Is true that he invited you.
His dinner's ready; and his heart welcomes you. But he has met with an unhappy
news to day. --


Val. I feared some ill. What is the matter?


Cash. His only son, whom he of late expected home out of France, we hear, is
dead.


Val. His daughter will prove a bouncing match then.


Cash. That Is the impression the heavy news makes in you, Gentlemen.


Er. Come, let us go.


Cash. Nay, Gentlemen, although my Masters sudden sadness shuts him from you.
His meat and wine are ready. There are some good company in his Parlour too,
Pray stay.


Val. Are his fair daughter, and the French-borne
Damsel there to be seen?

Cash. Both. Pray be pleased to enter.

I hope his passionate fit e're you have dined will be past over. He is not
wont to suffer long under the hand of sorrow.

It Is like that you shall see him ere you go.

Er. In that fair hope we'll enter and fall to.

Ex. Val. Er.
Cash. It Is like you shall fall short though of your aim
At my young Mystresse, who by this black news,
Becomes my Masters heir, and so the white
That all the gallant suitors of the City
And Court will level their keen shafts at. Where
Are mine own hopes then, that stood as fair
In competition for her, love as any,
When the great noise of her inheritance,
Shall drown each Lovers tongue, that cannot say,
It is a Lords at least, I rather wish
The young man had not did.
Enter Strigood.
Stri. Where Is my Boykin? my Friskoe? my Delight? my Cash? by what better name
can I call thee?


Cash. O me! Master Strigood, what make you here?


Stri. I come to comfort my brother in his sorrow.
His son is dead, they say. Ha! Is It not so?

Cash. And he is almost dead with sorrow: Back sir.
The sight of you, that are his sole vexation, will make him mad.

Str. That is my way to cure him.
Madness drowns grief in any man. -- Probatum.

Cash. Good Mr. Strigood depart.

Str. Good Mr. Cash, and Mr. Matchils man.
I Will see your Master. What! deny his brother?
His nowne natural brother? By the surer side too
We tumbled in one Pannier; though we had
Two Rippiers, Sweet sir, I am the elder too
Strigood was in my mother before Matchill
Therefore, because I have spent an estate
And he has got-one, must not I maintain
My self the better man?

Cash. Yes: if you had the wherewithal.

Str. Sir, you had been as good have held your tongue.
Lend me some money Cash.

Cash. I have no money, sir, but what is my Masters.

Str. Whose money, sir, was that you played last night.
Among the Knights and Braveries at the ordinary?
Gold by the handfuls, Cash! Lend me two pieces.

Cash. Speak lower, sir.

Str. Lend me three pieces, Cash.
Before I speak too loud, whose money's that
You use to wear abroad at Feasts and Revels
In silver lace and satin; though you wait
At home in simple Serge, or broad-cloth, sir.

Cash. Be not so loud, I pray.

Str. Lend me five pieces.
I shall grow louder else. Who pays your Barber?
I mean not for your Prentice pig-hair'd cut
Your wear at home here; but your Periwigs;
Your locks and Lady-ware that dangle in 'em,
Like straws in the bush natural of a Bedlem?

Cash. What mean you Mr. Strygood.

Stri. I mean ten pieces now; I Will go no less. Do not I know your haunts? --

Cash. You may; you trained one to 'em

Str. Do not I know your our leaps, and vagaries?
Your tiring houses, where you shift your self,
Your privy lodgings, for your trunks and punks?
Your midnight walks and meetings? Come, the money.
And, hark thee, though thou modest my brother by it.
I Will keep thy council: thou shall find me yertuous.
I want, he gives me nothing; and thou can not
Do him better service, then relieve his brother.

Cash: I am in; and must, to hide my old faults, do
-- Aside. Like an ill Painter, lawbe 'em over with new.

Str. Quickly. I shall grow loud again else Cash.

Cash. Sir, I am in your hands, here are ten pieces.
I hope you will not think my Master for*^^.

Str. No; no for all he has that comes through thy hands.
My nimble Cash; and from his I am sure,
Though I were starving, I should finger nothing.

Cash. Will you go now?

Str. I Will see him e're I go,
And dine, if there be meat in the house. What eate's
Are there within ^'ll draw a knife amon^ 'em.
Ex.
Cash. This desperate old Russian, would undo me,
But he hopes to waste his brother by me.
He has spent himself to beggary; and would fall so,
But that he has pernicious fire in's brain,
That raging spreads to ruin others with him.
I must beware of him,
Enter Lady Nestlecock, Ephraim. Is she come too?
Then it is deereed, my Master must, from sorrow, suffer in madness.

La. Go home Ephraim.
And have a care you suffer not my boy
To Straggle forth among his unhappy play-mates,
For fear of mischief.

Ephesians. It shall be my care.
-- Ex.
La. What do you lock up my brother, ha? --

Cash. H' has locked himself up, Madam; and will suffer
None to come at him, till his sorrowful fit
Be somewhat over.

La. Not's own Sister, ha? --

Cash. Nor his half brother neither: yet he is here.

La. Is he here, ha? That Strygood? Is he here?
Hang him old reprobate. And beshrew thy heart,
For a young varlet, to call him our brother.
It is no marvel, if my brother Matchil
Lock up himself, and such a wickedness
Be in his house, as is that Strygood, ha --
Let him take heed, he comes not in my Nayl reach,
And call me Sister, or my Brother, brother,
Like a debaush'd old Villain, as he is.
O that my husband Nestlecock were alive,
But for three minutes, to send him to
Newgate, if he presume to call me Sister
But I command you in my husbands name,
Who was a Justice, when he lived, to thrust him
Out of your Masters doors, my brothers house.
Lest I be sick with the loathed sight of him.
You will not disobey this, will you, ha? --
If not, why stir you not? ha. --

Cash. I must remove
This fit of hers. There Is but one way to do it;
And that's to talk of her white boy, she is fond on.

La. Will you not send him packing, ha? --

Cash, First, Madam.
(By your good Ladyships leave) how does your son
Sweet Master Nehemiah Nestlecock?

La. I thank you courteous friend. In truth, last night,
One of my Coach-gueldings fell lame, and I,
By that constrained to come afoot,
Was forced to leave my boy at home; or else
He had come with me, to have been a comfort
To his sad Uncle: But I would not now
For twice my Gueldings price, my child were here;
And that foul fiend in the house, whose very looks
Would fright him into sickness.

Cash. O good Lady!

La. I cannot so soon forget the fright he took
At seeing the roguish Jugler once eat tow,
And blow it out of's mouth in fire and smoke,
He lay a fourtnight by it.

Cash. That Is two years since.
And he was then but young, he is now a man.

La. Alack a child; but going in's nineteenth year.
Where Is my Niece Joyce?

Cash. Within there Madam; so is Gabriella
The French young Gentlewoman to attend you.

La. I Will stay with them till I may see my brother.
-- Ex.
Cash. I hope old Strygood, who now on the sudden
Has slipped her memory, meets her by the ears first.
Enter Matchil, an opeu letter in his hands. But the good minute's come, before
I looked for it.
My Master now appears. He looks most sourely
Expressing more of anger then of grief.
I fear, old Strygood was so loud with me,
That he has overheard us, and I shall break
Before I am a Freeman.

Mat. Sorrow be gone
And puleing grief away, whilst I take in
A nobler and more manly Passion;
Anger, that may instruct me to revenge.
My child is lost by treacherous neglect
In that false Frenchman, to whose seeming care
I trusted the chief comfort of my life;
Matchil reads. My boy. Nay, read again. It Is written, here,
He was grown man:

Cash. His man, I think, he said.
Cash listens to Matchil, and speaks aside. Does your man trouble you. I do not
like that

Mat. And here he writes that in his youthful spring
And heat of spirit, he began to grow
Intemperate and wild --

Cash. Wild! Are you there?

Mat. Which drew him on to riotous expense --

Cash. And there again, to riotous expense!
It Is I directly that he is troubled with.

Mat. And sometimes into quarrels. What of that?
In all this he was still mine own. Oboy --
Mat. kisses the paper.
Cash. Some slave has writ some fearful information.
Against me, and he hugs and kisses it.

Mat. And had his Guardian had a feeling care
(Hang his French friendship) over my dear child,
As I had over his, these youthful follies
Might have been tempered into manly virtues.

Cash. I hear not that.

Mat. But I fall back again
From my revenge to grief. Away; I will not.
He reads again. Here Is the death-doing point. These slight disorders.
In my young forward son (I find it here)
Were, by his churlish and perfidious Guardian,
Interpreted no less then Reptobation,
And, by his ignorant cruelty, so punished.
For, here he shuts his ear and door against him:
When suddenly the loose licentious world
Soothes on his youthful, in judicious courage
To imminent destruction; so being engaged
In a rash quarrel, he in duel fell.
The Opponents sword was instrument; yet I infer.
Lafoy, his Guarcian was his murderer.
Farewell, my boy; and this is the last tear
Thou shall wring from me. Something I Will do,
Shall show a fathers love, and valor too.
I Am young enough to draw a sword in France, yet.
But first -- Come hither, Sirrah.

Cash. Now it comes.

Mrt. I purpose straight to order my estate
Look that you forthwith perfect my Accounts;
And bring me all my books of debtor and creditor,
Receipts and payments, what you have in wares,
And what in cash, let me inform my self.

Cash. It Is as I feared.

Mat. I Will set all right and straight,
All statutes, bonds, bills, and sealed instruments
That do concern me, I have in my Closet
Or at my Councels, or my Scriveners.
I Will call in them my self. Why do thou look so amaz'dly?
Would have me yield a reason? why, I Will tell thee
I mean to make a voyage; and, perhaps,
To settle and proportion out my estate
By Will, before I go. Do you as I command you.

Cash. Whatever he pretends, I know his drift:
And, e'te I Will be discovered by my stay;
Being run out, I Will choose to run away. --
Ex.
Mat. My daughter in the first place must be cared for.
I Will make her a good match. My next in blood then,
My Knave-half-brother, and my whole fool-Sister.
But the best is, her Ladyship has enough;
And all I have, in Strygoods hands, were nothing.
Therefore I Will purpose nothing to him. Oh.
Enter Joyce and Gabriella. The Joy and Torment of my life, at once
Appear to me. I must divide them, thus.
He thrusts off Gabriella. Hence hated issue of my mortal foe
Whom I have fostered with a Parents Piety
As carefully and dearly as mine own.
While the inhumane cruelty of thy Sire
Has to untimely death exposed my son.
Thank me I kill not thee; so leave my house.
There Is French enough in town, that may befriend you.
To pack you over to Paris; what is your own
To Joyce. Take w'ye, and go. Why cleave you to her so?
Forsake her, cast her off. Are not my words
Of force, but I must use my hands to part ye?

Jo. Dear, honored father, I beseech you hear me.
In parting us you separate life from me,
And therein act a real cruelty
On me your only child, sharper then that,
Which you can but pretend done by her father.

Mat. Durst thou speak so?

Joy. I cannot live from her.

Mat. O monstrous. Pray, your reason. Why not live?

Joy. You know, Sir, from our Infancy we have been,
Bred up together, by your tender care
As we had been twin-borne, and equally
Your own; and by a self-same education,
We have grown hitherto, in one affection,
We are hoth but one body, and one mind,
What Gabriella was, I was, what I, was she.
And, till this hapless hour, you have enjoined me,
Nay, charged me on your blessing, not to arrogate
More of your love unto my self, then her,

Mat. That was, 'cause I presumed her father loved,
Or should have loved my son, your brother.

Joy. I never knew brother, or sister, I;
Nor my poor self, but in my Gabrella.
Then blame me not to love her, I beseech you
-- Upon me knees.

Mat. The art knee-deep in rebellion.
Unnatural Gypsy, since thou prov'st my torment
In being the same with her; and have declared
Thy self no more my child, then she, whom now
I do abhor, avoid, with her, my sight.
Rise, and be gone, lest thou pull curfes on thee
Shall sink thee into earth.

Gab. O rather, Sir.
Let me, against whom your fury first was bent
Suffer alone the sharpness of your vengeance:
And let it not be said, 'cause you surmise,
My father lost your son, that, therefore, you
Have cast away your daughter. Hurl me, rather,
Into the ruthless waves to seek my way;
Or do but take her, hold her in the arms
Of your paternal love, and I Will take flight
To weane her to you.

Joy. She cannot, may not leave me.

Mat. Out of my doors then, with her. --
Enter Lady Nestlecock.
La. What Is the matter? ha --

Mat. Such as you cannot mend, dear Lady Sister.
What come you hither with your Ha -- for? Ha --

La. To comfort you, dear brother, if you will hear me.
Your son is dead, they say; and here I find
Your daughter is rebellious against; our will.

Mat. You speak much comfort, do you not, think you.

La. But is it so Joyce? ha! -- I thought you, Joyce,
Would have rejoiced your father in obedience, Joyce;
And not afflict him with your stubbornness.

Mat. O this impertinent woman!

La. But my brother,
Let me advise you, rather then suffer her
To be an eyesore to you, put her out,
Where she may learn more duty. If you please
I Will take her home, and show her how it should be

Mat. Yes, as you have shown your Nestlecock, your son.

La. I, there is a child! Brother, you will pardon me,
If I aspire in hope, that he shallbe
Your heir, if Joyce miscarry in rebellion.

Mat. And therefore you would breed her. How the devil
Works in a covetous woman! Though a fool too.
Your sonne's an Ass; an Idiot; and your self
No better, that have bred him so. Do you tell me
Of your sweet sugar-chop't Nestle cockscombe?

La. Ha --

Mat. He Is fit to inherit nothing but a place
In The Spittle-house, Fools College, yond, at Knightsbridge.

La. And did I come to bring thee consolation?
Now let me tell thee, I rejoice in thy
Just punishment, thy scourge of crosses. Thou,
That for these six years space* until this day,
Have kept continual feast and jollitie
For thy wives death, who was too good for thee.

Mat. Right, for she was my Master, a perpe^^^l
Vexation to me, while she was above-ground
Your Ladyship could not have spoke more comfort to me
Then the remembrance of that shook-off Shackle,
Which now, in my affliction makes me smile,
And were I on her grave, I could cut capers.

La. A further punishment, I pr^^hecie
Grows in the neck of thy lewd insolence

Mat. I could e'ne find in heart to marry again,
In spite, now, of thy witchcraft, my son dead!
My daughter disobedient! and your child
A very chilblaine. What have I to do
But marry again: all women are not devil^,
I may yet get an heir unto my mind.
Enter Strigood.
Mat. Art thou here too --

Stri. Stay, you forget your brother, Mr. Matchil.
You have matched ill once already; and take heed
You match not worse, your children, though untoward.
And taking of the devilish Shrew, their mother,
Were likely of your own begetting; Yet
Your second wife may bring you a supply
Of heirs, but who must get them, first is doubtful.

Mat. Thy impudence amazes me.

Str. Ha, ha.

La. I Am sick at sight of the lewd Reprobate.

Stri. Dee cast about for heirs; and have besides
Your daughter here, a brother and a sister?

La. Call not thy self our brother. He appears
U^^^nde to me, but thou insufferable,
I loath to look upon thee.

Stri. He has spoke
Against her Aunt, her Moon-calf son. I Will make her love me best, and
presently.

Brother, I say.

Mat. I cannot look upon thee.
Provoke me not to ^^eech, I charge thee.

Str. Give me leave to speak; Hold you your peace;
Hear but my brotherly advice; and when
Give your consent in silence.

(Mat.) hum hum, etc.

La. Hear him not.

(Mat.) Nor you neither, hum -- hum -- hum.

La. I am not angry with you now; and therefore
I charge you, hear him not.

(Mat.) hum hum --

Stri. My advice is thus, that for your daughters good.
For mine own good, and for your Sisters good.
And for her son, your Nephew's good.

La. How Is that? ha!

Stri. And chiefly for your own good, and the credit
A wise man would desire to hold in the world,
Think not of marrying, nor of buying horns
At the whole value of your whole estate,
But match your daughter while you have the means
In your own hands; give her a good round portion,
Here are deserving Gentlemen in the house.
Next, think of me your brother, that has spent
In downright fellowship (heaven knows what
All fraudulent purposes to make any man
A miser or a gainer by it) a fair estate.
And now do want a brotherly supply.
A hundred a year or so: but above all
Fasten your land unto yout Sisters son.
That hopeful Gentleman, sweet Nehemiah.

(Mat) hum.

La. Now brother you may hear him.

Stri. What though it straggle from the name of Matchil.
Remember yet he is your mothers Grandchilde.

La. Why dee not hear him, brother? --

(Mat.) hum.

Stri. As I hope
To be a landed man my self,
Had I a thousand yearly, I would leav't him.

La. Truly, I thank you. Now I Will call you brother.
You Are a good natured Gentleman if you had it.
Come home, and see my son. -- Will you not hear him? ha

Mat. I need not, nor your self. I see you gape
Like monsters that would swallow me alive.
I know your minds; and I will do mine own.
And, thus it is. Stay, let me stay a little.

La. Look you how wild he looks.

Stri. He Is falling mad.
Stark staring mad,

La. I would he had a wife then,
For nothing else can tame him.

Mat. So it shall be.
First, I Will be Master of mine own estate.
Next --

Stri. Take a wife to master that, and you.

Mat. Next, you Mademoiselle, (on whom with patience
I cannot look) forsake my house, and suddenly;
Linger not for a man to wait upon you,
But let your black bag guard you, it is a fashion
Begun amongst us here by your own Nation.
And if I longer must call you my daughter,
Forsake you her.

Joy. What mine own heart? dear Sir.

Mat. At your own choice. I can force her departure,
Though not persuade your stay, determine quickly
Either to leave her, and enjoy a father,
Or never more expect a fathers blessing.

Gab. Dear, mine own heart, leave me, obey your father.

Joy. It must be to my death then.
[Weepes
Mat. I Will be sudden.
Therefore be you as brief in your resolve.

La. Alas, poor hearts. Just so loath
To part was I and my son Nehemiah
Today when I came forth.

Stri. Niece Joyce, let me
Advise you. --

Mat. Pray, Sir, none of your advices.
Let her advise her self; whilst I impart
To you my next intention; which is thus.
To end your strife for shares in mine estate
I Will venture on a wife: indeed I Will marry

La. Will you so? ha!

Mat. Yes indeed La, --

Stri. If then
You Will estate nothing on me for my life
Give me a see to help you to a wife,
I can, a good one.

Mat. I Will none, Sir, of your good ones.
Besides, Sir, I Am provided.

La. You are not, are you? ha

Mat. Let it suffice, I say it, so quit my house.

Stri. Shall I expect then nothing?

Mat. Pray sir, do.
It Is all I can afford you. You have wit,
Yes, you can dance, tread money out of rushes,
Slight and activity to live upon.
A nimble brain, quick hands and airie heels
To get a living.

Stri. Hah.

Mat. Pray fall to practice.

Stri. I may, sir, to your cost, if you put off
Your daughter with her Sweetheart, her Mon Coeur
There, as she calls her. Dear, my Lady Sister;
You see how churlishly this Merchant uses us.
He has forgot, sure, he was borne a Gentleman.
Will you be pleased, I speak to you in your ear.

La. Any way, brother Strigood, Hang him, Nabal,
To warn me out o's house; and not alone,
To turn a stranger from within his gates,
But offer to cast out his child too, ha!

Stri. It Is about that I Would speak, pray Madam hark you.
Enter Erasmus, Valentine.
Er. Noble Mr. Matchil, though we are your meat
Before we saw you you will give us leave
To take our leaves, and thank you ere we part.

Mat. O Gentlemen.

Val. We Have heard your cause of sorrow.

Mat. But I have over-past it. Hark ye Gentlemen

Eras. You Will give us leave first to salute the Ladies.

Mat. Nay, if you love me, hear me first.

Er. Val. Your will, Sir.
Talk aside.
La. Niece, you shall no way disobey your father
In being ruled by me.

Stri. So, so, it takes.

La. You and your second self shall home with me
Until his furious humor be blown over.
To which the first means is to (...) his fight,
And then let me alone to make your peace.

Joy. Gab. We thank your Ladyship.

La. So let us slip.
Home to my house together.

La. Hist brother, lead the way.

Stri. As glad as ever Fox was of his prey
Exit. ^om. Pet. Mat. Er. Vab.
Mat. It Is even so, Gentlemen, sorrow finds no lodging.
In my light heart sometimes she knocks at door,
And takes a drink, but here she must not sit by it.

Val. Y' are happy Sir.

Er. Yet I have heard you say
You never tasted joy for diverse years
Till your wife died: since when, a King of mirth,
And now to marry again is such a thing.

Mat. Yes sir, it is such a thing that I will marry
That I fore know can never disobey me
And I Will defy the devil to dishonest her.

Er. Is she so ougly?

Val. No, he means so virtuous.

Mat. Well-said, sir, you shall drink before me. Rachel, Mawdlin.

'Protest you shall though it be in my own house.

Er. Now he resumes his humor.

Mat. Ratchel I say,
Bring me a kan of sack.

Er. But how can you
Presume before the dangerous marriage-trial
That she whom you have chosen will be obedient.

Val. D' ye think he has not tried her? There Is a question

Mat. Well-said again. I was about to say so.
Rachel, some sack, I say. Yes, I have tried her, sir,
Tried her, and tried her again; all over and over
These five years day and night; and still obedient.

Er. Then you are sure to her.

Mat. No, I never used
A marriage-question, not a woing word,
But do all by command, she is so obedient.

Val. And yet she is chaste and virtuous withal.

Mat. Well-said again, sir, so I was a saying.

Er. But we have talked away the Gentlewomen.

Mat. No matter, let'hem go. Would they were far enough.

Ent. Rach. Enter Rachel, silver Kan and Napkin. Come, the sack, the sack. --
Who taught you that courtesy maid.

Pray try a better to the Gentleman.
Protest you shall begin.

Val. In your own house, sir?

Mat. ^'ll rather g' ye my house, then break my word in it.


Val. Y' are Lord here, and may command me, sir. And so my service to you.


Mat. I Will do you reason, sir.
-- Val. drink. Be ready with your Napkin, and a lower douke maid.
I Will hang dead weight at your buttocks else. So.
Is not this obedience, Gentlemen, Mr. Erasmus?
Mus, I will call thee Mus, I love to be
Familiar, where I love; and Godamercy
For your friend here; you both shall see my daughter.
But my French Damosel and I are parted
I hope by this time. So here is to you Mus.

Er. To me, to me, to me.
[M. drinks.
Mat. Ha boy, art there? dispatch
Your court'sie quickly, and go call my daughter.
[Er. drinks
Rach. She is gone forth, forsooth.

Mat. Forth, ha? when? whither?
La ye, she thinks I Am angry, and the finger
Is in the eye already. Is not this
Fear and obedience, Gentlemen? who went with her.

Rach. She went with my Lady Nestlecock, to bring Gabriella on her way they
said.


Mat. I would
They were all in France together.

Er. What, your daughter?

Mat. She comes again, I doubt not. Dry your eyes.
And drink that sack, without a court'sie, drink it.
You do not know my meaning, Gentlemen.
Stay: now gi' me't again. -- Now go and dry
Your face within -- without a court'sie? ha!
Ex. Rach. Now is not this obedience, Gentlemen?

Val. But this is not the rare obedient piece
That you will marry?

Mat. You do not hear me say so.
But I presume, as much obedience
In her I have made choice of.

Er. Marry a maid.
And we will be her Hench-boyes, if you please.

Mat. No, I Will have no such blades 'bout my wives hanches.
But come, to end this tedious Scene, in which
I have past the Purgatory of my Passions
Of sorrow, anger, fear, and hope at last.
I am refined, sublimed, exalted, fixed
In my true Sphere of mirth; where love's my object.
And bloody thought of black revenge cast by.

Val. Could your fair breast harbor a bloody thought?

Mat. For some few minutes, in which ecstasy
I meant to have gone, as other Gallants do.
To fight in France, forsooth, and charged my man
To draw up his Accounts, call in my moneys,
Thought to have made my Will --.

Er. I saw your Cashier
Go forth e'ne now with a sttong lusty Porter
Laden with money: I will not say my teeth
Watered at it.

Val. But 'twas enough to make
A very true man's fingers itch.

Mat. I cannot
Think he is run away; but yet I like not
His carrying forth, when I say, fetch in money.
But this is from my purpose. Love ye mirth?
Let Us in, and drink, and talk. That gives it birth.

ACT. II.
SCENE 1.
Camelion. Hannah. Came. I prithee now, I prithee, prithie now
Urge me no more in this case; for I cannot,
Nor I wo' not so I wo' not, I be jealous
Os mine own wife, mine own deat flesh and blood?
That Is such a thing! I pidee speak no more on it.

Han. You show you love Rafe.

Came. So I hope I do Nan.
My cock, my pity nittle nansie cocksie,
Do I not show my love when I deny thee
Unreasonable requests? I never heard
Of woman that desired a loving husband
To be a jealous Master over her.
Especially a City-Shopkeeper.
The best part of whose trade runs through the hands
Of his fair wife too! It Is unreasonable.
And thou the sirst that e're take up the humor.

Han. And you the sirst that e're I knew besotted
Into a wilful confidence, which renders
Me to a vile construction; and your self
By leaving me to all assaults and hazards
Have got the reputation of a Wittal.
Or one that seems contented to become so.

Came. Hon soit qui maly ponse.
My Cock, my Nansie Cock, my Cocksie Nansie,
Kiss me, and use thine own conscience: I scorn
The yellow sickness, I, let 'hem all say what they will.
D'einty, come thou to me. I will not lose
An hairs breadth of my humor, nor retain
An ill thought of my Cocks honesty
For all the wealth in the Exchange, not I

Han. I not desire you should, but only that
You will not seem so careless of my credit,
Exposing me to all temptations
Of the wild Gallantry of the wanton time.
By whom (although my chastity remains
Untouched) my name and your discretion suffers.

Came. Pish, Honi soit again: Cock, I defy
Calumniation and detraction I.
When I am jealous, let the horne-curse take me;
And let me be with hornets stung to death.

Han. Still you fly from the point, I would not have
You vex your self with causeless jealousy
Over my constant love; but only seem
A little watchful over my reputation.
Whereby you may decline men's lewd attempts.
And not to throw me upon opportunities
To draw them on; as if I were a thing
S^^ out, as in your shop, for common sale.

Came. Cock, Thou shall never tie me to it: not I.
I must not lose my harmless recreations
Abroad to snook over my wife at home.
Thought have me like the hair-brained Point-tagger,
That used to hammer his fingers at one end
Of The shop, while's wife was bargaining at the other?
Not I; sweet Cock, pidee lets hear no more on it.
Enter Foot-post. Now friend! Is your business to me or my wife?

Post. This Superscription will inform you, sir.

Came. To my dear daughter Mrs. Hannah Camelion, at her shop or house in or
near the New Exchange.


Cock. Take it quickly, what a Knave art thou to put a letter in my hands, that
is directed to my wife. Sbobs I would not have opened it for fonrty pound.


Post. If all husbands in the City were of his mind, it were a Forest of
fools indeed.


Came. Cock, I must leave thee.

Han. Pray stay a little. This letter's from my father.


Came. I hope the good Captaine's well.

Han. Yes, very well, pray read his Letter here.

Came. Cock, you shall pardon me. Not I.
I have a match to play at the ducking-pond.
Prithee fore-slow not my occasions, Cock,
As I forbear to pry into thy secrets.

Han. Here Is nothing but what I would have you see.

There Is for your postage, friend. It needs no answer.


Post. I thank you, Mystris.
Ex.
Han. But if you will not stay to read this Letter.
You shall not deny me one thing.

Came. What is it, quickly? my sweet Nanny Cock.

Han. Here, take this pen: write here a word or sentence.
What you please. But keep it well in mind,
And look that you be sure to know it again
When I shall shew't you.

Came. It Is done, there: I defy, and dare the devil and all his Clerks to
counterfeit my hand. So, my sweet Cock, a kiss and adieu.


Han. Well Rafe, remember that you will not be jealous.

Came. Not I, Sbobs yonder comes one of the Blades,
That thou would have me have an eye to; He
That lives by his wits, and yet is seldom sober:
That goes so gallantly, and has no credit,
Nor ever buys with ready money; But
Barters commodity for commodity.
(Such as it is) with Tradesmens wives, they say.
What call you him, oh Askal; there is another
Comes with him too. Into thy shop, good Cock.
I wo' not stay, not I. So, farewell Cock.
Ex.
Han. And farewell Coxscombe, some wife would say now.
I am much troubled at his silliness.
And would to right me, strain a woman's wit,
Knew I with modesty how to answer it.
Something I Will do.
Enter Erasmus, Valentine.
Er. Was ever such a humor in a man, as this mad
Merchant Matchil is possessed with.
To marry so, to spite his child and kindred.

Val. He has made his daughter by it a match worth nothing.
And there your hope is gone.

Er. And yours in me.
For as I said before, good Valentine.
I must return you to your City wives.
By the old trade to pick your maintenance
Out of em, as you boast you can.

Val. It Is well, sir.
And now to let you know that I can live
Without the helps of such cool friends as you.
I Will show you a present probability.

Val. Do see yond pretty mumping piece in the shop there?

Er. Yes, is that one --?

Val One of the forty, boy,
That renders tribute in to my Exchecquer.

Er. Did ever lie with her?

Val. How plain you are. Not I, not I.
That*s her fool-husbands word.
Let it sussice that I have seen her thrice.
And that I lay with, drink, and wear her money.
O it is the sweetest Rogue.

Er. How got you acquainted.

Val. I Will tell you that, walking by chance as now,
Before her shop, where a young Gentleman
Was bargaining, he called me by my name,

Val Askall. Instantly her eye was fixed,
And straight ran over my delineaments,
Which I set to her view; and took occasion
To ask her how the object pleased her.

Er. Bold-face.

Val. I never lost by that.
She then demands, Is your name Askall, sir?
I answer, Yes. Pray of what country, sir?
I told her; when a sudden flaming blush
Did in her face betray the fire of love,
That was at the instant raging in her breast,
She looked me through and through. Sighed, turned away.
Then looked again under her hat-brims thus.
And thus I nimbly caught her with mine eye.

Er. I, thou have a devilish catch i'that same eye.

Val. Sir, what I have, I have. I gave a leere
With that same eye that made her turn her whitesup.

Er. But to the point.

Val. Why do you think a woman's so quickly brought to the point?

Er. What followed then?

Val. I saw she was struck, and thus I gave her line
To play withal. I whispered in her ear,
The way to find my lodging and my service.
Next morning early comes a message to me,
Inviting me to dinner: Cheer and welcome
Plenteously flowed; and sir, before we parted
Upon some private conference, twenty pieces
Were clutch't into this hand, but with a caution
To be discreet and thrifty of her purse,
And keep a friend in store. I have been modest,
And have not struck her since, but for ten more.

Er. And that is your last.

Val. I le hold you ten o that
See she has spied me.

Han. What lack ye, Gentlemen; fair cut-work bands, boot-hoose, or boot-hoose
tops, shirts, wast-coats, night-caps, what will you buy?


Val. I come not now to buy.
But in plain terms to borrow. Do you not know me?

Han. Not on these terms.

Er. Sure thou mistak'st the woman.
This is not she, thou talk fo freely on Bounce.

Val. She Is cautious before thee. Walk off a little.
Now you may hear me, Lady.

Han. Give me leave
A little, first to wonder at your rashness,
To talk so openly before a stranger.

Val. My intimate friend: I Will trust him with my life.

Han. What Is that to my unblemish't reputation?
It Is not your life can salve that, being wounded.
But thus it is, when women out of goodness
Hazard their fortunes to relieve the wants
Of such as you, that carry no respect,
But to your own licentious Appetites.
And think no favour's sweet, unless you may
Have privilege to boast 'hem to our shame.

Val. I do not boast of yours.

Han. Pray, boast no more
Then you have found, and much good may they do you.
It Is not poor thirty pieces can undo me.

Val. No, nor ten more I hope; and that is the sum
I would entreat: all makes but forty pound.
I Will pay thee like a Gentleman, as I am one,
Either in money; or do hear me, Rogue,
In what shall please thee better. Come, be wise,
Thy husband's a dull ducking Gamester. And
Kennels his water-dog in Turnbull-street.
We'll answer his delights with better sport.

Han. There Is your presumption.

Val. No, it is my ambition.
When shall we walk to Totnam? or cross over
The water, or take Coach to Kengington
Or Padington; or to some one or other
Of The City out-leaps for an afternoon,
And hear the Cuckoo sing to the purpose? when?

Had. A woman were a wise one that would trust
Her self in such wild hands as yours; to have
Her name made Tavern-talk among your blade,
And thrust in the 'list of your loose-hilted Mystresses:

Val. O no; fie no: you cannot think how close
And careful I will be. Hark in thine ear.

Er. I cannot blame this fellow now so much
For using of his wits to get his living,
Though in an idle way; as for traducing
People of worth and virtue, as this woman
Who I am credibly informed is virtuous
And too discreet for him to shark upon.
Therefore to grace himself, he slanders her.
I have always liked his company till now,
And shall hereafter be more wary of him.

Han. Well sir, upon pour faithful protestation,
And vow of secrecy, liere's ten pieces more.
You have found a tenderhearted woman of me
Over your wants; and all the satisfaction
That I desire, is, that I may not suffer
Under a lavish tongue; it is easy payment.

Val. Yes, but I Will pay thee better. Therefore tell me, when we shall meet and
have a spirtabroad.


Han. Your friend stays for you, sir.

Val. Pish, let him stay.

Han. You slight him now, but he knows all your Councels.


Val. By this good tongue, no more then the unbegotten Hans that I mean to clap
into thy Kelder.

Nor ever shall: do think I am so foolish
To talk away my hopes? No, thou art my Faery,
Pinch me to death when I discover thee.

Han, Go to, avoid suspicion then, besides
I have occasions that do call me hence.
Ex.
Er. Your stay was somewhat long.

Val. Yet 'twas to purpose.
As here you may behold, but I must make no words on it.
[1. 2, 3, 4, etc. She has enjoined me that. O'tis a cunning Gypsy.

Er. So't seems, by trusting thee that have no power to keep a secret.

Val. Troth, to tell you true.
My conscience will not beare't, I cannot be
So ungrateful to receive a courtesy,
But to acknowledge it.

Er. Yet thou have the conscience
To work a man's estate out of his hands
By his wives frailty, even to break his back.

Val. It Is rather to be feared she may break mine.
She Is a tight strong dock't Tit.

Er. O Tradesmen, why do you marry?

Val. Why? to make Tradeswomen.
For Gentlemen that want money and commodity.
You know the thing that I call father in (...),
That had my mothers whole estate, and butied her,
Allows me nothing.

Er. Thank your own sweet courses.

Val. My courses are sweet courses, they serve me to live upon.

Er. But I shall put you off
O'one of your sweet courses, or at least
I Will strain a point of friendship to be satisfied
Touching this woman, 'twill be worth discovery.

Val. But why these cloudy looks? do not you like my courses? ha*

Er. I cry thee mercy, Val.
I was upon our former subject Matchil.

Val. I there is a hasty match clap't up. You ask't
Why Tradesmen marry, there is a marriage now!
A humorous Coxscombe that could never laugh
In all his last wives days; and since her death
Could never be sad. For him to marry his Malkin
For poor and course obedience. Well. I hope
To take my course in his house yet for all.
Her boasted chastity and obedience.

Er. Would thou touch such a thing?

Val. What, not for money?
She can pay well and her ugliness cannot fright me
I can do that work winking.

Er. She can be no such woman.

Val. Tell not me
What any woman can or cannot be,
You Will give me leave to try my fortune with her,

Er. Yes, and walk with you toward it.
Ex. Ambo.
Scoen. 2.
Enter Lady Nestlecock, Ephraim. La. No news, no tidings of 'em, Ephraim, ha!
Was even sucg a escape?

Ephesians. Not since the Rape
Of H^llon^ I Am persuaded. I have searched
With narrow eyes (as I may say) with care,
And diligence in most secret places.
And can no way inform my self, what is
Betide of the young Damsels, or old Squire.
Your Niece, and the French Virgin, and the man
Unworthy to be called your brother Strigood.

La. O hang him Villain.

Ephesians. Doubtless 'twas his plot
To work upon your Ladyships good nature
To harbor them, that he might take the advantage
Of stealing them away.

La. What to do, ha?

Ephesians. To do? much may be done by his seducements,
On two such tender Virgins, though he should
But plant them in our suburbs: but my fear
Is that he has transported them beyond seas
Into some Nunnery. Your Ladyship
Knows he is adverse in Religion.

La. I know he is of none.

Ephesians. Satan will work.
The stronger in him, then to their subversion.

La. How shall I answer now my brother Matchil?
But he is justly served to marry so.
The thought of it torments me. Where Is my comfort?
Where Is Nehemiah, ha?

Ephesians. He Is busy, Madam.

La. What, at his book? or at his music, ha?

Ephesians. That is, his Ballet, or his Jews Trump. No,
Madam. He is busy at his exercise of Arms
With a new Casting top, a Cat and Catstick,
I bought and brought him home.

La. I thank you for 'hem,
My careful discreet Ephraim. I like
His harmless exercises well.

Ephesians. I hope,
Your Ladyship can say since I have had
The Government of him under your Ladyship,
I have been careful of the Gentleman,
And have his love withal so much, that I
Dare say (I hope you will pardon the comparison)
That had you married me (which was as likely
As that your brother would have taken his Maid.
I think that Mr. Nehemiah would not
Have run away in hatred of our Match,
As Mrs. Joyce. it seems, has done of theirs.
I hope your Ladyships pardon, I understand
My duty.

La. And you speak but reason Ephraim.

Ephesians. I have given her there a touch of my affection.
Who knows how it may work?

La. Go call him in.
I would not have him over heat himself.

Ephesians. It Is a good care. And Madam, by the way,
Let me advise, that since his riper years
Require, and that fair Propositions
Of marriage are tendered for him, that
We gently by degrees, do take him off
From childish exercise, indeed plain boys play.
More manly would become him.

La. You would have him
Do worse then, would you? and be naught, you varlet?
What! would you have him play at Mans-game, ha?
Fore he be married, ha! what, what! how now!
Is it but up and ride w'ye, ha!

Ephesians. I humbly
Beseech your Ladyships pardon, I will call
Sweet Mr. Nehemiah to your worship.

La. Go, thou art an honest man. I know thou love him.
Ex. Ep^. Indeed he is all my comfort and my care
And I must naturally respect all those
That do partake with me my care of him.
Enter Nehemiah, looking down and eating.
Neh. my boy Negh, Son Nehemiah.

Neh. F'sooth.

La. That Is my good Lamb. Hold up thy head; and thou.
Shall have a wife.

Neh. But mother f sooth, when I have her,
Will she play with me at peg-top?

La. At any thing, my boy.

Neh. And she have not good box and steel, I shall so grull her.
And then at Mumbledepeg I will so firk her.

La. But when you are married, you^ll find other pastime.

Neh. Whatever I say, I have a meaning though.
But yet, I doubt, I shall not forsake all
My old fagaries in a year or two.

La. I know thy will is good to leave thy wag-tricks.
And I commend your understanding in it.
It shows you man, and ready for a wife.

Neh. Amardla, f'sooth, I think so; I Amardla.
For I did beat a boy as high as my self
Yesterday, with one hand.

La. Where was thy the other.

Neh. The boy had but one hand f'sooth. I used both.

La. Well thou art too witty to live long, I fear.
But as I was saying, son, I do expect
Sir Swithen Whimtby to bring his Niece.

Neh. Who f^sooth, the crying Knight, he that has wept
E're since his Lady di'd; and mournes in colors;
Speaks nothing but in verse, and gives me Ballats;
The old Knight Powel, that pronounces what dee call 'hem?

La. Odes child and Elegies. He has been inspired.
With the infection of Poetry,
E're since his wives departure: and it is thought
Nothing can put him out, or cure him of it
But a new wife to kill the furious itch often,

Neh. But is not his Niece too big for me? I would be loath
To be over-match'd.

La. O witty, witry, still.
But when she comes Nehemiah, What'll you say to her?

Neh. I Will give her the time of the day or the night
I warrant her, come at what hour she will.
Why if I eat not all before she come.
(And she must try her, if I do'nt) I Will ask her
If she can speak with plums in her mouth; and then
I Will offer her a long one and two round ones,
And nod at her.

La. You will not, will you, ha?

Neh. Mother, I know both what to say and do
I trust I am not to be taught to woo.

La. Too witty still, I say, to be long-lived.

Neh. But hark you mother f'sooth; I am told that you
Bear a months mind to that Sir Whimlby,
And a cross match is talked on betwixt you
And the old Knight, and me and his young Niece.
O ho -- is it so?

La. This is no crafty child.

Neh. Let me but see how you will handle him now
And mark how I Will come over her with small Jerks.

La. O thou art a witty wag. A blessing on it.
Enter Ephraim, ushering Whimlby and Blithe.
Ephesians. Madam, Sir Swithen Whimlby and his Niece,
Mrs. Blithe Tripshort.

La. They are very welcome,
Noble Sir Swithen.
[Kisse.
Neh. Noble Mrs. Blithe.
[Kisse.
La. Sweet Knight, you are welcome.

Neh. Welcome, sweet Lady.

La. Still weeping.

Whi. O good Madam.

Neh. Still weeping for a husband.

Bli. Ha, ha, ha.

Neh. Mother, she puts me on it,
She laughes.

La. Laugh with her then.

Neh. Amardla, so I will, and if you laugh
At me, I Will laugh at you again, so I will.

Bli. Ha, ha.

Neh. Are you there with me? I Will be here with you then.
Will you eat any Sugar-plums? no, I Will eat 'em for you.
There Is ha, ha, ha, ha, for you now.

La. Do you note, Sir Swithin, what a wag it is.
Walk into the next room Nehemiah. Did you note him?
Ex. Neh. Blithe.
Whi. Madam, to tell you true.
My love to you
Springs from the joy,
I take in your sweet boy
-- Ephesians. And that is the way to win her. I can take no delight
But in his sight,
Nor any pride
Since my dear Grissel di'd,
In all, I see on earth or find in books,
But that which overcomes me in his looks.

La. O sweet Sir Swithen, you have all wooed and won me.

Ephesians. Then all my hopes are frustrate.

La. My son shall have your Niece, and for mine own part.
You loving him so well, of what is in me.
I can deny you nothing.

Whi. Gentle Madam.

Ephesians. She offers up her self; now may the proverb
Of proffered service light upon her.

La. Nay, Sir Swithen.
Let me entreat you to leave weeping now.

Whi. Madam, I cannot so
Forego my woe.
For while I strive
My solace to revive,
I do but still restore
My grief, before
That did beti'd
When my dear Grissel did.
And when your Ladyship appears in sight.
(Pardon) I cannot choose but cry outright.

La. Alas, good Knight. He weeps pure Helicon.
He has not wherewithal to quench his love,
But his own tears. A wife would cool him better.
Why sir, does sight of me renew your grief?

Whi. O Madam, Madam, yes;
In you the bliss,
That I do miss,
I find inshrined is.
And till, to ease my pain,
I shall regain
In you the Bride,
That in my Grissel di'd.
So often as she in you to me appears
My numbers cannot cease to flow in tears.

La. Good sir, collect your self, and be assured
I am your own, so Neh. may have your Niece,
With her full Dowry of four thousand pounds.
My personal estate is full as much.
That and my self are yours on the cross marriage,
You making me an answerable Joincture.

Ephesians. Is It come so near; I Will cross it, or my star*
Drop crosses on my head. O vain, vain woman,
To dote on Poetry in an old man.
Ladies may love it in the young and bold,
And when they are sick give gally-pots of gold,
For cordial Electuaries to cheer
Their crop-sick Muses; but to an old and sere
Man that out-lives his labors, who can be
So vain to give her self away but she.
I had been sitter for her, and I Will watch
Occasion yet, perhaps, to cross the match,
I can tu^n Poet too.
Ex.
La. Dry now your eyes, and answer me in prose,
Are you content to yield to those conditions
I have propounded, ha!

VVhim. I am content.
And now for joy could weep,
Finding my Grissel in your Ladyship.

La. I hope the young ones do accord as well.
Enter Nehemiah, Blithe.
Bli. Protest, I cannot abide you.

Neh. Nor I you.
Amardla, that I cannot.

Whim. They Are agreed.
Madam, it seems they both are of one mind.

La I do not like it. What Is the matter Nehemiah?

Neh. She is no wife for me, she has broke my Jewes-trump; look you here else.
And almost broke my head with one of my bounding stones.


La. Bless my boy; she has not, has she, ha!


Neh. And yet after all that, and for all I offered to teach her to shoot in my
Trunk and my Stone-bowe, do you think she would play with me at Trou, Madam?
no, nor at any thing else. I Will none of her.

And yet I Will have her too. If she will promise to do as I would have her
hereafter.


La. There, do you note him there, Sir Swithen?
This child has no childish meaning in it, I warrant you.

Whim. No Madam, no, I know him inwardly
He is my joy, and she shall be conformable,
Or fare the worse.

La She will, I know she will.
Will you not have my son, sweet Mrs. Blithe?

Bli Sweet Madam, what to do? ha, ha, I shall be quickly weary with laughing at
him. His fooling will soon be stale and ^edious; and then to beat him would be
as toilsome to me; and lastly, to be tied to nothing but to cuckold him, is
such a common Town-trick, that I scorn to follow the fashion.


La Can she talk thus? ha!

Whim. A merry harmless Girl.
Fear not, good Madam, she will come about.

Bli. A thousand mile about rather then meet him.

La. I much desire she would; for now my son
Is set a marrying, I warrant it pure thing
It is in pain, till it be at it: ha!
Pray bring her on, Sir Swithen, let him kiss her.
Poor heart, he licks his lips; and look how arseward she is.

Whi. Fie Blithe, be courteous, Blithe.

Neh. Mother, -- she has spit Amard just in my mouth.

Bli. Amard, what is that? if you speak French you wrong me.

La. Gip, Mrs. Tripshort. Is this the manners your Mother left you?

Bli. Speak not you of Mothers, Madam.

La. Sir ^w^then, will you s^e my child abused so, ha?

Whim. I can but grieve for it, Madam.


Neh. My mother is as good as your mother, so she is, for all she is dead.


La. I, well-said Neh.


Bli. Yes, it appears in your good breeding
Your fine qualities express her virtues sussiciently.

La. How dare you Huswife talk thus to my son, of me, and before my face too?
ha! Sir Swithen, can you think well of me, and suffer this, ha?


Whim. Alas, good Madam, I am down again I know not what to think of living
woman now.


La* Do you bring your Niece to abuse me?


Whim. I am so drowned in tears, that I cannot ^ee what to say to it.


Neh. Mother, Amardla, the more I look on her, the better I like her.


La. Say so, my boy. Besides, I have a conceit she can out-scold you* and
that is more then ever woman did, I think f'sooth.


La. For thee, I do forbear her.

Enter Matchil, Rachel.
Mat. By your leave, my Lady Nestlecock, I have brought a sister of yours here
to salute you.


La. Though unworthy to be of your Counsel, or at the Ceremony, I heard you
were married brother. And by a Sisters name you are welcome.


Rac. I thank your Ladyship.


Mat. Sir Swithen Whimlby! and your pretty Niece! well met, what affairs have
you in hand here? what do you cry for your old wife still or for a new one? But
hark, you Lady Sister, where is my daughter?


La. Now for a tempest. Truly sir, I know not.


Mat. Is shenot with you, ha?


La. No truly, sir.
She Is slipped from me with her good Uncle Strigood.

Mat. That Thief has sold her then into some Bawdihouse
Was this your project for her education,
To steal my child to make a whore of her?
Are you turned Lady b^ud now for your Niece
Because you have no daughter? O the devil!
If there be Law, I Will trounce your Lady Hagship.

La. What, what? how now? do you taunt me, sirrah, ha?


Mat. I Will make thee an example.


La. Thou have made thy self an example, and the scorn of thine own child in
marrying of thy drudge there; and that's the cause of her running away thou
may think, because she hates to live where she must call her mother that was
thy droile.


Ra. Droile, I think, she said.


Mat. Speak to her, I charge thee, on thy obedience to speak to her.


Ra. The droile is now your brothers wife, Madam, and in that setting your
Ladyships lavish tongue aside, as good a woman as your self, none disprais'd,
ha.


Mat. Well-said Rachel, hold thine own Rachel. And so to you, sir Sw then.


Neh. Mother, come away, mother.


La. By and by, my boy.


Rac. Do you presume to call me drudge and droile, that am a Ladies Sister
every day in the week; and have been any time these three days, ha.


Bli. That Is not every day in a whole week yet.


La. Thou shall not dare to call me sister Huswife.


Ra. Cods so, and why troe? because a Lady scorns to be a huswife, ha. If you
be no huswife, I sc^rn to call you Sister, I; though my husband be your
brother. From whence came you troe, ha?


La. I know not what to say to the bold-face.


Neh. Pray f'sooth come away, I am afear'd she will beat you.


La. Thanks, my good child, but do not be afraid my Lamb.


Ra. Boldface, ha! Her brothers wife*s a bold-face, but her face is not
varnish't over, yet like his Ladysisters face, but it may be in time when she
learnes the trick on it, and have as many flies upon it, though not so troubled
with 'hem, as a bald mare at Midsummer, hah.


La. I know not what to say to her, she has charmed the virtue of my tongue.


Mat. I never heard her speak so much in all her life, Sir Swithin, nor half so
loud. hank heaven, she has a voice yet on a good occasion. And so far I Will
maintain her in it. Nephew Nehemiah, when saw you your Cousin Joyce.


Neh. O Lud, O mother f'sooth, look you, mine Uncle holds me.


Mat. Ah, naughty man, did a so gi*me a stroke, and I Will beat it, ^h --.


La. Your wife has taught you to play the rude companion, has she? Pray take
her home sir, and let her discipline your own child if you have one, and let
mine alone. You know the way you came, sir; or if you have a mind to stay
here, Come Sir Swithen, come away children; I hope I shall find some other
room in mine own house, free from your assaults, if not, I Am sure there is Law
against Riots. Come Sir Swithen.


Mat. Not yet good Madam Nestlecock, you shall hear me.
You have enticed away, then lost my daughter.
And now you are a juggling with your widow wit,
And your small worm here, to catch up for Gudgeons.
Sir Swithen and his Niece, I know your plot..
She Is not fit match for you Sir Swithen; and her son
Much less for your fair Niece. Come dry your eyes,
And look upon him, and not only look,
But laugh at him, I charge you.

Bli. I could now for him heartily.

Mat. Mark how his mothers milk drops at his nose, while I show you the mother
and the child.

He was her youngest son, and all that is left of seven, and dreaming that he
needs must prove a Prophet, she has bred him up a fool.


Neh. F'sooth mother he mocks me, oh. --

La. O profane wretch, worse then thy brother Strigood.

Do not cry, Nehemiah, peace, good boy, peace. So so.

Mat. A tender mother I must say she has been.
For till he was fifteen, none but her self
Must look his head, or wash his pretty face
For making of it cry. Laugh at her good Sir Swithen.
And before that, till he was twelve years old
She would dance him on her knee, and play with his Cock.

Wh^m. Ah ah ah ah. --

Mat. So well-said, Sir Swithen.

Whim. Just so efac my mother would serve me, ha, ha.
Is not this better then whining.
Yes, or perhaps then wiving either.

Rac. Do you say so.

Wh. Ha, ha.

Mat. Well said, Sir Swithen, laugh on. I hope I have done a cure on him, by
showing him a more ridiculous object then himself, to turn the tide of's
tears.


Wh. Ha, ha.

Mat. Laugh still, defy the fiends, women, and all their works.

Wh. Ha, ha, ha, let the dead go, and the quick care for themselves. You buried
your wife, and cried, and I buried mine.

And laugh; which is the manlier Passion.

Ra. He knows not that he is married again.

Whi. You are the merriest Merchant, ha, ha, ha.
I think I shall not marry again in haste, ha, ha.

Mat. Well-said, hold there. And for your Niece
Let me alone. I Will fit her with a match.
I know a Lad that is worthy of her.

Whi. Ha, ha, ha. --

Mat. He^ll laugh too much, I fear.

Ra. He may at you,
For your officiousness.

Mat. How Is that?

Whi. Ha, ha. --

Ra. To thrust your self into unthankful offices.
In things concern you not. Will you turn Matchmaker
For others un-intreated, it is enough.
For you, I hope, that you have matched your self, ha.

Mat. Hah! Do you hab, or talk to me?

Ra. Who else
Should talk or give you counsel but your wife?

La. VVell-said Rachel, hold thine own Rachel.

Mat. I am matched again.

Whi. Ha, ha, ha.

Mat. Pax, cry again, or burst thy self with laughing.

Whi. La. Ha, ha, ha. Laugh son Nehemiah.

Neh. Ha, ha. ha.

Mat. What am I? what do you make of me?

La. Nay, what have you made your self? best ask the Chimney piece that you have
married there.


Mat. Durst thou advance a voice against me, ha?

Ra. You did commend it in me against your Sister.
And I may better be familiar with you;
Hah, are you not my husband? I am sure
It Is not so long since we were married, that
You can forget it, or ^epent so soon.
I am not now your slave, to have my face
Washed with your snuffes, nor to be kick't and trod on
Without resistance, nor to make you answers
Merely with silent court'sies, run when you bid go
To fetch and carry like your Spaniel,
In which condition I liv^d long enough,
And was content until ^ou freed me out on it.
Now free I am, and will be a free woman,
As you are a freeman, ha.

Whi. Ha, ha, ha.

Mat. O base-borne beggar.

Ra. You wrong your wife in that.

Mat. How she holds up the wife.

Ra. I never begged
Nor moved a lip to be your wife, not I,
You held my service portion good enough,
And for my blood it is no more base then yours,
Since both are mixed in marriage.

Mat. Come your way.
And let me hear you speak so much at home.

Ra. I hope I may be bolder in mine own house.
So Madam, for the love I have found in yours,
You shall be welcome thither, when y' are sent for.

La. What a bold piece of Kitchin-stuffe is this?
Brothery' are matched.

Whi. And caught ifacla, ha, ha, ha.

La. He has not a word to speak.

Mat. Follow me home and durst.
Ex.
Ra. Yes sir, I dare without more leave taking, ha.
Ex.
La. Was ever comb so cut.

Whi. Ha, ha, ha, ha.

Neh. There Is a new Aunt indeed! she brought me nothing.

Whi. I have not laughed so much I know not when,
H'has made me laugh until I cry again.

La. Again, you are welcome, Sir, Mrs. Blithe
Now the unwelcome guests are gone, lets in
And dine, then will we after meat

Whi. Of Joinctures, Madam, and of Nuptials treat.

La. Right sir.

Bli. Love, as I shall adore thee for a deity.
Rid me of this ridiculous society.

Act. III.
Scoen. 1.
Enter Matchil, Rachel, between Erasmus and Valentine. Eras. GOod Mr. Matchil.


Val. Mystris, be not so violent.


Ra. Ha.


Mat. I Will rather run my Country, Gentlemen, then endure her.


Ra. You were best to kill her then, and then you will have no other course to
take, unless you stay and behang'd.


Mat. I Will make thee glad to fly first.


Ra. From my house and husband shall I? from my possessions shall I? And leave
you all to spend in riot shall I? No sir, I Will stay and spend my share if you
go to that, that will I. And make all fly as well as you, and you go to that,
that will I, ha.


Mat. Whoop, whow.


Er. Nay, fle be not so loud.


Mat. What did thou bring thou drudge thou.


Ra. That which you were content to drudge withal, I am too sure of that. The
drudge you speak of is no worse then your own wife, I am too sure o'that.


Mat. I know not what to say to her.


Ra. Did you not fay for better, for worse? And if 'twere worse then it is,
'twere all too good for you. And that I hope I shall find some good Friend to
know.


Val. That I like well, I Will be her first man.


Ra. I trust you have found the drudge to be a woman fit to content a man, and
if you grant not that, some better man perhaps shall be a Judge, betwixt you
and the drudge.


Val. Better still.


Mat. She threatens horns. I think.


Ra. Horns. I think, you said. If 'twere so 'twere too good for you. Cannot
your own wife content you, ha?


Val. She holds up that point stoutly.


Ra. That shall be tried.


Mat. O for an expert Chyrurgion now to cast her in a dead sleep, and geld her.


Er. In Troth you will be both sorry, when your passion gives but least way to
your understandings. Mr. Matchil, let me persuade with you.


Mat. Never uniesse you bring her on her knees, to crave forgiveness at my
foot.


Val. If you but yield an inch he treads upon your neck, I will not give an
under spur-leather for you. But bear it out bravely, and I Will be your servant.


Er. Mrs. Matchil.


Ra. Mrs. Match-ill indeed, to be so matched.


Mat. So matched* how matched? what from the hurden sinock with lockram
upper-bodies, and hempen sheets, to wear and sleep in Holland, and from the
dripping-pan to eat in silver, ^ha. Do you repine at your Match, ha. Is wealth
contemptible to you?


Ra. I was better content in my poverty. I have not been my self, Gentlemen,
since he married me.


Mas. You may be poor again as soon as you please, the door is open, depart at
your pleasure; you know the way to your old Aunt the Apple-woman, at
Hockly-hole. Take your knitting Needles again, and live with her, go.


Ra. No sir, I Will stay with you, and make you as poor before I have done wi'
ye, as I was before you had me Gent. I shall not be my self till then.


Mat. The devil you shall. Was ever such a crooked condition crept into a thing
like woman?


Val. Yet this sir, is the rare piece of obedience
You boasted of, and said you would defy
The devil to dishonest her, I am sorry
Your judgment led you into such an error,
Already she is my Mystresse.

Mat. Is she so?

Ra. Yes, and I^le call him servant, Gentlewomen use it.

Val. Do so, Mystresse.

Mat. If she, sir, be your Mystresse, Then am I
Your Master-in-law, out of my house I charge you.

Er. Do thou conspire to grieve him?

Val. Troth, sir, I did but jest. You have my pity.

Er. All are not times for Jest, friend Valentine.


Mat O my affliction!

[She looks in her Watch.
Er. Have a little patience, sir.

While I talk calmly with her.

Mat. Leave me then
A while unto my thoughts. Go into the house.

Ra. Pray servant help me here a little. Do so much
As wind up my Jack for me, my Watch I would say.

Val. Her Jack* she is in the Kitchen still.
A pretty Watch this, Mystresse, what did you pay for it.

Ra. Nothing, my husband ga't me.


Val. Pity the Spring is broke, but I can get it mended.


Ra. Good servant take it with you then to the Jack-makers, I would say, the
Watch-makers. Come Gentlemen, shall we have a crash at cards?


Er. With all my heart. What is your game?


Ra. I can play a many old games. One and thirty bone-ace, Tickle me quickly,
and my Ladies hole, and sichie. But you shall teach me new ones, though I lose
money for my learning, Gleek and Primero, Gresco saut, primofistula, I know all
by hearsay. Come let us have a bout at somewhat. I have money enough.


Val. And I Will make shift to ease you of some on it.

Ex. three.
Mat. Affliction on affliction hourly finds me,
And lays me on the Rack, tearing my heart
Like greedy vultures, O my heart, this heart
That I so long supposed impenetrable
By all the darts of sorrow, is now transfixt,
Shot through and through with torments, and by this.
This last made sensible of all the rest.
My sons untimely death, my daughters loss.
My Sisters follies, and my Brothers vices.
My servants falsehood, and the jeers of strangers
Now wound me all at once; and all through this
Predominant blow, pulled on me by mine own
Impetuous rashness. Let me here consider,
While my hearts torture keeps my soul awake,
The moving cause of all these ill effects.
Mine own unbridled wild affections.
Scorn of example, and contempt of counsel.
I cannot but observe withal, how just,
A judgment follows mine own wilful acts,
In the same kind of doing ills for ills.
For my lost son, I rashly wrought revenge
Upon an innocent Girl; and with her
Have lost mine own; and for th'unmanly joy
I took in one wives death, because a Shrew.
(Though otherwise virtuous) I am in another
Trebly tormented; not alone with noise,
But with a fear of unchaste purposes,
Which if they come to act, my purse must pay for.
I see my faults, and feel the punishments.
And rather then stand out in my defense
To Enjoy some peace, I will endure some sorrow
And bear it civilly. Within there.
Enter Servant.
Ser. Sir.

Mat. Go call your Mystresse, pray her to come alone.
Ex. Ser* My resolution brings me yet some ease:
Men that are borne to serve, must seek to please.
Enter Rachel.
Mat. Rachel.


Ra Your pleasure quickly, I have left
My company, my servant, and my friend yond,
Sawing against one another at Corn the Caster; till I come to 'hem.

Mat. And then all three to In and In, is it so?


Ra. My servant, and my friend and I are e'ne all one.
They are the goodest Gentlemen, the best company.

Mat. Your servant and your friend.


Ra. Yes, and my servant plays for me now in my absence, as far as ten
pieces go that I left him. My plow goes there, though I am here.


Mat. Your plow makes vile baulkes of my money the while.


Ra. I am not so ill a huswife as you imagine. And my friend, and my servant
have promised to carry me abroad, to this town, and to that town, and the other
town, and whow, I know not whither. And my servant will have me to Hide-Park he
says, to see and to show all, as well as the brave Gallants.


Mat. This is gallant indeed.


Ra. And my friend will carry me to a whatdeecall, a new Academy, where I shall
see the rarest music and dancing, he says, and learn the finest Complements.
and other courtly qualities that are to be had for money, and such instructions
for the newest fashions


Mat. She will fly to the devil for fashions sake. Pray stay a little, and let
me talk calmely with you. You have almost broke my heart.


Ra. But not altogether, I hope. I would not win so great a game, without some
sport in playing it.


Mat. Hear me.
I know you put on this affected carriage,
But to try masterie, and the disease
Being so general among all women,
Is in you therefore more excusable.

Ra. O, are you coming?

Mat. Hear what I will say to you.
And find in that a husbands good affection.
I love my peace, and would preserve my honor,
Both which are in your breasts to save or spoil.

Ra. And can you think the way to purchase peace
Is by a war with me? hah, you are cozened.
Do you think your domineering looks, or noise,
Or blows, can fright me into quietness,
Or that you shall have honor by abasing
Your wife?

Mat. You will not understand me.

Ra. Hah.

Mat. Though I love peace, and would preserve my honor.
I Will yield in both to you, and can, (I have been
So us^d to thraldom) But the world, the world
Is such a Talker. --

Ra. I have found the man.

Mat. There I would save a reputation.

Ra. He Is loath to bring it out; I Will close w'ye.
You Will be content so, I will suffer you
To bear a loud command over me in public,
That I shall carry it in private. Is It not so?

Mat. Truly wife, yes.

Ra. You Will give me leave to beat you
In private then.

Mat. Nay, we'll bar blows at all times.

Ra. But if I chance to give you a rap or two,
Or now and then a nip, and you strike me
Again, I Will strike you some way else, as you
Would not be struck. And so observe my carriage.
The Gentlemen are coming.
Enter Erasmus, Valentine.
Er. O, here they are.

Val. And not by the ears: that is wonderful.

Ra. Sir, I perceive my error, and repent it.
Promising you in all my after life,
To be a faithful and obedient wife.

Val. He has fetched her about, it seems.

Mat. Grammercy Rachel, bind it with a kiss.
[Kisse.
Er. And thus it should be.

Mat. Gentlemen, have ye found us?

Er. With joy to see this reconciliation.

Mat. Thus shall ye see it ever, Gentlemen.
I knew she would yield, or I should make her heart ache.
What were a husband, if he were not Master?

Val. You have won the sield, it seems, yet I may hope
I have not lost a Mystresse.

Er. Nor I a friend.

Mat. In a fair way, Gentlemen, I shall
Abridge her of no courtly privilege.
But no more haytie twaytie tricks, I charge you.
She shall not jaunt to this nor that town with you.
(I thank you for your care) nor to Hide-Park.
Nor to the Academy you tell her of, without my leave.

Val. And do you say so Mystresse?

Ra. Truly yes.
I am no such woman as you took me for,
With Mr. Matchils leave you may be welcome
Home to his house in good and seemly sort.
Put pray expect no further entertainment
Then he shall well allow of.

Val. I have lost her.

Er. This change is admirable.

Mat. Why do you admire it.
Is she not mine? how could you think she durst
Stand out in her rebellion? although the devil
Who soothes all Upstarts dispositions
Into an overweening of themselves.
Possessed her for a time, had not I power
And virtue do you think to conjure him out?
What have I studied for, think you, e're since
My last wife di'd, but how to rule the next?
Go get you in, there is something in the house
Worth looking after.

Er. I be sworn, he frights her.

Ra. Would I had you within to perform covenants.

Mat. What do you grow rebellious again.
Why stir you not else, ha? prithee Sweetheart
Respect my dignity, or only seem to do it.

Ra. Yes, I will only seem to do it.

Val. He makes her tremble.

Ra. Gentlemen, I must about my house-^ffaires.
So, I take my leave.

Er. Val. Good Mrs. Matchil.

Mat. Aha.

Ra. And Mr. Matchil, at your own good pleasure.
[Curt'sie. Having in private something to impart to you,
I would entreat your presence.

Mat. Well, Anon, anon.

Ra. Your ear before I go good Mr. Matchil.
[Curt'sie, Pinch.
Val. H'has brought her to her servile old obedience.

Mat. O -- oh.

Ra. That is a private touch, sir, of the business.

Mat. Pox of your Lobster claws. There waanip*

Ra. It will be worth consideration, sir.

Mat. Well, I Will come to you presently.

Ra. I humbly take my leave.
Ex.
Er. Any ill news that you change color so?

Mat. No, nothing, nothing but a womanish fear.

Val. Well, you are a happy man that have of recom her.

Mat. You know not me yet Gentlemen, I know a word in private would do it.


Val. Yet she desires to have you again in private.

Mat. It Is her abundant love, and pure obedience.

Er. She comes again.
Enter Rachel.
Ra. Since you are not yet disposed to cnter, sir.
One word more, Mr. Matchil, if you please.
[curt'sie.
Mat. Oh, -- I understand you. Go, I Will follow you.

Ra. Again, I take my leave.
Ex.
Mat. I must wear Lantern-hornes upon mine arms,
If she use this. Well, Gentlemen, at your own time
Lets see ye. My Rach. shall make you welcome,
And for me, you know me, I will still be Master. --
Enter Rachel. I come, I come, I come. So, farewell Gentlemen.
Ex.
Val. Ha, do you run?

Er. What do thou think of this?

Val. I Will lay all the tricks I have against his brags.
She masters him in private, and that all
This show of her obedience is dissembled.
My hope revives again; we must abroad with her.
But tell me, what new Academy's that
You told her of, I understand not that yet.

Er. Nor have I seen it, but we both will shortly.
It Is but of two or three days standing yet.

Val. Where is it? who are the Professors,
And what the Arts?

Er. I Will tell thee all know.
It carries a love-sound; but I am told
It is but private lodgings kept by
Both men and women, as I am informed, after the French manner.
That profess Music, Dancing, Fashion, Complement. --

Val. And no drabbing?

Er. A little perhaps in private.
But guess now in whose house all this.

Val. I cannot.

Er. Even in your City-Mystresses, that lends you
Money so freely.

Val. Who Camelion?

Er. Yes sir, I doubt, your borrowing of the wife
Has broke the husband, put'hem off their trade,
And now they seek new ways to live by projects.

Val. And could you keep this from me all this while,
Till I am there, each step's a tedious mile.

Er. But not without me, good Val. We'll find a time.
Together, and our Mrs. Matchil with us.
Ex.
Scoen. 2.
Enter Camelion and Hannah. Came. Cock, I protest Cock, I commend thy course
Thou have taken in brave Lodgers, gallant Guests,
Guests of the Game Cock; and my house is counted
A house of quality and recreation, Cock,
In civil sort and gentle fashion, Cock,
Sbobs Cock, I know thou would not have it otherwise
For all the wealth in the Exchange.

Han. But Rafe you care not
What people say, so I bring you in profit.

Came. Not I, not I, my little Cocksie Nansie,
Not I, pish, Honey soit qui maly pense.

Han. Some do not stick to say, I know what is what,
And that our house is no better then it should be.

Came. Pish, Honey soit again, in the very teeth of 'hem,
Let 'hem all say what they will. Dainty come thou to me.

Han. But I know what I know, and that our house is
Better then it should be, if some of them
Had but the keeping of it, that speak so ill on it.
And that the Gentlewomen in our house
Are well-condition'd, and as chaste as courteous.
And if you saw, (as they desire I should
See all betwixt their great Resorts and them)
You Would be in love with their sweet way of living.
Then for their dancing, it is so neat and graceful.
See 'hem anon at practice.

Came. Not I, Cock, I Will see nothing.
I will not leave one ducking pond, for ten dancing schools.
Yet I can dance, and love it: you know that Cock.
And though you are a Gentlewoman borne,
You took me for my legs, not ^or my arms.
Is not that a good Jest, Cock. Sbobs 'twas out before
I was aware. Here comes their father.
Enter Strigood, Cash, disguised in bravery.
Came. It seems he has brought in some new scholar.

Stri. Where are my daughters, Landlady.

Han. Close in their chamber, sir.

Stri. Are none of our Academicks come yet?

Han. Not any, sir.

Stri. I look for some anon
Pray bid the Girls come down
To practice.

Han. Yes, sir.
Ex.
Came. Sir, when I was a Batchelour, I practiced,
Dancing sometimes.

Stri. Indeed, good Landlord?

Came. And maugre wedloek, I have something left
Yet in these legs, that can express at least
Love to the quality.

Stri. That shall not be lost,
If I can further it.

Came. I saw last night
Your new French dance of three, what call you it?

Stri. O the Tresboun.

Came. I think I could make one in it.

Stri. This Gentleman's another, call the Music.
I Will try what you can do.
Ex. Came. Cash, Thou art welcome, I am glad I met thee.

Cash. But that you had foreknowledge of my habit,
And seen it in my out-leaps, as you call 'hem,
I might have past. But you in this disguise,
None but the devil himself that is your Inmate,
And lodges with you in it, could have known you.
Sure he devised it.

Stri. No, you are short.
I learned it of a Jesuit.
And 'twas but easy: shaving of my old
Gray hair and beard off; clapping on this perrule
After the fashion; having but few wrinkles.
(For which I thank my Batchelourship, I pass
For a brisk youth. But for my Hannibal eye here. And by my brothers
Courteous advice I have taken a course to live
Upon my stock of wit, slight and activity,
With nimble brain, quick hands, and aerie heels, as he told me, ha!

Cash. He could not think you would have stolen his daughter to have set up
withal.

Stri. But now I care not
What the wretch thinks, so he discovers nothing,
I dare trust thee Cash, partly on thy Oath
Which I have taken you know: but more respectively
Upon your forty pieces here, friend Cash,
Which I have also taken: but most of all
For that I know you dare not make discovery,
For fear of Little-ease. That were a prison
Too fearful for such bravery to stoop into.

Cash. That keeps me still in awe. It Is well you know it.
But it is better, he has no suspicion
That I am run away.
Enter Camelion.
Came. The Musick's ready, sir.

Stri. Play then, -- the Tresboun.
Dance.
Stri. 'Twas very well done, Landlord, I protest
I love your house the better for your quality.

Came. But if you saw me at the ducking pond,
Me and my Trull.

Stri. Your Trull?

Came. I mean, my bitch, sir.
O she would ravish you.
Enter Hannah.
Stri. Some other time.
Here comes your wife. The news good Landlady?

Han. News out of France, your fame is spread abroad.

Stri. How out of France?

Han. Two young French Gentlemen.
New come ashore, the daintiest sweetest Gentlemen
That e're I saw (now you will be jealous Rafe)

Came. Not I.

Han. Are come to lodge here, having heard
It seems, that you profess French qualities.
And instantly desire to be acquainted
With you and your sweet company.

Stri. Can they speak English?

Han. One very well: and the the other can say
Tree Fransh crown for two English kiss already,
Now be jealous Rafe.

Came. Pish, Honey soit qui maly pense.

Stri. You can speak French, Landlord.

Came. So much as you have heard, not one word more.
I assure you but this, Adieu Monsieur and so
I leave you.

Han. Will you not see the Gallants Rafe?

Came. Not I, I will not be jealous Cock, and so*
By the Backdoor to the ducking pond. I go.
Ex.
Stri. Enter then Landlady, where be these Girls?

Han. Here they are come.
Ex. Enter Joyce, Gabriella.
Stri. Stand aside Cash, and be not yet discovered.
Now Ladies, how do y'like your way of living?

Joy. I do not like it Uncle.

Gab. Troth, nor I sir.

Joy. We eat and lodge well; and we wear good clothes.
And keep our credit in the house we live in,
But what we suffer in our reputation
Abroad, is dangerously doubtful.

Stri. So, so.

Gab. Here we are viewed and reviewed by all comers.
Courted and tempted too, and though we are safe
In our chaste thoughts, the impious world may say,
We are set out to common sale.

Stri. So, so.

Cash. And so you are to the utmost of his power
I dare be sworue;

Joy. But Uncle, for the time that you intend
To stay, I pray admit no new acquaintance,
Nor any more, lest I for my escape
Venture a leap two stories deep.

Stri. Ha! you said?
You know I have disclosed you to no eye
That could take knowledge who or whence you are,
And for the foreign strangers, and such Townsfolks
As knew us not; what need we weigh their thoughts.
Their gold is weight; let that be all we look to.
While our deserving arts and qualities
Require it from 'hem. If they think us wicked,
And hope to get Virginities for salary,
And pay for their deluded hopes beforehand.
What is our act bnt Justice on their follies,
In taking of their prodigal coin?

Gab. I hope,
You deal not that way for us.

Stri. Never fear it.

Joy. But Uncle, though you have taught us courtly
Gypsy tricks.
That somewhat trench upon our modesties.
Pray let it not be thought we'll sell our honesties.

Stri. Trust to my care.

Cash. And that's the way to do it.

Stri. And in that care be confidently seen,
By a deserving Gentleman, whom I
Present to kiss your hands.

Joy. I will see none.

Cash. You need not fear me, Lady; for I can
But tell your father, if you slight his servant.

Gab. Bless us! what Metamorphosis is this?
It Is Cash your fathers man.

Joy. Is this the habit of a Merchants Prentice?

Cash. Is this the lodging of a Merchants daughter?

Joy. Has his great marriage turned my fathers house
Into a sumptuous Palace, that he keeps
Such costly men. Or does the bravery
Of his late beauteous Bride require such gorgeous
Attendants? Pray what office may you fill
About her person.

Cash. Will you home and see?

Gab. We are betrayed?

Stri. Ha, ha, ha. Be not afraid of Cash.
I know him, and he knows us. He is our friend
And we'll be his. As for his bravery
It Is no new thing with him. I know him of old.
This sute's his worst of four.
And he is one
Of the four famous Prentices of the time.
None of the Cream and Cake-boyes, nor of those,
That gall their hands with stool-balls, or their Catsticks,
For white-pots, pudding-pies, stewed prunes, and Tansies.
To feast their Titts at Islington or Hogsden.
But haunts the famous Ordinaries of the time,
Where the best cheer, best game, best company are frequent.
Lords call him Cousin at the Bowling Green; And the great Tennis-Court.
Thy fathers money
Would rust else, Girl. Keep thou our Council Cash.
And we'll keep thine, though it be to the undoing
Of him and all the wretches of his brotherhood,
That love their money, and their base desires,
Better then blood or name.

Gab. But can you hold
It good in any servant so to hazard
His Masters livelihood.

Stri. Can you hold your peace?
He Is wise, and saves by it all this while: He knows
His friends are bound in full two thousand pounds,
For's truth, and his true service, and perhaps,
He is not out above one thousand yet,
Where Is your wit now?

Cash. Mystresse, I Will do you service, and be true to you.
I Would not have mist of this discovery. --

Stri. You see she hearkens to him. Talk aside Cash.
And touch her boldly.

Cash. I would not have mist it.
For all the wealth your father has: and at
Convenient privacy. Ple give you reasons,
That shall gain your belief to it.

Stri. The French Gallants.
Enter Papillion, Galliard. I had almost forgot them. They are a pair
Of delicate young Monsieurs. If they have
But crowns enough, they are the likelicst
Merchants for my new Mart that I can choose.
She said they can speak English, that is a help.
For devil of French have I to entertain 'hem.
[Salutes.
Gab. See mine own heart, here is more temptation still.

Joy. I Will not endure the onset.

Cash. I le defend you.

Joy. Yet there are graces in their looks methinks,
That do invite my stay.

Pap. N' entendes vous, la langue francois Monsieur dittez.

Stri. I would be glad to hear you speak the language
I better understand, and that is English.
In which you are most welcome.

Pap. Your fair courtesy
Merits our greatest thanks.

Gali. I tanck you, sir.
I have bid France adieu to come and learn
De English very well; I speak a lietel,
But de English Mesteresse can teach de best.
I shall be glad to take my commencements,
Or my first Lessons from these Ladies lips.
[Salute.
Stri. A fine forward spark?

Gali O sweet, O delicate.
Ladies, if you will breath into me English,
I shall, if you please, put Fransh into you.
Vne pour l'antre, dat is one for anoder.

Cash. So they might make a hot bargain on it.

Joy. Are these your Civil Gentlemen, Landlady?

Han. He seems a little waggish: but the other
Is wondrous civil. He comes blushingly.

Pap. You are before me in the Salutation
Of these fair Ladies, Monsieur Galiard:

Gal. Il E'vray Monsieur Papilion, I kiss before, then you mose kiss behind.
But let me pray my tardinesse be excused
[Salute.
Joy. You pronounce English well sir.

Pap. I am glad
You like it Lady.

Gab. I like the others as well.

Pap. I have before spent many months in England:
And my great love unto the Nation,
Especially to the beauties of your Sex,
Retracts me hither, where my friend was never.
Till now that my perfwasion won his company;
And happily, I suppose, we are arrived:
That, to the sight and knowledge we have had
Of Music, Daunces, Courtships, and Behavior.
Through all parts of our Country, France, with an
Addition of all Italy affords.
Where (by all best opinions) even the choicest
Of such court qualities, and active graces,
Have had their Spring, we now, as Fame suggests,
Shall in this fair Society, discern
More then by all our former observation.

Stri. Report, sir, speaks too loud on our behalf,
And let me pray ye, that it not beget
Too great an expectation on our weakness,
By your too gentle suffrage. What we can,
We'll do.

Gali. O we dats de best. Do is de ting
De Fransh man loves: If all your both two daughters
Show all; all makes but more desire to do.
Speak I no good English, Mademoiselle?

Joy. I understand you not.

Gali. You no understand me,
Because you tinck I lie. But if you lie
With me, I make you understand me presently.

Cash. This hot-rein'd Mousieur takes 'em for the same.
Strigood would have 'em be I came in time.

Stri. At afternoon we'll have an exercise
Of courtship, Gentlemen. In the Interim,
If you will have to stir the appetite,
A dance before our Ordinary we are for you.

Gali. And we for you Alloun al Egremant Alloun
Monsieur Papillion pour l' honor de France.

Pap. What are your dances chiefly in request.

Stri. Good Landlady, bid the Music be in r^adinesse.
And then see dinner set upon the table.
Ex. Han. We have Sir for Corants, -- La Miniard,
La Vemimde, Le Marquess, Le Holland,
La Britain, Le Roy, Le Prince, Le Montague,
The Saraband; the Canaries, La Reverree.
For Galliards, the Sellibrand, the Dolphine,
The new Galliard, the Valette Galliard and lepees,

Gali. It Is all very good Monsieur Papillica Essontes
Mon Amy.

Cash. And hark you, Monsieur Strigood, you will be put to it.

Stri. I fear no French flashes. Bear up Cash. If we cannot dance 'hem of of
their legs, our wenches can,
I warrant thee. Music be ready.
Gallants, what are you pleased to dance?

Phil. tells what, etc.
After the Daunces, Enter Hannah.
Han. Gentlemen, your dinner stays meat will be cold.

Fran. And we are hot, it is better that take cold then we.
But come, one table for us all.

Phil. Stri. Agreed, agreed, agreed.

Cash. I say so too.
But to my self reserve what I will do.
Ex. omnes.
Act. IV.
Scoen. 1.
Nehemiah, Ephraim. Neh. EPhraim, thou have made me a man, both without,
witness this sword and within, witness this precious book, which I have
gotten almost by heart already.


Ephesians. But sir, beware you fall not back again Into your childish follies: but
go forwards In manly actions: for non progredi est regredi.


Neh. I know the meaning of that too, Ephraim. That Is once a man and twice a
child. But if I turn child again, while I have teeth in my head, ^'le give
Mrs. Blithe leave to dig 'hem out with Sugarplums, as she almost did these two
of 'hem yesterday, with her knuckles. I would they stuck both in her bum for it,
till I we^e married to her, and that shall be shortly, they say, I wo' not
turn boy again for that trick.


Ephesians. I hope you will not.


Neh. Thou may be sure on it Ephraim: for if I would turn boy again, I have
not wherewithal to set up again. Thou saw that, as soon as I had tasted the
sweetness of this delic^ous book here, I tore and burnt all my ballats, as
well the godly as the ungodly. In my conscience as many as might have furnished
three Bartholomew Faires, and then for love of this sword, I broke and did away
all my storehouse of tops, gigs, b^l^s, cat and catsticks, pot-guns, key-guns,
trunks, tillers, and all; and will I turn boy again can think? ye^ I am half
sorry, being toward a wife, that I did not keep 'hem for my children: some
money might have been saved by it. And that is a manly and a good husbandly
consideration, I take it. But hang covetousness: There comes not a mouth into
the world, but there is meat for t; and if I find 'em not play games, their
mother will find friends, that shall, for them and her self too


Ephesians. I Am glad to hear such good things to come from you,

And hope that now your judgment's strong enough

To manage my affair. You know my mind, sir.


Neh. Amardla Ephraim, 'twill be hard to compass. For the old Knight will
never let me have his Niece, unless he have my mother. He means to truck for
her, though, I confess, I had rather call thee father then any man, I know,
yet I know not how to bring it about, unless he marry her first; and then she
be weary of him, and take thee afterward to mend her match. I think it must be
so, Amardla Ephraim.


Ephesians. Now you fly out again, that is as impossible, as it is unlawful.


La. Within. Negh. Negh.


Neh. Peace, my mother comes.


La. Where are you child? Neh.


Neh. I hear her neighing after me, I Will do all I can for thee, Amardla Ephraim.

Enter Lady.
La. Look you ^onne, what kind Sir Swithin has sent you. A dancing frog, you
would think it were alive, and a ballet of burning the false prophets before
they be tried. And another fearful one of the new Antichrist.


Neh. Hang bawbles, burn ballets, I am a man, and defy boys tricks.


La. A sudden change, I pray it be good.


Neh. Tell me of toys? I have a sword: offer me ballets? I have a book. Speak
to me of Sir Swithin, I Will talk to you of Ephraim that gave me these blessings;
and is fitter to be my father, (so he is) then the foolishest Knight of 'em all.

[Reades,
La. Bless my son from too much learning. That book has done him no good, I
doubt. He talks and looks so wildly of the sudden.


Neh. A ha!


La. What book is it. Let me see it.


Neh. I Will tell you first. It is a book all of Bulls, Jests and Lies Collected
by an A. S. Gent. Mother f'sooth, there be such things in it! If you never
read it, it is the rarest book that ever you read in your life. Open it where
you will, and you shall learn something. As here now. One refusing to eat
Cheesecakes, was ask't his reason. He told them he loved the flesh well, but
was afeard of the bones. Then here is the next to it. One asking whence Lobsters
were brought: his fellow replied, one might easily know their country by their
coat. They are fetched from the red sea. Now would I might never eat more of
'hem, as well as I love 'hem, if I know what Cheese-cakes were made of, or from
whence Lobsters came before.


La. Is this your book-learning? In troth thou make me laugh.


Neh. Laugh on, good Mother. And while you are in the merry mood, let me speak
a good word for Ephraim. I have a mind f'sooth, because he has made me a man,
to make him my father, f'sooth.


La. What, what! How now.

How durst you firrah, move my son in this? ha.


Ephesians. Madam.


La. Is it but so? ha!


Neh. Pray f'sooth hear him speak. He can speak Poetry (he says) as well as
Knight Whimlbie. Speak Ephraim.


Ephesians. Madam, Fa^re truth h^ve told
That Queens of old
Have now and then
Married with private men.
A Countess was no Blusher,
To wed her Usher.
Without remorse
A Lady took her Horse-
Keeper in wedlock. These did wisely know,
Inferior men best could their work below.

Neh. Mother f'sooth, Is it not fine?


Ephesians. Nay, Madam, more then so, I Will further go


La. But you shall not, Sirrah. What, what! how now! Is It but up and ride? ha!
Out of my doors thou varlet.


Neh. I must out too then, mother I am afraid, oh. --


La. Good Neh. be pacified, I Will give him a better answer.

But not a word on it now, sweet child, I pray thee.
Here comes Sir Swithin.
Enter Whimlbie, Blithe.
Whi. Ha, ha, ha, Madam, ha, ha, ha.

[Kisse.
La. I marry Sir Swithin. This is better then O Madam, O --, when you washed
your handkerchiefs in the suds, and then to wring hem out in Poetry.


Whi. My tears with the memory of the dead are all fallen into Lethe; and
nothing but joy left in me, sinc my hopes are confirmed in your lap. And hang
Poetry: I study profit now. Therefore, look you, Madam, here is a draught of my
marriage-instrument to your lap.


Ephesians. His instrument being drawn, I must put up my pipe and be gone.

Ex.
Whi. And here is another draught for sweet Master Nehemiah, for my Niece
Blithes Joincture.


Neh. O but she says she will not have me.


Whi. When did she say so?


Neh. Now, now, she spat the word out of her mouth. And I say, if she have not
me, you shall whine both your eyes out before you have my mother; and see never
the worse, I warrant you.


Neh. A cross marriage, or no marriage, I say still.


La. I say so too, son, Sweet boy, be content.


Whi. Blithe. You spoke well of him behind his back: and made me think you
loved him, and would marry him.


Bli. Behind his back, I may do much to please you. But when I look upon him,
he turns my stomach worse then a fool made of sour wilk.


La. Marry Gip, Mrs Queasie, my sonne's as sweet as you, I hope, and as wise as
you. And sucked as sweet milk as ever the good Cow your mother gave.


Bli. Ha, ha, ha.


Whi. Patience, good Madam.


Ephesians. I hope the cross marriage is crossed. This is untoward wooing.


La. Uds so! do you flirt out your unsavory comparisons upon my son?


Bli. Flirt not you at me, Madam, lest I flirt your milk-sop under the snotty
nose here.


Neh. Yes, and I have a sword, and you have got never a one.


La. You wo' not will you, ha! Do you fly at him, ha!


Whi. Fear not, good Madam.


La. Ephraim, save my boy.


Bli. Ha, ha, ha. --


Whi She shall not hurt him. Leave her to me, good Madam.


La. I ever feared he was not long-lived he was so witty. And now I fear, she
will be the death of him. I would not he should marry her for a million.


Neh Say not so, mother. I love her better and better still.

I never had play-fellow i my life, but we fell out and in again.

And I must and will marry her, I take my death on it aforehand.


La. O me! he is bewitch't to her.


Whi. Leave all to me, dear Madam.


La. As I am to you, I think, Sir Swithin.


Whi. Let me alone with her: I Will win her, and he shall wear her* fear not. As
^ was saying, Madam, she speaks as well of him behind his back, as your own
heart can wish. And told me she was content to marry him.


La. Behind his back? did she so?


Whi. Yes truly, Madam.


Neh. Lo you there, mother, Let her marry me behind my back then: And when we
are married, I Will make her stick to it before my face, I warrant you; or if she
will make back-play. I Will play at nothing but backgammons with her.


La. Well, Heaven bless thee, thou art but too good for her.


Whi. Speak gently, Niece, I charge you.


Bli Madam, I hope your Ladyship shall find me too good for him. If e're he
has me.


La. Ha! say you so?


Whi. She means in well-doing, Madam.


La. Nay then, I thank you Mrs. Blithe. Assuring you that you shall be no way
so good to him, but I will be as good to you.


Neh. Agreed again of all hands. But look how she turns and keeps cut like my
Sparrow. She will be my back Sweetheart still I see, and love me behind.


Whi. She is yet raw, and has not much been abroad to see the manners of the
time. In which my melancholy has been her main hinderance. But Madam, there is
now that is worth all our sight and observation; A new Academy, where they say,
the newest and most courtly carriage and behavior is taught and practiced both
for young Gentlemen and women. Have you not heard on t?


La. Yes Sir Swithin; and that the French tongue is taught there with great
alacrity; and my son is wished thither, but soft I warrant you.


Whi. But let him see it: at least in our company it will embolden him; I mean
to carry my Niece thither. I have been a Lover of Arts and Exercises; and know
somewhat since my youth. Pray let us spend one hour of this afternoon there.


La. Pardon me good sir Swithin.


Neh. But he shall not mother if you love me: for I mean to perfect my dancing
there; and to learn French there; For I mean when I am married to travel into
France. But I will first be perfect in the tongue I shall learn it the sooner
when I am there you know. Pray let us go to the Acomedy, what dee call it?


Whi. The Academy.


La. Say you so son? then come sir Swithin. Come Mrs. Blithe, we will all go.


Bli. I Will wait upon you, though my heart says no.

Ex.
Scoen. 2.
Enter Joyce, Gabriella. Joy. O mine own heart! how near were we both fallen
Into the Gulf of Ruin?

Gab. Thanks for our delivery!
We were upon the brink of main destruction.

Joy. Was ever such a Fr^end as this mine Uncle?
Pretending us his children too, and called us daughters
To those he bargained with to se^l our Maid head?

Gab. 'Twas a most damnable practice sie upon him.

Joy. And had the Monsieurs been as capable
Of our Virginities, as he was of.
Their moneys, how had we then resisted.

Gab. By Venus (mine own heart) my Gentleman
Came up so close to me, that if my voice
Had not been stronger then mine arms (O me!
I tremble fon it yet) I had been vanquished,

Joy. But did you note the virtue of the Gentlemen?
When they were sensible of our fears and tears,
How gently they desisted and with what humanity,
When they perceived how we had heen betrayed,
They pitied our conditions; and wooed homditly
Our loves in way of marriage. Provided that
Our births and fortunes might no way disparage
Theirs, being free and generous

Gab. I confess
I love 'hem both so well, that if they prove
(As they pretend they are not) our inferiors
In blood and worth, I would take either of them.

Joy. Troth (mine own heart) it is just the same with me.
I care not which I have. And mark a sympathy,
How equally all our ^ffections strike.
We both love them, they both love us alike.
But peace. Cash, though he has done us good service,
Must not know all. How goes it within Cash?
Enter Cash.
Cash. And why Cash pray. Have not you changed your names
From Joyce and Gabriella to Jane and Frances.
And is not your Uncle Strigood now become
Your father, by the name of Mr. Lightfoot
The nimble dancing Master? And must I still
Carry the name of Cash? and having lost
My nature too, in having no cash left?
(Pox of the dice) call me Mr. Outlash.

Joy. My father will fetch you home with an Inlash,
One o'these days.

Cash. But after you, fair Mistress,
Now to your question for the squares within.

Joy. I with the Frenchmen, and my Uncle Strigood.

Cash. Your father Lightfoot, you forget again.
There Is a drawn match made: For the Monsieurs
Have taken their money again: And you have still
Your Maidenheads, I hope. But to have heard
The coi^e they kept, the wrangle, and the stir;
And how the young Blades put the old one to it;
Would ha perplexed you more then keeping of
Your Maidenheads from men you love.

Gab. You cannot tell that.

Cash. O how the old man chafes that you would offer
To make your moan to them to move their pity,
And not to make his bargain good; and then
How they put home his baseness to him; to make sale
Of his own blood and honor in his children.
(They knew they said some parents in their country,
After their children were turned whores, would share
To live upon the profits, but to sell
Their souls before they were damned, fie; fie, fie, fie).
Till he confessed indeed you were none of his.
But children of some friends of his deceast,
Left to his care sor breeding; which he had
Plenteously given, and thought it might seem reasonable
To raise his money out of you again.

Joy. What an old devil is this?

Cash. Baser and baser still.
The Monsieurs cried, and swore if they could sinde
Your Parents were Gentle and virtuous,
Being their first Loves, they would marry you,
To free you from this miserable thraldom.

Gab. Brave honest Gentlemen.

Gab. Be advised though, Mistress.

Joy. I hope I shall.

Cash. Beware of Travelers, many pass abroad
For gallant fellows that have run their country,
For picking pockets.

Joy. And some you know at home
For cozening their Masters.

Cash. You are pleased.
But you have known my love; for Gabriella
Let'hem share her betwixt 'hem. You and I
Made one, may soon make peace with the old man
At home.

Joy. O Rogue! I Will tell you more anon Cash.
Enter Strigood, Pap. Galliard.
Stri. Come Gentlemen, Monsieur Papillion.
And Monsieur Galliard, all friends, all friends.

Pap. A greed, agreed, sir.

Gall. And agree for me.
Agree poor tout.

Stri. Cheer up your faces Girls.
'Twas but my trial of your chastity.
And since you have stood firm, I am proud of you.
Trust me, 'twas but to try you.

Gall. We we All, but for try. Trimount, trimount.
No more, but all for try: no man can tinck,
But'twas too very moshe to take two hundred
Crowns for two pusillages, no, no was but
For try: but and she had not squeek and scrash too
Like to do leetel chat, I had Trimount
One, two, tree, five time, for all your try.

Stri. What Is past let be forgot. According to
Agreement, Gentlemen, you are now content
To join with us in Academick fellowship,
And for your pastime profess Art and Science,
As we do for our profit: you are expert,
I find; and shall win wonder of our Nation,
To your own much delight out of their follies.

Cash. And then for Gamesters, Gentlemen. If you^ll play.
I Will bring ye those shall venture money enough.

Pap. We are planted to our wish.

Gall. All very good.
All very good; but I would see thee first.
What Ladies will come here to practice complement.

Stri. You are still hot upon the female Monsieur Galliard
Monsieur Papillion here flies over them.
Enter Hannah.
Han. Ha, ha, ha, what will this world come to?

Stri. Landlady, the news?

Han. The old will to it.
As well as the young I see.

Stri. To what Landlady?
He takes her aside. And that while the young men and maids court and confer at
the other side.
Han. To fashion following;
A Reverend Lady
Of fifty five; and a Knight of threescore
And upwards, are come hither to learn fashion.

Stri. Do you know their names?

Han. Yes, yes: and them; it is that
Begets my wonder.
It Is the Lady Nestlecock, and one Sir Swithin VVhimlby.

Stri. Wit be merciful unto us.
Enter Hannah, Cash.
Han. The Ladies man's without: who came to know if the house were ready to
entertain 'hem; do you know 'em Mr. Lightfoot?


Stri. I have heard of the Lady. Cash, see if it be Ephraim.
He cannot know thee. Let him not away,
[He looks out. By any means, his not return to them may keep 'hem back.

Cash. It Is he, I see him hither.

Stri. Landlady, is your husband come from ducking.

Han. Yes, overjoyed with the good sport he has had.
He Will play the good fellow then. Entreat him Cash.
To help thee, put a cup or two upon
That fellow; and hear^st me, spice his cup,
I mean, grave Ephraims cup with this same powder,
'Twill lay him asleep, and quickly.

Cash. I know the trick on it.
Ex.
Stri. And Landlady, when the Knight and Lady come,
Say we are ready for 'em.

Han. That I shall sir.

Pap. It Is then an absolute contract. I am yours.

Joy. And I am yours as firm as faith can bind.

Gall. To which we are de witness. Be so for us,
I am her husband, And she is my wife,
Speak you.

Gab. Before Heaven, I do acknowledge it,
But sir, the Church must be observed,

Gall. For that.
We'll send for one Minister that shall marry
Us all at once. One kiss till then shall serve.
[Kisse.
Stri. It Is well done Monsieurs, I no sooner turn
My back, but you are on the Damsels lips.

Gall. A leetel in de honest way will serve,
But he shall know no-ting.

Stri. On with your Masques-Maids,
And take especial heed you blush not through 'hem.
For here are some at hand will put us to it.

Joy. It Is not my father, nor my Lady Aunt?

Stri. I cannot promise you. Be bold and safe.
Bear it out bravely, or our school breaks up
Immediately: and we are broke forever,
Besides, there is no startiug.

Gab. That Is enough
To make a coward fight, and mine own heart;
We must stand stoutly to it, we lose our loves else.

Joy. Well, I am armed.

Gab. And I.

Stri. Fall into complement.
Masks on. Enter Whimlby, Lady, Neh. Blithe.
La. I muse we lost my man thus.

Neh. By your leave, sir.
Are you the Regent of this Academy?

Stri. I am sir.

Whim. And are those of your Assistants.

Stri. Yes sir, and all Professors of Court-discipline,
By the most accurate, yet more familiar
Rules, then have ever yet been taught by any,
For quick instruction both of young and old.

Whim. You promise very fairly. For us old ones,
We know and could have done things in our youth,
Which still we have a mind to: but we leave
The practice to our young ones: Here Is a pair
Would feign be at it. We'll pay their admittance.

La. But I Would be glad to see first by your leave,
Some probability of what they shall learn.

Stri. And reason good, good Madam. Pray observe there.

Pap. Fair star of courtship, my unworthy humble self, a Professed servant to the
integrity of beauty, makes this

Clear testimony of your merits, that every eye that sees you,

Owes you his heart for tribute, and that unjustly your beholders live, that
live not in your service.


Neh. Mother f'sooth, is not this French?

La. Peace ch^lde. Hear more on it.

Joy. Noble sir, you are so exactly deserving in the opinion of all righteous
judgments, that the least syllable of your fair testimony, is able to
re-edifie the ruins of a decayed commendation.


Whim. The best that ever I heard, since I wooed my Grissel.

Stri, Was not that a sweet bout, sir?


Whim. Yes, yes, it puts me in mind of some sweet bouts I had with one before
I married her.


Stri. ^as he married my Sister troe?


Pap. I am forced to give you over, Madam, you have such a preventing and
preoccupying wit in all things.


Neh. That goes like English Mrs. Blithe. I could learn some of that me thinks.


Bli. Best tell your mother so; she may rejoice at it.


Stri. There, Lady, was a taste of sweet complement between persons equally
affected. May it please you now to let your son pass upon this demosel. Who
being to her a stranger, and raw (as I imagine) in courtship, shall meet with
reprehension, that may be for his instruction.


La. Do Neh. speak to her.


Whim. Put of your hat and say --.


Neh. What! and her masque on?


La. That was well-said. Why are they masked, I pray sir?


Stri. We are commanded it by the policy of wise authority; for fear young
heirs might fall in love with 'em, and sink their fortunes.


La. You have well satisfied me.


Neh. What should I say to one I never saw.


Whim. When I was young and bold, I would have said, Lady, you are most
auspiciously encountered. And speak it boldly.


Neh. Lady, you are most suspiciously accoutred, I speak it boldly.


Whim. Auspiciously encountered man.


Neh. Auspicously encountered woman, I say.


Gab. I commiserate your encounter. It Is a most hungry, verminous, impoverish't
word sir. It seems you are a stranger by it, to the Innovation of courtship.


Neh. What should I say to that now?


La. He Is a weak scholar forsooth, and would be glad to learn.


Gab. The acknowledgement of his weakness is the first greece of gradation to
perfection, and his gladness the scaling-ladder of resolution.


Neh. Pray f'sooth, can you teach me a complement to offer you sugar-plums, and
eat 'hem my self: to save my manners and my plums too?


La. What a wag it is?


Gab. What walking dunghill is this? made of the dust swept from the house of
ignorance.


La. What, what! how now, ha? you are a Flapse to term my son so, ha!


Stri. O good Madam. This is but school play.


La. I Will put her by her school-tricks and no only ^nmask, but unskin her face
too, and she come over my heir apparent with such Billingsgate Complements.


Pap. Sweet Madam, no harm was meant, and nothing said in earnest: 'Twas merely
but school practice, but to show the sweet young Gentleman how he might be
subject to the scorn of Court, before he be seen in Complement.


La. Say you so?


Pap. 'Twas told your Ladyship before, that by reprehension he might find
instructiou.


Whim. Right Madam; For no Fencer learnes his Science before he receive some
hits and knocks too: Oh, I have had many.


La. Nay, I am satisfied, and pray, that my rash error may prove pardonable
Lady


Gab. Rather let me implore your mercy, Madam --.


Stri. It Is well, it is well Lets hear an Interchange or two now, of
complemental acknowledgement of courtesies past betwixt Ladies, for the
edification of ^his fair one, who seems not yet to have taken notice of us,
but looks of the ground still.


Bli. It Is not to find a fescue, sir, among the Rushes.

To pick out a lesson in your crisse-crosse-row of complement.


Stri. Sharp and sudden. She has a good wit I see.


Whim. Ob erve, good Blithe, observe.


Gab. Can your poor servant express acknowledgement enough, Lady, for favonrs
so incessantly heap't upon her, besides the accumulation of many secret
benefits?


Joy. I cannot but admire, Madam, your noble and illustrious Gratitude, that
can give beauty to benefits of so low a birth and condition.


Whim. O my Grissel comes to my mind again, she was the gratefullest woman.


Gab. If such favors, Madam, should pass under an humble name, Honor would
grow idle, and a thankful Nature beguiled of her emploiment.


Joy. You'^l make my zeal hereafter, too bashful to serve your most curious
acknowledgement.


Bli. Curious acknowledgement! There was a third drawn out.


Gab. I am hound by many kindnesses, Madam, to celebrate the fair memory of
you; as the trouble of your Coach twice in one day, besides those inestimable
Jewels, the Monkey and Dormouse your Ladyship sent me.


Neh. I would you could lend me a sight of 'hem forsooth, I love such things
devoutly.


Joy. You do but open a privy door to my thankful temembrance, Madam, for the
bounty of your Squirrel and Paraquitoe.


Bli. Fagh, shut that privie-door.


Neh. And shut in the Squirrel and the Paraquitoe to be stifled, shall she? O
that I could see hem!


Stri. Now Madam, and Sir Knight, Is not this neat and handsome?


Whim. Truly, truly, it is most admirable pretty.


Stri. Nay, if you heard our Lectures, saw our
Daunces.
Relish't our Music and harmonious voices,
Observed our Rules for fashion and attire,
Our many exact postures and dimensions,
Fit to be used by way of Salutation,
Of courtesy, of honor, of obeisance,
To all degrees of man or womankind,
From the low bent of vassalage, to the head
Of towering Majesty, you should admire.

La. But do you read and teach all these to your scholars?


Stri. Stand forth, Monfieur Galliard. Stay we are interrupted.

Enter Eras. Val. Rachel. Up maids, and quickly; or it is not your Masks
Can keep you undiscovered. Go, be ready,
With Music and your voices, when I call to ye.
Ex. Joy. Gab.
La. Why are we interrupted? pray proceed.


Neh. Mother, it is my naughty Aunt, so it is*


La. No matter, son, we'll take no notice of her.

I wonder at the boldness of the drudge though.

Ra. I can turn tail too, as well as the great Lady. Hab.


Val. And do so, Mystresse, give her a broadside.

Well-said, we'll make our party good, I warrant you.

Er. Sir, we have heard your Fame; and love your Arts.
(...) pray that our ambition be excused,
Which drew on our Intrusion.

Stri. To me and to the place you are all welcome.


Val. And so to all I hope, chiefly to you,
Good Madam Dowager, hoping in good time
I may get good, by doing much good upon you
How likes your L^p^my complement.

La. Do you bring your rude companions to affront me? Are you so hot? you stir
up your cinders before they be cak't.


Val. Still in the Kitchin-dialect.


Ra. No ruder then your self, hah.


Val. I brought her, Madam,

(...) advance my suit to you.

La. Will you see me abused

^ir (...), look to your Niece, the the other talks to her.


Whi. Kind merry Gentlemen, Madam, when I was young I would have done the
like. Their coming hither, was as ours was to note the instructions

That are taught here. Pray sir proceed. On with your exercise, that we may all
be edified.


Stri. We shall do so, sir.


Val. But sir, your Gentlewomen,

That past upon our entrance where are they?

(...) Sir, they were called in haste to private practice

With some great Ladies in an upper room.

Val. Umh -- private practice. Well, I shall know all.


Stri. And they being absent, we shall for the present

Only deliver by these Gentlemen,
^^me heads of Sciences.
A Song, a Dance, and then
Entreat you take a taste of a collation.
And all most fairly welcome.
Speak M^nsieur Galliard, The heads of our chief Arts. Your silence, pray you.

Gal. The first is the due carriage of the body,
The proper motion of the head, hand, leg,
To every several degree of person,
From the Peasant unto the Potentate;
To your ^nferiours how and when to use the Nod,
The Hum, the Ha, the Frown, the Smile,
Upon the fit occassion; and to your equals,
The exactest, newest, and familiar motions
Of eye, of hand, of knee, of arm and shoulder,
That are in Garb, in Congee, Crindge, or Shrug,
In common Courtesy, or Complement,
Lastly, for your Addresses to Superiors.
The Honors, Reverence, or Obeysances,
Proper unto the quality or estate
Of person whatsoever. And so much
For carriage and behavior. In the next place
You shall have rules for the more graceful wearing
Of your Apparel, with the natural Reasons,
Why some man's hat does better in his hand
Then on his head, and why his coat hangs neater
Upon his elbow, then upon his back,
As also Reasons for Tunes bringing up.
And marriages, together of the fashions
Of man and woman, how his Caller, and her
Black-bag, came on together; how his pocket-comb
To spru^e his Perrule, and her Girdle-glasse,
To order her black pashes, came together;
How his walking in the streets without a cloak
And her, without a man came up together,
Of these, and of a hundred more the like.
We shall demonstrate reasons and instructions.
Shall render you most graceful in each fashion.
The next are skills in instruments, song and dancing

Stri. Enough, those shall be made familiar to you
By voice and action instantly. A Song there.
SONG.
Whim. Admirable pretty still.

Er. Are these your Gentlewomens voices, sir?

Stri. They are

Val. What do you keep 'hem up like Nuns,
To sing and not be seen?

Stri. Not always sir.
But may it please ye Gentlemen and Ladies,
Now to observe the practice of our feet
In active dancing.

Neh. That came I to learn,
And to speak French, do you think sir, you can bring
My mouth to handle the French tongue handsomely.

La. He Is apt to learn, sir, I can tell you that.

Gal. Yes. I shall bring his Mout to it. But his Mont is yet a leetel too wide.
But he shall have some of de water datde woman use for anoderting, to bring it
better together, and he shall speak like de Fransh Lady.


Neh. Pray sir, if you can like the Ladies daughter of Paris properly.


Er. Now Val. thou know the way.

Val. I wonder sir, Amongst all your Arts and Sciences
You have so little judgment in a face,
Does his mouth appear wide to you? what false glass
Are your eyes made of?

Gab. What you mean?

Er. Nay, friend.

Stri. Pray sir take no offense. Here was none meant.

Val. Slander is no offense then. He has injured,
By breathing an aspersion on that face,
The life of beauty, and the soul of sweetness.
Wide mouth Y --.

Gal. Begar Monsieur, you shall no point out mouth,
No, nor outface the Frensh man with your great Bull-beef, and Mustard English
looks.

Er. Nay, gentle Val. forbear.

Val. I Will stop.
This mouth that knowingly says he dares except
Against a tittle of his face or person.
But as he is an ignorant stranger, and
I must respect the company. I forbear.

La. However sir, I can but thank your love in 't.

Er. Now it works in her.

Val. Pardon my plainness, Madam.
I never was so taken with Masculine beauty.
And till I win a woman that is like him,
Or has been like him, I can but languish.

La. They told me I was like him, when I was younger.
[Aside. And let me tell you y' are a comely Gentleman.
And be you but as honest as y' are handsome, you deserve well.

Val. Vmh, it is a hard matter to bring those ends together.

Neh. Mother f'sooth. Here Is a man now for you to make my father!
Beyond the Knight or Ephraim!

La. Were I free from the old Knight, I could look well upon him.

Ra. Come servant, come away.

Val. By no means, Mystresse, I do but sooth her up to jeare her for vou.
If you out-stay her not, you lose your honor.
She Will brag she has out-look't you. If you start.

Ra. Nay, and she go to that, I hope I can,
Look as ill favouredly as her self, or a better
Woman then she, and stay in spite of her, hah.

Val. It Is well done, Mystris, Madam shall I tell you.
But I would pray you not to storm, but laugh at it.
She says you are no match for me.

La. Ha, ha, ha.

Val. And knowing I aim at none but some great widow.
Tells me she knows her husband's but short-lived.
I fear she means to break his heart.

La. Say you so?

Val. No words, good Madam.

Whim. ^et more whispering.
Pray Madam let us go. Niece come away,
For I fear Madam, as you wisely doubted,
This is no company for us.

La. Sir, I hope.
I am not yet so tied, but I may safely
Use my own ^reedom, I Will go when I please.

Whim. O Grissel, Grissel, when would thou have said so?

Bli. Loves power, I hope, has won on destiny,
TO appoint this day for my delivery.

Er. Nay, good Sir Swithin, -- Ladies -- we have yet
Dancing to come, and a Collation promised.
Enter Camelion.
Stri. Yes Gallants, now w' are ready, we but stayed for this fourth man here.

Val. O Camelion.
Where is your wife? I hope your je lousie.
Locks her not up.

Came. Pish Honi soit. I hate it.
No, she has been preparing of a banquet,
Which now is ready for you, worthy Mr. Lightfoot,
And your fair company; jealousy I defy
The ba^e horn A gue, Mr. Askal I.

La. What does he call you? Rascal?

Val. Askal Madam.
My name is Askal. But the R in Master
Runs in^o't so, that sometimes it sounds doubtful.
I must be Knighted, Euphoniae gratia.
Sir Valentine Askal will come fairly off.

Came. Now note me Mr. Askal, and tell me if ever jealous man came so lightly
off.
Enter Hannah. Dance.
Han. Sir, your collation stays.

Stri. It Is well, Gallants and Ladies
Wilt please you enter.

Omn. Agreed, agreed, of all sides.
Ex. Omn.
Act. V.
Scoen. 1.
Enter Lafoy, Hardy, Matchil. Laf. INhospitable! it is inhumane, past
The cruelty of infidels.

Mat. Thou speak
But thine own barbarous cruelty, hollow Frenchman.

Laf. Abominable hypocrite.

Mat. Cunning Villain.

Har. Fie Gentlemen, forbear this unknown language.
And either speak to others understanding,
If you speak Justice:

Mat. Give me then my son.

Laf. Thou have thy son, give me my son and daughter.

Har. Pray Gentlemen, if you will not hear each other, yet both hear me.


Mat. I pray Captain speak.

Har. You had his son to foster; he your daughter.
You faithfully affirm you sent his son
For England a month since.

Laf. And mine own with him.

Har. You have confessed you put away his daughter.

Mat. And mine own with her, through her disobeence.
But 'twas upon advertisement by letter,
That he had first cast off my son to an
Untimely death.

Har. Some Villain forged that letter,
And let me tell you sir, though in your house,
Lafoy's an honest and a temperate man.
You are rash and unadvised, what Lafoy speaks
I will maintain for truth: what you have done
I wish you could make good; But I may fear
You are marked out by your own wilfulness,
The subject of much woe and sad misfortune.

Mat. I know not what I am; but did you know
The number, and the weight of my afflictions,
You could not chide me thus without some pity.

Har. Indeed I pity you, and now you are calm,
Know that Lafoy sent his son over with yours,
And but for some affairs he had with me,
In The Isle of Wight he had embarked himself
With them, and brought hem to you.

Mat. There Is hope then yet
That my boy lives.

Hard. And is come over fear not.

Mat. You comfort me, and now Lafoy y' are welcome.

Laf. But to what comfort, having lost my daughter.

Mat. Lost or lost not, mine is with her. And I
purpose now to be sad no longer. For I think
I have lost my wife too, there is a second comfort.

Har. Take an example here Monsieur Lafoy,
And shake of sadness; mirth may come unlook't for.

Har. I have lost a son too, a wild roaring Lad,
About this town. And if I find not him,
I doubt not I shall find, that he has spent me
A hundred pound since I last heard of him.
By the way sir, I sent you a bill of change
Last month, to pay a hundred pieces for me.

Mat. 'Twas paid. I have your bill for my discharge.
How now?
Have you found your Mystresse.
Enter Servant.
Ser. Nor tidings of her, sir.

Mat. She has found then some good exercise, I doubt not.
That holds her so.

Ser. Sir, there is a Gentleman
Craves instant speech with you.

Mat. Who? or whence comes he?

Ser. He will be known to none before he sees you.
And, when you see him, he says he thinks you will know him.
He Is a brave gallant, one of the Alamodes,
Nothing but French all over.

Mat. Fetch him me quickly,
It is my son. Grammercie mine own heart,
That wast not light so suddenly for nothing,
Pray Gentlemen, who e're you see, name no man
To me, unless I ask you. He comes, he comes.
Enter Cash. I Am grown a proper man. Heaven make me thankful.
Just such a spark was I at two and twenty,
Set clothes and fashion by. He thinks to try
If I can know him now. But there I Will fit him.
With me sir is your business?

Cash. I presume
You do not know me, sir.

Mat. As well as he that got him.
Pray Gentlemen keep your countenances. Not know you sir?
It Is like I may have known you here to fore,
But cannot readily collect; perhaps
You are much changed by Travel, Time, and Bravery,
Since I last saw you. There he may find.
I partly guess, but will not know him yet.
Good Geutlemen say nothing.

Har. What ailes he troe.

Cash. He knows me, I fear, too soon. If now my plot fail, and he have a
Counterplot upon me. I am laid up.

Cash. Do you not know me yet sir.

Mat. Know you, or know you not sir, what is your business.

Cash. You sometimes had a son sir.

Mat. Now he comes to me.
I had sir. But I hear he is slain in France.
And farewell he. Mark how I handle him.
And what sir of my fonne?

Cash. He Is dead you say.

Mat. I mufe the Knave asks me not blessing though.

Cash. But to supply his loss you have a daughter
That may endear a son, sir, to your comfort.

Mat. Whither now flies he trow! Sir, do you know her.
Or where to find her?

Cash. First upon my knees
Let me implore your pardon.

Mat. Now he comes home: And I can hold no longer.
My blessing boy, thou meanest. Take it, and welcome
To a glad father. Rise, and let my tears,
If joy confirm thy welcome.

Cash. I may not rise yet sir.

Mat. No? why? what have thou done? where is young Lafoy?
My true friends son here? whom I now must lock
Up in these arms, amidst a thousand welcomes.
Where Is the young man?

Cash. I know not who you mean sir.

Mat. Distract me not.

Laf. I fear you are destraught.
I know not him. How should he know my son.

Mat. Let me look nearer.

Cash. Sir, I am your Prentice.

Mat. Whow -- whow, whow, who -- my Thiese and Runaway.

Cash. Prav sir afford me hearing.

Mat. Sir, your cause
Requires a Judges hearing.

Cash. I have put me
Into your hands, and not without much hope,
To gain your pardon, and your daughters love.

Mat. It Is roundly spoken. Gentlemen, I Will tell you.
This gallant youth, has gallanted away
A thousand pound of mine.

Cash. For your advantage sir: For
By this way
Of Gallantry, as you call it, I have traveled
Through the Resorts and Haunts public and private
Of all the Gallants in the Town. In brief
I have found your daughter, where she had been lost
For evet in your brother Strigoods hands.

Mat. Can bring me thither?

Laf. Is my daughter with her?

Cash. Madam Gabriella, the French Damsel's there.
And others, men and women, whom you will know when you come there.

Laf. Good sir, lets hasten thither.

Mat. You Will aid me, sirs?

Har. Yes, with our lives and fortune.
Ex. omnes.
Scoen. 2. Enter Erasmus, Blithe, Camelion.
Er. Be fearlesse Lady, and upon my life,
Honor, and faith; you are secure from danger.

Bli. Sir, I have put me in your hands you see
So liberally that I may fear to suffer,
If not a censure, yet a supposition
Of too much easiness, in being led
So suddenly so far toward your desire.
But my opinion of your nobleness
Joined with your Protestation, pleads my pardon
At least it may, the wretchedness considered,
To which I was enthralled.

Er. It is not more my love
Unto your virtue, and your fair endowments.
Then pity in me labors your release.
Nor is it rather to enrich my self.
Then to save you from so immense a danger,
As you had fallen into by yielding under
Your Uncles weakness in so fond a match.

Bli. Bless me from being fool-clog'd.

Er. Now you are free.
If you can think your self so, and but yield
Unto my present Counsel.

Came. Do so Lady
Before you are mist within. Here is the Closet,
And here is the Key in your own hands, And presently I Will fetch a Priest.

Er. You see
I still deal fairlie w'ye; and give you power
To keep guard on your self.

Bli. And yet I yield
My self your prisoner.

Came. In: some body comes.
She will be yours. And let me tell you, sir,
I wish you as much joy with her, as I
Have with my Cock.

Er. You have befriended me
In this good enterprise: And one good turn
Requires another. And now for that I told you,
Touching your wife, your Cock you so rejoice in.

Came. Alas. alas, good Gentlemen, you would fain
Have me be jealous. Honi soit, you are short.
Enter Val. Hannah.
Er. Stand by and observe.

Val. Do you begin to boggle,
And when I send for twenty pieces, do you
Send me but ten?

Came. What Is that?

Er. Nay mark.

Val. I pray,
What have I had in all by your account.

Han. At several times, you have had fifty pounds of my poor husbands money.

Val. What Is that to the free pleasure of my body
Which must afford you sweet and lusty payment?
You froward Monkey. But perhaps you have got
Some newfound Horn-maker, that you may think,
Deserves your husbands money better, for
Doing his Journey-work, one of the Monsieurs,
Or both perhaps in the house here under's Antlers,
It must be so, why else of all the town,
Must I be one of the last that must take notice
Of your new College here, your brazen face College
Of feats and fine fagaries? do you grow weary of me?

Han. Do you grow wild? speak lower, do you mean to undo me?

Val. Will the other fifty pound undo thee, I have lost
All that I had within among your Monsieurs.
And you must yield supply, or lose a friend
Of me.

Came. What a way would so much money have gone
In betts at the ducking pond?

Han. Will no less serve your turn then fifty?

Val. No less. All makes (you know) but a just hundred.
And there I Will stick; and stick close to thee too,
Else all flies open. What care I who knows
Your credits breach, when you respect not mine.

Came. It Is too well known already; All^s too open.
My house, my purse, my wife, and all is too open.

Han. O me, undone.

Came. Was ever loving husband
So much abusd?

Val. Enquire among your neighbors.

Er. Be patient man.

Came. O thou close whore.

Val. Take heed, sir, what you say.
Eene now you said she was too open, sir.
You Are in two tales already.

Han. I fear he is mad
Or jealous, which is worse.

Val. Pish, Honi soit.
He jealous, he defies it.

Came. Do you deride me?
Sir, you can witness with me, he confessed
Receipt of fifty pounds my wife has lent him,
(False woman that she is) for Horn-making,
Job Journey-work.

Han. You are deceived.

Came. I know.
(At least I think) I am deceived in both.
My money and thy honesty, but the Laws
In both shall do me right, or all shall fly for it.
I Will instantly to council.

Han. Hear me first.

Er. By all means hear her first. Pray grant her that.

Came. I dare not look on her, lest I be tempted
To yield unto my shame and my undoing.

Val. Will you not hear your Cock, your Nansie,
Nanny Cock.

Han. Time was you would not have denied me that.

Came. Nor any thing, if my Cock had but stood upon it.
Such was my love, but now,

Han. But now you are jealous.

Came. Have I not cause?

Han. Here Is the other fifty pieces, take 'hem sir.
They are full weight, and truly told.

Val. Brave wench.

Han. If you will law, sir, you shall law for something.

Came. What do thou mean?

Val. I hope she will humble him so,
That he shall keep our chamber door for us,
While we get boys for him. A dainty Rogue,
She tempts me strongly now. Would she would call me
About it presently.

Han. That money sir
May serve to countenance you among the Gamesters
Within, that blew you up. The Lady widow
May think the better of your credit too,
Being so good in the house.

Val. I Will straight amongst 'em.

Came. Council me not sir. All my joys are gone.
I cannot think now what a ducking pond
Can be good for, except to d^own me in it.

Er. Alas, poor man, I was in this too busy.

Han. Stay, you shall promise me before my husband,
That you will never more attempt my chastity.

Val. That bargaine's yet to make. Though before him
I may say much, I will not stand to that
For all the wealth he has.

Han. You shall protest
Then, fairly, as you are a Gentleman
You never have enjoyed me.

Came. I like that.

Val. No, no, I cannot safely, for in that
I shall surrender up my interest
In's house; and he may warn me out on it. No,
Take heed of that. It Is not his the other hundred
Shall make me slip that hold.

Came. I am lost again.

Han. What a bold thief is this! Pray hear me, sir.
You may remember that I ask't you once
What Countreyman you were.

Val. Yes, when you first cast your good liking on me, and I told you.

Of The Isle of Wight: And what of that?

Han. And you
Call Captain Hardyman, their father-in-law.

Val. You wrong me basely, to say I call him any thing; for he gives me nothing.


Han. You wrong him basely. Look you, Can you read.

Val. I had done ill to venture (as I have done)
On Salisbury plain else. Hah, what is here
That daughter, I sent you order to receive for me an hundred pounds. If you
find that your brother the Spendthrift Val. Askal, (Zookes that I) be in any
want, furnish him according to your own discretion.

I am Val. Askal, where is the money? My hundred
pound, have you't.

Han. It seems a Sister of yours had it.
Have you a sister?

Val, He had a daughter by my mother, but
He plac^d her out a child, I know not where
Where Is that young whore trow? Hannah I think
her name was. Hang me if (...) know directly.

Came. My wives name's Hannah, sir.

Han. I am that sister, brother, but no whore.

Er. Now Val. your brags to make men think you lay with her.

Han. You have your hundred pound sir. Look you, husband.
This is my fathers letter which you wrote on.
That which you dared the devil and Clerks to counterfeit, read your own hand.

Came. Honi soit qui maly pense.

Er. I must admire this woman.

Val. Do think I did not know thee.

Han. No sir, nor would I that you should,
Till I had foiled you in your course,
And had my will to make my husband jealous.

Came. My Cock, my Cock again, my Nanny cock,
Cock-all my Cock-a-hoop, I am overjoyed,
See, see thy father too.
Enter Matchil, Hardy, Lafoy, Cash.
Mat. This is the woman.
To whom I paid your money.

Hard. It Is my daughter --.
My blessing on you. -- What are you here too.

Val. And ask you blessing too. Your hundred pound Has bound me to it. Heaven
bless you, Here Is half one still, yes, and the better half, for tother's
spent.

Hard. O you are a great good husband.

Val. I would be one. And here is a good rich widow
Now in the house, your countenance may help me,
My Sister and my Brother both can tell you,
How orderly and civilly I live.

Came. O wag.

Hard. It Is like sir, I shall prove your Furtherer.
What is she?

Val. That Merchants Sister, and a Lady sir.
I would not have him hear.

Hard. Well talk aside then.
[talk aside.
Mat. In that I Am partly satisfied.

Er. I love you sir,
And waited on your wife but as your Sp^e,
For fear he might have led her to more folly.

Mat: But saw you not two such Damsels here?

Er. Here are
Some in the house that would not be seen by us.

Cash. Because they thought you would know 'hem.

Er. And if that
Old fellow be your brother Strigood, it is most strange

Mat. You know not him here do you?

Er. No not I.

Mat. It Is my man Cash.

Er. Most wonderful.

Mat. We shall know more anon.

Laf. Pray haste sir, to discovery: I would f^ine
Once see my daughter.

Mat. I would see a little
The fashions of the house first.

Cash. Pray obscure
Your selves in that by room there, where you may
See and hear all that passes, nor can any
Pass out of the house without your notice.
The Gentlemen and I will mix again
With the Society, if they please.

Er. Agreed.
Within Strigood. Where are you Gent'emen?

Er. Come away Val.

Mat. Is not that the Hell Hounds voice?

Cash Yes, it is your brother.

Mat. Good Captain go with us upon discovery.

Han. I Will seat you to see all, and be unseen.

Came. Do so good Cock. Do so now sir, I Will fetch the Priest.
Ex. Han. Hard. Mat. Lafoy. Enter Strigood.
Stri. O Gentlemen, you have lost such sport, the
Lady
And Merchants wife have been by the ears.

Cash Could not
The old Knight part 'hem?

Stri He has done his best,
And almost lost his eyes in the adventure
Betwixt the Furies tallons*

Er. But are they friends again?

Stri. And deep in complement.
Our school affords no such in act or language.
Enter Lady, Rach.
La. Sister, Indeed I am too much your trouble.

Ra. Pray Madam let me serve you truly truly.
I Will be your servant for a year and a day

La. Indeed, indeed you wrong your self, I am yours.

Ra. I am your servants servant, and will serve
Under your Ladyships Cook to do you service.

La. Indeed you may not.

La. If I may not be
Accepted for your household servant, let me
Become your Chare-woman* in any office
From Cupboard to (lose-stool, I can do all
To do your Ladyship service.

Val, This now savours of Complement indeed.

Ra. In sooth, it is sooth, forsooth the tale I tell you.
Enter Neh.
Neh. Well acted mother.

La. Y' are too obsequious
Good gentle Sister.

Ra. I am short of good.
Gentle I grant I am, for I bite no body,
Command me then sweet Madam.

Neh. And very well acted Nant.

La. O you shall pardon me*

Ra. I am no Pope, for your sake would I were.

La. Your courtesy o'recomes me.

Ra. O not so.
I wish it could forsooth, would it were better for you.

Neh. Exceeding well acted o'both sides.
Mother and Aunt f'sooth, Amardla you have done't
Better then the two School-Mystresses to d^y
Could do their Whatshicomes, their Complements
I think you call 'hem. But I have lost my Mystresse
To complement withal. Mrs. Bli^he Tripshort
Has out-strip't me, Amardla that she has.

La. Where Is he^ wise Uncle should have looked to her.

Neh. He Is crying all about the house for her,
But cannot find her. How shall I have her now?

La. Thou shall not have her boy, she is naught.

Neh. Then he is
Naught too. You shall not have him.

La. Nor will, I fear not.

Neh. Think of the Gentleman, mother that out-fac'd
The Frenchman for me. I would you had a thousand such in France now.

Val. God-a-mercy boy.

Er. Peace, hear a little more.
Enter Camelion.
Came. Sir; come away.

I have found a careless Curate, that has nothing but a bare Coat too loose
shall chopt't up presently. And give him but a piece, he will fear no Cannon.


Er. I am bound to thee for ever.
Ex. Came. Er.
Stri. Whither goes he?

Val. No matter, let him go t'untrusse perhaps.
Enter Whimlby, Ephraim.
Ephesians. I say she is in the house.

Whim. She Is gone, she is gone.

Whim. She Is flowen out of a window, or chimney-top then.
I Am sure I wrtch't the door with epen eyes
E're since you entered, as my Lady charged me,
Lest her child might slip out to play i the street.

Neh. And I am here you see. He cannot see
He has no more eyes then a sucking pig,
And yet he weeps like a roasted one.

Whim. I am abused,
And r^nder me my Niece,
You have stolen her for your son.

La. My son defies her,
As I do you, old whining withered fellow,
That has no moisture in him but for tears.

Val. That is my Cue. A young well governed man
Were fitter, Madam.

Ra. Where have you been servant?

Val. I speak to my Lady.

Ra. My Lady, I think you said.
Are you so stout sir* hah?

La. I rather think he plays the cunning hypocrite
With his false tears, and packt her hence himself

Ra. My Lady minds you not, and I can learn
To give you a broad side too.

Ephesians. Madam, that cannot be, for I have seen
All that went out, or came into the house*
Since you. Here came a Church man in ere while.

Whim. A Churchman! then I fear she is clbsely married unto her woe and mine.

Neh. Perhaps to me.
Behind my back you said she would do so.
And before him came in your brother Matchil.

La. My brother, who her husband?

Ephesians. Yes, with others.

Ra. My husband, I think you said What a foul house these washing days make?

Val. Nay, it is no Jest Now ^^dies let me tell you,
And sad Sir Swithin; pray lend all your ears.

Stri. Cash, we are betray^^ Cash if we be not nimble.
I smell a Fox. Hy thee up quickly Cash,
And hurry down the wenches We'll make bold with
My Ladies Coach to hurry us away.
Enter Matchil, Hardy, Lafoy, Hannah.
Mat. But not too fast, Go sir, fetch down the wenches.
Thou shameless Reprobate. Do thou hang thy head now?
I Will take a course to hang the rest o'thee.
Your Ladyships well met at the new school.
So is your Chare-woman. Have you profited
By the devils doctrine here? you weep sin Swithin
For the iniquity of the times.

Neh. You mean
His Niece, pray Uncle did you meet her,
She Is gone away too, after my Cousin Joyce,
And the French maid, I think, she is here again.
Enter Eras. Blithe, Camelion. Amardla, wipe your eyes, and look Sir Swithin,
The the other honest Gentleman has found her.
And let him take her for his pains for me.

Er. I thank your love. But sir, it is your consent
We only seek.

Mat. Sir Swithin, let 'em have it,

Mat. This is the Gentleman I would have spoke for:
In birth, in means, in person every way
Deserving her. Take him upon my word.

Hard. And Madam, since you stick but upon Joyncture,
Having heard lately well of his husbandry.

Han. Thank a good sister, sir.

Hard. I will secure you
Three hundred pounds a year, your brother knows me.

Mat. With make good his word. Agree by your selves.

Lad. Upon these terms, it is like we shall agree.
Sir Swithin are you pleased.

Whim. Pleased or displeased.
It seems they are married.

Came. Yes, I assure you,
I saw their hands joined, and I heard 'hem both
Answer the Priest.

Whim. I will no longer whine.
Heaven give you joy, As you are your own, y' are mine.

Came. There are more weddings in the house, your daughters,
Are linck't by this time to the two young Frenchmen.

Mat. His daughters? ours I fear? what French? where are they?
Enter Cash, two sonne's, Joy, Gab.
Cash. Here sir, undone I fear.

Mat, What are you married.

Mat. Jun: Sir, she is mine, I must and will maintain it.

Laf. Jun. And she is mine.

Laf. This is your son. And this
Is mine.

Mat. This is your daughter. And this mine. Each married to her brother.

Laf. Jun. Mon Pere Je desire vestre Benediction Jour pour moy and ma fennue.

Laf. You are lost children all, was ever thread
By fate so crossely sp^n, so crossely wed?

Mat. I know not how to Bless you, or to look
On your incestuous eyes.

Laf. Jun. What is dat Incest,
We have commit noting, we have no time,
Since we were marry for so much as kiss,
Begar no point so much as but one kiss.

Har. Be not dismayed. These marriages are none.
The error of the persons nullifies
The verbal ceremony; and it is well
They past not unto further rites: I Will find
A lawful way to clear all this. And then
As you and they consent, they shall exchange
And marry in due order.

Laf. Jun. Sir I tanck you.
You'ave speak very well. And we shall make.
De exshange presently. A new exchange,
De new Exshange indeed, for de husbands
To shange the wifes before they can be weary.
Prenez mon friar, la voici la' une pour lautre.
Dear, is one for anoder:

Har. Is each party
Agreed, and so content?

Ma. J. Gab. We are.

Jo. And we.

Laf. Ju. We we, I ensuis tresbien contult.

Mat. Ja. Provided that we have our fathers leaves and councels.

Mat. Can you seek fathers leaves or councels now,
That have run from 'hem in your disobedience,
Into the snares of hell: too far I fear
To be releast. O hell-bred Villain.

Stri. Your brother of one side.

Mat. Ju. Lend but a patient care.
And by my hopes of your desired pardon
I Will quit you of your fear. It Is true, my duty
At my Arrival should have winged me to you.
But hearing of your late, ill talked on marriage.

Mat. O that root of mischief,
And of my Sisters flight as ^oth to appear to you,
As to presume a welcome; I was curious
First to observe the Town, and taste the news;
When more by Providence then accident,
Here we made choice of lodging, saw and liked
The practices of the Society,
Until this wicked man; (who still presumes
To call you brother,) finding us youthful strangers,
And (as he might suppose) wanton --

Mat. He made
A bargain with you for their Maiden heads.

Cash told me that, and how that hellish purpose
Was virtuously declined.

Stri. O counterfeit Cash.

Mat. But must you therefore, knowing whose sons you were.
Marry you knew not whom.

Mat. Ju. Pardon me, sir.
Our loves were noble, and by due inquiry,
Fetched from each others faithful breast, the knowledge
Of each other.

Mat. What! and marry then
Each his own Sister? Riddle me not to death.

Mat. Ju. Sir, I have done. And now that I have said
The worst that might have happened by his practice,
To make his shame or his repentance greater,
Who only was my aim. We are not married,
None of us all are married one to other.

Came. No, I assure you sir. Howere I li'd
At their request, (small matter for a friend)
I saw all the hurt the Priest did here to day.
That was upon them two there.

Er. Thank you sir.

Mat. You shall be then: And so take hands in earnest.
Is It not a double Match Lafoy?

Laf. Without
All manner of condition I consent.

Mat. I am full of joy.

Cash. O can you pardon me sir.

Mat. Good boy, good boy. I know not how a City
Could stand without such Prentices. And hope
This wants few such. But what can thou now say
Brother, of one side for thy felfe. Speak quickly*
While the good humor holds me to be friends
With all the world: yet yonder is one lies heavy
Athwart my stomach.

Stri. You Are full of joy you say.
And I say had it been within my power,
To have broke your heart, I had don't. Therefore in me
Be comforted and love me; for I find
I have no power to hurt you, and will therefore
Attempt no further.

Mat. Brotherly spoke in troth.
And worthily worth an hundred mark a month,
Shall have it.

Stri. Know then into the bargain, that
I forged the letter that suggeited to you
My Nephews death, in hope of means that way.

Mat. Honestly said agaiu. Now what say you?

Ra. I say that I am humbled on my knees.
I beg your pardon.

Mat. All Is too well me thinks.
But hark, before you break up school, lets have
Oue frisk, one fling now, one cariering dance,
And then pack up.

Omn. Agreed, Agreed, Agreed.

Stri. Play then Les tous ensembles.

Neh. That Is the French name on it, Uncle, it is in Dutch
called All-to-mall; and I call it in English.
Omnium Gatherum, it is the daintiest dance.
We had it here to day: I and my mother,
My Aunt and all can dance in it, as well as the best.
With every one in their own footing. Now observe.
Dance.
Mat. You have done well. Now pray lets break up school.

Hard. But yet not break up house. My son and daughter.
Have given me power to call their Supper mine.
To which I Will give you welcome, Ale and Wine.
Deus dedit his quoque finem, laus Deo.
FINIS.
These BOOKs following are sold by Andrew Crook, at the Green Dragon in St.
Paul's Churchyard.
In folio.
A Large and complete Concordance to the Bible, by Samuel Newman. The Bible of
a large English, or black Letter, used in Churches. The Bible of a fair London
Print. 'The Bible in Welsh. Leviathan, or the Matter, Form and Power of a
Commonwealth, Ecclesiastical and Civil, by Thomas Hobbs. Ben. Johnsons Works,
in two Volumes. The History of Don Quixote. Doctor Kellet of the Sacrament of
our Lords Supper. All Homers Works translated by George Chapman. Orlando
Furioso, by Sir John Harrington. Psyche, or Loves Mystery, by Jo. Beaumont.
In quarto.
Riders Dictionary. Thomae Thomasii Dictionarium. Doctor Gauden, of the
Ministry and Ministers of the Church of England. -- His three Sermons upon
several occasions. The Fables of Esop, paraphrased in verse, and adorned with
Scripture, by John Ogilby. Doctor Lightfoot, his Harmony on the four
Evangelists. -- His Commentary on the Acts of the Apostles. -- His Description
of the Temple -- His Description of the service of the Temple. Ten godly and
faithful Sermons by John Gore, late Minister at St. Peter's in Cornhil. Doctor
Day his Treatise of the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 16. Burton of bowing at the
Name of Jesus. Mr. Thomas Shepherd, of Liturgies, power of the Keys, and of
the Catholic visible Church, in answer to Mr. John Ball. Dr. Twisse of
Predestination, in answer to Mr. Cotton. The Swedish Intelligencer, containing
the principal passages and actions done in the best parts of Christendom.
Virgil translated Grammatically by John Brinsley. A Phylosophical and Chemical
Treatise of Fire and Salt. Clement, (the blessed Paul's fellow laborer in the
Gospel) his Epistle to the Corinthians. The Protestants Calendar. The Mysteries
of Art and Nature in four parts* the first of Waterworks, the second of
Fireworks, the third of Drawing, Limming, Painting, Engraving, and Etching,
the fourth of sundry experiments, by John Bate. William Lithgow his Travels. A
Sermon preacbed at Newport in the Isle of Wight, October. 1648. in the time of
the Treaty, on Gal. 5. 22. 23. by Robert Saunderson D. in D. and Chaplain to
the late King. An excellent Treatise of the interest of Princes and States of
Christendom. A Pathway to Piety, containing 1. Christ's Prayer expounded. 2. A
Communicant instructed. 3. A Direction to live well. 4. A Direction to die well.
Doctor Swadlin his Manuel of devotions, suiting each day with prayers and
meditations suitable to the works of the Day, as also each man's calling, she
Nobleman, the Soldier, the Lawyer, the Tradesman, the Sick man, the dying man.
A Brief of the Bibles History.

THE QUEEN And CONCUBINE.

A COMEDY

BY RICHARD BROM.

Asperius nihil est Humili cum surgit in Altum.
-- Si vis vincere, disce pati.
LONDON: Printed for A. Crook, and Hen. Brom, at the Gun in Ivy Lane. 1659.

Drammatis Personae.
Gonzago. King of Sicilie. Gonzago. His Son the Prince. Horatio. An old
humorous Courtier. Lodovico. Eulalia's faithful Counselor. Flavello. alias
Alphonso, Alinda's Sycophant. Four Lords, two Bishops. Sforza. Two Rival
Generals. Petruccio. Two other Captains and Soldiers. Strozzo. Two cashiered
Lieutenants. Fabio. A Doctor. Suborned false witnesses against Eulalia. A
Midwife. Pedro. A Gentleman of Palermo. Poggio. Two chief Inhabitants of
Palermo. Lollio. Three or four Contrymen of Palermo. Curat. Crier. Of
Palermo. Guard. Andrea. Eulalia's Fool. Jago. Rugio. Two other her Servants.
Jailer. Women. Kings Guard Eulalia, The Banished Queen. Petruccio's Servant.
Alinda, the veiled Concubine. Genius of Eulalia. Three or four Girls. The
Scoene Sicilie.
The first Song, for page 88.
What if a Day, or a month, or a year
Crown thy Delights
With a thousand wished contentings?
May not the chance of a Night or an Hour
Cross thy Delights
With as many sad Tormentings?
Fortune, Honor, Beauty, Birth,
Are but blossoms dying.
Wanton Pleasures, doting Mirth,
Are but Shadows flying.
All our Joys
Are but Toys,
Idle thoughts deceiving:
None has power
Of an Hour
In our life's bereaving.
The second Song, for page 111.
HOw blessed are they that wast their wearied Hours
In solemn Groves, and solitary Bowers,
Where neither eye nor Ear
Can see or hear
The frantique mirth
And false Delights of frolique earth:
Where they may sit and pant,
And breath their pursy Souls;
Where neither grief consumes, nor griping want
Afflicts; nor sullen care controuls.
Away false Joys, ye Murder where ye kiss.
There is no Heaven to that, no Life to this.
ACT. I.
Scoen. I.
Enter Horatio, Lodovico. Hor. THe clouds of Doubts and Fears are now dispersed,
And Joy, like the resplendent Sun, spreads forth
New life and spirit over all this Kingdom,
That lately gasp'd with Sorrow.

Lod. Now the Court
Puts on her rich Attire, and like fresh Flora,
After the blasts of winter, spreads her Mantle,
Decked with delightful Colors, to receive
The jocund Spring, that brings her this new life.

Scoen. II.
Enter Flavello bare before the Prince, the Queen Eulalia, Alinda, Attendants,
Hoboys, Hor. The Queen comes on, Joy in that face appears
That lately was overwhelmed in her tears,

Lod. and Hor. Health and perpetual Joy unto the Queen,

Eul. Thanks my good Lords, I am prepared to meet it.
How neer's the King?

Hor. At hand, my Sovereign.

Eul. Welcome that happy word that leads the way,
But yet he is not come, he is not here:
Never so sweet an expectation
Appeared so tedious: pray set on apace,
That I may live yet to an interview
With my loved honored Lord.

Hor. That your delay
May seem less grievous, hear this by the way,
A brief relation of the Kings success
In this his late well-won Battle.

Eul. Be it so.
But mention not his dangers, good my Lord.

Hor. That were to make his Conquest nothing worth:
It would make Victory upon his head,
As she had flown into his Burgonet,
To shroud her from a storm, and not to sit
Or rather stand triumphant on a foot,
With displayed wings upon the utmost Sprigg
Of his high stourishing P^ume, vaunting her safety
So perched and so supported by his Valor.

Prin. Pray Mother hear the dangers too; the worst
Will make the best the sweeter: I could hear
Of dangers yet to come; and Women may
Discourse of Perils past each Holy Day.

Hor. Well said, young Prince, right of the Kings own Metal:
And gracious Madam, let me tell you, though
You do not love to hear of blood and danger,
Y' have brought a Warrior forth, I do foresee't:
I love to speak my thoughts, I hope you trust me,
A right old Courtier I, still true to the Crown.

Prin. How this old fellow talks! you said, my Lord,
You would discourse the Battle.

Ho. Excellent Prince,
I was in the way: but the Queen put me out on it.

Eul. Well, well my Lord, deliver't your own way.

Hor. Then, humph, humh, humh, in my own way.
But by the way, no way to derogate
From the Kings matchless resolution.
A word or two of the best Soldier
In all the world (under the King I mean,
I know my limits) that is our brave General,
Lord Sforza, Madam, your stout Countryman,
Though our Kings Subject now; that bore him so
At the great marriage-Triumph in Tourneament,
Tumbling down Peers and Princes, that ever since,
He Is called your Champion, and the Queens old Soldier.

Eul. But what of him now in the battle?

Hor. Marry but this, That as we have a King,
And as the King brings victory, nay life,
Home to his Queen, his Country and our comforts,
Next under Heaven we are to give the praise
To this old Soldier, to this man, the man
Indeed, another man is not to be
(Except the King) named in this Victory.

Eul. You seem my Lord to honor Sforza yet
Before the King.

Hor. Excuse me gracious Madam,
I know my limits: what? before the King?
I am an old Courtier I, still true to the Crown,
But thus it is declared, that in the battle,
When in the heat of fight the mingled bloods
Of either Army reek'd up to the Sun,
Dimming its glorious light with goryvapour,
When slaughter had ranged round about the field,
Searching how by advantage to lay hold upon out King.

Eul. Prithee no more.

Prin. Good mother.

Hor. At last she spied and circled him about
With Spears and swords so thickly pointed on him.
That nothing but his sacred valor could
Give light for a supply to his relief,
Which shined so through and through his walls offoes,
As a rich Diamond amongst an heap of Ruins,
And so was found by the quick eye of Sforza,
When like a Deity armed with wrath and Thunder,
He cut a path of horror through the Battle
Raining down blood about him as he flew,
Like a prodigious Cloud of pitch and fire,
Until he pierced into the straight, wherein
The Royal Person of our King was at
His last bare stake of one life to a thousand.

Eul. I dare not hear it, yet.

Hor. Then in a word, old Sforza fetched him off,
And with his sword which never touched in vain,
Set him in the heart of's Army once again.

Eul. That I like well.

Hor. That did your Champion, Madam,
The Queens old Soldier, and your Father, Lady:
Do You simple at it? such a Soldier breaths not,
Only the King except: now note the Miracle,
The King received and gave new life at once
Of and unto his Army, which new life
Was straight way multiplied, as if the lives
Of all the slain on both sides were transfused
In our remaining part, who with a present fury
Made on with that advantage on the Foe,
That the whole field was won as at one blow.
I am prevented.
[Shout within, Victory]
Scoen. III.
Enter Captain, Drum and Colors, King and Sforza, Soldiers. The King embraces
and kisses the Queen, the Prince and Alinda. King. Now cease our Drums, and
furle our Ensigns up:
Dismiss the Soldiers, hostile Arms surcease,
Whiles we rejoice, safe in these Arms of Peace.

Sfor. Go Soldiers, better never stood the shock
Of danger, or made good their Countries cause.
Drink this to the Kings health and victory.

Sold. Heaven bless the King, and our good General Sforza.

Again. Long live the King and Sforza, Sforza and the King,

Kin. The King and Sforza, Sforza and the King,
Equal at least, and sometimes three notes higher,
Exit Capt. and Sold. Sound Sforza's name then does the Kings: the voice
Of the wild People as I passed along
Threw up his praises nearer unto Heaven
Ever methought then mine: but be it so,
He has deserved well, now let me again
Embrace the happy comforts of my life.
Through deadly dangers, yea through death it self,
I am restored unto my Heaven on Earth,
My wife and Son: a thousand blessings on thee.
Say, dearest life, whose prayers I know have been
Successful to me in this doubtful War,
How welcome am I?

Eul. That Is more than I can speak:
For should I bring comparisons of the Spring,
After a Frosty winter to the Birds,
Or rich returns of ventures to the Merchant,
After the twentieth current news of Shipwreck,
Redemption from captivity, or the Joys
Women conceive after most painful Childbirths,
All were but Fabulous nothings to the Bliss
Your presence brings in answer to my Prayers:
Heaven heard me at the full: when I forget
To send due praises thither, let me die
Most wretched, though my gratitude shall never
Sleep to the inferior means, even to the meanest
Soldier assistant to your safe return,
Especially to you good Sforza, Noble Soldier,
I heard of your fidelity.

Sfor. My duty Madam.

King. Are you one of his great Admirers too?
The world will make an Idol of his Valor,
While I am but his shadow: I Will but think on it,
Indeed he is worth your favor, he has done wonders.

Sfor. Let me now speak, I may not hear these wonders bounc'd,

King. You do forget your self.

Eul. What says my Lord?

King. Nay I have done.
Gonzago, you and I have changed no words yet;
I have brought Victory home, which may perhaps
Be checked at when my heat shall fall to ashes.
How will you maintain your Fathers quarrels ore his Grave?

Prin. I do not hope to outlive you Sir, but if I must,
I sure shall hope to keep your name and right
Alive whilst I live, though I cannot hope
To have so good a Soldier at my Standard
As Warlike Sforza.

King. This is more and worse
Then all the rest: the child has spoken plainly,
I had been nothing without Warlike Sforza:
I Will make him nothing, and no longer stand
His Cipher that in number makes him ten.
My Lords, my thanks to you for your due care
In my late absence.

Hor. All was Loyal Duty,
As we are old Courtiers Sir, still true to the Crown.

King. I have found you faithful.

Hor. It befits true Statesmen
Watchful to be at home against civil harms,
When Kings expose themselves to hostile Arms.

King. There Is a State-Rime now: but Horatio,
Has not Petruccio visited the Court
Since our departure?

Hor. Pox on Petruccio.
Bless me, and be good to me: how thinks your
Grace of my Allegiance, and can ask
Me that Question?

King. Now he is in his Fit.

Hor. The Hangman take him. Petruccio King?
Peugh, peugh; I hate to name him.
How can you think your State had been secured
If he had breathed amongst us? That vile wretch,
Whom in your Kingly wisdom you did banish
The Court for a most dangerous Malcontent,
After his just repulse from being your General,
When he durst stand in Competition
With brave deserving Sforza here, the best
Most absolute Soldier of the world.

King. Still Sforza!

Hor. Except your Majesty.

King. There is an Exception wrung out,

Hor. He come at Court by my permission?
I should as soon be won to set your Court
On fire, as see him here.

King. Send for him speedily.

Hor. [Starts] Your Majesty is pleased to have it so.

King. And upon your Allegiance
Which you so boast of, let me have him here,
And very speedily; I Will have your head else.

Hor. Nay since it is your Highness pleasure, and
So seriously commanded, I will send
My own head off my shoulders, but we will have him:
In what you can command, I dare be Loyal.

King. Look to it,
[goes to the Queen]
Hor. It must be so, this is one of his un-to-be-examin'd hasty Humors, one
of his starts: these and a devilish gift

He has in Venerie, are all his faults.
Well, I must go, and still be true to the Crown.
Exit Horatio.
Lod. Petruccio sent for! who for braving of
Brave Sforza here, so lately was confined.

Flav. I cannot think the Court must hold 'm both
At once, less they were reconciled, which is
As much unlikely: what do you think my Lord?

Lod. I know not what to think.

King. She Sforza's Daughter, say you?

Queen. Yes my Lord.

King. She Is a right handsome one: I never knew he had a Daughter.


Eul. He brought her over a Child with me, when happily I came your Bride,
bred her at home, she never saw the Court, till now I sent for her to be some
comfort in your long absence.


King. Sforza's absence, I fear you mean.
[aside]
Eul. And trust me Sir, Her simple Country Innocence at first
Bred such delight in me, with such affection,
That I have called her Daughter, to embolden her.

King. O did you so?

Eul. And now she has got some spirit,
A pretty lively spirit, which becomes her
Methinks so like her Fathers.

King. Very good.
I like her strangely.

Eul. What was that she said
To you Conzago?

Gonz. That Heaven might have pleased
TO have fashioned her out to have been a Queen.

King. Comely Ambition.

Sfor. Reconcile all quickly,
Or you had better never have been born,
Then disobey my last command, which was
Never to see the Court till I induced you.
Do you stare at me?

Alin. I but obeyed the Queen.
I hope she will answer't.

Sfor. No more, I Will talk with you anon.

King. Come Sforza, Welcome to Court, so is your
Daughter too, I have taken notice of her: O f^irest, welcome.
Kisses her. Sforza storms. Come you both with me this night, weel Feast:
Pray bid us welcome all, as but one Guest.

Eul. I shall in all obey you.

Alin. And for this,
Less then a King I shall abhor to kiss.
Exeunt.
Scoen. IV.
Enter Petruccio. Petr. Repulsed? disgraced? and made the scorn of the Court?
Is the advancement of an upstart stranger,
Because he is the Queens dear Countryman?
Have I for all my many Services,
Found the reward of being made an outcast?
Could not the King be pleased, though he advanced
Sforza unto the Honor I deserved,
To trust me in his service? could he think
My sword could be an hinderance in the Battle,
Or have delayed the winning of the Field!
And must his Court and presence which I have
With my observance dignified, reject me
Now, as a dangerous and infectious person!
It Is a new way to gratify old Soldiers.
So soon returned? I do commend thy speed.
The news at Court.
Enter Servant in haste: switch.
Serve. The King's come bravely home,
And every ear is filled with Victory,
But chiefly with the Fame of Sforza's Valor.

Petr. Sforza? Ser. Lord Sforza Sir, I cry him mercy,
The new Lord General.

Petr. Thou come too fast
[strikes him]
Serve. So me thinks too, less 'twere to better purpose.

Petr. The Fame of Sforza's Valor, good if it last.
What other news?

Serve. I have told you all the best.

Petr. If thou have worse, let us have it quickly.

Serve. You shall, That you may fly the danger.

Petr. What is it, without your Preface?

Serve. Here are Messengers sent from the King to you; pray Heaven all be well.
There Is the old tutchie testie Lord, that rails, and never could abide you,
since the King looked from your Honor.


Petr. The have made me amends, there is for thy news.
Is this bad news?

Serve. Truly my Lord, I think so:
For if the King had sent to you for good,
I think he would have sent one loved you better.

Petr. What? then the old Courtier? thou know him not.
I Will show him thee. He is the only man
That does the King that service, just to love
Or hate as the King does, so much and so long,
Just to a scruple or a minute, and then he has an
ignorant Loyalty, to do as the King bids him, though
he fear immediate death by it.
Call him in.

Serve. They come.

Scoen. V.
Enter Horatio and guard. Hor. My masters, come along, and close up to me: my
Loyalty defend me, I shall not dare to trust me in this devilish fellows
reach else. And thus it is Sir.


Petr. It Is thus Sir, I can tell you.
[drawes]
Hor. Good friends look well to me.

Petr. You come with strength of armed men, to bear me
From mine own House which was my appointed Prison,
Unto a stronger Hold.

Hor. Look every way.

Petr. The King it seems now that his Nignion
General is Landed, cannot think him safe, and I not
Faster: which though I can prevent, I will not.
Come, what Gaol will you remove me to?

Hor. I would thou were in Hell for me:
No Sir, I come to call you to the King.

Petr. What? with a Guard?

Hor. That Is for my Self. I know thou love not me.

Petr. Nor you me, do you?

Hor. Nor cannot, less the King could love thee.

Petr. Why perhaps he does, you see he sends for me.

Hor. Why if he does, I do, but it is more then I know, or can collect yet by
his Majesty's affection.


Petr. Here Is an Humor now.

Hor. I know my Loyalty, and I know the King has sent for you; But to what end
I know not: and if it be to hang thee I cannot help it. Look to me now my
masters. Nor do I care, that is the plain troth on it, while the King is pleased,
and thou were my Brother. I am an old Courtier I, still true to the Crown.


Petr. I commend your Loyalty: Come, we are Friends.

Hor. Look to me for all that.

Petr. Were you afraid, you came so armed and guarded?

Hor. That Is because I would not be afraid: look to me still.

Petr. Indeed my Lord you are welcome.

Hor. Yes, as much as I look for.

Petr. What should the King intend by this? I fear no ill,
For I have done none; therefore I may go.
Perhaps he thinks to make me honor Sforza
Now in his time of Jollitie, and be friends:
I need not go for that; he cannot do it,
Yet I will go to tell him so: my Lord,
My joy to see the King will post me faster
Than your grave Loyalty, or Massy Bill-men.

Hor. Yes, prethie keep before with thy back toward me, and so long I dare
trust thee.
Have an eye though.
Exeunt Omnes.
Scoen. VI.
Enter King and Flavello. King. Her Father has surpised her then?

Flav. Yes, and means to hurry her away from
Court this night: I heard him threaten it.

King. But he must not do it, she is too sweet Flavello, and too fit for my
embraces, to be snatched away.


Flav. Now that she is ripe and ready for your use,
Like fruit that cries, Come eat me. I Will not boast
The pains I took to fit her to your Appetite, before she saw you.

King. How, my careful Agent?

Flav. At first sight of her Feature, I foresaw
She was compliable to your affection.
Then by discourse I found she was ambitious,
I plied her then with Pills that puffed her up
To an high longing, till she saw the hopes
She had to grow by. Pray stand close, they come.
Enter Sforza and Alinda.
Sfor. Has the air of Court infected you already?
Has the Kings kisses moved by adulterate heat,
Swollen you into astubborn loathsomness
Of wholesome Counsel? Come your ways; I Will try
If Countrey-Air and Diet can restore you
To your forgotten modesty and Duty.

Alin. What have I done amiss?

Sfor. Do you capitulate?
But so much satisfaction as may make
Thee sensible of shame, I will afford thee:
Did thou not after Banquet, when the King
Heated with wine, and lust raised in his eyes,
Had kissed thee once, twice, thrice, though I looked on,
And all the Presence whispered their cold fears
Of the Kings wantonness and the Queens abuse;
Did thou not then still gaze upon his Face,
As thou had longed for more? O impudence!

Alin. Impudence? Sir, pray give it the right name,
Courtship, 'twas Courtship Sir, if I have learned
Any since I came here.

King. Brave metal'd wench!

Sfor. I am amazed.

Alin. Besides Sir, the Kings kisses
Are great inestimable Honors, and
What Lady would not think her self the more
Honored, by how much the King did kiss her?

Sfor. And should he more then kiss, still more Honored?

Alin. It might be thought so.

Sfor. Durst thou argue thus?

Alin. I know he dares not beat me here. Pray Sir
Let me but ask you this, then use your pleasure:
(Cause you style Impudence, that which I call Courtship)
What Courtier sits down satisfied with the first
Office or Honor is conferred upon him?
If he does so, he leaves to be a Courtier.
And not the thing we treat of. Did your self
After the King had graced you once, twice, thrice,
(As he kissed me) expect no further from him?

Sfor. She Is wonderously well read in Court already:
Who in the Devils name has been her Lecturer?

Flav. Do but your Majesty observe that, and think
What pains I took with her.

Alin. How many Offices
Did you run through before you were made General?
And as the more the King confers upon us,
Is more our Honor, so it is more the Kings,
When most his Favors shine upon Desert.

King. I like her better still.

Sfor. Insufferable Baggage.!
Dare thou call any thing in thee Desert?
Or mention those base Favors which the King
Maintains his Lust by, with those real Honors
Conferred on me, who have preserved his life?
Is it such Dignity to be a Whore?

Alin. Pray Sir, take heed: Kings Mistrisses must not
Be called so.

Sfor. Dare thou talk thus to me?

Alin. Yes, Sir;
If you dare think me worth the Kings embraces,
In that near kind, how 'er you please to style it:
Sure I shall dare, and be allowed to speak.

King. That word makes thee a Queen.

Sfor. The King dares not
Maintain it.

King. And that costs you your Head.

Alin. Dear Sir, take heed; Protest I dare not hear you:
Suppose I were advanced so far above you
To be your Queen, would you be therefore desperate,
And fall from what you are to nothing? Pray
Utter no more such words, I Would have you live.

Flav. She vexes him handsomelie.

Sfor. As I live she is mad. Do you dream of being a Queen?

Alind. Why if I should, I hope that were no Treason:
Nor if I were a Queen, were that sufficient
VVarrant for you, to utter Treason by,
Because you were my Father; No dear Sir,
Let not your Passion be Master of your Tongue.

Sfor. How she flies up with the conceit? do you hear?

Alind. Because you were my Father.
Sovereignty you know, admits no Parentage.
Honor, poor petty Honor forgets Descent.
Let but a silly Daughter of a City
Become a Countess, and note how squeamishly
She takes the wind of her Progenitors.

Sfor. She has swallowed an Ambition
That will burst her: I Will let the humor forth.

Alin. You will not kill your Child?

Sfor. Though all Posterity should perish by it.

Alin. Not for the Jewel in your Ear.

Sfor. Impudent Harlot! she has heard me value
This Jewel, which I wear for her dead Mother,
I would not part with, whilst I wore my Head;
And now she threatens that: a Kingdom shall not save thy life.

Alin. Know where you are, Sir, at Court, the Kings House.

Sfor. Were it a Church, and this unhallowed Room
Sanctum Sanctorum, I will bring you to your knees,
And make me such a Recantation
As never followed Disobedience;
I Will take thy life else, and immediately.

King. Flav. Treason! a Guard! Treason! etc.

Omn. Heaven save the King.
Enter Capt. and Guard
King. Lay hold on Sforza, the dangerous Traitor.

Sfor. It Is Sforza is betrayed.

King. Away with him, see he be kept close Prisoner.
Flavello, see that his daughter have convenient Lodging.

Sfor. Let me but speak; I hope your Majesty --

King. Let not a word come from him: hence, away.
What a most dangerous estate even Kings do live in?
When those that we do lodge so near our Breast
Study our Death, when we expect our Rest.
Exeunt.
Scoen. VII.
Enter Lodovico and Eulalia. Lod. Be comforted good Queen, and I beseech
Your Grace to pardon me in this command
The King has laid upon me.

Eul. Lodovico,
I do, and must no less submit my self
To the Kings sovereign will then you: and though
I am committed to your house and custody,
I am his Highness Prisoner: and more,
Though I know not my crime, unless it be
My due Obedience, I am still so far
From grudging at his pleasure, as I fear
To ask you what it is supposed to be;
But rather wait the Event, which though it bring
My Death, it is welcome from my Lord and King.

Lod. Was ever Virtue more abused then hers?

Eul. Yet thus much, good my Lord, without offense;
Let me demand, Is Sforza still close Prisoner?

Lod. Yes, and Petruccio his Adversary
Governs his Place, and high in the Kings Favor.

Eul. I will not ask his Trespass neither, it
Suffices it is the Kings high pleasure. But Alinda^
Sforza's fair Daughter, what becomes of her?
Poor virtuous Maid, is she thrown out of Favor
Because I loved her too?

Lod. Alas good Queen!

Eul. What do you weep? nay then all is not well
With her, I fear.

Lod. Good Queen, I fear so too;
And that all ill proceeds from her to you.

Eul. I may not understand thee, Lodovico:
I Will still retain the duty of a wife,
Which though it be rejected, shall not throw
Me from the path a Subject ought to go.

Lod. Two such wives more might save a Nation.
But see Petruccio the now-powerful man, under tho King.

Eul. Horatio with him too, are they such Friends?

Lod. None greater since the King was pleased to grace Petruccio.

Scoen. VIII.
Enter Petruccio and Horatio. Petr. Madam, however my Person, no less then my
Authority, I know is most unwelcom to you; I must appear, and lay the Kings
Command upon you, which you must obey.


Eul. I must? see, Lodovico, here is a plain-
Dealing Lord, that knows, my Love and my
Obedience to the King, and warnes me
Faithfully to observe it: good my Lord,
I will obey the Kings Command in you:
Lay't on me. What must I do?

Petr. You must go to the Bar, to answer to
Those Accusations that will be brought
Against your Life and Honor, as touching
Your foul Disloyalty unto the King.

Eul. He is a Traitor to the King and Me,
That dares accuse me of Disloyalty.
Patience assist me, and control my Passion.
The greatest Crime that ever I committed
Against my Sovereign, was, To be so near
The Vice of Anger in the presence of
One that he loved so well; but pray your Pardon,
Though truly those sharp-pointed words drew Blood
From my oppressed heart: and though you love me not,
I hope you think me innocent.

Petr. Would I could.

Eul. You do.

Petr. I would I durst speak what I think.

Eul. My Lord, you ever loved me, can you think?

Hor. Come, what I think, I think; my love to you
Was the Kings love, if it were love at all:
If he will say, he ever loved you, I can say so too.
But to speak truth, I know not if I did,
Or I did not; but now you're hateful to me;
That I dare speak, because he hates you soundly.
And your old Russian Sforza, that fell Traitor,
That would have killed the King: do you look up at it?
You may look down with sorrow enough:
Your Countryman, your brave old Champion,
He has Champion'd you sweetly it seems.
Is there no honest Woman?

Eul. What means this unknown Language?

Hor. Women are always ignorant of Reproof:
I Will tell you what it means, for that loves sake
You thought I loved you once. Or do you know
What Mars and Venus meant, when injured Vulcan
Had them in's Net? Good King, how were thou abused?
And this good honest, faithful, loyal Lord,
Full to the brim, of Merit, and true Valor,
By that Blade-brandishing Sforza, that mere Fencer*
To this great Martialist: but he is fast enough,
And all is come out, however you will answer it.

Eul. What must I answer? I know not yet your meaning.

Hor. Nor ever shall, for me.

Petr. You Will know too much
I fear, anon. Come, Madam, will you go?
The High-Court stays your coming.

Eul. I must submit me to it, and its Laws;
But to a higher Judge refer my Cause.

Lod. Good Queen, thy wrongs are manifest, though none
Must dare to utter them, but in our Moan.
Exeunt Omnes.
Scoen. IX.
Enter Alinda. Alin. Mount, mount, my thoughts, above the earthy
Of Vassal minds, whilst strength of woman's wit (pitch
Props my Ambition up, and lifts my hope
Above the flight of Envy. Let the base
And abject minds be pleased with servile Bondage*
My Breast breeds not a thought that shall not fly
The lofty height of towering Majesty.
My power upon the weakness of the King
(Whose raging Dotage to obtain my Love,
Like a devouring flame, seeks to consume
All interposed Lets) has laid a Ground-vvork
So sure upon those Ruins, that the power
Of Fate shall not control, or stop my building
Up to the top of Sovereignty, where I Will stand
And dare the World to dis-commend my Act:
It shall but say, when I the Crown have won,
The work was harsh in doing, but well done.
Enter Flavello. Flavello, welcome!

Flav. Hail, my Sovereign Queen.

Alin. It Is a brave sound, and that which my Soul thirsts for;
But do not mock mine Ears.

Flav. Believe it Madam,
Join your attention but with one hours patience,
And you shall hear the general Voice of the Kingdom
Give you that style, with large and loud allowance.

Alin. Style thy self happy then, in what Reward
A Subject can receive, or a Queen give.
How moves our great proceedings?

Flav. Fairly, thus:
Eulalia, for now I must no more
Give her the Title that belongs unto
Your Execellence, of Queen.

Alin. Advance that Harmony.

Flav. Eulalia is brought unto the Bar, accused,
Convicted of that high offense, that instantly
Shall pull that Judgment on her, that shall crush
Her into nothing.

Alin. Appear the proofs manifest?

Flav. That was my care, it behoov'd me to work the VVitnesses, who swore (in
brief) most bravely, that they heard Lord Sforza, whom you also may forget now
to call Father.


Alin. That without your instruction.

Flav. They swore, I say, they heard that Sforza boast
The knowledge of the Queen in carnal Lust.

Alin. Was that enough?

Flav. No, but it served to put
The question to her, Was it true or not?
No, cries the Queen, nor can I think that Sforza
Would lay that scandal on himself and me.
Those Witnesses were two cashiered Lieutenants
That Sforza should have hanged for Mutinies
In the late war, but threw 'em by, it seems,
To serve him in this Office: me they cost
Five hundred Crowns apiece, and well they got it.
But where I left: the Queen denies their Oath.
And though it had been true that Sforza had
Affirmed as much, that had not found her guilty.

Alin. What Witnesses were next?

Flav. Two dainty devils
Birds, a Doctor and a Midwife, who accused
Themselves for Bawds in the Action, and deposed
I know not how many, how many, how many times,
They saw 'em linked in their unlawful pleasures.
These were the Queens own people, and deserved
A thousand Crowns apiece, and had it instantly,
Aforehand too.

Alin. What could the Queen say then?

Flav. She denied all, but in such a patient way,
After her foolish fashion, that it gave strength
To the Evidence against her; then she wept
For their iniquity, and gave them a God forgive ye.
And so attends the censure of the Court,
Which straightway will be given: they will be set
Before my coming.

Alin. Have, Flavello, have,
And let thy next news be to this a Crown,
That she is not a Queen, and I am one.
Exit Flav. This Father and this Queen I now could pity,
For being hewed out and squared thus to my use,
But that they make those necessary steps
By which I must ascend to my Ambition.
They that will rise unto a supreme Head,
Should not regard upon whose Necks they tread.

ACT. II.
Scoen. I.
[Loud Musick] Enter four Lords, two Bishops, King, Prince: they sit; Eulalia
in black, Crowned; a golden Wand in her hand, led between two Friars; she
kneels to the King, he rejects her with his hand. Enter at the other door, a
Doctor of Physic, a Midwife, two Soldiers; the King points them to the
Bishops, they each deliver Papers, kiss the Bishops Books, and are dismissed.
The Papers given to the King, He with his Finger menaces Eulalia, and sends her
the Papers: she looks meekly. The Bishops take her Crown and Wand, give her a
Wreath of Cypress, and a white Wand. All the Lords peruse the Papers. They show
various countenances: Some seem to applaud the King, some pity Eulalia. Music
ceases. King speaks. King. MY Lords and loyal Peers.

Lod. A new distinction
Between Spiritual and Temporal.

Hor. Good Lodovico, peace.

Kin. This is a Cause, the which, but for fair Order,
By which I am constrained to be a Judge,
Would rather drive me to a mourning Closet
Then to this Seat; to show my equal grief
Against the Crime and Shame of the Delinquent.
I see you are all amazed, and cannot marveil
At your Astonishment, who do suffer with you
In the great Change Honor compels me to,
Together with Religion, fairly urging
To an high point of Justice, which to utter
Draws faintness from my words, chilling my Blood
Like the departing Breath that separates Life.
For such I held her, and so many years
Retained her in the Closet of my Heart,
Its self-Companion: that till these proofs,
Which now like daggers by compulsive wounds
Have made their passage, she could never have parted.

Lod. Royal Hypocrisy!

King. The Proofs you see are plain,
That she was found -- Pray speak it for me.

Hor. In Adultery.

King. And that she sought the Life of fair Alinda
By Sword and Poison both: and of that Cup
It Is like my self had tasted,
For my supposed love to that wronged Lady.

Lod. You have given her the Bed-right that belonged to your wronged Queen,
these twelve months.

King. Our Laws of Sicilie are so well rebated
With Clemency, and Mercy, that in this Case
They cut not Life from one of Royal Blood,
Only take off (as is on her performed)
All Dignities, all Titles, all Possessions,
All means to live, even to her naked hands.
And such, Eulalia, now is your condition.

Lod. To work for her living? if she were as young, and no honester then she
for whose sake this is inflicted on her, she might find something else about
her, then naked hands, to help at a living shift-


King. Now to this Censure, for due Orders sake,
And for which end this Parliament was called;
Your Voices are required: do ye all approve it?

Omn. We do.

Lod. We must.

King. What say you, Lodovico?

Lod. We do; Heaven knows against my heart.

Eul. My thanks unto you all, that do obey
So well with one consent your Sovereign Lord.
And sacred Sir, thus low, as it becomes me,
Let your poor Handmaid beg, that you incline
A patient Ear to this my last Petition:
That as you cast me off, as an offense,
You will be pleased to think me not offended,
But pleased in all I suffer: for, Heaven knows,
I am as free from any Passion
Of Anger, Hate, Repining or Distaste,
Nay, as insensible of Grief or Sorrow,
Or whatsoever Anguish of the Mind,
As I was capable, for ought I know,
Of Joy or Bliss the first hour I was born.
Never made happy till I was your Bride,
In which blessed state I cannot but remain,
While you are pleased, and I obey your will,
Though unto Death, to Banishment or Prison.
Poverty is Blessedness, in which I Will pray
For pardon of the Sins of my Accusers,
And those that have suborned them.

Lod. O poor Woman!

Eul. So in the blessed continuance of your Days,
I shall pray Heaven to smile on all your VVayes.

King. Nay, stay Eulalia, I have yet a Business
I would have pass the general Consent
Of this Assembly, in which your Voice is useful.
Flavello?
Exit Flavello.
Lod. Upon my life, his Marriage with that Start-up,
That Snake this good Queen cocker'd in her Bosom,
Is not this Royal cruelty?
[Gonzago kneels to the Queen]
Eul. You wrong your Princely Dignity:
Turn to the King your Father, kneel to him.

Gonz. And are not you my Mother?

Eul. I must and can forget what I have been;
So must not you: your Mother was a Queen.
My present fortune claims no Title in you.
Hurt not your own, by looking down on me.
This I will do as warranted by safety,
Not as a Mother, but Beadswoman, pray
For all that bliss on you a Mother may,
Good Sir, observe the King before his wrath.
Take hold upon you for regarding me.
[Loud Musick]
Scoen. II.
Enter Favello ushering Alinda like a Bride, two Virgins. The King descends,
takes her up: the Lords rise, all amazed. King. Let your amazement cease, and
now perceive
My Lords in general, that I your King
Am Subject to this all-deserving Lady,
And do require you not alone to hear
What I can say, but without all denial
That you approve, confirm what I will say.
I am by law no less then your consent
Divorced, and free from all impediment
To make my second choice in Marriage,
And therefore crave Alinda for my wife,
And that immediately we solemnize
Our Marriage, and her Coronation.
I hope none rates our will or his own life
So meanly, as to give least contradiction.

Eul. O let me lead your voices. Long live
Gonzago and Alinda, King and Queen of Sicily.

Alin. O gross Hyocrisie!

Eul. My Lord the Prince, pray let your voice be next;
The rest will follow. Why speak you not, my Lord?

Alin. She would fain seem to voice in your behalf,
But in a way that much persuades against you.
Do but your Highness note it.

Kin. You Sir, come from that Woman.

Gonz. She was my mother when she was your wife;
And that is so late, I cannot yet forget it.
But I fear to offend.

Eul. O show it in your Duty then, young Prince:
It Is true, the Law of Nature-wills a Son
To be a partner in his Mothers woe;
But Laws above that lay a strong command
On Sons to obey the Edicts of their Fathers.
A Fathers frowns are Comets threatening ruin.
Let all your thoughts be free from his offense:
The most Heaven seeks, is our obedience.
In all obey the King; think not of me:
I am no more, nay not so much to you
As is the Beggar whom you may relieve,
Since of all these comforts I am deposed.

Lod. Faith thou had not mine, good woman:
I must not call thee Queen now.

Eul. Or if you needs will think I am your mother,
Let it be only in the charge I give you,
That since Alinda blessed by providence
Must be invested with the Regal Crown,
You show her that obedience befits a Queen,
And your dread Fathers Wife.

Alin. I fear she will turn him
Traitor, if he give more ear to her enchantments.

King. I Will show him a way to give her thanks.
Gonzago?

Gonz. My Royal and dread Father.

King. Put forth that woman:
Do it without grudge, out of the Court,
I mean to seek her way. Do you refuse?

Eul. He does not, shall not, Royal Sir.
Only I beg that I may take my leave.
The wishes a true Subject ought to send
From the most humble heart up to the Throne
Of sacred Majesty, I equally divide
To you my King and Queen,
Professing by the Powers you present,
I part as well content with my condition,
Since it is your command, as ere I was to sit in that Promotion.

Alin. Sir, I may not sit to be taunted and upbraided thus.

Eul. Pardon me, mighty Lady, I am as far
From daring to do so, as from a Queen.
And whilst you love the King, and he is pleased,
I shall no less obey you, then I loved you
When I sent for you to the Court, and there into
this heart received you.

Alin. I am plainly jeered: hence that woman.

King. Away with her.
Exit Eulalia with Conzago. And let it be proclaimed according to the
extremity of Law our Censure be observed.

Lod. Alas, how can she live one night?

King. And now to your consent: have I it yet
For Marriage with Alinda? If you are pleased,
Then call us King and Queen.

Omn. Long live the King and Queen.

Lod. I mean Eulalia
[aside]
King. It Is well: on to the ceremonies then. Kings were
But common men, did not their Power get fear.

Scoen. III.
Enter presently again, Lodovico, Horatio. Lod. It is oppression, Tyranny
indeed.


Hor. Speak lower, good my Lord.


Hor. For fear of whom? of what?


Hor. You would not that the King should hear you, would you?


Lod. Faith if he did. --

Hor. Faith then as sure as your tongue's your own now, your whole head would
be his then.


Lod. If it might so excuse the Queen, I cared not.

Hor. It will do the Queen as much good, as the money it might be sold for in
the Market; That and the Appurtenances to it, would yield little at the
Shambles. Come my Lord, speak privately, and purposely keep your head on your
shoulders: it becomes the place as well as 't had been made for it. If the King
have a mind to turn away his Wife, I Will give him leave to turn mine after her,
to wait upon her, rather than to have my head bowl'd at her, though I were sure
it should kiss the Mistress.


Lod. Oh but the ensuing danger, my Horatio! The mischiefs that of necessary
course must follow, even to the ruin of the State, by the Kings dotage on his
second choice, draws blood from Subject hearts: Oh that lewd Woman!


Hor. She is a Woman of middle earth yet. But what shall we dare to say two
hours hence? Come, think upon Law and Regal Authority. The Kings Power
Warrants his Acts: I know as well as you the Queen Eulalia (Heaven bless her, I
hope it is yet no Treason to pray for her) is as virtuous a Lady as ever
beautified a Court, or made a Kings Bed happy, For all the Articles framed
against her.


Lod. The perfect Pattern of Meekness, Patience, Obedience.

Hor. Of all that is good, or should be wished in Woman.

Lod. So obsequious a lover of her Husband, that she gave way unto his loose
affections, even to this now-she-start-up that supplants her.


Hor. She considered she grows old: she reads in her Sons face nigh twenty
years of the Kings love to her: and gives him leave to place it now elsewhere.


Lod. And is so far from limiting his Choice,
That she possesses it that seeks her blood.
My soul tells me the witnesses against
The Queen, are by this Concubine suborned.

Hor. I will not say so.

Lod. You cannot choose but think so.

Hor. My thoughts are warranted by the Proverb. But come, make up your Face,
temper your voice and looks with the rest of the most Honorable Assembly:
shake off this discontent, it is a disease by which you will perish else:now all
the Court's in height; you to profess distaste! Come, be a looker on at least.


Lod. Upon a Court on Fire? O Horatio,
Bright Burning Troy gave not a dearer cause
Of willingness to those affrighted souls
She forced to leave her sinking in her ashes,
To fly for refuge to another Region;
Nor in their flight could they by looks reverted,
See danger in more horrible aspect,
Than I upon the ruins of this Kingdom.

Hor. Your stay, my Lord, may prevent danger.

Lod. Yes, if it could remove the Fatal cause,
The pride, the cruelty, the Ambition
Of that wild Fury, the outrageous Queen,
Who treads and tramples down the Covernment.
Consider this Horatio, and the means
To work this great effect: and I am yours,
To stay till it be done.

Hor. Alinda's Death.
Who's there?
[Looks about]
Lod. Is it not necessary? no body: what d' ye fear?
Or can you find how to preserve the State
At a less rate? you know too well the King,
How apt his Nature is to fell oppression.
The burden of whose cruelty long since,
If by the virtuous Clemency of his Wife
It had not been alay'd and mitigated,
Had been a general subversion.
And now that Peerless Princess being deposed,
Whose virtue made her famous, and us happy;
And he re-married to this shame of women,
Whose vileness breeds her envy and our mischief,
What can we look for but destruction?

Hor. I dare me thinks a little hear you now,
(The Court being surfeited too with wine and noise)
And could almost talk to the point it self,
To your own ear.
(Looks about him at every word.] It Is fit somewhat were done:
I cannot say what: but if the wronged Queen
Be not restored, we show ingratitude,
How much, I may not say: enough to damn us.

Lod. I, now you speak.

Hor. And though I will not speak it: if the Strumpet:
Be not conveniently and speedily destroyed,
Though death dance with us in the enterprise,
We shall seem born more for our selves than Country.

Lod. Brave noble resolution!

Hor. Nay more, now I will speak.

Lod. This way, good Horatio.

Hor. That way, or any way; If Poison, Sword,

Policy or Strength may do it --

Lod. Speak lower, good Horatio: see the Mignion.

[Enter Flavello and diverse Petitioners]
Hor. What for him? my Ladies Game-keeper, that understands nothing but
Monkeyes, Parrots, short-nos'd Dogs and Starlings; Master of her Majesty's
Foisting-hounds.


Lod. So, he hears you.


Hor. Let him; he has no Soul to understand, nor Language to answer a Man: he
knows how to diet, disple and perfume the small Cattle he has charge of; for
which rare Art, and catching Spiders for principal Pug, he is raised prime man
in his great Mistresses favor.


Lod. How the Petitioners flock to him!


Hor. Swarm rather, for they are Bees in his head; Oh! he engrosses all the
Suits, and commends them to the White Hand, whose disposing will make the whole
Kingdom black in Mourning, if Fate by us prevent not. See how he carries it! We
might talk what we would, for him. His well-ordered head is so taken up with
Particular Affairs, he minds no General talk.

But my good Lord, *fore others Ears and Eyes,
Pursue we our Design as all were Spies:
You and the Common Good have won me.

Lod. O I embrace you.

Exeunt.
Scoen. V.
Enter Andrea with a Box. Andr. Oh -- Oh -- and Oh-ho -- O and alas! O and
alack for O -- O -- O -- that ever a true Neapolitan born, should live to see
this day in Sicily! there O-again, ^ Queen -- O me -- what will thou do? O -- O
-- what shall I do? O -- thou may work and starve; O -- and I may beg and
live: O -- but from thee I cannot live: O -- I cannot, nor I wonnot, so I
wonnot.

[Enter Jago and Rugio.]
Jag. See, here is poor Andrea mourning as well as we,

And all the rest of the poor Queens cast-awayes.


Rug. But I can tell him comfort.


Andr. Oh -- I will hear no comfort.


Rug. Yes, and be glad on it too.


Andr. Is my Queen Countrey-woman called back again?


Rug. No, but the Queen Alinda has enquired for thee, to entertain thee into
her service, whilst we and all the rest of our late Queens servants are turned
out o'th'Court, and now at this high dinner time too.


Andr. She would eat me, would she not?


Jag. That would make it a Feast indeed.


Andr. But I Will not trust her on a fasting-night: Fools are meat then.


Rug. Well said Andrea, witty in thy sorrow: I know thou will back again for a
new Mistress.


Andr. No, no, take you your course, and serve her if you please,

I have played the Fool too long, to play the Knave now.

I Will after my old Mistress.


Rug. Thou may not serve her: that will be brought within compass of Relief,
and then thou may be hanged for her.


Andr. If I be hanged for doing good, pray let it not grieve you: and as I am
an Innocent, I Will never grieve for you though you be hanged never so justly.


Both. We thank you good Andrea.


Andr. Take you your swinge, let me take mine I pray.

[Flourish]
Jag. Hark, the King drinks now to his new Queen.


Andr. So, having turned his old Wife out of door,
A man may drink and frolique with his who --
Would have thought it? did you think to catch me?

Rug. Not I Andrea.


Andr. Catch me if you can: when it shall be Treason to say there is an honest
woman, I Will say my Countrey-woman was justly condemned of Adultery: and till
then, I know what to say: Catch me if ye can.

[Flourish]
Rug. There again: now the Queen drinks.


Andr. Poor woman, at what River?


Rug. I mean the Queen Alinda.


Andr. O the new thing at home here; I will not call her Queen, not I: my
Countrey-woman is my Queen.


Jag. Why is not she thy Countrey-woman?


Andr. She was when she was Sforza's Daughter:
But she has turned a Father out of him.

Rug. As here come some to turn us out of the Court.


Scoen. V.
Enter Horatio, Flavello, Guard, two or three Gentlemen. Flav. Away with them:
out of the gates, away.


Hor. See, here are more of them: more of that hated woman's Retinue: away with
all.


Rug. Beseech you, good my Lord: I hope we are true men.


Hor. As I am true to the Crown, not one of you pesters the Court a minute
longer: go, you are trash and trumpery: and I Will sweep the Court of all of ye:
follow your Mistress: go.


Flav. The Fool my Lord shall stay: the Queen asked for him.

Exeunt Omn. praeter Andrea.
Hor. Yes yes, the Fool my Lord, shall stay.


Andr. The Fool my Lord will not stay.


Hor. Will not? how dare thou say so? ha, Fool, ha?

[Seize and rifle his Pack.]
Andr. The Fool dare say more than the wisest Lord dares do amongst ye: you
will not take my own proper goods from me, will ye?


Hor. See what he caries: I heard of Plate and Jewels lost to day.


Flav. Let Us see, Sir, I will see.

[Opens the Box: Coxcomb, Babble, Bells, and Coat.]
Hor. Heyday, here is stuff indeed!


Andr. Your VVardrope cannot matched it: pray give me all again; or if you will
be the Kings and Queens Takers with that extremity to force my goods from me,
then present this to his Highness, and this to Hers; and tell them, it is all
the poor discarded Fool could spare them.


Flav. No Sir, you shall take them with you, and a whip for advantage, unless
you will stay and serve the Queen.


Andr. No Sir, to you with an excusee moy,
If you be your Queens Fool-taker, you may
In Country, Court and City quickly find
Fools upon Fools that I shall leave behind.
New Lords (you know the Proverb) make new Laws,
New Lawyers of an old make a new cause.
New workmen are delighted with new Tools,
And her new Majesty must have new Fools.
New fools she wants, not having you about her,
While the old Fool makes shift to live without her.

Fla. Let the Fool go my Lord, it is but a Fool the less,
For he will get wit by it, to wish himself here again.

Andr. If I get but enough to keep me from Court, I care not.


Flav. Farewell Fool, take your Trinkets with you.


Andr. Farewell fine Lords, adieu old Courtier.


Hor. The Court unclouded of this Factious crew,
Will shine on us that to the Crown are true.
Exeunt.
Scoen. VI.
Enter Sforza and Keeper, as in Prison. Sfor. Was ever man so hurried into
thraldom,
And locked up in the ignorance of the cause,
Stronger and darker than his Prison walls?
But I must not be Sepulchr'd alive,
And therefore Keeper, though thy office be
More Devilish than thy visage, yet thy heart
May be humane: let me then conjure thee
To vent the secret forth but in a whisper;
Or should thou utter't in a Tempests voice,
As loud as are my injuries, thou art safe:
I can be here no carry-Tale: I am fast
In thine own custody, thou see:
I pray thee tell me, what is laid unto my charge?

Keep. All I can say, It Is the Kings pleasure, and you must obey.


Sfor. Do you bark Sentences, Hell-hound?


Keep. My Lord, you are off your Command, and under mine,

You much mistake your self and me.


Sfor. It Is true.


Keep. Lions may rage in toils: but whilst they do,
They more enthral themselves: will you sit down,
And promise on your Honor not to force
My counsels from me? I Will deal fairly with you,
(My meaning is, to give him never a word)

Sfor. I will not lift a finger up against thee,
As I am a Soldier: now prithee tell me,
What say they is my crime? [shakes his head] nay speak it freely.
I can give it hearing:
[shruggs, etc.] Or tell me first if thou will, how fares the Queen?
What? art thou dumb to that too? Answer me,
Is my Antagonist Petruccio
Repealed to Court yet? thence may spring my mischief.
Why do not speak? this is dogged silence,
In scorn of me, to mock my misery.
I may not wrong the Honor of a Soldier
In my Revenge, or I would thrattle thee.
[he makes legs.] You're very civil, Hell take your courtesy.

Keep. I pity him: but must not dare to show it.
It adds to some men's misery, not to know it.
Exit.
Sfor. It is decreed of me, that I must suffer
This Barbarous cruelty; and I Will bravely bear it:
I have not force these double walls to part,
Or mollify the Jaylors harder heart.
May spirit then assist me to despise
And bear my scorn above my injuries.

Scoen. VII.
Enter Petruccio and Guard. Petr. Revenge has cast her self into my hands,
Strangling the Life of Sforza in these Lines:
His Head is in this grasp, but where is Honor?
Must that forsake this Breast? must the pure heat
Of heavenly Honor, yield unto the scorch
Of Hell-bred base Revenge? it must not, cannot:
For as the Sun puts out all baser Fires,
Where Honor shines, thought of Revenge expires.
Besides, he is below my Anger now;
And has no Life but forfeited to Law,
Or the Kings Fury, I Will not question which;
Nor was it justly, he gave me the Affront,
In being made Lord General, when I stood for it.
But the Kings self, in his Election,
He wronged not me no more then I did him,
When the Honor was transferred from him to me.
That Is answered clearly, I acquit thee, Sforza.
But now my Loyalty, how shall I discharge
That special Duty I am here commanded,
(Stand back I say) to see the Execution,
And bring the Head of Sforza to the King?
What an addition here is of Advanceme^t?
To make me first a General, then a Hangman:
I Will do him better Service: Loyal Horatio
Would think himself now damned, to leave a tittle
Of the Kings powerful pleasure unfulfil'd.
Call the Keeper.

Keep. Here my Lord.
[Enter Keeper]
Petr. I am to see and speak with Sforza.

Keep. Then I doubt not but your Honor has brought VVarrant.

Petr. My Honor be your VVarrant: will not that serve?

Keep. I will not lose the Kings Grace for all the
Honors in the Kingdom.

Petr. Do know me, or my place?

Keep. Yes, I both know and honor you, as far as my own place gives me leave:
but in this I must crave pardon; you may not see him my Lord, by a less
VVarrant then the Kings own Signet, and that fetches him out, and it please you.


Petr. But have you been so strict to all men else?
Has no man changed a word with him?

Keep. Not since
These Keys commanded him, I can assure you,
Not even the Prince himself, who much desired it.
I looked as black on him, as upon you now.
I am no white Prison-Keeper, I, to venture
Mine own Neck for a Prisoner's, at a price,
And give condemned men leave to run away:
No, I am the black Jailer, I, and it is thought,
Lineally descended from Cerberus.

Petr. I must commend thy Care; see, there is the Signet.

Keep. I Will fetch the Prisoner.
May it please you to come forth, my Lord?

Sfor. Have I then lived to hear Man's voice again?

Keep. Here Is the Lord Marshal, and chief General
Of the Kings Forces, come to speak with you.

Sfor. Those Titles once were mine, but now I must
Attend his pleasure that is Master of them.

Petr. All leave the Room, but be at hand.

Guard. We shall.
Exeunt Keeper and Guard.
Scoen. VIII.
Sfor. My first object from my long obscurity,
The man that hates me most of all the world?
It is: his news cannot be good. not good?
The better: it is best to know the worst; he cannot deceive me.

Petr. My Lord, I do presume I am unwelcom,
Because you are possessed I never loved you:

Sfor. The Court yields me such Complement; this has
No ampler Comforts in it. But you are deceived,
For you are welcome, sour captious Lord, you are welcome.
Because (love me or love me not) you speak.
I have been here these two and twenty days,
And never heard the voice of Man till now:
Meat I have found, and Lodging; but for Language,
In what part of the world I am, I know not.
Proceed; I value your words well, you see,
That give you six for one; why do you not speak?
I have been used to talk with men that love me not,
And more with Enemies, I dare besworn,
Then Friends: come, speak, I pray, what is it you come for?

Petr. Alas! I pity him: his too too much vexation
Has over-tam'd him.

Sfor. Will you not speak and tell me?

Petr. Pray let me ask you first; Have you been kept
So strictly from the Speech of all men?

Sfor. Ever since I was committed, and from the knowledge
Of why I was committed too; nay, he that keeps me,
'Till now he called me forth, never spoke a word:
If I asked him, what News? here he was with me:
Or when he heard from Cuurt? then there again:
Or, why I was committed? still the same answer.
So that I could inform my self of nothing.
Come, if thou be an honest Enemy,
Tell me something:
As thou do wish my throat cut, tell me something.

Petr. You seem to take no notice of the cause of your commitment.

Sfor. Further than this I cannot: 'Twas the Kings pleasure to command it.
Treason was cried; a Guard: away with him:
But for what cause, unless it were for drawing
My sword upon (O that Rebellions Girl!)
To save her from the danger of his lust,
(Which I tell you I was doubtful of) and so Sir,
Let me ask you, is she still about the Queen? (Queen.
My daughter Sir, I mean.

Petr. Yes, much about the

Sfor. And the Queen loves her?

Petr. As dearly as her self.

Sfor. Nay if you be a Soldier, now speak truly.

Petr. The Queen and she is all one.

Sfor. Then there is some hope,
The King yet keeps fair quarter with her.
Women are quickly jealous.

Petr. He knows nothing,
I Am confident, of all these great proceedings.
Poor man! I pity him: but I Will put him to it.
Will you now answer me as y' are a Soldier
To some few Articles?

Sfor. You have engaged me.

Petr. 'T were shame he should die ignorant of at least
The Accusations are laid against him.

Sfor. Come Sir, your Articles?

Petr. You are accused
Of an intended Treason against the King.

Sfor. Who Is my Accuser?

Petr. Even the King himself.

Sfor. Umh, umh, umh: he should not be my Judge then.
It is some Devilish dream of his, or else
That Policy that Princes purchase Hell by,
With strong assurance without all exception;
That is, when Soldiers men of best desert
Have merited more then they have means to give,
To cut their lives by whom they only live.

Petr. You fly now from the question: y' are engaged by the Honor of a
Soldier
Unto that Accusation: guilty or not guilty?

Sfor. I am not guilty, as I am a Soldier;
And in that Oath I would not be forsworn,
To save as many lives, were they within me,
As perished by my Sword to save his One.

Petr. In that I am satisfied: now to the next,
If you will hear it; you shall promise me
To answer without passion I or no.

Sfor. I will do what I can.

Petr. You're next accused
Of fowl Adultery with the Queen Eulalia.

Sfor. Hah!

Petr. Guilty or no?

Sfor. No Sir, nor dares there be
Such a suggestion in the heart of Hell.
And were he there, that thought, or could but dream
Of such a Scandal, I Would squeeze it out on's Brains.

Petr. Then I must hold you to your promise Sir.
[Enter Guard.]
Sfor. A wrestling toward; away west, away.
Nay then I am betrayed.

Petr. Forbear I pray.
[Guard retire]
Sfor. He comes but to insult and to torment me.

Petr. My Lord you much forget, is not this Passion?

Sfor. Passion of heart! he hopes not for Salvation
That hears with patience but the repetition
Of such a Blasphemy. I must not die,
Until the world be vindicated from
The redamnation such an error threatens.

Petr. You see I could oppress you; but all forbear the room.
Exit Guard.
Sfor. Do you come to mad me?

Petr. If you will be calm, I Will tell you what I come for.

Sfor. As settled as a Rock beneath a mountain
Here will I sit, and hear thy loudest malice.

Petr. If this man be not innocent, virtue lives not.

Sfor. Now tell me what you come for; and be sure
You ask no more abominable questions,
Whilst calmly I clear these, thus: By the Honor
And faith of a true Soldier, I am clear
Of these suggested crimes, which before Heaven
(Which knows my Innocence) I do not urge
To save my life from the Kings violent Fury,
Nor any way to close with thee in Friendship,
Now that my fortune is at worst. So, speak:
It Is long a coming: I begin to think
It is some good, you are so loath to utter 't.

Petr. It is, if you can apprehend it so.
My Lord, I take you for my friend, and come
To make my moan to you; insomuch as now
I do conceive you Noble, Virtuous, Honest.

Sfor. Foh! this is worse than all the rest, this stinks
Of the Court-putrefaction, Flattery, grossly.
But on I prithee: talk is such a noveltie,
I will hear any thing.

Petr. I could not see your virtue, when it shined
Through the radiant favors of the King:
It dazzled me with envy then: but now,
Like the red Sun through cold and mystie vapors,
I can behold it at the full.

Sfor. So, so: umh, whu: so much for my virtues:
What Is your business now?

Petr. I say I come to make my moan to you,
Groaning beneath a weighty Injury
The King has thrown upon me.

Sfor. Has denied him
Something I warrant, that he would have begged;
The making of a Knight, or some such foolerie:
What was 't?

Petr. In putting a base office on me.

Sfor. Is the great Marshals and chief Generals
Office, become so base?

Petr. No Sir, the Hangmans Office. Read that --
I am commanded there, and warranted
With present speed to bring your Head to him.

Sfor. A prayer or two, by his great leave and yours,
And you shall have it instantly.

Petr. My Lord, you shall not undervalue't so:
That Honor which has won me to you, shall
Work better for your preservation.
I have much more to tell you, and strong Reasons
Why you should live: of the Queens infinite wrongs
And yours, wrought by your Daughters cruel Ambition.

Sfor. This is a nobleness beyond Example:
Sure now you are honest.

Petr. There you see my strength:
If now for truth and Honors cause I strain
A point of Loyalty, you will engage
Your Honor to secure me?

Sfor. I hold my Honor equal to the best,
And prize it still so far above my life,
That to save Kingdoms I Will not forfeit it.
Here in the sight of Heaven I do engage it,
For your security.

Petr. I ask no better. Keeper!
[Enter Keeper.]
Keep. My Lord.

Petr. Dismiss that Guard, and give us way.

Keep I shall.

Petr. Now come my Lord, virtue may be cast by;
But never overcome by Tyranny.

Sfor. Wars Sword, Laws Axe, or Tyrannies fell Knife,
May overcome my Person, not my life.
For that is yours Petruccio.
Exeunt Ambo.
ACT. III.
Scoen. I.
Enter Enlalia. Eul. Turned out of all, and cast into the world;
And that forbidden too to pity me?
No sucour, no relief to be afforded?
Heaven still is where it was, and cannot lose
The Providence it ever had: let those
That think me wretched now, consider that,
And be with me converted to a Faith
That will proclaim us happy. What Is my loss?
What was the State and glory of a Court,
But steps and lights through dangerous Ambition,
To ends beyond our selves, in whose achievements,
We make our selves but nothing to ourselves.
And all that we are then, is to the world,
Which renders us great Titles: which taken off,
We then return unto our selves again,
And all the world is ours: I was not great
Till now; nor could I confidently say
Any thing was mine own, till I had nothing.
They do but sleep, that live in highest Pomp;
And all their happiness is but a dream,
When mine is real: nay, nay, I can prove it.
Their costly fare breeds riot, mine content:
Their rich Attire is but mere Pageantry,
Made to please their eyes: mine keeps me warm,
And healthful, when a cold becomes their sickness.
They boast of Honor and Gentilitie,
For their Attendants then, when the chief Honor
Of the best woman, meek obedience,
Is my own handmaid; and my Patience
A sweeter servant than Gentilitie,
Continually my other: for Council and defense, what have I now?
They have the helps of worldly wise men's brains,
And I the comforts of my fruitful Prayers.
They have tall big-bon'd servants for defense:
I the strongst guard of all, mine innocence.
[Birds chirp.] What Music had the Court compared to this,
Or what comparison can all their sports
And Revells hold with those of Kids and Fawnes,
And frisking Lambs upon the country lawnes?
Which are my hourly pleasant entertainments
In all my wanderings: in which I have not
Hunger'd at any time, but I have found
Meat which I duly earned: nor ever thirsted,
But I have found a Spring that has refreshed me.
And am no sooner weary, then I find
A shelter or a shade to rest me in:
As now, in which a slumber 'gins to creep
Over mine Eyes, more soft then any sleep,
Could these my Senses when I lay of late
On Down, beneath the Canopy of State.
[falls asleep]
Scoen. II.
Enter Genius. Sleep in thy Sainted Innocence,
Whilst Angels watch in thy defense.
Sleep whilst I charm these bubling Streams
With Music, to make sweet thy Dreams;
Thy Dreams which truly shall relate
The Passages of thy Estate.
Dumb show. Enter Alinda, Flavello, two Lieutenants, Doctor, Midwife. Exeunt
Lieutenants, Doctor, Midwife. Enter Sforza at the other end raging, and the
Jailer, with mute action. Enter King, Petruccio: Alinda whispers the King: he
gives a Warrant and Signet to Petruccio: Exit Petruccio. King. kisses Alinda,
graces Flavello. Exeunt. All this as the Genius speaks. Note, first thy Foes in
Court conspire
Against thy Life, and Villains hire
To act thy Tragedy.
Lo those the perjured Evidence
That suggested thine offense,
Are hired the second time to be
Co-actors in thy Tragedy.
They have their Fee, and now are sent
Toward thee with a vile intent.
Ill thrive their purposes. Now note
The wrongs that are against Sforza wrought,
Who lives from Speech of all men still,
Pent by the Kings abused will;
Not knowing of the Treachery
That was conspired against him and thee.
Nothing of all that is past knows he,
More then he must a Prisoner be;
Which does him much impatience bring:
But the bad Queen instructs the King
How his vexation he may end,
Who strictly for his Head does send.
What from these black intents shall grow,
Is not as yet for thee know.
Now, holy Soul, I must thee set
A course that must thy living get.
Thou must not beg, nor take for need
More then thy Merits proper meed.
First therefore, I thy Brain inspire
With a Divine Prophetic Fire;
Thou shall be able to Fore-doom
The ends of many things to come.
Into thy Breast I next infuse
The Skill of Medicine how to use:
Learned Aesculapius never knew
The use of Simples more then you.
Many diseased by Grief and Pain,
Of thee shall Health and Strength obtain.
Next Handy-Works and Literature,
With Education good and pure,
Thou shall be able to bestow
Upon the Country's Youth, and show
The Elder sort how to improve
Their Wealths by Neighborhood and Love:
Now when thou from this Trance do wake,
See that thou present Practice make
Of these thy Gifts, and fear not then
The Practices of Fiends or Men.
Exit Genius. Eul. What soft? what sweet? what heavenly Trance was this?
I feel my self inspired with holy Flame
Above the heat of Mortals: sure I have
The Spirit of Prophecy, the Gift of Healing,
And Art of teaching hidden Mysteries.
Thanks Heaven, that first did send me Patience
To sweeten my Afflictions, and now
Plentiful means to live, for others Good.
Who live but for themselves, are but for show,
And stand like barren Trees, where good might grow.

Scoen. III.
Enter to her, Lodovico and Andrea. Lod. Farewell, thou foolish Pomp, and Pride
of Court,
Whose shine is but an Ignis fatuus
That leads fond Mortals from the path of Virtue,
And Tracts of real Comforts: thus I shake
Thy wanton Dust from off my Feet, to tread
The ways of Truth and Innocence: this Air
Breaths Health upon me, Peace, and perfect Pleasure.
Where the swollen Courts sophisticated Breath
Did but disease my Blood, and taint my Senses.

Eul. It is good Lodovico, though disguised,
I can no less then know him: and the poor Fool
That was my Servant: they come to relieve me
In these disguises, that I might not know
From whom I received Comfort.

Lod. To this way
The most unfortunate Queen inclined her course:
And see, already, how her Wants and VVoes
Have worn her to the bone: Alas, she is pined!

Andr. And look you new Master, yonder is my old Mistress;
What Fools were we; that could not find her sooner!
Alas! I can see through her: there is not
So thin a Queen in the Cards.

Lod. Hold thee, good Woman, pray thee take it quickly.
I came now from a Feast where we had plenty,
And brought these Dainties, meant unto another;
But my dear Charity tells me thou do want it.
I pray thee eat it; do not look, but eat it.

Eul. What Traitor art thou, that presents me Poison?

Lod. By all the truth and honesty in Man,
It Is wholesome Food: see, I will be thy Taster,
Though in good sooth, it grievs me to beguile thee
Of the least Morsel: sure thou have need of 't*
Good Woman eat, and let not Famine be
Fearful of Poison, or false Treachery.

Eul. Is it not Poison to a loyal heart,
To eat contrary to the Kings Command?

Andr. No, if it were, what a many would have been poisoned the last Lent, that
may live to be very good Subjects, very good Subjects all the year after,
except a few Fish-Dayes?


Lod. Alas, we are plain poor Country Folk, and hear no such news.


Eul. Why will ye urge so much against your conscience?
Have you not heard of my banishment, and the Kings Edict,
Proclaiming all men Traitors that relieve me?

Lod. We heard indeed the King had put away his old good Wife, and taken a new
one: but can we think you are she that was the Queen?


Eul. Yes good Dissembler, you do know it, and you;
As sure as I know you for Lodovico,
And you, Sir, for Andrea: Can it be,
That you that have been loyal Subjects, should
Now go about to forfeit thus your Lives?

Andr. Pray leave this fooling, Mistress: eat your meat;
And here is good Drink to wash it down: and then
If you have a mind to hang us, let the
Gallows take his due; for my own part, I had
Rather hang like a man, while I am good
For something, then you should pine away to nothing.

Eul. Fear not you me, pray Sir, nor neglect the care
That Is due unto your selves, to injure me.

Lod. O dearest Heaven! do you think we'ld injure you,
That venture lives for you? no, gentle Queen.

Andr. Lo, there again, that is Treason too, to call her Queen.

Lod. No body hears nor sees; pray eat a little.

Eul. Do not I hear and see you? I am not safe
In my obedience unto the King,
To hold such conference with you that would
So violate his Laws: but let it warn ye
Off of this course; for I Will appeal to Justice
If you persist in this Rebellion.

Andr. Any woman but she, now in her Case, would eat such an Husbands Brains
without Butter, rather then forsake good meat; and but for this wilfulness in
her, I should not think her a woman, I. But as she is, new Master, we shall
never do good upon her: and therefore since your Grace has not the grace to eat
this meat, mark with what a grace or without Grace, I will eat it my self: do
you fear Poison? [Eats] Now Bottle let me play a part with thee; can you think
this Poison, that goes down so merrily?

[Drinkes]
Eul. Much good may it do thee.

Lod. Stay, now perhaps she will eat.

Andr. It Is like enough; I did but eat to get her an Appetite, therefore I Will
even eat on, till all be done, to get her the better stomach: now Bottle, to
thee again.


Eul. See, here come poor Folks, that perhaps do want
That which superfluously thou have devoured.

Andr. I Will eat again, for that: I am as poor as they; and you never knew
Charity in Beggars toward one another. Bottle again for that.


Scoen. IV.
Enter to them, Pedro, Poggio and Lollio. Pedr. O Misery! O Desolation!

Pogg. Loll. Diseases, Sicknesses, O Calamity!

Andr. What Saints are those that they invoke so?

Eul. What is the Cause of these sad Cries, good People?

Pedr. Go back, if you respect your safety, go;
And look not this way where the Air disperseth
Nothing but foul Infection, Pain and Sorrow.
Return, I say, for here you appear strangers,
And run not to the Ruin of your selves:
This way is filled with Cries: you can meet nothing
But Lamentations of a thousand Souls:
Some Lame, some Blind, some Deaf, some Lunatic,
Some struck with Palsy, some with Leprosy;
All sighing, groaning, crying, underneath
The painful weight of Sorrow and Affliction.

Eul. What is that woeful part of the Country called,
That suffers this Calamity? and how
Did the Inhabitants there stand affected
To Goodness or Religion?

Pedr. We are all sinful*
Yet no way to extenuate our fault,
Or murmr at the Judgment fallen upon us;
We have been held obedient to the Church,
True Subjects to the King, and friendliest Neighbors
Among our selves, all Sicily could boast of:
This part of it, or Province, being called,
The fair Talermian Fields, and is the same
Our Kings have customarily laid out
For their Queens Dowry: and has therefore been
Vulgarly called The Paradise of Love.

Andr. Stay there, old man: I have heard there is
Neither Lawyer nor Physician in all the Province.

Lod. None could ever get a living amongst 'um in all their Practice.
It seems they lived then civilly and temperately.

Andr. Nor Gentleman nor Beggar in their Confines.

Lod. Then sure their Wealth was all communicable.
There could not but be excellent Neighborhood.

Andr. And, which was worth all the rest, their Priests
Were ever the best good-Fellows in all the Country.

Pedr. You Are now upon the Confines of that Country,
And cannot escape some dangerous ill,
If you dare taste the Air of it.

Andr. That shall be tried; I Will have a whiff on it:
If I get a mischief by it, let the Fools harm be a warning to the Wise.

Pedr. See more of those distressed Souls that fly
The foul Contagion,
[Enter four Others. Exit Andr.] Yet charitable to each others wants:
For here the Deaf conducts the Blind: the Blind
Supports the Lame: the Dumb removes the sick and feeble.
All that can make least shift for it, fly the Place,
Then do not you press torward it.

Eul. There will I.
Take up my Habitation.

Lod. You Are not desperate?

Eul. Mark me, good Lodovico, note my Reasons:
This poor afflicted Province was my Dowry:
And the o'er-hasty judging world will say,
According to the Censure passed on me,
My Trespass drew this Evil on the Land.

Lod. It Is better that the world should judge so, and perish
For it in it is Ignorance, then you so wilfully
Be cast away: you hear that none escape.

Pedr. None, Old nor Young, Man, Woman Child, all
In one kind or other, do feel Affliction.

Eul. Do any die?

Pedr. None, though the most do wish
They might, in lieu of their sad sufferings.

Eul. And whither now do you intend your travail with your griefs?

Pedr. We hope a better Air will cure us. But
We are advised by our Divines and Augurs,
By the best means we can, to make our Journey
Toward the Court, to send our sad complaint
Unto the King.

(Eul. Hear now what he will say)

Pedr. They find by Divination, that this punishment
Is fallen upon this Province by the Sin
Of the Adulterous Queen, whose Dowry 'twas.

Eul. Did not I tell you?

Pedr. And that until
His justice take away Her loathed life,
This evil will not cease.

Lod. What, the Queen Eulalia's life?

Pedr. Yes Sir; we hear she is banished, and forbid relief:
But nothing save her polluted blood must quench this flame,
In expiation of her Sin and shame.

Lod. Dare you stay longer here? pray let us fly.

Eul. Why then you think me guilty, Lodovico.

Lod. I know not what to think, but that I will not.

Eul. Was that your Priests opinion and advice?

Pedr. Yes, and thus grounded, that our pains began
Just at the hour, the Kings Indulgencie
Released her forfeit Life.

Eul. 'Twas everso; Priests are but Apes to Kings,
And prostitute Religion to their ends.
Might you not judge as well, it was the injustice and the wrongs the innocent
Queen has suffered, that has brought sense of her injuries upon her Province?
And that if she had died, her Dowry here with her had also suffered Death? to
make it nothing to the King, as he made her.


Lod. I, mark ye that: and that your false surmise
Against the Queen has brought this evil on you.

Pedr. O now my pain increases. 1. O mine Eyes. 2. My Brain. 3. My Bones. 4. My
limbs are on the Rack.


Lod. It Is plain, your fowl mistrust is the infection that rages in you.


Eul. Lodovico, peace: where is thy pain good man?

Pedr. Here in this Arm shrunk up as it were seared with fiery Irons.


Eul. Blessed Providence assist me whilst with Prayers I use the gift thou
gav'st me for the cure of these afflicted People. Give me thine hand: what
feelst thou now?


Pedr. A precious cooling Balm that has extinguished
The scorching heat I felt, and has reduced
My Flesh, my Sinews, and my Arteries,
Into their natural temper and true use.

Eul. Join that hand to thy other, and thank Heaven then

That made thee whole.

Pedr. I do, I do.

Lod. Miraculous!

Pedr. O sure you are some Heavenly Saint or Goddess.

Eul. Beware Idolatry, and only send
All praise to the power whose mercy has no end.
Only do this for me: inform the rest
How you have sped, and win them back again,
To the next village: bid them be of cheer,
Whilst I make Holy Prayers for their help.
I Will come and live among you for my hire,
Which shall be cheap, believe me.

Pedr. All we have
Will be too slight reward: first take my store.

Eul. I will but take my next competent meal.
I hope this will be thought but valuable.

Pedr. I pray take more.

Eul. Go back I say with your sad company,
And comfort them with news of your success,
And a full hope of cure to every one
That Is Partner in this sad Affliction.

Pedr. With happy feet I shall spread it through the Country.
Exeunt omnes Rustici.
Lod. O happy woman, now no more a Queen,
But Holy Saint: I see how Providence
Means to advance thy injured innocence.
I Will dwell here now my self, and without fear:
For perfect health I think dwells only where
Good Eulalia remains: I have enough
To buy a Farm for me and poor Andrea.
But what is become of him?

Eul. I Will tell you, Lodovico: the poor Fellow
Is gone to taste the Country Air for me,
Lest I might be infected: you shall see
Straight how he speeds.

Lod. And that was honest love.
Enter Andrea.
Andr. A Surgeon, a Surgeon! Oh a Surgeon!

Eul, How now, Andrea?

Andr. A Surgeon: Oh twenty Surgeons, bonesetting Surgeons.


Eul. What Is the matter man?


Andr. I am out of joint. I Will taste no more of such contagious Aires, To save
as many Queens as I have hairs. Oh Surgeons and Bone-setters, Bone-setters and
Surgeons, all my Bones, all my Bones for a penny.

I have not a finger nor a toe in joint: my Legs,
my Thighs, my Arms, my neck.
My back and Crupperbone is out of joint.
Oh for a Sowgelder, a Surgeon I would say.
Out a joint, out a joint, I am all out a joint.

Eul. Thy tongue's not out a joint.

Andr. No, nor a Thing
I have that has no Bone in it: All else is out a joint.

Eul. This came of tempting Providence: were not you
Told the danger by the many that smarted of it?

Andr. I met them all dancing and frisking home.
The blind man made the way: the dumb man sung,
The deaf kept time to his Notes: the lame led on
The Dance to all the rest: whilst I can go
No further. [lies down] 'Twas for you I ventured.

Eul. And now you repent you meant me so much good.


Andr. And now again I do repent that ever I did repent. Oh for a Stone-cutter,
a Bone-setter I would say.


Eul. Well Sir, give me your hands: stand up.

Andr. With as good a will as ever I stood to woman.

Eul. Now, how do you feel your self?

Andr. In very pretty plight, I feel I am sufficient.
Haugh, heigh -- [Capers and turns] 'twill do again: and if I durst venture
into that unluckie Country again, I would now teach the Clowns how to Dance
for joy.


Eul. Yes you shall venture Sir; and by the way,
I Will teach you to teach them to work and pray.

Andr. To work and play I pray you,

Lod. If there be Heaven on earth, it is this woman.

Andr. Then if there be a Purgatory on earth,
I Will venture through it for her, heigh, o, ho.

Scoen. V.
Enter three or four Contrymen. 1. Health and Joy: Health and Joy.
2. O happy woman that ever she came hither!
1. Nay happy we that ere she came among us.
2. What shall we render her in recompense?
All that we have is too little for this woman,
This good woman, this holy woman, this she-Saint,
If there be one above ground.
3. O do not make an If at her, neighbor, lest the ground swallow thee quick
in thy Infidelity.
2. Now doubtless, and without all adventure, she is an unknown woman.
3. And therefore a good woman: for it is too true,
All those that are well known are even bad enough:
And known she will not be for all our entreats,
No not so much as from whence she came, we see.
2. And that counsel she may keep still for me:
For doubtless, and without all peradventure
If we had need of another such, 'it were in yain to seek her.
1. Sure 'twas from Heaven she came,
Where the whole stock of good women were placed long ago.
Scoen. VI.
Enter Fabio and Strozza. Fab. It Is she I Am confident.

Stroz. Our work lies fairly then before us.

Lod. These look like mischievous Robbers.

Eul. What can they take from us?

Lod. Your Life, I fear.

Andr. I have even dined, let 'em take away when they please.


Lod. Their looks are murderous.

Eul. Fear not, Lodovico: why look ye Friends, so amazedly? ha'ye lost your
way? or what do ye seek?


Fab. No, we have found our way, it is to you we seek: we dare come roundly to
you, for all your

Guard, your old Fool, and your young here.

Lod. O my unhappy Fears!

Eul. You will not murder me?

Fab. It Is all the Office we are bound to do you.

Eul. Just Heaven protect me.

Fab. Call upon Heaven as you go thitherward:
We may not stay long Invocations.

Andr. Pray take me in your way, and run me through her, if you be honest
Murderers. Help: Murder, Murder!


Scoen. VII.
Enter to them, Curate, Crier, Pedro, Lollio, Poggio. Crier. O yes! O yes! O
yes!


Cur. Silence Crier, suspend the Proclamation, to preventa bomination.

Lod. Heaven has sent us aid.

Fab. O we are prevented!

Cur. On, on; sa, sa; down with their Weapons, up with their heels, till we
insect and rip up the intrails of the Cause: what an Assassinate was here
attempted? O infausta D^es! two swords against the naked womb of a Woman! and
none but weaponless men to assist her!


viz. Senex and Ineptus.

Andr. That is to say, Give me their Swords under my Fools Coat, I Will hurt no
body.


Cur. Upon my facundity, an elegant construction by the Fool. So, I am cedunt
arma Togae.


Fab. For our attempt Sir, we will answer it: we are for the King.


Car. Then we are for the King, Sir; and in nomine
Majestatis, we command you to attend our present
Office, and then we will examine yours.

Loll. And then if you deserve the Gallows, you shall be sure on it: a short
breathing-vvhile shall be no hinderance to you. So Crier lift up your Voice,
and proceed.


Crier. O yes, O yes, O yes: By the Kings most Excellent Majesty, a
Proclamation, prohibiting upon pain of Death, any Relief to be given unto the
banished Eulalia.


Cur. Now say, Whereas upon just and lawful Trial.

Crier. Whereas, etc.

Cur. The said Eulalia.

Crier. The said Eulalia.

Eul. I am that hapless she, that for relief will not beg, nor borrow, nor take
of ye.

[Lod. and Cur. aside.]
Pedr. It Is she, and at the price of Life I will relieve her.

[aside]
Pog. How? what have we done? In relieving her from killing, we are all
become Traitors.


Loll. That Is an idle fear: we knew her not,
Which now we do, we may again reliver her
Into their hands, for them to kill her yet:
And then there is no harm done.

Pog. So let us give them their swords again; and
when they have done their work, to make all sure,
we will hang them for their pains, and so keep the Law
in our own hands while we have it.

Cur. O homines insani! quomodo erravistis?
The woman must be saved a manubus istis.
They are Catilinarian Traitors.

Lod. You Sir, have reason; you have found her Life
The King has pardoned: and although her Doom
In this her Banishment were heavy, and
A punishment even unto Death, but that
Good soul she works and labors for her food,
You find not yet it is lawful any kill her.

Cur. Recte dixisti Domine: therefore Sir,
You that are for the King, as you pretend,
Show us the Imperative mood or warrant for her death,
Or we shall put you into the Optativa mood,
By punishment to wish your selves dead oftener
Or more times than bona fide there be Tenses
In all the Moods of all my Accidences.

Eul. For my part I Will forgive them, if they will
Deliver truly who corrupted them,
To rid the world of this weary burden; that I may pray for them.

Pedr. Can such a goodness deserve so fowl a Censure?

Eul. But first tell me: Are not you two the men that gave false evidence at my
Arraignment touching injured Sforza?


Fab. We gave no evidence, nor false nor true.

Andr. No countrey-woman, they had no such Beards. But I will try if I can
make'm like'em: O rare! what a nimble Barber am I? Lod. They are the self-same
men, the two cashiered Lieutenants that Sforza should have hanged for mutinies
in the late Wars.


Pedr. What hinders now their execution?

Cur. Digito compesce labellum: silence good Pedro.
I do commend your zeal: but Periculum est in via,
We will walk safely: for this time therefore we will do only thus,
Double our guards upon 'em, and away to prison with them,
Est locus in carcere quod Tullianum appellatur.
We will presume to know who 'twas that set you awork, before you go,

Ambo. You will be made to answer it.

Cur. A word more, we will hang you presently, and answer that too: Abite hinc in
malam Rem: away with 'm.


Loll. Ah Rogues, we will hamper ye.

Pogg. Kill a woman 'cause she was a Queen?

Loll. We Will hamper ye, and halter ye, and do ye hear? hang ye.

Exeunt Lollio and Poggio, with Fabio and Strozza.
Andr. Abi hinc and malam rem, away with'm.
[Lodovico, Eulalia. Petro aside]
Cur. As I am Erudite, idoneus Adolescens,
A very towardly Juvenis. Cupis atque doceri?

Andr. What Is that?

Cur. Will thou be a Scholar?

Andr. After you is manners.

Cur. Now by mine intellect, discreetly spoken.
Be but my Pupil, I will make thee one,
And dip thy Caput in pure Helicon.

Andr. Pray what is my Caput? and what is your Helicon?

Cur. Still a desire to learn: this is no Fool.
And by the company he is in, I do suspect,
Simile non est Idem: he is too wise,
To be the thing he seems but in disguise:
Some Lord of Court, his outside non obstante.

Lod. It is confessed Sir, I am Lodovico,
Sometimes a Lord of Court when this was Queen.

Cur. O Oedipus! I meant this Juvenal.

Andr. No truly Sir, your Simile non est Idem.
I am no Lord, what ere you like me to.
What I may pass for in the Country I know not,
At Court I was a Fool when she was Queen.

Lod. We dare not call her Queen now: but while we
Relieve her not, though we associate her,
We are the Kings true Subjects: and with your leave,
Disclaiming of all Honorable Titles,
We Will live amongst ye.

Pedr. O gracious woman, so I may safely call you,
Who once preserved my life.

Eul. Mention not that.

Pedr. I ought not to conceal it: therefore know
That some years past being employed to Court
To render the Kings Rents for this Province:
Which though I duly did, there was a Lord,
A strange officious one, that charged me deeply,
And all our Province, with detested breach
Of our Allegiance: at which my rage
Banished my reason, and confounded so
My senses, that without respect of Person,
Or Place, which was the Danger of the Law,
I struck him there in Court: and was adjudg'd
To suffer death for it, till you won my Pardon.

Lod. Were you that man?

Andr. And 'twas my
Cozen Lord'I warrant that you box'd.

Pedr. It Is he that braggs so much his truth unto the Crown; I need not name
him.


Cur. Sed nunc quid sequitur? Pray mark the issue of this Court quarrel. By
the way,'it is well you have renounced all quality of Court.

Here were no living for you else; for know,
Since this man's trouble, not a Gentleman,
Much less a Courtier dares breath amongst us,
But be as you pretend and write, but Yeoman:
You shall live Jovially with us and welcome,
At your own charge, your own Viaticum.
[Enter Lollio and Poggio.]
Loll. We have laid up
The murderous minded men in dungeon deep,
Clogged them with Ploughchains, Fetters and Horselocks.

Pog. We Will teach 'm to kill Queens:

Cur. Cave, caveto.

Lol. We mean this woman, this discarded Queen.
Exeunt Omnes.
Scoen. VIII.
Enter Alinda and Flavello. Alind. For all the Feasts, the Triumphs and the
Glories
That have been spent, at price of great Estates,
In celebration of my high Advancement;
For all the King has in his present being,
His Love to boot, assured in highest measure;
Methinks there is yet wanting an Addition
To crown my Happiness: all is not safe hereafter;
I cannot safely say I am his Wife,
While the other seems contented with a Life. Flavello!

Flav. Most Mighty Sovereign.

Alind. O most Celestial sound!
Here Is all your business granted.

Flav. Greatest and best of Queens! All?

Alind. See the Kings hand to all: do you mistrust me?

Flav. I only look for the poor woman's Pardon
That killed her Husband for his gelding the Priest.

Alind. If you but manage the Profits of my Favors with a discreet Hand now,
you may soon find the difference between a Mignion, and the Son of a
Dish-Maker.


Flav. I find it in your Gifts, my bounteous Goddess.

Alind. Oh Divine!

Flav. And would presume that
I my self were worthy
A place in the Calendar, might I do you Service,
That merited the smallest of your Graces.

Alind. Do you know the village where that woman lives?

Flav. Who, sacred Deity?

Alind. I Am very sick to name her or her Son.

Flav. O Eulalia; yes, the very House: it is in your Majesty's way now, as you
pass to Nicosia: the King is ready, Madam, and calls away; he longs to be at
the end of his journey, to perform his Duty in the three Grants belong to you.


Alind. O but that Woman, and that hated Boy.

Flav. Eulalia* Madam?

Alind. Thou art a base
Ungrateful Villain to name her to me;
Thou hear'st me say, I dare not speak her name,
Yet thou dare stab mine Ears again, with it.
Had some received the Favors thou have done,
Or could but dream of half*thou'rt like to have,
I should not fear her Ghost; but thou art dull.

Flav. O let me take new spirit from your hand,
And say unto your self, She is sure dead.
But the King comes. I am enough inspired.
Exit Flav.
Scoen. IX.
Enter King and Gonzago. King. I will not only have you guiltless, Sir,
But free from least suspect; let but a spark
Of Discontent appear upon your Look,
I Will rip the hollow cave that holds the fire,
And with Death quench it.

Gonz. I beseech your Highness,
If any alteration in my looks
Be found, or read, let it as well be construed,
It grows but from a filial fear to offend.
I have forgot I had another Mother:
And humbly at the Feet of this I honor,
I beg her Aid, to win your Favor toward me.
Most gracious Madam, if you knew the Truth,
The fair sincerity I bear in Duty
Toward your Highness --

Alind. For what respect, young Prince?

Gonz. The principal in the World: For that you have
My Fathers Love; and but to Wrong or Grieve you,
Were Stripes or Wounds to his Affection.
So much of my late Mother I remember,
To yield a Reverence to his Contentment, and shall for ever.

Alind. My Lord, my Love, what pretty meaning have you?
Do you bring your Son to mock me?

King. Ha! my Alinda, he is no Son of mine,
That with less Adoration dares look up
On thy Divinity, then the Egyptians
Gave to the Sun it self: but an outcast Bastard,
And of the daring Giants ignorant Nature,
That war'd against the Gods.

Alind. I would not move your Anger: pray let this win your Reconcilement.

[Kisses]
King. O thou art gentle, and the life of Sweetness:
Come, my Alinda, I was calling you
To our intended Journey to Nicosta,
Where solemnly I will perform my Vow,
To grant the three demands I promised you,
In the full view of our Nobility.
Which by the Custom of my Predecessors
Have ratified and confirmed the Power
Of Queens, and made them absolute: have you thought
To ask things worthy of your Dignity,
Wherein I fully may declare my Bounty?

Alind. I, Sir, shall be so reasonable, that
I doubt not upon the way, or there at very instant,
To crave past my Desert.

King. O you are modest: but ask home, Alinda.

Alind. And by the way, Sir, let it be my Suit,
We give a Visit to distressed Eulalia;
Wherein we may do Charity fitting Princes;
(We may perhaps give Order for her Burial)
[aside]
King. Thou art all Goodness: Come, all Friends, Gonzago:
But thank her Clemency.
Exit King. Manet Alinda, to her Flavello.
Alind. An Earldome be thou sure of, wise Flavello,
To add to thy improvements: Though it be
No full Discovery, I Will make it serve,
As I will fashion it, to excellent use.
Poison or Sword thou heardst him speak?

Elav. And in a menacing way: Now what may be
Conjectured by such words, from men whose looks
Show discontent against your Mightiness,
Rests most considerable.

Alind. Write, Flavello, write,
Write by that Copy in a States-Man's hand.
Alas, good men! I dare even swear for them,
How ere those words might fall in their discourse,
They had no thought of me: yet this surmise
Gives me an hint to try her Loyalty,
Or make her once more guilty: for my State
Stands by the King, as unto her his hate.
Read it Flavello.
[Reads.] Most Royal and most wronged Sovereign Mistress, be happily assured
that the time of your Restoration is at hand: and thatby no loss means then the
death of that she-monster that usurps your Dignity. All shall be determined at
Nicosia, by

Your devoted Servant unto death. Nameless.


Alind. It Is well.
It needs no superscription: only seal it,
And think of your directions and disguise.
It Is but your half days journey: and be sure
We are not far behind you.

Fla. I fly, my Sovereign.

Alin. Now to the King,
Of whose despite I still must sharp the sting.

Scoen. X.
Enter King, and Horatio. King. No news of Lodovico yet, Horatio?

Hor. None since he stole from Court upon the Banishment
Of that false wicked woman, whom I cannot
Name to your face or forehead, but I tremble.

King. Because you fear all horned Beasts.

Hor. My Loyalty forbid,
And my infallible Truth unto the Crown,
But I were sensible of the injury.

King. I know thy Loyalty: but as for Lodovico,
How was my Judgment wronged in him!

Hor. And mine.

King. I thought my self as safe in that man's Counsel --

Hor. And so did I,
By my loved Loyalty, think my self safe
In his Advices --

King. Yet methought he had
A kind of slyness in his Countenance.

Hor. Yes, he had ever a kind of a sly look.

King. That still methought I had a Genius
That checked my forward love, and did inform me
That he would prove disloyal: and for that cause,
To speak plain truth, I never loved him truly.

Hor. Will your Majesty believe me? I would I might never rise
Into your Favor (and that I would not say
For all the Traitors Lands in your Kingdom,
Which were no small reward) if that were not
Mine very own conceit of Lodovico
That Traitor; hang him: what should I call him less?

King. Yet 'twas given out you loved him.

Hor. So 'twas thought your Highness did.

King. And that he was your yoak-fellow in the State.

Hor. Yes, when he is hanged he shall be King. How Horatio?

Hor. Your Majesty knows my thoughts: nay I thank my creation, I was ever
Just of your Majesty's mind from my Nativitie,
And in that faith I Will die.

King. Here Is a true Statesman now!
Go, send Gonzago to me.

Hor. My sweet young Prince?
I shall: but ere I go,
Let me inform your Highness in my thoughts
Of the sweet Prince Gonzago: if ever King
Was happy in a Son, you are in him.

King. Go, call him to me.

Hor. Cherish him, good my Lord:
He Will be a sure staff to you in your Age,
And prove a Statesman quickly: I cannot think,
Except in him and your undoubted Queen,
Petruccio and my self, True Loyalty lives.
And here he comes: obedience in his Face
Most brightly shining.
Enter Gonzago.
King. Wait without Horatio.
[Exit Horatio] Gonzago?

Gonz. My dread Lord.

King. Did you attempt
Against my strict command to visit Sforza?

Gonza. It is most true, I did.

King. You are a Traitor.

Gonz. Gracious Heaven forbid it.

King. What was your purpose?

Gonza. First on my knees let me implore your Royal Pardon.

King. Well Sir.

Gonz. My end was noble: as I thought, well suiting
The Honor of a Prince: I would have searched
Into the secrets of his heart by questions,
Whether he had intended or conceived
Treason against your Highness, as it is
Presumed he did: for which he was committed.

King. My self for that was his Accuser;
How durst you then make a scruple at it?

Gonz. Still relying on your Pardon, I had thought
To Have won confession of it from himself.

King. Suppose he had confessed it?

Gonza. I had then
Concluded there had been a Probability
Of my poor mothers falsehood: yet I would have put
That Question to him next.

King. And say
He had confessed that too?

Gonz. Then had I saved
Your Laws a needless labor in his death;
And with the same hand made that mother childless,
That by her folly forfeited her Husband.

King. Was that your resolution? but suppose
He had denied all?

Gonz. All had then been nothing
But a Scandal to my mother and himself:
So good a Soldier would not be a liar
To save an abject life.

King. Sirrah, you are
His Bastard, not my son, in doing this.

Gonza. You are my King, would I could say, my Father.

King. Within there!
Enter Horatio. Horatio, would you think it? this young stripling
Takes part against me with that Traitor Sforza.

Hor. Does your Grace think so?

King. Think so? I know it.

Hor. Then I know it too: Think, did you say? I think 'twas time to think it.

King. I knew it not till now.

Hor. As I am true to the Crown, just now I knew it too.

Gonz. O do not so interpret, Royal Sir.

Hor. What can be said against it? has not his Grace spoke it?
What must be done with him to please your Majesty?

King. Convey him from my sight, and let our Marshal
Petruccio take him to safe custody,
Till our further pleasure.

Gonz. My King, and Father.

King. Hence with him I say.

Gonz. Great Sir, your mercy.

Hor. Did not I tell your Majesty there was not,
But in the Queen, Petruccio, and my self,
True Loyalty in the Court? Away you Traytorling.

Gonz. My Lord, you are too severe.

Hor. What? in being true to the Crown? O my Loyalty!
Exeunt with Gonzago.
Scoen. XI.
Enter Alinda, Flavello. Alin. No news yet? no return?

Flav. We shall have, Madam.

Alin. You made not choice of men of Resolution.

Flav. They were the same exasperate cashiered Soldiers
That swear so valiantly against Eulalia.

Alin. Many that pass for Soldiers dare swear valiantly,
That dare not fight.

Flav. Many that dare not fight,
Dare do a murder Madam, such a tame one too.
I am confident they have killed her: however, I have done my best.

Alin. Thou have done nothing whilst that woman lives.
The work was not so course, that your own hand
Could have disdained it, Sir, if you had loved me.
So leave me, negligent Fellow.

Flav. Her first months Majesty has wiped out
The memory of all her former days.
I must not lose her though: this hand then soon
Must do the work, be 't not already done.
Exit.
King. How cheers my love? what ominous aspect
Has wrought this sad Eclipse upon that Beauty,
Whose radiancie only is my life?
Cast by this veil of sadness: quit my fears,
And from my Brows wipe off a score of years.
No? what must then remove it? or dispell
These Clouds, that from the anguish of thy heart
Do cast this shadow ore my happiness?

Alin. I must not, will not name it: but you said
You would do something, which it seems
Your wavering love neglects.

King. Can I neglect
A duty that belongs to my Alinda?
Speak it again: and by my first nights bliss
I had with thee, by this kiss, and by this,
I Will treble in performance all my promises.

Alin. Y' are dull in your performances: I will
Not name a request the second time, although my life,
Your dignity, and your Kingdoms safety,
Lie on the rack for 't.

King. She will not name 't again:
Her last request was for the head of Sforza,
Her arrogant proud Father, whose perverseness
Checq'd at her due promotion; and whose life
Swollen up with Popularitie, was my danger,
Threatening no less then ruin on my State.
She will not name 't again, poor tender soul,
Lest she might fall into the interpretation
Of an unnatural child: yet for my safety,
She suffers in desire to have it done.
I have prevented her desire, it is done:
I know Petruccio his Antagonist,
Who had my warrant and Signet for it,
Would not be slack in the execution.
Come, sweet, be fearless: that which your mild goodness
Is now so timorous to name, is done.

Alin. Is she pursued and put to death?

King. What she?

Alind. Nay, I have said again.

King. Sforza, my dearest life, the unnatural Homicide
That sought thy life and mine, is put to death.

Alin. What, my dear Father?

King. Was it not your Desire?
Enter Petruccio. Here comes sure Testimony: speak Petruccio;
I will not ask, Is 't done? but speak the manner
How Sforza di'd.

Petr. A self-wil'd obstinate man:
Such as he lived he di'd: and gracious Madam,
That a more bloody Spectacle should not move
Your tender nature to compunction, I brought
But this inseparate Adjunct of his malicious Head
[a Jewel] Against you, the King, and the whole Kingdoms good.

Alin. This is a token most infallible,
The Jewel that none but the cold hand of Death
Could ravish from him: It Is done:
The fear of him is like a storm blown ore:
It Is done but this is yet but part of that full satisfaction
That must confirm my safety: Pray my Lord,
[side] You fatal instrument of my Fathers blood,
Let me not look upon you.

King. Nay Alinda,
Exit Petruccio. You must not be so sad: your gentle sorrow
In those obsequious Tears expressed, show nature
And Filial piety as he was your Father:
But think upon your wrongs, my dangers, and your own.

Alin. Alas my Lord, think you withal, a Father
Is not so early forgot. But sorrow leave me,
And do you give me leave to think, that now
It is no less a Child's part to embrace
Revenge then sorrow for a Fathers loss.

King. How means my love?

Alin. She lives that was his Ruin.
You may remember whom I mean: Eulalia.
Till now, I had no Plea against her life:
Only my care of you might wish her Death,
For your security. Her fowl Adultery
And secret Practices against your Crown,
Were nothing unto me, compared with this.
Now I have lost a Father: she the cause:
He suffers, she survives: where are your Laws?

King. Sweet, be content.

Alin. Content your self great Sir,
With your black infamy: sit down content
On your Majestic Throne, the President
Of Capital contented Cuckolds, do,
Till all your Subjects dance the Hornpipe too.

King. Nay dear Alinda, do but think --

Alin. Think what?
What on a course to be revenged on you?
To serve you in that kind my self?

Kin. O torment!

Alin. Or rather, let me think your lustful purpose
Was but to rob me of my Virgin-Honour.
And that you put her by but for a time,
Until my youth had quenched your Appetite;
Then to recall her home to your embraces.
She is your wife it seems then still: not I.

King. You have awaked me from a Lethargy
In which I was confounded: now I see
She and mine Honor cannot live at once:
She dies, Alinda.

Alin. And you may consider
A little further yet Sir, if you please:
You Father and maintain a Son (your own
I cannot safely say, and therefore more
Is my vexation) who demeans himself
Not toward me, like one that were your wife.

King. He Is also doomed already, my Alinda.

Alin. It may prevent a greater strife hereafter,
Should he but live t'inherit Lands and Titles
That must belong to yours and my succession.

King. Thy wisdom inspired me: all shall be
(Be thou but my Alinda) ruled by thee.

Alin. Seal you that Grant: with this kiss I Seal mine:
My glories were eclipsed, but now they shine.

ACT. IV.
Scoen. I.
Enter Poggio, Lollio, two Contrymen with Eulalia. Eul. You Are welcome
Friends, your prayers and good wishes
Are comforts to me, yet without danger of the Proclamation.

Pog. Madam, the Court in all the Braverie
It boasts and borrows, cannot so rejoice
In the bright shining Beauty of their Queen,
As we in your enjoying in this plainness.
Their Bells, and Bonfires, Tilts and Tournaments,
Their Feasts and Banquets, Musicks and costly shows
(How ere unpaid for) shall not outpass our loves.

Eul. Be you as confident, I will not wrong
A man among you: therefore pray reserve
What is your own, and warrant your own safety.

Pogg. But how you will live, we know not: we are now
In our old former Health: the Countrey's cured,
Your Practice at an end: unless you had
The common gift of most Physicians,
To make as many sick, as you make sound,
You will not find a Patient in seven years.

Eul. But I have other Arts: sufficient skill
In works of several kinds, the Needle, Loome,
The Wheel, the Frame, the Net-Pin: and choice of
Fingers works are most familiar with me.

Lol. And can you handle the Bobbins well, good Woman?
Make statute-Lace? you shall have my Daughter.

Pogg. And mine, to make Tape-Purles: can you do it?

Eul. Yes, and teach all your children works to live on.
The which, together with my own labor,
May bring sufficient for my maintenance:
Without the idle help of Begging, Borrowing,
Or any way infringing the Kings Command.

Lol. You Will have a help beyond himself, but borrowing.

Eul. Something I have in Book, to help their knowledge,
And by practice give them literature.
Then when these serious works and studies toil us,
For Recreation, yet with equal skill,
We Will practice diverse Instruments, Songs and measures,
That shall invite the Powers above to smile
On the content of which we them beguile.

Pog. Well Mistress, ours is the voice of the whole Country;
All which, or what you please of it, is yours:
Take this House: make your choice of servants.
Take our children: make your own Rates for their Education.
Our Purses and our lives are free to you:
Get what you can, that is your own: will this please you?

Eul. Yes gentle Friends, and with as much content
As ere I found in height of Government.

Pog. Take your possession then: and let
Posterity record, that without grieving
A Royal Queen once Traded for her living.

Scoen. II.
Enter Curate. Cur. Eho, oh, io, where is my learned sister?

Eul. Why seem you so distracted?

Cur. Proh Sancto Jupiter!

Eul. Alas what is the matter?

Cur. Hei mihi Qualis erat?
Talis erat qualem nunquam vidi.

Andr. Sure, sure, his Scholars have over-Master'd him, and whipped him out of
his wits.


Cur. Corpus inane animae, hold thy peace.

Eul. Pray speak, what chance has happened?

Cur. Non est narr andi locus: Go forth and see. The enraged Rurals are in an
uproar loud, each one an Hercules furens, a formidabilis formidandus Hostis and
quite against the Law

Of nostrum est injuriam non infer,
Are on the point of making themselves merry,
In hanging those ill destined men by the neck
That sought so late to give your neck the check.

Eul. O let us fly to rescue them.

Andr. Yet I hope
Your have will bring you short to cut the Rope.

Scoen. III.
Enter Lollio, Poggio, and guard, with Fabio and Strozza. Lol. Bring 'em away
to present execution:
They have lien too long upon the Countries charge.
We have given 'em bread and water a whole fornight.

Fab. You dare not do it: what Law are we condemned by?

Pog. Dare we not do it? that word's an hanging matter
Here in our Civil Government: dare not do 't Sir?
We Will do it; and when it is done, we will argue Law with you.

Stroz. When you have taken our lives, you will lay the
Law to us: you cannot be so Barbarous.

Lol. Impudent Traitors! how dare you say we cannot? yet because we graciously
are pleased to put the Law out of our hands, and make you hang your selves, I Will
give you Reason: Silence on your lives. First, know, lewd men, y' are Traitors
to the King, In offering to be wiser then his Judgment, Which was but
Banishment to the good Eulalia:

Seeking most Traitorously to take the life
Of (I do not say the Queen, but) the Kings wife
Of most happy memory.

Fab. The good Eulalia?

Stroz. the Kings wife?

Pog. That was:
You shall not catch us tripping Sir,
We are more than your match.

Lol. Good I do say she is, and good again
I dare pronounce he (...) that by daily pain
Works for her daily bread: and for bare hire,
Teaches our children so, that we admire:
The Infants who have understanding more
Then we their Parents have, or then
Our Forefathers before us had.

Pog. But brother Lollio, make not your speech so long: what is 't to them?
they will carry none on 't to the 'other world: let us do what we came to do, even
hang 'em. Then, as I said, we will argle it afterward.


Lol. But brother Poggio, better it is they live
A minute two or three, then such a Speech
As I am now upon, be lost.
Enter Lodovico, Pedro, Curate, Andrea, Eulalia.
Pog. See what y' have won by your delay! if she prevent not now
The good we meant her, I dare hang for 'm.

Cur. In tempore venimus with a Reprieve, quod omnium Rerum est Primum.

Eul. Alas, what mean you neighbors? would you now
For all my labors and my Prayers for you,
Blast me with curses of expiring men?
What trespass have I done you, that for me
You put these men to death against my will?

Fab. Stroz. We do applaud your mercy, gracious Queen.

Pog. There now, there they deserve hanging for that:
They call you Queen, against the Proclamation.
Dare you maintain 'em in it, and now speak for 'em?

Eul. No, I condemn their faults, and blame their lives;
But have nor Power nor will to judge the men:
You have the will; but to assume the Power,
You take the Kings Right from him: you transgress
As much his Laws in spilling of their blood,
As they had done in mine, had they prevailed.

Andr. They do not intend to spill their blood, Country woman, they would but
strangle them: never pierce the skin, nor make 'm an hair worse men, if you
consider rightly what they are.


Lol. But to the point. This is the All and some: We meant you a good turn, and
for your sake to have hanged 'em right or wrong. Now since you will needs stand
in your own highway of women's wisdom, which is wilfulness


(Cur. A most Elegant Figure!) Let Them and please you come to the Gallows
another day for killing you out right: who can help it?


Cur. Oraculously spoken: which of the Sages could said more?


Lol. It Is not unknown to you, that I can speak like a Sage, and am one of the
Sages of our Precinct here for the Laytie, though your learning lie another way
among us. I am a Sage, and will be a Sage.


Pog. And so am I, and will be: and but that wise woman, which is as much to
say as a fool for her labor.


Cur. Another elegant Figure.


Pog. But that, I say, she has gainsaid it, we would; yet to show our selves
Sages, hang 'em up for Scarcrowes, to fright all their fellows for coming from
Court to kill women in the Country.


Andr. O how I love a Sage! how many Sages do you allow in your Precinct?


Lol. Some three or four main Heads: we have now only Pedro, Poggio and my self:

But we have many Powers under us:
These now are Powers that execute our Commands.
There is as much difference between a Sage and a Power,
As between a Judge and a Hangman.

Andr. But is not the learned Curate a Sage amongst ye?


Lol. No, as I said before, their learning lies another way: we allow not our
Clergy any Temporal Offices, for reasons known unto our selves.


Andr. Pray let me have a Sages place amongst ye then: I long to be a Sage.


Lol. Brother Andrea, you shall have my voice in your Election.


Andr. Sage Brother Lollio, I thank you.


Cur. But will ye now, if misericordially
This gracious Foeminine preserve your lives
Ex ore lupi, from the Gallow Tree,
Become new men indeed?

Eul. I know they will
When they consider the most dangerous sin,
That threw them on their desperate Attempt,
And their escape from merited Punishment,
They cannot be so graceless, not to turn
To a reformed life: First know, young men,
Your former Act against me an Innocent,
Was Perjurie by which I fell, yet flourish.
Consider there how black and fowl your Sin
Is rendered by my Crystal innocence:
Your next Attempt against me, was blacker, Murder,
The very word sounds horrow.

Stroz. Gentle Madam,
Name it not then: but by your sacred mercy,
Acquit us of the Doom which we so justly
Have drawn upon our selves: and we will spend
Our lives in rendering satisfaction
To your abused goodness.

Eul. This is serious.

Fab. Or may the earth on which we kneel for favor,

Forced by the weight of our detested Sins, open.

Amb. Quick devour us.

Eul. So, enough:
I Will take your words.

Lod. But now you must reveal
By whom you have been wrought to these fowl Practices.

Fab. All, we will discover all, though justly then we pay our lives to Law.


Lod. Good neighbors, Lollio, Poggio, and Andrea, conduct them to my House.


Cur. My self also will to be their securer convoy go,
For fear the Rusticks may presume again
To stretch these penitent necks with halter strain.

Lod. You shall do well: I thank your Charity.

Lol. Well, since in these we are prevented thus,
Come more, we will hang 'em, or they shall hang us.

Andr. Make me but once a Sage, and then fear nothing.


Pogg. Thou shall be one next Sessions, without all peradventure.


Lod. When we have taken these men's confessions,
I Will write at large each passage to the King,
Against the good Eulalia's will or knowledge

Pedr. I Will be your faithful Messenger, my Lord.

Lod. Thanks my good Pedro: but remember Silence.
So deep in thought good Madam?

Eul. Never enough in contemplation of my Happiness.


Pedr. It is your Heavenly mind that sweetens all things.

Enter one of the Countrymen.
Pogg. What Is the matter man?

Doubtless and without all peradventure, more miracles.


Pogg. The news, good neighbor.


Countr. O neigbours Poggio and Lollio, such a news, such a Discovery, such a
thing is come to pass, such a business is come to light, as your hearts never
heard, your Tongues never thought, nor your ears ever uttered: you cannot hear
it, but it will drown you in a Sea of Admiration, never to rise again in your
right wits.


Lol. Now am I mad till I hear it.


Pog. Thou shall tell me first whether it be good or bad, or I Will not hear it.


Countr. It is good or bad I assure you: and therefore you may be gone.


Pog. I mean which is it? good or bad?


Countr. I say it is good and bad: and you may both stay and be gone, hear it
or hear it not, an't' please you.


Pog. Nay thou art in thy Jibes now: how good or how bad is thy news?

I pray thee neighbor, I do pray thee how good or bad is it?

Countr. Nay then it is neither good nor bad, but both: the best and the worst
that ever you heard in your life, and the worst shall out first: what do you
think of the woman that we have got among us?


Pog. Who, the holy woman? that we are all so bound to pray for? I hope no
ill's betide her.


Countr. Come, she is a witch: flatly and plainly said to be a witch.


Pog. Did not I tell you she was an unknown woman, and therefore a good one,
quoth you? but say I, doubtlesly; and without all peradventure, all that she
did was but a kind of witchcraft.


Lol. It cannot, fie, it cannot be: how is she found so? Countr. I do not say
she is found a witch, but she is accused for one.


Pog. By whom is she accused?


Countr. By two brave men at Arms that came from Court
With purpose to have killed her for the same.
To be short, They found her out, and naked swords they drew:
But as they thought to have thrust her through and through,
They both dead Palsie-struck fall to the ground.

Countr. And had no strength but of their Tongues to wound
The Fame she had.

Pog. Virtue can want no Foes,

Count. With that they cried she was a witch, and swore
She also was that Queen which for a whore
The King had turned away.

Pog. This is indeed the best news thou could bring.

Now doubtlesly and without all peradventure, it is the Queen indeed: and if she
be not a witch, I am sorry I thought so, with all my heart: where be those men?
we will hang'm presently.


Countr. No, the Queen, if she be the Queen, will not have them hurt more then
they be: we wete about to execute 'em: but she would not suffer it.


Lol. Goodness it self!


Pog. Nay without all peradventure, if there be goodness above ground, I said,
and I say it again, it is in that woman.


Countr. She would have cured 'em presently her self: but could not do it,
because the cruel Caitifs would not confess their sins, as she made us, you
know, before her gift could cure us: by the same token I suffered an hours
torment that I might have escaped, because I was so loath to bring out that
naughty business betwixt me and the Millers wife.


Pog. 'Twas well you confessed at last.


Countr. I, and they will be glad to confess, before they be able to stir hand
or foot, I warrant: and so I told 'm when I lodged 'em both lovingly together
upon straw in my Barn, too good for 'em; and so I told 'em too, for being
Traitors to her Holiness.


Lol. But where is our Holy woman?


Pog. Our Queen we will call her now, without all peradventure.


Lol. Coming this way to her Court-Cottage here, but very slowly, though our
two new neighbors make the best way they can for her through the People that
press upon her so with thanks and offerings for their new Healths: but she
takes not so much for curing of a thousand mortal People, as I have spent in
Turpentine and Tar to keep my Flocklings cleanly in a Spring time. Hark, she
comes: this is her Music where ere she goes.

[Shout within.]
All. Heaven bless our Holy woman.


Scoen. III.
Enter Lodovico, Eulalia, Andrea. Lod. Depart good neighbors, good people all
depart: she will come abroad again to morrow.
Within Heaven bless our Holy woman.

Andr. She thanks you all good People, pray depart,
To morrow you shall have the second part:
She shall appear again unto you; pray depart,
The men in Peace, the Wives in quietness,
And let your bigger children still the less.
[All within.] Heaven bless our Holy woman.

Andr. So, now the Hubbub's gone: I pray pass on.
I shall be as weary of the Cottage, as of the Court,
If this noise hold: here is thrusting and crowding
As much as there, only here they have less Pride.

Eul. Was ever comfort in the Court like this?

Lod. I never lived till now.
Enter three countrymen more.
Andr. Here come more of our weather-headed wise neighbors.

Pog. Heaven bless our Holy woman.

1. Heaven bless your Holiness.

2. Nay then Heaven bless our Sacred Sovereign.

Eul. This Homage fits not me.

1. We had not lived but by your sacred means;
And will no longer live then be your Subjects.

Eul. You go about to cast away your lives:
In serving or in succouring me, you fall
Into Rebellion against the King.

2. We have no King nor Queen but you.
Heaven bless your Majesty.

Omn. Heaven bless your Majesty.

Andr. That was pronounced bravely; O my brave new neighbors!

Eul. Y' are Traitors All.

1. In honoring our Sovereign?

Andr. I, well said, hold her to it.

Eul. How dare you call me so?

2. We dare, and can prove it good and lawful.
This Province is engaged unto you Madam,
The King made it your Jointure: and we find
No reason but you instantly possess it.

Eul. What, and the King alive?

1. He Is dead to you.

Lol. Yes, yes, he is dead to you.

Andr. Well said again: that is a sound point, besworn
These be true Blades.

Eul. I tremble but to hear you,
And will not live an hour amongst you more
But with this freedom, To use my fair obedience to the King.

2. You shall obey the King then, and we'll obey your Majesty.

Eul. O let that Title die with my late Fortune:
Remember it no more, but let me be
As one of you; nay rather, an Inferior,
Or I from this abiding must remove:
Of which I first made choice in truth for love.

3. O Madam!

Eul. Take heed good neighbors,
Beware how you give Dignity or Title; therein you may transgress.

2. No whit good Madam. Observe the Dialect of France,
And you shall find Madam given there in Courtesy,
To women of low Fortunes, unto whom
It Is held a poor addition, though great Queens
Do grace and make it Royal.

Eul. It Is then the Greatness of
The Person dignifies the Titles, not it the Person.

1. And in that, Madam, you are in your content
Above all Title's proper to great Princes:
But setting this aside, how thrive your Scholars?

Eul. We go fairly on. [Enter 1. Girl.] look you Sir,
Here Is one that knew no letter in the Book
Within these ten days, can read hitherto,
And waits for a new lesson: proceed hither --
And at your hour I Will hear you.

1. Girl. Yes forsooth Mistress.
Enter 2. Girl.
Eul. Good Girl, well said: nay, nay, hold up your head: so, so, it is very
well: let us see your Samplar: what an hearts ease is here! Lod. Right in its
perfect Colors.


Eul. Nay she will do well: now take me out this Flower. Keep your work clean,
and you shall be a good Maid. Enter 3. Girl. Now where is your writing book?


3. Girl, It Is here forsooth. Pray shall I hay a Joyn-hand Copy next?


Eul. No child, you must not Joyn-hand yet: you must your letters and your
minums better first. Take heed, you may Joyn-hand too soon, and so mar all:
still youth desires to be too forward. Go take your Lute, and let me hear you
sing the last I taught you.

[Song] Enter 4. Girls.
Scoen. IV.
Enter Doctor and Midwife. Lod. Whither do you press? who would you speak
withal?


Doctor. O Sir, for Charity sake give us access unto the holy woman.

Lod. Who are you? or from whence?

Doct. We are poor Pilgrims man and wife, that are upon our way struck with sad
pain and sorrow.


Andr. Alas poor Pilgrims! here is she must do you good.

Eul. How divine Justice throws my Enemies into my hands? what are your
griefs?


Doct. My wife is struck with dumbness.

Andr. Hold a little,
That Is the greatest grief a woman can endure:
But trouble not thy self to seek for cure.
Too many a man in the world will change with thee
A wife that of her Language is too free,
And give good Boot.

Eul. Pray Sir be you silent.
And where is your pain?

Doct. Here in this hand;
Which I desire to show in some more privacie.

Eul. Because your Blow cannot be safely given here, you think.
O sinful wretch! thou had no pain till now;
Nor was she dumb till divine Providence
Now at this instant struck her. It is now
Just as thou say: and justly are you punished
For treacherous counterfeits. Lodowick search his hand.

Lod. His hand is withered, and lets fall a Knife.

Andr. As sharp to do a mischief as ere was felt on.

Eul. Now take off his false Beard: see if you know him,
And let the woman be unmuffled.

Lod. O Devils!

Andr. O the last couple that came out of Hell!

Lod. These are the other two that damned themselves
In perjurie against you at your Trial.

Andr. How do you master Doctor, and Mistress Midwife?
Is this the Pen your Doctorship prescribes with?
This might soon write that might cure all diseases:
And are these the Labors you go to, Mistress Midnight?
Would you bring women to bed this way?

Omn. O damnable conspirators!

Eul. Pray take 'm hence, their time 's not come for cure yet.

Andr. Come away Pilgrims: we'll cure 'em for you,
If your own salves can cure you: O my sweet Pilgrims.

1. Fough, they stink of Treason damnably

2. What, shall we hang'm? drown 'em? or burn 'em?

1. They shall taste forty deaths, then take their own.

2. I, come away with 'em: they shall die forty times without peradventure,


Eul. You shall lose me, if you do any violence to any of 'em: but let'm be
lodged with those we took to day: I Will feed 'em all.


Andr. They Will be a jolly company.

Eul. Pray do as I entreat.

3. You shall in all command us.

1. I Will make my Barn a spittle for your conspirators till it be top full, and
then set fire on it, and please you.


Eul. Do you no harm, and fear none: send your Children.


2. Omn. Long live our Queen.

Andr. Your Queen? have you a mind to be hanged?
Queen? have you a mind to be hanged?

Omn. our School-Mistress, we would say.

Eul. We live secure in spite of Foes: and see,
Where Heaven protects, in vain is Treachery:
Who says out State is low, or that I fell
When I was put from Court? I did not rise
Till then, nor was advanced till now. I see
Heaven plants me 'bove the reach of Treachery.

Lod. O happy, happy Saint!
Ex. Rustici with Doct. and Midwife.
Scoen. V.
Enter Flavello, alias Alphonso, with a Letter to Eulalia, Poggio and Lollio
following. Lol. I would she had a Council: she shall have a Council,
And we will be the Heads thereof,
Though I be put to the pains to be President my self.

Pog. It is most requisite for her safety: her danger may be great.
A good guard then in my opinion were more requirable.

Lol. It Is well considered: she shall have a Guard too: and we will be the
limbs thereof, though I be put to the trouble of Captain on it my self.


Pog. You will put on all Offices, yet count 'em pain and trouble.


Lol. Yes, and perform 'em too here in our Court of Conscience, for here is no
other profit to hinder the Duty: let them above do what they list; we will
have as much care of our School-Mistress, as they of their Semiramis: I speak
no Treason nor no trifles neither, if you mark it. But she must never know this
care of ours, She Will urge the Statute of Relief against it.


Pog. This is some Courtier sure that is with her; he smells illfavordly.


Lol. That made me dog him hither.


Pog. He shall not have her out of sight, that is certain.


Lol. Nor out of reach neither: a mischief's quickly done.


Eul. No Superscription, nor any names unto it. Most Royal and most wronged
Sovereign Mistress: (that must needs be me.) Be happily assured your
Restoration is at hand; And by no less means then by her Death that usurps
your Dignity: (a plain conspiracy against Alinda in my behalf.) All shall be
determined at Nicosia, by

Your Loyal Servants.

Nameless.


Eul. You know not the contents then, and are bound by Oath you say not to
reveal the senders of this Letter.


Alph. It is most true: only thus much I tell you, they are your noble and
best chosen Friends.


Eul. Heaven! can it be, that men in my respect can plunge into such danger?


Alph. So Madam, this being all I had in charge,
I must crave leave (indeed I do not like this
Opportunity, nor well the countenances of these Hobnols.
[aside]
Eul. You are no messenger of such ill Tidings
To part so slightly: indeed you shall not.

Alph. She Is honied with the news: I have already
Madam my Reward, and will no longer stay.

Eul. Then I must say, you shall stay: or I Will send
A cry as loud as Treason after you.

Alph. You Will wrong yourself and Friends then.

Omn. You wrong your self Sir, and we charge you stay.

Alph. By the command of Peasants?

Lol. How! you choplogical Rascal, Peasants!

Pog. Down with him into utter darkness.

Eul. No-violence good Friends: but if you will detain him
Till I give order for his liberty,
You do the State good service.

Lol. May it do you Service?

Pog. The State is finely served already.

Eul. Me most of all.

Lol. Hell cannot hold him faster then.

Alph. Madam, hear me.

Lol. Mad Ass, hold your prating till she calls you:
Mean time you are fast: 'twas time we were a Council or a Guard.
Exeunt with Alphonso.
Eul. I thank thee Providence, I dreamed not of such ready help.
I am struck through with wonder at this Letter:
I could not at the first but think it a Bayt
To catch my willingness to such an Act;
Or Gullerie to mock my Hopes or wishes,
In case I had such: therefore I desired
The Messengers restraint from being my Relator:
But now a strong Belief possesses me,
A ^oble Fury has stirred up some Friends
To this high enterprise: whereby I gather
My cause is weighed above, whence I shall see
How well my patience overrules my wrong,
And my Foes ruined with mine Honors safety.
But let my better Judgment weigh those thoughts,
I do not seek revenge, why shall I suffer it?
My causeless injuries have brought me Honor,
And it is her shame to hear of my mis-hap.
And if by Treachery she fall, the world
Will judge me accessarie, as I were indeed
In this foreknowledge of the foul intent,
Should I conceal it.
Then here is the trembling doubt which way to take*
Whether to rise by her Destruction,
Or sink my Friends, discovering their pretense.
Friends have no Privilege to be treacherous:
She is my Sovereigns wife, his chief content;
Of which to rob him, were an act of horror
Committed on himself. The question's then,
Whether it be more foul ingratitude
To unknown Friends, and for an act of Sin,
Then to be treacherous to the Prince I love?
It is resolved: I Will once more see the Court.
Lollio, Poggio and Countrymen return. O my good Patrons, I must now entreat
Means for my Journey to attend the King,
On a discovery for the present safety
Of his fair Queen: she will be murdered else.

Pog. And let her go: we have shut up your news-bringer safe enough, will keep
you by your favor, short enough from hindering such a work.


Eul. Dear Friends, a small matter will prevent this world of dangers.


Lol. Would you have us to become Traitors, to
Supply your wants against the Proclamation?
If you be well, remain so: your Iudustry
Can keep you here: but for a Journey, that
Requires Horses and Attendants: money must he had*
Which we have not for such an idle purpose.

Eul. O hear me.

Pog. Will you neglect your House and Trade to meddle any more with
State-matters?


Pog. And bring our necks in danger to assist you?
Let your own counsel advise you to stay.

Scoen. VI.
Enter King, Petruccio. King. How died the Boy?

Petr. Gonzago Sir, your Son?

King. My Son, my Son? you urge the name of Son
To work remorse within me, when I ask
How died that Bastard Boy; no Son of mine.

Petr. His last words that he spoke to me, were these;
Go, tell the King my Father, that his frown
Has pierced my heart: tell him, if all his Land
Be peopled with obedient hearts like mine,
He needs no laws to second his displeasure,
To make a general Depopulation:
But that he may not lose so much, I pray
That in my Death his misse-plac'd anger die,
And that his wrath have double force against those
That to his Person and his Laws are Foes.

King. Did he say so?

Petr. And then, as if the Spirit of Prayer
Had only been habitual in his soul,
He did implore Heaven's goodness to come down,
Lifting him hence to shine upon your Crown.

King. This Boy yet might be mine, though Sforza might have wronged me by the
By.


Petr. This done, he prayed me leave the Room. I wept: In sooth I could-not
choose.


King. Well, well, you wept, returned, and found him dead in's Bed you say.


Petr. Yes, in so sweet a Posture, as no Statuarie
With best of skill on most immaculate Marble
Could fashion him an Image purer, slighter.

King. No more.

Petr. I found his stretch'd-out fingers which so lately
Had closed his eyes, still moistened with his tears;
And on his either cheek a tear undryed,
Which shone like Stars.

King. It seems he wept and died.
Prithee no more: I cannot though forget
My threatenings were too sharp: I must forget it.
I charge you that you leavy up our Army
Against those Rebels that we hear give succor
Unto the wretched cause of all my mischiefs,
That hated ill-liv'd woman.

Scoen. VII.
Enter Horatio. Hor. O my dread liege?

King. The matter? speaks; how does the Queen?

Hor. O the sweet Queen! I fear, I fear, I fear.

King. What fearst thou? speak the worst I charge thee.

Hor. I fear she has a Moonflaw in her brains:
She chides and fights that none can look upon her.
Her Fathers Ghost, in her I think: here she comes.

Alin. Where Is this King? this King of Clouts,

Petr. Fearful effect of Pride!

Alin. This shadow of a King, that stands set up
As in a Press among the Rags and Vizors
That represent his deceased Ancestors.

King. What means my love?

Alin. Your love? where is your love?
Where is the preparation that you promised
Of strength to tear in pieces that vile Witch
That lives my souls vexation? your love?
You are a load of torment: your delays
To my desires are Hellish cruelties.
Are these your Promises?
[Horatio holds up his hands.]
King. I have given order with all speed I could.

Alin. You could cut off an old man in a Prison,
That could make no resistance, and you could
Vex a poor Boy to death, that could but cry
In his defense; that you could do; but this
That has so much show of fear or hardness,
As a few Peasants to maintain a Strumpet
Against your Dignity, is too much to do
For a poor coward King.

Petr. What a tyrannous Ambition
Has the Devil puffed up this Bladder with!

King. I fear her wits are crazed indeed. Alinda,
Hear me gentle love.

Alin. O my torment!

Hor. As I am true to the Crown, I know not what to say to this: she is falling
mad sure.

Alin. No, no, you dare not do it: your Army may
Perhaps in the dangerous Action break a shin,
Or get a bloody nose: it now appears
My Father (as 'twas voyc'd) was all your valor.
Y' have never a Mars or Cuckold-making General
Now left: and for your self, you are past it.

Hor. His' the other wife would not have used him thus.
Quiet Cuckoldrie is better then scolding chastity all the world over.

King. I see distraction in her face.

Alin. Did all your brave Commanders die in Sforza?

Petr. By the Kings favor Madam (not to stir
The dust of your dead Father) he has Soldiers
That know to lead and execute no less
Then did victorious Sforza.

Alin. Sirrah! you have stirred more then his dust; you have moved his blood in
me, unto a Justice that claims, they traiterous head.


Petr. My head? and Traiterous? I do appeal unto the King.

Alin. A King? a Cobweb.

Hor. And she the Spider in it I fear.
My Loyalty knows not how to look upon her.

Alin. If thou be King, thou yet art but that King
That ows me love and life, and so my subject.

King. Indeed Alinda; --

Alin. Yes indeed Gonzago,
Life by inheritance: for my valiant Father
Whose life thou tookst, gave thine, and so it is mine.
And for your love, you dare not wrest it from me;
Therefore deny not now my just demand,
In that proud Traitors head.

Hor. She Is mad beyond all cure.

King. Examine his offense, my dear Alinda.

Alin. Is It not enough Alinda does command it?
Are these the Articles you gave me grant of?
Is this the nothing that you would deny me?

King. Sweet, weigh but his offense.

Alin. His Head is my offense: and give me that
Now, without pause, or by the strength of Hercules
I Will take thee by the Horns, and writhe thine own off.

King. Go from her sight Petruccio; levy up our Forces,
And let the Boy Gonzago be embowell'd,
And sent as a forerunner of our Fury
Unto that Witch, contriver of these woes.

Petr. It Is done, my liege.
[Exit Petruccio.]
Alin. Was ever woman barred her will, as I am?

Hor. Here Is a fine woman spoiled now, by humoring her at first, and cherishing
her Pride.

Alin. Sure you have but mocked me all this while:
I am no wife, no Queen, but silly Subject.

King. It Is a disease in her that must be soothed:
Sweet, thou shall have his Head.

Alin. O, shall I so?

King. Go in, it shall be brought thee.

Alin. Mark what I say to bind you to your word:
Do it, or I Will not love you: I can change
Love into hate, hate into love most sweetly:
Let that man live to morrow, I Will love him,
And do fine feats with him, such as your the other wife
And Sforza did; but make much better sport on it.
They were an old dry couple.

Hor. Take this, take all.

Alin. I leave all to your Kingly consideration:
You know your charge: look to it, and so I leave you.
Exit.
King. What wild Affections do in women reign!
But this a Passion past all President.
O it is mere Madness, mixed with Divellish cunning,
To hurl me upon more and endless mischiefs:
It has awaked me to the sight of those
My fury (sprung from Dotage) has already
Laid in my Path, grim Spectacles of horror,
The blood of Sforza, and that tender Boy:
O let me think no further, yet stay there:
To plunge at first into too deep a Sense
Of soul-afflicting terrors, drowns the Reason,
And stupifies the Conscience, which delivers
Us over to an insensibilitie
Of our misdeeds, and of our selves: just Heaven!
Afford me light to see I am misled:
But let it not as lightning blast mine eyes,
Confound my Senses, make me further stray,
For ever coming back to know my way.

Hor. How fares your Majesty?

Kin. O Horatio! she is lost, she is lost, Horatio.

Hor. I would my wife were with her then:
And so would any good Subject say; I think.

King. What do thou think?

Hor. Marry I think (and so would any good Subject think, I think) as your
Majesty thinks.


King. What do thou think of Loyalty now?

Hor. Truly I think there is now not any warrantable Loyalty left but in
Petruccio and my self.
The Queen is now out of my Catalogue, and my Creed too.

Scoen. VIII.
[A shout within] crying, Kill him, kill him: for Sforza, Sforza: kill him for
the blood of Sforza, Sforza, etc. King. What terrible, what hideous noise is
this?
[Within.] Kill him for Sforza, Sforza; kill him, kill him.

Hor. My Loyalty defend me! I know not what to make on it.
[Enter a Captain distractedly, Sforza Disguised.]
King. What art thou? speak: had thou the voice of Hell,
Denouncing all the Furies in it, I dare yet hear thee; speak.

Capt. O mighty Sir, Petruccio.

King. What of Petruccio?

Capt. O Petruccio! I tremble but to speak him.

King. Shall I then with the Prophetique Spirit of a King
Speaks of Petruccio? he is turned Traitor,
And animates the Soldiers against me,
Upon the discontent Alinda gave him
Now in her Fury: is it not so?

Hor. It Is so, it is so: never ask him for the matter:
I thought so, just, just as your Majesty thought it;
And find withal, that now you have not left
A Loyal heart but in Horatio's bosom,
Now that Petruccio fails: I feared 'twould come
To that: nay knew't: O hang him, hang him,
False hearted villain! he was never right,
And so I always told your Majesty.
[Shout.]
King. The cry comes nearer still: what does he mean,
To bring my Army on to Massacre
Me in my House?

Capt. Dread Sir, vouchsafe attention:
Petruccio is Loyal: it is his Loyalty,
And most sincere obedience to your will,
That brings him to the ruin of his life,
Unless your aweful Presence make prevention.

King. Is then his Loyalty become his danger?

Capt. As thus great Sir, in the late Execution
Of Death-doom'd Sforza, which the Soldier
(Not looking on your Justice, but the Feud
That was betwixt Petruccio and him)
Resents as if it were Petruccio's Act,
Not yours, that cut him off: and still, as madly
Bewitched with Sforza's love, as ignorant
Of the desert of brave Petruccio,
They all turn head upon him: and as if
'Twere in his power to new create him to them,
They cry to him for Sforza, Sforza; or if not,
Petruccio's life must answer Sforza's blood.

King. Left you him in that distress?

Capt. He did prevail
With much entreatie, by some private reasons,
Upon their fury for an hours respite:
In which dear time it is only you may save
Guiltless Petruccio from a timeless Grave.

King. Thou art a Soldier, art not?

Capt. And have commanded in your Highness Wars.

King. Me thinks I should remember, but I Will trust thee.

Hor. I hope you will be advised, though, how you run
Into this wildfire of Rebellion.

King. My Fortune is more desperate then his:
I am beset and circled in with mischiefs.
Waylaid with heaps of dangers every where:
Yet I will on: Kings were not made to fear.
I Will fetch him off, and the more readily,
For my misprision of his Loyalty.
Could I think that man false?

Hor. No Sir, nor I:
By all means fetch him off: that Loyal General
Is tenfold worth the whole Rebellious Army:
Save him, and hang them all.
Enter Petruccio with a Rabble of Soldiers, and two Captains, crying, Come,
come, away with him, away with him.
Petr. Have you no Faith, nor due obedience
Unto the King? this outrage is against him,
In me he suffers.

1. Capt. We obey the King,
And it is his Justice that we cut your throat,
For doing such outrage in the death of our brave General,
That had you lives more then false drops of blood,
They were not all sufficient satisfaction for his loss.

2. Capt. Your limited hour draws on apace: Prepare.
Enter a Servant.
Petr. He Is come within that hour, that shall relieve me.
Where is he? is he come?

Serve. You are betrayed:
He Is fled and gone: no such man to be found.

Petr. Then Faith is fled from man: is Sforza fled?
Why should I wish to live, now Honor's dead?
Now take your bloody course, and in my fall,
Martyr the man that saved your General.

1. Capt. Saved him? how saved?

Petr. Sforza lives.

All. How Is that? how is that? that, that again.

Petr. As I now live, I set him free from Prison,
Trusting unto his Honor to secure me,
In which I did abuse the Kings Authority
To the forfeit of my life.

Sold. This sounds: this sounds.

1. Capt. But does this sound well from a Soldiers mouth?

2. Capt. He is not now worthy of death, before He be well whipped for lying.
[Within] The King, the King, the King!

1. Capt. He could never come in a better time, to see how bravely we will do
justice for him.

King. How comes this Fury raised amongst ye Soldiers?
Have you forgot my Laws and Person too?

1. Capt. We honor both thus low: now gives us leave
To look like men, and give your Highness welcome
To see a General of your Election
Die with a lie in's mouth: your Soldier here,
None of the good Queens old ones.

King. Dare you both judge and execute this man?

2. Capt. We dare to kill the Hangman of our General,
And think it fits our Office best: though you
Have Law enough to wave our care and pain,
And hang him up your self: for he affirms
That he let Sforza live against your command;
And that is the lie we treat of.

Kin. I Will give you all your Pardons, and him Honor,
To make that true. Sfor. Your Kingly word is taken.
[Discovers himself.] Noble Petruccio, thou art disengaged:
And if the temper of the Kings high Anger
Blow still above his Justice, let it crush
This cloud that holds a shower of innocent blood,
Willing to fall and calm his violent fury.

All. Our General lives: a Sforza, Sforza.

King. Sforza!

Petr. You have outdone me in Nobility.

King. I am all wonder: now this man appears
The Mansion and habitual Seat of Honor;
Of which he seems so full, there cannot be
An Angle in his breast to lodge so base
An Inmate as disloyalty: if so,
How was Eulalia false? or how Gonzago,
That tender Boy, the fruit of lawless lust?
There I am lost again: Great Power, that know
The subtletie of hearts, show me some light
Through these Cymmerian mists of doubts and fears,
In which I am perplexed even to distraction:
Show me, show me yet the face of glorious Truth; where I may read
If I have erred, which way I was misled.

Hor. Enters. O my dread Lord!

King. Thy news?

Hor. O my sweet Sovereign!

King. Art thou distracted too?

Hor. No Sir: The Queen, the Queen, the Queen's distracted,
And I am like to be, and you, and any man
That loves the King, unless some Conjurer
Be found to lay the Devil: I mean Sforza.
Sforza Sir (would you think?) that monstrous Traitor
Sforza walks in the Court without a Head;
Appeared unto the Queen: I found her talking with him,
Kneeling and praying him to give her Pardon;
Told him indeed 'twas she that sought his Head,
And that she thought, that being now a Queen,
She might by her Prerogative take Heads,
Whose and as many as she listed: but
She promised she would send it him again,
Or else Petruccio's first: or if he would forgive her
This time, shee'ld do so no more.
He seemed he would not hear her: then she beat
Her self against the walls and floor, and flies
To free her self by the windows: calls for Poison,
Knife, Rope, or any thing, whereby to follow
Her most abused Father. What to make on it,
As I am true to the Crown, I must refer
Only unto your Majesty.

King. O it is fearful!

Petr. My Lord, you saw not the Apparition, did you?

Hor. Not I: I saw him not: nor has the Devil
Power in a Traitors shadow to appear
Unto a Loyal Subject. Hah! my Loyalty
And Truth unto the Crown defend me!
See the very foresaid Devil at my Elbowe,
Head and all now: avoid, attempt me not Satan,
I do conjure thee by all the virtues of a Loyal Courtier.

Sfor. They are all too weak to charm a Devil Sir;
But me they may, your Friend.

Hor. I defy thee Bubsebel.

Petr. What do you see, my Lord?

Hor. Look there, the Apparition, there it is;
As like the Traitor Sforza when he lived,
As Devil can be like a Devil -- oh!

Petr. Fear not: he lives, and Loyal to the King.

Hor. Does the King say so?

Sfor. Give me your hand my Lord,
The king will say so, if this be flesh and blood.

Hor. I, if thou be flesh and blood: but how to believe that I know not,
when my touch makes me sweat out a whole shower of pure Loyalty.


King. No more, Horatio: I find that my credulity
Has been wrought on unto my much abuse,
And Sforza now appears an honest man.

Hor. Who ever thought otherwise? or how
Could he in nature appear less then Loyal?
O my right noble Lord, I weep thy welcome.

King. Back Soldiers, to your duty: learn of me
Hereafter how to judge with equity.

Sold. Long live the King.
Exeunt Capt. and Soldiers.
King. Now in the midst of my soul-frighting objects,
I cannot but applaud your mutual Friendship.

Hor. Yes, and how equally I affect them both.

King. O that mischance propitiously might be
A light to reconcile my thoughts and me.

Sfor. May you be pleased Sir then to let the cause
In which your injured Queen, your Son and I,
And truth it self have suffered, be reviewed?
The mischievous creature that was drunk, now is mad
With brain-confounding strong Ambition:
She whom your ill-plac'd love Graced as a wife,
Whom now I am not fond of to call Daughter,
It seems is past Examination.

Hor. Mad, mad, most irrecoverably mad.

Sfor. But let those Hell-bred witnesses be called,
And re-examined.

Hor. They are not to be found.

King. No? where is Flavello?

Petr. Not seen in Court these ten days.

Hor. Let me out-squeeze that Court-Sponge.
If I do not fetch out the poisonous corruption
Of all this Practice, let me yet be guilty.

Scoen. IX.
Post-Horn. Enter Pedro. Letters. King. From whence art thou?

Pedr. Your Province of Palermo
Thus low submits in duty to your Highness,
The Service and the lives of whose Inhabitants
So truly are subjected to your Power,
That needless is the Preparation
Which with much grief we hear you make against us,
By hostile Force to root up a Rebellion
Bred merely out of Rumor.

King. Peace, no more:
I find the Province Loyal.

Hor. Who made doubt on it?
I Will undertake to find more Toads in Ireland,
Then Rebels in Palermo, were the Queen
(Queen did I call her?) that disloyal woman
And that sly Traitor Lodovico out on it.

King. See Sforza, see Petruccio, what Lodovico
That trusty and true-hearted Lord has wrote me:
He has ended all my doubts, good man.

Hor. Ah, ah! does not your grace come to me now?
I thought I would put your Highness to it for once,
To try what you would say: when Lodovico
Does not prove trusty, then let me be trussed.

Petr. It Is a most happy Information.

King. I, do you note the Passages?

Sfor. It Is indeed worthy a Kings regard: you see your way.

King. Yes, yes, I know now what to do,
And mean to put it presently in Act.

Hor. This I foresaw would prove an hour of comfort.
The Stars themselves never saw events more plainly.

King. How full of April-changes is our life?
Now a fit shower of sad distilling Rain,
And by and by the Sun breaks forth again.
Exeunt Omnes.
ACT. V.
Scoen. I.
Enter Lodovico, Eulalia. Lod. FEar not good Madam, trust my care and Reason.

Eul. Good Lodovico, though I thank your care
And love to me, yet give me leave to doubt,
That as that cruel and Ambitious woman
Has oversway'd the Judgment of the King,
She may pervert his Royal purposes
Of Peace and love, to your and my destruction.
Before you sent, would you had taken my Counsel.
Enter Pedro with Gonzago, and Letters.
Lod. To end all doubts, see Pedro is returned.

Pedr. And happily: see Madam.
[Presents Gonzago to her.]
Eul. My Gonzago;
My Prince, I should have said.

Gonz. Thrice-gracious Mother,
I thank Petruccio, who preserved my life,
For nothing more, then this one minutes Bliss,
In which I find your Blessing in a kiss.

Eul. Weep not, fair Sir.

Pedr. The Lord Petruccio Madam
Presents you these.
[Letters She Reads.]
Lod. Welcome my sweet young Prince.

Gonz. I thank you Lodovico.

Lod. Now I see methinks a Court again.

Pedr. We shall do shortly; for the King is coming,
And not in terror, but with Grace and Favor.

Lod. It Is happy Heavenly news.

Eul. See here is an Inundation
Of Joys that do like waves overcome each other.
Brave, wise, and valiant Petruccio!
That could so happily deceive the King
By a supposed death, to save the Life
Of my sweet Boy: all that I can be sorry for,
Is this: Alinda is Frantic.
[Lod. reads]
Pedr. Can that grieve you?

Eul. He brings her with him: and I hope the change
Of Air, with wholesome Prayers and Physics Art,
In which I am not ignorant, may restore her.

Lod. Madam, the Sun shines fairly.

Scoen. II.
Enter Lollio and Poggio. Lol. News, news upon news!

Eul. The Queen is killed: is not that it?

Lol. No nor the King neither, God bless him: they are both alive, with all
their Pomp and Train coming to see our School-Mistress.


Eul. Auspicious Providence!


Lol. They take us in their way, for they are passing to Nicosia, where the
King means to keep his word with the Queen, in giving her three what do you calls?


Lod. Three Boons, as the custom is.


Lol. Boons? I Boons: I warrant she will ask no Baubles.


Pog. O Mistress, you were careful for her, that comes
I warrant but to jeere you.

Eul. Patience would die, if 'twere not exercised.
But now it rests, that we prepare to entertain our Guests.
We must to welcome them make Holy day,
And give our Scholars leave to Feast and Play.
The Swains you say are perfect in the Dance;
So are my Maids: we will leave it for the King.
Exeunt.
Scoen. III.
Enter King, Alinda, Horatio, Lodovico, Attendants. King. I cannot but applaud
your mind, Alinda,
But am not much affected with the Subject
On which you purpose now to cast your Favor.

Lod. More scorn upon my life, and rude vexation.
[aside]
Alin. If my fair meaning Sir shall prove mistaken,
It Is but a loving purpose lost.
(O that wretch Flavello!)
[aside]
Lod. If she have further purpose then to raise
More sorrow by the Kings displeasure to her.
[aside]
Hor. Let her alone, her Raign's but short we know.
[aside] Soft Music.
Hor. Is this the sound of want and misery?

Alin. Of wantonness I fear, and Luxury.
(The villain had no purpose but to flatter.)
[aside] O Sir, why came we hither?

Lod. Mark the Camelion.
[aside]
King. It Is most sweet Music.

Scoen. IV.
Enter Eulalia with three or four Girls, and work in their hands. Eul. Such as
the rudeness of the Country yields Sir,
Hayl to the King and Queen, and may the thanks
Which on my knees I offer at those Feet
That beautify and bless this humble Earth
Add many years unto your happy lives.

Alin. We have even seen enough: 'twas all I feared,
To find her knee-deep in Hypocrisy.

Eul. Seem not to turn away, most gracious Madam,
Before I show for which I hoped you came,
The manner how I get a competence to live.
[Shews her works, and makes abrave description of Pieces: As Sale-work,
Day-work, Night-work, wrought Night-caps, Coyfs, Stomachers.]
Alin. Your work you say, though it be of the newest Frame,
I fear your Play is still at the old Game.
Both ways bring money: is it not so forsooth?

King. Enough, Alinda.

Lod. Too much, to tread upon Affliction.
[aside]
King. What say you Lodovico?

Lod. I say Sir, the distresses of that Lady merit a
Kings Pity, and not such scorn
As I see cast upon her: but the best are women.

King. No more.

Eul. May it please your Highness sit, and note the Play
By which we gain when we lay work away.
The Song I taught you last.
Song.
Alin. These wenches will be a good help to you at wassel-tide.

Eul. We have variety for all the Seasons,
Of such poor entertainments, mighty Queen,
To show our much contentment in their welcome.

Lod. Goodness speaks in her.

Alin. There Is for your Song () No, stay, I may transgress
The Law.

(Lod. O Devil!

Hor. Let her jeer on.)
[aside]
King. Not if you give it for her pains, Alinda.

Alin. Nay since you warrant it, let us pay and go.
Though I have heard such pains disputed Begging.

Lod. As all Arts are, by the Rewards they find.

Eul. Nay I beseech your Majesty's.

Alin. What Is the Feat now?
[Musick, Dance.]
Alin. Sir, are you pleased to prosecute your journey?
Or do these Beauties and delights enchant you?

King. Ha? no, come, let us away.

Eul. Oh let me yet entreat your Highness stay.

Alin. Not a stroke more I thank you: we have heard
And seen enough: so much, as I must tell you
I cannot but commend your Parents Wisdom,
Who having Calculated your Nativitie,
By which they had the foresight of your fall,
Prevented thus the Planets by their care,
By teaching you to live by Hand and Foot.

Lod. Did ever Daughter of a King thus suffer?
Or has she Pride to smile on Injuries?

Alind. Sir, you forget Nicosia.
[Eulalia whispers her.]
Alin. Plots against me?

King. How Is that?

Alin. She dreams of Treason intended against me.

Hor. No Divination against her own good, I hope.
[aside]
Eul. Mighty Sir, hear me: not to implore your Bounty;
No not your thanks, nor Popular Applause;
But for I am your Subject and your servant,
Bound by your Allegiance as well to prevent
All Ills might pass against you, as to do none.
I could not think it but strict duty in me
To hasten this discovery.

Lod. Treason, and a Letter?
We have never a false Brother amongst us, have we?

Hor. If ever you held your peace, peace now.

King. It bears a face of Horror.

Alin. Cunning and Gypsy Tricks: will you to Nicosia?

Kin. What we meant there, we may do here as well.
The Treason's there intended: look ye my Lords!
How careless is this woman of her safety.

Alin. You Sir are careless: for if there be danger,
Where can I fear it but in this place only?
The world holds not an Enemy of mine,
But this enchantress you maintain against me.

King. Your motion and your own love drew us hither.

Alin. I would fain love her, and certainly I should,
But that she still begets fresh cause of Hatred.
She has some Devilish Plot in hand this Instant:
This show is but the straw that hides the Pit.

Lod. No enemy but she? to let her know she lies,
Even unto Profanation against that Lady,
I Will speak.

Hor. I hope you will not.

Lod. The King shall see his error.

Hor. Will you?

Lod. She her cruelty.

Hor. Will you, will you?

Lod. The world Eulalia's Piety.

Hor. Will you? will you?

King. What says Lodovico?

Lod. Most mighty Sir, we here confess and say.

Hor. We? you hear not me say any thing; do you?

King. What will you say?

Lod. That Letter was not ours.

H^^ That Is well.

King. We easily believe it.

Lod. Nor any day or place as yet set down
Among our selves, for fact against the Queen.
I mean Alinda.

Hor. Nor fact intended was there, of death or danger?

Lod. 'Twas wished at least by us.

Hor. Lord, Lord,
Lord mumb.

King. Our Guard.
[Enter Guard]
Lod. King she is the General grudge of all thy Kingdom.

Hor. You do not hear me say so.

King. Their grudge incites my love: take them away.
Come my wronged Alinda: This place shall serve,
And this Assembly, to make a Kings word good.
Make your Demands: three things I promise you.
Ask what you will, even to my dearest blood.

Alin. Your Highness will excuse me, if I urge you
To bind it with an Oath?

King. Give me a Book.
What I have promised to my lawful Queen,
I will perform; ask freely.

Eul. Great Queen, vouchsafe to take an Admonition,
My last and truest Testimony of Love.
The rest were shadows to it.

Alin. Well, pray let us hear it.

Eul. Let your Demands be for the common good.
Not for your own respects: selflove may hurt you:
Beware Ambition, Envy, and Revenge.

King. The Oracle could not pronounce more wisely.

Alin. Is this your love? it is fear of my just Vengeance.
Therefore hear my demands, my King and Husband.
First I demand the lives of these conspirators
Lodovico and Horatio.

Omn. Bloody.

Alin. Next that your Son, much of the Mothers Nature,
By Act of Parliament be disinherited.

Omn. O fearful.

Alin. Last, that this woman have her eyes put out,
And be for ever banished your Dominions.

Omn. Cruelty and Ingratitude past all Example

King. Was this your Charity? you have now declared it fully:
And I of both have made sufficient Trial.
Come here Eulalia, take now thy wonted Seat and keep it ever.
Thy poverty and patience have restored thee
By the just Providentce: while her Excess and Pride
Casts her before thee, to receive that Doom
She had devised against thy immortal Goodness.
Into perpetual Exile; hence, away with her.

Alind. Remember your Oath, my Lord.

King. My Oath was to perform what I had promised unto my lawful Queen: that is
my Eulalia.
And let good Lodowick and Horatio be restored.
Exeunt King and Attendants Alinda entransed carried out.
Scoen. V.
Enter Curate. Cur. Oh! proh! proh Nef as!
I Will have no hand in blood of any man.

Eul. More exclaimations? what distracts you now?

Cur. Coram Senatures acta est: sub Judice lis est.
Ocurvae in Terris animae: the Rusticks
Have taken again the Law into their hands.
And will you tender clemency non justante
A Courtiet hang, his sweet Face nec invante.

Eul. What is his Name?

Cur. His Name is hight Alphonso
That Treason brought in Pectore and Skonso

Eul. Who are the heads of the Judicious Faction?

Cur. Andrea, Lollio, Poggio, the Drudges
Have got the Peoples voice to their Judges.

Lod. Dare they do this?

Cur. Yes Judges they will be,
And kill, they say, the Snake of Treachery.

Eul. I hope we may come yet to stay their Sentence.

Eul. Pray bring us to the place: where if we can,
Let us avert their Judgment from this man.
Exeunt.
Scoen. VI.
Enter Andrea, Poggio, Lollio, a Typstaff before them. Andr. And can these
turmoiles never have an end?
Unless we load our heads and shoulders thus
Our bodies eke with Justice Capa Pe.
And Pepper all our brains with Policy.

Pog. 'Twas time to have a care: I, and a piteous care.

Lol. A pious care you mean.

Pog. Well pious then:
You Will show your own wit, whose clothes soever you wear
(So do the wits of the time) but as I said,
It Is time we have a care, for though our Queen,
Our School Mistress I would say, be mercifully, idleful
It is fit that we be prejudicious in the State.

Lol. Ju-dicions Brother.

Pog. Jew in your face.
Trip me again?

Andr. Agree upon it, Brother Sages of the Bench.
My Brother Poggio here said very well
And learnedly and as I would have said my self?
(If you will take his meaning) to wit that as
Our Shool Mistress doats upon
Clemency, it is fit that we run mad upon cruelty
Someeting her in the midst, we shall jump into the Sadle of Justice.

Pog. I do say so, without all peradventure
For if the Candle of her mercy be not put out,
We shall shortly, see more honest men then Knaves among us.

Lol. More Knaves you mean Brother.

Pog. I mean no more Knaves then your self, Brother.

Andr. Agree again, Sage brothers of the Bench: and let no private
Itch grow to a put like Scab.

Lol. Then the point:
Do not I understand the purpose of our meeting
Here in our petty Parliament, if I may so call it?
Is it nor for a Reformation, to pull down
The Queens mercy, and set up our Justice?
For the prevention of a superabundance of Treason
Daily practiced against her?

Andr. Most true. And is it fit therefore that you brabble among your selves,
and leave all worse then you found it?


Lol. No, we will make such a Reformation, that Treason shall not dare to peep
over the Hedge of her Dominion, but we will take it by the nose and punish it
indignely: most indignely will we punish it?


Pog. All this I grant: but before we sit and bustle on the Bench, because it
is, and that without all peradventure, the strst time that ever we played so
wise a part, is it not fit to take advice among our selves, how to deform our
selves in our office.


Lol. De did you say? in in you should say.


Pog. In with your Horns: how now?


Andr. Nay Brothers o'th Bench.


Pog. Does he think to control me? because he has been a Sexton, and a little
more book learned then a Lay man with an Amen forsooth?


Andr. Nay Brothers: this will control the business.


Pog. Or because he has been in many a man's grave before him, does he think no
man so deep in grave matters as himself?


Lol. Well, I forbear.


Pog. Shall he bid me In, In? as if I were not his inserior?


Lol. I forbear still.


Pog. I will show my self his inferior I, and a greater man then he; and to
prove my self a great man, let him hang one, I will save two.


Lol. Still orbear.


Andr. Pray Brothers yet agree: and remember we use no mercy


Pog. Let him that uses any mercy lack mercy, for my part.


Lol. Then let us sit, and fall to the Business.


Pog. Sit and fall: was that so wisely spoken of a book-learned man now?


Lol. Still I forbear Passion becomes not Judges,
Now bring in the offender, the new and last offender.

And. Pray think on your speeches.

[Exit Typstaff.]
Lol. I have made speeches that I hope shall make Traitors.


And. How?


Lol. Ashamed to wear their own heads on their shoulders.


Andr. A Traitors head is not his own head: it is forfeired by Law to the King;
it is the Kings head.


Pog. I say a Traitors head is his own Head: and a good Subjects head is the
Kings Head.


Lol. I say that is Treason: and the head thou wearest is not thine own then, if
thou be a good Subject.


Pog. Will thou tell me that?


Andr. Passion becomes not Judges, Brothers o'th the Bench.

The offender comes,
Now they are hot, he shall be sure to smoke for it.

Scoen. VII.
Enter Alphonso and Guard. Alph. Whither do you hale me? you Pease-porridge
Peasants:
Is this a place for me to come to Trial in?
If I had broke the Law, as I have not
I am a Peer, and do appeal unto
The Kings high Seat of Justice, publicly.

Lol. And will not our low stool of Justice, privily

Serve for a Traitor? ha.

Alph. Your selves are Traitors,

In succouring against the Law, a dissolute woman
Whom I command you, in the Kings high name,
To yield into my hands.

Lol. Pog. Andr. You shall be hanged first.


Alph. By whose Authority?


Lol. By the said woman's Sir.

She is our Queen and her Authority is in our hands.

Alph. That speaks you Traitors: and the King has Law against you and her.


Lol. When you are hanged he has: to the next able

Tree with him, and hang him presently.

Alph. Villains: you dare not so say.


Omu. We do all say Hang him with one accord:

Gua. If on cord will not do it another shall:
So come away Sir.

Lol. Stay: hear a speech first.

Alph. You dare not use me thus: dare you take Justice one ye?

Lol. Yes Sir, we can spy
Great faults in Noble Coats, with half an eye.
What though we nod? does Treason therefore think
Justice is adle brained? or though she wink
In us (as thus) that she is a sleep? or say
She take a nap, d' ye think she will sleep for ay?
No, she but dreams a while, to circumvent,
Your vains hopes, with sharper punishment.
For if she be but jogged, no Mastife takes
Swifter or surer vengeance when she wakes.

Pog. I, hang him, hang him.

Andr. Is he not hanged yet?

Pog. Without all peradventure the Hangman means to hang for him.

Guard. Come Sir along, never hang backward, for up you must.

Lol. Stay him, my speeches will be lost else.

Pog. Your long speeches will loose our purpose again, without all peradventure.


Alph. Must I be mocked out of my life? and have
My death by hanging made a sport to Peasants,
In this blind hole oth' Kingdom?

Andr. Why thou choplogicall Fellow, do thou not think, there are as good men
hanged, and as good sport made of it too, in the bli^^ holes of the Kingdom, as
in the very eye or open mouth of it? ha!


Pog. Away with him without peradventure

Alph. I am a Courtier, and servant to the King.

Lot. Come all the Court in all your costly Braveries.
And Treason in your Breech, we'll hang you for your Knaveries,
On tree in Hempen twine nay if you come
In open Arms, up shall you all and some.
For though for Tournament your Fames do fly
Run all at Tilt on us, we will draw you dry.

Andr. Tell us you are a Courtier? we find here
F^u^^s to correct, which you perceive not there.
So, now away with him, I have spoke my best.

Pog. And without all peradventure well said Judge Andrea:
How long must we say away with him? ha!

Alph. You hobnayl'd Rascals: can you think that you
Are fit to spy or corrects faults at Court?

Lol. Stay, a short speech for that, and turn him off.
Your shoes at Court are all too fine and thin:
To tread out snuffes and sparks of kindling Sin,
Which let alone the Rushes may take fire.
Then flame, then burn up higher still, and higher:
You warm you at such fire, it is we walk through't
The hobnayl'd Common wealth must tread it out.

Andr. So, now away with him. Hang him first, d' ye hear
He has the bast clothes, that will encourage
The Hangman the better to turn the rest after him.
Enter Eulalia, Lodovico.
Enl. Whither away with him?

Pog. So, now you see what is become of your fine s^^eches.

Eul. Will ye, against all my Counsels and requests
Persist to pull destruction by taking others lives upon your own?
And seem to carry it as in care for me?

Pog. No, it is in care of our selves, because we know
Not to breed our Children honestly without you.

Eul. Have I not often counseled and entreated
You would forbear?

Lol. Your councels and entreats
We are bound to disobey by Proclamation:
For we must grant you nothing.

Andr. Well found out.

Pog. And therefore if you say, Hang not this man We are bound to hang him; we
will show our selves the Kings Subjects not yours.


Lod. If you can answer't to the King, it is well;
His Majesty is here at hand.

Eul. Go leave him unto me.

Andr. The King at hand? it is time for us to look about us.

Lol. Must not we be hanged now?

Pog. It will be so, without all peradventure.

Eul. Release your Prisoner, set him free, and go send the rest of the
confederats.
Exeunt Guard Alphonso kneeles.
Alph. I was not bound till now
I have no power to move or stir a limb:
O sacred Queen, use mercy, in ad^udging me,
To present death, to quit me of the torment.
That rages all upon me, all within me.
The sight of you has shot more pains into me
Then I have drops of blood: O let me die.

Eul. I cannot give thee death: nor will my prayers
Be prevalent for thy cure poor sinful man!
Till rhou layst open the cause of thy disease;
(Thy heinous sin) by fair and free confession.

Alph. I hope no cure, and therefore ask no life.
But the Kings Justice to afford me death,
That is no less deserved then desired;
For I confess, This my Device was but
To make my way to you, to have murdered you.
Enter two Lieutenants, Doctor and Midwife. Wrought thereunto by Alinda's
Instigation.
More I confess; The Evidence against you,
Whereby you were despos'd, was false.
And all these witnesses which now do bring
Addition to my to my torment, did I hire
Both for their perjury past, and for their late
Attempt upon your life, with the Queens money.

Eul. Do you confess it?

Omn. Heaven Pardon our misdeed: it is most true.

Eul. Heaven grant you all your cures.

Omn. All blessings on the Queen.

Eul. All was confessed before by Fabio and Strozzo.
And you do well to seem so penitent:
I do forgive you: and will plead your pardon unto the King.

Alph. Your sacred mercy Madam, shall save a life then, to be spent in Praises
and Prayers for your Grace.


Eul. Go, and pray for grace to mend your lives.
[Exeunt offenders.] So, let us now to the King.

Lod. Now look you about you: cast your Coats, and instantly
Have to the Curat, he is preparing sports,
In speech and Dance, to entertain the King:
Go and assist him: that must be the way
To gain your Pardons.

Andr. Come then, let us away,
No longer Brothers of the Bench we will be,
But of the Revels for his Majesty.

Scoen. VIII.
[Recorders.] Enter King, Horatio, Sforza, Petruccio. King. These troubles
over: let us, now
Surveigh this part of my Possession.
I never saw before. I could contemplate
This late neglected piece of my Estate,
To be the happiest: sure it is no less,
To those that think on earth there is happiness,
The Air disperseth pleasure and the Earth
Of fresh delight to every step gives birth.
Here plenty grows, and above it content,
Ore spreads the Face of all the Continent.
Eulalia, thou art happy, and did rise,
Not fall from Court into this Paradise.
Thy can it move my admiration much,
Thy virtue wrought the change, and made it such.

Sfor. My Lord, the King is sad, what shall we do?

Hor. I am as sad as he, and should be dead,
If he were dead: and therefore no fit member
To make Him merry, I: try your vein with him,
Tell him your Daughters dying; that may cheer him.

Sfor. Are you so tart Court Blain-worm?

King. Yet can I smile in midst of grief to think
How the Court malice has been waved and punished,
By Rustical simplicity.

Petr. The Sun
Appears again in the Kings smiles: observe.

Hor. I thank your Majesty, that sweet smile revived me,

King. Who smiled?

Hor. not I, I Am sure did you: or you?
There could be no such thing: who dares be merry, when the King's sad?

Shalmes
Petr. Yes, here are some now coming, I hear 'm, that are merry in hope to make
the King so.


Scoen. IX.
Enter Curat richly robbed, and Crowned with Bays, playing on a Fiddle, many
School Boys with Skaerfes and Nosegays, etc. then follow Gonzago, dressed and
Crowned as Queen of the Girls, following her: at last Eulalia supported by
Lodovico and Andrea: Alphanso, Strozzo, Fabio, D. Midwife. The former being all
passed over the Stage: they kneel to the King. King. O my Enlalia!

Eul. Still the most humble Handmaid
To your high Majesty.

King. Thy words are sweet:
Yet to my guilty sense they are not less
Then thunder bolts; framed of the wrongs I shot
Against the Heavenly Region of thy mind.
And it is but Justice that the repercussion
Do strike me dead.

Eul. No Passion mighty Sir,

Hor. O my sweet Queen! but I am thunder struck

Andr. Old Lad, art there? still sick oth' Kings disease.
[aside]
Eul. If I may presume of any favor, vouchsafe a glance on these.

Alphonso Stro. Fab. Doctor and Mid. Beseech your Highness.
Enter Curat Gonzago in his hand veiled three or four Lasses.
Cur. Thus have you seen great King in best array,
Nostri Discipuli have made Holy Day,
Whilst I their Paedagogue or petty King
Present in hand this little Royal Thing,
Yclep'd their Queen or Mistress: certe fallor
For that is the Royal School Misttess as we call her.
And this her under Usner: vey'ld is she,
Dreading the Power of shinning Majesty.
Might dazzle her Dancing: for nunc est saltandum,
And here are Lads and Lasses that at Random
Have left their works, as we the School and Templum,
To follow us; it is Regis ad Exemplum.
The youth's are muffled for their better graces,
Though you may like their feet, youl'd blame their Faces
But I Will not trouble you with long Oration,
Because I had but short precogitation.
[Dance]
Hor. His Highness thanks you: and has here disposed
An hundred Duccats in this Purse enclosed;
Drink it amongst ye to the Kings well faring,
And see there be no falling out in the sharing
So make your Exit.

Cur. Non simus ingrati
Rex and Regina semper sint Beati.
Exeunt Curat and Lasses.
Eul. Stay you a while.
Manent Fabio Strozzo Alphonso Doctor and Midwife; they all kneel. You know my
Story, Sir, and who have been
My strong abusers, and by me converced,
Therefore let me Petition: Royal King
You have by these discovered the abuse
That led you into error: and that light,
Which makes discovery of their black misdeeds,
Will show you to a Throne of greater merey
Then you can give.

King. I must confess I need it,
Be It as thou will Eulalia.

Eul. Go then, and thank the King.

All. Long live the King and Queen.
[Exeunt offenders.]
Lod. Here Is goodness now.

Hor. I would the Devil had, 'm that thought ill of her.


Andr. And good King Pardon me, and my pure brother Judges, and Sages of the
Dorpe here, that would have hanged those Manufactors.


King. It Is quickly granted.

Andr. And I Will as quickly make them run mad with Joy.

Eul. My next suit is, (for now I Am set a begging,
You Will Pardon your Alinda.

King. She is not mine;
Should she recover, as Heavens will be done.

Eul. Recover? fear not, Sir, this Traunse have drowned
Her Frenzy, and she will live a sober life.

King. I shall forgive her,
But she must no more, in her recovery:
Be consort or acquaintance unto me:
But where is Posterity now? O my Boy!

Eul. Sir you have had but homely entertainment
Yet in my humble dwelling: now I Will show you
(Since you appear so tender and so good
A Father) the sweet comfort of a Son;
Pray fetch the Prince.

King. You cannot raise from death.
Exit Lodovico.
Eul. Can you forgive Pttrucio that deceived you
In his faign'd death, to save a real life:

King. Forgive? he won me in preserving Sforza,
Let me but see my Son, I Will honor him.
Enter Lodovico with Gonzrgo.
Hor. See the most Princely virtue that survives.

King. lives my Gonzago?

Gonz. If you my Royal Father be not displeased
With me, or my good mother, I shall live.

Hor. And long live my sweet Prince.

King. Let not my joy confound me! where is Petruccid?

Lod. Sforza and he are bringing the entrauns'd Alinda
(Your fair Queen to your presence.)

King. She is no Queen of mine.

Hor. No, hang her, hang her. This, this is the Queen.
A very Queen of hearts: a better Title
Crowns not the best of women in our days.

King. Good Lodovico, may the merited Fame of thy fidelity,
While there are Kings on Earth, Show them to gratify
All trusty servants: love him Gonzago.

Hor. Love him? my Loyalty preserved,
I shall not desire the Princes love my self
If he not giv't to faithful Lodovico,
My true yoke fellow in State and Commonwealth.
[Recorders.] Enter Sforza and Petruccio, bringing Alinda in a Chair, veyl'd.
King. But here is the man Gonzago, whom thou owe,
A love of equal value to thy life.

Petr. I cannot Sir, in duty nevertheless
But fall before your mercy, which I pray for,
That durst assume the hardness to control:
Your Majesty Command.

Hor. There is a Loyalty after my own heart now.
Here a new Song, Ealalia unvailes Alinda.

Eul. Blessed Heaven! she lives and wakes I hope in health.

Sfor. If she awake to virtue, she is welcome,
Into the the world again: but if she rise
With an Ambitious Throught of what she was
Or meet the light with a presumptuous look:
That renders her in thought but worthy of it:
By this blessed presence I will yet take leave.
To sink her under earth immediately.

Eul. Patience good Sforza, see what she will do.

Alin. Where have I been? or how am I brought hither?
Or where I am I know not: but that shall not.
[Musick ceased.] Be unto me a wonder: for I know
Were it reveil'd, it could not be so strange:
A stotie as my self was to the world.
How have I wandered in the way of Error!
Till I was worn into an Airie vapor.
Then wrapped into a cloud: and thence distilled,
Into the earth to find a new creation.
It Is found: and I am found in better state,
Then I was in, before I lost my Duty.
For in this second Birth: I find a knowledge
How to preserve it: Therefore if an Heart
Dissolved in its Tears may move your Pity
My noble Father, (if I may say Father,)
Whose blessing and forgiveness I entreat,
Let not your frown destroy my future hopes.

Sfor. What a rich sound were this now, were it real!

Eul. As you may think I honor virtue Sforza,
I do believe it is really unfaigned.

Sfor. It is Heavens goodness to your Grace then Madam.
The more to vindicate your injured virtue.
And manifest your merits to the world,
Thou art mine own again Alinda.

Eal. Note her further.

Alin. My suit is next to you King, Queen, and Prince,
Whose love, whose Piety, whose Innocence,
I have too much abused that to appeal,
My trespasses at large by due confession.
I should appear but more impertinent to each eye and ear.
My suit is therefore (though you not forget
I ever was) you will be pleased to think,
There is not an Alinda in the world.
So give me leave to leave it: and in this,
I beg my Fathers Aid, to be removed
Back to my country Naples; and in that,
Into the Magdalene Nunnerie at Lucera,
To spend this life in Tears for my amiss,
And holy Prayers for eternal Bliss.
[veiles ber self.]
Sfor. So thou art mine for ever.

King. She has anticipated my great purpose,
For on the reconcilement of this difference,
I vowed my after life unto the Monaste^ie
Of holy Augustinians at Solanto.

Omn. O mighty Sir!

King. It Is not to be gainsaid.
So have we to Nicosia, where (my Son)
In lieu of former wrongs, I Will yield thee up my Crown and Kingdom.
Your virtuous mother (whom may you for ever
Honor for her piety) with these true
Statesmen, will enable you to govern well.

Hor. Who makes a doubt of that?

King. And let your study, Sir, be ever watchful
To cherish virtue, as to punish vice.
And see that you considerative be
Of Sforza, in the wrongs he felt by me.
His was the greatest loss.

Sfor. Sir, I have won:
My wrongs are drowned in her conversion.

King. Good Sforza, see her placed as she desires,
In that Religious order. I have now
Plighted my Troth to Heaven, and so has she.

Omn. O may (Sir) such Wedlock never broken be.

King. Now with such melting silence as sweet Souls
From Bodies part to Immortality,
May we for better life divided be.
Exeunt Omnes.
Dedit Deus his quoque finem. RIC. BROM.

The Epilogue.
Lod. THrough much distress, and many perilous ways
Our Queen at last with more then conquering Bays
Is Crowned with hearts: but now she falls again,
And we, except her glory you maintain.
Our good depends on you then, thus it stands;
She chears our Hearts, if she but gain your Hands.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Hen. Brom at the Gun in Ivy-Lane.
THe Souls Conflict, Being Eight Sermons, six whereof were Preached at Oxford.
The Queens Exchange, A Comedy, by Richard Brom. Two Essays of Love and
Marriage. The Grand Impostor Examined, or the life and Trial of James Nayler.
The Souls Turnkey, Being a Conference betwixt Mr. Hanum and Mr. Tuke Moderator
of Gr. Coll. in London. Poems, Epistles and Epigrams, on several persons and
occasions, by no body must know whom, are to be had every body knows where,
and for any body knows what. Dr. Browns Sepulchral Urns, and gardens of
Cyprus.
Books now in the Press: which will shortly be extant.
The affinity of sacred Lyturgies, By Hamon L' Estrange, Esquire Five New Comedies
which were never before published, By Richard Brom. A Learned and desired
Commentary on the whole Epistle to the Philippians. By Nath. Tucker late
Preacher of the Gospel at Portsmouth. Adam out of Eden, or an Abstract of
remarkable observations, touching the improving of Husbandry: by John Speed,
etc.
Errata.
Page 9. l. 13. f. is read in p. 11* l. 5. f. Nignion. r. Mignion. p. 28. l. 6.
f. Hor. r. Lod. p. 38. l. 13. and 14. Ent. Sforza. p. 61. l. 20. for and r. in.
p. 68. l. antepenult. f. mine r. my. p. 69. l. 5. f. shall be King. r. shall.
King. p. 75. l. 19. f. inspired r. has inspired. p. 76. f. but r. bate. l. 32.
p. 80. l. 26. f. said, r. have said. p. 83. l. 4. r. Lol. p. 84. l. 18. dele
Countr. p. 94. l. r. Exeunt. p. 95. l. 23. f. speaks r. speak. and l. 29. f.
in. r. is in. p. 97. f. they. r. thy. p. 97. f. speaks. r. speak. p. 115. l.
13. f. to their r. to be their and l. 18. dele Eul. p. 116. l. 24. p. 119. l.
3. f. on. r. one, and l. 6. f. one, r. on p. 122. l. 5. dele to my.


