Two Remarkable LETTERS Concerning the KINGS Correspondence with the Irish
REBELS. The first by Digby in the KINGS Name to the Irish Commissioners. The
second from the Lord Muskery one of those Commissioners in Answer to Digby.
Also a full state of the Irish Negotiation at Oxford now treated, set forth in
the Rebels Propositions, and the Kings particular Concessions.

Published according to Order.

LONDON: Printed by F. Neile, dwelling in Aldersgate Street. 1645.

My Lords and Gentlemen:
HIs Majesty having long expected a conclusion of a happy peace within your
Kingdom, and his Affairs having highly suffered by the failing of his
Expectations from thence, cannot choose but wonder what the cause is of it:
calling to mind those fair professions and promises which you made unto him,
when you were employed here as Agents. And knowing well what power and
Instructions he has long since given my Lord Lieutenant to comply with you for
your satisfaction (as far forth, as with Reason or Honor his Majesty could in
civil things, or with Prudence, or Conscience in matters of Religion) and in
the latter, as to the utmost of what, for any wordly consideration, he will
ever be induced to) so did he conceive nothing less, then (what you declared
unto him) you were persuaded the Catholics would be satisfied withal: Nay
ought not in their own Interest to seek more in the present condition, his
Majesty was in, lest further concessions might (by confirming former scandals
cast upon his Majesty in matters of Religion) so (...) to the hearts of his
faithful and loyal adherents, to make them abandon him: which as it would draw
inevitable ruin, so were you rightly apprehensive that when the ((...)) should
by that means have prevailed here, that must soon after bring a certain
destruction upon your selves. What the change of Principles or Resolutions are,
his Majesty knows not: but he finds by the not concluding of a Peace, there,
that your party (it seems) is not, satisfied with the utmost that his Majesty
can grant in Matters of Religion, that is, the taking away of the penal Laws
against Roman Catholics within that Kingdom. And his Majesty here hears that
you insist upon the demands of Churches, for the public exercise of Religion,
which is the occasion that His Majesty has commanded me to write thus frankly
unto you, and to tell you, that he cannot believe it possible, that Rational
and prudent men (had there been no Propositions made to the contrary) can
insist upon that which must needs be so destructive to his Majesty at present,
and to your selves in the consequences of his ruin (that is) inevitably to be
made a prey to the ((...)) of these Kingdoms, or to a foreign Nation.
Wherefore my Lords, and Gentlemen, to disabuse you, I am commanded by his
Majesty to declare unto you, that were the Conditions of his Affairs much more
desperate, then they are, he would never redeem them by any concession of so
much wrong both to his Honor, and Conscience. It is for the defense of his
Religion principally, that he has undergone the extremities of war here. And
he would never Redeem his Crown by ratifying that there. So that to deal
clearly with you, as you may be happy yourselves, and be happy Instruments of
his Majesty's restoring, if you would be contented with Reason, and give him
that speedy assistance, which you well may: so if nothing will content you but
what must wound his Honor and Conscience, you must expect, howsoever his
Condition is, and how detestable soever the ((...)) of his Kingdom are to him,
he will in that point join with them, the Scots, or with any of the Protestant
Religion, rather then do the least Act, that may hazard that Religion, in
which, and for which, he will live, and die. Having said thus much by his
Majesty's command I have no more to add, but that I shall think my self very
happy if this take any such effect, as may tend to the peace of that Kingdom,
and make me

Your Affectionate humble Servant, GEO: DIGBIE.

My Lord,
WE have here received your last of this July instant, whereby we understand
the Kings utmost resolution concerning the free use of our Religion in this
Kingdom. What public Answer will be returned to it, I cannot tell as yet: but
I in the meantime hold it my duty to pre-acquaint your Lordship with the
inclinations of the people, and the very first motions, which are likely to
sway the judgments, and resolutions of our wisest Patriots. This I hope your
Lordship will accept of as an argument of my affection to your self, and make
use of as a point of zeal to his Majesty's service. My Lord, it is great matter
of amazement to the vulgar amongst us, to hear, That His Majesty does
principally undergo these extremities of war for defense of the Protestant
Profession: and that He will rather forfeit His Crown, then ratify the
Catholic Faith in Ireland, or do any the least act that might hazard that
Religion, in which, and for which, He is prepared to live, and die. If His
Majesty had insisted only upon maxims of Honor, or public utility (though
they do not hold either of them really valid in this case) things would have
been far more easily digested: but when Pleas of Conscience are so much
pressed, diverse that pretend to much reason here seem to be exceedingly
scandalized. For as for matter of utilitie, His Majesty (it should seem) has
waighd strictly in the scoles, as well all his Catholics in Ireland and
elsewhere, as that part of Protestants which adheres to Him in England, and
Scotland: and that party of Protestants in value (as He distinguishes)
overpoizes the Catholics: This is a thing that makes them wonder at his
scoles, or suspect his eyes, and senses. For it is supposed here to be out of all
question, that if the King did not declare himself so pendulous, and
equilibrious betwixt Catholics, and Protestants, those supplies which He would
receive from Catholics would far outvie all those of the Protestants, and put
the difference beyond all further dispute. Next, they take to heart matter of
Honor, and how (say they) can He expect more Honor in the eyes of a poor part
of Protestants by being soyled and kept in misery, as He now is; then in the
eyes of all the chief Countries of Europe by prevailing, and over-bearing those
wretched Roundheads which He now so much professes to detest? You will say,
his faith is more strongly engaged in Honor to those Protestants which now
follow Him to protect them, then to the Queen to defend those of her
profession: If this be so, we have not been kindly dealt withal, for either
the King has professed more to the Queen, or the Queen (which has some influence
upon his Honor) has professed more to us then was just for her to do in the Kings
name. But the last, and chiefest consideration is the consideration of
Conscience: and this as was said before perplexes most of all, and begets the
most untoward Interpretations. For (say the people) these pretenses of
conscience are either feined, or unfeined in His Majesty: if they be unfeined,
then how shall our side ever trust him? If Conscience will not permit Him to
grant us Churches now in his greatest conflictations though to redeem his
Crown, what will He grant us when he has no further use of us at all? And if
for State reasons, not known to all the world, He can now so treat millions of
that Religion, which is so precious to Him; How can He want the like pretexts
to oppress us, whom He esteems heretical in so high a degree, when the face
of things shall change?

Again, if these Pleas of Conscience be feined: what side can ever trust him at
all? It Is safer for us to live under a King that is of any Religion which may
limit and bind his conscience with some certain Laws, whatsoever they be, then
to serve a Master that either has no Religion, or no such Religion as can hold
his conscience in any subjection: It Is probable the Protestants themselves will
agree to this, as well as Papists.

My Lord, the Irish have hitherto generally believed the King to be a
Roman Catholic in his heart, and only constrained to dissemble the same, and
so the main current of his actions here have assured them: but now these
professions made so sanctimoniously at such a time of exigence, as this, give
stronger assurance of the contrary: and yet neither so can they be freed from
all doubts and fluctuations. For (say they) can that conscience, which checks
not at the granting of a toleration without Churches by taking away all penal
Laws, and allowing other great immunities, suffer such shipwreck at our demands
of Churches for the free exercise of our Religion? we should deal unfaithfully
with ourselves if we should not acknowledge that the King in his Concessions
already by granting us such a share in the Legislative, Military, and Judicial
power, and by taking away former penalties has condiscended to as much, as can
truly conduce to the propagation of our Religion: that which we request further
is but for the more ease, or pomp, or better accommodation of such as profess
our Religion. This therefore creates the more intricacy in the case; and makes
the matter more irreconcilable, when we behold that the complemental or
ornamental part is abjured so solemnly as repugnant to conscience, and yet the
more substantial, virtuall part is agreed to without reluctance. Thus as our
doubts, so our fears multiply, for we well know, that if the King bona fide
have so high an esteem of his own Religion, He must have as low a one of ours;
and the consequence will be, when the tie of a promise shall hereafter come
into competition with such an esteem, when it shall be disputed whether the
Kings engagement to us do in some degree empeach, or hazard the Protestant
Profession, or no; and if it do, then whether such an engagement be
rescindible, or no: a Protestant Casuist will easily unloose his Conscience.

But the King threatens to join with the Scots, etc. how odious soever, if we
accept not of his Propositions without further debate. Surely (my Lord) if the
King does join with the Scots, etc. this Kingdom hopes to be otherwise
protected; and if it were wholly exposed to the mercy of the Protestants, yet
it sees not how it has merited to be cut off from all reconciliation, more then
the King and his Oxford party has: nay it presumes very far, that it shall give
a better account for its pursuing its natural interests, then such, as have
been more unnatural, can.

In the last place (my Lord) whereas you seem to wonder at the Irish, as changed
from their former aims, and us that were Commissioners, as transported beyond
our former promises, and expressions. The Answer will be very ready. For had we
received less satisfaction in due season, before we had expended so much
blood, time, and treasure in this war, it had been equivalent to a greater
proportion now given us: or had that been of grace given which the Sword has by
its own dint gained, a charge of ingratitude might have been laid upon us, if
we had further extended our demands. But I shall not need to enlarge upon this
Subject, or to represent things otherwise to your Lordship then a Letter will
permit; if I should, I should seem to outrun your Lordships nimbler
apprehension, or to utter my own conceits instead of the speeches of the
people. I am more afraid of prolixity, and therefore heartily wishing your
Lordship may make good use of these Avisoes, for the better mollifying of his
Majesty, I kiss your hands, and assume the honor to list my self,

My Lord, Your humble Servant, Mu^kery.

To a Friend in the Country.
SIR, I have gotten Copies of two Letters, not yet divulged, which I here send
you, as worthy of your perusal. The first from Digby to the Rebels is true,
and authentic; the other I suspect to be counterfeited, but so as it comes
very near to truth. Out of both you will find what distance there is, and what
has caused it, betwixt the King and his good Catholic Subjects of Ireland.
They, as well as we of England, and Scotland, are liable to vicissitudes in the
Kings favor, according to turns of his endless designs; They were monstrous,
prodigious, unparalleled Traitors; They are now loving, loyal, good Subjects:
but if they make not haste to cut throats here, as well as they have done in
Ireland, they may probably ere-long change their style again for that which we
have now, and perhaps we may be restored to that which they have now. There Is
nothing impossible to a Proclamation dated at Oxford, if Montrosse, do not
hinder it. Neither of these Letters discover any thing to me: I always
apprehended what I here find: this only I wonder at: The King still takes no
notice of that which is the Rebels true End, and Intent: nor do the Rebels of
that which the King shoots at. Yet it is impossible that the King should think
the Irish cordially devoted either to the defending of Protestantisme, or
enlarging of Prerogative: and it is improbable now, they should think the King to
be in Arms for introducing of Popery, or establishing their old Tanistry, and
other barbarous customs. Both having contrary intentions, the King thinks to
out wit the Irish, and this the Irish cannot be ignorant of; the Irish think as
far to overreach the King, and the King cannot but suspect the same: yet still
in debates both proceed, and allege other matter, whilst in the mayn, they
seem to make a (...) both in deceiving, and in being voluntarily deceived. This
it is to forsake the beaten road of policy, and to wander in the blind mazes
of subtilty, or rather perfidie: after all that sea of Protestant blood which
it has cost the King to comply with Papists, now he is driven to a new
consultation, whether it be safer for him to comply any longer with them, or to
join again with their opposites. The condition of the Irish Papists also is but
little better: for they to ingratiate with the King, have committed most
execrable massacre upon the Irish Protestants, yet now at last they begin to
find, that they have no more assurance of the King then we had. The Lord help
us, and disabuse all that err, and recall every one into the right path;
further I will not forestall your judgment.

I am yours to command, A. B.
Postscript.
SIR, I have since thought good to send you also copies of the Rebels late
Propositions, and the Kings condiscentions thereunto. Only understand, they
were intercepted about six months since, and I believe the King has since
condiscended to much more, for it has been his fortune always hitherto to be
as humble a suitor to the Rebels for good terms, as we have been to him.



The Propositions of the Roman Catholics of Ireland, humbly presented to his
Sacred MAJESTY, in pursuance of their Remonstrance of grievances, and to be
annexed to the said REMONSTRANCE.
1. THat all Acts made against the professors of the Roman Catholic faith,
whereby any restraint, penalty, or incapacity may be laid upon any Roman
Catholic within the Kingdom of Ireland may be repealed, and the said
Catholics to be allowed the freedom of the Roman Catholic Religion.

2. That your Majesty be pleased to call a free Parliament in the said
Kingdom, to be held and continued as in the said Remonstrance is expressed.
And the Statute of the tenth year of King Henry the seventh, called Poynings
Act, and all Acts explaining or enlarging the same be suspended during that
Parliament, for the speedy settlement of the present affairs, and the repeal
thereof to be all are further considered of.

3. That all Acts and Ordinances made and passed in the now pre^ended
Parliament in that Kingdom, since the seventh day of August, 1641. be clearly
annulled and declared void, and taken off the ^^les.

4. That all Indictments; Attainders, Outlawries in the Kings (...) or
elsewhere, since the seventh day of August 1641. and all (...)rents, Grants,
Leases, Custodims^, Bonds, Recogni^, and all (...) Records, Act or Acts
depending thereupon, or in prejudice of the said Catholics, or any of them, be
taken off the fyles, annulled and declared void; First by your Majesty's
Proclamation, and after by Act to be passed in the said free Parliament.

5. That in as much as under color of such Outlawries, and Attainders, debts
due unto the said Catholics, have been granted, levied, and disposed of, and
of the other side, that debts due upon the said Catholics, to those of the
adverse party, have been levied and disposed to public use, that therefore
all debts be by Act of Parliament mutually released, notwithstanding any Grant
or disposition.

6. That the late Offices taken or found upon feigned or old titles since the
year 1634. to entitle your Majesty to several Counties in Connaught, ^homond,
and in the Counties of Jipperary, Lymmerick, Kilkenny, and Wickloe, be vacated,
and taken off the fyle, and the Professor settled and secured in their ancient
estates by Act of Parliament. And that the like Act of limitation of your
Majesty's title, for the security of the estates of your subjects of that
Kingdom, be passed in the said Parliament; as was enacted in the 21 year of his
late Majesty's (...) Kingdom.

7. That all marks of incapacity imposed upon the Natives of that Kingdom, to
purchase on acquire Lands, Leases, Offices or Hereditaments be taken away by
Act of Parliament, and the same to extend to the securing of Purchase, or
Leases, or Grants already made, and that for the edution of youth, an Act be
passed in the next Parliament, for the erecting of one or more Innes of Court,
Universities Free and common schools.

8. That the offices and places of Command, Honor, Profit, and (...), within
that Kingdom, be conferred upon Roman Catho(...) in equality and indifferency
with your Majesty's other subjects.

9. That the insupportable oppression of your subjects, by reason of the Court
of Wards, and respit of Homage, be taken away; and a certain ^venew, in lieu
thereof settled upon your Majesty, without diminution of your Majesty's profit.

10. That no Lord not estated in that Kingdom, or estated and not resident,
shall have note in the said Parliament, by proxy or otherwise, and none
admitted to the House of Commons but such as shall be estated and resident in
the Kingdom.

11. That an Act be passed in the next Parliament declaratory, That the
Parliament of Ireland is a free Parliament of it self; independent of and not
subordinate to the Parliament of England, and that the subjects, of Ireland are
immediately subject to your Majesty, as in night of your Crown. And that the
Members of the said Parliament of Ireland, and all other the subjects of
Ireland are independent, and no way to be ordered or concluded by the
Parliament of England, and are only to be ordered and governed within that
Kingdom by your Majesty, and such Governors as are or shall be there
appointed; and by the Parliament of that Kingdom, according to the laws of
the land.

12. That the assumed power or jurisdiction in the Councell-Board of
determining all manner of causes be limited to matter of State, and all
Patents, estates, and Grants, illegally and extrajudicially avoided there or
elsewhere, be left in state as before and the parties grieved their heirs or
assigns till legal eviction.

13. That the statutes of the eleventh twelfth, or thirteenth year of Q.
Elizabeth concerning staple commodities be repealed reserving unto his Majesty
lawful and just pound age, and a book of rates to be settled by an indifferent
Committee of both Houses for all commodities.

14. That inasmuch as the long continuance of the chief Governor or Governors
of that Kingdom in that place of so great eminence and power, has been a
principal occasion that much tyranny and oppression has been exercised upon
the subjects of that Kingdom; That your Majesty will be pleased to continue
such Governors hereafter but for three years. And that none once employed
therein, be appointed for the same again, until the expiration of 6 years next
after the end of the said ^ years. And that an Act pass to disma^ble such
Governor or G^ during their government, directly, or indirectly; in use,
trust, or other wise make any manner of purchase, or acquisition of any
Manors, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments within that Kingdom, other then
from your Majesty; your Heirs or Successors.

15. That an Act may be passed in the next Parliament for the raising and ^ing
of Trained-Bands within the several Counties of that Kingdom, as well to
prevent foreign invasions, as to render them the more serviceable and ready for
your Majesty's occasions, as shall require.

16. That an Act of oblivion be passed in the next free Parliament, to extend
to all your Majesty's said Catholic subjects, and their adherent^ for all
manner of offenses capital, criminal, and personal: and the said Act extend
to all Goods and Chattels, customs, maisne profits, prizes, arrears of Rent,
taken, received, or incurred since this trouble.

17 Forasmuch as your Majesty's said Catholic subjects have been taxed with
many inhumane cruelties which they never committed, your Majesty's said
subjects therefore for their vindication, and to manifest to all the world their
desire to have such heinous offenses punished, and the offenders brought to
justice; do desire that in the next Parliament, all notorious murders, breaches
of quarter, and inhumane cruelties committed of either side, may be questioned
in the said Parliament, if your Majesty so think fit: and such shall appear to
be guilty to be excepted out of the said Act of Oblivion, and punished
according to their deserts.

Forasmuch Dread Sovereign, as the ways of our addresses unto your Majesty,
for apt remedies unto our grievances were hitherto debarred us, but now at
length through your benign grace and favor laid open: We do humbly present
these in pursuance of the said Remonstrance; which granted, your said subjects
are ready to contribute, the ten thousand men as in their Remonstrance is
specified toward the suppressing of the unnatural rebellion now in this
Kingdom, and will further expose their lives and fortunes to serve your
Majesty, as occasion shall require.

Additionall Propositions.
1. THat an Act be passed this next parliament, prohibiting that neither the
Lord Deputy, Lord Chancellor, Lord High Treasurer, Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor,
or any of the Barons of the Exchequer, Privy-Councell, or Judges of the four
Courts, be Farmours of your Majesty's customs.

2. That an Act of Parliament may pass in Ireland against all Monopolies, such
as was enacted in England 21. year of King James, with a further clause for
repealing of all Grants of Monopolies in Ireland.

3. That the Court of Castle-Chamber in Ireland having been an oppression to
the subjects, and there being other remedies for the offenses questioned in
that Court by the common Law, and Statutes of th^r Realm, be taken away; or
otherwise limited, as both Houses* shall thin^.

4. That two Acts lately passed in Ireland, one prohibiting the plowing with
horses by the tail, and the other prohibiting the burning of Oats in straw,
may be repealed.

5. That it may please your Majesty to give order, that upon presenting the
names of three persons of quality in each County by your suppliants, to your
chief Governor or Governors, their Patents be passed to such of those, so to be
presented respectively to be Sheriffs in each County, as to be chief Governor
or Governors, shall seem meet to make choice of for that purpose.

6. That one or more Agents from that Kingdom may be admitted still to attend
his Majesty for his Information of the Affairs of that Kingdom. And that as a
testimony of his Majesty's favor, some of the Nobles and others of quality of
that Kingdom, may be employed about your Majesty's person.

7. Forasmuch as diverse of the Scotch Nation, and others in Ireland, do not
obey the present Cessation, and many of them having of late taken the Covenant
proposed by the Members of the Parliament at Westminster, now in Arms against
your Majesty, it is therefore humbly desired, that such as disobey the said
Cessation, or have taken the said Covenant, be by his Majesty's appointment
proclaimed Traitors in Ireland, and prosecuted accordingly by your Majesty's
authority. And that such Counties or Corporations as have not submitted to the
now Cessation of Arms in that Kingdom, according to your Majesty's Commission,
be not admitted to make any return to the Parliament.

8. Forasmuch as since the late Commotion in that Kingdom, some persons of
quality of his Majesty's Roman Catholic subjects dyed, or were killed, and
their estates by means thereof became wast, and useless. That therefore for the
better enabling of that party to serve your Majesty. It is humbly desired,
that the Wardship of their heirs, and the management of their estates, be
granted to such as shall be accountable to the said heirs for the profit of
those lands, whereby their lands may be of some use to the commonwealth, in
their contributions to his Majesty's service.

9. Forasmuch as sundry persons estated in that Kingdom have either actually
raised Arms in this Kingdom against your Majesty, or have otherwise adhered
to the malignant party now in Arms against your Majesty, that therefore it may
please your Majesty to give way to the impeachment, and Attainder of those,
and of such Officers whose names we shall here represent to your Majesty by
way of Bill in Parliament, whereby they may receive condign punishment for
their offenses, and your Majesty take advantage of the forfeiture of their
estates, And in the interim those possessions to remain in the hands wherein
they are at present.

10. Forasmuch as upon application of Agents from that Kingdom to your Majesty
in the fourth year of your Reign, and lately upon humble suit made to your
Majesty by a Committee of both Houses of the Parliament of that Kingdom, Order
was given by your Majesty for redresses of several grievances: It is therefore
humbly desired that for so many of those as are not expressed in the now
Propositions presented to your Majesty (whereof both Houses in the next
ensuing Parliament shall desire the benefit of your Majesty's said former
directions for redresses) that the same be afforded them.

11. That the Office of Admiral in that Kingdom be settled, independent of none
but your Majesty, whereby Maritine Causes may be determined there without
driving Merchants or others to appeal, or seek Justice elsewhere in those
Causes.

Concerning any thing in Religion, His Majesty's Answer is,
1. THat as the Laws against those of the Romish Religion within that His
Kingdom of Ireland, have never been executed with any rigor or severity; So if
such his Subjects shall by their returning to their duty and loyalty, merit
His Majesty's favor, and protection, they shall not for the future have cause
to complain, that less moderation is used toward them, then has been in the
most favorable of Queen E: and King James his times. Provided, that under
pretense of Conscience, they do not stir up Sedition, but live quietly and
peaceably according to their Allegiance.

2. Touching the calling a free Parliament (by which His Majesty supposes the
Proposers intend a new Parliament) His Majesty says that he could wish that
all the particulars might be fully agreed on, and ratified this Parliament; His
Majesty well understanding, That his Protestant Subjects may be in far greater
danger in a new Parliament, then the Proposers and their party can be in this;
His Majesty being willing to give them any security that can be desired
against their apprehensions. Howsoever since some objections and doubts are
raised of the legal continuance of this Parliament since the death of the Lord
Deputy Wansford, and by the late arrival of his Majesty's Commission after
the day of meeting, upon the Prorogation (though those doubts may be easily
solved) his Majesty is content to call a new Parliament, upon Condition that
all particulars be first agreed on, and the Acts to be passed be first
transmitted, according to custom (for his Majesty will by no means consent to
the suspension of Poynings Act) and the Proposers giving his Majesty security,
that there shall be no attempt in that Parliament to pass any other Act then
what is agreed on and first transmitted, or to bring any other prejudice to any
of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects there.

3. His Majesty neither can nor will declare Acts in themselves lawful to be
void, but is well content that neither the Proposers nor their party, shall
suffer any prejudice by any Acts or Ordinances passed since the time in that
Proposition mentioned by reason of this commotion, and for that end, shall give
his full concurrence.

4. The matters of the fourth and fifth, and sixteenth Propositions are to be
disgested into an Act of Oblivion, in which his Majesty will admit any clauses
to enlarge his mercy, but will not by declaring indictments legally taken, and
regularly prosecuted to be void, give any countenance to, or make any excuses
for the present Rebellion, which would be a great prejudice to truth, and the
future security of that Kingdom. And therefore his Majesty is contented to
grant a full and general Pardon to all persons whatsoever, within that his
Kingdom: (Except) For all Trea^ons, Rebellions, or other crimes whatsoever,
growing and arising from, or by reason of the said Rebellion: And will likewise
give his consent to such an Act of Oblivion, as shall be prepared and
transmitted to him by the advice of his Lord Lieutenant, and Council of
Ireland, who are fittest to consider in what state debts are to be left, and
particular Actions and Remedies to be waved. In which his Majesty for the peace
of the Kingdom, will be content to release what concerns himself.

6. When all other things shall be agreed on, and faithfully executed on the
parts of the Proposers, his Majesty (excepting a just acknowledgement of his
bounty, as well knowing that he parts with very much, to which he has a legal
and undoubted title) Is content to release and acquit his right to all such
lands in the Counties mentioned (except in the Counties of Kilkenny and
Wiekloe, upon the terms formerly assented to by his Majesty, in his answer to
the grievances in the 17 year of his reign, and will consent to such an Act of
Limitations as is desired.

7. When all other things shall be concluded, his Majesty will consent to an Act
for the taking away any incapacity, as Natives either to Lands or Offices, if
any such there be And will willingly consent to the erecting an Inn of Court,
University, or Free-schooles; provided that they be governed by such Statutes,
Rules, and Orders, as his Majesty shall approve, and agreeable to the custom
of this Kingdom.

8. Such of his Majesty's subjects of the Romish Religion within that Kingdom,
as shall manifest their duty and affection to his Majesty, shall receive such
marks of his Majesty's favor in Offices and places of trust, as shall manifest
his Majesty's good acceptance and regard of them.

9. His Majesty will take care that his good subjects of that Kingdom shall not
be oppressed by his Court of Wards; And if oppression (...) kind have been upon
good and due information, His Majesty (...) Justice to be done for the time
past, and for the future will prevent (...) by instructions; But for the taking
away of that Court, his Majesty (...) make no answer, till the particulars for
his satisfaction, be set down and presented to him.

10. His Majesty consented as far as is fit for him in this point (...) his
answer to the 25th grievance in the 17th year of his Reign, the (...) he is
still willing shall be enacted, looking forward still to five years, (...)
begin after the peace, concluded.

11. His Majesty conceives the substance of this Proposition (which concerns
the fundamental rights of both Kingdoms) fit to be referred to the free
debate and expostulation of the two Parliaments, when it she please God that
they may freely and safely sit. His Majesty being so equally concerned in the
prviledges of either, that he will take care to the utmost of his power that
they shall both contain themselves within t^ proper limits, His Majesty being
the Head, and equally interressed in (...) Rights of both Parliaments.

12. This is sufficiently provided for in his Majesty's Answer to the tenth
grievance, which he is content shall pass.

13. Since it appears by long experience, that their Laws have not produced
that good effect, for which they were made: His Majesty (...) graciously
pleased by his late Graces, that those Statutes should be ^led, save only for
Wools, and Wool-fells; and will observe the same ^lution. And a book of Rates
shall be settled by indifferent Commiss^

14. His Majesty does not admit that the long continuance of the Governors of
the Kingdom in that place, has been an occ^ much tyranny and oppression, or
that any tyranny and oppression (...) been exercised upon his subjects of that
Kingdom: However his Majesty will take care that such Governors shall not
continue longer in the places, then he shall find for the good of his people
there. And is c^ that they shall be inhibited to make any purchase (other then
by ^ for the provision of their houses) during the time of their govern^ such
manner as is desired.

15. This Proposition is to be explained, and some particular wa^ be proposed
to his Majesty, for the doing hereof. And this his Majest^ on due consideration
of the safety and security of his Protestant su^ will return his Answer.

16. Answered the 4th and 5th. Such persons who shall be excepted out of the
act of oblivion, shall be tried by the known laws of the land.

FINIS.

