Two TREATISES: The One, Handling the DOCTRINE Of CHRIST's MEDIATORSHIP:
Wherein The great Gospel-Mystery of Reconciliation betwixt God and Man is
opened, vindicated, and Applied. The Other, Of MYSTICAL IMPLANTATION: Wherein
The Christian's Union and Communion with, and Conformity to Jesus Christ, both
in his Death and Resurrection, is Opened, and Applied. As they were lately
delivered to the Church of God at Great Yarmouth, By JOHN BRINSLEY, Minister of
the Gospel, and Preacher to that Incorporation.

London, Printed by T. Maxey, for Ralph Smith, at the sign of the Bible in
Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange. 1651.

To the Christian READER.
EVery natural man will readily assent to this Assertion of Solomon, Eccl. 11.7
viz. Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to he
hold the Sun: And every considerate experienced Christian (valuing Gospel
Sunshine at a far higher rate) does with the blessed Apostle, Phil. 3.8.
account all things but loss; for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus
Christ his Lord: neither designing, nor desiring to know any thing in
comparison of him crucified. 1 Cor. 2.2. Mal. 4.2. Pro. 2.10.
Although every beam from this Sun of Righteousness is pleasant to the
sanctified soul, yet nothing in the mystery of Christ, is more affectionately
taking upon the heart which loves and improves him, then the discoveries of his
taanscendent transactions as Mediator betwixt his Father and the Elect, in
reference unto all soul concernments, from their first Conversion, to their
full Glorification.

This Fundamental truth of the Gospel (viz.) the happy execution of Christ's
Mediatorship, in purchasing by his passion, Heb. 7.25.
and applying by his intercession, whatsoever may conduce to the complete bliss
of his people, is very well cleared, and strongly defended from pregnant
Scripture in this ensuing Treatise. The reverend and laborious Author (my
ancient and worthy friend) has also added thereunto another profitable Piece,
viz. A Discourse concerning the Believers Conjunction and Communion with
Christ. Both which will (I hope) be found very useful both for information and
comfort, unto them who shall seriously peruse them. In them the understanding
Reader shall taste the savouriness of the Authors spirit, and see Scripture
Authority backing all the particulars which he holds forth unto public
consideration. England of late years has been unhappily pestered with frothy
and pernicious Pamphlets, which have tended only to feed men's lusts, and to
satisfy the itching humors of vain hearts: Oh, that the Almighty would give
us again to prize and relish such wholesome Treatises, whereby our souls may be
edified in the knowledge and practical improvement of Jesus Christ. In him I am

Thy Friend and servant, SIMEON ASH.
Sept. 22. 1651.
ESITS: OR, The One and Only MEDIATOR Betwixt GOD and MEN, The MAN CHRIST
JESUS. Wherein The Doctrine of Christ's Mediatorship is largely handled; And the
great Gospel-Mystery of Reconciliation betwixt GOD and MAN is Opened,
Vindicated, and Applied. As it was lately presented to the Church of God at
Great Yarmouth, BY JOHN BRINSLEY, Minister of the Gospel, and Preacher to that
Incorporation.

2 COR. 5.18. God has given to us the Ministry of Reconciliation. PSALM. 11.3.
If the foundations be destroyed, what can the Righteous do? London, Printed by
Tho. Maxey for Ralph Smith, at the sign of the Bible in Cornhill, near the
Royal Exchange. 1651.

Memoriae SACRVM.

To the Eternal Honor OF THE One and Only Mediator betwixt God and Men, The
MAN CHRIST JESUS, His blessed SAVIOR and REDEEMER:

J. B. The unworthiest of his Redeemed Ones, in Testimony of his unfeigned
Gratitude for so unestimable a Favor, Humbly Dedicateth these His WEAK, and
(so far as they are his) WORTHLESS MEDITATIONS.

To the Pious and Judicious Reader.
Reader,
Do thou expect an Account of the Preaching and Publishing of this Treatise,
take what the Frontispiece holds forth. The Word of Reconciliation is that
sacred Depositum, which God has committed to his Ministers, not that it should
be smothered in their private bosoms, but that by them it might be transmitted
and published to the world. And such is the main Subject of this Discourse,
which is here Doctrinally opened and Practically applied. As for the Polemicall
and Controversall Part of it, I wish it were not too justly occasioned through
those pernicious errors of Socianisme, which now, among the crowd of many
other, begin to walk abroad, striking at the very Root or Foundation of that
Religion, which has hitherto been called Christian. And If the Foundation be
destroyed, what shall the Righteous do? This it is which has stirred my spirit
to appear in this cause, thus to (...), Jude v. 3.
contend (which I am required to do, and that earnestly,) for that faith which
was once delivered unto the Saints: Wherein my design is, not so much to
recover those who are already taken in this snare; who are by others (how
justly let themselves see to it) looked upon for the most part, as men so
wedded to their own carnal Reason, as that they disdain to submit themselves
to God's Reason; not regarding the Authority of Scripture further then as it
complieth with the genius of their natural Principles. So much their Master
and Leader sticks not to profess, who has in downright terms published it
to the world, that as for, Nec si ubique clarissimis verbis testatum
reperiremus, sic tamen rem se habere nobis compertum esset. Socin. de Jesu
Christo Servatore, part. 3. cap. 2.
God's punishing our fin in, and upon his Son Christ, though he should find it
every where attested in most express words in Scripture, yet would he not take
it for granted that so it is. And again, speaking of Christ's Satisfaction: Ego
quidem, etiamsi non semel, sed saepe id in sacris monimentis scriptum extaret,
non idcirco tamen itaa rem prorsus se babere crederem, ut vos opinamini. Socin.
ibid. cap 6. Acts 8. 22.
For my part (says he) though I should not once, but often meet with textant
in sacred Records, yet would I not for all that believe that it was so indeed.
Now if his followers be of the sane mind, I shall leave them as I find them,
only praying for them, (what Simon Peter wills Simon Magus to do for
himself, that upon their Repentance, this thought of their heart may be
forgiven them. It is for the sake of others that I have spent this little
strength; such whose veins are not as yet infected with this poison. For them
have I prepared this Antidote, that their spirits being confirmed in the
ancient and received Truths of God, they may not by whatever devices of Satan,
or his Instruments, be removed to another Gospel. In the managing of this
Controversy, I must acknowledge (what my Margin confesses) my self to owe
not a little to the learned Grotius. But whether to Grotius Orthodox, or
Grotius Heterodox more, I must say I cannot readily tell. I have made use of
both, comparing the one with the other, his former with his later thoughts, his
Book De Satisfactione, with some of his Comments. So doing, I have found the
one clear and candid, free from subterfuge, or evasion; such as (whatever has
been assayed by way of reply to it) may give full satisfaction to any
unprejudiced spirit: The other so palpably guilty of both, as that they deserve
both Censure and Pity. And this to me, (and I suppose it may be the like to
others,) has been, and is no small confirmation of this Truth of God. Surely,
if any one had been able to answer Grotius, it should have been Grotius
himself, then whom I know none more able to have done it, and (as it seems)
none more willing. But finding him so foiled by himself, so unable by all his
Artifice, to build again what before he had destroyed; I cannot but subscribe
to that Apocryphal Text, 1 Esdras 4.41.
Magna est veritas, and praevalet: Great is Truth, and mighty above all things.
May these my poor labors contribute ought toward the clearing and vindicating
of this sacred Truth, (upon which I do freely adventure my own soul, not
knowing in what other way to look for salvation,) whilst God has the Glory,
and others the Benefit, my self shall have what I aimed at. In the desire
whereof, I rest

Thine in the Service of this blessed Mediator, JOHN BRINSLEY.

An Alphabetical Table of the chief Points handled in this TREATISE.
A
CHrist an Advocate for his people, and how. p. 168 Christ an Agent, or Lidger
Ambassador in heaven, 160 How Christ performs the office of an Agent in
heaven for us on earth 162 Angels, whether they have any benefit by Christ's
Mediation 198 Christ the Head of good Angels 202 To the good Angels Christ is a
Mediator of Confirmation 201 Primitive Angel-worship 268 Christ the Anointed,
how 38 The Greek particle (...) explained 75 The word (...) expounded 77
Comfort against fear of total and final Apostasy 233 Christ's appearing on
earth in the end of the world 88 Christ appears once upon earth, and once in
heaven 90 Christ an Arbitrator betwixt God and Man 48 To receive the
Atonement, what 246 Christ an Attorney for his people, and how 170 The word
(...) explained 125
B
HOw Christ is said to bear our sins 66 The difference betwixt Christ's bearing
our sins, and our sicknesses 67 Sins expiated by Blood 102 Covenant old and
new, both made with Blood 148, 149
C
CHrist called to the office of a Mediator, and that by God his Father 34, 36
How Christ was called to this Office 37 When Christ was called to this Office
42 Christ a Surety by way of caution 139 Conditions of the new Covenant, Faith
and Obedience 141 Christ an undertaker for the performance of these Conditions
ibid. No cruelty in the Sufferings of Christ 129 Cruelty what, and when 130
D
DAvid anointed, a type of Christ 38, 39 The death of Christ more then a
preparatory to his oblation 93 Comfort against Death 239 The Law, Deuter.
24.16. against commutations of Punishment, explained and cleared 114 Christ the
Disposer of his people 193 Christ a Dispenser to his people ib.
E
SAtan a Mediator of Enmity 28 Mediators of Enmity too many 29 Natural enmity
betwixt God and Man 221 Sense of enmity preparatory to reconciliation. 222
Enmity against God to be laid aside 247 Expiation how understood by the
Socinian 98 Christ's expiation properly of the guilt of sin ibid. Expiatory
Sacrifices under the Law a type of Christ's expiation 99 Sacrifices under the
Law, how they are said to expiate 101 Ezekiel. 18.20. explained and vindicated 106
F
FAith and Repentance subordinate unto Christ and his satisfaction 110
Forgiveness of sins, how consistent with Christ's satisfaction 125, 126 The
Parable of the Kings forgiving his servants Mat. 18.23. explained. 127
G
A double Garment wherewith Christ cloatheth his Elect 191 The Elect gathered by
Christ into his Kingdom of Grace and Glory, and how. 181 Christ's giving himself
for us explained and vindicated. 74 Christ truly God, evinced by Scriptures. 10
The Godhead of Christ evinced by Argument. 12 Christ not Mediator only as God
204 God taken Essentially and Personally 209 Christ as God-man differs from
God and man 210 Christ as God differs from his Father, a threefold
difference. 211 The Godhead of Christ concurred with his manhood in all the
acts of his Mediatorship. 213 The Godhead concurring with the manhood in
suffering, 4 ways. 216 Christ a governor generally over the whole world,
specially over mankind. 175 Christ's government over the Reprobate world. 176
Christ's government over the Elect world. 180 Christ's outward government in his
Church. 184 Christ's inward government in the Hearts of Believers. 185 The Grace
of God consistent with Christ's Satisfaction 120 Grace gloriously manifested in
Christ his satisfaction in five particulars 121 etc. The Grace of God exalted
by the Doctrine of Christ's satisfaction, more then by the Socinian Doctrine 123
The Grace of God in vain to four sorts af Persons. 242 The Grace of God in
Christ to be received. 246 Guilt under the Law twofold, viz. Ceremonial
(External) Moral (Eternal.) 101

H
HEarts of men not known by Saints or Angels. 269 Hebr. 9.26. opened, and
glossed upon 88 The Holy Ghost, how said to intercede 261
I
CHrist took our infirmities, how 69 Comfort against daily infirmities 231
Innocent persons may suffer for the nocent, and how 115 Christ an Interpreter
betwixt God and Man 50 Christ an Intercessor upon earth, in heaven 154, 156
Intercession made by Christ for his people, but against his enemies 157, 158
Christ's Intercession a necessary Transaction, putting life into his death 159
Saints upon earth, how Intercessors 259 Neither Saints nor Angels properly
Mediators of Intercession 266 Isai. 53. a clear Prophecy concerning Christ's
Satisfaction, opened 63 Isa. 53.4. compared with Mat. 8.16. and cleared 66
Comfort against the last Judgment 240 Christ's Satisfaction, how consistent with
the Justice of God. 113 Justice twofold Strict Moderated ibid.
Justification an act of grace, notwithstanding Christ's Satisfaction. 124
L
JAcobs Ladder, the mystery of it 46 Christ a Lidger-Ambassadour in heaven, and
great need he should be so 161 Whether one man may lay down his Life for
another. 117 Christ an absolute Lord over his own Life 118 Christ gave his Life
a ransom for many, for a world 119. 126 Gods eternal Love to his Elect, what
26 The Love of God demonstrated in appointing and giving Christ to be a
Mediator. 35 This Love declared in three particulars 225
M
MAgistrates, though enemies to the truth, must be prayed for, and why 3, 4
Christ true Man, but not meet Man 119 Christ Mediator not only as Man 204 The
Man Christ Jesus, why so called 207 Christ a Mediator betwixt God and Men 6 A
twofold Mediation of Christ Satistantiall Operative 7
Mediation of Christ, how managed and carried on, viz. by 5 stops 48 Christ a
complete Mediator, showed in five particulars 249 Mediators of Redemption
Intercession
a Romish distinction. 263 To a Mediator of Intercession two things requisite,
neither of which agrees to Saints or Angels 266 To us but one Mediator 270
Christ Mediator as God-Man 212 Christ the only Mediator 254 Moses and others,
how called Mediators 258 Whether Saints or Angels be Mediators ibid. Mediation
of Christ a spring of consolation. 228 Mediation of Christ to be made use of
253 The Mercy of God, how consistent with Christ's Satisfaction 129 (...), the
word opened 6, 7 Christ a Middle person betwixt God and Man. 8 Millenaries
refuted 90, 161
N
WHy Christ must partake of both Natures. 19 According to what Nature Christ is
Mediator 203 The concurrence of the two Natures in the work of Christ's
Mediatorship explained 220
O
WHether a party offended may be a Mediator. 211 Christ offered up himself, how
87 Christ a Mediator by Office 20 The Office of Mediator, how conferred upon
him 33
P
WHether God could not have pardoned sin freely without any Satisfaction 131
Christians ought to be Peacemakers, only in God's way 31, 32 Perseverance of
Saints undertaken for by Christ 143 The death of Christ a true Price, or
Counterprice 80 Promises of Remission and Salvati-upon the Conditions of
Repentance and new Obedience, how to be understood 109 Promises assured by
Christ: viz, by his Word, Works, Blood, Spirit 145, etc. Properties of God
agreeing to Christ 13, etc. Christ the Propitiation for our sins, the word, and
thing explained 85, etc. Christ a protector to his people 186 Christ a provider
for his people 187 Christ purges our sins, how 97 Christ purges not only
from power, but guilt 98 How Christ is said to put away sin 91
R
CHrist a Ransom for us; word and thing explained 76 God forgiveth sin without
any recompense 128 Reconciliation the great business of Christ 21
Reconciliation what it imports ibid. To be reconciled to one, the phrase
expounded 24 and 82 Reconciliation by Christ mutual 23 Reconciliation on Gods
part 25 and 83 Reconciliation on Man's part 27 Reconciliation a blessed work 28
Christ being a Mediator of reconciliation, a pattern for our imitation 30
Reconciliation betwixt God and man how effected 46 The way and means of
Reconciliation imparted in the Gospel 53 Christ the meritorious cause of
reconciliation 81 The same way of reconciliation under the old Testament and
under the new 111 Comfort to such as desire reconciliation with God 228 A
threefold relation betwixt Christ and the Believer viz. Natural Mystical
Voluntary 115
Whether a man may remit what he pleases of his own tight 133 God cannot part
with his right, though man may. 134 Christ the rewarder of his people 195
S
THe Sacrifice of Christ was offered upon Earth, not in Heaven 92 By this
Sacrifice Christ puts away sin 93 Satisfaction of Christ, the word not
mentioned in Scripture 61 Satisfaction of Christ evinced by Scripture
Testimonies, in the Old Testament and New 63, 72 The Death of Christ, how
satisfactory 81 Whether God could not have found out some other way of
Satisfaction then by the death of his Son 134 Why God put the salvation of man
upon this way of satisfaction 135 In the Satisfaction of Christ, there is a
joint manifestation of God's Justice and Mercy 137 The Scapegoat a type of
Christ 96 Sealing, what signified by it, and how Christ is said to be sealed 41
Christians may be confident, but not secure. 235 Socinian doctrine about the
suffering of Christ, explained and confuted. 79 Socinian Objections against
Christ's Satisfaction answered 105 Christ a Solicitor for his people 172 Christ
the Son of God, how 12 Speculum Divinum a School fancy 268 Christ no stranger
to those for whom he suffered and satisfied 115, 116 Christ suffered for us,
not only for our Good, but in our stead 72 In the sufferings of Christ no
Cruelty 130 Christ a Surety betwixt God and Man 56, 79 A Surety, what 58 Christ
a mutual Surety ibid. Christ a Surety on man's part by way of Satisfaction 59
Christ a Surety on man's part by way of Caution 139 Christ a Surety on Gods part
to man 144
T
CHrist takes our sins upon him, and takes them away 95 Comfort against
Tentations 236 Truth of God in his Threatenings, Promises,
how consistent with Christ's Satisfaction 106, 109
W.
COmfort against wants temporal and spiritual 237 Witness of the Spirit,
what 152 Divine works, viz. Creation and Providence attributed to Christ 15, 16
Divine Worship given to Christ 17
Z.
ZAleucus a just Judge and a merciful Father in the same act. 137
ERRATA.
Page 7. line 3. r. Castellio. p. 11. l. 4. r. Tzidkenou. p. 18. l. 13. r.
(...). p. 23. l. 4. r. grand work. p. 52. marg. r. Gennadius. p. 55. r. as the
Apostle says of himself. p 76. l. 6. r. and. p. 77. l. 7. dele of. p. 92.
marg. r. Ostensionis. p. 105. l. 22. r. oppugning. p. 110 l. 30. r. Repentance
without Faith. p. 111. l. 23. r. new. p. 115. l. 30. r. Joshua. p. 123. l. 26.
r. whence. p. 154. l. 9. r. mystical. p. 192. l. 4. r. garment. p. 201. l. 13.
r. These. p. 105. l. 20. r. here calls. p. 213. l. 23. r. retract. p. 215. l.
22. r. secretioribus. p. 240. l. 2. r. partaker. p. 241. l. 1. r. unbelievers.
p. 256. l. 28. r. (...). p. 262. l. 32. r. other. p. 269. l. 21. r. renounce.

ESITS, OR, The One and Only Mediator betwixt God and Men, the Man CHRIST
JESUS.
1 Timothy 2.5. For there is one God, and one Mediator betwixt God and men, the
Man CHRIST JESUS.


AMongst Ministerial offices and services there are two which are looked upon
as chief and principal, viz. Coherence
to speak from God, and to God. To speak from God to his people, to speak to
God for his people. The one of these is done in Preaching, the other in Prayer.
Touching both these our Apostle Saint Paul indoctrinates his scholar Timothy in
this Epistle. The former he does in the close of the chapter foregoing, ver.
18. where he gives it in charge to him, that he should [War a good warfare.]
And that not only as a private soldier, a private christian, [fighting the
good fight of faith] (as elsewhere he exhorts him: 1 Timothy 6.12.
) but as a public officer, a Minister of the Gospel, maintaining the truth of
God against all false Teachers and Corrupters of it. [Holding faith and a good
conscience:] So it follows: Faith, the Doctrine of faith, that sacred
Depositum, the doctrine of the Gospel which was committed to his trust; This
Timothy must hold, 1 Timothy 6.20.
holding it fast, and holding it forth; therein discharging his conscience in
the sight of God and Man. The later of these he does in the former part of this
chapter, which begins (as you may see) with a serious exhortation and
incitement to all kinds of public prayer [I exhort therefore, that first of
all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of thanks be made:] But
for whom should they be made? why, generally, [for All men] i. e. All sorts and
conditions of men. For so must we understand that universal Particle,
Particula universalis semper ad hominum genera referri debet, non ad personas.
Calv. ad Textum.
both there, and where else we meet with it in this chapter (as Calvin notes
it upon this text) as relating not unto all particular individual persons;
(for there are some for whom Christ would not pray: [ I pray not for the world,
Joh. 17.9.] viz. the Reprobate world, that mundus damnandorum (as Augustine
calls it,) such as in Gods eternal purpose and decree were passed by, and
ordained to just condemnation for sin: And there are some for whom Christians
may not pray, viz. Malicious apostates, such as have sinned that sin unto
death, the sin against the Holy Ghost, 1 John 5.16.
[ I do not say (says Saint John) that a man should pray for it,] pray for
pardon for any that have committed that sin, which in it self, is irremissable,
unpardonable,) but to the several species, the several kinds and conditions
of men, not only Jews but Gentiles; not only Christians but Infidels, not only
friends but enemies. Thus in general, Pray for all men.

More particularly, for Public persons, Magistrates, Rulers. So it follows,
[For Kings and all that are in Authority:] Magistrates, whether supreme, or
subordinate: All that were (...), in eminent place, the Higher Powers, Romans
13.1.
as the Apostle elsewhere calls them: Such must be remembered by Timothy and
others, and that in the first place.

But how so? what, were not the Magistrates and Rulers of those times generally
(if not universally) professed Enemies to the Truth and Church of God,
persecutors of the Saints? True; such they were; And in that regard possibly
some might make it a question whether they ought to be prayed for, or rather
prayed against. To take off that scruple, and to set on the general duty, the
Apostle subjoyns three or four Arguments or Reasons in the verses following.

1. The first whereof peculiarly concerns them. And it is fetched from that
Head which swaieth most with Flesh and Blood, ab utili; from the profit and
advantage that might accrue from this Duty. In so doing, Timothy and others
might reap no small benefit. By this means, through the blessing of God upon
the government of superiors, they might enjoy a Civil peace [ That we may lead
a quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness and Honesty, ver. 2.]

2. But, however (in the 2d place) in praying for them, and others, they should
perform a service acceptable unto God [For this is good and acceptable in the
sight of God our Savior, ver. 3.

3. A 3d Argument is taken from Gods gracious purpose revealed in the Gospel,
which extends it self indefinitely, and indifferently to all sorts of
persons [Who will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
truth, ver. 4.

4. A 4th and last (being near a kin to the former) is taken from that common
Interest which all sorts of persons have, or may have, in the same God, and in
the same Christ, [For there is one God, and one Mediator betwixt God and men,
the Man Christ Jesus.] One God both to Jews and Gentiles. [Is he the God of
the Jews only? (says the Apostle Romans 3.29.) Is he not also of the Gentiles?
Romans 3.29, 30.
Yea of the Gentiles also. It is one God that justifeth the Circumcision (the
Jews) by faith, and the Uncircumcision (the Gentiles) through faith.] And as
one God, so one Mediator; As one God the Creator and Father of all, so one
Lord Jesus Christ by and through whom all may have access unto that God.

And thus have I brought you to the words of the Text. Out of which I shall
only single forth the later clause. A clause which holds forth unto us that
great Gospel-foundation, upon which the whole work of man's salvation rests;
the very sum and substance of all Christian Religion.

There is one Mediator betwixt God and men, the Man Christ Jesus. General
Proposition.


For the better handling of which Proposition, that I may not graspe too much
at once, I shall divide it, and draw it forth into two. 1. Jesus Christ is a
Mediator betwixt God and men: 2. He is the one and only Mediator. Divided
into two Doctrines.
In the former we have the general office of Christ, he is a Mediator. In the
later we have the peculiar Appropriation of this office unto him, with an
Exclusion of all others from having any share in it; He is the one and Only
Mediator. Upon these two I shall insist severally; craving your best
Attentions to go along with me; this being a subject of high consequence and
concernment. Begin with the former.

Doct. 1. Jesus Christ is Mediator betwixt God and men. Confirmat.
Jesus Christ is a Mediator betwixt God and men.

So we find him elsewhere styled. Gal. 3.19. The Apostle speaking of the Law
given upon Mount Sinai, he says it was ordained by Angels in the hand of a
Mediator. Who was that Mediator? Moses (says some;) whom God made use of as
an Internuncius, an Agent or Interpreter between him and his people. Vide
Bezam. Gr. Annot.
So Beza earnestly contends that the word there must be understood, Ex Graecis,
Chrysostomus, Theophilactus, Occumenius, Ex Latinis, Ambrosius, Augustinus,
Hieronimus, Primasius, citati per Cl. Espencaeum de Mediatore, Cap. 4.
giving diverse Reasons for it. Others (amongst whom judicious Calvin is one)
understand it of Christ, of whom Moses was a figure. Moses was a Typical,
Christ is the true Mediator.

More clearly and expressly in that Epistle to the Hebrews, the Author speaking
of Christ, he calls him the Mediator of a better Covenant, Chapt. 8.6. id
est, the new Covenant. So he elsewhere explaines it, [The Mediator of the new
Testament] Chap. 9.15. [Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant.] Chap. 12.24
Not to spend time in exhorting or confirming a granted truth. Our main
business will lie in Explication, Illustration, Application.

Explicat.
By way of Explication, we shall look first upon the Word, then upon the Thing.

1. Of the word (...).
1. For the Word: (...), says the Original. A word which Erasmus looks upon
as peculiar to the sacred Scriptures, not to be found amongst profane Authors.
In the translating of it I find some slight difference. Tertullian sometimes,
(and after him Catellio) renders it Sequester, an Vmpire, or Arbitratour, one
that stands indifferently disposed betwixt two parties. Others, Interventor,
Internuncius, one that comes betwixt two parties as an Agent, a Messenger.
Others, Interpres, an Interpreter, one that imparts the mind of one to another.
Others, Intercessor, one that intercedes, steppeth in betwixt two, to let and
hinder the exceeding of somewhat which is betwixt them. Others, Conciliator, a
Reconciler, one that procures Love or Agreement betwixt two or more, who were
strangers, or Enemies each to other. Not to trouble you with these trivial
differences. The word properly signifies, as our translation renders it,
Mediator, A Mediator, a Middler, a Middle person that deals betwixt two
others. This for the Word.

2. For the Thing. 2. Of the Thing.
How and in what respect is Christ said to be a Mediator? To this I answer in
the general. He is a middle person dealing betwixt God and man. More
particularly and fully. Christ a Mediator in a twofold respect.
He may be said to be a Mediator in a twofold respect. 1. In respect of his
Person: 2. In respect of his office. In respect of his Person, he is a middle
person betwixt God and man. In respect of his office, Tileni Syntagma de
Officio Chricti.. 39. Corn. a Lap. ad Textum.
he is a middle person dealing betwixt God and man. The former of these
Bellarmine first, and after him some others, call Mediatio substantialis, a
substantial Mediation. The later Mediatio, (...), an operative Mediation.
Which Distinction, Chamier Panstratia, de Christo Mediatore.
however (as Chamier notes upon it) it be a new-coined one, not to be found
among the Ancients, and possibly may be abused by the mis-application of it,
(as it is by Bellarmine himself,) yet in it self it is Orthodox, serving not
unfitly to explain unto us this great and useful Doctrine. I shall deal with
these branches severally.

1. In respect of his Person; God-Man.
1. He is a Mediator in respect of his Person. A middle Person betwixt God and
Man, (...). So may he well be called, in as much as he participates of both
Natures, being (...), God and Man; God-man. Such a Mediator ought to be; one
that has interest in both parties. And such is the Lord Jesus, One that has
interest in both Natures, the Godhead, and the Manhood.

Evinced by Scripture.
For this, Scripture is express and clear to those that will not shut their
eyes against the light. What else can we make of that known place of our
Apostle in the 3d chapter of this Epistle? Magnum est pietatis mysterium, quod
manifestatum est in carne. V. Lat. (...). Grot. ad loc. Qui ipse alibi aliter
locum citat. sc. Jo. 1.14. (...).
ver. 16. [God was manifested in the flesh] Not the Mystery of Godliness. (So
indeed the Vulgar Latin rendereth it; and so Grotius would have it, leaving
out the word [(...), God] which (says he) Hincmarus informs him was added by
the Nestorians; and Erasmus conjectures was put in against the Arians, [Great
is the mystery of Godliness, which was manifested in the flesh,] viz. by
Christ and his Apostles, weak, mortal men.) But [God] was manifested in the
flesh,] which word [God] Beza more rightly conceives was in some Copies
expunged by those who denied the Divinity of Christ, Vide Bezam in Graec.
Annot. ad locum, fuse.
or the Union of the two Natures. As for the former reading and exposition (as
Beza rightly observes upon it) it is inconsistent with that which follows in
the verse. To let pass other passages; How can it be said of the Mystery of
Godliness (what we find in the close of that verse) that it was received up
into Glory? Certainly this cannot be applied unto any other thing but the
Person of Christ, even God manifested in the flesh. I am not ignorant how
Grotius goes about to elude that Allegation. The Mystery of Godliness,
Gloriose admodum exaltatum est, nempe quia multo majorem attulit sanctitatem,
quam ulla antehac dogmata. Grot. Annot. ad loc.
the Gospel (says he) may be said to be Exalted in Glory, in as much as it
brought in greater sanctity into the world then any other Doctrine before it
had done. But the word in the Original is (...), which properly signifies (as
Beza renders it) Sursum receptus est, Received, or taken up. Which the
Evangelist Saint Luke applies unto Christ, Acts 1.2. and ver. 22. (...), he
was taken up. The evidence is clear to those that will not Festucam quaerere
(as he spoke) seek strawes to put out their own eyes withal. That passage of
the Apostle is a description of the Messiah, [God manifested in the flesh.]
God, i. e. the eternal Son of God, the second Person in the blessed Trinity,
being God coessentiall and coequall with his Father. He was manifested in the
flesh, by assuming the humane nature into a personal union with the divine.

To the same purpose is that other obvious Text of St John, Joh. 1.14. [The
Word was made flesh.] The Word, of which he says in the first verse, that it
was with God, and was God. The increated, essential Word, the second Person in
the blessed Trinity, it was made flesh, viz. by taking the nature of a man into
such a personal union with his Godhead. Thus was the Messiah, both God, and
Man, two natures in one Person; Truly God, and truly Man.

Christ truly Man.
Truly Man. For that, were there no other Text in Scripture to assert it, this
one which we have now in hand would put it out of doubt. [There is one
Mediator betwixt God and men, the [Man] Christ Jesus.]

As truly God.
If there be any question, it must be about his Godhead. That the Arians of
former, and the Socinians of later times, have not only questioned, but
denied. And for countenance of that their damnable Heresy, amongst other Texts
of Scripture, they take hold of this we have now in hand, [There is one
Mediator betwixt God and men, the [Man] Christ Jesus.]

The Godhead of Christ evinced by Scripture Testimony.
But for this also Scripture speaks as fully, as expressly, as for the former.
Testimonies are obvious. In the old Testament, Isa. 9.6. The Prophet speaking
of the Messiah, he calls him the [mighty God] El Gibbor [El] being one of the
names of God. More clearly the Prophet Jeremie, Jer. 23.6. This is the name
whereby he shall be called, [The Lord our Righteousness.] Jehovah Tzidkeu,
Jehovah our Righteousness. A name proper unto God (as the Jews acknowledge)
not so communicable to any creature.

In the New Testament, Acts 20.28. Paul charge the Elders at Ephesus, that
they should feed the Church of God which he has purchased with his blood. The
Church of [God] (...), not (...), of the Lord. So indeed Grotius would evade
it, telling us of some Greek Copies that so read it. True, Beza, instanceth in
five of them; In quinque Exemplaribus logitur (...): Beza ad loc. Hunc locum
eludere frustra conati sunt Ariani. Bez. Gr. Annot. ad loc.
but then they add'd the word [(...), God] to it. (...) The Lord and God. A
Text speaking so full for the Divinity of Christ, that (as Beza says of it.)
All the Arians in the world do but in vain go about to elude it.

To this add that other obvious one of the Apostle, Romans 9.5. where speaking of
Christ, he calls him [God blessed for ever.] True it is (what Erasmus
observes, Cyprianus lib. adversus Judaeos 2 cap. 5. Hilarious, in Psalm. 12.2.
Vide Bezam Graec. Annot.
and Grotius says hold of) that in citing this Text, some of the Ancients, as
Cyprian and Hilary, have left out the word (...), God. But that omission (says
Beza) is to be imputed Librariorum vitio, to the writers or keepers of those
copies; which plainly appears in that the design of both these Authors in
those places is from that Text to prove that the Name of God does truly and
properly agree unto Christ. To which purpose also the Greek Father Athanasius
in his disputation against the Arians urges both that Text and Word.

To these (if need were) other Testimonies might be added, as that known one
Phil. 2.6. where the Apostle speaking of Christ, he says, that He being in
the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God.] Which place,
however obscured by Erasmus, and wrested and blanched by Grotius, and others,
yet speaks fully for the Divinity of Christ, as Beza clearly vindicates it.
Beza Gr. Annot. To these add, Tit. 2.13. and 3.4. Jude 25. 1 John 5.20.
And that other Joh. 5.18. where this is laid down for a ground of the Jews
malice against our Savior, that he said, that God was his father, making
himself equal with God.

For the seconding of these Testimonies, I might subjoyn many Arguments clearly
evincing the Godhead of Christ. By Arguments.
Five of which a Modern Divine, for memories sake, has comprised in one Latin
verse. Martinius in Symbolum. lib. 2. cap. 5.


Jova, Dei Natus, Propriu^, Dei et Actio, Cultus.

Jova, The name of God; J, his proper name [Jehovah] is given to him. The
proper Name of God (Jehovah) given to Christ.
So we find it in that place forenamed, Jer. 23.6.

2. Dei Natus, The Son of God. So he Luke 1.35. Gal. 4.4. And that not by
Creation, Christ the Son of God.
as Angels are said to be, Job 1.6. Psalm. 89.6. And Adam, Luke 3.38. Nor yet
only by Profession, as all the Worshippers of the true God are called, Genesis
6.1. Nor yet by the Grace of adoption, as all true Believers are, Joh. 1.12.
Romans 8.14. Gal. 4.5. But the Son of God properly so called, his Son by nature,
by an eternal generation, an inexpressable and unconceivable emanation of
essence, (...). Justin. (...) hic recte dicitur, quia singulari modo a Deo
processit, Grot. Annot. ad loc. Joh. 1.14.
and communication of substance. [Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee, Psalm. 2.7.] which the Apostle applies and appropriates unto Christ, Heb.
1.5. Thus is he the Son of God so as no creature is, or can be said to be.
Thence called, the [only begotten Son of God] Joh. 1.14.

3. Proprium. Many of the Properties of God, Incommunicable properties are
attributed unto him. As, Divine Properties attributed to Christ. 1 Eternity.


1. Eternity. [In the Beginning was the Word,] says Saint John (Joh. 1.1.)
speaking of the Messiah, that Essential word, of whom, and by whom God spoke
unto the Fathers. This Word was in the Beginning; Not that temporal and
determinate beginning, in time, or with time, of which Moses speaks, Genesis 1.1.
[In the beginning God Created the heaven and the earth;] But indeterminate and
eternal; so our new Annotation expounds that word. Or, in the Beginning,
(...): Sic mos est Hebraeis aeternitatem populariter describere. Grot. Annot.
ad loc.
when the world began first to be created; then he was, (...), Jam tum erat,
having a being before it, and consequently from Eternity. So much we learn from
that of the Wise man Prove. 8.23, 24, etc. where speaking in the person of
Christ the Son of God, the Essential Wisdom of the Father, [ I (says he)
was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was. When
there were no depths, I was brought forth, etc.] And to the same purpose our
Apostle, Col. 1.17. describing of Christ, He is (says he) Before all things]
viz. all Created things: Before the world was. So much we learn from our
Saviors own mouth, Joh. 17.5. [Father, glorify thou we with thine own self,
with the Glory I had with thee before the world was.] Such glory had the Lord
Christ with his Father, viz. in the heavens; and that before the world was.
This he had not only in regard of Destination, (...); sc. Destinatione tua,
Grotius Annot. ad loc.
being predestined to it by God his Father (as Grotius would evade it,) but
in regard of Actual possession. [The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his
way (says Christ the Son of God) Prove. 8.22. And as his Father possessed him,
so he was possessed of the selfsame glory with his Father, before the world
was, from Eternity. [His goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting
(from the days of Eternity,) says the Prophet Micah, speaking of the Messiah,
Mic. 5.2.

2. Immensity.
2. As Eternity, so Immensity, to be present in all places. [Where two or three
are met together in my name, (says our Savior) there am I in the midst among
them, Mat. 18.20. viz. by his Eternal spirit. A passage (as Grotius observes
upon it) most like unto that trite sentence in use among the Jews. Ubi duo
consident sermonem habenies de lege, Shecinah est inter ipsos. Grot. ad loc.
[Where two are sitting together; and conferring about the Law, there is the
Shecinah (the divine majesty) amongst them.

3. As Immensity and Omnipresence; so Omnipotency. 3. Omnipresence.
[ He shall change our vile body (says the Apostle) that it may be like unto
his glorious body, according to the mighty working, whereby he is able to subdue
all things to himself.] Phil. 3. ult.

4. As Omnipotency, so Omnisciency, 4. Omnisciency.
[ Lord thou know all things (says Peter) Joh. 21.17. [ He needed not that
any should testify of man, for he knew what wat in man, Joh. 2.25.] He was
(...), a searcher of the hearts, knowing the thoughts of men, and that before
they bewrayed themselves by any outward expression, De animis hominum certo
judicare solius est Dei. Grot. in Act. 1.25.
as appears from those known places, Mat. 9.4. Luke 16.15. now this is
confessedly Gods peculiar, God which knows the hearts, Acts 15.8.] Thus are
the properties of God attributed to him.

4. And so (in the 4th place) is Dei Actio, and Works, Divine Actions ascribed
to Christ. Creation.
they are attributed and referred to him. As, viz. Creation. [All things were
made by him, Joh. 1.3.] By him were all things created that are in heaven, and
that are in earth, visible and invisible, Col. 1.16. By whom God made the
worlds (says the Author to the Hebrews) Heb. 1.2. (...), Videtur (...) hic
recte accipi posse pro (...). Grot. ad loc.
not propter quem (as Grotius would evade that clear Text,) [For] whom he made
the worlds. But per quem, By whom. So the Apostle, to to put it out of doubt,
puts them together, Col. 1.16. All things were created by him, and for him.]
(...). Thus were the worlds made by him. Not only the New world, the
intellectual world, the world of mankind, (which is the chiefest part of the
world) whom God reformeth and restores by the mediation of Christ, Dr.
Lusshington. Comment. ad loc. Heb. 1.2
by giving him a new state and condition by a new Covenant. So indeed I find a
Divine of our own expounding that Text: Borrowing his Exposition (as I suppose)
from Grotius, (...), Intellige omnia quae ad novam Creationem pertinent. Grot.
Annot. ad Col. 1.16. Similiter super versum 17. (...), Et haec vox (inquit) de
veteri creatione ad novam traducitur.
upon that place forenamed, Col. 1.16. who being there put to a straight,
makes use of the same shift. A miserable subterfuge! What worlds the Apostle
there speaks of, we may learn by comparing him with himself; that Text Heb.
1.2. with that other Heb. 12.3. Through faith we understand that the Worlds
were framed by the word of God.] These were the worlds which God the Father
made by his Son, even the whole Universe, the upper world, and the lower world;
the visible, and the invisible world, both continuing through several ages:
And therefore called in the plural number, (...), the worlds. These worlds God
the Father made by his Son, and that not as an Instrument, or inferior Agent,
but a concurring, cooperating, and equal cause, having the same efficiency
with his Father, only differing in the order of working.

Providence.
And as Creation, so Providence: That we find also ascribed unto Christ. As the
Father made the world by him, so he governs it by him. So it there follows,
Heb. 1.3. Who being the brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express
image of his Person, he upholdeth all things by the word of his Power.] Thus
does Christ bear up all things, continuing to the several creatures their
being, ordering and governing them; and this he does by the word of his power.
(...), not (...), Christus verbo potentiae paternae (id est, jussu) regit
cuncta. Grot. ad loc.
(as Grotius would have it, referring it to God the Father, by whose order and
command, (says he) Christ governs the world, by the word of [his] power:)
but (...), The word of his own power: i. e. his own powerful word, Verbo illo
suo potente. Beza.
(as Beza renders it.) By this word he made the world. [He spoke, and it was
done.] And by this word he governs the world; by his own mighty word, the
word of his Power. Both these are divine Actions; and being ascribed unto
Christ, evidence him to be no less then God.

5. The fifth and last particular, is Cultus, That we shall also find given
unto Christ, Divine worship given to Christ.
[ When he brings in the first begotten into the world, he says, And let all
the Angels of God worship him, Heb. 1.6.] The Angels who refused divine honor
to be given to themselves, [ See thou do it not, (says the Angel to John, when
John fell at his feet to worship him) I am thy fellow servants, etc. Rev. 19.10.
and 22.9.] yet they give, and must give it unto Christ; And so must all others.
Believing on him: [ Ye believe in God, believe also on me, John 14.1.] The same
respect that Christians give unto God the Father, they must also give unto the
Son; believing on him: which is an honor due only to God: other creatures,
Men and Angels may be believed, but not believed on, rested on: This were to
make them Gods; no less then Idolatry. And so invocating him: It is the
Saints Character, they are such as call on the Name of the Lord Jesus, Acts
2.21. and 9.14.

Now put these together; the Name and Titles of God, the Son of God, the
Properties of God, the Actions of God, the Worship due only to God; all these
are attributed and ascribed to Christ. A full evidence that he is, and must be
more then (...), Dr. Lusshington. in Heb. 7.22.
mere man, or yet a Divine Man, (as some of them style him) viz. Truly God, as
well as Man.

Upon this Subject, I shall say no more; neither should I at the present have
said so much, did I not take notice of a generation of men (and those none of
the meanest for learning and parts, Socinians.
) risen up in these shaking times, who are not afraid to set their shoulders to
this principle of Faith, endeavoring to overthrow this main pillar of the
Christians hope, and of his Religion; the Divinity, the Godhead of Jesus
Christ. Against them it is, for the vindicating of the Truth of God from some
of their evasions, and false glosses, and the confirming and establishing you
in the faith which you have received, that I have spent this little time and
strength. The Text cleared from the Socinian gloss.


Object. But yet what say we to the words of the Text, which hold forth Christ
unto us only as a Man? The [Man] Christ Jesus.]

Ans. True, so he is, Man, True Man, Christ true Man, but not mere Man.
but not mere Man, Verus, sed non merus. The word is not to be taken
exclusively, as denying the Divine Nature. No, Elsewhere in this Epistle, the
same pen styles him God, (as I have shown you) [God manifested in the Flesh.]
So as here is no ground for the Arian, or Socinian; to cast anchor upon. By the
like reason the Marcionites, or Manichees, might conclude against the truth of
Christ's Humanity, because elsewhere he is called God. [God blessed for ever,
Romans 9.5.] Thus is the same Person, being (...), both God, and Man, sometimes
denominated from one nature, sometimes from the other; Sometimes called God,
and sometimes man: Yet so, as he is truly both. And in that respect fitly said
to be a Mediator betwixt God and men; having an Interest in, and participating
of both Natures.

Reas. Reason. Why Christ must partake of both Natures.
And it was very requisite that he should be so; And that for the due
qualifying of him for the Office and Work of his Mediatorship, That he might be
a meet and fitting Person to deal betwixt God and men. That was his Office,
that was his Work; to deal with God for man; and to deal for God with man. Now
that he might be fit for both these transactions, for both parts of this
Office, he must partake of both Natures: That he might effectually deal with
God for man, he must be God, [If a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat
for him?] (says Eli to his sons) 1 Samuel 2.25. And that he might deal from
God, and for God with man, he must be man. When God spoke unto Israel at Mount
Sinai, at the giving of the Law, (though I conceive it was not the immediate
voice of God himself, Lex non data est per Filium, sed per unum e praecipuis
Angelis Dei nomine loqueniem. Grotius Annot. in Hebr. 2.2.
but of some principal Angel, whose Ministry he there made use of in that
promulgation, as may not obscurely be collected from those known Texts, Heb.
2.2. Acts 7.38. yet the people were not able to abide that Voice or Presence:
And therefore they desire an Internuncius, a man like themselves, who might be
as a Mediator, to go betwixt God and them, Exodus 20.18, 19. For this Reason,
(amongst others) it was requisite that the Messiah, Jesus Christ, should be
both God and man, that he might be a meet Mediator to deal betwixt God and man.

Thus have I passed over this first Branch of the Point in hand, showing you
how Christ is a Mediator in respect of his Person; A middle Person betwixt God
and man, participating of both Natures. And here is that Mediatio
substantialis, his substantial Mediation.

2 Christ a Mediator in respect of his Office, dealing betwixt God and Man.
Pass we now to the second Branch, to the Energeticall, Operative Mediation;
where we shall see how Christ is said to be a Mediator in respect of his
Office; performing the work of a Mediator: being in himself a Middle Person,
he deals betwixt God and man.

Quest. Deals betwixt them? How? The great Transaction of Christ.
in what way? what is that Transaction? what is the business wherein, and
whereabout the Lord Christ deals betwixt God and man?

Answ. To this take the Answer in one word. It is the business of
Reconciliation. Reconciliation.
This was the great Negotiation about which the Son of God, leaving the bosom
of the Father, came into the world, took the nature of man upon him, and
undertook the office of a Mediator, All for the reconciling of God and man. So
the Scripture holds it forth: [ God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself, 2 Cor. 5.19.] [It pleased the Father by him to reconcile all things
to himself, Col. 1.19. This was the great design of God in giving his Son,
and of his Son in giving himself, that he might be a Mediator of
Reconciliation betwixt God and man.

Reconciliation. Take we hold of the skirts of that word. Reconciliation
importing three things.
We may learn that from it which may conduce not a little to our present
purpose. (...), says the Original, fitly rendered Reconciliation, Which is,
the restoring of former love, amity, agreement, betwixt two, or more,
disagreeing parties. This is properly Reconciliation, importing (as you may
take notice) these three particulars. 1. A Foregoing Amity, and friendship: 2.
A Subsequent Breach, and disagreement: 3. A making up of that Breach, and a
restoring of that former Amity again: All fitly appliable to the point we have
now in hand. Christ's reconciling of God and man imports all these three
particulars.

1. A precedent Amity, and friendship. Such there was betwixt God and man at
first. 1. Precedent Amity.
God having made man after his own Image, like unto himself, there was a
blessed unity, and agreement betwixt them; they were at One. Man was God's
Favorite, greatly beloved of him, highly in grace and favor with him. And God
was again highly honored, and greatly beloved of man. Thus was there a near
Union, a sweet and blessed Communion betwixt them. Such was the state of man in
his Creation.

2. A subsequent breach.
2. A Subsequent Breach: whereby that Union and Communion were dissolved, and a
natural Enmity introduced. So came it to pass by Satan's mediation, his
interposing betwixt God and man; his soliciting and enticing man to sin against
the Law of his Creator, and so to break the Covenant betwixt God and him.
Hereupon followed a mutual alienation. God was estranged from man, and man was
estranged from God. Nay, a mutual Enmity. [You that were sometimes alienated
and enemies, (says Paul to his Colossians, speaking of their estate before
conversion,) Col. 1.21. [When we were enemies we were reconciled to God, (says
the same Apostle to his Romans) Romans 5.10. Such a mutual Enmity there is
betwixt God and man; God for sin hating man, and man through sin hating God.
Such is the estate of man by Degeneration and Corruption. A state of Enmity.

3. And hereupon it was (which is the third particular) that Jesus Christ took
upon him the Office of a Mediator, 3. A restoring of Amity.
that he might dissolve and destroy this groundwork of the Devil, (as Saint
John speaks 1 John 3.8.) That he might slay this Enmity, make up this Breach,
compose this difference, restore that former love and amity; That he might make
reconciliation betwixt God and man.

A Mutual Reconciliation. Reconcillation by Christ mutual.
Such was the Enmity which Satan had made. A mutual Enmity. And such was the
Reconciliation which Christ undertaketh, A Mutual Reconciliation. To reconcile
God unto man, and man unto God.

Which let it be taken notice of by-the way; Socinian error refuted.
And that against the Socinians, and some other of the times, who would have
this Reconciliation to be only on one part, viz. on Man's part to God, not of
God's to man. To this end (says one of them) Christ came into the world not to
reconcile God to man, but man to God. Paul Hobson's Sermon. Christ the effect,
not the cause of the love of God, page 47.
As for God, he was reconciled to his Elect from Eternity, So as he not only
bare them no ill will, but he bare them good will; loving them, and intending
good unto them: What then needs any Reconciliation of his part? The
Reconciliation spoken of in Scripture (say they) is only on Man's part: [When
we were enemies we were reconciled to God] Romans 5.10. not God to us. [God was
in Christ reconciling the world to himself,] 2 Cor. 5.19. not himself to the
world.

But this opinion of theirs is justly censured and condemned by others as
erroneous and heretical, Testimony to the Truth by the London Ministers. p. 9.
having no ground for it, but the ignorance of the Authors and Abettors: who
(as it seems) do not understand the meaning of that phrase, To be reconciled
unto one.

To be reconciled unto one, what is it but to be reingratiated, To be
reconciled to one: the phrase expounded.
to be restored to grace and favor with him? So the Princes of the Philistines
understood the word, 1 Samuel 29.4. where declaring their jealousy concerning
David, lest if he should go along with them, he might betray them, [Wherewith
(say they) should he reconcile himself to his Master? etc.] i. e. Reingratiate
himself, make his peace with him, procuring his grace and favor again. In the
same sense our Savior advises the offending Brother, that he should [go and
be reconciled to his Brother, Matthew. 5.24. i.e. Seek to make peace with him by
confessing his fault, and if need were, making satisfaction. And so in like
manner the Apostle wills the woman that had without cause deserted her
husband, [Let her (says he) be reconciled unto him, 1 Cor. 7.11. i. e. Humble
her self, and seek the good will of her husband, that he passing by her
offense, might receive her again as a wife, being reconciled unto her. And thus
are men most properly said to be reconciled unto God; when they do Redire cum
Deo in gratiam, when they are restored to his grace and favor again; so as his
wrath is appeased toward them, and they are reingratiated with him.

But to leave them (with whom happily I shall have occasion to deal somewhat
more fully upon this point hereafter.) Hold we on our way.

The Reconciliation undertaken by Christ betwixt God and man, is a Mutual
Reconciliation. On God's part, on Man's part.

1. On God's part, 1. On God's part.
the reconciling of God to man. In this respect it is that Christ is said to
have made peace, Col. 1.20. And to be our Peace, Ephesians. 2.14. i.e. the Author
of peace and reconciliation with God: which he has purchased by the Blood of
his Cross; by making satisfaction unto the Justice of God. This is the
Reconciliation spoken of by the Angel Gabriel, Dan. 9.24. Seventy weeks are
determined, etc. to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and
to make reconciliation for iniquity. This was the Messiah's work. So the
Apostle applies it unto him, Heb. 2.17. where speaking of this great high
Priest, he sets forth this to be the principal part of his work, [to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people.] This was the work, the most proper
work of the Priests under the Law, those Typical Mediators, to reconcile God
unto his people, Lev. 8.15. by making Agreement for them, Exodus 29.36. And this
is the work of this Architypall Mediator, the Lord Jesus, to reconcile God
unto man. So are we most properly to understand both those forenamed places,
which our Adversaries aforesaid conceive to speak so full for them. That of the
Apostle, Romans 5.10. [When we were enemies we were reconciled unto God.] How?
why, by the death of his Son,] by and through that satisfaction which Christ
has made to the Justice of God. And that other, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself.] How? The next words explain it, [not
imputing the trespasses unto them,] pardoning the sins of his people; accepting
the satisfaction made by Christ on their behalfes: which being applied unto the
persons of believers, now God is actually reconciled unto them.

Object.
Object. But was he not so before? Did not God love his Elect from eternity?
How then is he said to be reconciled to them? Answ.


Answ. To this it is answered, True, he did so. Gods eternal love, what?
[Jacob have I loved,] So the Apostle Romans 9.13. cites that of the Prophet
Malachy, Mal. 1.2, 3. which is to be understood not only of Jacob's posterity,
the Israelites, whom God preferred before the posterity of Esau, the Idumaeans;
but of the person of Jacob. Thus God loves the persons of his Elect, and that
before they have done either good or evil. But what is that Love? why, only a
gracious purpose of God toward them, for the reconciling of them unto
himself, and receiving them into grace and favor with him. This is the Love
of God to his Elect; not any complacencie and wel-pleasing that he has in
their persons so long as they are in a state of sin; no, the Apostle lays
down this for an irrefragable Conclusion, Romans 8.8. that They which are in the
flesh (in state of nature) they cannot please God.] And the verse foregoing
gives a reason for it, because the carnal mind (or the minding or wisdom of
the flesh, (...)) is Enmity against God.] Rebellious Subjects, so long as they
continue in that state of Rebellion, cannot be pleasing to their Prince. No
more are rebellious sinners (and such are God's Elect, as well as others,
before conversion, Ephesians. 2.3.) to their God. To the same purpose is that other
Text, Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is impossible to please God.] Neither the
person, nor services of an unbeliever can be well pleasing unto God. And why?
Because it is by faith that the person is united unto Christ, In whom God the
Father is well pleased, Mat. 3.17. In him it is that the persons of God's Elect
come to be accepted: He has made us accepted in the beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. God's
eternal love then toward his Elect imports no more but a gracious purpose of
reconciling them to himself in time. Which is not actually done, until the
Reconciliation purchased by Christ be effectually applied unto them through
faith. Now is God said to be reconciled unto them, and not before. Here is
Reconciliation on God's part.

2. On Man's part; 2. On Man's part.
the reconciling of man to God; Which is done by subduing and healing that
rebellious principle of Enmity which is in the soul; inclining the sinner to
accept of Reconciliation being offered and tendered unto him: to close with God
upon his terms; by faith to lay hold upon his grace and mercy in Christ:
yiedling up himself unto God; taking and acknowledging him for his Sovereign
Lord: so as laying down and casting away the weapons of his rebellion,
abandoning what ever it is that might be offensive to him, whatever it is that
might alienate him from his God, or his God from him; thenceforth to walk
before him to all well pleasing, in newness of obedience all his days. This
is Reconciliation on Man's part. Of which we may understand the Apostle to
speak, 2 Cor. 5.20. We pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God.]
i.e. Accept the grace that is offered you in the Gospel, embracing it by faith,
endeavoring to walk worthy of it, answerably to it.

Put these together. Here is the great work, for the effecting and procuring
whereof the Lord Jesus undertook the Office of a Mediator: viz. a Mutual
Reconciliation betwixt God and man.

Reconciliation] A blessed work! Reconciliation a blessed Work.
Such is not only Reconciliation betwixt God and man, but also betwixt man and
man: a work which every Christian should be forward in, and ambitious of; to be
in this sense a Mediator, a Mediator of Reconciliation; Satan a Mediator of
Enmity.
not of Debate, and Division; to make, or maintain, or widen differences. This
was Satan's work at the first; Such a Mediator was he betwixt God and man, a
Mediator of Enmity; going betwixt God and man to make a Breach, to dissolve
that Union betwixt the creature and the Creator: to sow the seeds of Division
betwixt them: which he did (even as Tale-bearers, and Make-bates use to do,)
first, by casting in of jealousies, and suspicions betwixt the one and the
other. Yea, has God said, ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? (says
he to the woman Genesis 3.1.) Insinuating that in that Prohibition God intended no
good to man. Then plainly accusing the one to the other; God to man; as if he
envied man's happiness, [God does know that in the day ye eat thereof, your
eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil, ver. 4.]
Thus did he bring in Enmity into the world at the first; and by the like
Artifice he still endeavors to continue, and increase it; to that end accusing
man to God. Thus dealt he with righteous Job, Job 1.9. Does Job serve God for
naught?] Insinuating that Job, what ever shows he made, he was no other but a
Mercenary Hypocrite; one, that in what ever service he did, looked more at his
own private advantage, then the honor of his God. And the like he still does;
whence he is called the Accuser of the Brethren, Rev. 12.10. Accusing man to
God, and man to man; all to sow divisions betwixt them. Such a Mediator is he.

And such Mediators there are enough to be found every where; Mediators of
Enmity: Such as do the like ill offices betwixt men and men; sowing of strife,
(as the Wise man says of the wicked man, the mischievous man, the
False-witnesse, the Talebearer, Prove. 6.14, 19. and 16.28.) either making, or
maintaining of differences amongst Brethren: which they do after the very same
manner that Satan did; by casting in of jealousies and suspicions betwixt them;
accusing the one to the other. An office as ill as may be; which whosoever are
employed in, they are therein no other but the Devils Agents and Instruments,
Diabolus est medium disjungens; Christus est medium conjungens. Aquinas ad
Textum. Christ a Mediator of Reconciliation, and therein a pattern for our
Imitation.
doing his work; He was and is a Mediator of Enmity:

But Christ of Reconciliation. And herein let every of us propound him as a
pattern for imitation, accounting it one of the best offices we can perform, to
make peace. [Blessed are the Peacemakers, (says our great Peacemaker,)
Matthew. 5.9. Peacemakers, whether they be such as endeavor to reconcile man to
God, which is the work of the Ministers of the Gospel, to whom is committed
the Word, and Ministry of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. Or man to man; in
composing of differences, seeking to make peace, betwixt those which are at
variance. Peace, a good seed, which whosoever sows, shall not lose his labor;
how ever it may prove a thanklesse office with men, and sometimes meet with ill
requitals, (So fared it with Moses, when he interposed himself betwixt those
contending Hebrews, Exodus 2.14. he met with a Check and a Choke. And so it
fares sometimes, and oft-times with Reconcilers, Peacemakers; whilst they
interpose themselves betwixt two disagreeing parties, it may be they have
thanks from neither, but suffer from both) yet their labor shall not be in
vain in the Lord. They shall reap that which will be worth the reaping. [The
fruit of Righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace, (says Saint
James) Jam. 3.18. As they have inward peace and tranquillity in their Christian
endeavors here, so they shall reap that fruit of Righteousness, eternal
Peace, hereafter.

Every of us then be ambitious of being active in such a Mediation; a Mediation
of Reconciliation. Be we also Peacemakers.
An Exhortation, never more seasonable, never more needful then at this day,
in these dividing times, wherein that Mediator of Enmity, the Devil, has
sown so many tares of Division, as that they threaten the choking of what ever
good seed the good hand of God had begun to sow amongst us in this, and the
Neighbor Nation. In this labor we all of us to counterwork the common
Adversary: To be as industrious in sowing of Place, seeking of Peace. Seek it
from God, seek it from men, seek it by prayers, seek it by counsels, seek it by
all possible endeavors; every of us contributing what we may toward the
regaining of what to so great a degree we have lost; our Peace.

1. To this end labor (in the first place) to make prace in Heaven, by seeking
Reconciliation with God. Were there peace above, there would be peace below;
were we at peace with God, we should be at peace amongst our selves.

2. Then be we in our selves peaceable; all of us seeking after our share in
that Wisdom which is from above; which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle,
and easy to be entreated. That so, what in us lies, we may all of us promote
this so much desired work of a National, Ecclesiastical, Civil, Domestical,
Personal Reconciliation. A service grateful to God.

Only, Let it be managed in God's way. Only in God's way.
So did this our Peacemaker, our blessed Mediator manage this great business
of Reconciliation betwixt God and man, in the way that God his Father had laid
forth to him. The like do we: not going out of God's way to seek for peace, not
parting with what is Gods, to purchase it: what is our own, we both may, and in
some cases ought. So did this our Mediator; how ever he was tender of his
Fathers honor, yet he emptied himself (so the Original has it; Phil. 2.7.
(...),) viz. of his own honor, [He made himself of no reputation; yea, laid
down his life to purchase peace, Col. 1.20. And herein imitate we him; be
content to empty our selves, to part with much of our own for peace; not with
God's Truth, his Honor, his Glory, by yiedling to any sinful accommodations
and complyances. Peace so bought is but an ill purchase; otherwise it can
hardly be purchased at too dear a rate.

But to return from whence I have deviated, being drawn aside by the
seasonableness of this Exhortation, which fell in by the way.

We have seen what the great Negotiation is, in reference whereunto Jesus
Christ took upon him the office of a Mediator betwixt God and men.

Quest. Our next Question must be, How came he by this office? Question. How
Christ came by this Office.
How came he to undertake this work?

Ans. To which I return this general Answer, He was called to it. Answer. He
was called to it.
Christ did not intrude himself into this office, He glorified not himself to
be made an High Priest, a Mediator, Heb. 5.5. He did not run before he was
sent. So much we may learn from those Titles given to him; that of an Angel, or
Messenger, Mal. 3.1. [The Messenger of the Covenant:] That other of an Apostle,
Heb. 3.1. [The Apostle and High Priest of our Profession.] Each importing a
Mission, a Sending. Christ did not undertake this office without the warrant of
a lawful Calling.

Let it be taken notice of by all those who shall undertake any public Office
or Service in the Church of God. Note
Let them also see that they do not herein glorify themselves; that they have
a calling, a lawful and warrantable calling to it; not running before they are
sent. This would not Jesus Christ do, He would not undertake the Work of
Reconciliation, but upon a lawful Call. Let not any without the like warrant
undertake the Ministry of Reconciliation. Such is the public preaching of the
Gospel, the dispensing of the Word of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19.
Concerning which, the Apostle propounds this Question, Romans 10.15. How shall
they preach, except they be sent?] A Question (which (my self not being able,)
I shall leave to them to answer, who stand guilty of that presumption. I pass
on.

Jesus Christ was called to this Office. But, By whom was he called? How was he
called? When was he called to it? A threefold Enquiry, the Resolving whereof
will contribute not a little to the clearing and illustrating of this Branch of
the point in hand, touching the Calling of to this Office of Mediatorship.

By whom was he called?
Quest. 1. By whom was he called?

Ans. I answer, By God himself: Answer. By God himself
[No man takes this Honor unto himself, (says the Apostle, speaking of the
Priestly Office) but he that is called of God, as Aaron was, Heb. 5.4.] This he
speaks de jure, showing not what men sometimes do, but what they ought to do:
viz. Not take upon them a Ministerial Office to deal betwixt God and his
People, unless they be called of God, either Immediately, or Mediately. This
did not Jesus Christ do, His Office of Mediatorship he received it immediately
from God himself, [He was called of God as High Priest after the Order of
Melchizedech, Heb. 5.10.]

And from what other hand should he receive it? None could appoint a Mediator
but God
Who should appoint a Mediator to deal betwixt God and man, but God himself?
As for man, as he was the person offending, so he was far from seeking of
Reconciliation; having sinned against his God, he flies from his presence to
hide himself; Nay, such was the corruption of depraved nature, Genesis 35.3, 8.
that it was ready bent to stand it out against God, to hold out the quarrel,
to maintain this enmity; so far was man from seeking Reconciliation. But, had
he sought it, what Mediator should he have sought for? This was that which Job
in his passion complains of, Job 9.33. Neither is there any Daysman (or
Umpire) betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon us both.] None to judge
betwixt him and his God. Amongst the creatures, there was none in Earth or
Heaven that durst have undertaken this cause, to interpose and come betwixt the
Creature and the Creator. [If one man sin against another, the Judge shall
judge it, but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? 1 Samuel
2.25.] This was God's own work, first to find out a way and means of
Reconciliation, then to find out a fitting person to undertake that Work; then
to put him upon that undertaking. This was the Lord's own doing.

And well may it be mavelous in our eyes? Never such a Demonstration of Love
A Demonstration of Divine Love.
as this. That when man had offended his God, broke Covenant with him, and
turned enemy to him, standing out in actual rebellion against him, that God
should then seek peace with him, offer conditions of peace unto him. And for
that purpose should appoint a Mediator, and call his own Son to that Office,
to undertake the work of Reconciliation; what a gracious condescension was
this? Herein, let us both admire and adore this matchless and unparalleled
love: that God was thus in Christ, reconciling the world to himself.

A clear Intimation (so let us conceive of it) of a gracious purpose An
Intimation of a gracious purpose.
in God toward all those whose hearts he inclines to accept of this
Reconciliation. Surely, had not he had a good will toward them, he would never
have called forth his Son to this Service.

And withal, giving a full assurance to them of a gracious acceptance
Assurance of a gracious acceptance.
of whatever this Mediator has done and performed on their behalfs, in as
much as he was thereunto called by God himself. But I do but glance at these
(not unusefull) Meditations by the way.

Thus you see, By whom Christ was called to this Office, viz. By God, By God
his Father. Christ was called by God his Father.
So the Spirit of God in Scripture more peculiarly attributes this work unto
him; to the first Person in the blessed Trinity. [ Him has God the Father
sealed, John 6.27.] [ It pleased the Father, etc. By him to reconcile all
things to himself, Col. 1.19.] where, though the word [Father] be not
expressed in the Original, yet it may not unfitly be supplied. So in those
places where it is said, God gave his Son, John 3.16. God sent forth his Son,
Gal. 4.4. The word [God] is to be understood Relatively and Personally, as
pointing at God the Father; not that the two other Persons are thereby excluded
from any concurrence in this work; not so, as it is in all other Actions and
Operations ad extra, (as they are called,) works done out of themselves, they
are Indivisa, Common to all the three Persons; so is it here. The calling of
Christ to this office of Mediatorship it was the concurrent Act of all the
three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Only it is Attributed to the
Father for Orders sake, in as much as he being the first, is the beginning, as
of every operation, so of this. But to go on. Christ was called to this office
by God his Father.

Quest. 2. But, How was he called to it? There How Christ was called to be a
Mediator.


Answer. To which I Answer. 1. He was Designed to it. 2ly He was Furnished for
it. 3ly He was invested in it. In these three consists the manner of this his
He was designed to it.


1. He was designed, elected, ordained by God his Father unto this office.
Thence called his Elect one, Isaiah 42.1. [Behold my servant whom I uphold,
mine Elect in whom my soul delighteth], It is spoken of Christ as Mediator, who
was Elected and designed by God his Father unto that Office; viz. In his secret
purpose and Decree.

2. Being thus Elected to it, he was also furnished for it. Furnished for it.
Furnished with all requisite [Behold my Servant, whom I uphold, mine Elect
one, etc. I have put my Spirit upon him, Isaiah. 42.1. that is, fitting him for
that office to which he was Elected.

3. Being thus elected to it, and furnished for it, he was Invested in it.
Invested in it.
This are we to giving his Son, John 3.16. His sending his Son, Galat. 4.4.
Each importing the Investiture of Christ into the office of his Mediatorship.

Here is the manner of this his calling to this office, He was thus designed to
it, furnished for it, Invested in it.

All which may be conceived to be comprehended in that one word, [Anointing:]
All comprehended in the word Anointing.
From whence this our Mediator is called by the name of Messiah, or Christ;
[Thou art Christ] it is the Devils confession Matthew. 16.16. And the Christ, [We
have seen the Messia, which is, being interpreted, The Christ, Joh. 1.41.
(...), And, the Christ of God, Luke 9.20. i. e. One Anointed of God, Anointed
by way of Designation, Qualification, Inauguration.

All these three ways was David Anointed. Thus was David Anointed.
First, by way of Designation. Of this we may read, 1 Samuel 16.13. Where the
story informs us, How he was Anointed by Samuel, [He took the horn of oil,
and Anointed him in the midst of his Brethren:] By that ceremony designing him
to the Kingdom. And being thus designed to it, he was Qualified and furnished
for it: So it there follows; And the Spirit of the Lord came upon David from
that day forwards] id est, God did indue him with Heroical gifts in an
extraordinary measure, and manner; as wisdom, Magnanimity, Courage, Grace,
Holiness. And being thus designed to it, and furnished for it, then was he
Inaugurated, and Invested in it, And that by a second Anointing in the presence
of the people, of which we may read, 2 Samuel 2.4. Thus was David Anointed.

And herein may we look upon him as a lively Type of Jesus Christ David herein
a Type of Christ.
the Anointed of the Father. Who being after the like manner first designed to
this office of his Mediatorship, before he undertook it; he was then Qualified
for it. This is that which Peter tells Cornelius and his company Acts 10.38.
God Anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with power] Thus was he
Anointed; with the Holy Ghost, [The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because the
Lord has anointed me; Isaiah 61.1. Anointed him by a large effusion of the
Spirit upon him, after an extraordinary measure and manner, [God, even thy God
has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows, (says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 45.7. Speaking of the Messiah.) Of whom Saint John tells us,
that God gave not the Spirit by measure unto him, John 3.34. This is the Spirit
given to all other of the Saints of God, [unto every one of us is given grace
according to the Measure of the gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4.7. But not so to
Christ; To him not by measure, that is, plentifully, abundantly, [It pleased
the Father that in him should all fulness dwell. Col. 1.19. that is, all
Perfection of grace, wisdom, goodness, mercy. Thus was he Anointed with the
Holy Ghost. And with Power; Having both (...) and (...) given to him, might and
Authority. Christ the Power of God, says the Apostle, 1 Corinthians 1.24.
(...). All power is given to me in heaven and in Earth, (says our Savior)
Matthew 28.18. Thou have given him power over all flesh, John 17.2. (...),
Authority. Thus was he anointed, furnished with all Qualifications requisite
for the discharge of this his Mediatorship.

And being thus furnished for it, now was he invested in it, put upon the
undertaking and executing of it. Of his Prophetical office; [The Lord has
Anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek, he has sent me, etc. Isaiah
61.1. Of his Priestly office, [The Lord has sworn and will not repent, Thou
art a Priest for ever, Psalm 110.4. Of his Kingly office, [The Lord said unto
my Lord, sit thou at my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool,
Psalm 110.1. Which three are the parts of his Mediatorship. Thus was the
Messiah called to this office: Designed to it, furnished for it, Invested in it.

All three comprehended under the word Sealing.
Which three we may again in like manner conceive to be couched under that other
word of Sealing. [Him has God the Father sealed, John 6.27. Sealed, 1. by way
of Destination. Thus do men sometimes set their marks or seals upon things
which they design and intend for some special use. And thus was the Lord
Christ Sealed by God his Father, with the seal of his Eternal Predestination.
That Seal which the Apostle speaks of 2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God
remains sure, and has this seal, God knows who are his.] Thus are all Gods
Elect Sealed; having an irrevocable decree passed upon them; whereby they are
Sealed up unto Eternal salvation, being predestined unto life. And thus was
Christ the Head of the Election sealed, predestined unto this his office of
Meditatorship. 2. Sealed by way of Qualification. Thus are Agents and
Ambassadors said to be Qualified by the Seal of the Prince or State that sends
him, which gives them Credit and Power to act in their Name; so as they are
thereby known to be what they are, where ever they come. And thus has God the
Father sealed his Son Christ, by putting his own Image upon him, communicating
to him the fullness of his Spirit, Anointing him with the Holy Ghost and with
power; which is as it were Gods seal, whereby Christ was known to be the
Messiah, the true Mediator. And 3. Sealed by way of Investiture. Thus are
public officers invested in their places, by receiving their commissions under
seal; which give them Authority to execute that office to which they are
called. And thus has God the Father Sealed his Son Christ, Authorizing him to
undertake, and execute the office of a Mediator. Thus was this our Mediator
called to this office. Here is the manner of his calling.

Question. But When was he thus called to this office. When Christ was called
to this office.
There is the 3d Inquiry; To which I shall return Answer briefly.

Ans. He was called to this office, Before time: Answer. Before time.
In time.

1. Before time, in respect of Destination: He was predestined hereunto from
all Eternity. Yea, in some sense he may be said to have been a Mediator from
Eternity, viz. in the business of Election. So much we may learn from the
Apostle in that known place, Ephesians. 1.4. where he tells believers, that they
were chosen in Christ before the foundation of the world.] Chosen (...), in
Christ, or for, Musculus Loc. Com. de Electione Cap. 6.
by and through Christ. In him, as Members in their Head. For by, and through
him, as Mediator. He being the Head of the Election, the first born amongst
many Brethren (as the Apostle upon another account calls him Romans 8.29.) the
first that opened the womb; others were Elected in, by, and through him. Thus
was he a Mediator before his Incarnation: yea, before the worlds Creation. Then
was he a Mediator in the business of Election: yea, and then was he
predestined to be a Mediator of Reconciliation. I was set up from Everlasting
(says Wisdom) Prove. 8.23. It is spoken of Christ the Wisdom of the Father,
who was designed and appointed to be a Mediator from Eternity. Thus was he
called to be a Mediator before time.

2. In time. 2. In time.
Then was he invested in this office, put upon the undertaking and executing of
it. Which he did first virtually, then actually.

1. Virtually 1. Virtually.
and Inchoately. So was he a Mediator even from the fall of Adam. When God and
Man were fallen at variance by reason of sin, so as the First Covenant, the
Covenant of works was disolved and broken, and an enmity, through Satan's
artifice, introduced. Now did the Lord Christ, for the disolving of that work
of the Devil, and the repayring (in measure) that breach which sin had made,
enter upon the exercise of this office of Mediatorship, to which he was before
designed. Now did he undertake that great negotiation of Reconciling God to
man, and Man to God. Now did that promise made unto our first parents, being
yet in Paradise take place, Genesis 3.15. Now did the seed of the woman begin to
break the serpents head. So as from thenceforth he was a Mediator virtually.
How ever he was not of many ages after incarnate, yet was he an Effectual
Mediator. The virtue and efficacy of his Mediation extending it self even unto
the first Ages of the world. In which respect (as also in the former) Christ is
said to be the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, (as that passage is
commonly read) Revelation 13.8. So he was, (as in respect of Gods destination,
being designed before time to be offered up in time, so) in respect of the
Efficacy of that his Sacrifice, which extended to the first age of the world,
as far as Adams fall. Even as it was with the Incense offering in the
Tabernacle, or Temple, however it was burnt only in one place, viz. upon the
golden Altar before the Arc of the Testimony, Exodus 11.5. yet the perfume of
it extended to every corner of the house. Thus the Sacrifice of Christ, however
it was offered up only at one time, in one age, in the End of the world (as
the Apostle has it Heb. 9.26.) and only in one place, upon the Altar of the
Cross, yet the virtue and efficacy thereof extended to all places, and all
ages; as well to those who lived before his Incarnation, as those who lived
after. Thus did Christ enter upon the exercise of this office immediately upon
the fall of man, so soon as there was need of a Mediator. From thence does
this his Mediatourship Commence, From that time he was a Mediator vertually.

2. Actually.
2. Actually. Thus was he a Mediator after his Incarnation. When he had taken
the nature of man upon him, and was made man, Then was he an Actual and
Complete Mediator. Mark the Text [There is one Mediator betwixt God and men,
[the Man] Christ Jesus.] The eternal Son of God being made Man, (...),
God-Man, now was he an Actual and complete Mediator. Being thus manifested in
the flesh, now he was manifested to be what before he was. Now did he act that
part visibly upon earth, which before he had acted secretly and invisibly in
heaven. Now was he every way furnished for the office of a Mediator. Now was a
Body prepared for him (so the Apostle Heb. 10.6. following the Translation of
the Septuagint, cites that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 40.6. applying it unto
Christ, [A Body have thou prepared (or fitted) for me.]) Thereby meaning the
humane nature of Christ, which was prepared, fitted for the work of the
Mediatorship: Fitted through Sanctification of the Spirit. Thus are all
believers fitted for their work of obedience; as Saint Peter tells them, 1
Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the foreknowledge of God, through sanctification
of the Spirit unto obedience.] And thus was the Lord Christ fitted for his
great work of obedience, which as Mediator he was to perform here upon Earth,
viz. through Sanctification of the Spirit; the large effusion of the Spirit
upon his humane nature. And being thus fitted for it, now he entered upon it;
upon the work of his Active and Passive obedience: discharging his
Prophetical and Priestly office here upon earth; which having done, then he
entered upon his Kingly administration in heaven. But this I shall have occasion
to clear up unto you more fully in resolving of the next Question; which now
falls in fitly. And that is,

Question. How, and in what ways the Lord Christ manageth and carries on this
work of mediation for the effecting of this Reconciliation? The Work of
Mediation how managed and carried on.


Answer. By diverse steps typified by Jacob's Ladder. Where.
Ans. A Question of great use, high concernment unto all those who desire to be
acquainted with the mystery of Christ. For the Resolution of it; we must know
that this work of Mediation, it was begun and carried on by diverse steps and
and degrees; not unlike that ladder which the Patriarch Jacob saw in his
nightly vision, Genesis 28.12. which I look upon as a Type, carrying with it a
lively representation of this our Mediator, and his blessed Mediation. So our
Savior himself applies it, John 1.51. That ladder reached from Earth to
Heaven, uniting the one to the other. So does the Lord Jesus by his Mediation,
he uniteth Heaven and Earth; God and man: by the means whereof, they come to
have a sweet and blessed union and communion each with other; So as all graces
descend from God unto men upon earth; and men come to ascend unto God in
Heaven. Now in this Ladder there are two things to be taken notice of, viz.
First, The two Extremes or Ends of it; the Bottom, and the Top. Secondly, The
intermediate steps or staves betwixt them. And the like may we observe in this
our Mediator, and his Mediation.

1. The two Extremes representing the two Natures in Christ.
1. Here may we first take notice of the two Extremes, viz. the two Natures of
Christ, his Humanity, his Divinity; fitly represented (as some conceive it) by
the two ends of that Ladder, the foot whereof was upon Earth, and the top in
Heaven; the one aptly representing the Humanity of Christ, the other his
Divinity; his Humanity upon Earth, his Divinity in Heaven: yet both united
together in one Christ by an Hypostaticall, Personal Union. And here is the
foundation and groundwork of Christ's Operative Mediation: which was laid in
this Substantial Mediation (as they call it;) in the union of these two
natures. God and man being at variance, this our Mediator, that he might make
way to the reconciling of their Persons, he first uniteth their Natures; being
the Son of God by nature, he takes the Manhood into a personal Union with his
Godhead. Even as one desiring to mediate peace betwixt two dissenting families,
which are at deadly feude the one with the other, he being first clearly allied
unto the one, he marries into the other, that so being related and allied unto
both (to the one by consanguinity, to the other by affinity) he may have the
greater advantage for reconciling each to other. Thus did our Mediator, the
Lord Jesus. Being the Son of God, by nature, he marries the nature of man,
takes it into a personal and indissoluble union with his Godhead, that so,
being nearly allied unto both, he might be fit to deal betwixt them, and might
with better success manage this Work of Reconciliation. Here are the two
Extremes in this Ladder, the Bottom, and the Top.

2. Now betwixt these two, there were many intermediate staves The intermediate
Staves, five.
or steps; So there is in a Ladder, and so there were in that Ladder; how else
should the Angels ascend and descend by it, as they are said to do? And in like
manner in this great Negotiation of our Mediator betwixt God and man, we shall
find diverse steps and degrees whereby he managed and carried on this Work of
Reconciliation. Of these steps Bellarmine Bellarminus de Christo Mediatore.
lib. 5. c. 1.
reckons up four. Christ in his work of Mediation Five steps in Christ's
Mediation.
is 1. Arbiter, an Arbitratour, an Vmpire. 2. Interpres, an Interpreter, or
Messenger. 3. Advocatus, an Advocate, an Intercessour. 4. Sponsor, a Surety, an
Undertaker. And to these, to make the enumeration complete and full, Junius
Junius Animadvers. in Bellarm. ibid. lib. 5. cap. 1.. 9.
adds a 5th, Gubernator,: A Ruler, a Governor. These are the steps of this
Ladder, the several operations whereby the Lord Christ manageth this his work
of Mediation. The first and second whereof belong unto his Prophetical Office:
the third and fourth to his Priestly Office: the fifth and last to his Kingly
Office: All together rendering him a complete Mediator, I shall take a view of
these particulars severally; speaking of them as plainly, as clearly as I can.
Let me crave your best attentions to go along with me. 1. The first step;
Arbiter, Christ an Arbitratour or Umpire betwixt God and men.
Begin with the first of them, which is

1. Arbiter, an Arbitratour, an Vmpire, a Judge; Such a one may properly be
called a Mediator, who lays his hand upon both parties, (as Job speaks, Job.
9.33.) judging betwixt them. Who made thee a Judge over us? says one of the
contending Hebrews unto Moses, when he interposed himself as a Mediator
betwixt them, Exodus 2.14. One that takes cognizance of the difference, what is
the ground of it, who has done the wrong, then judges betwixt them,
propounding and setting down the terms of Reconciliation and agreement; Such a
one may fitly be called a Mediator. And such a Mediator is the Lord Jesus
betwixt God and men: One whom God his Father has constituted and appointed to
be an Arbitratour, an Vmpire, a Judge betwixt him and them, committing
Judgment unto him. [ The Father judges no man, but has committed all
judgment unto the Son, John 5.22.] All Judgment, as of Absolution, and
Condemnation, so of Arbitration. As to judge men, so to judge betwixt God and
men. This does the Lord Christ. And being the Wisdom of his Father (as the
Apostle calls him, 1 Cor. 1.24. Christ the Wisdom of God.) He has also
determined and set down the terms of Reconciliation and Agreement betwixt them;
as it were drawing up a Covenant betwixt them. In which respect (amongst
others) he may be said to be the Mediator of the Covenant, (as he is called
Heb. 8.6. and 9.15. and 12.24.) In as much as Conditions of the Covenant were
set down by him. Missus enim a Patre factus Arbiter, reconciliavit Deum and
Homines, etc. Ambrosad Textum.
Thus Ambrose (cited to this purpose by Bellarmine) conceives of it, expounding
the word in the Text in this sense. Thus (says he) is Christ said to be a
Mediator betwixt God and men; In as much as being constituted by God his Father
an Arbitratour, he set down in what way, and upon what terms Reconciliation
should be made betwixt them; viz. upon God's accepting the satisfaction which
should be made in their behalf, Ut Deus ignosceret, and Homo de caetero in Dei
fide maneret. Ambros. ibid.
and of pardoning their sins; and their complying with God in the way of Faith
and Obedience. But to let this pass, come we to the second, which is

2 Step. Interpres. Christ an Interpreter, or Intermessenger.
2. Interpres, or Internuncius, An Interpreter, an Inter-messenger. Such a one
may fitly be called (...), a Mediator; one that in this nature goes betwixt
two parties at variance, imparting the mind of the one to the other, so to
breed a right understanding, and thereby to work a compliance betwixt them. And
in this sense Jesus Christ may truly and fitly be said to be a Mediator betwixt
God and men: Though not only in this; so indeed the Heretic Socinus would have
it; Vide Grotium de satisfactione Christi. cap. 8.
affirming this word [(...),] which we render [Mediatour,] wherever we meet
with it in Scripture, to import and signify no more but Dei Interpres, God's
Interpreter. And so his followers treading in his steps still, expound the word
in the same sense. For Christ to be a Mediator of the Covenant (says one of
them, Dr. Lusshington Comment. in Heb. 8.6.
writing upon that Heb. 8.6.) is nothing else but to be the Interpreter of God,
or the Intercessour passing betwixt God and men with mutual messages to make
and finish up the Covenant on both parties: By which Inter-messenger God
declares and testifies his will unto men; and they again being informed in the
knowledge of God's will, do comply with God, and contract with him, are
reconciled with him, and enjoy their peace afterward.] But that this is not
the whole truth, I shall have occasion (God willing) to show you hereafter: For
the present, take we up what is truth in it: viz. that as the word [(...)] will
fitly bear this sense, so it may in this sense as fitly be applied unto Christ.
Such a Meditour is he; an Interpreter, an Inter-messenger, going betwixt God
and man, imparting the mind of the one to the other; such an Interpreter was
Moses, who went betwixt God and the people at the giving of the Law, making his
mind and will known unto them. And in that respect he may not unfitly be called
a Mediator. That Text in Deutronomie (Deuteronomy. 5.5.) imports no less, where
Moses speaking to the people, [I stood (says he) between the Lord and you at
that time, to show you the Word of the Lord.] Which the vulgar Latin renders,
[Ego sequester and medius,] I was a Mediator, a Middler betwixt God and you.]
And so Beza, Beza Gr. Annot. Theodoretus and Germadius, citat per Claudium
Espencaeum de Mediatore, cap. 4.
and some others (and that as I conceive most properly) understand that place
of the Apostle fore cited, Gal. 3.19. where he says of the Law, that it was
ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator.] (...): meaning thereby Moses, who
was an Internuncius, an Inter-messenger betwixt God and his people in the
promulgating of the Law, in making the mind of God known unto his people. Thus
was Moses a Typical Mediator.

And thus is the Lord Jesus Christ truly said to be the Mediator. In as much as
he is his Fathers Interpreter, Imparting the mind of God to man.
by whom the mind and will of God is imparted to the sons of Men. [No man has
seen God at any time (says Saint John), the only begotten Son which is in the
bosom of the Father, (near and dear to him, and intimately acquainted with all
his secrets) he has declared him, John 1.18. (...). He it is that gives the
true, clear and full knowledge (for that is properly (...), as Beza, Aretius,
Piscator note upon the place) of God, and of his will unto the sons of Men,
which otherwise were unsearchable. [No man knows the Father save the Son, and
he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him.] says our Savior, Matthew 11.27. By
him it is that the hidden things of God the mystery of his will is revealed
unto the Sons of Men.

In this respect (among others) it is that he is called [the word]. John 1.1.
In the beginning was the Word, etc. ver. 14. The word was made flesh,] (...):
In as much as by him God reveals his will unto men. A word is an Interpreter
of the mind; and so is Jesus Christ of the mind of his Father. And hence also
it is that he is called A Prophet, Acts. 3.22. and The Prophet, John 7.40. and
That Prophet John 6.14. In as much as this was one part of his office, to
impart the will of God to the sons of men.

Which he has done. And that, as in other passages, so specially in declaring
and making known the gracious purpose of God toward his Elect, for the
Reconciling, Specially concerning the way and means of Reconciliation.
and bringing them to life and salvation. In this respect it is that he is
called the Angel (or Messenger) of the Covenant, Malachy 3.1. It is spoken of
Christ, who was the publisher of the Gospel Covenant, the Covenant of Grace.
And in this respect also (among others (it is, that he is called the Mediator
of the Covenant, (in those places forenamed,) the new Covenant. Even as Moses
was the Mediator of the Old Covenant, (for to him the Apostle there alludes)
the Publisher of it. So was Christ of the new Covenant; Gods Messenger and
Ambassador sent and employed by him to declare the Gracious purpose of God
toward his Elect, held forth in that Covenant. Here is now the 2d staff of
this Ladder; the second step in this great work of Christ's Mediatorship. He is
a Mediator betwixt God and Men, viz. as an Interpreter an Intermessenger
betwixt them, Imparting the mind of God to Man.

And in this way does he promote this great design Thereby promoting that great
design.
of Reconciliation; the Reconciling of men to God: viz. by enlightening of them.
This is his work. [ He is that true light, which enlightneth every man that
comes into the world: John 1.9.] Enlightneth them with a Common, Natural
light of Reason and understanding; So he enlightneth all Men. Enlightneth them
with a special, supernatural light of saving knowledge; Thus he inlightneth
all that are so enlightened. And by this means he begins to dissolve the work
of the Devil. It was the way whereby Satan first estranged man from God, by
blinding his eyes. And by the same means it is that he holds him under that
estrangement, by continuing him under that blindness. This is Satan's grand
design, as the Apostle sets it forth, 2 Cor. 4.4. In whom the God of this
world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, least the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ who is the Image of God, should shine unto them.] And
by this means he maintains, confirms, increases that alienation and
estrangement betwixt God and Man, which was at the first by himself
introduced. This is the great bar which hinders all communion betwixt God and
the soul, Ignorance. The Apostle speaking of the Gentiles, Ephesians. 4.18. he
says [They were alienated (estranged) from the life of God] But how came they
so to be? The Reason follows [Through the Ignorance that was in them, because
of the blindness of their minds.] Thus are men estranged from God. Now for
the effecting of a Reconciliation, Christ's first work is to dispell this
darkness, to open these blind eyes, and to make known unto men the things
which belong unto their peace: which he does by the revelation of his word and
Spirit, making known the good will of God unto them; causing that Grace of God
that brings salvation to appear unto them; To shine not only upon their
Heads, but into their Hearts, (as the Apostles say of themselves 2 Cor. 4.6.)
God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts,] working in them an effectual knowledge of God, and his will, whereby
they are brought in to comply with God, and to close with him upon his own
terms, the terms of Faith and Obedience. Thus in this way is Christ a Mediator
of Reconciliation.

Even as at the first, being a Mediator in the work of Creation (for so he was,
[By him God made the worlds, Heb. 1.2.) he laid the foundation of that work in
light, that being the first Creature that was produced, Genesis 1.3. Even so in
this new Creation, in effecting this great work of Reconciliation, he lays
the foundation of it in light, even the light of supernatural knowledge, the
knowledge of God and his will; By that means making way for peace. But to pass
on.

Having done with the two first and lowest steps of this ladder, come we now to
the two next; both which belong to the Priestly office of Christ, as the two
former did to his Prophetical. This our Mediator, as he was an Arbitrator
betwixt God and Man, and an Interpreter or Messenger, making known the mind of
God unto Man; so shall we also find him an Advocate and a Surety. Here are the
two next and principal staves of this ladder, the chief and principal parts
of Christ's Mediatorship. In the handling whereof I shall take leave to invert
Bellarmines order, dealing first with the last, as conceiving the former to be
the higher step of the two. Christ is first a Surety, then an Advocate. First a
Surety, undertaking, Satisfying for the sins of his people; before an Advocate,
Interceding for their persons. So much we may learn from the Prophet Isaiah,
Isai. 53. last, where speaking of the Messiah, he says, [He bare the sin of
many, and made intercession for the Transgressors.] As also from the Apostle,
who ranks them in the same order Romans 8.34. It is Christ that died, yea rather
that is risen again, etc. who also makes Intercession for us.] oblation goes
before Intercession. 3 The 3d step, Sponsor. Christ a Surety betwixt God and
Man. Eodem prorsus sensu (...) et (...) Christum vocat Apostolus. Pateus ad
Heb. 8 6. An office proper to Christ. Hic modus mediationis propriissime
convenit Christo. Bellarm. de Mediatore lib. 5. cap. 1.
And so I shall handle it.

3. In the 3d place then, Christ manageth this his work of Mediatorship qua
Sponsor, as a Surety, so we find him expressly called by the Apostle Heb. 7.22.
The Surety of a better Testament (or Covenant) (...), Sponsor, or Fidejussor, a
Surety or undertaker. Which for substance is all one with that which elsewhere
he calls him, a Mediator of the Covenant. In this respect is Christ said to be a
Mediator, in as much as he is a Surety betwixt God and Man.

An office proper and peculiar unto Christ. More peculiar (says Bellarmine)
then any of the other three by him named. As for the other three (says he)
they are or may be common with Christ to others. And there is some truth in
that assertion, though not so much as is by him contended for. Men may be
Judges, and after a sort, Arbitrators betwixt God and others. Thus the Lord
appeals to the men of Judah in the case betwixt him, and his unfruitful
vineyard, his ungrateful people, making them Judges in their own cause, Isai.
5.3. And now O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, Judge I pray you, betwixt me and my
vineyard.] And thus elsewhere he appeals to them in the case betwixt himself
and their forefathers, Jer. 2.4, 5. Hear ye the word of the Lord, O house of
Jacob, etc. What iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone far
from me? etc?] And as Men may be sometimes Judges betwixt God and Men, so often
times Messengers from God to Men, to impart his will unto them. Such a Mediator
was Moses (as I showed you) at the giving of the Law. And such a Mediator was
John the Baptist in the promulgating of the Gospel; Thence called the Lords
Messenger Mal. 3.1. Behold, I will send my Messenger, and he shall prepare the
way before me.] And such Mediators are all the Ministers of the Gospel, being
by their office Gods messengers, his Interpreters, as Elihu styles them Job.
33.23. This being their proper work, to go betwixt God and his people, to make
known to them the way and means of Reconciliation: the Ministry whereof is
committed unto them, 2 Cor. 5.19. And so again for Intercession; however I dare
not call any other a Mediator of Intercession besides Jesus Christ, to whom
that style properly belongs (as God willing, I shall show you hereafter;) yet
others may be called Intercessours. Such a one was Job for his friends, Job
42.8. And such ones ought all Christians to be one for another [I exhort, that
Intercessions be made for all men, (says our Apostle in the first verse of
this Chapter.) Thus may those three be after a sort communicated to others; but
not so this. Solus ipse solvit. Bellar. ibid.
To be a Surety betwixt God and Man, this is proper and peculiar to Christ: not
communicable to any Creature, whether man or Angel.

A surety, what.
Quest. But how, and in what respect is Christ said so to be?

(...), sponsor proprie est qui pro alio satisfactionem spondet, vel de ea
cauet. Pareus Comment. in Heb. 8.6.
Answ. For Answer. A Surety, we know (it may be some of us too well) what
properly he is: One that undertaketh and ingageth for another, whether for his
debt, or otherwise, [My son if thou be surety for thy friend, etc. (says the
Wiseman, setting forth the hazard and danger of such engagements) Pro. 6.1. now
such a surety was the Lord Jesus: One that undertook for his elect people unto
God. As he was Gods messenger unto them; so he is their surety unto God.

Or, to give you it somewhat more largely and fully. Christ is a surety betwixt
God and Man, and that on both parts. Christ a mutual Surety.
On man's part to God: and on Gods part to man. Such is the Covenant. It is
mutual on both parts: from God to man, and from man to God. And in both
respects Christ may be said to be a surety of that Covenant. A Surety on Man's
part, on Gods part: undertaking for Man to God, and for God to Man. I shall
insist upon them severally, beginning with the former.

1. Christ is a surety on Man's part. 1 On man's part.
This the Socinian denies. [Christ is said to be a surety of the Covenant
(says one) not as if he became our surety to God, D. Lusshington in Heb. 7.22.
and took upon him the payment of our Debts.] How then? Why, Only as a surety
on Gods part, undertaking the performance of his promises unto us.] But
Scripture is as express for the one as the other, as (God willing) I shall
show you before I part with this point.

Christ is a surety for Man to God, Christ a Surety for man to God two ways.
and that in a twofold respect. A surety in way of satisfaction, and a surety
in way of Caution. Such are the sureties which are common and Ordinary amongst
us. Sureties in way of satisfaction; Such are sureties for Debt or Trespasses.
Sureties in way of Caution, Such are Sureties for the Peace or good-behaviour,
and sureties for Appearance. And both these ways shall we find Jesus Christ a
surety for his Elect, for all true believers. A surety in way of satisfaction:
A surety in way of Caution: Thus have I laid out the way wherein I am to walk.
I shall desire you to go along with me with your best Attentions. And the
good Lord be a Guide unto us both.

1. Christ is a surety in way of satisfaction, 1. In way of Satisfaction.
undertaking for the Debts and trespasses the sins of his Elect; In this
respect it is that Christ is most properly called a Surety; In regard of his
taking upon him the sins of his Elect, and undertaking to answer, and make
satisfaction unto the Justice of God for them. And in this respect it is
chiefly and principally (as Bellarmine and others rightly observe upon the
Text) that he is here called by our Apostle a Mediator. In this respect
principally called a Mediator in the Text.

Neque apud ineruditos tantum, sed and apud eos qui elegantius loquuntur, (...)
dicitur is qui placat aliquem, Grot' de Satisfact. cap. 8.

Object. Here is no mention of Gods wrath or displeasure.


[A Mediator betwixt God and men,] id est, One that interposeth himself
betwixt the wrath of God and them, undertaking to satisfy their debts, and so
to reconcile them unto God. Thus the word in the Text (as Grotius notes) may
fitly be rendered: (...), Plaactor; One that pacifieth and appeaseth another by
giving satisfaction and contentment to him. And in this sense it is here
applied unto Christ.

Obj. Not so (says Socinus, and his followers.) The word here signifies no
more then what it does elsewhere, Interpres, Internuncius, an Interpreter, an
Intermessenger betwixt God and Man: Not a Peacemaker; No, here is not a word
(says he) concerning any wrath or displeasure of God against sin or sinners,
that might induce us to make such a construction of the Apostles meaning.

Ans. But to this Pareus Answ. Pareus in Heb. 8.6.
returns him an Answer. It is not to be conceived that what ever belongs to
such, or such a subject, should be mentioned wherever that subject is touched
upon. True, the Apostle makes no mention of Gods wrath against sin and sinners
in this place. This we find elsewhere.
But elsewhere he does sufficiently, abundantly: Romans 1.18. The wrath of God
is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness of men.] Cap. 5.9. Being
justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him.] Such is the
state and condition of all men by nature: They are all alike Children of wrath,
Ephesians. 2.2. Being out of Christ, not believing on him, the wrath of God abides
on them. John 3. last. A truth so sufficiently known, so frequently inculcated
by himself and others, as that there was no need why the Apostle should here
make any mention of it, before he call Christ a Mediator.

But if this satisfy not, look but a little after, and there shall we find
what is by the Adversary desired. [Who gave himself a Ransom for us.] In
which words (as Bellarmine well notes upon it) the Apostle assigns the cause
and Reason of what he had said: plainly showing in what respect it was
principally that he called Christ a Mediator: viz. In as much as he gave
himself a Ransom unto God his Father; making satisfaction for the sins of
his people.

Objection. Satisfaction? But, Object. No mention of Christ's satisfaction in
Scripture.

Christoph. Ostorodius contra Purgationem peccatorum Ar gum. 1.

Answer. Pareus ad Ro^. 9. Dubio. 12. Though not the word, yet the thing is.
Grot. de Satisf. cap. 7. in initio.


where do we meet with this word in Scripture, thus applied unto Christ and
his Mediatorship? So some demand of us.

Answ. To whom Pareus and others soon return Answer, that though the word be
not found, yet the thing is, being set forth in other expressions which are
equipollent and equivalent. And this it is that our Adversaries contend against
(as Socinus acknowledges it) not the word, but the thing. And this it is that
we must with earnestness contend for against them: for this truth of God is a
part of that Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, and a principal
part of it, a foundation-stone, a principle of Christian Religion, the maine
hinge upon which the whole work of our salvation turns. Take away this, the
satisfaction of Christ, and what sure foundation shall our faith rest upon? If
this foundation be destroyed, then what shall the righteous do? They must
then go seek for another way of Justification then by faith in the merits of
Christ: And so seek for a new way to heaven, which none of their forefathers
ever yet found. Let me therefore take up a little time for the asserting and
vindicating of this truth of God against the Adversaries and Opposers of it.
Wherein my aim shall be to deal as little as may be in a Polemicall
controversall way, in arguing and disputing the case with them, but rather in
demonstrating it against them; by laying this foundation as sure as I can, that
so you may with more assured confidence adventure your souls upon it.

Christ is said to be a Mediator as a Surety undertaking and making
satisfaction unto God for the sins of his people. That he is so, Christ's
Satisfaction evinced by Scripture Testimonies.
Scripture is clear to those who will but look upon it without prejudice: To go
about to call in all those Texts that speak to this purpose, would prove a
long, if not a tedious work. I shall single out some of them, which I conceive
to give in the clearest, and most convincing evidence.

And here I shall begin with the old Testament, Old Testament.
where I shall in the first place have recourse unto that clear Prophecy
concerning Christ (then which all the old Testament affords not a clearer)
which we meet with Isaiah 53. Isa. 53.
Arg. 1.
There shall we find a mutual compact and agreement betwixt the Father and
the Son about this way of Reconciliation, viz. by way of satisfaction. This
the Father imposes, And this the Son submits to. The Father imposes it by
charging the sins of his Elect upon him. So you have it verse 6. Ver. 6.
The LORD laid on him the iniquities of us all:] Not the sins themselves, not
the evil in them, or fault of them, but the guilt and penalty belonging to
them. This GOD laid upon his Son; charging it upon him; as a Creditor charge
a debt upon the surety, requiring satisfaction from him. Or, as the margin
reads it according to the Original, [He shall make the iniquity of us all to
meet on him.] Even as many debts of several persons are charged upon one
common surety, and so all meet together upon his head. Thus did the sins of all
God's Elect, or all true believers, (for of such, and only such, he there
speaks, (as Diodate expounds it,) such, as having union with Christ, have a
true spiritual Communion amongst themselves,) they all meet together upon the
head of their common surety; the Lord Christ: Even as the sins of Priests and
people, met together upon the head of the Sacrifice, being laid upon it by the
Priests, who to that end laid their hands upon the head of it, (as you may read
Exodus 29.10, 15, 19.) by that Ceremony putting and laying their own sins, and
the sins of the people upon the head of that Sacrifice, which was to be offered
up for them. Even thus (says the Prophet) did God the Father lay the sins of
his people upon his Son Christ (who was the truth of that Type:) laying upon
him the iniquity of them all.

And he thus charging them, Christ undertook them; (...) proprie significat
exegit: and (...) respondere. Pagnin. Buxtorf.
took that charge upon him, and undertook to answer it; So it follows in the
next verse, ver. 7. which our Translation reads thus, [He was oppressed, and
he was afflicted.] But our new Annotation hints to us another version, which it
conceives more agreeable to the Hebrew. [It was exacted, and he answered:]
that is, God the Father he required satisfaction for our sins, and his Son (as
our Surety) answered for us; undertaking and discharging what was charged upon
us. God the Father lays our sins upon him, and he bare them, [He bare the sin
of many, (says the last verse of that Chapter:) viz. Iniquitates eorum ipse
portabit, quas illi portare non poterant, and quarum pondere opprimebantur.
Hieron. ad loc.
of his Elect. He bare them as a Porter that bears a burden for another, which
himself was not able to stand under, (as Jerome rightly glosseth upon that
place,) He bare them, the guilt of them, undergoing the punishment which was
due unto them, [Surely he has born our grief, and carried our sorrows, (says
the fourth verse.) [He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for
our iniquities, the chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and with his
stripes we are healed: (So it follows) ver. 5. Thus did the Lord Jesus his
own self bear our sins in his own body on the Tree, (as Saint Peter cites
this of the Prophet, 1 Pet. 2.24.) As a Surety for his Elect, he stood in their
room and stead, submitting himself unto the penalty due unto their sins; and
by that means having made satisfaction to the Justice of God, he reconciled him
to his people. [By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many,
(even all that believe on him:) For he shall bear their iniquities; (So you
have it ver. 11.) By this means he takes away the guilt of sin, so as it shall
not be imputed to, charged upon those, who knowing him, apply the merit of his
death unto themselves; So clearly, so fully does this Evangelicall Prophet in
this Chapter speak for this Truth of God, as I do not well know what can with
any color be objected against it. What is objected, I shall have occasion to
meet with it anon in some of the ensuing Arguments.

How Christ is said to bear our sins. The Socinian Evasion refuted.
Alleg. For present let me only take notice of one Evasion, wherein the
Socinian puts a great deal of confidence, no less then Ajax did in his
shield. True (say they) Christ bare our sins; but how? not by taking them upon
himself, suffering for them; but by taking them away; viz. in respect of the
power of them, healing them; and in respect of the guilt, remitting and
forgiving them: In favor of which Exposition they bring in that Text of St
Matthew, Socinus de Jesu Christo Servatore. lib. 2. c. 4. Dr L. Comment. in
Gal. 1.4.
which we conceive to speak full to this purpose, Mat. 8.16. where reporting
how our Savior cured all diseases, healed all that were sick, viz. such as
were presented to him, he subjoyns, This he did, [That it might be fulfilled
which was spoken by Isaiah the Prophet, saying, Himself took our infirmities,
and bare our sicknesses.] So he cites and expounds the 4th verse of that 53d
Chapter. Now, how did Christ then do this? not by taking upon him their bodily
infirmities, and so bearing their sicknesses; but only by healing and taking
them away. Even in like manner, and no other ways (say they) is he said to take
our sins, and to bear them; not taking them upon himself, as our Surety,
bearing the punishment of them, but forgiving and healing them, and so taking
them away.

Ans. But to this it is answered: The difference betwixt Christ his bearing our
sins and our sicknesses. Sibrandus Lubbertus contra Faustum Socinum. Lib. 2. c.
4
There is a broad difference betwixt Christ's bearing our sins, and bearing our
sicknesses. These he cured though, not carried. Those he both cured and
carried, undergoing the punishment of them. So much that Prophet clearly
expresses in the verse following, ver. 5. He was wounded for our
Transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: The chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.] So again ver. 7. He
was oppressed, and he was afflicted; And again ver. 10. It pleased the Lord to
bruise him, he has put him to grief. Thus did Christ bear the sins of his
people, bearing the punishment of them. Hence is it that he is said to be made
sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. viz. by way of Imputation; or made a Sacrifice for sin; And
to be made a Curse, Gal. 3.13. susteining the curse of the Law due unto us. But
never do we find him said to be made a Demoniack, made blind, made deaf, etc.
Neither do we ever find that God is said to have laid on him our Bodily
Infirmities and sicknesses. But thus he is said to have laid on him our
iniquities, Isai. 53.6. So that there is a manifest difference betwixt his
bearing of the one and of the other.

Repl. But yet the Allegation goes on. What say we then to the Evangelist, who
citing that Text of the Prophet gives this exposition of it?

Answ. To this diverse Answers are returned. Mat. 8.16. cleared.
Among which that of the Jesuit may be sufficient to stop the mouth of this
Cavil. Maldonatus Comment. in Mat. 8.16.
In citing of this Text the Evangelist accommodates it to a sense rather like
unto it own, then the same. The like whereunto he does elsewhere, Cap. 2. ver.
15. citing that of the Prophet Hosea, chap. 11. ver. 1. [When Israel was a
child, then I loved him, and called my Son out of Egypt;] he applies it unto
Christ, affirming that Prophecy (or History) to have had an accomplishment in
him, in his return out of Egypt. [This was done (says he,) that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet saying, Out of Egypt have
I called my Son:] not that the Prophet in that place had an eye properly at
Christ; but it is referred and accommodated to him by a certain kind of
concordancy and allusion, in as much as the one was a Type of the other. The
like application we meet withal again verse. 17, 18. of the same chapter;
where the Evangelist setting forth Bethlehem's lamentation for their murdered
Infants, Then (says he) was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremiah the
Prophet, saying, In Ramah was there a voice heard, Lamentation, and weeping,
and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children, etc. This Jeremiah spoke
properly in reference to the Jewish Captivity; but the Evangelist accommodates
it to this Herodian massacre. In like manner may the present Text be looked
upon rather as an allusive accommodation to, then a proper, and literal
Exposition of the fore-alledged Prophecy. And if so, then is there no reason
why the words should be strictly tied up to the same sense in the one place as
in the other.

But if this satisfy not, (which I know not why it may not) consult we the
words cited and used by this our Evangelist, and we shall find in them nothing
that the Adversary can take hold of. Christ [took our infirmities,] he did so
our bodily infirmities, and that properly, taking them upon himself. So he did
all such infirmities as are common to the nature of man, having experience of
many, subject to all. So the Apostle lays it down, Heb 2.17 18. and 4.15.
[And he bare our sicknesses, (...), which Tertullian indeed renders Abstulit he
took them away. But (as Grotius well notes upon it) the word imports more, Est
in hac voc ((...)) oneris quaedam, id est, molestiae, significatio. Grot. in
Mat. 8.16.
viz. the bearing of a thing as a burden, not without some pain or trouble: And
thus did Christ bear our sicknesses. Even as in the former part he is said to
have taken our infirmities, not only taking them in hand (as the Physician is
said to do the disease of his patient,) but taking them upon his shoulders;
Such an Emphasis Grotius there apprehends in the word, (...), Assumpsit, He
took them upon him. (...) est, quasi dicas, in humeros sustulit. Grotius ibid.
Thus did he bear our sicknesses, though not properly patiendo, yet
compatiendo, though not by way of Passion, yet of compassion; having and
manifesting a Sympatheticall participation with us in all our infirmities, and
Sicknesses: We have not an high Priest (says the Apostle in the place
forenamed Heb. 4.15. speaking of Christ) which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities, (...), that cannot Sympathize with us. This Christ
did when he was upon Earth; and in that respect he may be said to have taken
our infirmities, and born our sicknesses.

Besides to these, ex abundanti, we may add what Grotius observes, Comment
Groti. ad loc.
that the curing of these diseases was not a little trouble to our Savior. At
this time when these many deseased persons were presented to him for cure, the
Text tells us, it was in the Even, (after Sunset,) which circumstance being
taken notice of by the three Evangelists, who report the story, Matthew, Mark,
and Luke, it may not be conceived to be without an Emphasis (as Theophylact
notes upon it; Vesperi and intempestive languidos adducebant; Ipse autem
utpote misericors curavit omnes. Theo. ad loc. Sensus est Christum ut morbos
hominibus demeret, nullos labores, quantumvis intempestivos defugisse. Grotius
Comment. ad loc.
) the time was unseasonable. And at other times we find the people pressing
and thronging upon him; as at the cure wrought upon the Paralytick, Mark. 2.2,
4. And that other upon the woman with the Bloody issue, Luke 8.45. which could
not be without some trouble and hazard. Yet such was his compassion toward
them, as that he willingly bare with these and the like inconveniences;
refusing no labor, how unseasonable so ever, that he might do good this way.
And in this sense also he may be said to have borne our sicknesses.

In such a Sense it is that the Apostle wills Christians, that those who are
strong, should bear the infirmities of the weak, Romans 15. And elsewhere he
wills them to bear one another burdens, Gal. 6.2. (In both which places,
the word is the same with that in Saint Matthew, (...),) viz. by way of
sympathy, and fellow-feeling, being as if they were in their condition; (so was
Paul himself, 2 Cor. 11.29. Who is weak, and I am not weak? etc: And so he
wills others to be, Romans 12.15. Weep with them that weep, etc:]) withal
succouring and helping them according to their power, though it be with some
inconvenience, trouble, hazard to themselves. Both these did Christ unto those
diseased persons which were brought unto him: And in that respect he may fitly
be said to have born their diseases: So that the word as there used, it imports
more then a bare Abstulit, a bare healing and taking them away. And so in like
manner are we to understand it in that Text of the Prophet, where he speaks
of Christ's bearing our sins, (Isai. 53. ult.) He not only bare them away, by
way of Remission, but he took them upon himself, bearing and undergoing the
punishment due unto them, that so by satisfying for them, he might take them
away out of the sight of God. Thus is that irrefragable evidence in that Text
of the Prophet, cleared and vindicated from the Cavillation of the Adversary.
Now pass we on.

Arg. 2.
To this of the Prophet Isaiah, I shall join only that other of the Prophet
Daniel, Dan. 9.24. Dan. 9.24.
where setting forth the blessings that should come by the Messiah, he
reckons up these among others, The finishing the transgression, the making an
end of sins, and making Reconciliation for iniquity; or expiating it, as the
word properly signifies;) which the Messiah did, by the sacrifice of himself.

New Testament.
But I hasten from the Old Testament to the New, where we shall find evidence
more then sufficient.

Arg. 1. Christ is said to suffer and die for us.
1. In the first place, What means all those expressions, which we meet with
about Christ's suffering and dying for us? 1 Pet. 2.21. Christ also suffered
for us.] chap. 3.18. Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust.] Heb. 2.9. He tasted death for every man,] Romans 5.8. While we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us.] 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. One died for all.]

Alleg. To this I know what the Adversary will answer, And that not only
nostro bono, for our benefit.
Christ suffered and died for us. He did so; but how? Nostro bono, for our
profit, our benefit; That by his death he might give testimony to his Doctrine,
sealing the Covenant with his blood; that so we being induced to believe it,
might be made capable of receiving Remission of sins.

Repl. But to this we reply. This is truth, but not the whole truth. But also
nostra vice, in our stead.
Christ did die for our good, our benefit, in the respects aforesaid. But there
is somewhat more in those phrases of suffering and dying for us, then so.
Somewhat which is proper and peculiar to the death of Christ. Christ so died
for us, as no other person can be said to die: So much we may learn from the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.13. where he demands of his Corinthians, Was Paul crucified
for you? This Paul might have been, as Peter and some other of the Apostles
were, he might have been crucified, and in this sense crucified for them: viz.
for their good, their benefit. Libenter tolero in id, ut vos and alii eo magis
in fide confirmemini. Grot. ad loc.
In this sense he tells his Colossians that he suffered for them, Col. 1.24. Who
now rejoice in my sufferings for you.] viz. for your good, for the confirmation
of your faith, and the furtherance of your salvation. So himself expounds his
own meaning, 2 Timothy 2.10. Therefore I endure all things for the Elects sake,
that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus.] And in this
sense he afterward suffered death for them: sealing the Doctrine which he had
preached with his blood: which was of great use and benefit unto the Church.
Sanguis Martyrum -- The Blood of the Martyrs is the Seed of the Church. But
neither Paul, nor any other ever were, or could be crucified, could suffer and
die for the Church, as Christ did. His suffering and dying for the Church
imports somewhat peculiar unto him, which could not be communicated to Paul, or
any other of the Apostles,

And what should that be, but that he dyed in our room in our stead, as our
Surety, to free and deliver us from death by laying down his life? In this
sense Paul says that he could wish himself to be Anathema, accursed or
separated from Christ, for his Brethren, his kinsmen according to the flesh.
Romans. 9.3. (...) for his countrymen the Jews, viz. in their stead; that so by
the perishing of one, a whole nation might be saved, which he apprehended would
tend more to the glory of God. And in this sense Caiaphas the High Priest
speaking by a Prophetical spirit, Joh. 11.50. tells the Jews, that it was
expedient that one man should die for the people, (...), in stead of the people;
that so the whole nation might not perish (as himself there expounds it. Ego
pro te molam. Terent. Vnum pro multis dabitur caput. Virgil. Vide Grotium de
satisfac. c. 9.
) Thus the phrase is commonly and properly used in all languages. For a man to
do or suffer ought [for] another, is as much as to do it in his stead. And in
this sense Christ is said to have suffered and dyed [for] us. Not only nostro
bono, for our benefit; (So Martyrs and Confessors dye,) but nostra vice, in
our room, our stead, as our Surety.

Grotius ibid. The phrase of Christ's giving himself for us vindicated.
That it must be so understood, there is one place which speaks more fully to it
then the rest, viz. Matthew 20.28. (repeated again by Saint Mark, Mark
10.45.) where our Savior sets forth this to be the end of his coming, The Son
of man came to give his life a ransom for many.] As for the word [Ransome] I
shall touch upon that anon. For the present I only take notice of the particle
[For,] which in the Original is not, as in the places forenamed, (...), but
(...), (...), Multorum vice, Beza Gr. An. Grotius ubi supra.
which properly signifies [in stead.] So it is still to be taken (says
Grotius) where ever it is thus applied to persons, or things: It imports a
Subrogation, or Commutation, a substituting of one in the room of another, or
exchanging one for another. Thus we read of Archilaus, Matthew 2.22. that he
reigned in the room of his Father Herod, (...). Thus runs that Ancient law of
Retaliation, Matthew 5.38. An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth: (...), etc.
And thus most fitly may we understand that place Matthew 17. ver. 27. where our
Savior orders Peter to take the piece of money which he should find in the
fishes mouth, and to give it in way of Tribute, for him and himself. (...),
Beza Graec. Annot. ad Mar. 10.45. Grotius ad loc. and de satisfact. cap. 9.
For me and thee, which Beza (I confess) expounds, for my sake and thine. But
Grotius more properly, mea tuaque vice, in stead of me and thee. For in that
Action Peter stood in the room of two, his Master and himself. And thus it is
said Luke 11.11. will a Father give his child a Serpent for a fish?] (...), id
est, in stead of it. Thus the Apostle says of the woman, that her hair is
given her for a covering (or veil. 1 Corinthians 11.15. (...), in stead of it.
And thus the same Apostle, as also Saint Peter, make mention of rendering evil
for evil; and Railing for Railing: (...), id est, In exchange of it. Thus that
particle, (...), Joh. 1.16. ubi (...) continet in se negationem pretii, Grot.
ad loc. Jam. 4.15. (...).
where it does not imply a Negation or opposition (as sometimes it does) it
imports a Subrogation or Commutation.

And thus are we to understand the word in those places of Saint Matthew, rends
Mark, where Christ is said to have given himself a Ransom [for] many, (...),
id est, in stead of many.

Constrictus hic Socinus, negare non audet illo (...) commutationem quandam
indicari, sed misere effugium quaerit. Grot. ibid.
Here I know the Adversary (though in measure convinced) yet still goes about
to elude this Evidence. But truly the evasions which I have met with are such,
as that they deserve to be looked upon no otherwise but as miserable
subterfuger: wherein men not willing to divorce the Errors which they have
once espoused, and to submit to the truth, do rather show what they would do,
then what they are able. And therefore I shall not trouble you with the
refutation, or yet rehearsal of them. I shall rather pass on to another
Argument. Arg. 2. Christ a Ransom for us, How?


Which I will not go far for. You shall find it in the verse next after the
Text. Wherein (as I told you) the Apostle shows in what respect he calls
Jesus Christ a Mediator betwixt God and Men; viz. in as much as he has given
himself a Ransom for all,] For All; All men indefinitely, all Ranks and
conditions of persons (as we expounded it before: Or, for all his Elect, all
that shall believe on him; (which are those [Many] spoken of Isaiah. 53. last,
Matthew 20.22. and 26.28. Hebrews 9.28.) For them he gave himself a Ransom
(says Saint Paul. (...), sc. de Credituris in Christum, Grot. in Mat. 20.28.
The word (...) expounded.
) The word in the Original is (...): A word which, as it is amongst those
(...), never to be found in the New Testament save only in that place, so it is
of special emphasis and of signification. The Vulger Latin renders it,
Redemptionem, Redemption. Beza Redemptionis precium, a price of Redemption;
(...), vicissim datum Redemptionis precium. Scapul^. (...) est tale (...) in
quo Liberator simile quiddam subit ei malo, quod ei imminebat qui liberatur.
Grot. de Satisfact. c. 8. (...) significat proprie precium, quo redimuntur
captivi ab hostibus; eamque commutationem qua capite caput, and vita redimitur
vita. Leigh Critic. ex Hyperio ad loc.
But neither of them fully expressing the force of the word; which properly
signifies a Counterprice: When one does or undergoeth in the room of another,
that which he should have done in his own person. As when one yields himself a
Captive for the redeeming of another out of Captivity: or gives his own life
for the saving of another. Such Sureties amongst the Greeks were commonly and
properly called (...), such as gave Life for life, Body for Body.

And in this sense says our Apostle here of this our Mediator, that he gave
himself (...), a Ransom, a Counterprice. Paying a price for his people, Ye are
bought with a price (says the Apostle to his Corinthians) 1 Cor. 6.20. and
7.23. So are all believers, they are bought, They are Gods Redeemed ones, Isa.
51.11. And who bought, who redeemed them? That did Jesus Christ; [Denying the
Lord that bought them (says Saint Peter speaking of those Apostates who
professed that they were redeemed by Christ) 2 Peter 2.1. And how has he
bought them? Why, by paying a price for them, a (...), a price of Redemption.
And what price was this? why his own blood. [Yee are redeemed with the precious
blood of Jesus Christ (says Saint Peter) 1 Peter 1.18. Thou wast slain, and
have redeemed us to God by thy blood, Rev. 5.9. In whom we have Redemption
through his blood, Ephesians. 1.7. id est, his death and passion, which was the
principal piece of his obedience. This was that (...), (as our Savior
himself calls it) that price of Redemption which he gave for his Elect. The
Son of Man came to give his life a Ransom for many, Mat. 20.28. A Ransom,
(...), Redemptorium, a price of Redemption; that by his death he might free and
deliver them from death.

And thus says our Apostle here in this verse after the Text, that Christ gave
himself (...), a Counterprice, a Ransom; submitting himself to the like
punishment that his redeemed ones should have undergone. So the Apostle fully
expresses it Galat. 3.13. (Which place we may well look upon as a Periphrasis,
an Exposition of this word (...), showing us how Christ is said to have given
himself a Ransom for us,) Christ (says he) has redeemed us from the curse
of the Law; being made a curse for us.] Subjecting himself to that same curse
of the Law, under which all mankind lay; and that for the delivering his Elect
from it.

To the same purpose are those other Texts, which for substance speaks the
same thing, John 6.51. Christ a true Surety.
where Christ says that he gave his flesh for the life of the world,] Titus
2.14. [He gave himself for us that he might redeem us.] Thus was Jesus Christ
a true Surety; (...), one that gave his life for the life of others; as the
Poet says of Castor and Pollux, Si fratrem Pollux alterna morte redemit:
Virgil. Aeneid. 6.
that the one redeemed the others life with his own death. So did the Lord
Jesus, this our Mediator, he became such a Surety for his Elect, giving
himself an (...), a Ransom for them.

Alleg. Now, The Socinian Doctrine. Vide Grotium de satisfact. cap. 1. and cap.
8.
how will the Adversary evade this? why, it is true (says Socinus;) This
Christ has done to deliver us from the punishment of sin: But how? not in way
of satisfaction to God, by procuring from him a discharge of our debt: How
then? why only in reference to us, that by this means we being induced to
believe the truth of his Doctrine, thus confirmed and sealed by his death, and
yiedling obedience unto God, according to the pattern that he had set before
us, we might obtain Remission of sins, and Eternal life, which upon our
repentance, and new obedience, God has promised to give. This is the sum (as
Grotius has cast it up) of what Socinus has to say in this business.

Reply. But how unsatisfactory is this? Reply
what is all this to the Texts alleged? which assert a Redemption properly so
called; The death of Christ properly a Price.
affirming that we are bought, bought with a price, a Counter-price, redeemed
by a Ransom. Now a Price, a Ransom, is somewhat that is tendered and given to
the Deliverer for the redeemed; not to the redeemed themselves. And such was
the death of Jesus Christ: a Price; and that properly so called; So much may be
collected from that place of Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. where he tells the
believers to whom he writes, [Ye are redeemed not with corruptible things, as
silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Jesus Christ.] So comparing one
price with another; silver and gold, with the blood of Christ: Now the former,
(silver and gold) given in way of Redemption, is a true price; and so is the
later, the Blood of Jesus Christ, a true (...), a true and proper price of
Redemption, given unto God as a valuable consideration for the satisfaction of
his Justice. Away then with all those mysts or fogs; which are or may be raised
by any, for the obscuring and darkning of this Truth of God, which shines so
clearly through these emphaticall phrases and expressions of Scripture
alleged, as surely that eye must either be weak or wilful, that does not, or
will not see and acknowledge it.

Socinus proprie dictum (...) seu precium definit, id quod a detinente
accipitur. Vide Grot. de Satisf. cap. 8.
Alleg. As for that which Socinus alleges, that a Price must be somewhat that
is given to, and received by one that sets another free, it is not worth the
answering.

Reply. For such was the death of Christ. It was such a price as God the Father
received accepted by way of satisfaction for those for whom it was tendered:
Accepted of God by way of satisfaction.
being contented with it. As it was under tht Law, what was there which any
ways accrued unto God from any of those Sacrifices? what did he receive from
them, which might any ways turn to his account in way of advantage? Only this
was enough; they were accepted of him, as you have it, Lev. 20.27. And so was
it with this Sacrifice of the death of Christ, which was prefigured by those
sacrifices; Though God properly received nothing for it, yet it was accepted of
him. But I shall no longer dwell upon this evidence; neither shall I over-do the
work in hand by alleging many more; yet I must remember that Foundations
cannot be too surely laid, especially where Earthquakes are frequent, as they
are in the Church amongst us at this day. And therefore let me yet subjoyn two
or three.

In the next place, what shall we say to those Texts of the Apostle, Arg. 3.
where he holds forth the death of Christ, Christ the meritorious cause of
our Reconciliation.
as the meritorious and procuring cause of our Reconciliation with God? The
places are well known, let them be seriously weighed and considered, Romans 5.10.
When we were enemies, we were reconciled unto God by the death of his Son,
Ephesians. 2.16. That he might reconcile both, (viz. Jews and Gentiles) unto God in
one body by the Cross, Col. 1.20. And having made peace through the blood of
his Cross, by him to reconcile all things to himself. In all which places the
Apostle clearly holds forth the death of Jesus Christ as the proper means of
procuring our Reconciliation with God.

Allegat. Socinian Evasion.
Allegat. To this the adversary answers (as before.) True, by this means we
are Reconciled unto God; but not God to us. As for God, he was not an enemy to
us, but we are enemies unto him. He was ready to receive and embrace us upon
our returning to him by repentance: Only we were averse to him, Enemies in our
minds through wicked works. Now this indeed Christ by his death effects
(say they) reconciling us unto God, Col. 1.21.
by bringing us unto him in the ways aforesaid, by repenting and believing.

To be reconciled to God, the phrase cleared and vindicated. Idem valet nos Deo
conciliari, and Deum nobis. Grot. de satisf. cap. 7. Grot. ibid. ex Sophocle.
Repl. But hereunto we have returned answer already; that for us to be
reconciled to God, and God to be reconciled to us, imports one and the same
thing. This we have evidenced by showing the use of the phrase in Scripture
language. To which might be added the consent of profane writers, with whom
(...), To be Reconciled to the Gods, is as much as for the Gods to be
reconciled to them, who had offended them, that so they might escape their
anger and revenge. But we shall not need to go down to the Philistines to
sharpen this Goad. In those very places alleged, upon a serious review of of
them, we shall find, that the Reconciliation there spoken of is a reconciling
of God to Man.

That to the Romans is clear. [When we were Enemies, we were reconciled unto
God.] How reconciled to him? why; so as to have peace with him, ver. 1. So as
to have a standing in his grace, ver. 2. So as to be saved from his wrath, ver.
9. Such is the Reconciliation there spoken of by the Apostle, which he further
makes to be the proper and immediate fruit and effect of the death of Christ.
[Reconciled by his death.] And consequently it must import, not properly the
Reconciling of our Natures unto God, which is done in Sanctification, and is an
immediate fruit of the Spirit of Christ; but the reconciling of our persons
unto him by Justification, which is the immediate fruit of his death.

In like manner in that place of the Ephesians, chap. 2.16. Christ is said to
have reconciled Jews and Gentiles unto God, that by reconciling them first unto
him, he might reconcile them betwixt themselves, [Reconcile them to God in one
Body.] And this he is said to have done by the Cross. Not by the Doctrine of
the Cross, (as Grotius in his later time, going about to destroy what before
he had built, Cum crucem dicit, simul intelligit doctrinam cruce sanoitam.
Grot. Comm. ad Ephesians. 2.16. Grotius de satisfact. cap. 7.
blancheth that Text,) the doctrine of the Gospel confirmed by his suffering
upon the Cross: but by the merit of the Cross, (as the same Author in his
first and better thoughts orthodoxly expounds it,) per vim scilicet
placatricem, by that pacifying, appeasing virtue which is in his blood which he
shed upon the Cross. By this means it was that he reconciled God to them, and
them to God.

And after the same manner in that other place, Col. 1.20. God is said by
Christ to reconcile all things to himself. (...), (...) hic sumendum ut supra,
ver. 16, sub ipso, five ita ut ipsi pareant. Grot. ad Col. 1.20.
not In unum, into one, (as Socinus would have it,) for then (as Grotius notes
upon it) it should have been (...). No; nor yet (as Grotius himself in his
declining time expounds it) sub ipso, under him, viz. under Christ; or to him,
viz. that they might obey him; but [to him] viz. to God the Father. So that
other place of the same Apostle explains it 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, (...). And this he has done by Christ, viz.
by and through his death. So that Parenthesis there ( Col. 1.20.) explains it
[Having made peace through the blood of his Crosse] (not the Doctrine of his
Cross, but the blood of his Cross) viz. that bloody oblation made and offered
upon the Cross: Sanguinis hic fit mentio, quia per sanguinem foedera sancire
solebant. Idem ibid.
whereby not only the Covenant was sealed (as Grotius again there blancheth it,)
but whereby the Justice of God was satisfied, and so his wrath appeased.

Thus you see the adversary put by that muse also, which being put to his
shifts he made for: and withal, this evidence made out. To which in the next
place, I shall subjoyn another near a kin to it.

John, who speaking of Christ, calls him, the Propitiation, Christ called the
propitiation.
1 John 2.2. He is the propitiation for our sins.] And again, chap. 4.10. God
sent his Son to be a Propitiation for our sins.] the word in the Original is
(...), which properly signifies Placamen, somewhat whereby an other being
offended, is pacified; That is the meaning of the Latin word made English,
[Propitiation:] it imports somewhat whereby the anger of another is appeased,
and he is induced to be propitious, merciful, favorable. So much we may learn
out of the Publicans Petition, Luke 18.13. where he prays, [God be merciful
to me a sinner.] The word is the same, (...), Placator: or Propitius esto; Be
thou appeased toward me, be thou propitious to me. This is Propitiation. From
whence the Mercie-seat (or lid) which covered the Ark was called the
Propitiatory. Exodus 25.17.
So the Apostle (following the translation of the Septuagint) calls it Hebrews
9.5. (...) ponunt 70. pro (...) quia (...) etiam (...) placare, propitiare
significat. Grot. ad Heb 9.2.
The Cherubims shadowed the Mercie-seat.] (...) (says the Original) the
Propitiatory. So called, because from thence God showed himself propitious and
favorable to his people. So he is through Jesus Christ, of whom that
Mercy-seat was a Type and figure: He is the true Propitiation. So we find him
called by our Apostle, Romans 3.25. whom God has set forth (says he, speaking
of Christ by whom we have Redemption, as the verse foregoing has it) to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood.] A propitiation; the word in the
Original is (...) the Propitiatory; alluding to that Typical Propitiatory
under the Law. Such is Jesus Christ, the true Propitiatory, (the substance of
that shadow,) the means of our Reconciliation with God, by whom his anger is
pacified and appeased, and through whom his mercy and favor is communicated
unto us. And that through his blood, (which the Apostle there sets forth as
the meritorious cause of it,) being apprehended and applied by faith, (which is
the Instrumental cause whereby it becomes effectual to that end for which it
was shed.)

And in this sense is he there called by Saint John, the propitiation; In as
much as he Reconcileth God to men, appeaseth his wrath, procures the exercises
of his grace and favor, so as God becomes actually propitious unto his people
through him. Which Christ effects, 1. as their Surety, standing in their room
and stead, interposing betwixt the wrath of God, and the rigor of the Law. A
mystery excellently represented and shadowed out in the placing of the
Mercy-seat betwixt the Tables of the Law, and the Majesty of God appearing
between the Cherubims, Exodus 25.21, 22. Showing how Jesus Christ our Mediator
interposeth betwixt God and the Law in the behalf of his people. So as God
looking upon the Law through him, he beholds it as fulfilled by him for their
sakes, and on their behalf; and so becomes propitious unto them. And 2ly,
Opera- (...) torium. Montanus.
this he does by Covering their sins. That is the proper and primary meaning of
the Hebrew word [Caphoreth,] which we render the Mercy-seat; it properly
signifies a Covering, which the Mercy-seat was to the Ark. And such is Jesus
Christ unto his people, a Covering; covering their sins by his merit, so as
they appear not in the sight of God, to the making their persons guilty before
him. Hereunto the Psalmist alludes, Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is the man whose
transgression is forgiven, and whose sin is covered: viz. by the obedience of
Jesus Christ. And thirdly, This he does by expiating their sins, and making
satisfaction for them. This are we to understand by that unwonted phrase of the
Apostle, Heb. 2.17. (borrowed from the Prophet Daniel, Dan. 9.24.) where this
is set forth as one principal part of Christ's Priestly Office, (...), hoc
quidem loco est purgare a peccato, i. e. efficere ne peccetur, vires
suppeditando pro modo tentationum. Grot. ad Heb. 2.17. (...) Heb. 2.17.
significat expiatiationem, sed eam quae fit placando: Grot. de Satisfact. cap.
7.
[To make Reconciliation for the sins of the people.] (...): that is, to
expiate, and take away their sins. To take them away, not only in respect of
Power, (as Grotius comments upon it) by giving them strength against them
suitable to their tentations, and so causing them not to sin: but in respect of
guilt; by the Sacrifice of himself, making satisfaction unto the Justice of
God for them, (as the same Author in his better mind expounds it.) Thus is
Christ said to be the Propitiation, being the means of reconciling his Elect
unto God, and that by the offering up of himself.

Offering up of himself. Christ offered up himself.
That gives me a hint of one Evidence more, which is the that I shall take up
from the Author to the Hebrews, who in that Epistle makes frequent mention of
this Oblation, Christ's offering up himself. And as elsewhere, so especially
in his 9th Chapter, where he purposely discourses of that Subject; comparing
the Sacrifice of Christ with those Typical Sacrifices under the Law. The sum
and substance of which discourse you shall find bound up in one verse, ver. 26.
of that Chapter, where speaking of Christ, Heb. 9.26. Opened and glossed upon.
he says that [Now once in the end of the world, he has appeared to put away
sin, by the Sacrifice of himself.] A passage, wherein there is not a word but
has his weight. Give me leave briefly to gloss upon each of them.

Christ has appeared.] (...), Christ's appearing on earth. Christus (...), i.
e. obtulit se, and ostendit Deo Patri in Sanctuario coelesti: Grot. Com. ad
loc. Fuerat ante Abrahamum Jesus divina constitutione. Grot. ad loc.
he was made manifest: appearing not in heaven (as the Socinian would have it)
but upon earth. Christ was before; [ Before Abraham was I am, John 8.58.]
Christ was before Abraham, not only in respect of God's Ordination, (as Grotius
would elude that Text,) for in that sense all others were before Abraham as
well as he; yea, Abaham was before himself, having a being first in God's
Ordination, before he had an actual existence in the World: But he was so
actually; having a being in Heaven according to his Godhead. There he was, but
there he was hidden, hidden in the Bosom of the Father: But in his Incarnation
he was manifested, [The Son of God was manifested (says Saint John) 1 John
3.8. God was manifested in the flesh, (says Saint Paul) 1 Timothy 3.16. Or, He
appeared. Before, he was hidden under those Legal Types and Ceremonies, which
were as a Veil overshadowing him; But now being incarnate, that Vail was taken
off from his face, and he appeared, being made conspicuous under the Gospel; so
as now all might with open face behold the Glory of God, shining in the face of
Jesus Christ, (as our Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 3.18. and 4.6.) Thus has Christ
appeared. But when did he thus appear? That follows.

[In the end of the World.] In the end of the World.
(...), that is (say some) when the Jewish State, the Temple, Vide Grotium ad
loc.
and their Commonwealth drew nigh to an end. This is that end which our Savior
speaks of Mat. 24.6. The end is not yet.] meaning thereby the final
destruction of the Temple and City of Jerusalem. Before this time, and not long
before, it was that Christ was manifested in the flesh, that he appeared. Or
(as it is more commonly, and (as I conceive) more properly taken,) In the end
of the world] i. e. In the last days, (as the same Apostle has it, cap. 1.2.)
the last Time, or Times: so St Peter calls them, 1 Pet. 1.5. and 20. And St
John, the last Hour, 1 John 2.18. (...) the last Time, or Hour, So did the
Apostles then look upon the world, as drawing toward a period, a consummation:
And that not far from it in their times: what then may we do in ours? But I
pass on.

Thus Christ appeared in the end of the world, and that but [Once.] Once, and
but once.
(...). As for the Priests under the Law they appeared Often before God in the
execution of their Ministerial function; [The Priest went always (say the 6th
and 7th verses of this chapter) i. e. daily, every day, into the first
Tabernacle (the holy place, the second court of the Tabernacle, or Temple)
accomplishing the service of God. But into the second (the Holy of Holies) went
the High Priest once every year.] Thus they appeared Often. But Christ our High
Priest appears but Once: Once upon Earth, and Once in Heaven. Once upon Earth
before Men; Of this speaks the Apostle here in this 26. verse. Once in Heaven
before God; Of this he speaks verse 12. By his own blood he entered in once
into the Holy place.] i. e. Into Heaven. Mark it. Once he appeared upon Earth,
and once in Heaven. Christ appears once upon Earth, and once in Heaven.
As for any such second appearing upon Earth, and returning to heaven before
his coming to the last and general Judgment, Millenaries confuted.
as some imagine, this our Apostle takes no notice of it; And therefore I dare
not avouch it. Nay, he tells me expressly in the last verse of this chapter,
that Christ having been once offered to bear the sins of Many, he shall appear
the second time without sin unto Salvation, unto them that look for him.]
Mark it. Christ appears, not twice upon Earth, once to suffer, and once to
reign there personally; and twice in Heaven, once after his Resurrection; and
once after the settlement of his supposed Government, (as some have conceived;)
but Once upon Earth, and once in Heaven; As for his second Appearing, it shall
be unto Salvation, to the complete and perfect salvation both of Soul and Body
in heaven (so Expositors, I think universally, expound that place) of all those
who love and look for that Appearing. Heb. 5.9. 2 Timothy 4.8.
In the mean time, let it be enough for us, that he has appeared once upon
Earth. So it may well be, if we do but consider what follows: viz. the end of
this Appearance, which was.

To put away sin] How Christ is said to have put away sin.
(...), to the Abrogating, abolishing, taking away of sin. Not taking it out of
the world. No; the world still lies in wickedness, 1 John 5.19. Nor yet
taking it out of the persons of his redeemed ones, so as that it is should have
no abiding, no inbeing in them. No; this is a perfection reserved for heaven,
not to be looked for on Earth. But so taking it away, as that it shall not be
imputed to them, nor yet reign in them: For both these ends Christ appeared
upon Earth, for the abolishing of sin in his people, both in respect of Guilt
and Power. It is the former of these that is here properly and principally
intended. So much will appear from the next clause which sets forth the way
and means whereby Jesus Christ effects this abrogation and abolition of sin,
viz.

By the Sacrifice of himself,] The Sacrifice of Christ, himself.
(...). This was the Sacrifice which Christ our High Priest offered. Not the
Bodies of other creatures, as those Legal Priests did; but his own body,
Offered upon Earth- Vide D. L. in Heb. 1.3. and 9. ver. 26.
himself. And this Sacrifice he offered up, not in Heaven (as the Socinian
would have it) in presenting himself before God his Father, but upon Earth,
viz. in his Passion upon the Cross. There was this Sacrifice offered up.
Duplex est, ut legalium quarundam victimarum, ita Christi oblatio: prior
mactationis, altera ostentationis. Grot. de satisfact. cap. 10.
True indeed, it was afterward presented in heaven, but it was first offered
upon Earth. So was it with some Sacrifices under the Law; The blood of them was
represented by the High Priest in the most Holy place, (as this our Apostle
tells us, ver. 7. of this chapter,) but they were offered before, viz. in the
slaying and sacrificing of them by the Priest. So was it in this Sacrifice of
Christ. How ever it be presented before God in heaven (which is an other part
of Christ's Mediatorship (as God willing I shall show you hereafter) belonging
to the next branch, his Intercession) yet it was offered up upon earth, viz. in
his Death.

(...) est (...). In mactatione Sacrificium. Grot. de Satisf. cap. 10.
Thus were sacrifices said to be offered up, when they were slain. So profane
Authors ever use the word, and Scripture the like. When God bids Abraham go
offer his son, Genesis 22.2. he addresseth himself to slay him, ver. 10. which
because he had intentionally done, though not with his hand, yet in his heart;
he is therefore said to have offered him up, Heb. 11.17. Therein was Isaak a
Type of Christ, who was offered up after the same manner, being actually slain:
There was he truly offered. Hence it is that Saint John calls him only the
Lamb slain, Revel. 5.6. and 13.8. which Saint Paul renders, Sacrificed,
Offered, [Christ our Passover is sacrificed (or offered) for us, 1 Corinthians
5.7. Thus was Christ first offered up upon Earth.

Neither was this only a Preparation to that oblation which is made in Heaven
(as the Socinian would have it) but a perfect Oblation. The death of Christ
more then a preparation to his oblation.
So was the offering made by the Priest in the Holy-place. It was more then a
Preparation to an offering; a true Sacrifice. As for the presenting of the
blood of the Sacrifice in the Holy of Holies, it was not properly a Sacrifice,
Grotius ibid.
but rather the Commemoration of a Sacrifice already made. So stands it
betwixt Christ's Oblation and his Intercession: The former was done upon Earth:
There was the Sacrifice offered. The later is only a Commemoration of that
Sacrifice, a presenting it unto God, as it were continually to put him in mind
of what was done: that for the merit thereof he may be propitious unto his
people.

And this is the Sacrifice, whereby Christ is said to put away sin. By this
sacrifice Christ puts away sin.
Not properly his Intercession in heaven, but his Immolation, his oblation upon
earth in his death upon the cross. So the Spirit of God clearly carries it,
every where ascribing the work of our Redemption, the taking away of sin, to
the death and bloodshed of Christ. [He gave his life a Ransom, Mat. 20.28.
Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation through faith in his blood, Romans
3.25. In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, the forgiveness of sins,
Ephesians. 1.7. Ye are redeemed with the Blood of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.19. Thou
wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy Blood, Rev. 5.9. Places are
numerous which give attestation to this truth. Were there no other, those last
words of our Savior were sufficient, John 19.30. Consummatum est, It is
finished.] What was finished? Why, the great Work of Redemption, for which he
came into the World. That was not only inchoated and begun, but consummated,
perfected there: His Passion was not only a Praeludium, a Preparation to this
work, but even the accomplishment of it. There was this great benefit of
Remission of sins merited, purchased. There wanted nothing but the Application
of that merit to the persons of God's Elect, to the making it effectual unto
them for their Justification: Otherwise the work it self was complete and
perfect. By one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified,
Heb. 9.14.

To this Truth this our Apostle in this Epistle to the Hebrews speaks so
fully, so clearly, as we shall not need to seek elsewhere for evidence, Cap.
1.3. Christ is said to have purged our sins by himself, (i. e. by the offering
of himself) before he sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high.]
before his entrance into Heaven. Cap. 9. ver. 12. he is said to have entered
into the holy place, (that is, Heaven,) By his own Blood having obtained
Eternal Redemption for us.] viz. by the shedding of that blood: Here in this
26th verse which I am now discoursing upon, he is said to put away sin by the
Sacrifice of himself.] (...), which word properly signifies a Sacrifice
slain, (as Grotius observes from that place of Saint John, John 10.10. where
the word (...), which signifies to sacrifice, is used simply for to kill, [The
thief comes not but to steal, and to kill: (...).) Now Christ was slain upon
the Altar of the Cross, and there was he sacrificed.

And by that Sacrifice he took away sin: not only the power of it, (as the
Socinian would have it) but the Guilt and Punishment of it. This is that (as I
said) which is here properly and principally intended, as being the immediate
fruit of this Sacrifice: The explating and taking away sin in reference to the
Guilt of it; abolishing the Obligation of sin, so as it shall not bind the
believer over unto condemnation. This is that which Christ has done for us.

And this he has done by that Sacrifice as our Surety. First, taking our sins
upon him, Which he did as a Surety for his Elect.
and then taking them away. Both these are comprehended in that one word which
we meet with in the last verse of this Chapter, [Christ was once offered (says
the Apostle) to bear the sins of many.] (...), (says the Original,) a full
and emphaticall word, signifying not only to bear, but also to bear away. And
both these has Christ done by our sins, [Behold the Lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the world (says the Baptist of Christ, John 1.29. ((...); the
word signifies both Ferens, and Auferens: bearing them, and bearing them away.
Both these did the Scapegoat under the Law, (as you may see Lev. 16.21, 22.)
The High Priest laying the iniquities of the people upon the head of that Goat,
it bears them upon it, and bears them away out of sight. Thus has the Lord
Jesus (of whom that Goat was a Type) he having the sins, the iniquities of his
Elect laid upon him by God his Father, (as the Prophet Isai. has it in the
place forenamed, Isai. 53.6.) he bears them, (as you have it in the last
verse there.) And bearing them, he took them away. (...), That is the word
which St Peter also makes use of, 1 Pet. 2.24. He bare our sins in his Body
upon the Tree.] The word (says Beza, Beza Gr. Annot. ad loc.
writing upon that place) it properly signifies Attollere, or sursum far: to
take and carry up. So the Syriack there renders it, (as he observes.) (...),
Bajulavit, and sursum tulit, He bare our sins, and carried them up. This has
Jesus Christ done for us. He has born our sins, and carried them up; viz. up
upon his Cross, there to make satisfaction for them: according to that of the
Apostle, Colos. 2.14. where he speaks of Christ's nayling the Handwriting of
Ordinances unto his Cross, and so taking it out of the way.

Thus has Christ by the sacrifice of himself taken away the sins of all that
believe on him; Expiating them, Purging them. That is the expression which this
our Apostle elsewhere makes use of, viz. chap. 1.3. where speaking of Christ,
he tells us that he has by himself purged our sins.] And Saint John makes use
of the same word 1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ purges (or cleanses)
us from all sin.] Give me leave to take hold of the skirt of that expression;
we may learn somewhat from it, which may conduce not a little to the clearing
of the point in hand, touching Christ's taking away our sins by the sacrifice of
himself. To which end I shall enquire.

Que. How is Christ there said to purge our sins?

Quest. How Christ is said to purge our sins.
Ans. Answ. Nor only declaratively, but effectually.
I answer. Not only Declaratively (as Socinus would have it;) declaring the
sins of believers to be purged upon their Repentance. That is but a miserable
evasion. So it must needs appear to him that looks upon the former of those
Texts with an impartial and unprejudicated eye; where it is not said, that
Christ declared a Purgation of sins, but he made it: So the Original has it.
(...), purgatione facta, having made a Purgation: And that by himself, (...):
not declaring what his Father had done, or would do, but what Christ himself
had done.

Quest. But what Purgation is it that is there spoken of? whether from the
Power, or Guilt of sin? Quest. Whether Christ purges only from power, and not
also from guilt.


Ans. Answ. Socinian evasion. Dr. L. in Heb. 1.18. Vide Grot. de Satisfact. c.
7. Expiation how understood by the Socinian.
Here Socinians being put by the former shift, some of them make for this:
Christ is said to Expiate and purge our sins (say they) in as much he
succoureth us in our Tentations, and so preventeth sin in us. This is all which
those of that way mean, when they speak of Christ's expiation (which they in
word acknowledge, but in truth deny) they refer it only to sins to come, not to
sins past. And understand it only of the destruction or Prevention of sin; not
of any satisfaction made for it: Of taking away the Power, not the Guilt of it,
otherwise then occasionally, viz. by making us capable of receiving remission
upon Repentance.

Christ's expiation is properly of the guilt of sin.
But this evasion is no less palpable then the former. True, Christ does also in
this sense purge away sins. But the Purging and cleansing there spoken of is
properly and principally the taking away of the Guilt of sin by way of
Remission. This is the (...), the Purgation which the Author to the Hebrews
there aymeth at. So we shall find himself expounding the word and thing chap.
9.22. Almost all things are by the Law purged with blood, and without shedding
of blood is no Remission.] The later clause expounds the former, showing what
he means by Purging, viz. the taking away the Guilt of sin by way of
Remission. And S. John does as much for himself v. 9. of that first chapter,
where he puts these two words (...) and (...), Forgiving and cleansing of sin,
together; so showing what Purgation it was that he had before spoken of ver. 7.
viz. Purgation by way of Remission, by taking away the Guilt of sin. In this
way Christ is said to have purged our sins, by way of Expiation properly so
called, Purging them by the Sacrifice of himself.

A mystery clearly represented and held forth in those expiatory Sacrifices,
the sin offerings under the Law. Concerning which, pardon a necessary
digression.

That those Sacrifices were a Type of Christ, none but a Socinian will or date
to deny: Expiatory Sacrifices under the Law a type of Christ's expiation.
Scripture being so express and full for it. And that as elsewhere, so
specially in this Epistle to the Hebrews; where the Apostle speaking of those
Legal Rites and Ceremonies (the Sacrifices among the rest) he tells us, that
they served unto the example and shadow of heavenly things, cap. 8.5. And chap.
9. v. 9. Heb. 8.5. (...). Cap. 9.9. (...).
he tells us that the first Tabernacle was a figure of the time then present, in
which were offered up both gifts and Sacrifices.] All of them Types and
Figures. And again, verse 23. he calls them patterns of things in the
heavens. And verse 24. Verse. 23. (...). Verse. 24. (...).
Figures of the True, viz. of Christ and his Sacrifice. Thus again chap. 10.1.
he calls the Law (...), a shadow of good things to come.] That was but a shadow.
And what was the substance but Christ? Christus and Christi, Christ and his
benefits. Christ, he was the True Minister of the sanctuary and of the
Tabernacle, which God has pitched; So you have it chap. 8.2. (...). The
Minister of the holy things. These are those good things whereof the Law is
there said to be a shadow, even the good things of Christ, the Benefits
procured and dispensed by him. Those Ceremonies were the shadow; Christ the
Body. So the Apostle expressly informs us, Col. 2.17. where speaking of some
Ceremonial observations, he says, they were a shadow of things to come, but
the Body is of Christ.] And St. John intimates no less, Joh. 1.17. where he
tells us that the Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus
Christ.] He was the Truth of all those Types, the substance of all those
shadows. A truth so evident, that surely, were not men brought to great
straights in maintaining their Error, they would never deny, or once call it
in question.

The Representation cleared.
This being thus cleared (for we are enforced to clear our way as we go, finding
it so obstructed at every turn, as it is by the many cavils of the Adversary,)
come we now to take notice of that Representation (which I spoke of) which is
held forth in and by those Expiatory Sacrifices, and see wherein they were a
Type of Christ, and his sacrifice. For this purpose consult we that place of
Leviticus cap. 10. ver. 17. where Moses declares unto the people the
Institution of the sin-offering, showing to what end it was given to the
people. [God has given it you (says he) to bear the Iniquity of the
Congregation, to make atonement for them before the Lord.] Mark it. Herein
are two things to be taken notice of. First, this Sacrifice stands in the
room of the people, in their stead, bearing their sins. And then it makes
atonement for them before the Lord. In both, a lively Type of Jesus Christ,
and of his Sacrifice upon the cross, wherein he in like manner first stood in
the room and stead of his people, bearing their Iniquities (as I have shown
you.) And then Expiated them, made Atonement for them.

Quest. Quest. How those sacrifices are said to expiate. (...) ad Expiandum.
Montanu.
But how are those sacrifices said to make an Atonement for the people, or to
Expiate them? for so the Hebrew word is there most properly rendered, importing
a freeing and delivering one from the Guilt and punishment of sin. Now how are
those sacrifices said to have done this?

A. For answer to this, we must take notice that in those sins committed under
the Law there was a twofold guilt; Answ. A twofold Guilt under the Law. Pareus
Com. ad Heb. cap. 9. Dub. 1.
A Ceremonial and a Moral guilt; or an External and an Eternal guilt. An
External or Temporal guilt, a guilt before men, binding the offenders over
unto temporal punishment. An Eternal or Spiritual guilt before God, binding
them over unto Eternal condemnaton. Now as for the former of these, that
External or Ceremonial guilt, that was expiated and taken away by performing
that which was legally required in the way of a Ceremonial satisfaction.
Hereby the people offending was acquitted before men, in foro Externo, and
freed from Temporal guilt and punishment, by virtue of that Sacrifice, or
rather Gods Ordinance and Institution concerning it. But for the later, that
Eternal and Moral guilt, that was expiated and taken away by those Sacrifices
only Typically and Sacramentally: viz. as they represented and shadowed out the
true Expiatory Sacrifice of Jesus Christ. And thus are those Sacrifices said to
have Expiated the people. It is a Sacramental phrase and manner of speech,
wherein that which is the proper effect of the thing signified, is attributed
to the sign. Even as the Sacramental water in Baptism is said to wash away
sins, Act. 22.16. Thus did the blood of these Sacrifices expiate the sins of
the people, by representing the Expiation of Christ, that Satisfaction whereby
his people are freed from eternal guilt. Such an expiation has Jesus Christ
made.

And that by his Blood. Christ's expiation made by his blood,
In this way the sin offering is said to have made that Legal, Typical,
Ceremonial Expiation, Levit. 17.11. It is the blood that makes an atonement
for the Soul.] And in this way it is the Lord Jesus has made this true and
real Expiation, viz. by his Blood shed upon the Altar of the Cross. [The blood
of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin (says Saint John) 1. Joh. 1.7.
Behold here an Expiation, a full and perfect Expiation: A full and perfect
expiation.
wherein the shadow comes short of the substance, the Type of the Truth. As
for those Sacrifices, they extended only to a Ceremonial and Temporal
Expiation; and that only of some sins. But the Sacrifice of Christ extends
to a real, Eternal Expiation; and that of all sins. So Paul delivers it in
his Sermon at Antioch, Act. 13.39. By him all that believe are justified from
all things, from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses.] By the
Law of Moses, by those Legal Sacrifices therein prescribed, none could be
justified before God for any sins. So much we may learn from this our
Apostle, Heb. 10.1. The law can never by those sacrifices, which they offered
year by year, make the comers thereunto perfect.] That is, as touching the
Conscience, as the same pen expounds it, chap. 9.9. They could not in and by
themselves, as separated from their spiritual significations, sanctify or
purify the Conscience; they being Corporal, and that Spiritual. Neither
could they give an absolution in foro conscientiae, they could not give any
assurance to the Conscience that sin was pardoned, and reconciliation obtained
with God. In reference hereunto the Apostle tells us ver. 4. of that 10th
chapter, that It is not possible that the blood of Bulls and of Goats should
take away sin: Take away the Eternal guilt of it. And as for the External and
Temporal, it extended (as I said) only to some kinds of sin. Thence was it
(as the Hebrew Doctors observe) that David deprecating of his Adultery and
Murder, Psalm. 51.16. he waves the offering of Sacrifice for them. Why so? not
only because Sacrifices themselves severed from the Blood of Christ, could not
ought avail to the purging away of any sin; but also because the Law had
provided no sacrifices for those sins. To which the Apostle may be conceived to
allude Heb. 10.26. where speaking of that unpardonable sin, the sin against the
Holy Ghost, wilful malice against the Truth of the Gospel received and
acknowledged; he says, There remains no more sacrifice for that sin. But now
the Blood of Jesus Christ, as it is a true and real Expiation, making
satisfaction for sin, and so purging the conscience from the guilt of it, so it
extends to all sin. So it does, where the remedy is not refused, as it is in
the sin forenamed, that sin exempted from mercy.

And thus have I at the length, taking hold of the clew of the Spirit, held
forth in the sacred Scriptures, passed through this last evidence, or proof;
upon which I have insisted the longer, because I apprehend it to be of special
consequence and importance for the vindicating and clearing of this Truth,
touching Christ's taking away of sin by way of Expiation, by making
satisfaction unto the Justice of God for it.

I am not ignorant that the Adversary yet seeks out for other evasions
besides those already named, for the declining of the force of this Argument.
But I find them to be such, as vulgar and ordinary capacities are not capable
of apprehending and conceiving them: which, though no more should be said to
them, is more then a probable evidence, that there is no strength in them: but
that they tend merely to the darkening of the Truth, which to those who will
not shut their eyes against the light, shines forth clearly in those
aforenamed plain and simple Evidences. And therefore I shall not trouble you
with them.

To what has been spoken, in way of further confirmation of this Truth; I
might yet, ex abundanti, add many Scripture Evidences more. And to them I might
also subjoyne the Testimony of the Church, held forth by the eminent Lights
therein, in their successive generations: a work which I find already done to
my hand, by one well versed in this Controversy and those Records. But I will
not hold forth a Candle to the Sun. Grotius de Satisfact. in Calce. Testimonia
veterum.
Give me leave only for further satisfaction, to take notice of some few of
the principal Arguments, which the Adversary takes up either from Scripture
or Reason, for the expounding, of this Doctrine. This task I shall dispatch
with all convenient brevities.

These Arguments or Objections, Socinian Objections answered.
such as I have met with, I find them all reducible and referrable to three
heads. First, How can this Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction stand with the
Truth of God? Secondly, How with his Justice? Thirdly, How with his Grace and
Mercy? All these Attributes are charged by the Adversary to be impeached and
prejudiced by this our Doctrine. But how unjust this charge is, will (I trust)
clearly appear in their vindication. Begin with the first.

How can this stand with the Truth of God? His Truth in his Threatenings,
Christ's Satisfaction inconsistent with the Truth of God. 1. In his threatenings.
his Truth in his Promises: both which seem to disclaim any such way of
Reconciliation?

Alleg. 1. For the Threatenings. They charge sin upon the head of the sinner.
That of the Prophet Ezekiel is express, Ezekiel. 18.20. The soul that sins it
shall die; the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the
father bear the iniquity of the son: the righteousness of the righteous shall
be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him.] Lo, here is
a Law that excludes all Commutations of Penance, of Punishment: requiring
satisfaction from the person offending, not from any other.

Ans. Answer.
To this it is answered. It is a mistake, if any shall look upon this as an
universal and indispensible Rule, Ezekiel. 18.20. explained and vindicated.
which God does tie himself to walk by at all times, in all places, toward all
persons. No, both Law and Practice speak the contrary. For Law, that Apendix to
the second Commandment is well known. I the Lord thy God am a jealous God,
visiting the iniquities of the fathers upon the children unto the third and
fourth generation of them that hate me.] Exodus 20.5. And for Practice,
Precedents are obvious. Canaan is cursed for the sin of his father Cham, Genesis
9.25. Saul's sons and Nephews are hanged up for the fact of their father, and
that not without God's approbation, 2 Samuel 21.8. Seventy thousand persons
perish for David's sin in numbering the people, and that by God's immediate
stroke, 2 Samuel 24.15. whereupon David, conscious of his own guilt, and their
innocence, cries out in way of a just commiseration, I have sinned, and I
have done wickedly, but what have these sheep done? ver. 17. Instances of this
kind are numerous, 1 King. 14.10. The Lord threatens to bring evil upon the
house of Jeroboam for Jeroboam's sake. Thus does God often, according to that
his threatening, visit the sin of the fathers upon the children, viz. in the way
of temporal Judgment. Specially where he finds them treading in their
fathers steps, as Canaan did in Chams, and Jeroboams posterity in his.

So then, we cannot look upon that passage in Ezekiel as a perpetual and
standing Law for all times and places: but only as calculated for that present
Meridian, as peculiar to those times, and that people. The Lord therein
declaring to the people of the Jews what the course of his ordinary providence
should thenceforth be in his proceedings with them. So much may clearly be
collected from the first verses of this chapter, where the Lord expostulates
with that people about a Proverb which was in use amongst them, [The fathers
have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge, ver. 2. The
meaning whereof was, that Manasseh and others of their forefathers had sinned,
and they suffered for it. So you have it explained Lam. 5.7. Our Fathers have
sinned, and are not; and we have born their Iniquities.] Thus did they abuse
the patience and indulgence of God in deferring his Judgments, taking occasion
from thence to charge him with some hard measure, some unequal dealings
toward themselves. Hereupon the Lord tells them, that he would take away that
occasion from them. So you have it ver. 3. As I live (says the Lord) ye shall
not any more have occasion to use this Proverb in Israel.] How so? why
hereafter he intended to be more speedy in the execution of his Judgments; he
would bring them speedily upon the person that sins [The soul that sins
shall die, etc.] this is all that is intended in that place. Which being so
looked upon, makes nothing against the point in hand. Notwithstanding that,
with a Non obstante, God may and does, and that Justly, charge the sin of one
upon another, in the way of temporal Punishment; I, and accept such a
satisfaction made by one for another. Thus in those forenamed instances. That
execution done upon Saul's sons, it is accepted as a Temporal satisfaction for
the sin of Saul, so as thereupon the Lord was reconciled to the people, and was
entreated for the land, as you have it 2 Samuel 21. ver. 14. In like manner that
execution which the destroying Angel had done upon those seventy thousand, God
accepted it as a temporal satisfaction for the sin of David, whereby he had
provoked him against that people 2 Samuel 24. last. And even thus has God
required and accepted this Eternal satisfaction made by Christ in the behalf
of his Elect people: Which he has done without any impeachment to his Truth,
his truth in his Threatenings.

Alleg. 2. But how can this stand with his truth in his Promises? 2. In his
promises.
Has not God promised Remission of sins and Eternal life upon the condition
of Repentance and new obedience, without any further satisfaction? So it there
follows in the next verse ( Ezekiel. 18.21.22.) If the wicked will turn from
all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my statutes, etc. He shall
surely live, he shall not die. All his transgressions that he has committed,
they shall not be mentioned unto him, in his righteousness that he has done
he shall live.] Many such promises we meet withal, both in the Old Testament,
and New.

A. To this it is answered. True, the penitent sinner upon his Repentance,
evangelical obedience, Answ. The promises of Remission and salvation upon
conditions of Repentance and new. Obedience how understood.
and Perseverance, he shall live, and that Eternally. But what? are these the
cause of his salvation? Not so. Conditions they are, and so a causa sine qua
non (as they call it;) Conditions without which they shall not be saved. Except
ye repent ye shall all likewise perish, (says our Saaiour to those censorious
Jews) Luke 13.3. And they are the way, which leads to heaven; Via Regni, The
way to the Kingdom, a way which God has laid out for his people to walk in,
Ephesians. 2.10. and they walking in it, shall attain the end of their hope, the
salvation of their souls; it will bring them to heaven. I, but not causa
regnandi, not the cause of their Reigning there. No, the proper procuring cause
of salvation is only the Obedience of Jesus Christ, being apprehended and
applied by Faith. To both which, Repentance and new obedience are subordinate.

Mark it. There are three things which (besides the Grace of God, which is the
first moving cause) concur in bringing a sinner to salvation, viz. Christ,
Faith, Repentance. Christ, Faith, Repentance, subordinate; the one presupposing
the other.
The first of these (Christ) he is the meritorious cause of it. The two others
( Faith and Repentance) are as Conditions of the Covenant, without which Christ
and his merits shall be of no avail unto the sinner; Repent and believe the
Gospel, Mark 1.15. Now these are subordinate the one to the other. The first
(Christ) being the proper and principal procuring cause. The 2d (Faith) an
Isntrumental cause. The 3d (Repentance) a Concomitant of Faith, a fruit and
effect of it. The one necessarily depending upon the other. Repentance upon
Faith, and Faith upon Christ. There is no true Faith without Repentance: it
being Faith that purifieth the heart, Acts 15.9. And there is no true Faith
without Christ: he being the proper object of true saving justifying faith, as
it justifies and saves. Now, according to that known and vulgar Maxim,
Subordinata non pugnant: Things which are subordinate the one to the other,
they may well stand together. The asserting of the one is not the denying of
the other. The taking in of the one is not the shutting out of the other;
whilst it is said that God pardons sins unto the sinner upon his Repentance,
it does not exclude faith, without which it is impossible to please God. Heb.
11.6. But includes it, presupposes it. And thus when we are said to be
justified and saved by faith, it does not exclude, but include Christ, from
whom faith draws that Justifying and saving virtue. Thus do these stand well
together. He that Repents and believes shall be saved; but not without
Christ. It is not his Repentance or Faith, as they are works, that shall be
imputed unto him unto Justification and salvation; But the Obedience of Christ
apprehended by faith and imitated in near obedience. Hereby it is that sinners
are Reconciled, Justified, saved.

Q. But was this the way of Reconciliation under the old Testament? The same
way of reconciliation under the old Testament and the New.


Ans. Surely yes. Our Apostle in the verse after the Text tells us, that,
Christ gave himself a Ransom for us all; that is, not only for Gentiles, but
for Jews; not only for those who lived after his death, but those who lived
before. All true believers. As by the offense of one (says the same Apostle,
Romans 5.18.). (or rather by one offense (so the Original has it, (...)) viz.
the first sin of the first Adam) Judgment came upon all men unto condemnation;
Even so by the righteousness of one (or one Righteousness, (...), one
Justification, meaning the righteousness of the second Adam) the free gift
came upon all men unto Justification of life.] Thus there is but one way of
Reconciling Men to God. As there was but one door at which Enmity brake in, so
there is but one door to let in Reconciliation. The same way that is held
forth under the Gospel, was also held forth under the Law. Only with this
difference; That which was velatum, veiled and hidden in the one, hidden under
Types and Figures, is Revelatum, unvailed, in the other. Otherwise, there is
the same Jesus Christ, yesterday (under the old Testament,) to day (under the
New,) and the same for ever. The virtue of his satisfaction extending as well
backwards, as forwards; as well to the sins of the Law, as the Gospel. So
much is expressly asserted by the Apostle, Hebrews 9.15. where this our
Mediator the Lord Jesus is said to have suffered death for the Redemption of
the trespasses that were under the old Testament] not that the sins of the
fathers were not pardoned before Christ died: but that they WERE pardoned only
by virtue of Christ's death who in reference to the virtue and efficacy of his
death, (as I showed you before) is said to be the Lamb slain from the beginning
of the World, Rev. 13.8. Thus you see the first of these Attributes vindicated
and cleared from such impeachments as it might be conceived to suffer through
this Doctrine of Christ's satisfaction. This makes nothing against the Truth
of God, whether in his Threatenings, or Promises. Pass we now to the second.

How can this stand with the Justice of God, How Christ's Satisfaction stands
with the Justice of God.
and make satisfaction for the sin of another? The Rule of Justice is, Noxa
sequitur caput. The same person that sins should suffer.

To this it is answered. Justice is twofold, either strict, and rigorous; or
moderated Answ. Justice twofold, Strict, or Moderated.
and tempered with Lenity, Clemency, Mercy. So is it with men: Amongst us there
is a King's Bench, (as it was wont to be called,) and a Chancery; the one a
Court of strict Justice, the other of Equity. And thus is it in Gods
proceedings with his creatures; with some he deals in strict Justice, so he
does with reprobate Angels, and reprobate men, such as despise that Redemption
which is held forth unto them. With others he proceeds in a way of moderated
and tempered justice. So deals he with believers, relaxing and dispensing
with his own Law as to them, accepting the satisfaction of another on their
behalfs.

Alleg. But still is not this injustice, thus to charge their sins upon
another, and to require satisfaction from him? Is it not directly contrary to
God's own Law, Deuteronomy. 24. The Law Deuteronomy. 24.16. cleared.
where he expressly prohibits any such Commutation or Exchange, ver. 16. The
fathers shall not be put to death for the children, neither shall the children
be put to death for the fathers; Every man shall be put to death for his own
sin.]

Ans. To this it is answered, This is a Law for man, not for God: Answer. That
Law binds man, not God.
binding the one, not the other. God having an absolute power over the lives of
his creatures, he may dispose of them as it pleases him, and who shall say
unto him, what do thou? If he punish the sin of the father upon the child,
though it be unto death, who shall challenge him of injustice, when as both
Parents and children are guilty before him?

Reply. But it may be said, Here the case is otherwise, Here the Innocent
suffers for the Nocent; Reply How the Innocent may suffer for the Nocent.
the just for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3.18. He that knew no sin, (viz. by
experience) was made sin, (that is, a Sacrifice for sin, bearing the punishment
thereof) for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. And can this be justice?

Ans. To this it is answered. Even thus it was in some of the cases forenamed.
Readiness sons were innocent as to that fact of their fathers, for which they
suffered. And so was David's child, as to his Fathers Adultery, and murder. And
so were the people as to David's act in numbering them, What have these sheep
done? Yet who dares challenge God of injustice herein?

Rep. Why, but that the Innocent should suffer, and the nocent go free, The
nocent going free.
this may seem to be harsh.

Ans. And was it not so in those two, last named instances? The Innocent child
and the Innocent people suffer, whilst guilty David goes free. True, he
suffered in their sufferings, otherwise his person not touched.

Repl. But it may be said in those examples, there was some Relation and
Conjunction betwixt the person offending and suffering, which drew the guilt of
the one upon the other.

Ans. And is it not so here? Betwixt Christ and his Elect people all true
believers? there is a near Relation and Conjunction. A threefold Relation. The
first Natural; the second Mystical; the third Voluntary. Answ. A 3. fold
Relation betwixt Christ and the Believer; natural, mystical, voluntary.
Christus nobis conjunctissimus, natura, Regno, vadimonio. Grotius de satisf.
Cap. 4.
A natural Relation; they are of the same flesh and Blood, Heb. 2.14. Christ
is their kinsman, their Brother. A mystical Relation; He is their Head, they
his members, Ephesians. 5.23. and 30. He is their King, they his Subjects. A
voluntary Relation; he is their Surety undertaking for them. Now upon this
threefold Account we find one man suffering for or with another. Sometimes upon
the account of a natural Relation; Thus Achans sons and daughters suffered
with him, John 7. And David's child for him, Thus the Disciples conceived, when
they saw the man that was born blind, that it might be for his parents sin,
John 9.3. Sometimes upon the account of a mystical Relation: Thus in a
Politic Body, (Even as it is in the natural Body, where one member sometimes
suffers for another; the Back or the Head suffers for what the hand has
acted), the Subjects sometimes suffer for their Prince, Delirant Reges,
plectuntur Achivi. So it was betwixt David and the people. And sometimes
Princes suffer for their Subjects: [If ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be
consumed, both ye and your King. 1 Samuel 12. last. And thus in the Church; God
sometimes removes the Candlestick because the people play with the light, Rev.
2.5. Ezekiel must be struck dumb, because the house of Israel is a rebellious
house, Ezekiel. 3.26. and 27. And thus in the family; As children sometimes suffer
for their Parents (as in the cases aforesaid,) so sometimes Parents suffer for
their Children. Elies sons were a break-neck to their father, 1 Samuel cap. 3
and 4. Sometimes upon the account of a voluntary relation; Thus Sureties suffer
for their Principals.

And upon the like threefold account Christ may be conceived to suffer for us:
Upon that threefold account Christ suffered for us. (...) Propinquus, Redimens.
Montanus. Numb. 58. and Ruth. 3.9.
1 Upon the account of a natural Relation: Being our kinsman, he is also our
Redeemer. So it was under the Law, the next of kin was to redeem the
inheritance, Lev. 25.25. whence it was that one and the same word (Goel)
signifies both, a kinsman and a Redeemer. Thus is Christ our (Goel) Isa.
59.20. Being our kinsman, he is also our Redeemer. 2. Upon the account of a
mystical Relation: Thus as our head he suffers for his members. As our King he
suffers for his Subjects. As a Husband he is responsall for the debts of his
Wife. 3. Upon the account of a voluntary Relation. Thus as a Surety he suffers
for those for whom he has engaged.

To let pass the other two, It is the third and last of these that I shall
take hold of. Which we shall find sufficient to free this Act from all
imputation of injustice. What Christ herein did, or suffered, he did it freely
and voluntarily, as our Surety, undertaking this satisfaction for our sakes.
Now we say, volenti non fit injuria. Where the person is willing withal, there
is no wrong done. Amongst men, what more ordinary then for the Surety to make
satisfaction for that debt which he has voluntarily engaged for? And who is
there that charge that with injustice?

Alleg. True it, may be said, In pecuniarie, Mony-matters, as Debts and Fines,
it may be so. But not so in Corporal punishment. Especially for one to suffer
death for another.

Whether one may lay down his life for another.
Ans. To this it is answered: that even in these cases it is no unusual thing
for some kind of Sureties, (as those whom they call (...) Such as engage Body
for Body, life for life,) to suffer death for others. Instances thereof amongst
all Nations are rife. Valerius de Amicitia: and Cicero de offic. lib. 3.
That of Damon and Pithias is obious. The one of them being condemned to death
by the Tyrant Dionysius, and desirous to visit his friends before he dyed: the
other ingageth for him tody in his room in case he returned not by the day
appointed. Which shows that such engagements in those times were not
unusual. So much is not obscurely insinuated in that of the Apostle Romans 5.7.
Peradventure for a good man some would even dare to dye.] This some have done;
and Heathens never made any scruple about the lawfulness, the Justice of it.
And surely were it so that men were Lords of their lives, as well as of their
estates, that they might as freely dispose of the one as of the other (as
Heathens apprehended they might,) then could there nothing be said against it.
This it is (as Grotius Grotius de satisfact. cap. 4.
well notes) which makes the difference betwixt these two, the laying down
ones Money and his life for another. The one a man has a more absolute power
and dominion over then the other: over his money, then over his life. And upon
that account he may engage and alienate the one, where he may not the other.
Were it so that a man had as much power over his life as over his money, there
could be no more question about laying down the one, then the other.

Now this is it in the case we have now in hand, This was Christ's privilege:
He being an absolute Lord, he had also power over himself, over his own life;
Christ a Lord over his own life.
so as he might lay it down at his pleasure, which others may not do. This we
may take from his own mouth. John 10.18. I have power to lay down my life]
Power, not only (...), ability; but (...), Authority, Right. This he had by
concession and grant from God his Father, who had given him power over all
flesh, John 17.2. And this he had in and from himself. Being God he had power
over himself as Man, to dispose of his Manhood as pleased him. Now the case
being so, that which is questionable in others, is out of question in him. He
might do what he did, engage and lay down his life for others, as a Surety in
their stead.

2. To this add (what is very considerable, His engagement not of private, but
public concernment.
) that this engagement of his was not for one, or yet a few, but for many. [He
gave his life a Ransom for many, Matthew 20.28. Now however such a private
engagement, for one to lay down his life for another in an ordinary way, may be
looked upon as not warrantable, not allowable; Yet in a case of public
concernment, to do it for a man's Country, this has ever been looked upon, not
only as lawful but laudable. And so in the case of Hostages given in war,
where some particular persons engage their lives for performances of promises
and conditions agreed upon by the party which they engage for. This in all ages
has been, and still is an ordinary practice; and who ever questioned the
lawfulness of it? And Such a Surety was our Mediator; not in a private, but
in a public way; not for one or a few, but for many: Yea, for a world. So the
Elect are called, [God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, 2 Cor.
5.19. that, is the Elect world; for no other are reconciled unto God but they.
For this world Christ laid down his life; And that to free them from Eternal
death. Who can charge this Act with any imputation of injustice? Thus have I
vindicated this second Attribute also, the Justice of God. Now pass we to the
third.

How can this stand with the Grace and Mercy of God? his Grace toward us, his
Mercy toward his Son?

1. How this stands with Grace.
Allegat. 1. For his Grace toward us. This it is which is every where held
forth and cried up as that which has the main stroke in the business of Man's
Salvation. [By Grace ye are saved, Ephesians. 2.8. The Grace of God which brings
salvation, Tit. 2.11. Now how can this stand with satisfaction required, and
received?

Ans. To this it is answered; that were it so that this satisfaction were
required and received from us, now it were inconsistent with Grace. But not so
being received from another. Gods grace and Christ's satisfaction are no ways
repugnant: Gods Grace and Christ's satisfaction no ways repugnant.
The one does not so much as cloud or darken the other. Nay, herein, in
putting our salvation upon this way, the grace of God is gloriously exercised
and manifested: In no way so much: So much will appear in diverse particulars.
Gods grace in this way gloriously manifested.


1. In that God was pleased thus to dispense with his own Law. In dispencing
with his Law.
The Law was peremptory, The day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the
death, Genesis 2.17. under that one particular, menacing every transgression with
death. Now with this Law, God (being the supreme Lawgiver, and so having power
to dispense with his own positive and penal Laws) he dispenceth, being
content to accept that satisfaction which the Law required, from the person of
another. This dispensation was an act of grace, free grace. God was no ways
bound to admit of such a satisfaction by a Surety: which the rigor of the Law
exacted from the person of the offender.

2. That God was pleased to indulge such a dispensation unto Men, not to
Angels. For men not Angels.
God (says Saint Peter) but cast them down to hell, and delivered them into
chains of darkness, to be reserved unto Judgment, 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. Here is
no relaxation but a strict execution of Justice upon them. Not the like upon
man. To him God grants a dispensation, a gracious dispensation, moderating
Justice with Mercy, admitting such a Satisfaction for him, not for the Angels.

3. That God did not only admit this way find it out. In finding out this way.
This was his Act, an act of his Wisdom, God was in Christ reconciling the
world to himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. When men and Angels were at a loss, neither of
them could find out a way of satisfaction unto the Justice of God, but by an
eternity of punishment, now God himself finds out a way. This was an act of
Grace, of special and singular Grace: there being nothing else that could move
God to it but his Grace. Yet further,

4. That God should put his own Son upon this Work. 4. In putting his Son upon
the work.
His Son, his Natural Son, his own Image, his only Son, his dear and
welbeloved Son, his second self: that he should give him, here was grace, here
was love, unparalleled love. So God loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, John 3.16. So, how? So as cannot be either paralelled, or
expressed. That he should give him, and that not only to declare the way and
means of Reconciliation by his Doctrine in his Life, and to confirm it with his
Blood in his Death, (which is the highest pitch that the Socinian reaches,)
but also to make Reconciliation, (as the Author to the Hebrews has it, cap.
2. ver. 17.) And that by making satisfaction unto the Justice of God, by giving
his life a Ransom for us. Surely, never such an act of Grace as this. [Herein
God commends his love to us, that while we were yet sinners Christ died for
us, (says Saint Paul) Romans 5.8. Herein is love (says Saint John) not that we
love God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our
sins, 1 John 4.10. This act of God in giving Christ unto death for us, how ever
it was an act of Justice toward Christ, yet it was an act of Grace toward us.
So the Apostle expressly holds it forth, Heb. 2.9. That he by the grace of God
should taste death for every man.] the grace of God toward the universality of
his Elect, for whose sake Christ was offered.

Henceforth then let the mouth of the Adversary be for ever stopped. Christ's
Satisfaction exalts God's Grace.
Let not Socinians charge this upon us (as they do) that whilst we assert the
Satisfaction of Christ, we derogate and detract from the Grace of God: Nay,
therein we advance and exalt it; and that far above what ever they by their
doctrine do, or can do. To give Christ to be a Surety for us, is a greater act
of grace then to give him to be a Teacher to us. To give him to die for us in
our room and stead, is greater grace, then to give him only for a Guide to
direct and lead us by his Doctrine, and Example. Yet further,

5. In the fifth place, Behold the Grace of God further exercised in the
Application of this Satisfaction. 5. In the free Application of this
Satisfaction to some, not others.
Where is it that God applies the death of Christ, makes it effectual to one
and not to another? Surely this is no other but an act of Grace, free Grace.
Let it then go for a most unjust and groundless imputation, that Christ's
Satisfaction cannot stand with the grace of God. when as the one shines forth
so clearly, so gloriously in the other.

Justification an act of grace, notwithstanding this Satisfaction.
Alleg. But yet it will be said, If such a Satisfaction has been made and
received, how can Justification then be said to be an act of Grace, free grace?
So we find it held forth in Scripture, Isai. 43.25. I, even I am he (says the
Lord) that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake.] [Being justified
freely by his grace (says the Apostle) Romans 3.24. Now how can this be, if such
a Satisfaction be made?

Ans. To this it is answered. Still both these will stand well together. God
blotteth out our sins for his own sake, and yet for Christ's sake. The phrase
excludes our merits, not his merits. No, it is with his Blood that these sins
are blotted out, 1 John 1.7. Rev. 1.5. Again, well may God be said to forgive
sins for his own sake, whilst he forgives them for his Son's sake, in as much
as Father and Son are both one. One, as in essence, so in will, and work, only
differing in order of working. Thus are they one in this act of Justification.
And thence is it that forgiveness of sins is attributed sometimes to Christ,
Col. 3.13. Even as Christ forgave you.] And thus may we be said to be justified
freely by Grace, and yet through the merits of Christ. So much we may learn
from the Apostle in that place alleged, Romans 3.34. where he puts them both
together, [Being justified freely by his Grace through the Redemption that is
in Christ Jesus.] The like again Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have Redemption through
his Blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his Grace. And
well may these stand together, as being causes subordinate the one to the
other. God's grace the supreme and first moving cause: Christ's Redemption the
meritorious and procuring cause. Thus are we said to be justified not only by
Grace, but freely by Grace; viz. in reference to us, our merits: not so to the
merits of Jesus Christ.

Alleg. But it may be further said, How Forgiveness of sin stands with this
Satisfaction.
Supposing such a Satisfaction, how then can sins be said to be forgiven? That
is the word in frequent use in Scripture. In the Lords Prayer, we pray, Forgive
us our Debts. And so we find Justification frequently called, the forgiveness
of sins, (one part of it being, by a Synecdoche, put for the whole;) as in that
place last named, Ephesians. 1.7. repeated, Col. 1.14. Now how can this stand with
Satisfaction? where sin is satisfied for, how is it said to be forgiven?

Ans. For answer. The word (...) explained.
The word there (and most commonly elsewhere) used for forgiveness, is (...);
and it properly signifies only a Dismission, a Discharge, a putting away a
thing, upon what terms soever; so you find it often used in the proper
signification. As in that place of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.11. where he prohibits
the husband to put away his wife, the word is the same, (...). And thus when it
is applied unto sins, it imports no more, but the dismission of them. So the
vulgar Latin renders that petition, Dimitte nobis: Release us our Debts,
discharge them. Now this does not exclude the Satisfaction of Christ. Nay, this
Discharge is for that Satisfaction: So much we may learn from the Apostle in
those places alleged, Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14. In whom we have redemption through
his blood, the forgiveness of sins.] Mark it, these two, (...) and (...),
Redemption and Remission may well stand together, in as much as this Remission
is througth that Redemption.

How sins are said to be freely forgiven; notwithstanding this Satisfaction.
Alleg. But it is further urged, that however that word will not reach it, yet
there is another that will: viz. that which is made use of by the Apostle Col.
2.18. (as twice elsewhere in the same sense, Col. 3.13. Ephesians. 4.32. where he
tells the believers to whom he writes, that God had quickened them together with
his Son, having forgiven them all their trespasses.] There the word rendered
[Forgiven] is not the same with that before, but another more significant;
(...), Gratis donans, or condonans, freely pardoning and forgiving. The word
imports a free dismission without any satisfaction.

Answ. To this it is answered as before. It is true, Thus our sins are pardoned
to us, Gratis sine merito nostro, contra meritum; freely without any merit of
ours, nay, against our merits: But not so without the merits of Christ; no it
is for Christ's sake that God does thus freely forgive sin unto us. So the
Apostle himself elsewhere explains it, Ephesians. 4. last. Even as God for Christ's
sake has forgiven you] The word is the same, (...), freely forgiven. Yet it
was (...), In Christ, i. e. ob, or propter Christum, for Christ's sake. And that
not only Christo deprecante (as Grotius in his Comment would blanch it) at his
Entreaty, but Christo satisfaciente, upon his Satisfaction. Thus are our sins
said to be forgiven, and that freely, Gratis quoad nos, etsi non gratis
absolute, freely in respect of us, though not freely in respect of Christ.

Alleg. But yet it is alleged. The Parable explained Mat. 18.3.
The forgiveness of sins is set forth to be an act absolutely free. What else
means that Parable which we meet with Mat. 18.23. etc. where a certain King is
brought in forgiving his servant his debt without any satisfaction? Now who is
that King but God? who deals with his servants after the same manner in the
Remission of their sins.

Answ. To this it is answered, 1. that Parables are no convincing Arguments.
However (in the 2d place) they must not be stretched beyond the staple, beyond
that point to which they are directed, and at which they aim: In so doing men
may make (and some have made) strange work with Parables. In that of Luke
12.39, 40. our Savior compares himself to a Theife: And cap. 16. ver. 8. he
propounds the pattern of the unjust Steward for our Imitation. Parables
therefore must be tenderly handled: As for that which is here cast in our way,
being rightly looked upon, it makes nothing against the point in hand. True,
God is that King and he for gives our sins as that King did his servants debt,
freely without any satisfaction on our part.

Reply. Why, but that King received no satisfaction at all, neither from the
servant himself, nor from any other.

Answ. Here the parable is stretched beyond the staple, urged beyond the
intendment of it: which is only to show, that as that King discharged his
servant without any satisfaction from him, he not being par solvendo, not able
to make any satisfaction; even so does God deal with his servants, freely
forgiving their sins, without any satisfaction from them, which they are never
able to make. This is all that can be extorted from that Parable.

Repl. But yet they reply. God so forgiveth us, God forgiveth sin without any
recompense.
as he would have us to forgive others. That is the main scope of the Parable;
as we may learn from the last verse of that chapter. And thus the Apostle also
presses it, that herein Christians should make God their pattern; [Forgiving
one another even as God has forgiven you, Ephesians. 4. last. Now this we are to do
freely. Thus are we to give freely, hoping for nothing again, Luke 6.35. And
thus are we to forgive, oft-times without any recompense.

Answ. And thus does God forgive us, without any Recompense, whether from us,
or any other. As for the satisfaction made by Christ, God is no gainer by it:
only the Law is thereby satisfied. Even as it is with one who freely (as a
Christian) forgiveth another some capital offense committed against his own
person, yet leaves him to give satisfaction to the Law, which it is not in his
power to absolve and free him from: He is no gainer by that satisfaction; no
more is God by that satisfaction which is made by Christ. This is to him no
advantage: So as still he pardons us freely. And thus you see how this
Doctrine of Christ's satisfaction it consists well enough with the Grace of
God, his Grace toward us.

Alleg. But yet it may seem not to stand with his Mercy toward Christ. How
Christ's satisfaction stands with Gods mercy to his Son.
Here is the second branch of this grand Objection. That God should thus deal
with his Son, his dear Son, his Only Son, his Innocent Son, thus to deliver
him up to the death, as a Surety for our sakes: Here the Adversary with open
mouth exclaims against this our doctrine, as charging God with the greatest
Immanitie and Cruelty that ever was heard of.

Ans. But these words are but wind: Christ's sufferings inflicted by God his
Father, without any cruelty.
As for the Torments and sufferings, what ever they were, that Christ was
subjected unto, they themselves will not deny but that they were inflicted upon
him by God his Father. Should they deny it, the Prophet Isaiah, will aver it
Isa. 53.20. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief.] Now
who dare herein charge God with Cruelty? Then, and not else, is one said to be
cruel toward another, when he puts him to torment or pain without a cause;
or puts him to great torment for a small cause. The Chyrurgian that puts his
patient to great pain for the saving of life or limb, when there is no other
way of Cure, he is not therein to be accounted cruel. Thus stands the case
here. It was not without cause, and great cause, that God thus delivered his
Son to the death. This he did, not only for those ends assigned by the
Socinian, that he might seal his doctrine with his blood, and show himself a
pattern of Obedience: but for a greater end then these, viz. for the Redemption
of a world (as I showed you) and that when there was no other Remedy. Grotius
de satisfact. cap. 6.
Now (as Grotius well presses it against them) this End being added to those
by them alleged, it cannot make Christ's sufferings greater then they were,
which they themselves acknowledge were inflicted by God his Father, and that
without any Cruelty. Nay, by how much the ends propounded were more and
greater, so much the further were those sufferings from all appearance of
cruelty. So as our doctrine in this regard freeth the Majesty of God from such
an Imputation far more then theirs.

Christ able to undergo and overcome them.
2. Besides, (what is also considerable) Though the sufferings of Christ were
great, yet was there no such Cruelty in inflicting them upon him, who was able
both to undergo, and overcome them. This was Jesus Christ able to do. As he
had power to lay down his life; so also to take it up again, John 10.18. That
burden which would crush a child, a strong man will go lightly away with, as
Samson, being enclosed within the walls of Gaza, did with the Gates thereof,
which he took upon his shoulders and carried up to the top of the mountain,
Judge. 16.3. Thus did the Lord Jesus, being enclosed in the Grave, he carried
away the gates of death, which would have crushed all the sons of Men into the
pit of Hell. So as those sufferings, though great in themselves, yet to him
they were not so great. His dying was but a Tasting of Death (as the Apostle
calls it) Hebrews 2.9.

but I will follow the Adversary no further. You now see these his supposed
strong-holdes (in a good sense) slighted; Those locks wherein he conceived his
strength to ly, cut off the Arguments and Allegations producible in this cause,
with the several improvements of them, clearly answered and satisfied. Quest.
Only a Query or two is yet behind: Whether God could not have pardoned sin
without any such satisfaction.
which I shall send away with their Resolutions briefly, and so dismiss this
point.

Q. 1. Could not God have pardoned sin freely without any such Satisfaction?
And might he not have done it?

A. 1. To this it is answered. From Power to Will, no good Consequence.
1. A posse ad esse, or velle. etc. From Power to Act, or from Power to Will,
the Consequence will not hold. Because a man can do, or may do such, or such a
thing, it cannot thence be concluded, that he has done it, or will do it.
Suppose that God might have pardoned sin in such a way, yet it will not thence
follow that he has done it.

A. 2. But (2ly) without any derogation from the perfection and absoluteness
of his Power, How it may be said that God could not do this.
it may be said with a reverence, that this was a thing which God could not do.
Only let it be rightly understood. Not that it is so in it self, absolutely
considered; but ex supposito, upon the supposition of his Decree. Gods decree
was that sin should be punished with death, that the one should be the wages of
the other. And that decree was gone forth, the sentence was past upon man to
that purpose; The day thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye the death, Genesis
2.17. Now this being presupposed, it may with reverence be said, that God could
not pardon sin, without some such satisfaction as the Law required.

Neither is this to be attributed to any defect of Power in him, but to the
perfection of his nature. Upon this account it is that we say, that God cannot
do this or that, which man can do. He cannot sin: he cannot Lie, Tit. 1.2. It
is Impossible he should do so, Heb. 6.18. And why so? The Apostle renders a
reason for it 2 Timothy 2.13. He cannot deny himself. Gods Truth and Justice, they
are himself. And being so, he cannot go against them. And thus is it in this
case. To pardon sin without any satisfaction (supposing the foresaid decree,
and sentence) it cannot stand with the Truth and Justice of God, and therefore
he cannot do it. This is Gods (...), (as the Apostle calls it Romans 1. last) The
Judgment of God, (Jus Dei (says Beza) Gods right: Justitia Dei (says Erasmus
and the Vulgar,) Gods Justice,) that they which do such things are worthy of
death.] This is not only a Positive Law, but Lex naturae, the very Law of
nature: a Law Originally engraven in the nature of God himself, and by him (as
a Counterpane from that Original) imprinted upon the nature of man. And being
so, God could not go against it, so as to let sin go alogether unpunshed. This
he could not do without wrong and injury to himself.

Repl. No? (may some say) May not men without any wrong or injury remit what
they please of their own right? Whether men may always remit what they please
of their own right.


Answer. To this it is answered, 1. This is not universally true. Some cases
there are, wherein men may not part with their own right. Parents may not
remit that honor and Obedience which of right is due to them from their
children. Husbands must not part with their Headship, which they have over
their Wives. And why? because this were against the Law of God, and the Laws of
nature. It is a good limitation which is given by Casuists to that vulgar
Maxim, A man may part with as much of his own right as he will to another, but
it must be Salvo jure tertii, saving the right of a third. Saving the right of
God, of the Law, of the Magistrate, of a man's Neighbor. Where any of these are
wronged or injured by the Concession, a man may not part with his own right.
Now thus stands it here, should God pass by sin without any satisfaction, it
would be a wrong to his Law, as well as to his Truth and Justice. And
therefore it cannot be.

2. But 2ly, Suppose man might do this, yet God cannot. This may seem a
Paradox, but we shall find it a Truth. Though man may part with his own right,
yet God cannot. How so. Because Gods right is himself, Deus ipse est jus suum.
Mark it. Gods right is himself, and therefore he cannot part with it. Upon
this Account a man may part with his estate, where he may not part with his
Life. The one is himself; so is not the other. And such is Gods Right, his
Truth, and Justice, they are himself. Should he do any act against them,
therein he should deny himself; which he cannot do. Quest.


Q. 2. But (supposing a satisfaction requisite and necessary) could not God
have found out some other way Could not God have found out some other way?
for the making of that Satisfaction? Was there no way but his own Son must
undertake that Work?

Ans. To this I answer. Answer.
In this Enquiry there is too much Curiosity. Too much curiosity in this
Enquiry.
What God out of the liberty of his will, and infinite depth of his Wisdom
might have done, it is not for us to enquire. We see what he has done, what
way it is that he has laid out: and therein let us admire and adore that
infinite wisdom, which has found out this way. It is not without cause, that
the Apostle speaking of the Doctrine of the Gospel, he calls it Wisdom, and
the Wisdom of God, and the Wisdom of God in a mystery, 1 Cor. 2.6, 7. Herein
was the Wisdom of God gloriously manifested in finding out this way, this means
of Reconciliation for lost mankind, through the satisfaction of his Son: which
had not he laid out, it had been past the skill of all the men and Angels in
the world ever to have found out either that, or any other.

Now this being so, it might be sufficient to stop any further enquiry touching
the reason of this Counsel of God: which yet because it is propounded as a
Question, I shall in the last place return an Answer to it briefly.

Quest. Question.
Wherefore was God pleased to put man's salvation upon this way? Wherefore God
put the Salvation of man upon this way?
To lay out this way of Reconciling man to himself, viz. by the way of
Satisfaction made by his Son?

Ans. For answer. 1. It is not for us herein to be too curiously inquisitive,
in prying into the Counsels of God, to find out the Reason of his Decrees.
God's Counsels unsearchable.
This is not allowable among men, that private persons should pry too far into
the mysteries of State, to enquire into the privy Counsels of their Superiors.
Much less to look into God's Ark, Heaven's Cabinet. As for the Counsels of
God, there is a depth in them; a depth to be adored, not fadomed. Blessed Paul,
though he had been wrapped into the third Heavens, yet in the Contemplation
hereof stands afar off, breaking forth into that patheticall Rapture, (...), O
the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out? For who has
known the mind of the Lord? or who has been his Counselor? Romans 11.33, 34.
Such are the Counsels of God oft-times, that should men attempt to search into
them, the best they could expect would be to lose their labor. In some things
(it may be) there is no reason to be given, save only the Will of God. This
was all the reason that Paul could give for those eternal Decrees of Election,
and Reprobation. [He has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will,
he hardneth, Romans 9.18. Other reason (though we know that being the supreme
Reason, he does nothing without) God is not bound to give.

joint Manifestation In this way there is a joint manifestation of Gods
of those two great and Cardinal Attributes of God (which David singleth forth
to make the matter of his Song, Psalm. 101.1.) his Justice, and his Mercy. His
Justice against sin; his Mercy to sinners: Both these are gloriously exercised
and manifested in this Satisfaction of Christ: his Justice in requiring it, his
Mercy in accepting it.

1. His Justice 1. Justice.
in requiring it. That God should not pardon sin without satisfaction. That he
should exact that satisfaction from his Son, having as a Surety undertaken it.
Herein has God declared his hatred, and indignation against sin, which he will
not let go unpunished: His Justice, his impartial Justice in executing the Law
upon whomsoever he found obnoxious to it, though otherwise never so near, or
dear to himself.

2. His Mercy, 2. Mercy.
in relaxing the Law, dispensing with it; Accepting satisfaction from the
person of another; and giving his own Son to make that satisfaction; here was
riches of Grace, riches of Mercy toward lost mankind. Thus did Justice and
Mercy here meet together, kissing each other. And upon this account it was that
God was pleased to pitch upon this way of Reconciliation rather then any other.

Even as Histories tell us of that Locrensian Lawgiver Zaleucus, (the story is
well known, Valerius, lib. 6. cap. 5.
and the Illustration which it affords us, is not more obvious then apt:)
amongst other wholesome Laws which he had enacted for that Commonwealth, he
decreed that who ever was convicted of Adultery, should lose both his eyes for
it. Afterward it so happened that his own Son was brought before him for that
crime, and was to have the Law executed upon him. Hereupon the people
interposing, make suit for his pardon; at length the father, being partly
overcome by their importunities, and not unwilling to show what lawful favor
he might to his son, he first puts out one of his own eyes, and then one of his
sons; therein showing himself (as the Historian has it) at once both a
merciful Father, Ita debitum supplicii modum legi reddidit, aequitatis
admirabili temperamento, se inter misericordem Patrem, and justum Legislatorem
partitus: Valor. Max. ubi supra.
and a just Lawgiver: so tempering Mercy with Justice, as that both the Law was
satisfied, and yet his son was spared from that rigor of Justice which the Law
required. Even thus has God been pleased to deal in this business betwixt man
and himself. When man, having transgressed the Law, deserved to die, he gives
his own Son to make satisfaction on his behalf: therein showing himself both a
Just Lawgiver, and yet a Merciful Father; in that Act so tempering Mercy with
Justice, as that both the Law is satisfied, and yet Man spared. Thus is that
twofold Attribute of God jointly manifested in this Transaction, and that
gloriously in both: So as we shall not need to seek for any further reason why
God should put the Work of man's salvation upon this way.

And thus you see this Truth of God, touching Christ's Satisfaction, both
vindicated, and cleared. Which I have the longer insisted on, both because it
is in it self of great consequence and importance, being not only near unto,
but of the Foundation of Christian Religion: I, a corner stone in that
Foundation; and a Truth principally aimed at by the Apostle in the Text I have
now in hand, (as I have shown you from the verse following;) as also because
(among other Truths of God) I find it of late called in question; nay, utterly
exploded; and that by some, who (to use Paul's words, Gal. 2.9.) seemed to be
Pillars, men of no mean note in the Church of God. Now pass we on to that
which remains; wherein I shall be as concise and brief as conveniently I may,
finding the work to swell in my hand far beyond my expectation, when I first
took it up.

Secondly, As Christ is a Surety in way of Satisfaction, so of Caution. II.
Christ a Surety in way of Caution.
In the former he is a Surety de praeterito, for what is past: In this later he
is a Surety de futuro, for what is to come. A Surety in way of Caution:
undertaking for those whom he has so reconciled unto God; viz. for the
performance of the stipulation, of the conditions of the covenant required on
their part.

This Jesus Christ our Mediator undertaketh and effects: wherein he being
the Truth, again out-strips the Type. Moses that Typical, Legal Mediator, he
could go betwixt God and the people, declaring his mind unto them, receiving,
and returning their answer unto him. Both these we find, Exodus 19.7, 8. Moses
called for the Elders of the people, and laid before their faces all these
words which the Lord had commanded him; And all the people answered together
and said, All that the Lord has spoken we will do: And Moses returned the
words of the people unto the Lord.] Thus he went betwixt them as an
Internuncius, an Intermessenger, reporting the mind of each to other: But he
durst not engage for them. As for God, he durst, and did engage for performance
of the Covenant on his part: And he laid an engagement upon the people. Both
these he did in and by that one Ceremony which we meet with Exodus 24.8. Having
first read the Book of the Covenant in the audience of the people, and
received their Answer to the purport aforesaid, Then he took the blood of the
Sacrifice, and sprinkled it on the people.] By that Ceremony confirming and
ratifying the Covenant; Assuring it on Gods part, and engaging the people to
fidelity and constancy on their part (as God willing I shall show you more
fully anon in moralizing of that Ceremony:) But engage for them he durst not.
Which if he had done, he had not been able to perform it.

But this does our Mediator the Lord Jesus. He having by his death reconciled
his people unto God, Undertaking for performance of the conditions on the
behalf of his Elect: viz. Faith and Obedience.
now he undertaketh for them; for their performance of the Stipulation, the
conditions of the Covenant on their part. What the Stipulation is you have
heard already. Even the Obedience of Faith, so the Apostle calls it Romans 1.5.
and 16.26. (...): The obedience of Faith; or if you will divide them, Faith and
Obedience. These, (without any just offense,) I may call the conditions of this
Covenant. Faith, whereby the Covenant is accepted upon the terms on which it
is tendered, and Christ the Mediator of it received. Obedience, whereby it is
kept, viz. in an Evangelicall way, in respect of desire and endeavor. This it
is which the Psalmist calls Keeping of the Covenant, Psalm. 25.10. and
103.18. Not a Legal, but an Evangelicall keeping, when the promises of grace
being believed, there is a serious desire and endeavor of yiedling obedience
to all God's Commandments. Now for this Christ undertaketh on the behalf of
his Elect, that they shall thus keep the Covenant, that they shall thus Consent
and Obey, (as the former Translation renders it, Isaiah 1.19.) And undertaking
it, he effects it; working in them what the Covenant requires. This he does
by his Spirit, which is to them in whom it dwells, first a Spirit of Faith: So
you find it expressly called, 2 Cor. 4.13. (...), The Spirit of Faith: So
called, not only because it is not given but to believers (as Grot. glosseth
upon it;) but also because it works Faith in the soul, inclining it to
receive Christ, and the offer of grace by and through him. And then a Spirit of
Holiness, So the Spirit of Christ is called, Romans 1.4. (...), The Spirit of
Sanctity, or Sanctification: Because, being Holy in it self, it sanctifies
the person in whom it dwells. Thus it sanctified the Humane nature of Christ,
wherein it dwelled, (...) (as the Apostle phraseth it, Col. 2.9.) Really,
Substantially, Essentially, Bodily. And thus it sanctifies all true believers
in whom it dwells, (...), after a Spiritual manner, being communicated from
Christ unto them, as from the Head to the Members.

Thus does Jesus Christ this our Mediator come unto all his Elect people; as by
his merit, so by his Spirit. So may we most fitly understand that of Saint
John, 1 John 5.6. This is he that came by water and blood.] Both these issued
out of the side of our Savior upon the cross; surely not without a mystery:
Betokening a double benefit redounding to all believers by and through him. The
one of Justification, the other of Sanctification. Thus Christ is said to come
to them, first by Blood, taking away the guilt of sin: Then by water, cleansing
them from the filth and pollution of sin. Both which were shadowed out by the
like Types under the Law. There, in the Service of the Tabernacle, was Blood
and water: Blood in the Sacrifices, water in the Legal ablutions. Both Types
of Christ, who thus comes unto his people; as by Blood, Justifying; so by
water, Sanctifying them. This is that which the Apostle tells us 1 Cor. 1.31.
where speaking of the Benefits which believers have by Christ, he says, he is
made unto them of God, Righteousness and Sanctification.] i. e. The cause and
procurer of both. Of Righteousness through his merit: Of Sanctification by his
Spirit. Thus does Jesus Christ work in the heart of his Elect both these
Conditions of the Covenant, Faith and Holiness.

And as he begins this work in them, With perseverance.
so he maintains and continues it. Causing those whom he has thus reconciled
unto God to persevere in Faith and Obedience. In faith, [I have prayed for thee
that thy faith fail not (says our Savior to Peter) Luke 22.32. The like he
does for all that are given to him, taking order for their persevering in
faith: So as though it may fail in the mouth (as Peter did,) yet it shall never
fail in the Heart. And as in faith, so in Holiness; this he also maintains;
which he does by the continual Supply of his Spirit, mortifying and keeping
under corruption; nourishing and exciting of grace: putting them on in the
course of their Obedience; guiding their feet into the ways of peace (Luke
1.79.) Causing them to walk in the statutes, and to keep the Judgments of their
God: and so to yield an Evangelicall Obedience to his Law; keeping his word,
and his Covenant: walking in their measure worthy of the Lord unto all
pleasing: Not willingly offending or provoking him. Thus does this our
Mediator save his people from their sins (as the Angel tells Joseph) Matthew
1.21. Those who believe on him, they are his people: And them he saves from
their sins, not only from the Guilt, but also from the Power of them. He
saves them from all their uncleanness, (as the Prophet has it Ezekiel. 36.29.)
So as whilst sin is not imputed to them, it does not reign in them. No, thus
they sin not. So says Saint John of him that abides in Christ, 1 John 3.6.
[He sins not.] Not willingly, with full consent of will: not so as to make a
practice of sin, so as to live in a course of known sin. No, whosoever so
sins, has not seen him, nor known him, (as it there follows.)
Presumptuous sinners are strangers unto Christ; they never had any lively
apprehension, any effectual knowledge of him. Those who so know him, he
keeps them from such sins, whereby they should violate and make void the
Covenant betwixt their God and them.

And thus you see the former Branch of this Point opened, and explained. How
Christ is a Surety on the believers part to God. A Surety in way of
Satisfaction, for what is past: A Surety in way of Caution, for what is to come.

Come we now to the later, to see how he is a Surety on God's part to man. II.
Christ a Surety on God's part to man.
This it is, (says the Socinian) which is intended by the Apostle in the Text
forenamed, Heb. 7.22. where he calls Christ, Dr L. Comment. ad loc.
The Surety of a better Covenant, (viz. the New Covenant.) So he is (say they)
on God's part to us: being sent by God to us, and contracting a Covenant with
us in his Name; he then ratified it on God's part, making faith of it unto us,
undertaking that God would keep the promises thereof, and perform them unto us.
And herein we will not differ with them. In this sense, (though not only in
this, as they would have it) Christ is rightly said to be the Surety of this
Covenant; in as much as he undertaketh for it on God's part, that all the
promises thereof shall be made good to us. This is that which the Apostle tells
us, 2 Cor. 1.20. where speaking of Christ, Assuring the Promises.
he says that All the Promises of God in him, are Yea, and in him Amen.] As
they are made in him, and for him, so they shall be made good by him, and
through him. Hereof he gives assurance unto us. And that he does diverse ways:
Which he does diverse ways.
By his word, by his works, by his Blood, by his Spirit: Every one of which
makes faith to us concerning the Covenant, and the Promises thereof.

1. By his Word. 1. By his Word.
Thus did Moses promise for God under the Law, assuring the people by word of
mouth of the performance of his Covenant unto them. Moses pro Deo spospondit in
lege veteri: Jesus pro Deo in nova lege. Grot. Com. ad Heb. 7.22.
And thus has Jesus Christ promised for him under the Gospel. Being upon
earth, he declared and published the Covenant in his name: by word of mouth
assuring all the promises thereof unto believers, making faith of them.
[Verily, verily I say unto you, (it is his speech to the Jews, John 5.24) He
that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life,
(has it in the promise, has the insurance of it,) and shall not come into
condemnation, but is passed from death to life.] Being already made partaker of
the life of grace, he shall also be certainly made partaker of the grace of
life, the life of Glory, as certainly as if he were already possessed of it.
Thus did Christ then in his own person hold forth the Covenant of grace,
preaching and publishing the Gospel of the Kingdom, assuring all penitent
believers of the performance of the Stipulation on God's part.

And the same he now does by his Ministers, whom he sends upon the same errand,
to publish the same Covenant, and in his Name to assure all those who shall
accept it, of the performance thereof unto them. This is the Commission which he
gives unto these his Ambassadors: viz. That Repentance and Remission of sins
should be preached in his Name among all Nations, Luke 24.47. Go ye into all
the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature: He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved, Mark 16.15, 16. Thus he assures the Covenant by his
Word.

And secondly, By his Works. 2. By his Works.
They were a confirmation to his Word, and so a further assurance unto us. This
is that which our Savior tells the Jews, John 5.36. I have greater witness
then that of John, the works which I do bear witness of me.] John's Testimony
was only verbal, by word: And such is the Testimony which the Ministers of the
Gospel give. But Christ's Testimony is confirmed by works. What works? why, the
works of God, (as he calls them, John 9.3.) such works as his Father had given
him to do, John 5.36. And such works as none but God could do. So he tells the
Jews, John 15.24. If I had not done the works which no other man did.] And what
works were these? why, his miraculous works, some of which were such as never
any before him did. As viz. the casting out of all kind of Devils, the curing
of all kinds of diseases, only with his word: the raising up of the dead after
four days burial. These were the Works of God; as himself says of that cure
done upon the man that was borne blind, John 9.3. He was so born (says he)
that the works of God should be made manifest in him.] viz. in the restoring of
him to sight. And these were such works as never man before him did. So says
the blind man of that cure done upon himself, Since the world began, was it
not heard that any man opened the eyes of one that was born blind, ver. 32. of
that Chapter. Moses, and Elias, and Elisha, those great Prophets, they had done
many great works, but none like these. And being such, they bear witness of
him. [The works which I do in my Fathers Name, they bear witness of me, (says
he to the Jews) John 10.25. They bare witness to his Person, that he was the
Son of God. And they bare witness to his Doctrine, that it was the word of God
confirming it. Of such use were those Miracles wrought by the Apostles in his
Name. [They went forth (says the Evangelist) and preached every where, the
Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signs following, Mark
16.20.] What signs? why, those spoken of ver. 17. miraculous works, wrought by
the power of God for the confirming of their Doctrine. And of such use were
those unparalleled works wrought by Christ himself. They were a strong
confirmation to his word, carrying with them a strong conviction, leaving
unbelievers without excuse, and aggravating their Infidelity. So our Savior
presses it upon the Jews, in that place forenamed, Joh. 15.24. If I had not
done among them the works which no man did, they had not had sin.] They might
then have had some plea, some excuse for their Infidelity, their rejecting him,
and his doctrine: How ever their sin had not been so heinous as now it was.
This Testimony added to the former, rendered their infidelity both inexcusable
and damnable.

Thirdly, By his Blood. 3. By his Blood.
Thus he also confirmed his Doctrine, taking his death upon it, sealing the
Covenant with his Blood. Thus were Covenants anciently ratified and confirmed
by Sacrifices, Psalm. 50.5. with Blood. Thus was that Old Covenant made betwixt
God and his people, (as I showed you even now) with the sprinkling of Blood,
Exodus 24.8. And Moses took the Blood, The Old Covenant made with Blood.
and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the Blood of the Covenant
which the Lord has made with you.] In imitation whereof the Heathens afterward
made their Covenants after the same manner. Thence came the word Sanctio, a
Sanction, (as some conceive it) a Sanguine, from Blood, which was used in the
making of it. A mystical ceremony, betokening the constancy, and stability,
required in keeping of the Covenant, specially Covenants made with God, which
ought to be even to the shedding of blood and loss of life (As our new
Annotation explains it in the place last named.) Or as others; importing a
Commination, Grot. Com. in Mat. 26.18.
or execration against him that should violate such a Covenant, viz. that his
blood should be shed after the same manner. Even as the story tells us of Saul 1 Samuel 11. Engaging the people to a just revenge of that reproachful affront
offered by Nahash the Ammonite to the men of Jabesh-Gilead, when he required
them to put out their right eyes before he would make a covenant with them, He
took a yoke of oxen (says ver. 7.) and hewed them in pieces, and sent them
through all the Coasts of Israel by the hand of the Messengers, saying,
Whoseever comes not forth after Saul and after Samuel, so shall it be done
unto his oxen.] viz. they should be hewed in pieces after the like manner. The
like signification probably there was in this Ceremony of blood used in
covenants; to intimate what they deserved who should violate them, viz. to have
their blood shed. Thus was that old Covenant made.

And thus was this new Covenant So is the new Covenant.
made It was ratified after the like manner, with blood. Only with this
difference, That was confirmed with the blood of Beasts, this with the Blood of
the Mediator, (as the Apostle observes it Heb. 9.12. etc.) To this end (among
other) it was, that Jesus Christ shed his Blood upon the Cross for the
ratifying that Covenant whereof he was the Mediator. So much we may learn from
himself Mat. 26.28. where in the Celebration of his last Supper, taking the
Cup into his hands, which was a Sacrament of his blood, afterward to be shed
upon the Cross, This (says he) is my blood in the new Testament (or
Covenant.) And thus elsewhere we find the Blood of Christ called the Blood of
the Covenant. So you have it Zach. 9.11. where the Prophet speaking of those
deliverances, Temporal and Spiritual, which poor captives should receive by
the Messiah, [As for thee (says he) by the blood of thy Covenant I have sent
thy prisoners out of the pit, where is no water.] That Blood of the Covenant
was the Blood of the Messiah, whose Covenant is by Blood, (as the margin there
reads that place.) And so again Heb. 10.29. and 13.20. the Apostle speaking
of the Blood of Christ, he calls it the Blood of the Covenant; the
Everlasting Covenant: id est, the Blood of Christ, whereby the new Covenant was
ratified and confirmed. So it was, and that both on our part and Gods part. On
our part, in the ways aforesaid, minding us how stable we ought to be in the
Covenant of our God; how we ought to resist even unto Blood (if God call us to
it) striving against sin, Heb. 12.4. And what we shall deserve in case we shall
violate that Covenant. On Gods part, assuring us of the performance of the
Covenant. Which last I conceive (without any prejudice to what has been
already said) may be looked upon as most properly and peculiarly intended by
the Apostle in that place forealledged Heb. 7.22. where he calls Christ the
Surety of this better Covenant: Pareus Com. ad loc.
viz. Quia novum foedus sanguine and morte sua obsignavit (as Pareus explains
it:) Because he has sealed the New Covenant with his Blood, taking his death
upon it. Thereby assuring unto believers the performance of all those promises
which he had made to them in the name of God his Father. Here is a third
Insurance.

4. The fourth and last is the Spirit. 4. By his Spirit
This is yet a further witness. So Saint John makes it in that known, but
obscure place 1 John. 5.8. There are three that bear witness in Earth, the
Spirit, and Water, and Blood.] What he means there by water and Blood, I have
shown you before from the sixth verse, which I fell with by the way. By the
one is understood the benefit of Justification purchased by the blood of
Christ: By the other of sanctification, an effect of his Spirit, which is
compared to water for the cleansing and purifying quality of it. Now to these
the Apostle joins also the Spirit, as giving yet a further Testimony. It is the
Spirit that bears witness [saith the sixth verse there.) Not but that the
Blood and the water bear witness also. The Blood of Christ shed upon the
Cross, and sprinkled upon the Conscience of the Believer, that seals up the
Covenant to him. And so does the work of Grace, the work of Sanctification
wrought in the heart by the Spirit. But besides this, there is yet another
witness, which is the witness of the spirit: viz. an Immediate work of the
same spirit of Christ, sealing up the covenant of grace unto the soul and
conscience of a believer; assuring and persuading him of Gods performance of
the conditions of his part.

The witness of the Spirit, what?
This is the witness which the Apostle spea- of in that known place Romans 8.16.
The spirit it self bears witness with our spirits that we are the children
of God.] The spirit bears witness concerning our Adoption, with our Spirit,
or to our Spirit (the Original will bear either, (...).) And this it does, not
only mediately, by the work of it; by making a real and permanent impression
upon the soul, stamping the Image of God upon it, making it partaker of the
Divine nature, (as S. Peter calls the work of Grace, which consists in those
divine Qualities of Holiness and Righteousness, 2. Pet 1.4.) which is as a
mark, a Character whereby men may know whose children they are, (Even as the
Spartans, or Lacedaemonians of old are said to know what stock and lineage they
were of, by a mark that was made upon their bodies by the head of a Lance, G
ot. in Romans 8.16.
or Speer, (as Grotius illustrates it.) Not only so but besides this there is a
more immediate witness of the Spirit, sealing up that and other benefits unto
the soul. Thus it testifies to the spirit, and with the spirit of the
Believer. The spirit of Christ and his own spirit, they do (...), witness
together: each bearing witness with the other. His Spirit bears witness
with the Spirit of Christ viz. by observing the work of that spirit, the work
of grace and Sanctification wrought in and upon the soul. And the spirit of
Christ bears witness with his spirit, by assuring him, as of the truth of
that work of Grace, so of his Interest in that and all other benefits belonging
to the Covenant of Grace. Thus does the Spirit notify unto the soul of a
Believer it own interest in Christ and his Benefits. So says the Apostle 1
Cor. 2.12. We have received the spirit of God, that we may know the things
which are freely given us of God.] Those spiritual benefits and blessings
which believers have by Christ, whether in present possession, or future
expectation, the Spirit causes them to know them. To know them, not only in a
general way, in the Theory, to know what they are, but to know their own
right unto them, and interest in them; assuring them both of the one and of the
other. And in this respect again (as judicious Diodate looks upon it) Christ
may be conceived to be called the Surety of the Covenant; Diodate annot. in
Heb. 7.22.
in as much as he assures the Grace of the Covenant, the grace of God by his
spirit unto the soul.

And thus you see this other Branch of this point opened and explained unto
you, How Christ is said to be a Surety on Gods part to Man: Assuring him of the
performance of the conditions of the covenant on God's part, which he does (as
you have heard) by his Word, by his Works, by his Blood, by his Spirit. And
thus am I at the length got off from this third Staff also: where we have seen
how Christ is a Mediator betwixt God and man; Qua Sponsor, as a Surety,
undertaking for man to God, and for God to man. Which being the middle, and as
I conceive, the principal staff of this mysteriall Ladder, I have stood upon
it the longer. Which I have done, as not without content to my self in the
contemplation of these divine and sacred Truths, so I trust not without some
benefit to you, to all you, who desire to be clearly and fully informed
concerning this great mystery of Christ.

I shall now in the Name and Fear of God, pass on to those two other steps,
which I shall pass over with what convenient speed I may, reserving the
Application of all into the close.

The fourth Staff of this mystical Ladder.
Jesus Christ is a Mediator betwixt God and men (in the fourth place) Qua
Intercessor, as an Intercessour. Such a Mediator was Job for his friends, Job
42.8. My servant Job shall pray for you; Christ an Intercessour.
for him will I accept.] And such a Mediator is the Lord Jesus for his elect
people. So he was upon Earth, and so he is in Heaven.

Upon Earth. He was so upon Earth.
Then was he an Intercessour; then did he perform a piece of this part of his
Mediatorship; interceding with God his Father in the behalf of his elect
People. This he did in those many sweet and fervent prayers, which he poured
forth for them from time to time: specially in that sacred and solemn one,
which we have recorded John 17. A prayer so divine, so heavenly, that whosoever
has ought of the Spirit of Christ, cannot but be exceedingly affected, and
even ravished with it. There have we a true Cygnea Cantio, a Swan-like Song:
wherein our blessed Savior, being then to leave the world, he commends his
Elect in the present, and succeeding ages, to the care and custody of God his
Father; that he would confer and bestow upon them all those benefits which
himself had purchased for them. As namely, that he would sanctify them, ver.
17. Sanctify them through thy Truth.] That he would keep them in unity, ver.
11. Holy Father, keep them through thine own Name, those whom thou have given
me, that they may be one as we are.] i. e. joined in the unity of faith and
love; one in him, and one among themselves. That he would deliver them from
evil, ver. 15. I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but
that thou should keep them from evil,] (...), from that evil one: viz.
Satan, their grand Enemy. That he would express his peculiar love to them,
ver. 23. That the world may know that thou have loved them, as thou have loved
me.] So again, ver. 26. That the love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in
them:] That he would fill their hearts with inward joy and comfort, ver. 13.
That they may have my joy fulfilled in themselves. And finally, that in due
season he would bring them to the participation of the same eternal glory with
himself, ver. 24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be
with me where I am, that they may behold my glory.] And so beholding it, might
be transformed into it. Thus did he then intercede for his Elect, Praying for
them.

This he did in his Life, and this he did in his Death. Even upon the Cross,
whilst he was a Sufferer, he was also an Intercessour. So says the Prophet
Isai. chap. 53. ver. 12. He bare the sins of many, and made Intercession for
the transgressors.] So he did in that prayer of his, which he poured out in
the Paroxisme of his Passion, the midst of his Agony, in the behalf of those
that crucified him. Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do, Luke
23.34. Thus was he an Intercessour upon Earth.

And he is the same in Heaven. He is so in Heaven.
There he performs the same office, still interceding; though not after the
same manner that he did here upon Earth; Grot. Com. in Heb. 7.25.
Non submissa ut olim, sed potenti Interpellatione, (as Grotius cites it out
of Gregory;) not any longer in a submisse and humble way, with knees bowed
down, with hands and eyes lifted up, as here he did in his state of
humiliation: but in a way suitable to his glorified condition: In such a way as
is fit for him to act, and his Father to accept. Still he intercedes. So much
we may learn from the Apostle, Romans 8.34. where he adds this to those other
steps of that mystical Ladder: It is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is
risen again; who also is at the right hand of God, who also makes Intercession
for us.] This Jesus Christ, being in heaven, does on the behalf of all
believers. He intercedeth for them.

Not against them. Christ interceding [for] believers.
Such Intercessours men sometimes meet with; such as intercede against them.
Such Intercessours Paul met with more then a good many: So Festus tells Agrippa,
and those with him, Act. 25.24. Ye see this man about whom all the multitude
of the Jews have dealt with me.] (...): which the Vulgar renders, Interpellavit
me: they have Interceded with me, viz. against Paul; crying out that he ought
not to live any longer (so it there follows.) Accusing him for a Pestilent
fellow, and a mover of sedition, (as you have it in the chapter foregoing: cap.
24. ver. 5.) Such Intercessours the Prophets of old and the Ministers of God in
all ages have met with: And such Intercessours they themselves sometimes
(though with grief and sorrow of heart) are feign to be against an ungrateful
and a rebellious people: So says the Apostle concerning Elias, Romans 11.2. Wot
ye not what the scripture says of Elias? How he made intercession unto God
against Israel.] (...): viz. complaining against them, accusing of them, as it
follows in the next verse, ver. 3. Lord, they have killed thy Prophets, and
dug down thine Altars.] And such an Intercessour is Satan against all the
Saints of God; Interpellans, Interceding against them, Accusing them before God
night and day, (as you have it) Rev. 12.10. But Jesus Christ Intercedeth for
us. (...).

True inded, as for his Enemies, Against his Enemies.
he intercedeth against them. Those who will not accept him as their Mediator,
his Blood cries against them. Thus Abels blood interceded against Cain; as the
Lord tells him, Genesis 4.10. The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from
the earth:] viz. for vengance against him that shed it. Even thus does the
voice of Christ's blood cry unto God against all obstinate and impenitent
unbeleevers; such as Crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, (as the
Apostle speaks of those Apostates, Heb. 6.6.) If Christ were upon Earth again,
they would show themselves as bitter enemies to him as ever the Jews were.
Being now in Heaven, they rereject him, they oppose him, they will not have him
to reign over them: They will not receive and acknowledge him for their King,
their Priest, their Prophet. As for such, Christ Intercedes and Negotiates
against them. But as for his own people, who are given to him to believe on
him, he intercedeth for them, negotiating with God on their behalf. This he
does for all those who come unto God by him: He ever lives to make
intercession for them, Heb. 7.25.

A Transaction very requisite and necessary, Christ's Intercession a necessary
transaction.
without which all those other parts of Christ's mediatorship would have been to
little purpose. This it is which puts life into the death of Christ, that
makes it effectual for the good and benefit of his Elect. Without this the
blood of this our Mediator had been spilt in vain. The Sacrifices under the
Law had not been of such force and efficacy, had not the high Priest entered
into the Holy place, there to appear before the Lord, and to present the Blood
thereof unto him; so making Intercession in the behalf of the people, for whom
he had offered that Sacrifice, Heb. 9.7. What ever Christ had done or suffered
upon Earth, it had been ineffectuall unto us, had he not after the like manner
entered into Heaven, which the Apostle to the Hebrews tells us he has done,
there to Appear in the presence of God for us] Heb. 9.24. To this end it was
that Jesus Christ our High Priest is entered into the Holy of Holies, the Heaven
of Heavens; that he might there appear in the presence of God in the behalf
of his Elect, making intercession for them.

Which he does diverse ways. Christ appears in heaven for his people diverse
ways.
Mark it. Christ appears in the presence of God for us, for all those whom
he has by his death reconciled unto God. And this he does in diverse respects,
according to diverse several relations. I shall take notice only of four of
them, which I shall present unto you in such obvious terms, as you may more
easily remember, and carry away. Christ appears in the presence of God,
interceding for his Elect, 1. As an Agent. 2. As an Advocate. 3. As an
Attorney. 4. As a Solicitour. Every of these is a kind of Intercessour,
appearing for, and negotiating on the behalf of others, for their good and
benefit. And every of these ways may Christ be said to be an Intercessour,
appearing before God for us. Pass them over severally, briefly.

1. As an Agent. A Lidger Ambassador, 1. As an Agent, or Lidger Ambassador,
Pareus Com. in Heb. 9.24.
So Pareus looks upon that forenamed expression, Heb. 9.24. where Christ is
said to appear in the presence of God for us.] An Allusion (says he) to the
Custom among Princes or States, who being confederated, have their Lidgers or
Agents, which upon all occasions appear in the presence of the Prince, in the
name and behalf of all those whom they represent and negotiate for. Thus may
Jesus Christ be said to appear in the presence of God for us; viz. as an Agent,
an Ambassador, Legatus foederis, (as Malachy calls him, Mal. 3.1.) the
Messenger, or Ambassador of the Covenant. So he was upon Earth: Then he was an
Ambassador, an Agent on God's part, to declare and confirm the Covenant unto
us. And so he is being in Heaven. He is now an Agent (as it were) on our part;
An Ambassador, a Lidger Ambassador.

So I may not unfitly, not improperly call him, in regard of his constant
residence there. That is the difference (as you know) betwixt a Lidger, and an
Extraordinary Ambassador: The one is sent upon some particular emergent
occasion; the other makes his abode in a place. And such an Agent is Jesus
Christ in Heaven; A Lidger Ambassador, that makes his constant residence
there. Whom the Heavens must receive (or contain) until the time of the
restitution of all things, Acts 3.21.] i. e. until the perfection and full
accomplishment of his Kingdom. Till then he shall appear in the presence of
God; ever living, to make intercession for those that come unto God by him, (as
the Apostle has it) Heb. 7.25.

And great need there is that he should do so; that he should be a Lidger in
Heaven, Great need that Christ should be a Lidger in Heaven.
that he should continually appear in the presence of God interceding for his
people, in as much as there is one continually interceding against them, even
that Accuser of the Brethren (of whom I made mention even now) who accuses
them before God night and day. Satan is a Lidger, ever at hand to make
Intercession against us: Great need that Jesus Christ, (whose design it is to
dissolve and destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8.) should be a Lidger
also, ever at hand, at the right hand of God his Father, to make Intercession
for us.

Such is Christ's Agency in Heaven, a Continual Intercession; which, should it
cease but for a moment, Millenaries confuted.
what should become of all his people here upon Earth? Should Christ cease to
appear in Heaven for us, (as he must do, if he shall come and abide here upon
earth for a thousand years together, as some imagine; for he cannot in his
Humane Nature appear both in Heaven and Earth at the same time,) all that time
Heaven must be without an Agent, without an Intercessour. Which, of what
consequence it would be, let it be considerd by those who are wedded to that
opinion. To go on.

Christ performs the offices of a Lidger Ambassador in Heaven, for his people
on earth.
Christ appears in the presence of God, interceding for us as an Agent, as a
Lidger-Ambassadour. And very fitly may he be so called; in as much as he
performs the like offices for us in Heaven, that a Lidger-Ambassadour does
for those whom he represents upon Earth. Of those offices, I might reckon up
diverse. I shall only single out three or four of them, and those of the most
obvious ones. The chief work and service of a State-Agent, or
Lidger-Ambassadour is (as I apprehend it.) 1. To continue Peace and Unity.
2dly. To maintain Intercourse and Correspondency. 3dly. To reconcile and
compose Emergent Differences. And 4thly. To procure the welfare of the State,
which he negotiates for. And all these does Jesus Christ our Mediator perform
on the behalf of those for whom he appears in Heaven.

1. Maintaining their peace.
1. He continues their Peace. This do Lidgers. So long as they continue, and
keep residence in a Kingdom, and appear as Agents in the presence of the
Prince, with whom they negotiate, so long the Confederation, the League
stands firm and sure. Like benefit have all believers by Christ's appearing in
the presence of God for them. Thereby the League and Covenant betwixt God and
them is continued, and their Peace maintained. So much the Apostle insinuates
Ephesians. 2.14. where speaking of Christ, he says, he is our Peace; id est, the
Author of it, of our Peace with God; and that, as the Purchaser and procurer,
so the Maintainer of it. The one by his Death, the other by his Intercession.
To the same purpose is that of the same Apostle, Romans 5.1. where he says that,
Being justified by Faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ.] Christ sitting at the right hand of God his Father, as God and Man, he
maintains the Union betwixt God and Man. So long as Christ appears in
heaven, there shall be peace for all believers upon Earth.

2. As he preserves Peace, so he maintains intercourse betwixt God and them.
2 Maintaining intercourse betwixt God and them.
This does a State Agent, so long as he resides in a Kingdom and appears
before the Prince, he keeps Trade and Traffic open and free. Like benefit
have believers upon the Earth by Christ's residing, and appearing in heaven.
Hereby they have Intercourse and Communion with God. So the Apostle sets it
down Romans 5.2, By whom also we have access in to this grace wherein we
stand.] So again Ephesians. 2.18. By him we both (Jews and Gentiles) have an
access unto the Father.] And again, Ephesians. 3.12. In whom we have boldness (or
Liberty) and Access with confidence by the faith of him.] In all which three
places the word rendered [Accesse] is one and the same, (...), And it properly
signifies a Manuduction, or leading by the hand. Alluding (says Estius) to
the Custom in Princes Courts, where none may come into the Presence Chamber,
unless they be led, and brought in by some Favorite or Courtier. Thus none
have access into the presence of God, unless they be brought in by this
Favorite of Heaven, the Lord Jesus; whose office it is to bring men unto God
(as S. Peter has it. 1. Pet. 3.18. where still the word is the same, (...):
that he might lead or conduct us to God. This benefit have all believers by and
through Christ. They have a free intercourse in Heaven; so as they may come
into the presence of God upon all occasions. They come unto God by him; Heb.
7.25. They have liberty (or Boldness, (...)) to enter into the Holiest by the
Blood of Jesus; By that new and living way, which he has consecrated for them,
Hebrews 10.19, 20. Hither may they come, and that boldly. Seeing then that we
have an High Priest that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God, etc.
Let us therefore come with boldness to the throne of Grace, that we may obtain
Mercy and find Grace to help in time of need: Hebrews 4.14, 16. Thus Jesus
Christ appearing in the presence of God for us, not only continues our peace,
but maintains our intercourse and Communion with God.

3. And (3ly) he reconcileth and takes up Emergent differences. 3 Taking up
emergent differences.
Such differences frequently arise betwixt confederate Princes and States. In
which case the Agents interpose for the composing of them, that so they may not
tend to a breach of the League betwixt them. And the like office does Jesus
Christ our Agent in Heaven perform for his people upon Earth. They through
weakness and infirmity are subject to manifold failings and Errors, which
render them obnoxious to Gods just displeasure. Which, if not looked to, might
tend to the breach of the Covenant betwixt him and them. But here Jesus Christ
interposeth, making intercessions for the Transgressors (as you have it in
that place forealledged) Isaiah 53. last. This did the High Priest under the
Law, (as the Apostle informs us) Heb. 9.7. He went into the second tabernacle,
(the Holy of Holies) once every year, not without blood, which he offered for
himself, and for the Errors of the people.] A type of Christ, and his
Intercession, He being entered into the Holy of Holies, the Heaven of Heavens,
there presenting his blood, the merit of his death unto God his Father, he
makes Intercession for those (...), the Errors of his people: Those sins
which they are daily subject to fall into through the infirmity of the Flesh,
so taking up the difference which they make betwixt God and them, so as they do
not proceed to a Breach of Covenant.

Fourthly and lastly, He procures their welfare, 4. Procuring their welfare.
So does a faithful Agent of the people, of the State, which he negotiates
for. And so does Jesus Christ of all his Elect. For their sakes it was, that he
sanctified himself, when he was upon Earth, John 17.19. In all the services
which here he undertook, he had an eye unto them, seeking their welfare more
then his own. And the like he does now in Heaven; He sits at the right hand
of God, as their Agents, interceding for them. This was shadowed out in the
High Priest under the Law, who when he went into the Holy Place, there to
appear before the Lord; he had the Names of the twelve Tribes of Israel
engraven in stones; first, upon his Humerall, then upon his Pectorall, bearing
them both upon his shoulders, and upon his heart, (as you shall find it, Exodus
28.12, 29.) in both showing that he entered into that place, not only or
principally in his own behalf, but in the behalf of the Tribes whom he
represented, and presented before the Lord, to the end that they might be had
in continual remembrance with him, (as the 29th. verse there explains it.) A
lively Type of Christ's Intercession; who being entered into the Heavens, he
there appears before God in the behalf of his Elect, whom he bears (as it
were) upon his shoulders, and upon his Heart; sustaining their persons, and
presenting their condition unto God his Father; so causing them to be had in
perpetual memory. And thus presenting them unto God, he procures their
welfare, by commending their estate and condition unto God: Expressing his
constant will and desire for their good, that they may be delivered from evil,
that they may enjoy all the benefits whch he has merited for them by his
death. And thus is he said most properly (...), to intercede for them, (...)
significat Interpellationem, quae fit cum postulatione. Estius Com. in Heb.
7.25.
viz. by making requests on their behalf. This (says Estius) is the most
proper signification of the word; therein following Augustine, with whom the
Apostles Interpellare is the same with Postulare, To Intercede is to make
Request. So our former Translation renders it in that place forenamed, Romans
8.34. Estius in Romans 8.34. and Heb. 7.25.
Who also makes request for us.] This Jesus Christ does, though not viva voce,
Orally, and vocally, by word of mouth, (as the same Jesuit would willingly have
it, drawing in Thomas (though without any just ground) to be of the same mind
with him,) yet really and effectually, viz. by the presenting of his merit, and
expressing his will and desire on the behalf of his people, in such a way as
is congruous and suitable to that glorified state.

Thus does he intercede, make requests for them; thereby impetrating and
obtaining for them such things as they stand in need of, and he has merited
for them. As viz. that (...), which Paul speaks of Phil. 1.19. a continual
supply of the Spirit: whereby they are strengthened and assisted against all
Tentations, comforted in all Tribulations, delivered from every evil work,
enabled to the performance of every duty, and finally preserved unto his
heavenly Kingdom. All which are fruits of Christ's Intercession; though merited
by his death upon the Cross, yet impetrated and obtained by his Intercession in
Heaven. And thus we see how Jesus Christ, this our Mediator, appears before
God on the behalf of his people as an Agent, conserving their Peace,
maintaining their Intercourse and Communion with God, reconciling their
emergent differences, and procuring their welfare.

Secondly, He appears before God as an Advocate, 2 As an Advocate: being
So Saint John calls him, 1 John 2.1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.] (...), (says the Original.) A
word generally and properly signifying any one that is invited, and called in
to the help and assistance of another. That is also the proper meaning of the
word Advocatus. In Scripture we find it attributed sometimes to the Holy Ghost;
and sometimes to Christ. To the Holy Ghost; Then it is fitly rendered a
Comforter. So you find it Joh. 14.16. and 15.26. and 16.17. In this place, and
only this of St John, it is attributed unto Christ: and here it is most fitly
rendered an Advocate: An Advocate, we know what he is; One that is of counsel
with another; and pleads his cause in open Court at the Bar of Justice. And
such an Advocate is Jesus Christ unto his people.

1. He is of Counsel with them. 2 of Counsel with them.
That is one of the Titles given to him by the Prophet Isai, Isai. 9.6.
Wounderfull, Counselor.] So Christ is to his people; counselling them in the
midst of all their straits and difficulties: which he does by his Word and
Spirit.

2. And as of Counsel with them, so pleading for them. 2 Pleading for them.
This he does in the High Court of Heaven, at the Bar of God's Justice. In
which respect he may be fitly said to appear for them. Even as an Advocate
appears for his Client, and pleads his cause, answering all Accusations and
Allegations which are made against him, vindicating his right: So does the Lord
Jesus, appearing before God, he pleads the cause of his people; answering
what ever Accusations or Allegations are brought in against them by Satan; or
their own Consciences; vindicating their right to Heaven, and Eternal Life.
All which he does by the continual presentation of his Merit unto God his
Father, the Merit of his Death and Passion, whereby he has made a full
satisfaction unto his Justice for all their sins. This it is which pleads for
them, even the Blood of Christ: which (as the Author to the Hebrews says of
it, Heb. 12.24.) Speaks better things then the Blood of Abel.] Abel's blood
pleaded against Cain, crying for vengeance, Genesis 4.10. But the Blood of Christ
pleads for his Elect crying for mercy, pardon for them, even for all that
shall believe on him. For them the Blood of Christ speaks a good word;
pleading the general plea, a Plene satisfecit, a full satisfaction made unto
the Justice of God for them. So as by this means they are freed from the
Accusation and Condemnation of the Law, whereunto otherwise every day by reason
of their renewed transgressions they become obnoxious. This is the ground of
Paul's Triumph, Romans 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
chosen? who is he that condemns, etc? It is Christ that dyed, yea rather that
is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
Intercession for us.] This he does as an Advocate, there pleading the cause of
his Elect.

3ly As he is an Advocate, so also an Attorney. 3. As an Attourny.
An Attorney we know what in Law it means. One that is authorized to appear
for, or to act in the name of another. And such an Attorney is the Lord Jesus
on the behalf of his elect people.

1. Appearing before God for them, 1. Appearing for them.
Thus are Atturnies said to appear for their Clients in the Courts of Justice,
Sum of Sacred divinity published by John Downham. p. 330.
answering for them. And from hence (says that learned and judicious
Divine-Lawyer) the Apostle may seem to have borrowed that phrase of Christ
appearing in the presence of God for us, (in that place forenamed) Heb. 9.24.
This he does as our Attorney, sitting at the right hand of God his Father as a
general person, representing the whole mystical body, whereof himself is the
Head, appearing and making answer for every member thereof.

2. As he appears, so also he acts for them: doing what he does in their
name, 2. Acting in their name.
in their room and stead. Thus he took possession of Heaven upon his ascension,
not in his own name only, but also in their name. This is that he tells his
Disciples John 14.2. I go to prepare a place for you. A Similitude borrowed
from Travelers, amongst whom some one goes before to bespeake and take up
rooms for the rest, against they come. The like office has Jesus Christ done
for his people. He is gone before, entered into the Heavenly Places, not only
for his own sake, but his peoples, in whose name he has taken up those
Everlasting Mansions.

And as he has taken, so he keeps possession in their name, in their room
and stead. Hence is it that the Apostle speaking of believers, Ephesians. 2.6. he
says that they are raised up together, and made to sit together in the
heavenly places in Christ.] So they do, though not actually in their own
persons, yet in the person of Christ. That which an Atturny does for another,
himself is said to do it; Thus one takes possession of a house or ground which
himself never saw, viz. by another, whom he appoints in his room, as his
Atturny to do it in his stead. And thus has Jesus Christ taken, and now
keeps possession of the heavenly places in our stead.

3 Which he does: being.
3. And this he has done, being Authorized and deputed thereunto. Even as
Atturnies in Courts are Authorized, and deputed. Authorized by the Judge, and
deputed by the parties; Otherwise they cannot appear, or Act as Attournies for
others. Even so is Jesus Christ authorized and deputed to be as it were our
Attourny, Authorized by God his Father.
to appear and answer for us. Authorized by God his Father; Him has God the
Father sealed, John 6.27. id est, (as I showed you before,) Authorized him to
execute the office of a Mediator, to be as an Attorney for his people in the
Court of Heaven. Deputed by them.
And Deputed by those for whom he appears: Christ does not undertake to do
the office of an Advocate or Attorney for any without their consents. No;
Attournies must be retained by their Clients. And so is Jesus Christ by all
those who have any benefit by his Advocation, his Intercession. They are such
as have retained him, and committed their cause to him; such as have received
him, and do acknowledge him, resting and relying upon him as their Mediator.

4 As a Solicitor, presenting and promoting their desires.
4. In the fourth and last place, he appears also before God as a Solicitour.
What the Solicitours office is, it is well known; viz, to present and promote
the desires and Requests of another, in such a way as that they may find
acceptance. And such a Solicitor is the Lord Jesus on the behalf of his people.
In which respect again he may fitly be said to be a Mediator betwixt God and
Men. Such a Mediatrix was Queen Hester, who appeared in the presence of King
Ahasuerus, presenting unto him the Petition which Mordecai had put into her
mouth in the behalf of her people, Ester 5. And such a mediator is a Master of
Requests in a Princes Court, who appearing in the Presence Chamber, there
presents the Petitions of the People which are put into his hands. And such a
Mediator is the Lord Jesus, the great Master of Requests, who appearing in the
presence of God his Father, presents both the prayers and services of his
people unto him, and that in such a way as that they become acceptable unto
him. So that Text commonly has been, and for ought I know, properly may be
understood, (for what other sense to make of it I well know not,) Rev. 8.3.
where we find mention of an Angel, which stood at the Altar, having a golden
Censer, and there was given to him much Incense, that he should offer it with
the Prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar, which was before the throne.]
This Angel is the Angel of the Covenant, the Lord Jesus; which offers up the
prayers of Saints unto God, being mixed with the precious odours of his own
merits. This is the incense which is offered with, or added (for so the word in
the Original has it, as the margin in our new Translation renders it; (...),
that he might give, or add to the prayers of all Saints. Such are the merits of
Christ, an additament to the prayers of Gods Saints. Like that Incense which
was offered up by the Priest under the Law, (for to that the Spirit there
clearly alludeth.) under the Law, whilst the people were praying without the
Priest was offering up Incense within. So you find it Luke 1.10. A Type of
Christ's Intercession; Whilst his people are praying without upon Earth, he is
within, appearing before God in the heavens, there offering up Incense,
presenting those prayers mingled with his own merits; Which are not unfitly
compared to Incense: Incense being a sweet perfume, the smoke thereof does
easily and gratefully penetrate into the nostrils of Man. Even so does the
Merit of the Lord Jesus being added to the prayers of Saints, it penetrates
into the nostrils of God, so it there follows verse 4. The smoke of the
Incense of which came with the prayers of the Saints, and ascended up before
God out of the Angels hand.] And by that means those prayers and services,
wherewith it is offered, they become grateful unto God, [Ye are an holy
Priesthood (says S. Peter, speaking to believers) to offer up spiritual
sacrifices (viz. Prayers and praises, etc. acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.]
And in this respect may he fitly be said to be a Mediator betwixt God and men.
A Mediator, as an Inteecessour And thus I pass off from the fourth staff to the
fifth and last.

Christ is a Mediator betwixt God and man qua Gubernator, as a Viceroy, The
5th staff of this mystical Ladder, Christ a Governor.
a Deputy Governor: such a Mediator was Joseph betwixt Pharaoh and his
people, Being taken out of Prison, he was advanced, set at Pharaohs right hand,
next to him in the Kingdom, and so set over all the land of Egypt. Herein was
he a Type of our Mediator the Lord Jesus, who being in like manner taken out
of prison, (as the Prophet Isaiah has it, Isaiah 53.8.) viz. the prison of the
grave, (as the next verse explains it, ver. 9.) he was highly exalted, having a
name given him above every name; (as the Apostle has it, Phil. 2.9. id est,
transcendent honor and dignity. God the father having raised him from the dead,
set him at his own right hand, far above all Principalities, and powers, and
might and Dominion, Ephesians. 1.20. Putting all power into his hand. [All power is
given unto me in Heaven and in Earth,] So he tells his Apostles Mat. 28.18. All
power: (...) All Authority. Authority he had before, [He taught the people as
one having authority (says the Evangelist) Mat. 7.29. But now after his
Resurrection, his Authority was complete and full, All Authority was given unto
him. Which being ascended into heaven, and set down on the right hand of the
Majesty on high, he exercises as a Viceroy, a Deputy Governor under God his
Father. And this he does,

1. Generally, universally, over all Creatures 1 Universally over all Creatures.
in Heaven and Earth; All which are upheld by the word of his power, Heb. 1.3.
Herein does this our Mediator excel that Typical Mediator Moses, whom we may
hear complaning of his charge Number. 11.14. I am not able (says he) to bear all
this people alone, because it is too heavy for me.] But this does our
Mediator; by the word of his power, his powerful word (as he created, so) he
upholdeth all things; continuing them in their beings, ordering and governing
them according to his good will and pleasure. Here is his general Government.

2. But besides this he has a more special Government, which he exercises
over mankind. 2 Specially over mankind.
He is a Mediator betwixt God and Men (says the Text) (The Mediatorship of
Christ does in some respect extend universally to all Creatures, all which are
given to him to dispose of at his pleasure. But more specially it is exercised
about mankind.

Now mankind is divided (as you know) into two ranks, into two Worlds. There is
Mundus salvandorum, and Damnandorum; The Elect world, and the Reprobate world.
And to both these does this Government of Christ extend. Directly to the one,
obliquely and indirectly to the other.

1. As for the Reprobate world of wicked and ungodly men, 2 Over the Reprobate
world of wicked men
who were of old ordained to just condemnation for sin, Christ rules over
them, (or rather amongst them; Rule thou in the midst of thine Enemies, Psalm
110.2.) exercising his Authority and power upon them, even as he does upon the
Reprobate Angels; hardening them, restraining them, overruling them, subduing
them, judging them. All these he does, and shall do, to Satan and his Angels;
and so in like manner to wicked and ungodly men, who are subjects of Satan's
kingdom.

1. Hardening them. 1. Hardening them.
This in his just judgment he does, giving them up unto a perpetual
obduration, a final impenitency; So the Evangelist Saint John expounds that
Prophecy of the Prophet Isaiah, which he brings in as a Reason why the
obstinate Jews could not believe on Christ, John 12.39, 40. Therefore they
could not believe, because Isaias said again; he has blinded their eyes, and
hardened their hearts, etc.] He? Who? why even Christ himself. So it
follows, [These things said Isaias, when he saw his glory, and spoke of him.]
His Glory, the manifestation of his Majesty, which shined forth in many
passages (besides his transfiguration) here upon Earth. This Isaias by his
Prophetical eye foresaw, (even as Abraham is said to have done his Birthday,
or the time of his abode in the flesh, John 8.56.) And foreseeing it, foretold
what he should do to the Jews, who obstinately rejected him. And the like
judgment he still executes upon the like obstinate sinners, hardening them, by
withholding his grace, and giving them over unto Satan, and their own
Corruption, which by continuance through custom grows to a Callus, a brawnie
obduracie and insensible hardness.

2ly Restraining them, bridling them, 2. Bridling them.
so as that they cannot do what they would; they cannot go beyond the lists and
limits which he appoints them. Thus dealt he with Saul, who before his
conversion was a desperate persecutour, breathing out threatenings and slaughter
against the Disciples, Acts. 9.1. Whilst he was in his full careere, posting
to Damascus with letters missive to fetch up all that were of that way, to
bring them unto Jerusalem before the Highpriests, Christ meets him in the
way, arrests him, dismounts him, stays his course, restrains his malice,
and changes his heart. Thus has he a hook in the nostrils, a bridle in the
Jaws of every Leviathan. Be they what they will, what for power, what for
malice, yet Jesus Christ restrains them.

3. And restraining their power and malice, he also Over-ruleth 3. Overruling
them.
their counsels and endeavors, making them subservient to his own designs,
turning them to his own praise, and his Churches good. So are we to understand
that somewhat obscure passage of the Psalmist, Psalm. 76.10 Surely the wrath of
man shall praise thee, the remainder of wrath will thou restrain.] So does
Christ restrain (or gird, as the Original has it) the wrath of his Enemies;
so keeps it within compass, as that it shall not break forth further, then
may serve for his glory, and his Churches good, giving his people occasion to
praise him.

4. And thus overruling them, he also Subdues and conquers them, 4. Subduing
them.
Thou shall break them with a rod of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like
a potters vessel. (It is a prophecy concerning Christ) Psalm. 2.9. The Lord at
thy right hand (says the same Psalmist, speaking of Christ sitting at the
right hand of his Father, ver. 1.) he shall strike through Kings in the day of
his wrath, He shall judge among the Heathen, he shall fill the places with dead
bodies, he shall wound the Heads over many countries, he shall drink of the
brook in the way;] like a valiant and hardy Commander, who being in the
pursuit of his enemies (as Calvin, and others after him conceive of that
expression) he does not sit down to take his repast, but borrowing a little
water from the brook in the way for his present refreshment, follows on the
chafe until he has made a full and final conquest of them. Thus shall Jesus
Christ deal by all his enemies, and the enemies of his kingdom, who will not
submit to his government, As for those mine enemies which would not that I
should reign over them, bring them hither and slay them before me, Luke 19.31.
This will he do, if not here, yet at that last great and terrible day; at which
time,

Fifthly, He shall judge them. 5. Judging them.
This is he (says Peter to Cornelius) which was ordained of God to be the
Judge of quick and dead, Acts 10.42 God has appointed a day (says Saint Paul,
Acts 17.31.) in the which he shall judge the world in righteousness, by that
man whom he has ordained,] viz. Jesus Christ this Mediator betwixt God and
men. Then shall he take vengeance upon all his enemies. Such is the Government
which this Mediator exercises over the Reprobate World. To leave that.

2. The Government of Christ as Mediator, is more directly over the Elect
World; 2 2. Christ a Governor more peculiarly over the elect world.
his own people, who are given to him by God his Father. To them is Christ a
Mediator after a peculiar manner: and over them he exercises a peculiar
Jurisdiction: Even as it is said of Joseph, Acts 7.10. Pharaoh made him
Governor of Egypt, and all his house.] Over Egypt in a general, but over his
Family in a special and peculiar way. Such is the Jurisdiction which God the
Father has committed to his Son as Mediator; a general Jurisdiction over all
creatures in Heaven and Earth; but a special, a peculiar Government over his
House, over his Church. This Government he everciseth in diverse several acts:
I shall single out some of the principal.

1. The first is in Gathering the Subjects of his Kingdom into one Body: 1.
Gathering them into his Kingdom.
Which he does first in his Kingdom of Grace, then of Glory.

1. Of the former speaks Caiaphas the High Priest in that notable prophecy
of his John 11.51, 52. where (speaking he knew not what) he foretells (not
without a divine direction) how that Jesus should die for that Nation of the
Jews, and not for that Nation only, 1. Of Grace.
but that he should gather together in one the children of God that were
scattered abroad.] Elect Jews and Gentiles where ever dispersed, they are
gathered into one, one fold, one Church, one mystical Body; and that (as in
Christ, Ephesians. 1.10. so) by Christ the Head of that Body. Those whom God has
before time given unto Christ out of the world, he in time gathers them out
of the world. Which he does, first by delivering them out of the hands of their
enemies, (as Zacharias has it in his Song, Luke 1.74.) viz. Sin and Satan.
And then bringing them into the bond of the Covenant, (according to that
Promise, Ezekiel. 20.37.) causing them to submit unto his Government. Thus does
Christ gather the Subjects of his Kingdom here.

This was his work when he was upon Earth. [O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often
would I have gathered thy children!] It was the passionate expostulation of our
blessed Savior with, and lamentation over that City, Matthew. 23.37. This he
then assayed to do by those external dispensations; coming himself, and
sending his messengers to that people; inviting, commanding, promising,
threatening. And the like he still does, being himself in Heaven, he sets up
his Standard upon Earth; So runs that prophetical promise, Isai. 49.22.
Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my Standard to the
people.] Thus do Princes gather their people to themselves, by setting up their
Standards. And thus does the Lord Jesus gather his Subjects together, by
setting up his Standard, viz. the Ministry of the word, the preaching of the
Gospel, which holds forth Christ crucified, (Gal. 3.1.) as the Royal Standard
does the Arms of the Prince. This is the outward means which Christ makes use
of.

Which being accompanied with the secret concurrence of his Spirit, it is now
made effectual unto that blessed end; It now becomes a powerful attractive to
draw men unto Christ. [Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power,
Psalm. 110.3. When Christ goes forth accompanying his word with his Spirit,
this is the day of his power, and now his people come, and come willingly unto
him. This is that which Christ foretold that he would do, John 12.32. If I be
lifted up from the earth, I will draw all men unto me.] And this he does, being
lifted up, first upon the Cross, then upon the Throne, he draws all men; all
belonging to the Election of grace, whether Jews or Gentiles; bringing them
home to himself, to receive and acknowledge him as their Savior and Lord, to
believe on him, to be governed by him; Thus he gathers his Subjects into his
Kingdom of Grace.

2. And thus he shall gather them into his Kingdom of Glory. 2. Of Glory.
To this end shall he send forth his Angels, who with the sound of that great
Trumpet shall gather together his Elect from the four winds, from one end of
heaven to the other (as you have it Mat. 24.31.) But of this again hereafer.
Here is the first Act of Christ's Jurisdiction in reference to his Church, the
gathering of it.

2. Having gathered it, 2. Ruling them.
he now rules and governs it: According to thy word shall all my people be
ruled (says Pharaoh to Joseph) Genesis 41.40. Such a Ruler is Christ in his
Church, Such was Moses the Mediator of the Old Covenant. This Moses whom they
refused, (says Stephen to the Jews) him did God send to be a Ruler, Acts 7.35.
And such is the Mediator of the New Covenant, the Lord Jesus, whom the Jews
refused. This Isaiah foretold concerning him, The Government shall be upon his
shoulders, Isa. 9.6. And the chief Priests and Scribes tell Herod, (building
upon the like prophecy) Mat. 2.6. Out of thee Bethlehem shall come a Governor
that shall rule my people Israel.] Such a Ruler was, and is this our Mediator;
Not a temporal one, as they dreamed: No, that he disclaimeth, My Kingdom is
not of this world, John 18.36. Though in the world, yet not of the world.
(...), as some of the kindred of our Savior are said to have answered the
Emperor Domitian, interrogating them concerning his Kingdom, of what kind it
was) not a Worldly, not an Earthly kingdom (say they.) (...), but an Heavenly,
but an Angelical kingdom. Such is the Kingdom of Christ upon Earth: A
Spiritual Kingdom; wherein he rules, and that both Outwardly, and Inwardly.

1. Outwardly; appointing for them,
First, Outwardly. Ordering and Establishing it (as the Prophet Isaiah has it,
Isai. 9.7. And this he does by appointing Laws, Ordinances, and Officers in it
and for it.

1. Laws 1. Laws.
and Statutes. This do Sovereigns in their kingdoms, Every one is a Lawgiver,
The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet,
till Shiloh come, Genes. 49.10. Such is the Lord Jesus in his Church, a
Lawgiver, Yea, the only Lawgiver, There is one Lawgiver (says Saint James)
James 4.12. And who that is the Prophet Isaiah will tell us Isa. 53.22. The
Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, even the Lord Christ. He it was
that gave the Law at mount Sina, though by the ministry of Angels, [His voice
then shook the Earth] Heb. 12.26. and he is still the Lawgiver under the
Gospel. That Law of Love, which Saint James calls the Royal Law, Jam. 2.8.
and Saint Paul says it is (...), The fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. the
same Apostle elsewhere calls the law of Christ, Galat. 6.2. and such are all
Laws which bind the Conscience. This is a branch of Christ's Government over
his Chruch: This (...), to appoint Laws to his subjects.

2. And as Laws; so Ordinances. 2. Ordinances.
Word, Prayer, Sacraments, Discipline, they are all of Christ's Institution.

3. As Ordinances, so Officers 3. Officers.
for the dispencing of those Ordinances. He gave unto the Church, some
Apostles, and some prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.11, 12.

Thus did Moses the Typical Mediator Order and Stablish the Jewish Polity both
Civil and Ecclesiastical under the Law, by appointing Laws, Ordinances and
Officers for both. And thus has Jesus Christ ordered and stablished his Church
under the gospel. This did Moses as a servant in the house: This has Christ
done as a Son over his own house. Each herein showing himself faithful to him
that appointed them, (as the Apostle sets forth) Heb. 3.2, 5, 6. Here is the
External Government of Christ.

2. Besides this, 2. Inwardly ruling in their hearts.
he exercises an Internal government, viz. in the Hearts of his people. Here
is the Chair of State, where this King sits: dwelling there, Ephesians. 3.17. and
ruling there: This he does by his Spirit, which he communicates as the Head to
all the members of his mystical body. Thereby guiding and directing them,
leading them into all truth requisite for them to know, (as he promises his
Apostles Joh. 16.13.) Then bowing and inclining them to yield a willing and
cheerful obedience to his will so revealed, causing them to walk in his
Statutes. Thus are all the subjects of this kingdom led by the Spirit, Gal.
5.18. they live in the Spirit, and walk in the Spirit (as it follows) ver.
25. And here is the 2d Act of this great Viceroy; having gathered his
subjects, he Rules and Governs them.

3. In the 3d place, he Protecteth 3 He protecteth them.
and defends them. So much the Prophet Isaiah makes promise of to the
kingdom of Christ, Isa. 4.5. Upon all the Glory shall be a defense.] The Glory;
So the Church is called, inasmuch as it is the habitation of the glorious God,
and all the members thereof are and shall be changed from glory to glory, 2
Cor. 3. last. And upon this Glory shall be a defense, a Covering. Such a
Covering was the Cloud in the wilderness unto the Israelites; a covert from
the heat, to defend them against the scorching of the Sun, of which you read
Exodus 13.21. And such a Covering was the Tent unto the Tabernacle; of which
you read Exodus 36.19. defending it against the injury of storms and Tempests.
Each a Type of Christ and his Protection over his Church (as the same Prophet
there insinuates by alluding to each in the place forenamed, Isai. 4.5, 6.)
Such a Covert, such a Defense, Jesus Christ is, and will be to all his people:
Saving and delivering them out of the hands of all their enemies. Even as those
Typical Saviors the Judges and Governors of Israel (whom we read of in the
Book of the Judges) they saved the people from their temporal enemies, in
which respect they are called by the name of Saviors, Nehem. 9.27. Even so the
Lord Jesus, (who is the Truth of all those Types,) he saves his people out of
the hands of all their enemies, both Corporal and Spiritual. Corporal
Enemies, wicked and ungodly men; Spiritual Enemies, Sin and Satan, Hell and
Death. All these are enemies to the Subjects of Christ's Kingdom. But he having
undertaken their protection, and having all power given unto him, he does, and
will defend them; so as though they may be annoyed and endangered, yet they
shall not miscarry by any of them.

Again (in the fourth place) defending them, he also provideth for them. 4.
Provideth for them.
This did Joseph, being made Governor of Egypt, he provideth for the people,
Genesis 41. To that purpose in the years of plenty, he lays up store of
provision, that so he might have a Magazine against times of scarcity. And the
like office does this our Mediator, whom God the Father has constituted a
Governor over his Church, perform unto all the Subjects of his Kingdom. He
provideth for them; whilst he rules them, he also feeds them. So that word
may be rendered which we find applied unto Christ, Mat. 2.6. He shall rule my
people Israel,] (...), Reget, or Pascet: He shall rule them, or feed them. The
one you shall have in the Text, the other in the Margin of our New Translation.
Both these do Shepherds to their sheep: and both these do good Kings to their
Subjects. And thence is it that both in profane, and sacred language, they are
termed Shepherds: (...), (says the Poet) Shepherds of the people,] Homer.
Cyrus my Shepherd (says the Lord by Isai.) Isa. 44. last. And such a Shepherd
is the Lord Jesus; So we find him sometimes styled, I am that good Shepherd]
(says he) John 10.11. That great Shepherd of the sheep, Heb. 12.20. so called
because he performs both these offices unto his people, of Ruling, and
Feeding them. So the Prophet Isaiah puts them together, Isa. 40. where,
speaking of the Messiah, [Behold (says he) the Lord God will come with strong
hand, and his arm shall rule for him, ver. 10. Then follows He shall feed his
flock like a Shepherd, ver. 11. And so the Prophet Ezekiel the like, cap. 34.
ver. 23. I will set up one Shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my
Servant David; (meaning Christ the Son of David according to the flesh.) And
then follows, ver. 24. And I the Lord will be their God, and my Servant David
a Prince among them.] Such is Jesus Christ, a Prince, and a Shepherd. A Prince
ruling his Subjects, a Shepherd feeding his flock; providing for his people,
and reaching forth unto them all things necessary and convenient for this life,
and for a better.

Even for this life Christ takes care for his people for the supplying of
their wants. For their Bodies.
Thus did he provide for his Disciples when he was upon earth. So as though he
sent them forth without purse, or scrip, or shoes, without ordinary
accommodations, yet they wanted nothing. So much themselves acknowledge upon
his interrogating them, Luke 22.35. The like care he takes for his Disciples,
being now in Heaven. Upon this ground David builds his confidence, that he
should not want. The Lord is my Shepherd, (even the Lord Christ) therefore I
shall not want, Psalm. 23.1. And upon the same ground Paul makes promise to his
Philippians Phil. 4.19. My God shall supply all your need by Jesus Christ,]
(...), per Christum; by Jesus Christ, as being the Dispenser, and High-Almoner
under God his Father. Even as Joseph was under Pharaoh, giving out provisions
unto the people according to his discretion: So is the Lord Jesus under God his
Father. He provideth for the Bodies of his people. For their Souls.


And as for their Bodies, so also and specially for their Souls. Thence is he
called, the Shepherd and Bishop of Souls, 1 Pet. 2. last. Them he nourishes:
Even as men nourish their natural Bodies, so does Christ his mystical Body. No
man ever yet hated his own flesh, (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.29. i. e. No man
in his right wits will wrong or starve his own body) but nourishes and
cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church.] The Lord Christ nourishes his
Church: This he does by his Word and Spirit; the one being a vehiculum, a
conduit-pipe to the other: so conveying spiritual nourishment to all the
members of this Body: So much we may learn from the Apostle, Col. 2.19. where
speaking of this Head, he tells us that from hence All the Body by joints and
Bands having nourishments ministered, etc: increases with the increase of God.]
Thus is it in the natural Body: The Head being the fountain of the animal
spirits, it gives sense, and motion, and nutrition to all the members. And
thus does Jesus Christ, this mystical Head: He makes a supply to all the
members of his mystical Body, of what ever is requisite for their spiritual
nourishment, and growth.

To the nourishment of the natural Body there are two things requisite; Meat
and Drink: And both these Christ affords to the soul. Of the former you may
read John 6.27. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for the meat which
endures unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you;]
meaning his word, or himself; his own flesh; (as he expounds it, ver. 51. The
bread that I will give is my flesh.] The other you have John 7.37. If any man
thirst, let him come unto me, and drink.] And again John 4.14. Whosoever shall
drink of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst;] meaning thereby
his Spirit, the Spirit of Grace, which is like a living Spring in the soul,
refreshing and comforting it. Both together you have, John 6.55. My flesh is
meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. So they are, The flesh and blood of
Christ, being eaten and drunk by faith, applying the merit of his death and
passion unto the soul, now they afford as true and perfect nourishment unto the
soul, as any meat and drink do to the body; thus does Jesus Christ nourish his
people. Even as Joseph is said to have nourished his Brethren, and all his
Fathers Household, Genesis 47.12. So does this our Mediator the Lord Jesus nourish
his people, feeding them.

To which I might add, As he feeds, so also he cloatheth them: He cloatheth
them.
and this he does with a double garment; The one of Imputed, the other of
Inherent Righteousness. This is the fine-linnen spoken of, Rev. 19.8.
wherewith the Bride, the Lamb's wife, is said to be arrayed: The fine-linnen is
the Righteousness of Saints;] (...), (says the Original) the Justifications,
the Righteousnesses. Such is the Righteousness of Saints, a double
Righteousness. Besides the Righteousness of Christ put upon them by a
gracious Imputation, they have also an Inherent Righteousness, consisting in
holiness of heart, and life; inward Graces, and outward good Works, (which as
Beza notes, (...), Justificationes, i. e. bona illa opera qua sunt vinae fidei
(...). Beza, Gr. Annot. ad Apocal. 19.8.
may not unfitly be called Justifications, in as much as they justify a man's
faith, and the truth of grace in him.) This is the Government in which that
Royal Spouse is said to be brought to her Husband, Psalm. 45.13. The Kings
daughter is all glorious within, her clothing is of needle work.] A contexture
of variety of graces and good works meeting together. And this is a Garment not
of the Spouses own making, but is bestowed upon her by her Bridegroom. [To her
was granted that she should be arrayed, etc. Rev. 19.8. And so is it to all
true believers, whom Jesus Christ both feeds and clotheth. But I hasten.

Fifthly, Thus providing for them; now he also disposes of them. 5. He
disposes of them.
Thus did Joseph dispose of his Brethren, Genesis 47.11. Thus does our Joseph, the
Lord Jesus, dispose of all his people; and that both in respect of their
stations and services: where he will have them to be; and what he will have
them to do, or to suffer. Thus did he dispose of his servant Paul, as you may
see Acts 9. Having first dismounted, humbled him, and so fitted and prepared
him for his service, brought him to his Lure, insomuch that he calls out,
Lord, what will thou have me to do? ver. 6. Now he orders him to go to
Damascus, and there to repair to Ananias, to receive his instructions from him,
to whom he had imparted his mind concerning him, as you find it, ver. 15. Go
thy way (says the Lord to Ananias) for he is a chosen vessels unto me to bear
my name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the children of Israel,] this was
Paul to do. And for his suffering work that follows, [I will show him what
great things he must suffer for my names sake, ver. 16. Thus did Jesus Christ
dispose of him; and thus did he then dispose of all his Disciples, sending them
which way he pleased, Matthew. 10.16, 17. And thus does he still dispose of all
others under his Government: Calling some to one office, to one service; others
to another, He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, etc.] Ephesians. 4.11. Some,
or these, (...): not only appointing the offices, but designing the persons.
Still he does the same, though not in so immediate a way. He puts one upon
doing this, another upon suffering that: He disposes of the persons of his
subjects.

6. And lastly, disposing of them he Dispenceth to them; 6. He dispenceth to
them.
distributeth among them. And this he does both Gifts, and Honors, and
Rewards. All this does a Viceroy at his pleasure dispense to those under his
government: And all these does Jesus Christ dispense unto his people.

1. Gifts. 1. Gifts.
All kind of Gifts, whether of Nature, Of Nature.
or Grace. Christ is the dispencer of both. Of the former speaks Saint John
(as he is commonly understood) cap. 1. ver. 9. That was the true light (says
he, speaking of Christ,) that enlightneth every man that comes into the
world;] viz. with a Natural light, the light of Reason, and Understanding;
which as it was at first infused into the mind of man by him, by whom all
things are made, ver. 3. so some sparks thereof are still preserved and
continued by the same Mediator, by virtue of the general mediation of Christ.
But to let them pass.

Gifts of Grace are all of his dispencing. To every one of us is given Grace
according to the measure of the gift of Christ (says the Apostle) Ephesians. 4.7.
Grace, both Common and saving.

Common Graces, Common grace.
gifts inabling men for special services. Of these speaks the Apostle there,
When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto
men,] ver. 8. Meaning thereby those extraordinary gifts, the gifts of the Holy
Ghost, bestowed upon the Apostles and others in the infancy of the Church. The
like office he still performs unto his Church; giving gifts unto men,
inabling his Ministers, and others, for the performance of those offices and
services which he calls them to in his Church: and private Christians for the
managing of those states and conditions which he sets them in. Every one has
his own proper gift, one after this manner and another that, 1 Cor. 7.7. And as
common, so

Saving Grace. Saving grace.
That has Christ for the dispencer of it: Being himself the fountain of
Grace, full of Grace, [It pleased the Father that in him should all fullness
dwell, Col. 1.19. fullness of Grace; [Hee dwelt among us full of Grace, John
1.14.] He conveyeth of that his fullness unto others, even to all the subjects
of his kingdom, Of his fullness we have all received, and grace for grace,
Joh. 1.16. (...), Grace upon Grace, one Grace after another. Even as Joseph's
brethren and kindred received a first and a second supply from his store; So do
Gods Elect receive from their Joseph, the Lord Jesus, a first and a second
grace. First the Grace of Justification, then of Sanctification: First
prevenient, then subsequent Grace: First converting, then confirming grace. One
grace after another, and one degree and measure after another. Thus is Christ
the dispencer of gifts.

2. As of Gifts, so of Honors. 2. Honors.
To as many as received him he gave power, ((...), dignity, privilege) to
become the sons of God, John 1.12. He has made us Kings and Priests unto God
and his Father, Rev. 1.6.

3. And 3ly As gifts and Honors, so Rewards. 3. Rewards.
Behold his reward is with him, and his work before him (says the Prophet,
speaking of the Messiah) Isa. 40.10. and 62.11. Behold I come quickly, and my
reward is with me, Rev. 22.12. He is that Steward spoken of in the Gospel, who
by the appointment of the Lord of the Vineyard gives to every one of the
laborers their penny, Mat. 20.8, 9. What ever services any shall here do unto
God his Father, Jesus Christ will see they shall not go un-rewarded. What
lesser service then a Cup of cold water, (the least act of charity that may
be,) yet even this given unto a Disciple, in the name of a Disciple (for God's
sake,) it shall not ((...), in no wise) lose his reward, Mat. 10. last. This
Christ has undertaken, and this he will perform: if not here, yet hereafter,
at that great day of Retributions. The Son of man shall come in the glory of
his Father with his Angels, and then shall he reward every man according to his
works, Mat. 16.27. Every man, both good and bad. Then shall be that (...), of
which the Apostle speaks, Rom 2.6. The Revelation of the righteous Judicature
of God: when the Lord Jesus (being constituted and appointed of God to be the
Judge of quick and dead, Acts 10.42.) shall render unto every man according to
his deeds. To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for Glory,
Honor, and Immortality, Eternal Life, Romans 2.7, 8. This is the reward which
God the Father has put into the hands of his Son Christ as Mediator, to
bestow upon all his Elect, Thou have given him power over all flesh, that he
should give eternal life to as many as thou have given him, (says our Savior
to his Father) John 17.2. And this he will perform. I give unto them eternal
life, (says he, speaking of his sheep) John 10.28. Thus will he crown his own
grace with glory; giving to every one of his Subjects, whom here he has made
Kings unto God his Father, a Crown. When the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye
shall receive a crown of glory, that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5.4. Henceforth is
laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge
shall give unto me at that day: and not to me only, but to all that love his
appearing, 2 Timothy 4.8. This shall Jesus Christ then do as Mediator betwixt God
and men.

And this is the last Act of his Mediatorship, this act of Judicature; which
having performed, then shall he surrender up the Kingdom unto God his Father (as
the Apostle tells us) 1 Cor. 15.24. viz. his Oeconomicall Kingdom (as it is
called.) As for his Natural, or Essential Kingdom, which he has as God, this
he shall enjoy in common with his Father, and Spirit unto all Eternity. But his
Oeconomicall Kingdom, which he has as Mediator, this as he received it from
God his Father, so, having finished that last Act, he shall resign it up unto
him again.

And thus have I now at the length brought you to the top of this mystical
Ladder; leading you by the hand from staff to staff; showing you the several
acts of Christ's Mediatourship; his several transactions betwixt God and men.
That which now remains, is that I should look back again, reflecting upon what
has been spoken touching this so excellent a Subject, by way of Application.

But before I come at that, there are yet two Questions, Two Questions resolved.
which meeting me in the way, call for Resolution; each taking its rise from
the Text; the one about the Object, and the other about the Subject of this
Mediation. 1. Whereas it is here said, that Christ is Mediator betwixt God and
men; it is demanded, whether only betwixt them. 2. Whereas it is said, that
this Mediator betwixt God and men, is the Man Christ Jesus; it is questioned,
whether he be his Mediator only according to his humane nature, as man. Take
the Answer to both with as much brevity and clearness as may be.

Quest. 1. Is Christ Mediator only betwixt God and men? Is Christ Mediator
only betwixt God and men?
what say we to the Angels? Have they no snare in, no benefit by this his
Mediation?

Answer.
Ans. To this it is answered variously, Divines not being agreed about it; Some
wholly exclude them, appropriating the benefit of this Mediation Whether Angels
have no benefit by this Mediation?
only to mankind, they shut out the Angels from having any thing to do with it.
In favor of which opinion, they bring in this of the Apostle in the Text,
which sets forth the Object of this Mediation to be mankind, men, not
Angels. And to this they add that to the Hebrews, cap. 2.16. where it is said,
that Christ took upon him not the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham.
Intimating, that he took upon him the office of his Mediatorship only for man,
and not at all for the Angels.

Others more warily, they distinguish. There is a twofold Mediation A twofold
Mediation.
of Christ (say they;) the one of Redemption, or Reconciliation, properly so
called; Mediatio duplex; Alia Redemptionis, alia Conservationis. Tilen. Syntag.
de officio Christi. Sec. 30.
the other of Preservation, or Confirmation. Now as for the former of these
(say they) it agrees not unto the Angels. Not unto the good Angels: they
needed it not, having never fallen. Nor to the evil Angels: They indeed stood
in need of a Mediator as well as man; but Christ did not undertake this for
them: So much himself insinuates, Mat. 25.41. where he says that, Hell fire
is prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And Saint Jude speaking of them,
tells us, that the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation, God has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day, Jude 6. Their fall, being with a high hand, in a
presumptuous way, without any previous Tentation, it was irreparable,
irrecoverable. Christ never intended them any benefit by his Mediation, as
Origin of old, and some Anabaptists at this day hold. In this sense Christ is a
Mediator only to mankind, not to the Angels, whether evil, or good; not a
Mediator of Redemption, or Reconciliation, properly so called.

And in this sense are we to understand the Text. Christ a Mediator of
Redemption only to men.
Jesus Christ is Mediator betwixt God and men; yea, and only betwixt them,
viz. as a Redeemer, a Propitiatour. So the verse following explains it, Who
gave himself a Ransom for all.] This he did not for the Angels, but for
mankind only. And so may that other Text alleged, Heb. 2.6. expounded.
( Hebr 2.16.) be most fitly and properly construed, [Christ took not upon him
the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham.] Where the word
in the Original is, (...); which properly signifies apprehendere, to sieze
upon a thing, to catch at it, to lay fast hold upon it, when it is going from a
man. Thus you shall find it used in the proper signification of it, Mat. 14.31.
where it is said, that when Peter was ready to sink, Jesus stretched forth his
hand, and caught him:] (...), the word is the same; Jesus took hold of him, to
save him: And thus may it most aptly be rendered and construed in this place,
[Christ took not hold of the Angels, but the seed of Abraham he took hold of.]
Angels and men being fallen, they were all (like Peter) swimming in the same
sea of misery, sinking into the bottom of hell, the gulf of everlasting
perdition. Now the Lord Jesus he took hold not of the Angels, but of mankind;
(...) hic est vindecare, sive asserere in libertatem, manu injecta: Grotius ad
loc. Hyperius ad locum. Vide Leigh. Critica Sacra ad verbum.
suffering the one to sink and perish; he redeemed and recovered the other: So
the word in that place is most genuinely expounded by Hyperius, and Grotius,
and others. And indeed the very Context leads us unto this sense. In the
verse foregoing, it is said, that Christ took the nature of man upon him (our
flesh and blood) that he might deliver them who through fear of death were all
their life time subject unto bondage.] This was the end of his Incarnation; to
save lost mankind. And this he did; For verily he took not hold of the Angels,
but of the seed of Abraham.] Laying a strong hand upon the one, to vindicate
and recover their liberty; not so on the other. Herein Jesus Christ has
expressed his love unto mankind, more then to the Angels: being a Mediator of
Redemption to the one, not to the other.

But of Preservation, and Confirmation, Christ a Mediator of confirmation to
Angels.
without any danger that I know, he may be said to be. Thus is he a Mediator
to the good Angels; This, however they kept their first estate, yet being
created mutable creatures, Quaevis creatura rationalis in puris naturalibus
constituta, errare ac peccare potest. Aquin. Sum: part. 1. q. 63. Conclus.
they were subject to fall. This some of them had done; and the rest were not
to be trusted. So much we may learn from that passage, Job 4.18. Behold, (says
he) God put no trust in his servants, and his Angels he charged with folly.]
Though not with Actual, yet with Potentiall Folly; He well saw what they were,
and how ready they might be to do what their fellows had done, if left to
themselves; though they were not as yet sinful and miserable, yet soon they
might have been, unless they were confirmed and upheld in that state by a
power greater then their own: And what power should that be, but the power of
him, who upholdeth all things by the word of his power, Hebr. 1.3. The power of
Jesus Christ: by him it was that they were created, Col. 1.16: and by him they
are upheld.

The good Angels have benefit by Christ.
Questionless, the good Angels have a near, and a mystical relation unto Jesus
Christ; and are beholding to him, (though not so much, yet as well) as
mankind. He is a common head to both, both meeting together in him. So that
place of the Apostle is most genuinely expounded, Ephesians. 1.10. That in the
dispensation of the fullness of time he might gather together in one all things
in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are in earth, even in him.]
Angels in heaven, and men upon earth, make one mystical Body, meeting together
in the same Head: So Christ is called: As the Head of man, 1 Cor. 11.3. The
Head of every man is Christ:] So of the Angels, Colos. 2.10. He is the Head of
Principalities and Powers. Hence is it that the good Angels are called the
Elect Angels, 1 Timothy 5.21. Now Christ is the Head of the Election; None are
elected but in him, and for him, Ephesians. 1.4. And thus they are styled the Sons
of God, Job 1.6. and 2.1. and 38.7. Sons, not by nature: That is Christ's
Prerogative, who is the only begotten Son of God, John 1.14. and 3.16. But by
grace, the grace of Adoption; and that also must be by and through Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 1.5. And thus are they reckoned as a part of that (...), the
general Assembly, the Catholic Church, Heb. 12.22. And being so, they must
have some benefit by Jesus Christ: viz. the benefit of Preservation and
Confirmation. By and through him they come to have a more perfect union with
God.

And thus may we understand that very obscure Text of the Apostle, Colos. 1.20.
expounded.
which Expositors are not a little troubled about, Colos. 1.20. It pleased the
Father, etc. By him, (viz. by Christ) to reconcile all things to himself,
whether they be things in heaven, or things in earth.] Where, granting (what
generally is not, and I think well cannot be denied) that by [things in Heaven]
are to be understood the Angels; the Question is, How they are said to be
reconciled unto God? To this it is answered. Properly they are not: Where there
was no breach, Cuicunque creaturae hoc convenit, ut peccare non possit: hoc
habet ex dono gratiae, non ex condition naturae. Aquin. Sum. par. 1. quaest.
63. Art. 1. Christi gratia effectum est ut Angeli Deo (...) adhaerentes, a
lapsu immunes perstarens. Tilen. Syntag. pars. 2. cap. 10. sec. 34.
there can be no proper Reconciliation. This is peculiar unto man; but
improperly and analogically they may be said so to be; and that by confirming
and establishing them in the grace and favor of God; taking away all
possibility of Defection from him, and Enmity with him. This benefit the elect
Angels may be conceived to have by Christ, through his Mediation; thereby they
are brought to a more perfect adhesion unto God, to an inseparable union with
him. Their peace and amity with him by this means is continued and
strengthened. And thus you see the former of these two Questions briefly
resolved. The latter follows.

Quest. 2. Is Jesus Christ Mediator only according to his Humane Nature? Or,
if you will, enlarge the question a little: Jesus Christ being both God and
man, partaking of both According to what nature Christ is Mediator?
according to which of these his Natures, he is said to be the Mediator
betwixt God and men. Whether only according to his Divine Nature, as God; or
whether only according to his Humane Nature, as man; or according to both, as
God and man? Here are three ways: Which shall we take?

Answer.
Ans. Take which we will, we shall fall with some company. A threefold opinion.
And therefore it behooveth us here to take that counsel which the Lord gives
unto his people, Jer. 6.16 to stand in these ways, and see, and ask for the
old path, where is the right way, that we may walk therein.

1. Christ is Mediator only as God: confuted from the Text.
1. In the first of these we shall find Osiander alone. Christ is Mediator
(says he) only according to his Divine Nature, as God: But this opinion
needs no other refutation, then that which it meets with in the Text, which
tells us expressly, that the Mediator betwixt God and man, is the Man Christ
Jesus; so, clearly interesting the Manhood of Christ in this Office and Work of
Mediatorship. Upon this account we leave him.

2. Only as man: the opinion of Papists.
2. The second path is more trodden. Here we find not only Stancarus, whom
Bellarmine seems to undertake, as being somewhat too gross in his opinion
this way: But even Bellarmine himself, and most of the Doctors of the Church
of Rome; who, however they acknowledge that that person, who was and is
Mediator, is both God and Man, Deus Humanatus, (to use Bellarmine's words) God
made man; Bellarminus de Christo Mediatore. cap. 1.
yet (say they) he performs and executes that office of his Mediatorship not
according to his Divine, but Humane Nature, only as man: So the Master of the
Sentences, so Bonaventure, Nullo pacto convenit Christo esse Mediatorem, in
quantum Deus est, sed in quantum Homo. Thom. 3. p. q. 26. Art. 2. Concl.
so Aquinas have determined it; And therein they are followed by the generality
of the Romish Persuasion. Jesus Christ is Mediator only according to his
humane Nature; not at all as God, but only as man. This is their Tenent, which
they endeavor to make good both by Scripture and Reason.

For Scripture. They have but one Text, The Text cleared from countenancing
this opinion.
which they can find that seems to speak any thing for them in this cause;
And that is this we have now in hand. [There is one God, and one Mediator
betwixt God and men, the Man Christ Jesus.] In this bulrush, they find two
knots: From hence they take up a double Argument. First, The Apostle he
recalleth this Mediator, the Man Christ Jesus: And wherefore so, but to
express and notify that Nature according to which he is Mediator? And
Secondly, He plainly distinguishes here betwixt God, and this Mediator,
[There is one God, and one Mediator.] And therefore Christ cannot be Mediator
as God, but only as man; Thus they argue from this Text. But how weakly will
soon appear, if we come to join issue with them. Which I shall do with all
convenient brevity, as not taking delight in controversies, or willingly
meddling with them, but where I am necessarily engaged to it.

Arg. 1. For the former, The Mediator betwixt God and man, is the Man Christ
Jesus. The man Christ Jesus.


Answer.
Ans. True, he is so; but not only as man, Not only as man.
there is a broad difference betwixt these two, The Man Christ is Mediator:
and, He is Mediator only as man: The Apostle here asserteth the one, not so
the other. He does not say, Jesus Christus Homo, Jesus Christ the Man; that
might have seemed to imply what they contend for: But Homo Jesus Christus, the
Man Christ Jesus: id est, not any other man; not any mere man: but that man,
who was more then man; the Man Christ Jesus; that Person who was both God and
man. Thus are we here to construe the word [Man,] Chamier de Mediatore. cap. 5.
sect. 5.
Non naturaliter, sed Personaliter; not in the Abstract, but in the Concrete;
not as pointing out unto us only the humane nature of Christ, but the whole
Person denominated and set forth unto us by and under that nature: Like phrases
we meet withal elsewhere, 1 Cor. 2.8. It is said that the Lord of Glory was
crucified:] not that Christ was crucified in that nature; according to which he
is most properly said to be the Lord of Glory, viz. his divine Nature, that was
impossible. But that Person, who being God, as well as man, was the Lord, and
God of Glory, (as he is styled Acts 7.2.) he was crucified. So in that obvious
place, Acts 20.28. it is said that God nourished the Church with his blood.]
Not that the Godhead suffered and died; (that had no blood of it own to shed,)
but that Person who was truly God, as well as man. In both places there is a
(...), (as Divines call it) a Communication of Properties; wherein that which
is proper to one nature in Christ, is attributed (not to the other nature, as
it is by some misconceived, but) to the person denominated and set forth by the
other nature: And thus are we to understand that somewhat obscure Text John
3.13. No man (says our Savior) has ascended up to heaven, but he that came
down from heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven.] Not that Christ in
his manhood came down from heaven; or that according to his Godhead he
ascended up into heaven; but the same Person did both according to diverse
natures. He was said to come down from heaven, in respect of his Godhead, which
assumed the humane nature into personal union; And he was said to ascend up
into heaven, and to be in heaven in respect of his manhood, which being united
to his Godhead, came to be of God's Counsel, to be acquainted with his
secrets: And after the like manner are we to understand the word here in the
Text; The Man Christ Jesus; that Person who being God before time, was also
made man in time, he was Mediator betwixt God and men.

Quest. Question.
But why then does the Apostle here add this, [The Man Christ,] Why the word
Man is mentioned?
if it be not for that end, to point out that nature according to which he is
Mediator?

Answer.
Ans. For this some other and better Reasons may be assigned; A threefold
Reason assigned for it.
as,

1. This he adds to intimate that common interest which all the Sons of men
have in this Mediator; In as much as he also is the Son of man, their Brother,
partaking in the same common nature, of their flesh and blood, as the Apostle
inlargeth it, Heb 2.11. and 14.

2. This he adds to encourage men so much the rather to come unto God by
Christ, and to make use of his Mediation, in as much as they have not an High
Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of their infirmities, but was
in all points tempted like as they are, (as the same Apostle has it, Heb.
4.15.) being a man like unto themselves, only without sin.

3. Again, he makes mention here of Christ's humane Nature, Quia de traditione
erat dicturus, ideo Hominem solummodo nominavit: Sedulius ad loc.
in as much as in this nature he paid the Ransom spoken of in the verse
following; [He gave himself a Ransom for all.] This he did by offering up his
humane nature as a Sacrifice unto God. Through his eternal Spirit he offered
up himself unto God, (as the Apostle has it) Heb. 9.14. By the power of his
Godhead he offered up his manhood: which because it was the Sacrifice offered
up, the Nature wherein Christ suffered, and so paid that price, therefore the
Apostle here makes mention only of it; stiling this Mediator, The Man Christ
Jesus. And thus you see that first

Arg. 2. Paul here distinguishes betwixt God and this Mediator. God and
Mediator distinguished.
And therefore Christ is not Mediator as God, but only as man.

Ans. To this it is answered. 1. That the God in the first place, Chamier de
Mediatore. cap. 5. sec. 6.
does not hinder, but that it may also be understood in the second: As in that
John 14.1. Our Savior says to his Disciples, Ye believe in God, believe also
in me.] Not but that he himself also was God, and to be believed in as God:
And so John 17.13. This is life eternal, that they may know thee the only true
God, and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ.] Not that Christ is thereby
denied to be truly God, (as the Arians of old, and the Socinians at this day
would conclude from that Text.) So here, There is one God, and one Mediator,
etc.] The mentioning of God in the first place does not exclude it in the
second: For by this reason, this Mediator should as well be denied to be God
at all, as to be Mediator as God.

2. But (secondly, and more plainly) the [God] there is to be taken, Chamier,
ibid. sec. 7. Dr. Prideaux. Fasciculus Controvers. de Redemptione. q. 3. The
word (God) taken personally.
not Essentially, but Personally; as denoting and pointing out the first Person
in the Trinity, God the Father: So we find it often used elsewhere John 3.16.
2 Cor. 5.19. Ephesians. 1.3. And so is it most properly to be understood here;
There is one God, and one Mediator betwixt God and men; id est, God the
Father, betwixt whom, and mankind, Christ the Son is said to be a Mediator. We
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, 1 John 2.1. And
being so understood, it does not exclude Christ from being God, or from being
Mediator as God; viz. as the second person in the Trinity. Thus is the Text
briefly vindicated from giving any countenance to this Doctrine of theirs.

As for their Reasons, I will not trouble you Bellarmine, Argument from Reason.
and others of that way, borrow from their Aquinas. A Mediator (says he) must
be a Middle person differing from both the Extremes, Aquinas p. 3. q. 26. art.
2.
both from the party offending and offended. Now such a Mediator is Christ
(says he) considered as a Righteous Man. As Man he differs from God: as
Righteous he differs from other men, Christ as God the same with God.
who are all sinners: and so in that respect he is a fitting Mediator betwixt
God and Men. But as God he is the same with God, not differing from him,
whether in nature or quality.

Answer.
Ans. To this I find diverse Answers returned. To let others pass. 1. Such a
Mediator is Jesus Christ, a middle person differing from both Extremes, 1.
Christ as God-man a middle person, differing from God and man.
both from the person offending and offended. So he does viz. as (...), as
God-Man. True indeed, in respect of his Natures, he agrees with both, but in
respect of his Person he differs from both, 2. Chamier de Mediatore c. 7.
sec. 2.
being not only God, or only Man, but God and Man.

2. But (2dly) consider him as God, yet does he therein also differ from God
his Father. I find a threefold difference Christ as God differs from his
Father. A threefold difference.
assigned betwixt them. 1. In respect of his Person, which being the second
Person in the Trinity, is distinct from the first: The Son is a distinct Person
from his Father, 1 John 5.8. 2. In regard of his Incarnation; It was not the
Father that took upon him our flesh, but the Son, The Word was made flesh, Joh.
1.14. And 3dly in regard of his Humiliation; It was not the Father, but the Son
which took upon him the form of a servant, etc. Which Humbled himself and
became obedient unto the death, etc. Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. Therein did he differ
from God his Father, as we may learn from the words following, [Wherefore God
also has highly exalted him: viz. God his Father. Thus then Christ according
to his divine nature is not every ways the same with God, God his Father. So
as in this respect there is noe mpediment but that he may be a fitting
Mediator betwixt God and men.

Reply. But they reply. Reply.
Christ as God was a party offended. Christ as God a party offended.
And therefore in that respect he could not be a proper Mediator.

Ans. To this it is answered that, Answer.
these two may well stand together. A party offended may yet be a Mediator. A
party offended may be a Mediator.
Thus stories tell us of Menenius Agrippa, how he, being himself a Senator of
Rome, Voloterranus.
was yet employed by the Senate as an Agent to deal with some revolters who had
made a defection from the State, and therein had wron ged him as well as the
rest. But we shall not need to go abroad; Scripture will furnish us with an
instance. Those Husbandmen in the Gospel, which endeavored to keep their
Landlord out of his vineyard, denying him the fruits thereof, therein they
wronged not only him, but his son also, whose Inheritance it was. Yet the
father imployeth the son as a Mediator to deal betwixt him and them, Mat.
21.37. Thus, however Jesus Christ being the Son of God, was a party offended as
well as his Father, yet he is employed by his Father as a Mediator to reconcile
the persons offending unto himself; and this without any absurdity at all.
Thus have you briefly seen what our adversaries of Rome have to say for this
their Opinion: which bearing no weight, we shall also desert them and this
their way.

3. 3d Opinion orthodox.
There is yet a third and a last way; and that shall we find to be the old and
the right way: Wherein the true Catholics, the Orthodox professors of all ages
have walked. And that is not to divide the natures of Christ in the office and
work of his Mediatorship, but to put them together; attributing it to his whole
person. Jesus Christ is Mediator betwixt God and Men, and executes the office
of his Mediatorship, Christ Mediator as God-man.
not only as God, nor only as Man; but as (...), God Man; So Augustine long
since clearly and soundly determined it, August. de Ovibus, Homil. 12.
Divinitas sine Humanitate, and Humanitas sine Divinitate non est Mediatrix.
Neither the Divinity without the Humanity, nor the Humanity without the
Divinity is Mediator betwixt God and men. How then? Sed inter Divinitatem
solam, and Humanitatem solam, Mediatrix est Humana Divinitas, and Divina
Humanitas. But betwixt the Divinity alone, and the Humanity alone is Mediator
the Humane Divinity, and the Divine Humanity: that is, Jesus Christ as God and
man, is Mediator betwixt God and men; not according to one, but both Natures.
So runs that ancient and approved Rule, Appellationes officii competunt Christo
secundum utramque naturam. Names of office which are given unto Christ, they
agree unto him according to both natures. Thus is he said to be a Prophet, a
Priest, a King; all as God and man. And thus is he said to be a Mediator
betwixt God and man. Claudius Espencaeus de Mediatore. cap. 5. Christus est
Mediator, non qua Deus, nec qua Homo, sed qua Deus Homo. C. Lap. ad Textum.
So much some of the Doctors of the Church of Rome have freely and ingenuously
acknowledged. By name, Claudius Espencaeus most fully. After him Cornelius a
Lapide, who in express terms grants what we desire, though afterward he would
seem to detract and call it in again. And even Bellarmine himself is enforced
to yield little less, whilst he confesses that in some Acts of Christ's
Mediatorship there was a concurrence of his Divinity with his Humanity. So
then, Bellarm. de Christo. lib. 5. cap. 7.
by his confession, he was not a Mediator only as man, but as God and man; His
Godhead concurred with his manhood in some acts of his Mediatorship. The
Godhead concurred with the Manhood in all the Acts of Mediatorship.


Nay more (say we;) not in some only, but in all. This we contend for, and
this may easily be made good; True indeed, some Acts we shall find wherein the
Humanity of Christ did not concur with his Divinity; as viz. those which he
wrought before his Incarnation: But none wherein his Humanity acted without the
concurrence of his Divinity: In tantam unitatem ab ipso conceptu virginis,
Deitas and Humanitas connexa sunt, ut nec sine homine divina, nec sine Deo
humana agerentur: Leo Epist. 81.
So one of the Ancients (and a Bishop of Rome too) has determined it. The
Godhead and manhood of Christ (says he) were so nearly united from the very
conception of the Virgin, as that thenceforth the one did not act without the
other: Still we find the Godhead interested in every Act which Christ did, or
does as Mediator.

To make this good, look we back a little upon that mystical Ladder which I
presented unto you; and see if we do not find the Son of God upon every staff
of it. I will pass them over briefly, beginning at the bottom.

1. Who was it that was an Arbitratour 1. As Arbitratour.
betwixt God and man? not Christ as man: no, this is not a work for man to
undertake, to be an Vmpire betwixt God and man: So much we may learn from that
passionat Saint, Job 9.33. Neither is there any Dayes-man, (or Vmpire) betwixt
us, (says he, meaning God and himself) that might lay his hand upon us both.]
No, he that should undertake this work, must be more then man; no less then
God, the Son of God; He it was who found out that way and means of
Reconciliation betwixt God and man (which neither men nor Angels could ever
have done,) even the second Person in the Blessed Trinity, the Wisdom of the
Father.

2. Who was it that was the Interpreter 2. As Interpreter.
betwixt God and man? the Messenger of the Covenat; that declared and made
known unto man the mind and will of God touching a Reconciliation; and the way
and means of this Reconciliation? who was this, or who could it be but the Son
of God? No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten Son which is in
the bosom of the Father, he has declared him, John 1.18. No man has ascended
up into heaven, (i. e. to be acquainted with God's secrets,) but he that came
down from heaven; (i. e. the Son of God) John 3.13. The gracious purpose of God
toward lost mankind, it was a Secret locked up in the breast of the Father;
And so it had been even unto this day, had not Christ the eternal Son of God,
who being in the bosom of the Father, near and dear to him, was a secretoribus
Consiliis, one of his Privy Counsel, revealed it: which he did to our first
Parents in Paradise in that first born Promise, Genesis 3.15. and afterward to
the Fathers in succeeding ages, Acts 7.38.

3. Again (3dly) come from his Prophetical, 3. As a Priest.
to his Priestly Office. Here (to let pass other, which I formerly named)
there are two main and principal Acts; His Oblation, and his Intercession. And
in both these shall we find the Godhead of Christ interested.

1. In his Oblation, In his Oblation.
In the offering up of that Sacrifice upon the Cross. Here indeed the manhood
seemed to have the main stroke. That paid the Ransom; but yet even here we
shall find a concurrence of the Godhead. However, the Godhead could not
properly suffer with the Manhood, yet it concurred with it in that suffering.
The Godhead concurred with the Manhood in suffering; four ways.
Which concurrence, because it is a point of special concernment, I shall
briefly show you wherein it consisted. Take it in four words; Voluit, Quievit,
Sustentavit, Efficatiam dedit. The Godhead First, willed that the manhood
should suffer. Secondly, It Rested that it might suffer. Thirdly, It Supported
it in suffering. Fourthly, It gave efficacy and virtue to those sufferings. A
word of each.

1. Voluit. The Godhead of Christ willed that the Manhood should suffer. 1.
Willing that it should suffer.
So much we may learn from the words of our Savior, John 10.17, 18. I lay
down my life. No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self. I
have power to lay it down, etc.] So he had. And that not only a Passive power,
which all men have; but an Active. Such a Power he there speaks of (as the
next words make it out) I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to
take it up again.] Men may have the the former, not so the latter. They may
have power to lay down their lives, but not to take them up again. Christ had
both, a Passive power, as Man; and an Active power, as God; a divine power. And
by this power it was that he laid down his life. His Godhead willed that his
Manhood should suffer.

2. And (Secondly) Quievit, It rested that it might suffer. 2. Resting that it
might suffer.
Which otherwise it could never have done. We see how it was in the Garden,
when the Godhead of Christ did but a little put forth it self, presently all
that were sent to apprehend him fell to the ground, John 18.6. Had not that
rested, it had not been in the power of men and devils to have brought him to
the Cross. The Godhead rested whilst the Manhood suffered. Even as it was
with the first Adam, he slept while his side was opened, Genesis 2.21. So was it
with the second Adam, the Lord Jesus, whilst his side was opened, pierced upon
the Cross; his Godhead (as it were) slept, not putting forth that efflux of
power which before it had done; which made him to cry out, My God, my my God,
why have thou forsaken me? Yet,

3ly, Sustentavit. Though it rested that it might suffer, yet it secretly
supported and sustained it in suffering; 3. Sustaining it in suffering.
so as he did not sink under that, otherwise insupportable, burden. Such were
the sins of the world charged upon him, and the wrath of God due unto those
sins powered out upon him. One sin, having in it an infinite guilt, is more then
a finite creature can stand under. What were a world of sins laid upon one
man? Had not the Manhood of Christ been supported by his Godhead in those his
sufferings, it must needs have sunk under them.

4 Giving efficacy to that suffering.
4ly And lastly, Efficaciam dedit. The Godhead gave virtue and efficacy to the
sufferings of the manhood. Which had they been the sufferings of the manhood
alone, they could have been but like the Manhood it self, finite. The stream
rises no higher then the fountain. The Humane nature of Christ being it
selffinite, the merit thereof could not have been infinite. But such must that
Merit be, which makes satisfaction to an infinite Justice: It must be an
infinite merit; an Infinite price. Bellarm. de Mediatore lib. 5. c. 7.
So much Bellarmine cannot deny. And thereupon he is enforced to acknowledge,
that here the concurrence of the Godhead was requisite and necessary.

Thus does the Godhead concur with the Manhood of Christ all these several
ways in that grand act of his Mediatorship, his Oblation. All which we may
conceive comprehended by the Apostle in that one passage Heb. 9.14. where he
informs us, how Christ through the Eternal spirit offered himself without spot
unto God.] the Godhead offered up the Manhood. Willing that it should suffer;
resting that it might suffer; sustaining it in suffering, and giving it the
value and virtue to satisfy and sanctify.

The other act of Christ's Priesthood (the 4th act of his Mediatorship) is his
Intercession. 4. In his Intercession.
Now how can this be the work of Christ's manhood alone? To hear, and offer up;
to receive and present the prayers and other spiritual Sacrifices of all
believers in the world, to negotiate for them all at one and the same time,
according to the variety and multiplicity of their several occasions; this is
and must be the work not of a finite but an infinite Agent: Not to be effected
without the concurrence of the Divine Nature with the Humane.

The last and highest step of the Ladder is the Kingly office In his Kingly
office.
of Jesus Christ. Now how should he execute that without the concurrence of his
divine nature? Certainly, to Gather and Govern the Church, to protect and
defend it against all assailants open and secret, to give the Holy Spirit, to
enlighten the minds of men, to Circumcise their hearts, to subdue their
Corruptions, to vanquish Satan and all adverse powers, etc. (all which are
Acts of Christ's Kingly Office) it transcends the power of any finite creature;
and so cannot be attributed unto Christ only according to his humane nature,
as man, but as God and man.

Such is the work of Christ's Mediatorship, the work of the whole Person, This
concurrence of both natures explained and illustrated.
wherein both Natures are engaged. And thence is it that some of the Ancients
speaking of it, Dionis. Areopag. epist. 4. ad Caium. Damascenus lib. 3. cap. 19.
call it (...), Deivira, seu Deivirilis Operatio, a Divine-humane Operation,
the work of God-man. In which work each Nature acts its part: acting
distinctly yet jointly. Agit utraque quidem distinct, sed tamen unite, Leo Ep.
10.
A mystery which Damascen illustrates very aptly by a familiar similitude of a
fiery sword, which both cuts and burns at one and the same time. Cutting it
burns, Quemadmodum unam incisam combustionem, and unam combustam incisionem
igniti gladii dicimus, sed aliam actionem dicimus incisionem, and aliam
ustulationem, etc. sic Christi junam (...) dicentes, etc. Dionis. ibid.
and burning it cutteth, both together. But this it does according to two
distinct principles and properties. It is the Iron, or steel that cutteth; it
is the fire that burns; in the mean time the same sword does both. Even so it
is here. Such a work is the Mediation of Christ: wherein his two Natures act
jointly, and yet distinctly; each performing its proper work: The Manhood
performs that which belongs unto it, and the Godhead performs that which
belongs to it; both together making up the (...), the complete and perfect
work. Or if you will, take yet a more apt and proper illustration: As it is in
Humane Actions, there are two principles, the one Formal, the other Material;
the one Inward, the other Outward; the one the Soul, the other the Body: These
two act together Jointly, and yet Distinctly: The one moves, directs,
actuateth the other, the Soul, the Body: the other concurreth as an Instrument
with the first Agent, the Body acted by the Soul: both together making one
joint work. Even so is it here: In this work of Christ's Mediation, there are
two Principles, the Godhead and the Manhood, the one (as it were) a Formal,
the other a Material Principle: The Godhead actuating the Manhood, the
manhood actuated by the Godhead, each having its own proper operation; both
together completing the work.

And thus have I with as much brevity and perspicuity, as a mystery of this
high nature would admit, endeavored to clear up unto you this second Question;
According to what Nature Christ is said to be a Mediator betwixt God and men.

That which now remains, is only the Application: wherein I shall be as
succinct as I may, having already glaunced at some heads thereof, as I fell
with them by the way. Let that be directed only three ways; by way of
Information, Consolation, Exhortation.

Use 1. By way of Information. Is Jesus Information.
Here then take we notice of (what I touched upon before) a distance, an
alienation, 1. Take notice of natural enmity.
nay an Enmity betwixt God and Men. Were it not so, what needed a Mediator?
were not God and men at variance, what needed a middle person to come betwixt
them, to lay his hands upon both of them, as an Arbitratour, as an Vmpire, as a
Reconciler, a Peacemaker? Those who were agreed before need no Arbitrator:
Those who were friends before need no Reconciler. Whenever we read or hear of
this office of Jesus Christ, that he took upon him to be a Mediator betwixt God
and men, from thence reflect and look back to the ground or occasion of it;
even that Enmity which was, and which by nature is betwixt God and us. Never a
man but is born an enemy to God, and has God an enemy to him. When we were
enemies we were reconciled unto God, Romans 5.10. Such a distance there is
betwixt God and man by Nature. To convince us hereof, we shall need no other
Argument but this: Wherefore is Christ a Mediator, if God and man were not at
Enmity? So much we may learn from that very obscure Text of the Apostle, Locus
obscurissimus, Pareus ad loc.
Galat. 3.20. A Mediator (says he) is not of one. (...), He is not a
Mediator of one, (as our Translation makes it out;) not of one Party, but of
two at the least, and those such as are at variance, and disagreement betwixt
themselves. So were God and Israel at the giving of the Law (a passage to which
the Apostle there relates,) there was a distance, a difference between them;
and thereupon it was that God employed Moses as a Mediator betwixt him and
them. And such is the condition of all men by Nature. Otherwise Jesus Christ
had never undertaken this Office.

Sense of Enmity preparatory to Reconciliation.
Every of us be convinced hereof, and labor to be truly sensible of it. Which
till a man be, he will never look out after a Mediator, a Peacemaker. Had not
Absalom apprehended the deep displeasure of his Father against him, in
banishing him from his presence, he would never have made means to Joab to be a
Mediator for him, as he did, 2 Samuel 14.29. Had not the men of Tire and Sidon
been deeply sensible of Herod's high displeasure against them, and of the
dangerous consequence thereof, they would never have sought unto Blastus the
Kings Chamberlain to intercede for them, as they did, Acts 12.20. Till a poor
sinner come to apprehend God as an Enemy, as an offended and incensed God,
ready to take vengeance upon him: till he come to see himself in Absalom's
case, an outcast, rejected, separated from the presence of his God and Father,
from the presence of his grace here, and (without timely reconciliation) of his
glory hereafter, in the case of those Tyrians and Sydonians, in an undone
condition; he will never seek out after Jesus Christ, that he may have any
benefit by his Mediation. Let this then be the first work: As many of us as
have not hitherto been thoroughly convinced hereof, labor now to be. Behold God
an Enemy to us: but withal take notice of the first Rise and Ground of this
enmity, where it first brake in, on which part it began. Not on God's part no;
God is one (says the Apostle in that forenamed Text, Gal. 3.20.) One, as in
Essence, so in Constancy: sibi constans, semper idem. Always the same, not
subject to change, or alter, I the Lord change not, Mal. 3.6. If there be a
change, it begins on man's part. Had not Israel been changed toward their God;
had not they broke the Covenant which he had made with their Father Abraham, he
would have been the same to them that he was to him: he would have dealt as
friendly, as familiarly with them, as he did with him: So as there should not
have needed to have been a Mediator betwixt him and them, more then there was
betwixt him and their forefathers. That God was changed in this his carriage
toward them, they might thank themselves; the breach began on their parts. So
is it here; Had not man first turned enemy to God, broke covenant with him, God
would never have turned enemy to man; there should never have been any need of
a Mediator betwixt them, no more then there was betwixt Adam and him in state
of innocence. Herein then let us justify God; charging the ground of this
enmity upon our selves. We are enemies to him, otherwise he had never been at
enmity to us.

That we are so, we shall need no other evidence, but what we carry about with
us. Who is there but has his conviction in his own bosom? even that principle
of Enmity and Rebellion which is to be found in the heart of man by nature. The
carnal mind is enmity against God, (says the Apostle, Romans 8.7. speaking of a
man in his unregenerate estate;) for it is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be: (viz. not without a work of supernatural grace,
subduing the rebellion of the will.) Thus are all men by nature enemies to God.
No wonder then that they cannot please him (as it follows in the next verse,
ver. 8.) that he should be an enemy to them. Be we convinced of this Enmity,
whereof this word [Mediatour] puts us in mind.

2. (In the second place) Is Jesus Christ Mediator betwixt God and men? 2.
Admire and adore God's unparalleled love declared in this Mediator.
Here stand we still, observing, admiring, adoring the matchless and
unparalleled love, mercy, and goodness of God toward poor lost mankind, in
finding out a way and means of Reconciliation for them; appointing an
Arbitratour, a Peacemaker, ordaining and sending a Mediator, such a
Mediator. Herein there are diverse particulars which do exceedingly commend
this love of God to us: as,

1. That he being the Person offended, 1. In seeking Reconciliation with man.
should seek Reconciliation. This we take to be great condescension in men;
especially in Superiors to do this to Inferiors. What is it in the great God?
That he should appoint an Agent to negotiate with, and for man; a Mediator to
compremize and take up the difference betwixt him and them, and to reconcile
man to himself. Behold here an act of Grace, free grace, rich grace, mere
grace. What was there in man that God should thus regard his Enmity, or seek
his Amity? Had God any need of man? nothing less. He was absolutely and
infinitely happy and blessed from all eternity; He needed neither man, nor
Angel: He was as happy before their Creation as after. It was all one to him,
whether men, or no men; and those, whether enemies, or friends: Their amity
could add nothing to, nor their enmity detract any thing from his felicity: He
should have been no gainer by the one, and he could have been no loser by the
other. He knew which way to glorify himself, as well upon man an enemy, as
upon man reconciled. What was it then that moved him to seek this
Reconciliation; and to send a Mediator about this work? Surely, nothing but
his grace, that (...), that grace bringing salvation, that (...), that
kindness and love of God toward mankind, (of which the Apostle speaks, Tit.
3.11. and 3.4. Behold an act of mere and rich grace. Which is further commended
to us,

2. Appointing a Mediator for man, not for Angels.
Secondly, In that this Mediator is appointed betwixt God and men, not betwixt
God and Angels. As for the Angels, some of them (as I showed you) stood in as
much need of a Mediator, as mankind; They being fallen from God, were plunged
into a depth of misery, and so were as proper objects of Pity and Mercy; as apt
to move compassion as mankind: yet God overlooketh them, passes them by,
leaving them in that forelorne estate to be confirmed and hardened in that
their Enmity against him; that so he might have an occasion for the declaring
and exercising the riches of his Justice upon them. In the mean time he
appoints a Mediator in the behalf of Mankind; one that might take hold of
them, to reconcile them, to save them.

3. And (3ly) take notice of the person, 3 Designing his Son to this office.
who it was whom he designed and appointed unto this office, whom he puts
upon this work, even the Man Christ Jesus; no other, but his own, and only
Son. God was [in Christ] Reconciling the world to himself.

Now lay these together, and see whether this Grace of God manifested toward
us in and through this our Mediator, do not deserve to be looked upon with a
grateful Admiration. I have done with the first Head Pass we to the second.

Is Jesus Christ Mediator betwixt God and Men in the way aforesaid? Use 2
Consolation.
here is an overflowing spring of abundant Consolation. Not unlike that Spring
which issued out of the Rock in the wilderness, Exodus 17.6. which followed
the Israelites, went along with them in their passage to the Earthly Canaan.
That Rock (says the Apostle) was Christ (viz. Sacramentally) 1 Cor. 10.4 Even
this Mediator betwixt God and Men; In whom it pleased the Father that all
fullness (both Repletive and Diffusive) should dwell. And behold out of this
Spiritual Rock a Spring of heavenly Consolation breaking forth; which
follows and goes along with the Elect people of God in their journey through
this wilderness to their heavenly Canaan. This Spring (as it is supposed that
also did) divides it self into diverse several streams and Rivulets.

1 To such as desire Reconciliation.
Here is comfort for all poor penitent siinners, such as being convinced of that
Enm ty which is betwixt God and them by reason of sin, do unfeignedly desire
Reconciliation. Let them look up, and behold this great (...), this Blessed
Peacemaker, this Mediator the Lord Jesus, whose office it is to make peace
betwixt God and Men, to reconcile the one to the other. This office, being
imposed upon him by God his Father, he undertook: And undertaking, he has
discharged it, Performing what ever was required from him by his Father in
order to this Reconciliation: making a full satisfaction unto his Justice by
giving himself a Ransom for all men; all that shall believe on him: shedding
his blood in the sense of his Fathers wrath, that so he might appease it. And
hereby has he slain this Enmity (as the Apostle has it Ephesians. 2.16.) Not
only Enmity betwixt Men and Men, Jews and Gentiles (which he did by breaking
down that Intergerinum parietem, that middle wall of partition, spoken of ver.
14. abolishing the Legal worship and Ceremonies, which being peculiar to the
Jews, divided them from the Gentiles,) but also betwixt God and Men. This he
slew by taking away the ground and cause of it, viz. Sin. This it was (as I
have showen you) which first brought this Enmity into the world. And this it is
that continues it in the world. Now this Jesus Christ has taken away by his
death: Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world. Joh. 1.29
viz. the Elect world. Even of all that are given to him, and shall believe on
him. Their sin he has taken away by way of Expiation: having made satisfaction
unto the Justice of God for it, so as it shall not be charged upon them unto
condemnation; it shall not separate betwixt God and them.

This he has merited by his death; and this he has declared and published. So
the Apostle there goes on Ephesians. 2.17. Having slain the Enmity by his Cross,
he came and preached peace. This he did in his own person in the days of his
flesh, being then himself a Messenger of peace. And this (being himself gone
off from the stage of the world) he caused to be done by others; sending his
Apostles, his Ministers upon the same errand, to preach peace; even that peace
which is revealed in the Gospel, peace betwixt God and Men; whose feet in that
regard are said to be beutifull, Romans 10.15.

Lo here then glad tidings of good things (as it there follows.) So is it to
a convicted, a condemned Rebel to hear of some special favorite, who has
undertaken to mediate for him with his Prince, to make his peace; much more
that he has done it. Such are the tidings which the Gospel brings to all
selfe-convicted, selfe-condemned sinners, who being convinced of Enmity, desire
Reconciliation with God. Lo here a Mediator, the great favorite of heaven,
the only begotten Son of God, he has undertaken to make their peace; nay
he has done it. So as there wants no more to the completing of this
Reconciliation, but only that they should come unto him, and unto God by him,
(of which I shall speak more anon.) And therefore let not any in the sense of
this Enmity run away from God, as Adam did in the garden. If they be but
willing to be Reconciled, lo here a way, a certain way made for it: For this
very end is Jesus Christ appointed a Mediator betwixt God and men. This for
those who are yet in a state of Enmity.

2 To such as are Reconciled.
2. For those who are Reconciled unto God; all true Believers, who being by
faith made one with Christ, have received the Atonement, are at one with God
by and through him, let them with comfort look up to this their Mediator;
drawing and drinking water from this well of Consolation; Which they may do
diverse ways.

1. Here is comfort to them against their daily sins, their daily infirmities,
2. Comfort against daily infirmities.
which deserve to separate, and threaten a breach betwixt their God and them:
to disolve that agreement which is betwixt them, and to make God an Enemy to
them again. True, this they deserve to do, and in their own nature they tend to
it. Never a sin but being a breach of Gods Law, tends to a breach betwixt God
and the sinner. But here is the comfort; There is one that interposeth betwixt
God and them; even this our blessed Mediator the Lord Jesus. If any man sin
(says Saint John) We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous.] 1 John 2.1. If any man sin,] viz. of Infirmity, being overcome by
some temptation, not purposing, not intending so to do, but does the Evil
which he would not (as the Apostle says of himself Romans 7.19.) let such a one
know, and know it to his comfort, He has an Advocate with the Father,] a
Mediator, an Intercessour, who is at hand to plead his cause, to answer what
can be laid to his charge. A strong consolation. So is it to a pretended
delinquent, to know that he has a good Advocate, who knows how to answer the
Law. Such an Advocate have all penitent believing sinners; an incomparable
Advocate, [Jesus Christ the righteous;] one who by his own perfect obedience
has satisfied the Law already; which being by him pleaded, stops all further
proceedings in way of Justice. Such an Advocate have we; One who is the
Propitiation for all our sins (as it there follows verse 21.); One who by
that Propitiatory sacrifice offered up upon the altar of the Cross, expiated,
satisfied for the sins of his people. And having made that satisfaction upon
earth, now he pleads it in heaven: Otherwise he should lose the fruit of his
death. Having shed his blood upon earth, now he presents it in heaven.

This did the High Priest under the Law (as I have shown you) Heb. 9.7. Having
first slain and immloated, offered up the sacrifice in the first Tabernacle
(the outward part of it,) then he presented the Blood of it in the second
Tabernacle, the holy place, there offering it up for the Errors of the people.
You know the mystery. The former of these was a Type of Christ's Oblation upon
the Cross, the other of his Intercession in heaven: where he continually
presents unto God his Father the merit of that blood which was shed upon the
Cross, offering it up for the sins of his people; their (...), their Errors,
their sins of Infirmity, which they are continually subject to. And by this
means does he maintain that peace, which before he had made by the blood of his
Cross, viz. by Appearing in heaven as a Mediator, an Advocate on the behalf of
his people. A just ground not only of Consolation, but of Triumph unto all
believers; so the Apostle makes it in that place forecited, Romans 8.33, 34.
where he closes up that his excellent Treatise of Justification with this
triumphant Challenge, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen?
etc. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that dyed; Yea rather that is
risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes Intercession
for us.] So long as we have such a Mediator in heaven, we shall not need to
fear that our sins of infirmity shall ever make a breach betwixt our God and us.

2ly Upon this ground let believers strengthen their hearts against the
inordinate fear of total and final Apostacy, 2. Comfort against fear of
falling away.
of falling away from the grace of God. True, this of themselves they are
subject to; but this they shall be preserved from by the power and care of this
their blessed Mediator, to whose custody they are committed. This is a benefit
which (as I have shown you) the Elect Angels are conceived to reap from Jesus
Christ, the benefit of Confirmation; so as they shall never fall from God, as
the other did. And this benefit shall all true believers have by this their
Mediator: Being once given to him, and once reconciled unto God by and through
him, they shall never more fall from his grace and favor again; but they
shall now be kept by his power through faith unto salvation. So much we may
learn from the Apostle, Romans 5. 10. If when we were enemies we were reconciled
unto God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall be saved
by his life.] Of the two, Reconciliation is a greater work then Confirmation.
To be brought into grace and favor with God, then to be kept in it. Now Christ
having effected the former, he will not fail in the later; they who have
received the fruit and benefit of his death; let them be assured of the
benefit of his Intercession. Being Reconciled by the one, they shall be saved
by the other.

Upon this condition it was that God the Father gave his Elect people unto
Christ, that he should redeem them, and save them, This is the Fathers will
which has sent me (says our Savior) that of all which he has given me I
should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day, John 6.39. O
Christians! Can you but evidence this to your own souls, that you are given to
Christ, given to him to believe on him (as the verse following explains it,
ver. 40.)? now doubt not your standing in the grace of God. No, Jesus Christ
this good shepherd will not lose any of his sheep; He will not suffer you to
perish and miscarry, totally and finally to fall away from this grace of God.
But having through him (through his blood) had access into this grace, you
shall stand and abide in it, till Grace be swallowed up of Glory: He who has
made you partakers of the first Resurrection, will also make you partakers of
the second; even of that Resurrection of the Just, raising you up unto that
blessed and glorious life, which is put into the hands of this your Mediator to
dispense to all those who are given unto him.

This I speak not to render you secure in this your standing. Confident you may
be, Christians may be confident, but not secure.
you ought to be: We are always confident (says the Apostle) 2 Corin. 5.8.
And this all believers ought to be, Holding fast their Confidence, and
rejoicing of hope firm unto the end, (as the Apostle has it Hebr. 3.6.) Not
casting away their confidence, which has great recompense of reward, (as the
same Apostle presses it Hebrews 10.35.) But not secure, not trusting to your
own strength; which, if leaned upon, will be found to be but weakness; but
in the strength of another, even of this blessed Mediator, who has prayed for
you, that your faith should not fail. Thus does a Child walking in slippery
ways, it trusts more to the hand that leads it, then to its own feet.
Such is a Christians way to Heaven, a slippery way; So David apprehended it,
when he put up that prayer unto God, Psalm. 17.5. Lord, hold up my goings in
thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.] Even David, if left to himself, is
subject to slip and fall, which he did, and that dangerously: And so are the
best of Saints. Peter standing upon his own legs, being confident in his own
strength, we know how he fell insomuch that had not his Lord and Master stepped
in to him, to help him up, he had never risen again. Learn we hence never to
be confident in our selves, never secure. Sola istaec securitas, nunquam esse
securum; This only is a Christians security, never to be secure; But ever
fearful: Happy is the man that fears always (says the Wiseman) Proverbs
28.14. that is ever mistrustfull, never confident of himself, Selfe-confidence
is carnal confidence; And therefore away with it. In this sense, let us have
no confidence in the flesh. Yet confident we may be, rejoicing in Jesus
Christ, from whom we have that (...), that Manuduction spoken of by the Apostle
Ephesians. 3.12. who holds, and leads by the hand all those who are given to
him; so as that either they shall not fall; or falling, they shall rise again;
so as not to miscarry in their journey to heaven. To pass on.

3. Comfort against Tentations.
3ly, Here is a ground of comfort against the many and manifold Tentations which
believers are subject to. This they are; subject to Tentations, and that all
kind of Tentations. But let them not be dismayed or discouraged by them,
knowing that the Mediator betwixt God and men is the [Man Christ Jesus;] A man
like unto themselves, In all things made like unto his Brethren, Heb. 2.17. One
who in the days of his flesh had experience of the like Temptations, He was in
all points tempted like as we are (says the Apostle Heb. 4.15.) only without
sin.] So he was. Tempted in his Body, tempted in his Soul; tempted in his
life, tempted in his death, tempted of Satan, Mat 4.1. Tempted of men, the
instruments of Satan, Mat. 22.18. Tempted of God his Father, Luke 22.44. So he
was in the Garden, where in the midst of an unparalleled agony, conflicting
with the sense of his Fathers wrath, he sweat as it were drops of blood. And
afterward upon the Cross, in the paroxysme of his Passion, we find him in
the depth of a spiritual desertion, the saddest of all Tentations. The light
of his Fathers countenance was for a time totally eclipsed from him; the sense
whereof drew from him that passionate Expostulation, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? Mat. 27.46. Such experience had this our Mediator of all
kind of Temptations; And having had so, he now sympathizeth with his people in
the like condition; being both ready and able to succor them in their
Temptations. For in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to
succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2.18.

Fourthly, Again, 4. Comfort against wants.
here is a ground of Consolation against the manifold wants which believers are
here subject to. This they are; subject to all kind of wants, both temporal
and spiritual. In regard whereof, they have daily need to become Petitioners
and Suppliants at the Throne of Grace; ever wanting something. And at some
times these wants may be very pressing and urgent, reducing them to great
straits, great extremities, so as they know not what to do, which way to look.
Now in this case let them look up to this their Mediator, through whom they
have access unto God the Father, (as the Apostle tells them, Ephesians. 2.18.) This
is a privilege which is purchased for them by the blood of this their
Mediator. They have liberty (or boldness, (...),) to enter into the Holiest
by the Blood of Jesus, Heb. 10.19. So as they may come into the presence of God
upon all occasions, to present their wants, to pour forth their complaints, to
put up their suits and supplications. This they may do; and that with an holy
Confidence and Boldness. [In whom (says the Apostle, speaking of Christ) we
have boldness and access with confidence by faith in him.] Being assured of
acceptance for their persons, audience and success in their suits, coming in
the Name of this Mediator. So much our blessed Savior makes promise of to
his Disciples, John 14.13. For further confirmation, repeating it in the next
verse; and again inculcating it, cap. 16. ver. 23. What ever they should ask
the Father in my name, it should be given them. And this let all believers
comfortably build upon. This is the confidence that we have in him (in Christ)
(says St John, 1 John 5.14) that if we ask any thing according to his will, he
hears us.] And hearing, he will answer, granting the desires of his people,
either ad voluntatem, or ad salutem, either in what they desire, or in that
which shall be as good, or better for them. So the same Apostle there goes on,
ver. 15. If we know that he hears us whatsoever we ask, we know that we have
the petitions that we desired of him.] (...), we have the requests; have them
in the Promise, and shall have them in performance as surely, as if we were
already possessed of them. Yet again,

Fifthly, 5. Comfort against death.
Here is comfort against the inordinate fear of death, both first and second.
As for the first death, that is terrible to nature; much more the second. But
this grace of God in Christ, in this Mediator, may support the soul against
both. This was Job's consolation, Job 19.25. I know that my Redeemer lives,
and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth, (or, as some others
read it,) shall stand the last upon the ground) like a Triumphant Conqueror,
which having vanquished all his enemies, put them either to the sword, or to
flight, keeps the field, stands his ground. Thus shall the Lord Jesus at the
last day, having vanquished all his enemies, put them all under his feet; even
the last enemy, amongst the rest, Death, (as the Apostle has it, 1 Cor. 15.25,
26.) then shall he stand upon the earth. And what follows? Then, though after
my skin worms destroy this Body, yet in my flesh shall I see God.] Such was
Job's hope and confidence in this his Mediator, his Redeemer, that however
death might for a time bring and keep him under the power of it, not only
consuming his skin, but his flesh; yet he should be raised again by his power
and virtue at the last day, and made partakers of a blessed and glorious
Resurrection; so that he should both in soul and body enjoy that beatificall
vision, the presence of his God for evermore. This benefit shall all those have
by this their Mediator, who are given to him. He will be to them the
Resurrection and the Life, Joh. 11 25. Resurrection to their Bodies, and Life,
eternal Life both to Souls and Bodies. So it there follows, He that
believes on me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and whosoever lives,
and believes on me, shall never die.] No, living the life of grace here, he
shall live the life of glory hereafter. Over such a one, though the first death
for a time may, yet the second death shall never have any power. This benefit
shall all believers have by and through this their Mediator, to whom God the
Father has committed this dispensation, that he should bestow eternal life
upon them; [ Thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life to as many as thou have given him, Joh. 17.2.

6. Comfort against the last Judgment.
Sixthly, and lastly, Here is comfort against the terrors of that last and
dreadful Judgment. Such shall that day be, when all men shall be brought before
the Judgment Seat of Jesus Christ, to give an account of what they have done in
the flesh, whether it be good, or evil; a dreadful Tribunal. So the Apostle
looked upon it, 2 Cor. 5.10. where speaking of it, he infers, Knowing therefore
the terror of the Lord, etc:] meaning the terror of that day, the last and
universal Judgment: which shall be a day full of terrors to all wicked and
ungodly men, all misbelievers; such as have rejected the yoke and Government of
Jesus Christ, would not stand to the Covenant which he had made, would not have
Christ to reign over them. Then shall the Lord Jesus be revealed from heaven
with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, rendering vengeance to them that know
not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Then shall they be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power, (as the Apostle thunders it out 2 Thessalonians 1.7, 8,
9. To them shall that day be a terrible day, when they shall look upon him
whom they would not own as their Mediator, and behold him sitting as a Judge
to pass sentence upon them.

But so shall it not be to Believers; those who have an interest in this
blessed Mediator, let them know that his second appearing shall be to their
salvation. They being reconciled unto God by him here, shall be saved by him
there. He will not undo what he has done. Having satisfied for their sins,
and absolved them in the Court of their own consciences here, he will then
declare that satisfaction, and publish that Absolution before the whole world.
Then shall they reap the full crop of those Benefits by this their Mediator,
whereof they have here received only the first fruits. Then shall the Lord
Jesus perform the last Act of his Mediatorship on their behalf, bringing them
into the presence of God his Father, presenting them faultlesse before the
presence of his Glory with exceeding joy (as the Apostle has it Jude 24. These
are some of those streams of Consolation which flow from this spiritual Rock,
this our blessed Mediator. The third and last head of Application is yet
behind; which is

Use 3 Exhortation. Let not this grace of God be in vain.
A word of Exhortation. Take it briefly. Let not this Grace of God be in vain
to any of us. This is Paul's obtestation to his Corinthians, 2. Cor. 1.6. We
then as workers together with Christ, beseech you also, that ye receive not
this Grace of God in vain.] What Grace? Why the grace of the Gospel. The grace
of God in Jesus Christ, in giving him to be a Mediator. Of this grace he had
spoken in the close of the chapter foregoing; [ God was in Christ Reconciling
the world to himself, verse 19. This he there holds forth as the sum and
substance of all his preaching. [He has committed to us the word of
reconciliation.] And concerning this grace he beseeches them that they should
not receive it in vain. And let me (in the name of God) press the same upon
every soul that hears me this day. You have heard of the grace of God
manifested unto Mankind in giving his Son to be a Mediator betwixt him and
them. O let not this Grace of God be in vain to any of you. So it is, and so it
shall be to many. This grace of God is in vain to them.

So it is to 1 Ignorant persons.
1. So it is (in the first place) to Ignorant persons. Such as live under the
sound of the Gospel, where they hear the name of a Mediator rung in their
ears, but yet they regard not to know him, to have any acquaintance with him;
to know who he was, what he was, what he has done, how and in what way he has
discharged this office of his Mediatorship.

2. And (secondly) all persons openly profane. Such as cast off the yoke of
Jesus Christ; 1. Profane persons.
such as refuse to come into the Bond of the Covenant; refuse to stand to the
Covenant, which Jesus Christ as Mediator has drawn up betwixt God and man:
which on man's part requires faith and obedience, (Evangelicall Obedience) for
the conditions of it. This they reject; saying in their hearts with those
rebellious ones in the Psalm, Psalm. 2.3. Let us break their bonds asunder, and
cast away their cords from us.] As for such, better they had never heard of the
name of a Mediator; yea, better for them there never had been a Mediator.
This is, and will be no small aggravation of their guilt, that they should thus
trample the Blood of the Covenant, the Blood of Jesus Christ, whereby he sealed
the Covenant betwixt God and man, under their feet, by a wilful and obstinate
disobedience.

Thirdly, And in this rank (in the third place) are all proud Justiciaries, 2.
Proud Justiciaries.
who think themselves not to stand in need of such a Mediator. As for Jacob's
Ladder, they need it not; they have one of their own making, by which they hope
to climb to Heaven: they have that of their own which they hope may
sufficiently commend them unto God. So thought that proud Pharisee in the
Gospel, who coming into the Temple to pray, begins to reckon up all his good
deeds; tells God of his negative and positive Righteousness, Luke 18.11, 12. as
supposing that he should need no other to speak a good word to God for him. And
thus is it not only with Romish Perfectists, who dote so much upon their own
good works, that they fancy in some of them a supererogation, (sure, they have
no need of another to speak for them, who can and dare speak so much for
themselves,) but even many amongst our selves; mere civil persons, who stand
so much upon their own moral righteousness, as that without any other
Mediation they dare present themselves before God. As for such, let them never
make account of any benefit by this Mediator. Paul has laid it down for an
irrefragable conclusion, Gal. 5.4. Christ is become of none effect unto you;
whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from grace;] viz. from
this grace of God in Christ; so as living and dying in this condition, you shall
neither have part nor portion in it.

4. All unbelievers.
4. To these I might yet add, generally all unbelievers, who do not close with
this Mediator, laying hold of this Mediation, applying it to themselves, and
complying with his design therein; To all these is this grace of God in vain.

O let it not be so to any of us. Having heard of this Mediator, make out
after him, Let it not be so to us.
that we may have a share in the benefits of this his Mediation; not contenting
our selves with general notions, to know that there is such a Mediator
betwixt God and men, (So there may be, and yet we never the better for it;) or
yet to know in what way he has discharged his office. Let it be our care to
insure our particular interest in him, that he is a Mediator betwixt God and
us. To that end,

1. Be we reconciled unto God by and through him. 1. Be we reconciled unto God
through this Mediator.
This is the grand work of this Mediator (as I have shown you) wherefore he
took upon him this office of Mediatourship. Let us herein comply with this
great design of his, which is of so great concernment to every of us: Be we
reconciled unto God. So Paul presses it upon his Corinthians in that place, to
which I have had so frequent recourse, 2 Cor. 5. where having first laid down
his Doctrine, in effect the very same with that which I have dwelt so long
upon; viz. that God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, ver. 19.
Then he makes this use of it, ver. 20 Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ;
as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled unto God.] This was the sum of his message to them. And this is the
sum of our message to you. This is the word which God has put into our mouths,
[ He has given to us the Ministry of Reconciliation, ver. 18. He has
committed to us the word of Reconciliation, ver. 19. Now then we being
Ambassadors for Christ, (substituted by him, as he was by his Father,) as
though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled unto God.

Be reconciled unto God. In this single motion there is a double request; there
being two things comprehended in that word.

1. Accepting the Reconciliation purchased and offered on God's part.
1. The first is, That you will accept of the Reconciliation, which is purchased
for you, and tendered to you. Purchased for you by Christ; and tendered to you by
God his Father. This receive: Receiving this Grace.
This is that which Paul says of himself, and his believing Romans, Romans
5.11. We have received the Atonement, (...), dictum (...), i. e. accepimus
effectum istius reconciliationis, Spiritum sanctum. Grotius Comment. ad Romans
5.11.
(...), the Reconciliation:] Not the fruit and effect of their Reconciliation;
viz. the holy Spirit, which being reconciled to God, they had received (as
Grotius in his Comment goes about to elude that Text, which looks so broad
upon the Socinian,) but even the benefit of Reconciliation, or Atonement,
which they received upon their believing. So the same Author in his former and
more candid thoughts explains it elsewhere. Quid hic est aliud, Accipere
reconciliationem, quam accipere remissionem peccatorum? Grotius de Satisfact.
cap. 7.
To receive Reconciliation, is to receive the benefit of Reconciliation. In
effect the same with that which is elsewhere called, Receiving of remission of
sins, Acts 10.43. and 26.18. And this let all of us do. Thus receive we this
Reconciliation, accepting this Grace; by faith laying hold upon this Mediator.
In this way is Remission of sins received. So Peter tells Cornelius and his
company Act. 10.43. To him (to Christ) give all the Prophets witness, that
through his name (his merit) whosoever believes in him shall receive remission
of sins.] And in this way receive we this Reconciliation. By faith laying hold
upon the Obedience and satisfaction of this our Mediator, applying the merit
thereof unto our selves; resting thereupon for the great obtaining of this
great benefit. Thus receive we this Grace of God, and this gift by grace, which
is by this one man Jesus Christ, (as the Apostle describes this benefit of
Reconciliation, or Justification, Romans 5.15.

And thus having received this Grace, Persevering in it.
now persevere in it; and that by holding fast this our Mediator, our
Peacemaker in the arms of our faith. Continually interposing him as a skreene
betwixt the fire of Gods wrath, and our poor sinful souls; presenting him,
with the merit of his Obedience unto God his Father; that so our peace being
made, it may also be maintained by the means of this our blessed Mediator.
Thus be we reconciled unto God by accepting of this Reconciliation.

2. And 2ly, 2. Laying aside Enmity on our parts.
By laying aside that Enmity which is in our souls against him. Laying down all
the weapons of our Rebellion; all our sinful lusts; Every of which (as Saint
James says of one of them, the Love of the world, James 4.4.) is Enmity with
God. (...), for (...): Enmity against God; though not Directly, yet
Interpretatively; in as much as they alienate the soul from God. And therefore
lay them aside. This is the Condition of the Covenant on our parts, for which
this our blessed Mediator, as our surety has undertaken; viz. that we shall
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, etc, As ever we desire then to be made
partakers of the benefit of this his Mediation, see that we perform this
Condition. Nonperformance of the Condition nullifies the Covenant. The
nonperformance of this Condition will make the death of Christ to be of
none-effect to us. So long as a Rebel continues in actual Rebellion against
his Prince, whatever Treaties, or overtures of Reconciliation there have been,
it makes them all void, rendering him incapable of his Sovereigns grace and
favor. So long as a poor sinner stands it out against God, and will not be
reconciled with him, he cannot expect that God should be reconciled to him. No,
Men must first be turned from the power of Satan unto God, before they can
receive remission of sins; Acts 26.18. See then that in this way we be all of
us reconciled unto God, that our hearts be reconciled to him, so as not
willingly to offend or provoke him; but to love him, and to cleave unto him
with full purpose of heart, desiring to walk before him in all well pleasing.
This is that (as I said) which this our Mediator, in order to our
Reconciliation with God, has undertaken that we shall do. Let not us offer
that wrong to our Surety, as to violate the Covenant, for performance whereof
he stands engaged. Thus be we reconciled unto God.

2. And being thus Reconciled, 2. Come unto God by and through this Mediator,
who is
now Come we unto him. Seeing then we have such an High Priest, let us come
boldly to the throne of grace. Hebrews 4.14, 16. Seeing that we have such a
Mediator, make use of his Mediation, coming unto God, by him. Such a Mediator
(I say,) What can be required in a Mediator, that is not to be found in him.

1. He is a faithful Mediator. 1 A faithful Mediator.
He that sat upon the white horse, Revelations 19.11. was called faithful
and true. Such is Jesus Christ (the righteous Judge, and triumphant Conqueror)
in all his Relations. A faithful witness, Revelations 1 5. and 3.14. A
faithful High Priest, Hebrews 2.17. And so, a faithful Mediator, dealing
faithfully betwixt both parties, God and Man. Being faithful in things
pertaining to God (as the Apostle there has it, Hebrews 2.17.) viz. in
executing his will, and satisfying his Justice. And faithful in things
pertaining to men; dealing effectually with his Father on their behalf; not
seeking himself. This do false and faithless Mediators sometimes; being
betrusted to intercede for others, they speak one word for them, and two for
themselves; seeking themselves in their Mediations. But so did not, so does not
this our Mediator. In this his Mediation, emptying himself, and laying aside
his own interest, he sought the good and benefit of his Elect. As Paul says of
himself that in his Ministerial transactions amongst the Churches, he sought
not theirs, but them, 2 Corinthians 12.14. (a true pattern for all the
Ministers of the Gospel, who are not to seek the goods, but the good of the
people committed to them;) So did the Lord Jesus; In all his transactions as
Mediator, he seeks not ours, but us: not any benefit to himself ( Papists
whilst they contend so eagerly for Christ's meriting for himself, they do
therein seem not a little to disparage this work of his Mediatorship;) but our
Reconciliation and salvation,

2 A Merciful Mediator.
2. And (2ly) a Merciful Mediator. So the Apostle puts them together in the
place forenamed, Hebrews 2.17. A merciful and faithful High Priest.] A
merciful and pitiful Mediator. One that having in his humane nature had
experience of our Afflictions, our Tentations, is ready to succor those which
are tempted. One that is soon touched with the feeling of our infirmities. Such
a Merciful Mediator he showed himself in the days of his flesh; when he wept
over Jerusalem, upon which he had bestowed so much fruitless pains, in
attempting to gather the inhabitants thereof under the wings of his gracious
government and merciful protection, Luke 19.41. And such a Mediator he still
is, having carried the same bowels to heaven with him. A Merciful Mediator.

3ly. A potent and prevalent Mediator. 3 A potent and prevalent Mediator.
Able to do much with his Father, for his people. With his Father. Being
gracious with him (so he is, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased,) he can impetrate any thing at his hand: ( Father, I know that thou:
hear me always, John 11.42.) For his People. He is able perfectly to save
them which come unto God by him, (as the former Translation reads that Text
Hebrews 7.25.) To save them from the wrath of God; to save them from their
sins, from the Guilt, Terror, Power of them; to supply all their wants; to
do for them above what they are able to ask or think. A potent Mediator, able
to perform what ever he has undertaken, whether for Man to God, or for God to
Man. Thus has the Lord herein laid help upon one that is Mighty, (as the
Psalmist speaks, Psalm 89.19. putting this office of Mediatorship upon one
that was able to go through with it. A potent Mediator, being El Gibbor, the
mighty God. Isa. 9.6.

4. And (4th) a Perpetual Mediator. 4 A perpetual Mediator.
This Man (the Man Christ Jesus) continues ever, Heb. 7.24. Ever a Mediator;
And so continuing, now he is able to save them to the uttermost ((...), for
ever) that come unto God by him; seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for
them, ver. 25. It is not with this our Mediator as with that Typical Mediator
Joseph. So long as he lived to intercede for his kindred, it went well with
them; but when he was dead and there arose a new king which knew not Joseph,
then they went to wreck in their liberties, estates, lives. It is otherwise
with our Joseph, our Jesus. He lives ever, sitting continually at the right
hand of God, making Intercession for his people. He is a permanent Mediator.

5. And lastly, a Present Mediator; always at hand. Absalom, when he had a
desire to be brought into his fathers presence, his Mediator (Joab) was to
seek; and though sent for, would not come at him, 2 Samuel 14.29. It is not so
with our Mediator the Lord Jesus, he is ever at hand; at the right hand of God;
so as they who would make use of him, may know where to find him. An Agent who
lies Lidger in heaven, ready to receive and present the suites, the Petitions
which his people shall at any time put into his hand. So as by his means they
may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.16. (...);
Seasonable Succor, suitable to their present necessities.

Now put all these together. Such is this our Mediator, a Faithful, Merciful,
Potent, Permaneant, Present Mediator; what remains then, but that having so
many and great Encouragements, we make use of his mediation, coming unto God by
him.

And that Boldly: viz. with an awful boldness. Thus do Suppliants come unto
their Prince, Come boldly to God through him; making use of his Mediation.
having some special favorite to their friend, standing at his right hand,
they come with an awful confidence, awed with the Majesty of the Prince, but
confident in the presence and prevalency of that their Mediator. And thus come
we to the throne of grace, in an holy aw of the Majesty of God, but with an
holy confidence of this our Mediator. Thus make we use of his mediation: And
this do we both for our selves and others. 1 For our selves.


For our selves, begging renewed pardons for our daily sins, suing them out
in his name, presenting our daily wants, begging that (...), that continual
supply of the Spirit, with all other blessings requisite and convenient; the
dispencing whereof is committed to this our Mediator. Thus make suit for
ourselves. 2. For others.


And in like manner for others: For the Church of God: for all who desire or
stand in need of our prayers. This the Apostle presses in the entrance into
this chapter. I exhort that supplications, prayers, intercessions, etc. be made
for all men:] And this he exciteth to upon this ground, among others; For there
is one Mediator betwixt God and men, the Man Christ Jesus;] one who
Intercedeth in the behalf of such Intercessours; ready to receive and present
their Petitions, on whose behalf soever presented unto God his Father.

And thus have I at length, through a gracious conduct, finished the former of
these conclusions, which informs us that Jesus Christ is Mediator betwixt God
and men. Come we now to the later; in the handling whereof I shall be very
concise; having already dispatched what I aimed at when I took this Text in
hand.

Doctrine 2.
The Man Christ Jesus is the only Mediator betwixt God and men.

Christ the only Mediator.
So much is clearly insinuated by the Apostle here in the Text, There is [One]
Mediator. One and but one. So are we to understand this Particle here, Calvin
ad loc.
Exclusively. As in the former part of the verse, [There is one God.] One, and
but One. So in this later, [There is one Mediator] one, and but one: Pointing
out Jesus Christ, but excluding all others from sharing with him in this
office. So it is looked upon not only by Protestant, but also by some of the
most ingenuous of the Romish Expositours. Estius ad loc.
And thus it is; (...). There is One and only one Mediator betwixt God and
men, the man Christ Jesus.

Typified by Moses and Aaron. Exodus 14.2.
So much was not obscurely shadowed out in that pair of typical mediators under
the law, Moses and Aaron. At the giving of the Law, Moses was alone with God in
the mount. The Prohibition was express, [ No man shall come up with thee, Ex.
34.2, 3. Then there was no Mediator betwixt God and the people but he, [ The
Law was given, (...), in the hand of a Mediator, (viz. Moses,) Gal. 3.19. In
like manner Aaron, and the High Priests successively after him, when they went
into the holy Place to present the blood of the Sacrifice before the Lord for
the errors of the people, (which they did once every year) they went in
alone.) Heb. 9.7. Into the second tabernacle went the High Priest alone.]
Herein both shadowing out this great and Archetypall Mediator the Lord Jesus;
who is the alone Mediator betwixt God and men.

A truth sufficiently confirmed by Christ's own attestation, John 14.6.
Confirmed by Scripture.
I am the way (says he) the truth, and the life.] Jesus Christ is the way
whereby men come unto God, to have union and communion with him, here and
hereafter. So he is, and that not only Exemplariter, (as Grotius blancheth it,
Grotius Com. in John 14.6.
) in regard of his Example, by the imitation whereof men come to heaven; but
also Efficienter, in regard of his Mediation, his Satisfaction, and
Intercession. He it is who has laid out unto us, and paved for us a new and
living way to God, by his own meritorious blood, Heb. 10.20. which he keeps
open by his continued Intercession. Thus is he the way, and the only way: So
it follows, No man comes unto the Father but by me, John. 14.6. Into the
Holy of holies, there was but one way; no more is there into the Heaven of
Heavens. And that is by Jesus Christ, his Mediation, his Satisfaction, his
Advocation.

To the same purpose is that other Text, John 10.9. where our Savior seteth
forth the same Truth, though under a different similitude, [I am the door, by
me if any man enter he shall be saved.] Men enter into a house by the door, and
thus do we enter into Heaven, by our prayers now, and persons hereafter; even
by and through Jesus Christ, and only through him, who is the alone Mediator
betwixt God and man. By Arguments.


That he is so, may further be confirmed by diverse Arguments which evince this
Truth.

Arg. 1. This Mediator must be a middle person betwixt both.
Arg. 1. The Mediator betwixt God and men must be a middle Person, having an
interest in both parties, partaking of both natures: He must be (...), both God
and man: otherwise he cannot be capable of doing and performing all mutual
offices betwixt them. But this is proper and peculiar only to Jesus Christ.

Arg. 2. He must be a righteous person. Aug. l. 2. contra Epist. Parmen. cap. 8.
Arg. 2. The Mediator betwixt God and men, must be an innocent, a righteous
person, one that needs none to mediate or intercede for himself. So
Augustine has rightly determined it, Pro quo nullus interpellat, sed ipse pro
omnibus, hic unus verusque Mediator est. He that intercedes for all, but
needs none to intercede for him, he is the true and only Mediator. Now such
a one is Jesus Christ, and only he: As for all other of the Sons of men, being
sinners by nature, they stand in need of a Mediator to reconcile them to God,
and to intercede for them. Only Christ is such an High Priest as the Apostle
speaks of, Heb. 7.25. One that is (...), Holy, harmless, undefiled, separated
from sinners. And therefore the only true Mediator.

Arg. 3. Christ only able to perform the Office of a Mediator.
Arg. 3. Again, He only is able to perform the office, do the work of a
Mediator betwixt God and men. None able to satisfy the Justice of God but he;
none able to pay an infinite price, for an infinite guilt, to an infinite
Justice, but that infinite person who being man, was more then man, God and
man. None able to restore the Image of God in man, but he who was the Image,
the essential and substantial Image of God, (...), the express Image of his
Father's Person, as Christ is called, Heb. 1.3. None able to reveal and make
known the whole mind and will of God unto man, but he, he who was in the bosom
of the Father, and is the Word of the Father. None able to ingratiate poor
sinners with God: his Father, but he; he, who was the well beloved Son of God,
in whom the Father was well pleased: None able to make others Sons by grace, the
grace of Adoption, but he that was the Son of God by nature, by an eternal
generation: none able to perform that threefold office of a King, Priest, and
Prophet to his Church, but he. In a word, none able to effect the salvation of
lost mankind but he, [ Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is no
other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved, Acts 4.12.
No name, no other Person, or Power, whereby salvation can be expected, but only
by and through the merit and Mediation of Jesus Christ. He only is able to
perfome the office of a Mediator.

Arg. 4. Again, Arg. 4. There needs no other Mediator.
Other Mediator there needs not; He being so every ways sufficient for all
those services which belong to that office; Able to satisfy for his people to
pay all their debts; to receive and present and their prayers and wants; to
reveal the whole mind of God to them. In a word, Able perfectly to saved those
who come unto God by him, Heb. 7.25.

You see that it is so, why it must be so. For further illustration, give me
leave to clear an Objection or two.

Object. 1. Moses is called a Mediator.
Object. 1. Is Christ the only Mediator? How then is this attributed to
others; in particular to Moses in that place fore-alledged, Gal. 3.19? The Law
was given in the hand of a Mediator; meaning Moses.

Answer. Others may be Ministers of the Word, but not Authors of the Work of
Reconciliation.
Ans. To this is it answered. Others may be Ministers of the word, but not
Authors of the work of Reconciliation. Such was Moses, an Internuncius, an
Intermessenger betwixt God and the people. And such are the Ministers of the
Gospel, whose office the Apostle sets forth, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19. They have the
ministry, the word of Reconciliation committed and given unto them. Thus are
they Ministers of the word, but not Authors of the work. This is Christ's
peculiar. But one Mediator.

Object. 2. Are not Saints and Angels Mediators?
Object. 2. But what say we to Saints and Angels? Are not they Mediators
betwixt God and men? though not of Redemption, yet of Intercession. They being
in Heaven pray for the Church upon Earth. Do they not?

Answer. Not Properly; no, not of Intercession.
Ans. To grant this, which in the general may not be denied; Saints and Angels
in Heaven, sympathizing with the Church upon Earth, (being members of the same
mystical Body,) they do earnestly desire the welfare of it. Those blessed
souls, which being separated from their bodies, have as yet received but a part
of their glory and happiness, they wait for the Redemption of their own Bodies.
And whilst they wish well to themselves, they are not unmindfull of others,
who are yet in that militant state and condition upon earth, through which
themselves have passed: being themselves come safe to shore, they are not
unmindful of those who are yet floating amidst the waves of this troublesome
world. Both Saints and Angels (questionless) do desire the welfare of all
God's Elect; the perfecting of his Kingdom of Grace here, and the hastening of
his Kingdom of Glory hereafter. And these desires they may in their way
represent unto God. About this we will not contend with any adversary: But what
then? shall we hereupon style them, and own them for Mediators? Not so; no, not
so much as Mediators of Intercession. This I shall clear up unto you anon in the
Application: To which I shall adjourn it.

Obj. 3. But what say we to Saints upon Earth? Obj. 3. Are not Saints upon
Earth intercessors?
Are not they Mediators? Do not they intercede for others? Is not this both
their liberty, and their Duty? Surely they both may do it, and must do it.
Moses in his time interceded for Israel, yea for Pharaoh, Samuel for Saul; Job
for his friends; And Paul here in the entrance of this Chapter requires it from
all. [ I Exhort that Intercessions he made for all men. v. 1 How then do we say
that there is but one Mediator betwixt God and Men? Ans. A Broad difference
betwixt Christ's Mediation and theirs.


A. to this it is answered. There is a broad difference betwixt Christ's
Mediation, his Intercestion, and theirs. They are indeed mutual and humble
suppliants one for another at the throne of grace. Not presenting the prayers
of others. Not suing for any thing in their own names, but in the name of
Christ; not in way of Merit, but of Mercy. All their confidence of obtaining
their desires at the hands of God, whether for others or themselves, being in
the alone Merit and Mediation of Christ; as the Priests interceding was by the
blood of the sacrifice which he offered up. But now Christ in his Intercession
for his people presents and tenders his own blood, his own Merit unto God his
Father; by virtue whereof he impetrateth and obtains whatever he makes suit
for. So as still he is the alone Mediator, properly so called.

Obj. 4. Is not the Holy ghost an Advocate?
Obj. 4. But yet (in the last place,) Is this office peculiar unto Christ? What
say we then to the Holy Ghost? does not he come in as a partner with Christ in
this his Mediatorship? How else is it that each is styled a Paraclete, an
Advocate? So Christ is called 1 John 2.1. We have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous.] And the same style is given by Christ himself unto
the Holy Ghost, Joh. 14.16. I will pray the Father, and he will give you another
Advocate.] So again. v. 26. and cap. 15.26. and 16.7. In all which places the
word in the Original is one and the same, (...), a Paraclete, an Advocate.

An. The Holy ghost properly a Comforter.
An. For Answer to this, know we that one word signifies both an Advocate, and
a Comforter. In the former sense it agrees properly unto Christ; in the later
to the Holy ghost, whose office it is to comfort the hearts of Gods people. So
our Translation there most fitly renders it, a Comforter.

Rep. But the Holyghost is said to intercede for us. So we have it expressly
Romans 8.26. Improperly an Intercessour.
The Spirit it self makes Intercession for us.]

A. True it does so, but how? why, by teaching the faithful how to make their
requests; provoking them to the duty of Prayer, suggesting, prompting,
dictating unto them what to pray; and directing them how to pray, so as their
prayers may be acceptable and prevalent; stirring up secret and unexpressable
groans, affectionate desires in their hearts. So the Apostle there explaineth
himself. The Spirit also helps our Infirmities, for we know not what to pray
as we ought, but the Spirit makes intercession (or Request) for us.] This does
the spirit, not properly by Interceding for us, but in us. [ Because ye are
Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying
Abba, Father, Gal. 4.6. This is the work of the Spirit, thus as it were to form
the prayers of the faithful for them, and in them; Which are Spiritual
Conceptions, conceived in the hearts of Chistians, after a sort as the humane
nature of Christ was in the womb of the Virgin, by a supernatural Operation of
the Holy ghost. Thus it (as it were) prays in them. In the mean time, Christ
is the alone Mediator, to whom the Spirit directs them, that so by and
through him their prayers may find audience and acceptance. These are obvious
and familiar truths; and therefore I shall not any longer insist upon them. That
which now remains is only a word of Application; which I shall direct only two
ways: by way of Confutation, Exhortation.

Use 1. Confutation. Of Primitive Angel-Worshippers.
By way of Confutation. Censured and condemned be that Doctrine by whomsoever
held forth, which sets up any other Mediators besides Christ, whether in
stead of him, or with him; so as to make them either Corrivals, or partners in
this office. This did some in the Apostles time; In the very infancy of the
Church, they brought in Angels to be Mediators. So much we may take notice of
from the Apostle, who gives his Colossians an express Caveat concerning it,
that they should beware of them, and their Doctrine, Col. 2.18. Let no man
beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of
Angels.] (or consisting in Angel worship; for so that later clause is fitly
looked upon, as being only exegiticall to the former, added by way of
explanation;) So it was. Under a color and pretext of Humility, and awful
modesty, as deeming it too high presumption for any to make their immediate
addresses unto God, they made use of Angels for their Mediators; presenting
their prayers and services unto them, that they might present them unto God.
Thus did they intrude into those things which they had not seen, (as it there
follows:) rashly undertaking to set up and establish new Doctrines and Laws
concerning the Service of God, beyond what is revealed in the Word. And (as is
most probable) adventuring upon curious speculations, and bold assertions,
touching the Orders and Offices of Angels; designing some to one employment,
others to another; giving them names accordingly. Thus did they set up another
Mediators in stead of Christ; so not holding the Head, (as the Apostle there
goes on;) not holding themselves unto Christ this one and only Mediator

And the like has the Church of Rome in succeeding ages done; Of the Church of
Rome which sets up Saints and Angels for Mediators.
bringing in a numberless number of Mediators. So many Saints or Angels as
there are in heaven, so many Mediators say they. True indeed, thus far Christ
is beholding to them, they will allow him to be the head of that order, Vide
Calvin. ad Textum. Observa, quod sicut unum Deum intelligit cum exclusione
plurium, fic and unum Mediatorem Dei and Hominum, qui est Christus Jesus.
Estius Com. ad Text. The distinct o^ of Mediators of Redemption and
Intercession.
the chief and principal Mediator, but not the only. So some of them go about
to elude this of the Apostle in the text, [There is one Mediator] True (say
they) Vnus, sed non solus, One, but not only one. An ill gloss corrupting a
good text. So it will soon appear to be, shall we but apply it to the former
part of the verse [There is one God.] What, One, but not Only one? This they
themselves will be ashamed of: and may as well be of the other.

Others of them, and that the greatest part, not daring to own so gross an
error, think to salve the matter by a distinction. There is one, and but one
Mediator (say they) viz. of Redemtion; but others may be and are Mediators of
Intercession. But neither will this subterfuge ought avail them, as will appear
from this text. which if we look about it, duly considering the circumstances,
will be found to speak of Christ in both these respects; as a Mediatot both of
Redemption and Intercession. The former is made good from the verse next
following; where the Apostle makes mention of Christ's giving himself a
Ransom for all men; In that a Mediator of Redemption. And the later from the
verses preceding where the Apostle exhorting Christians to the duty of prayer,
to pray for all men, he presses it upon this ground; [For there is one
Mediator,] one who is ready to receive and present the prayers of those who
make their addresses unto God by him: One Mediator of Intercession. So as in
both respects he is said to be one, and but one: But one Mediator, the Man
Christ Jesus; who is Mediator both of Redemption and Intercession.

Other Romish distinctions Estius ad loc. Cor a Lapide ad Text. Vide and Cham.
Panstrat. de Mediatore lib. 8. cap. 6. sec. 9.
Others who would be thought more acute, they seek relief from other
distinctions. Christ is Mediator (say they) Excellenti ratione, by way of
eminency, after a more excellent manner. Others are so only Participatione,
imperfecta ratione, by way of participation, in a more imperfect way. He the
principal Mediator, they ministerial; he primarie, they secondary; he
Immediate, they Mediate: He as an Advocate, they only as soliciters. He only
comes unto the Father Immediately by himself; Interceding for all, and
impetrating grace by virtue of his own merits. As for Saints, they intercede
for us not by any right or merit of their own; as claiming ought in their own
names; but in the name, through the merit and mediation of Christ. To this
purpose they bring in their devout Bernard, Bernard Sermon. de B. Maria, citat.
per C. Lap. ad Text.
who in one of his Sermons insinuates, that Saints are not to be called
Mediators betwixt God and men; but rather Mediators to the Mediator, viz. unto
Christ. This (says he) do we stand in need of. Opus est Mediatore ad
Mediatorem; We have need of a Mediator to make way for us to our Mediator, viz.
Christ. Upon which account it is (says Lapide) that some of their own Doctors
have been so scrupulously cautious, Atque hac de causa Catholici nonnulli satio
scrupulose cavent, ne Mediatoris nomen alteri tribuant, quam Christo. C. Lap.
ad Text.
as that they would not have the name Mediator to be given to any, save only to
Christ. And hereabout he professes he will not contend with us. Neither shall
I at the present here enter the lists with him, or any other about this
subject, whether the Name or thing. This being a beaten controversy betwixt us
and the Church of Rome; which many having dealt fully with, I may well spare my
labor.

As for us, hold we fast this truth of God, One Mediator Exclusively.
which this text fo clearly holds forth unto us: [There is one Mediator
betwixt God and men, the man Christ Jesus.] One Exclusively: one and but one.
In this office Christ has no partners.

As for the word [Mediator] we will not much contend about it, whether it may
in a qualified sense be given to some others. As it was to Moses at the giving
of the Law, so in a like sense it may be given to the ministers of Christ under
the Gospel, whose office it is to go and deal betwixt God and his people. And
possibly, taking the word in a large sense, it may be given to private
christians, who by way of charity intercede for others in their prayers to God
on their behalf. But seeing the Spirit of God in the Scripture is not
acquainted with this language, therefore we own it not, we approve it not:
Rather choosing to reserve this as a Title of Honor peculiar unto Jesus Christ:
He is the One and Only Mediator.

As for Angels, or Saints departed, we cannot allow them either name, Angels
and Saints no Mediators of Intercession.
or thing As for those forenamed distinctions, in as much as they find no
footing in Scripture, we acknowledge them not. Sure we are (which our
adversaries will not deny) properly Mediators betwixt God and men they neither
are, nor can be; no not of Intercession.

Two requisites in such a Mediator, both wanting in them.
In a Mediator of Intercession there are at least these two things requisite.
He must be designed and appointed by God unto this office or service; And he
must be acquainted with the condition of those for whom he is to intercede.
But neither of these shall we find agreeing, whether to Saints or Angels.

1. Their Deputation.
1. For their Deputation, we know no such office or service designed to either.
Angels indeed, they are appointed to be Guardians unto the Saints upon earth,
(...); [ They are ministering Spirits sent forth to minister for the good of
them which shall be heirs of salvation, Heb. 1. last. But as for Mediators,
Intercessours betwixt God and men, we know no such office conferred upon them.
As for Saints upon earth, they have indeed a general commission to intercede
one for another. But what commission the Saints in heaven have to intercede for
their Brethren upon earth, that we know not: which if they had, they are not
capable of executing and discharging it; In as much as, (in the 2d place)

2. They are not privy to the estates of men upon earth.
2. They are not privy to the states and conditions of men here below. Whatever
Angels are, sure they are not. That of the Preacher seems to speak so much,
Eccles. 9.5, 6. The living know that they shall dye, but the dead know not any
thing.] Not any thing which is done here below: So the next verse explains it,
[Neither have they any more portion for ever in any thing which is done under
the Sun.] No, their transactions and negotiations are above the Sun. As for
occurrences here below, they are not in an ordinary way privy to them. A truth
more then probable: which if any shall question, it may be extorted and made
good by way of Argumentation.

Arg. If Saints departed be acquainted with humane affairs upon earth, Evinced
by Argument.
they must have this knowledge either in an Immediate or mediate way: Either
Immediately by themselves; or Mediately from some other: But not the former.
They do not of themselves take immediate cognizance of things here below. So
much is rightly concluded from that passage, 2 Kin. 22. last. where the Lord
promises Josia, that he would gather him unto his fathers in peace, and his
eyes should not see all the evil which he would bring upon Jerusalem. Saints
in heaven are neither eye, nor ear witnesses of what happens upon earth.
However, sure we are, they cannot take notice of all persons, and all
occurrences, in all places of the world, at the same time. This is an infinite
perfection, which neither Man nor Angel is capable of. Nor yet the later: They
do not attain this knowledge at the second hand, by way of Revelation, or
Information. For if so, then they must have it either from God, or from Angels,
or from souls departed. But all these are no less then ridiculous.

1. Such is the first. To imagine that God should first reveal our necessities
and our prayers to the Saints, to the end that they should intercede with him
for us; How absurd is this circulation? what were this but to make God an
Intercessour for us to the Saints, who are pretended to be Intercessours for us
to him?

2. And such is the second. In as much as Angels themselves neither do, nor can
take notice of all things which are done here below. Besides, that in this way
they should be our Mediators to the Saints.

3. And such is the third; In as much as souls departing do not themselves know
all things. How should they inform the Saints in heaven of what themselves were
ignorant of upon Earth?

Upon these reasons and grounds, we must conclude Saints in Heaven in an
ordinary way ignorant of humane affairs here below. Doubtless thou art our
Father (says the Prophet) though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
acknowledge us not, Isai. 63.16.

The Schoolmen's Speculum Divinum, a fancy.
I am not ignorant of what Bellarmine, and others of the Schoolmen here dream
of; viz. of a Speculum divinum; how that Saints and Angels behold all things in
God, as in a looking Glass, which being set before one, represents unto him
what is behind him; so as he therein beholds at once whatever is in the room:
But this is but a fancy, a groundless speculation, wherewith I shall not
trouble you, or my self.

Sure we are, Neither Saints nor Angels know the hearts of men.
some things there are which neither Saints nor Angels know; as viz. the hearts
of men. This they cannot do, but they must do, if they be Intercessours for
others; How else shall they know the mental prayers and suits of their
Clients? How shall they know them to be in the number of true believers; such
whose prayers shall find audience in heaven? surely they will not (as too many
Advocates upon earth do) undertake a promiscuous solicitation and intercession
for all comers: for Judas as well as Peter; Hypocrites as well as Saints; And
if not so, then they must be able to discern the spirits, and to search the
hearts of men; which being God's peculiar, (as Scripture appropriats it, [ Thou
even thou only know the hearts of the children of men, 1 King. 8.39. I the
Lord search the heart; Jer. 17.10.) cannot be communicated to any creature in
earth or heaven.

Upon this account we receive this Doctrine of the Chruch of Rome, which
directs us to other Mediators besides this one, the Lord Jesus: which they do
(even as those Heretics in the Apostles time did) under a show of humility. It
is too high presumption (say they) to come unto Christ immediately, without the
intervention of some other intermediate Mediators. Not so, say we, seeing
Christ inviteth, nay, commands us to come unto himself upon all occasions, [
Come unto me ye that are weary and heavy laden, Mat. 11.28. So again, Joh.
7.37. If any man thirst, let him come unto me:] not go to the streams and
rivulets, but to the fountain. Now to hearken to this Invitation, and to obey
this command, can be no presumption; nay, not to do it, (out of what principle
soever it be,) will be found not a little derogatory unto Christ, and this
office of his; as if he were not a complete and sufficient Mediator; or as if
there were not by this new and living way a free access unto him, and unto God
by him.

Use 2. Instruction. Know we no other Mediators. Not of Redemption. Vide
Chamier: Panstrat. de Mediatore. lib. 8. cap. 1. sec. 6.
Away then with all these dreams and fancies. As for us (to close up all with a
word of Instruction, or Exhortation) Know we this Mediator, and no other but
him: no other Mediator of Redemption. This also Papists may be charged to do,
whilst they cry up the merits of Saints, daring to present them unto God;
begging remission of sins, grace and mercy for, by and through them. What is
this but to make them Mediators of Redemption? as sharing with Christ in the
work of Satisfaction. For us, take we up the resolution of that dying
Cardinal, (Bellarmine, I mean,) who (not daring to dye in that faith, wherein
he had lived, and for which he had so eagerly contended,) professed to repose
his confidence, (Totam in sola,) wholly and alonely in the mercy of God, and
merits of Jesus Christ. As for our own merits, or the merits of any other,
renounce them, disclaim them, trample upon them: Knowing who it is whom God
has designed and appointed to be our Mediator, even the Man Christ Jesus;
know we none but him; [ To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his
Name, whosoever believes on him, shall receive remission of sins, Acts 10.43.
And to him let every of us give a real Testimony, by receiving him, and
resting upon him, as our alone Savior and Redeemer; that so through the
All Sufficiency of his merit applied unto us, by and through faith, we may
obtain Remission of sins, and Reconciliation with God. This is an honor which
is peculiar unto Jesus Christ; let not us go about to rob him of it, by making
others sharers and partakers with him in it. Know we no other Mediator of
Redemption.

Nor yet of Intercession. Nor yet of Intercession.
As for Saints and Angels, let Papists cry up them, and cry unto them. For us,
let us in this case say of them, as the Heathen once did of his Petigods;
Contemno minutos istos Deos, modo Jovem propitium habeam. So long as he had his
Jupiter to friend, as for them, he regarded them not. Thus, so long as we may
have our Jesus propitious to us, let others make use of Saints and Angels that
will; Let us ever have recourse to him, and to God by him. As for other
Mediators, we may cry unto them, and they not hear; as it was with that man in
the Gospel, who came at midnight to his neighbors house to borrow bread for
the entertaining of his unexpected guest, (it is Augustines observation, August
de temp.
and it is a witty one) he found the whole Family asleep, Nullus de janitoribus
respondet; None of the Porters, none of the Servants, none of the Children make
him any answer; Only the Master of the house: he hears, he opens, and gave
him that which he came for. Thus men may knock long enough at the gates of
heaven, before they receive any answer, whether from Angels or Saints, Gods
Servants or Children. Only the Lord Jesus, the Master of the family, he
neither slumbers nor sleeps; And therefore to him direct we our prayers, Ever
making use of the Mediation of this our Mediator: Coming unto him, and to God
by him. In both making use of that (...), that holy confidence and boldness,
which he has purchased for us by his blood. So coming, now shall our persons,
prayers, praises, all other our Services find a gracious acceptance with God
his Father, and our Father; To whom, with Son, and Holy Ghost, be Praise,
Honor, and Glory, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Mystical Implantation: OR, The great Gospel Mystery of the Christian's UNION,
and COMMUNION with, and CONFORMITY TO JESUS CHRIST, Both In His DEATH And
RESURRECTION, Opened and Applied. As it was lately delivered to the Church of
God at great Yarmouth, By JOHN BRINSLEY, Minister of the Gospel, and Preacher
to that Incorporation.

1 COR. 2.2. I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ,
and him crucified. PHIL. 3.10. That I may know him, and the virtue of his
Resurrection, etc. LONDON, Printed by T. Maxey for Ralph Smith, at the Bible in
Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1652.

To all that love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity: Specially, THOSE in the
Town of Great YARMOUTH, GRACE and PEACE.
(Much esteemed in the Lord,)
I Have heretofore put into Your Hands some few and small Treatises, the leaves
whereof were of like use with those of the Tree of Life in the midst of the New
Jerusalem, Revel. 22.2. serving to heal the Nations, to cure some of those
spiritual Distempers, which in these times of common contagion, have broke in
upon the Body of this Church in many parts of it, both infecting and
indangering of it. Here I present you with a taste of some of the Fruits of the
same Tree, some of the Benefits issuing to the Believer from Jesus Christ; A
Subject which my own soul has fed upon not without inward Complacencie and
contentment. My hopes are, you shall find the like in the perusal of this
Tractate; which is now made public, as for the furtherance of the work of
Grace in you, so to let the World know, that in the course of my Ministry I
have not made Controversy my Work. Only I have now and then dealt with it, as
the Physician does with his Medicines, and God with his Trials, which they make
use of, (...), 1 Pet. 1.6.
when and where need is. Well had it been for the Church of God in this Nation,
had there never been occasion for me or any other to have entered those lists.
But there is a fatal (yet Providential) necessity in it: There must be
Heresies: 1 Cor. 11.16.
such is Satan's malice, and Man's corruption, that in an ordinary way it
cannot be expected that God's Field should be free from these tares. And such
is Gods just and wise dispensation, to permit it to be so, knowing how to
extract good out of evil. And seeing it must be so, there is a like necessity
incumbent upon the Ministers of God, (servants of that great Husbandman) that
they should have John 15.1. 1 Cor. 3.9.
an eye to them, that they do not over-grow the good corn. Upon this account it
is, that I have, as occasion has been offered, underta-that work, which our
great Apostle, the Dr. of the Gentiles reckons amongst those (...), those good
works, 2 Timothy 3.17.
unto which the man of God should be thoroughly furnished: Applying my self
sometimes (...), to Reproof, Engl. new Annot. ver. 16.
viz. of Errors and false Doctrines; which the Verse foregoing reckons as one
of those four Cardinal uses for which the Scripture is profitable: yet so as I
have ever mainly intended those other Ministerial services there mentioned, of
Doctrine, Correction, Instruction in Righteousness. And to that end, I have
made choice of such portions of Scripture as I apprehended properly useful for
those purposes. Among other, I have singled out, and now, through a divine
manuduction, almost passed through this Chapter, whereof the Text is a part, with
that foregoing: Romans 5. and 6.
The one of which professedly handles the Doctrine of Justification, the other
of Sanctification; two main Pillars in the House of the Lord (not unlike those
in the Temple of Dagon, Judge. 19.26.) whereon the whole building stands. The
sum of the later of these you meet with in the Text, held forth under a
familiar, but apt and elegant Metaphor, serving as a vehiculum to convey this
divine Mystery into the soul with greater both facility, and perspicuity. In
prosecuting of this Allegory, I have endeavored to follow it home to the head;
yet so, as not willing to do, what in like cases too often done, viz. to
overdo; by extorting that from the Metaphor, which it would not genuinely and
naturally yield. My service which I have herein desired to do to God and his
Church, as I wish it may, so I hope it shall be accepted of the Saints, and of
You in special, over whom God has made me (though most unworthy) an
Overseeer. To his grace and blessing I commend it and you, resting

Yours, in the service of Christ desirous to be found faithful, JOHN BRINSLEY.
Yarmouth, Sept. 8. 1651.
An Alphabetical Table of the chief Points handled in this TREATISE.
A
AArons Rod blossoming miraculous p. 26 Adoption a benefit flowing from
mystical Insition. 37. Agonies in the Christians death to sin, both before
conversion and after. 111 The least Agony in true conversion. 116. Apostates to
be suspected, their condition dangerous 55. 240. Why men are called upon to
Arise from the Dead. 158. Augmentation a benefit flowing from union with
Christ. 51. Augmentation an evidence of Mystical Implantation. 54.
B
BArren Christians no true Mystical Branches. 74 The same body shall be raised
again. 181. 182 Bodies glorified, spiritual Bodies 184. Mystical Branches,
Believers 15.
C
CAll of God not to be put off. 121 Cessation from sin evidencing true
Mortification 137 Christ Mystical 33. Communion Mystical betwixt Christ and
the Believer. 35 Conformity of Christians to Christ in his Death. 90 Conformity
of Christians to Christ in his Resurrection 146 In the first act of Conversion
man a mere Patient. 28 Conversion more then a moral swasion. 158
D
Believers Dead unto sin three ways 125. 127 Death of Christ a violent death.
99 Death of Christ a painful death. 108 Death of Christ a lingering death 118
Death unto sin a dying, a continued act. 121 Death unto sin, what 126 Death of
Christ the cause of the Christians death unto sin. 130 Death unto sin, how
evidenced. 135
E
Eternal life a spiritual life. 184 Eternal life a glorious life. 186
F
FAith without works dead. 73 Christ a Foundation, how, 82 Fructification a
benefit issuing from union with Christ. 68. 72 Gospel- Fruits, good works. 70
Fruitfulness an evidence of Mystical Implantation. 75 Fruitfulness in good
works why requisite. 76 Directions for Fruitfulness 78 Fullness of Christ the
believers. 40
G.
GOspel preached the means of Mystical Insition 24 Grafting natural and
mystical, unlike in three particulars 18 Grafting natural and mystical,
alike in ten particulars 22 Growth a property of all mystical branches. 52
Growth in grace to be endeavored after 57 Growth in grace the honor of
Christ, and glory of Christianity 59 Growth in the Christian continual ibid.
Doubts about spiritual growth cleared 60 Hindrances of spiritual growth six
63 Means of growth 67
I.
THe Christian an immortal creature 175 Insition mystical what 13 Insition
mysticrll, how tried 24 Joseph's brethren coming to him, a pattern of the
Christians coming to Christ 47 Judas never given to Christ as the other
Apostles 85 Justification a benefit flowing from union with Christ 36
L.
THe Law a Grafting knife 23 The believer living and dying with Christ 12 No
spiritual life out of Christ 25 The Christians life a new life in four
particulars 165 Life of the Regenerate a spiritual life 171 An immortal life
173 Life of Saints in heaven spiritual, glorious, eternal 184 186 Believers
live the life of Christ 209 Life of Christ after his Resurrection, a pattern
for Christians to live by 236 Lusts being dead alone, what to do to them 102
Reprieving of lusts dangerous 107
M.
MOrtification resembles the death of Christ in five particulars 91
Mortification counterfeit discovered. 93 Mortification a voluntary act 97
Mortification a violent death. 100 Mortification a painful work 110
Mortification a lingering death. 118 Mortification how the believers work 133
Mortification twofold, Habitual, Actual. 134
Mortification, in what way to be sought and endeavored 140
N
Name of Christ put upon Christians 33. Nourishment believers receive from
Christ 11. Christ perfect Nourishment to the believer. 44. Nourishment how
conveyed to the soul from Christ, 45. Nourishment to be drawn from Christ 47
Nutrition a benefit flowing from Union with Christ 43.
O
OLd age the unfittest time for the work of Regeneration. 219. Old age renders
conversion difficult and suspicious 220. Repentance in Old age difficult to
man, not to God. 224.
P
Pelagian doctrine confuted 29 Believers planted together in Christ. 3
Believers planted together with Christ. 5. Plantation mystycall by way of
Adhesion and Insition. 6. Mystical Implantation how effected 16. ^^^ll
Implantation the work of free grace. 31. (...) spiritvall Pride. 7
Q
(...) a Quickening spirit. 200 (...) discerned. 202
R
CHrist Raised to the glory of God his father, how. 176. Believers raised to
the glory of God Actively and Passively. 177 Resurrection Corporal and
Spiritual 146 First Resurrection from Christ. 86. First Resurrection imperfect.
149. 248. Resurrection spiritual resembling the Corporal in six particulars.
151. Resurrection spiritual a Difficult work 157. Resurrection spiritual a
work to which man naturally is indisposed and averse 160. 161. Resurrection of
Christ a pattern of the first Resurrection. 164. Resurrection of Christ a
pattern of the Christians second Resurrection. 180 Resurrection to life, proper
to believers 183 Christ the Efficient cause of the Believers first and second
Resurrection. 189. First Resurrection common to all believers 195. Evidences of
the first Resurrection. 196. Motives to the first Resurrection. 215. First
Resurrection how attained 227. First Resurrection a mercy to be acknowledged
233. First Resurrection to be evidenced by the actions of a spiritual life 24.
Believers how to Rise more and more. 241
S
Sanctification a benefit flowing from union with Christ. 38 Stability of a
Regenerate man's estate. 48 Strivings of sin in a regenerate person, comforts
against them. 121. The two Adams two Stocks. 23 The Mystical Stock, Christ. 14
Christ a generous Stock. 46. 20. Christ a living and quickening Stock. 21 Christ
a Stock changing the nature of the graft ibid. (...), the word explained 5
Sustentation a benefit flowing from Christ 9, 82
T.
TRanslation to be waited for 245 Translation to be prepared for 247
V.
Virtues imitable in Christ 210 Unity among Christians 4 Union with Christ
desirable and necessary 8, 26 Union between Christ and the believer inseparable
10, 82 Union mystical a near union 32 Union with Christ an honor to Believers
34 Voice of Christ raising dead soul 196
W.
WAiting for glory the Believers property 179 Weakness of Christians in
themselves 6 Wildings, such are all men by nature 19 Christians have their
Winters 60 Good works Gospel fruits 71 World, how to be used by Christians. 172
ERRATA.
Page 24. li. 31. for in r. to. p. 37. l. 23. r. in ingrafting. p. 54. l. 19.
dele and. p. 93. l. 1. r. discovers. l. 2. dele make p. 133. l. 20. for that r.
of. p. 142. l. 31. r. from. p. 161. l. 9. r. wholly. p. 136. l. 11. r. was
white. l. 31. r. (...). p. 204. l. 7. r. (...). p. 224. l. 1. r. not.

Mystical IMPLANTATION; OR The great Gospel Mystery of the Christians Union
and Communion with, and Conformity to Jesus Christ, both in his Death and
Resurrection.
ROMANS 6. VER. 5. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his
death, we shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection.


IN the verse foregoing, Context.
the Apostle fetteth forth the Christians Communion with, and Conformity to
Jesus Christ. Communion and Conformity both in his Death, and Resurrection;
both. Represented, sealed and conveyed unto the believer in, by, and through
the Sacrament of Baptism, [Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into
Death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
Father; even so we also should walk in newness of life.] What he there plainly
and simply propounds, in this 5th verse he prosecutes and illustrates; which he
does by an apt and elegant Similitude, or Comparison. A Similitude taken from
planting or grafting, where the Graft and the Stock being made one, partake in
Life and Death; dying together in the Winter (seeming so to do,) Reviving, and
living together in the Spring. Even thus (says the Apostle) fares it with
Christ and the Believer. The Believer being implanted and ingrafted into
Christ, made one with him, from that union flows the like Communion, and that
both in his Death and Resurrection, [For if we have been planted together in
the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his
Resurrection.]

Division. A Supposition. A Position.

In which passage we may take notice of two things, a Supposition, and a
Position. The Supposition or Groundwork in the former words, [If we have been
planted together in the likeness of his Death.] The Position or Inference
deduced from, and built upon that ground in the later, [ we shall be also in
the likeness of his Resurrection.

Begin with the former, the Supposition, [If we have been, etc.] This the
Apostle here supposes, laying it down for a groundwork, that All Believers
are planted together with Christ in the likeness of his Death, which we may
(for the better handling of it) break, or resolve into two distinct
Propositions or Conclusions. The Supposition resolved into two Propositions.


1. Believers are planted together with Christ.

2. They are planted together with Christ in the likeness of his Death.

The former more general, the later more particular. I shall insist upon them
severally, beginning with the former. Proposit. 1. All believers are planted
together with Christ.

A double reference of the word (together.)

1. To believers themselves.




All Believers are planted together with Christ] Planted together. (...), says
the Original: where the Preposition ((...), together) may admit of a twofold
reference. Either it may be referred to Christians themseselves, or to Christ
and them.

1. To Believers themselves [We have been planted together] i. e. (says
Erasmus,) we Jews and Gentiles, both which are now planted together in the
same stock: or, we, viz. Paul himself and all other believers, even the whole
company of the faithful, who are (...), planted together, like so many
branches growing upon the same stock, making up one mystical body. A truth,
which the Apostle elsewhere sets forth under another Allegory, of a
Building, Ephesians. 2.20, 21. where resembling Christ unto a Foundation-stone, he
compares other believers to so many stones laid upon that foundation, all fitly
framed together, and builded together for an habitation of God through the
Spirit.] Thus some conceive the Apostle here to speak the same thing under
another Metaphor.

Applic. Being planted together, let them agree together.
A truth, and an useful one, did I list to improve it. Useful, as to other
ends, so especially to mind Christians of that holy concord, unity and
agreement which ought to be betwixt and amongst them. They are planted together
like branches of the same tree. Now how do we see such branches growing up
together quietly, peaceably? Happily in a storm there may be some clashing, but
that being over, they agree again, embracing each other with mutual
complications. Thus in storms of Satan's raising, there may and will be
sometimes animosities and unbrotherly contentions amongst Christians (as there
was betwixt Paul and Barnabas;) but the violence of the Tentation being over,
now they ought to affect a holy agreement, being knit together, and growing up
together in Love. But I shall not dwell upon this.

2 The second Reference more proper with Christ.
The later Reference I look upon as more proper and geinune [Planted together,]
viz. with Christ. So it will appear to be, if we parallel and compare the
phrase here with others of like nature. Elsewhere we read of Christians
suffering together, (...) Vide Bezam Gr Annot. and C. A. Lapide ad Textum.
and living together, and reigning together, 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. In this chapter
(this 6th of the Romans) we read of being buried together, verse before the
text; and Crucified together in the verse after it; and living together, ver.
8. In all which places the particle ((...), Together) must be looked upon as
relating to Jesus Christ: So here in the Text, (...), If we have been planted
together] i. e. together with Christ.

So are all true believers, All true Believers are planted together with Christ.
they are planted together with Christ.] Planted together. The word in the
Original ((...)) is very Emphaticall: having no one word either in the English
or Latin tongue that will fully answer and express it. It is a Metaphor (as I
said) taken from plants, which do in unum concrescere, or coalescere, The word
(...) explained.
grow up together; so as they become one body, and partake of the same common
juice; these are properly (...).

Now (to follow the Metaphor) of these there are two sorts, or kinds. Two sorts
of (...), viz. by Adhesion by Insition.

Some plants grow together by Adhesion; others by Insition. 1. By Adhesion; the
one only cleaving and clinging to the other. Thus does the Ivy grow up by and
with the Oak, or some other tree. 2. By Insition, by ingrafting, inoculating
the one in to the other, as grafts and cions which are put into a stock, and so
made one with it, being nourished by the juice of it. Both these are, (...),
Plants Planted together.

Two very apt and elegant similitudes, Two apt and elegant similitudes.
most lively and clearly representing unto us the nature of that spiritual
Union and Communion which is betwixt Christ and all true believers. Even thus
are they planted together with Christ, both by way of Adhesion and Insition. I
shall take liberty to prosecute them severally. More briefly of the former.

Simil. 1. Believers planted with Christ by way of adhesion. As the Ivy and
the Oak. The five Resemblances. Resembl. 1. Of themselves weak and feeble.
Believers are planted together with Christ by way of Adhesion, as the Ivy and
the Oak: Follow we the similitude a little, it will lead us to diverse
particulars of a very useful consideration. I shall name but three or four of
them.

1. The Ivy is of it self weak and feeble, creeping along upon the ground,
not able to raise it self above the Earth without the help of some tree or wall
which it grows by. And even such is the condition of every man by nature. All
weak and impotent. [ When we were yet without strength, Christ died for us,
(says the Apostle) Romans 5.6. Not able to do any thing in their own strength:
Not able to raise themselves above the Earth. We know what the Apostle says of
the first Adam, 1 Cor. 15.17. The first man is of the Earth, Earthy.] And such
are all the branches of that Stock, all men by nature; all of the Earth,
Earthy. Having their Original from the Earth, they as it were creep along upon
the Earth, savouring of nothing but the Earth. Joh. 3.31.
He that comes from the Earth, (says our Savior, speaking of the natural
man) he is earthly, and speaks of the Earth] Minding nothing but Earthly
things, (as the Apostle has it) Philip. 3.19. Their best wisdom is no better
then that which Saint James speaks of, Jam. 3.15. (...), Earthly. Of themselves
higher they cannot rise. Applic. A prick to let out the wind of spiritual pride.


Which (by the way) may serve as a prick to let out that wind of spiritual
Pride, wherewith the hearts of many are blown up. The selfe-conceited Romanist
he sets up a Ladder of his own works (as the Father bad Ascesius do) and
hopes to climb to heaven by it. And little less do many ignorant (poor and
proud) souls amongst our selves, who presume much upon their own natural
abilities. Even Gods own people are not wholly free from this spiritual Pride.
Peter dreamed he could stand upon his own bottom, and that made him take up
that Resolution in his own strength; Mat. 26.33.
Though all should be offended at his Master, yet so would not be. Proud
spirits: Go to the Ivy of the field, and let that read us a lecture of our no
strength, no ability to do ought of our selves. The Ivy of it self rises not
above the Earth, no more can the natural man by the power of nature. If we be
raised up the least degree heavenward, thanks to the Oak, thanks to Jesus
Christ, by, and with whom it is that we are raised; as (God willing) I shall
show you hereafter. I pass to a second Resemblance

2. The Ivy being so feeble of it self, Resembl. 2.
by a kind of natural instinct it reaches forth to, Closing with Jesus
Christ.
and takes hold upon the Oak, clasping and grasping that, twisting about it,
and clinging to it. And the like does the true believer unto Jesus Christ.
Being convinced of his own weakness, inability to do ought in his own
strength, he betaketh himself unto Christ, reaching forth unto him in the
earnest desires of his soul after Union and Communion with him; then clasping,
embracing him in the Arms of his faith. Luke 2.28.
Even as Simeon embraced him in the Arms of his body; so does the believer in
the arms of his faith. Genesis 32.26.
As Jacob did the Angel, whom he took hold of, and would not let go till he had
blessed him. Thus the spouse took hold of her welbeloved, Cant. 3.4. I found
him whom my soul loved, I held him, and would not let him go.

Learn how to claspe Jesus Christ.
Applic. Like course let all of us take, being conscious of our own impotency,
let us lay hold upon Jesus Christ; clasping him, adhering to him, resting upon
him as our alone all-sufficient Savior; resolving not to let him go: How
closely, how tenaciously does the Ivy cleave to the Oak? No wind can part
them: No small matter can sever them. Thus should the Christian hold the hold
which he has of Jesus Christ. Whatever winds or storms of Tentations, or
Persecutions come down upon us, yet let not him go. No, though God himself
should seem to write bitter things against us (as Job speaks; Job 13.15.
) yet let not that hold go. Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him.

From this second arises a third and fourth Resemblances. The Believer
receiving a double benefit from Christ, by closing with him.
The Ivy thus clasping the Oak, it receives a double benefit from it; viz.
Sustentation and Nutrition; Support and Nourishment. And the like double
benefit does the believer receive by this his embracing Christ in the arms of
his faith.

1. Sustentation and Support. Resemb. 3. 1. Sustentation
This benefit has the Ivy from the Oak. Though weak in it self, not able to
stand alone, yet being joined to the Oak, now it stands sure, bids defiance to
all storms and tempests. As long as the Oak stands, that cannot fall. The
like benefit has the christian from his Christ. Though weak in himself, not
able to stand by himself, not able to resist the least blast of Tentation, yet
being united unto Christ, he is now supported in all estates, borne up in all
Conditions; made able both to do, and to suffer. I am able to do all things
(says this Apostle,) but how? Through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4
13. Here was Paul's strength; not in himself, but in Christ. So much some
conceive that Enigmaticall expression of his to import, 2 Corinthians 12.10.
When I am weak, then am I strong. When weak in himself, then strong in Christ.
He it was that strengthened him. The Lord stood by me, and strengthened me: so he
tells Timothy 2 Timothy 4.17. And the like will he do to every soul that cleaves
to him, and rests upon him.

Applic.
Applic. Which speaks abundant consolation to all selfe-despairing souls,
Consolation to self-despairing souls.
which are made apprehensive of their own impotency, their own inability to
stand of themselves. Let them know, that being made one with Jesus Christ, he
is able to support them, to make them stand. As the Apostle says of the weak
brother, Romans 14.4. He shall be holden up, (or established,) for God is able to
make him stand: So say I of, and to the weak Christian, who despairing of his
own strength, relyeth wholly upon Jesus Christ; he shall be holden up; for
Christ is able to make him stand. Of all plants, none weaker then the Ivy; yet
being joined to the Oak, none stand surer. The Christian is weak in himself,
of himself subject every day to fall from the grace of God: but being once
united unto Christ, Romans 5.2.
he stands sure.

An Arminian Cavil refuted.
Object. True, (may the Arminian say,) so long as that union continues, he does
so. But what if that be dissolved? So long as the Ivy holds close to the
Oak, it is sure; but what if it be separated, severed from it?

Ans. To this let the Apostle himself return the answer, Romans 8.38, 39. I am
persuaded that neither life nor death, etc. shall be able to separate us from
the love of God in Jesus Christ our Lord. No separation of the Believer from
Christ.
] Death it self which makes a separation betwixt the soul and the body, yet
cannot make a separation betwixt Christ and the believer. If the Ivy may be
plucked and parted from the Oak, there I leave the Similitude. Sure I am, the
believer cannot be separated from Christ: and consequently not fall away
finally, or totally from the grace of God.

And therefore how weak so ever in our selves, yet be we strong in the Lord. So
the Apostle expresses it, Ephesians. 6.10. Finally, my brethren, be strong in the
Lord, and in the power of his might.] The Ivy is weak, but the Oak is strong.
We are weak, but Christ is strong. El Gibbor, the Mighty God, Isai. 9.7. Be we
strong in the power of his might; so shall his might be our might. 2 Cor. 12.9.
His power shall be made perfect in our weakness; supporting, sustaining,
strengthening us.

2. And as supporting, so nourishing. 4. Resemb. 2. Nutrition.
There is the fourth Resemblance. The Ivy clasping about the Oak, it receives
nourishment from it, which it sucketh and draws from it after a secret and
hidden manner. And the like benefit does Christ afford unto the believer; The
believer being united unto Christ, he now lives upon him, as the Ivy upon the
Oak, [The life which I now live in the flesh, (says the Apostle) I live by the
faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. From him the believer by the power of his
faith, (an attractive grace,) sucketh and draws a spiritual virtue after an
hidden manner: Even as that poor woman in the Gospel by the touch of her
finger, (or rather her faith,) drew from him a sanative virtue, for the cure of
her bodily infirmity. So does the believer by the like touch of faith draw
from him a nutritive virtue, for the nourishing up of his soul unto eternal
life. Of which virtue all true believers are in their measure made partakers.
Being made one with Christ, they live upon him. His flesh is to them meat
indeed, and his blood is drink indeed, John 6.55. He gives unto them that
water of life, John 4.14.
which whosoever drinks, shall never thirst any more: viz. Siti totalis
Indigentiae; with a thrift of total indigencie; such a thirst as arises from
a total privation of God's grace; thus is nourishment conveyed from Christ
unto all true believers. But of this I shall have occasion to insist more
largely and fully, when I come to handle the other similitude of Ingrafting,
where it will fall in more properly, and naturally.

5. Resemb.
5. To this I might add, in the fifth place, that which follows from the two
former put together; Living and dying with Christ.
viz. that which the Apostle himself here specifieth and instanceth in. The
Ivy being supported and nourished by the Oak, now it lives and dies with it.
Thus the believer that is united unto Jesus Christ, he partaketh with him both
in his death and life. In his death, dying in him, in regard of the merit of
his death, which redoundeth unto the believer no less then if he himself had
died; dying with him, dying unto sin, as he died for sin; and that by a virtue
issuing from his death. In his life, quickened, and raised up by him, and with
him; quickened from the death of sin, raised from the grave of sin, to a new
spiritual and heavenly life; the life of grace here, and glory hereafter. But
both these I shall have occasion to deal with more fully in opening the Sequel
of the Text; to which place I shall refer them.

Thus you see the former of these Allegories in measure made out. Come we to
the later, which my eye is principally upon as conceiving it here more properly
intended by the Apostle.

Believers are planted together with Christ by way of Insition: not only
Complantati, Similit. 2. Believers planted with Christ by way of Insition.
but Implantati; not only planted together with him, but in him. Even as the
graft and the stock are planted together; so is Christ and the believer; they
are (...), Insititii; (as Erasmus renders it,) Grafted with him, Grafted with
him.
(as the former Translation has it,) A Metaphor which this Apostle seems to
be much delighted in, and taken with. In that 11th Chap. to the Romans, we may
see him prosecuting it at large: where, speaking of the bringing in of the
Gentiles to the participation of the Covenant of grace, to have union and
communion with Christ and his Church, he sets it forth under this Metaphor of
(ingrafting;) using the word no less then six several times in that Chapter.
And indeed of all Metaphors, expressing and setting forth unto us the
spiritual union and communion betwixt Christ and the believer, I know none
more apt more elegant, more lively then this. And therefore I shall spend a
little more time then ordinary in the prosecution of it.

The Similitude prosecuted.
Christ and the believer are grafted together as the graft and the stock. In
prosecuting hereof, I shall show you these four particulars: 1. Who is the
Stock. 2. Who the Branches. 3. How these two come to be ingrafted the one into
the other. 4. And lastly, The Resemblances betwixt the natural and spiritual
Implantation. In the three former I shall be brief, intending to insist more
largely upon the last.

1. The Stock, Christ.
1. In the natural Implantation, there must be a Stock to graft upon; So in
this spiritual Implantation, here is a Stock. Who that is, the Text it self
points it out: viz. Christ himself, [We are planted together with him.]
Elsewhere our Savior himself gives it us more expressly, John 15.5. I am the
Vine.] He is the Stock.

Christ according to his two natures, puts on a twofold Relation: and is
sometimes called a Branch, sometimes a Stock or Root; the former we meet with,
Isai. 11.1. where Christ is called a Rod, or Branch, [There shall come forth a
Rod out of the Stem of Jesse, and a Branch shall grow out of his Roots.] Jesse,
(or Ishai,) the father of David, he was that Root: Christ according to his
humanity, he was a Rod, a Branch, springing from the Root. So some conceive him
elsewhere called; Isai. 4.2. In that day shall the Branch of the Lord be
beautiful and glorious.] Which most take as spoken of Christ, though others
(more genuinely, as I conceive) understand it of the Remnant of Israel,
escaping out of Babylonish Captivity, as the later part of the verse seems to
expound it. More plainly, Zach. 3.8. Behold, I will bring forth my Servant the
Branch] A Text clearly pointing at Christ.

The later we meet with, Isai. 11.10. [There shall be a Root of Jesse.] There
the Relation is changed. He that was a Branch before, ver. 1. is here called
the Root. Christ, both Root and Branch to the same Stock. According to that,
Rev. 22.16. I am the Root and Offspring of David.] The Offspring of David
according to his Humanity, as man. The Root of David, according to his
Divinity, as God.

Quest. But how is he the Root or Stock into which believers are implanted?
whether as God, or man?

Ans. I answer, as both; as Mediator; as God and man. So is he the Stock.

2. 2. The Branches, Believers.
From whence we may collect in answer to the second Proposal. Who are the
Branches: viz. All true believers, who are given to him, not only by Election,
but also by effectual Vocation, given actually to believe on him. I am the
Vine, ye are the Branches, says our Savior to his Disciples in the place
forenamed, John 15.5. Such are all true believers. All plants of God's
planting. Such as be planted in the House of the Lord, Psalm. 92.13. All plants
ingrafted into this Stock.

3. And how come they so to be? 3. How they come to be implanted.
There is the 3d particular. In answer whereunto (following the trail of the
Metaphor) I might here show you both who is the Planter, and what are the
Instruments.

1. The Planter 1. The Planter.
here is twofold. Principal; Ministerial.

1. Principal, God.
1. The Principal is God himself, My Father is the Husbandman, says our
Savior, Joh. 15.1.

2. Ministerial, the Ministers of the Gospel, 2. Ministerial, the Ministers of
the Gospel.
who are God's Servants, his Laborers in this plantation, [We are laborers
together with God, (says the Apostle,) 1 Cor. 3.9. (...), Laborers in this
planting work. The Minister of God is (...), He that planteth,] [I have
planted: (says Paul) ver. 6.

2. The Instrument 2. The Instrument; double.
in this work is twofold, according to a twofold Implantation. There is an
outward and visible, and there is an inward and invisible Implantation. And
each of these has its several Instrument.

1. In the former of them, the Instrument made use of, is that which the
Apostle himself here points at, viz. the Sacrament of Baptism. 1. Of the
outward Implantation, the Sacrament of Baptism.
Christians are baptized into Christ, ver. 3. and so ingrafted into him. The
one answers the other. So they are outwardly, visibly. And thus are little
children, Infants, like young and tender twigs, they are grafted into this
Stock, into Christ by an outward visible Implantation: Ingrafted into him
Sacramentally.

2. Besides this, there is an inward, spiritual, invisible Implantation, 2. Of
the inward Implantation.
and ingrafting into Christ. And in effecting of this, there are two sorts of
Instruments. The one Mediate, the other Immediate.

1. The Mediate instrument is the word, 1. Mediate, the word.
in the Ministry of it. Paul planteth; but how? By preaching of the Gospel. The
spirit of the Lord is upon me (says the Prophet Isaiah, speaking of Christ,
Isaiah 61. verse 1.) and has sent me to preach glad tidings, (viz. to preach
the Gospel, as Saint Luke explaines it Luke 4.18.) And to what end? why,
(amongst other,) that those which mourn in Sion (poor penitent sinners,) might
be called Trees of Righteousness, the planting of the Lord. So you have it
verse 3. This is the ordinary Instrument which God is pleased to make use of in
this planting work, viz. the preaching of the Word, the Law, and Gospel. By
the one he cutteth men off from the old stock, the stock of Nature. By the
other he puts them into this new stock, grafteth them into Christ, (as I
shall show you more fully anon.) Here is the Mediate Instrument.

2. The Immediate, on Gods part, is his Spirit, 2 Immediate: viz. the Spirit
the Faith

which gives efficacy to both the aforesaid Ordinances, Baptism and the
Word: making them effectual for those ends to which they are ordained. On man's
part, faith, Faith applying Christ unto the soul, and the soul unto Christ.
Thus in the natural ingrafting there is a mutual application of the Graft to
the stock, and the Stock to the Graft. The like mutual application is there
betwixt Christ and the believer. The believer apprehends Christ, Phil. 3.12.
and is apprehended of him. This on man's part is done by faith, laying hold
upon him; applying him with all his merits and benefits unto himself, and
giving up himself wholly unto him. Herby Christ and the believer are made one:
the one ingrafted into the other.

Thus have I briefly dispatched the three first particulars: which make way for
the fourth and last, which my eye is chiefly upon: viz. The Resemblance betwixt
the Natural and Spiritual Implantation: 4 The Resemblance betwixt natural
and Spiritual Ingrafting.
The Ingrafting of the Branch into the Stock, and the Incorporating the
believer into Christ. Wherein the one of these represents the other.

But before I come to this, give me leave first to mind you of that vulgar and
trite Maxim. Not in all things.
Omne simile est dissimile: No two are so like, but in something they are
unlike. Similitude supposes a Dissimilitude. And so is it here. Though the
Natural and Spiritual ingrafting do in many things one resemble the other;
yet not so in all.

Question. Wherein are they unlike? Answer. See the Dissimilitude The
dissimilitude in three particulars.
in two or three particulars, each usefully observable.

1 Ill branches put into a good stock.
1. In natural ingrafting there is a good plant put into a worse Stock; as the
branch of an Appletree put into a Crab-Stock. In this Spiritual ingrafting it
is clean otherwise; Here ill branches are put into a good Stock. This
dissimilitude the Apostle may seem to glance at, Romans 11.24. Where speaking
of the incorporating of the Gentiles into the Stock of Abraham, he says, they
were grafted contrary to Nature. [If thou wast cut out of the Olive tree which
was wild by Nature, and wast grafted contrary to Nature into a true Olive
tree.] For the wild Olive to be ingrafted into the true, is (...), besides or
contrary to Nature. Ambros. and Hierom. in Romans 11. Vide H. Grotium in Romans 11.
v. 17. and Bezam Gr. Annot. ibid.
As for the Crab to be grafted into the Appletree. Now so is it here in this
Spiritual ingrafting. Here is a branch of a wild Olive ingrafted into the
True. Men who by nature are branches of the old Corrupted Adam, they are taken
out of that degenerous stock, and grafted into the second Adam, a generous and
noble stock. A Crab grafted into an Appletree.

A Crab. Such are all men by nature, like wildings Al men by nature Wildings.
of the wood; bringing forth nothing but sour and bitter fruit. So the Lord
complains of his vine Isa. 5.2. I looked that it should bring forth grapes, and
it brought forth wild grapes.] Was putidas (says Montanus) vile, rotten,
putrid, stinking grapes. Such are the fruits which the natural man yeildeth;
Sour grapes, [The fathers have eaten Sour grapes, Ezekiel. 18.2. [As Sour
grapes are to the palate of man, setting his teeth on edg; so are these fruits
of the natural man unto God. And how should they be otherwise seeing the stock
is naught? The first Adam, through degeneration, a Crabb-stocke, a wilding.

But the second Adam Christ is an Apple Tree, Christ an Apple Tree a generous
stock.
so called, or compared by the Spouse, Can. 2.3. As the Appletree among the
trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons. All other the sons of men
are trees of the wood, wildings: Christ is the Appletree; a generous
fruit-bearing tree. A tree of Righteousness. Like that tree of life, in the
midst of the Paradise of God, spoken of Rev. 22.2. which bare twelve manner of
fruits: and the very leaves thereof are sanative, and sovereign for the
healing of the Nations. And into this tree are these degenerous branches
grafted. Branches of the wild Olive grafted into the true. Sinners by nature
taken out of the stock of nature, and ingrafted into Christ.

Dissim. 2. Dead Branches put into a living stock.
2. In Natural Ingrafting, Living branches are put into a living stock. If the
graft be dead, there is no engrafting. But here in this Spiritual Implanting,
behold, dead branches put into a living Stock. Such are all men by nature, dead
before they come unto Christ. [Yee will not come unto me that ye might have
life] says our Savior to the Jews, Joh. 5.40. intimating, that of themselves
they were dead. And so is it with all others in their natural condition;
before the grace of God meet with them, they are dead. [And you has he
quickened who were dead, etc. Ephesians. 2.1.

R. And it must needs be so: Because the stock is dead; The first Adam The
first Adam a dead stock.
dying in Paradise. And the Root dying, the branches die in it, and with it. In
Adam all dyed. 1 Cor. 15.22. But in Christ they are made alive. viz. All that
are given to him, and made one with him. Thus is the second Adam not only a
Living soul, but a quickening spirit, The second, A living and Quickening stock.
verse 45. of that Chapter: (...), quickening those that are put into him.

Where we may take notice, how far grace transcendeth and surpasses nature. In
nature the best, and most vigorous stock may continue that life to the graft,
which it has before: But convey it, it cannot to a dead, and rotten branch.
But so is it here, the Branches being dead, they are quickened in and by the
stock, receiving life from Jesus Christ.

3. In the natural engrafting the graft Dissim. 3. The stock changing the
nature of the Graft.
still retains it own nature bringing forth fruit after its own kind. Nativam
fructus edendi proprietatem retinet; It still keeps it own native property in
fruit-bearing. But it is otherwise in this spiritual engrafting. The believer
being once engrafted into Christ, his nature is thereby changed. [ If any man
be in Christ, (says the Apostle) ( in Christ, inserted, engrafted into him,)
he is a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17.] He is thereupon changed, though not in
substance, yet in quality; Changed in his Affection, Motions, dispositions;
having as it were a new nature put into him which S Peter calls the divine
nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. That you might be partakers of the divine nature. (...),
not (...). Not the divine Substance, which is incommunicable to any Creature;
but divine qualities of holiness and Righteousness, wherein consists the
Image of God. Hereof all believers are in their measure made partakers.

And being thus changed, made new, they now bring forth new fruits. Fruits meet
for Repentance; worthy of, (or answearable to) Amendment of life. Joh. 3.8.
Fruits of Holiness and Righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ to the praise
and glory of God, Phil. 1.11.

And this they have from the stock whereinto they are ingrafted, from Jesus
Christ into whom they are engrafted by faith. Being engrafted into him, though
barren before, yet now they are made fruitful. [He that abides in me, and I
in him, (says our Savior, Joh. 15.5. the same brings forth much fruit.] And
that fruit good fruit. Being now made good trees, trees of Righteousness, they
bring forth good fruit. Being now made free from sin, and become servants to
God, they have their fruit unto holiness Romans 6.22.

Thus I have briefly shown unto you the dissimilitude betwixt these two, the
natural, and spiritual engrafting, wherein they are unlike. Now come we to
that which I have all this while been making way unto: to show you the
similitude The similitude n 10. particulars.
and likeness betwixt the one and the other. And this I shall set before you in
6. or 7. particulars, still giving you some touch of Application of every one
of them as I go along.

1: In engrafting, the Graft is taken, Resembl. 1. The Graft cut off from one
stock, and put into another.
or cut off from one tree, that it may be put into another. And so is it in
this spiritual engrafting; here is a taking a man out of one stock, and
putting him into another. This is that which the Apostle says of the Gentiles,
Romans 11. They were cut out of the wild Olive tree, and grafted into the True.
And thus it is with all believers, (as I have in part shown you already) they
are taken out of the stock of nature, out of the old Adam, and grafted into
Jesus Christ. The two Adams, they are the two stocks: The two Adams the two
stocks.
All men by nature are branches of the one; by grace believers are made members
of the other.

In prosecution of this branch of the Allegory I might show you how both these
are done. How men are taken off from the one stock; how put into the other.

The former of these is done by the Law, which is as it were the Grafting
knife, Men cut off from the old stock by the Law. The Law the Grafting knife.
cutting a man off from the first stock, convincing him of his wretched state
and condition by nature; and so taking him off from his first bottom, from all
confidence in himself. Such a work had the Law upon this Apostle St Paul. [I
was alive (says he) without the Law, but when the commandment came, etc. I
died, Romans 7.9 The Law being brought home to his conscience, that took him off
from all his former confidences; from the former bottom of his own supposed
Righteousness.

Put into Christ by the Gospel.
The later of them is done by the Gospel, revealing and holding forth Christ
with his righteousness, as a new stock, a new bottom for the soul to pitch,
and rest upon. And then the Spirit of God, revealing Christ in the man,
persuading the heart to close with that gracious offer; and so to receive Jesus
Christ upon the terms on which he is offered: viz. as a Savior, and as a Lord.
By this means is this Transplantation wrought.

Applic. Applic. Spiritual Implantation how tried.
Every of us bring it home to our selves, and make the enquiry, whether we find
such a work upon our souls. Hereby may we know whether we be engrafted into
Christ Jesus, or no. Have we found such a work of the Law upon our hearts, thus
cutting us off from the old stock? Have we been convinced of our own
nothingnesse? and so taken off from our former false bottoms? from all
confidence in our selves, or any creature? And withal, brought to close with
Jesus Christ, to receive him as an All-sufficient Savior and Redeemer: resting
upon him, giving up our selves unto him to be saved and ruled by him? If so,
now we may conclude to our comfort, that this blessed work is wrought in us:
But are we still growing upon the old stock; resting secure in our natural
condition; never troubled about our spiritual estate: Still (it may be)
sticking in our old sins; still wedded in our old lusts: At the best resting
upon our own righteousness in whole, or in part? Deceive not our selves, we
are as yet strangers to this special Implantation. One and the same branch
cannot grow upon two stocks at one and the same time: It must be taken off from
the one, before it be put into the other. No more can the same man be grafted
into Christ, who is still in the stock of corrupted nature. Here is a first
Resemblance: Come we to a second.

2. A Branch being severed from the Stock, 2. Resemb. The Branch cannot live,
or bring forth fruit out of the Stock.
it cannot live, much less bring forth fruit of it self: No more can a man out
of Jesus Christ; he can do nothing of himself. This Resemblance we may take
from our Savior himself, in that place forenamed, John 15.4, 5. As the branch
cannot bring forth fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine; no more can
ye, except ye abide in me: without me ye can do nothing.] (...), not only sine
me, without me; which Beza Beza Gr. Annot.
notes to be nimis dilutum, too scant an expression; seeming to insinuate, that
Christ should be only (...), a joint, concurrent cause in the good works which
men do; and as if they had some power of their own, which being assisted and
helped by grace, might be able to act: not so; the phrase imports more: Extra
me (says Grotius) out of me; seorsim a me, severed from me, (says Beza;) Ye
can do nothing; viz. In spiritual works, nothing truly holy, and acceptable to
God, or advantageous to themselves in the way of salvation; no more then a
Branch severed from the Stock can bring forth fruit. True, one such a Branch we
read of, and but one, Aarons Rod, Aaron's Rod blossoming, miraculous.
which lying in the Tabernacle, blossomed and yielded Almonds, as we may read,
Numb. 17.8. But that was miraculous. In course of nature it is not so; men must
be engrafted into Christ before they can bring forth good fruits; naturally
they are all, (as the Apostle says of some) Tit. 1.16. Reprobate to every good
work: (...), void and destitute of true Judgment, not knowing what to do, as
they ought to do it. Wise to do evil, but to do well, they have no knowledge,
Jer. 4.22. Or Inutiles, (as Grotius renders the word,) unprofitable,
unserviceable; like that reprobate silver, which the Prophet Jeremie speaks
of, Jer. 6.30. which will not pass, but is rejected at all hands: Such are the
services of mere natural men, all so imbased, so defective and faulty either
for matter, or manner, as they will not pass for current: either they do not
what they ought, or not as they ought: neither can they in any strength of
their own. Of themselves, they cannot so much as will, or think that which is
good: It is God that works in you both to will and do of his good pleasure,
Phil. 2.13. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of
our selves, 2 Cor. 3.5.

Applic. Applic. The absolute necessity of union with Christ.
Which gives us to take notice of the absolute necessity of getting into Jesus
Christ, and abiding in him: Out of him we are but as grafts out of the stock;
good for nothing but the fire: Such are we out of Christ, unusefull,
unserviceable, unprofitable creatures; fit for nothing but for the fire of
God's wrath to sieze upon, and consume.

And therefore let our first and main design be to get into Christ: Renouncing
our own righteousness, fly unto him; lay hold upon him; close with him;
receiving him as our Savior, as our Lord.

And then abide in him. So our Savior presses it upon his Disciples, John
15.4. Abide in me.] The Branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide
in the Vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me: (So he goes on.) By all
means therefore let it be our care to maintain this blessed union and communion
with Jesus Christ.

To that end not neglecting any means appointed for that purpose: Amongst which
none more proper then that Ordinance, which is so much slighted and neglected
by too many among us, the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper: An Ordinance
instituted by Jesus Christ for the confirming and assuring unto believers their
abiding and continuing in him. Even as Baptism is a Sacrament of our
ingrafting into Christ; so is the Lord's Supper a Sacrament of our continuance
in him; abiding and growing up in him: not only sealing, but furthering that
continuance, and growth. And therefore as many of us as would have the comfort
of this our in-being in Christ, neglect not this Ordinance, but make use of it
to that end. Pass we on to a third Resemblance.

3. Resemb. The Graft can do nothing toward its own Insition.
In the third place; As the graft cannot bring forth fruit of it self, so
neither can it do any thing to the engrafting of it self. Herein it is a mere
Patient. And such is the believer in the first Act of Conversion, a mere
Patient; The Believer a mere Patient in the first act of Conversion.
who may be wrought upon, but cannot work; cannot contribute any thing toward
his own Conversion; toward the changing of his own estate. True, being wrought
upon, now he works. Even as the graft being put into the stock, now it
concurreth and co-operateth with the stock, in bringing forth fruit. Thus is it
with believers; being wrought upon by the Spirit of God, now, Acti agunt, moved
they move, wrought upon the work. But in the first act they are merely passive;
Only receiving of Jesus Christ. [ To as many as received him, John 1.12.]
Neither can they do this of themselves; this being a work of the Spirit of God
in them; which is to them a Spirit of Revelation, Ephesians. 1.17. 2 Cor. 4.13.
and a Spirit of Faith: Revealing Christ to them, and in them: inclining and
persuading their hearts to close with Jesus Christ. Even as the Planter fitteth
his graft, and disposes it to an Insition, an ingrafting, and then puts it
into the stock; thus does God by his Spirit prepare and dispose the soul to
the receiving of Christ: and then works actual faith in it: All which is his
work.

Applic. 1. From whence we may (by the way,) take notice of the erroneousnesse
of those Popish, Pelagian, Popish and Pelagian Doctrine confuted.
or Arminian Tenants, which tell us of what man of himself is able to do in
order to his own conversion and salvation. Man is not (say some of them)
totally dead, or destitute of all power, but rather like the traveller in the
Gospel, who falling among thieves, was sore wounded, Luke 10.30.
half-dead: but not quite dead. Though it be not much he can do, yet something
he can; Though he cannot change, and renew himself, yet (say they) he may so
prepare and dispose himself to the receiving of the grace of God, as that
grace shall not; nay, in equity cannot be denied him. And thus (say they) grace
and free will; they concur together as copartners in the work of Conversion,
the one not preventing the other in order of causality.

But how unsound this Doctrine is, we may not obscurely learn (as from diverse
express Texts in Paul's Epistles, so) even from this Metaphor, which here he
makes use of; where he says, that believers are planted, engrafted with, and
into Christ, ((...)) the word has a passive signification: intimating, that
men in the first act of conversion, they are mere Patients. They cannot prepare
or dispose themselves to the receiving of the grace of God by any power of
their own; no more then the Graft can dispose it self to its own ingrafting.

Use 2. Being convinced hereof, what remains but that they who would be made
partakers of this grace, Wait upon God in the use of means; specially the word.
wait upon God in the use of such means as he has appointed for the effecting
of this blessed Insition; the chief whereof is the public Ministry of the
word. Attend upon this: This they may do. Even as that poor impotent person in
the Gospel, though he could not put himself into the waters, yet he could lie
at the Pool. Mere natural men, though they cannot repent and believe of
themselves, yet they may wait upon God in the use of such means as he has
sanctified for that end. And this let them do, not pleading (as some desperate
wretches do.) They cannot convert themselves; it must be God's work; and
therefore they are careless and regardlesse about it. Nay, wait upon God in
his own way: and then, though the well using of nature, or common grace, or
attendance upon means cannot (so much as by way of Congruity,) merit any such
thing at the hands of God; yet God will not deny his grace to a soul, that so
waits upon him for it.

Use 3. Use 3. Give the glory of this work wholly to God.
And being made partakers of this grace, now give we the glory of it wholly to
the God of all grace. If the graft be transplanted and engrafted, thanks to the
Husbandman. Is it so that we are changed, translated from the state of nature,
to the state of grace, taken out of the Old Adam, and put into the New? brought
to have union and communion with Jesus Christ? lo, this is God's work, the work
of his grace, his free grace.

Free Grace Mystical Implantation, a work of free grace.
(I say.) There being nothing in us that might incline him to do this for us,
rather then others. In grafting, there may be, and commonly are some reasons
inducing the Planter to make choice of one Branch rather then another. It may
be it is straighter, more liking, better thriven then another. Not so here; In
this spiritual engrafting, God makes choice sometimes, often times of the most
unlikely Branches; it may be the meanest. Such was Israel, as the Lord tells
them, Deuteronomy. 7.7. The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you,
because ye were more in number then any, other people, (for ye are the fewest
of all people:) But because the Lord loved you.] And such are many, most, when
the grace of God first meets with them, [ Ye see your calling, brethren,
(says Paul to his Corinthians,) how that not many wise men after the flesh,
not many mighty, not many noble are called, 1 Cor. 1.26. The meanest Branches;
perhaps the crookedest. Such was Paul himself before his conversion, as crooked
a piece as any in his time; a Blasphemer, a Persecuter, injurious; The chief of
sinners, 1 Timothy 1.13, 15. A strange branch to make a graft on; yet God had
mercy on him, and revealed Christ to him, and in him. And such were many of his
Corinthians. [Such were some of you, (says he to them, 1 Cor. 6.11.) viz.
Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers:] yet engrafted into Christ, [Washen,
sanctified, justified in the name of the Lord Jesus.] Have any of us tasted of
the like grace; ascribe not any thing to our selves. Not to the goodness of our
natures. Of natures, bad is the best: we may wink and choose. The best plant by
nature, no better then a wilding; not to our well using of common grace; but
merely to the free grace of God in Jesus Christ. The grace is Gods, let the
glory be his. I have done with a third Resemblance; Take a fourth.

In Grafting, the Branch being put into the Stock, 4. Resemb. Branch and Stock
by ingrafting are made one.
they two do coalescere, they grow into one body, and become one. And so is it
in this mystical Implantation; Here is a spiritual Coalition betwixt Christ
and the Believer; an union, and that a very near one. Not only like that of the
Ivy and the Oak, which are one by Adhesion, the one cleaving to the other; but
like the Graft and the Stock, which are made one by Insition; both one Body,
one Tree. Such an union is there betwixt Christ and Believers, The Union
betwixt Christ and the Believer, a near union.
that are implanted into him by faith; a very near union: as near as can be
conceived or imagined. So the Apostle describes it, Ephesians. 5.30. We are members
of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones.] Alluding to the way and manner of
God's making the woman at the first, who was made of the man, of the rib taken
out of his side, and so they two were one. Even such a near union is there
betwixt Christ and believers, as is betwixt Husband and wife, [They two shall
be one flesh. This is a great mystery; but I speak concerning Christ and the
Church: ver. 31, 32.] This is a great mystery;] Not the natural corporal
marriage, (as Papists look upon it, who from thence conclude Marriage to be a
Sacrament,) but the spiritual Marriage betwixt Christ and his Church; which is
a Mystery to be apprehended by faith, not comprehended by reason. Elsewhere the
Apostle sets forth this union by the similitude of the Head and Members,
which make up one Body. So do Christ and believers. God gave him to be the head
over all things to the Church, which is his Body, Ephesians. 1.22. He is the Head
of the Body. Colos. 1.18.] Amongst all, no one similitude more lively
expresses it, then this in the Text, of Ingrafting: where the Graft is
incorporated into the stock, so as they become one. Thus are believers
Incorporated into Christ, the one dwelling in the other. [ He that eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him, Joh. 6 56.] as the
Graft dwells in the stock. And so they are made one.

And hence is it that they are both called by one and the same name. Christ and
his Church called by one name.
So you have it, 1 Corinthians 12.12. For as the body is one, and has many
members, Gal. 3.16.
and all the members of that one body being many, are one Body: So also is
Christ.] viz. Christ Mystical. Christ and his Church jointly considered, are
called by the same name: Even as Husband and Wife, or (to hold to the
similitude in hand) the Stock and the Graft are called by the same name.

Only here is an observable difference. Note.
In natural ingrafting the stock takes the name from the Graft (as the wife
does from her Husband.) Isa. 4.1.
But in this spiritual implanting, the Graft takes the name from the Stock.
The Reason is the same in both. The denomination is taken from the more noble
of the two. And hence is it that as the name of the Apple Tree Branch is called
upon the Crab stock; so the name of Christ is called upon the Christian. Here
is the Union betwixt these two.

Applic. The honor put upon Believers.
Which speaks much to the honor of the believer. For a Beggar or mean
personage to be married to a Prince: an Hester Hest. 2.
to an Ahasuerus, what an Honor? What is it then for poor sinful dust and
Ashes to be married to the Prince of the Kings of the Earth? Rev. 1.5.
to be thus united unto Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of God; the Heir of all
things? being thus made one with him, they are also made one with his father.
So says Paul of his Thessalonians, 1 These. 1.1. and 2.1.1. Paul, and Silvanus,
and Timotheus unto the Church of the Thessalonians, which is in God the Father,
and in the Lord Jesus Christ.] The Father and the Son being both one. [ I and
my father are one, Joh. 10.30.] Though not Personally, yet Essentially one;
though two Persons, yet one God; the believer having Union with the one,
through his Midiation he comes to have Union with the other. Having Union with
the Son, he has union with the Father. And from this Union flows a sweet and
blessed Communion. Take that for a 5th Resemblance.

The believer being thus made one with Jesus Christ, from that Union flows a
blessed Communion. Resembl. 5. The Branch has Communion with the stock.
This I take up from the Apostle in that of Romans 11.17. Where speaking of the
engrafting, Incorporating of the Gentiles into the stock of Abraham, he says,
that Being grafted in among, (or in stead of) the true Branches, Romans 11.17.
(...): pro ipsis, Beza. Inter ipsos: Grotius.
they were made partakers with them of the Root and fatness of the Olive Tree.]
Thus is it with all engrafted branches, they are made partakers of the Root and
fatness, (id est, of the Fatness which is in the Root, for there is (as Grotius
observes) an Hendiadio in the phrase; Root and Fatness, for the Fatness of the
Root) of the Tree into which they are engrafted. So says he of the Gentiles;
being ingrafted into the stock and Covenant of Abraham, they are made partakers
of the Root and Fatness of that Olive tree, viz. of the blessing and promises
made unto Abraham. And even so is it in this Mystical Implantation. All true
believers being engrafted into this true and Noble Olive, the Lord Jesus
Christ, they are made partakers of the Root and Fatness thereof, of those
Excellencies which are in Jesus Christ. From that near Union flows a blessed
Communion. Believers have Communion with Christ.
The stock communicates to the graft such sap and juice as it has in it self.
And thus does Jesus Christ communicates unto the Believer what is in himself.

In general, all Spiritual and heavenly blessings. Generally, in all
Spiritual and He^^^^^^ Bl^
So much we may learn from the Apostle, Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual and Heavenly
blessings in heavenly places (or things) in Christ.] Being in Christ they are
blessed with all spiritual blessings in him, and through him. God giving them
unto his Son, and his Son unto them, he gives all things that are in him. [ He
that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not
with him freely give us all things? Romans 8.32.] All things necessary and
convenient.

More particularly, The fatness of this Olive, the Excellencies of Jesus
Christ, Particularly in his Merit. his Spirit.

which here he communicates to believers, may be reduced to two heads: His
Merit, and his Spirit: both these Christ is full of. Full of Merit, and full of
Spirit. And both these he imparts and communicates unto believers. His Merit
unto their Justification, Adoption. His Spirit unto their sanctification. Of
each briefly.

1. The first thing Christ communicates unto the believer is his Merit; And
that 1. unto Justification. 1. Merit. Unto justification.
This Benefit the Gentiles receive from their ingrafting into the stock and
Covenant of Abraham. Thereby it comes to pass that Righteousness is imputed
unto them. So the Apostle lays it down, Romans 4.11. Abraham received the sign
of Circumcision, etc. that he might be the father all them that believe, though
they be not Circumcised; that Righteousness might be imputed to them also.]
This (says Grotius Idem hic figurate indicat Paulus, quod aper^ius dixerat,
cap. 4. ver. 11. Grotius in ^om. 11.17.
) is the fatness of the Olive; which the same Apostle speaks of cap. 11. The
one a covert and figurative, the other a plain expression of the same thing.
And this benefit are all true believers made partakers of; being made one with
Christ, now Christ is made unto them Righteousness. So says this Apostle, 1
Cor. 1.30. [Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who is made unto us of God, Wisdom,
Righteousness.] And how is Christ made Righteousness to the believer? not by
way of Infusion, but Imputation; not by putting a Righteousness into him, but
by putting a Righteousness upon him, even his own Righteousness. By the
imputing his merit, his Satisfaction, his Obedience unto them, through which
they are accepted as righteous unto eternal life. Thus is the Righteousness
of Christ communicated unto all believers: He is to them, The Lord their
Righteousness, Jer. 23.6.

2. The second Benefit issuing from hence, is Adoption. Thus in Ingrafting,
there is a kind of Adoption. Ramum ramus adoptat, 2. Adoption. Venerit Insitio,
fac Ramum Ramus adoptet. Ovid.
(as the Poet elegantly describes Grafting.) The Stock (as it were) adopteth
the Branch that is put into it. For what is Adoption, but the taking of
another child, and bringing it up as a man's own? Thus ingrafting, the Stock
receives the branch of another tree, and nourishes it as its own. And the
like benefit are believers made partakers of by their engrafting into Christ.
Christ being the Son of God by nature, he makes them the Sons of God by grace,
the grace of Adoption, [To as many as received him, he gave power, ((...),
Right, Privilege) to become the Sons of God; even to them that believe on his
Name, John 1.12.] This benefit Christ came to procure and purchase for his
Elect. [When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a
woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, that we
might receive the Adoption of Sons, Gal. 4.5. And this benefit upon their
believing, their receiving of Christ, they are made actual partakers of: Being
thereupon made Heirs of God, and coheirs with Jesus Christ, Romans 8.17. These
benefits believers have from the merit of Christ.

Secondly, As they are made partakers of his Merit, so of his Spirit; 2. Spirit.
[ He that is joined to the Lord, (to Christ) is one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17.] i.
e. like minded with Christ, in as much as he is made partaker of the same
spirit, [ Because ye are Sons, (says the Aposte) God has sent forth the
Spirit of his Son into your hearts, Gal. 4.6.]

And by this means Christ is made unto believers Sanctification. Unto
Sanctification.
So the Apostle goes on in the place forenamed, 1 Cor. 1.30. Who is made unto
us of God Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification.] So he is, viz. by the
communicating of his Spirit unto them; which is a Spirit of Sanctification. So
called by the Apostle, Romans 1.4. where speaking of Christ, he says, He was
declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness,
(or sanctification, (...)) meaning the Divine Nature dwelling in Christ, which
being holy in it self, sanctifies others by the merit, and virtue thereof:
according to that of the Author to the Hebrews, Heb. 2.11. where speaking of
Christ, he says, That both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified
are all one.] Christ and believers are one. And being one with Christ, they are
sanctified through the Merit, Mat. 23.^^, 19.
and Spirit of Christ. Through the Merit of Christ imputed unto them; Luke 1.35.
as the Gold was sanctified by the Temple, and the Gift by the Altar. Through
the Spirit of Christ dwelling and working in them, (after a sort as it did in
Christ in his Conception,) sanctifying and purifying their natures

Of Sanctification, there are two parts. Mortification the one; Vivification Of
Sanctification. Two parts, Mortification. Vivification.
the other; the one a dying unto sin, the other a rising to newness of life;
and of both these Christ is the cause; and that not only the Exemplary Cause,
the Pattern and Sampler of both, Christ the cause of both.
of which (God willing) I shall speak in the Sequel of the Text, which tells us
that believers are ingrafted with Christ in the likeness of his Death and
Resurrection; the one in their Mortification, the other in their Vivification;
but also the Meritorious Cause, having merited and procured these benefits for
them by his Death and Resurrection: And withal, the Efficient Cause, working
both these in them; which he does by the communication of his Spirit in them.
By this Spirit he works the mortification of sin in them, [ If ye through the
spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live, Romans 8.13.] And by the
same spirit he quickens them up to newness of life. This the Apostle calls
the power and virtue of Christ's Resurrection, Phil. 3.10. That I may know him,
and the power of his Resurrection.] (...) viz. that power whereby Christ
himself was raised from the dead; which was the power of his eternal Spirit
dwelling in him. Of this power, the work of this spirit, the Apostle desires a
further experimental knowledge in himself, in raising him up to the life of
grace here, and glory hereafter. And this power, this spirit, all true
believers in their measure, are, and shall be made partakers of; even as the
members of the natural body participate in those animal spirits which are in
the Head. And hereby they shall be enabled, as to mortify sin, so to live unto
God. And thus you see the communion which is betwixt Christ and the Believer,
as betwixt the Stock and the Graft, implanted in it.

Applic. Which is, a ground of everlasting consolation to all those that are
truly baptized into Christ, A ground of everlasting Consolation.
mystically ingrafted into him by faith. Being thus made one with him, now let
them know that all that is Christ's, is, and shall be theirs. The sap that is in
the Stock, is for the use and benefit of the Graft. And thus whatever is in
Jesus Christ, it is for the Benefit and advantage of those that are in him. So
as, All that is in Christ is the Believers.
what is it that they can want? Is it pardon of sin? is it Grace and favor
with God? Lo, here is merit enough for both. He has by his obedience, active
and passive, made an abundant satisfaction to the Justice of God: He has done
and suffered enough to finish the Transgression, and to make an end of, (or
seal up) sins, and to make Reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in
everlasting Righteousness, Dan. 9.24. Here is nothing wanting to the
Justification of a Believer before God.

Nor yet to his Sanctification. As there is a fullness of merit, so there is a
fullness of spirit in Christ; [ It pleased the Father that in him should all
fullness dwell, Col. 1.19.] So it did during his abode here upon earth; [ The
Word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us, full of grace and truth, John 1.14.]
Upon his change of State, he received an addition to that fullness, [ When he
ascended up on high, he received gifts for men, Psalm. 68.18] Gifts which he
might distribute and give unto men, (as the Apostle renders that of the
Psalmist, Ephesians. 4.8. He ascended far above all heavens, that he might fill all
things.] So it follows, ver. 10. [All things,] that is, all his Elect, and
faithful people: all which do, and shall in their measure, receive of that his
fullness; [ Of his fullness we have all received grace for grace, (says Saint
John,) John 1.16. [We all;] all believers, have received grace for grace:]
(...), grace upon grace, (say some) one grace after another, abundance of
grace: or, grace for grace; graces answering to those graces which are in
Christ; as the characters in the wax answer those in the seal; or grace for
grace. The grace of Sanctification, following upon the grace of Justification;
both flowing from the free grace and good will of God in Christ. And this
believers receive from the fullness which is in Christ: which is not only a
repletive, but a diffusive fullness. Plenitudo non vasis, sed fontis: Not like
the fullness of a vessel, which if a drop be taken from it, it suffers a
diminution by it; but of a fountain, which runs over for the benefit of all
that will come unto it. Such a fullness of Spirit, such a fullness of Grace is
there in Jesus Christ; who is in that respect compared to a Fountain, Zach.
13.1. In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David, for
sin and for uncleanness.] That Fountain is Christ himself, whose merit and
spirit (represented by the water and blood, issuing out of his side in his
Passion,) are as streams ever running from a living Spring, sufficient to wash
and cleanse all believing sinners from the guilt, and pollution of sin: Here is
merit enough for their Justification; and here is spirit enough for their
Sanctification. And in both these Believers being united unto Christ, have and
shall have communion with him.

A fourfold Benefit flowing from this Union and Communion.
Out of which General (still to follow the Metaphor) bud forth diverse other
particulars. The Graft being thus put into the Stock, made one with it, and
partaking in the sap and juice that is in it, it now receives from it a
fourfold benefit; viz. Nutrition, Augmentation, Fructification, Sustentation:
Nourishment, Growth, Fruitfulness, Establishment: And the like fourfold
benefit we shall find accrewing unto the Believer, from this his union and
communion with Jesus Christ: Each of which will yield us a several Resemblance.

A first of these Benefits, is Nutrition, 6. Resembl. 1. Benefit, Nutrition.
nourishment. This the Graft receives from the Stock: And this the Believer
receives from Christ. So the Apostle holds it forth (though under a
different Metaphor) Col. 2.19. where comparing Christ to the Head, and the
Church to the Body; he shows how the one receives nourishment from the
other; [Not holding the Head, from which all the Body having nourishment
ministered.] (...). Graeci (...) appellant illum qui omnia ornamenta suppeditat
sacras Choreas agentibus: Abbis ducta Motaphora, (...) dicitur, quicunque aliis
suppeditat res ad quemcunque finem necessarias: Et (...), est hoc facere abunde
and copiose. in Davenant. in Col. 2.19.
The word there used, signifies generally a Supply of all things requisite and
convenient, and that in an abundant manner: Such a supply does the Head make
unto the natural Body; It gives to every part sense, and motion, and
particular abilities, for the discharge of their several offices and
functions; as to the eye to see, to the ear to hear, etc. And such a supply
does Jesus Christ make unto his mystical Body: giving spiritual sense and
motion to every member, with abilities and graces suitable to their several
offices and conditions; furnishing them with whatever is requisite for their
Personal Salvation, and the Churches Edification. In this place the word more
particularly imports a supply of such things as are necessary for the
nourishing of the Body. Est autem (...) accipere ea quae alendo corpori sunt
necessaria: Grotius ad loc.
These the Head supplyeth to the members of the natural body; And these Jesus
Christ supplyeth to the members of the mystical Body; even to all that are in
him. Such a supply the Stock, makes to the ingrafted Branches: And such a
supply Christ yeildeth to all those living spiritual Branches that are
ingrafted into him; ministering to them spiritual Aliment for the nourishing up
of their souls unto eternal life.

To the nourishment of the natural Body, there are but two things requisite,
Christ is perfect nourishment to the Believer.
viz. Meat and Drink: and both these is Christ unto the believer. [My flesh is
meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed, (says he to the Jews) John 6.55.]
Meat indeed, and drink indeed: (...), vere, eminentissime. Truly and really,
(though spiritually and that most eminently. No food so nourishing to the body,
as the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, being eaten and drunk by faith, are unto
the soul. Whence it is that he compares himself to that which is most
alimentall, most nourishing; as to Bread, [I am the Bread of life, John 6.35,]
Bread is the staff of life natural; there being no food that yeildeth more
solid nourishment to the body then that. And thus is Jesus Christ the staff of
life spiritual: nourishing up the soul unto eternal life.

Wherein this Bread excels all other bread. Mannah was excellent bread, Angel's
food; [ Man did eat Angels food, Nourishing the Soul to Eternal life.
(says the Psalmist, speaking of the Mannah in the wilderness,) Ps. 78.25.]
Such food as Angels could eat no better if they used, or needed food; excellent
food: yet they which are of it died. [Your fathers did eat mannah in the
wilderness, and are dead.] (says our Savior to the Jews,) Joh. 6.49. But
(says he, speaking of himself in the next verses) [This is the bread which
came down from heaven; If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever.]
Such is the nourishment which Jesus Christ, this generous and vigorous Head,
and Stock, ministers to all that are united to him, engrafted in him.

What this soul-nourishment How this soul-nourishment is conveyed.
is, and in what way supplied, I might here further show you. I touched upon it
in the last point; Take it in a word. Christ nourishes those which are in him,
by the communication of his spirit unto them. Thus does the Head supply
nourishment unto the members of the body, by communicating unto them of those
spirits which are in it self: And thus does Jesus Christ nourish his members by
a continual supply of his Spirit unto them. This is that (...), which Saint
Paul speaks of Phil. 1.19. where speaking of the malicious designs and
intentions of his adversaries against himself, [I know (says he) that even
this shall turn to my salvation, through the supply of the Spirit of Jesus
Christ.] Thus are meats and drinks turned to nourishment to the body; through a
supply of spirits from the spirituous parts, helping to digest and distribute
them, and extract nourishment from them. And thus are all things made
advantageous to the believer in furthering his salvation, through the continued
supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ: which Spirit furnishes the soul with all
graces requisite and convenient, and by that means maintains the spiritual
life of it, nourishing it up unto eternal life.

Applic. 1. Applic. 1. A Spring of Consolation to Believers.
For Application of this Branch. Here is another spring of consolation unto all
those living branches that are truly ingrafted into this stock; all true
believers that are made one with Jesus Christ; let them know that being in him,
they shall find him a generous, and a vigorous Stock, Christ a generous, and a
vigorous Stock.
full of sap, full of juice, full of virtue, sufficient to keep and maintain
spiritual life in them in the midst of the hardest Winters, or most scorching
Summers, the sharpest Solstices of Tentation, or Persecution that can happen
unto them.

Aye, not only to keep life in them, but to maintain them in a flourishing
condition; like those Trees of the Lord, which are said to be full of sap,
Psalm. 104.16. So run these sweet promises, Psalm. 92.12. The righteous shall
flourish like the Palm Tree, he shall grow like the Cedar in Lebanon.] Palms
and Cedars are Winter Plants, green all the year long. And such are the Trees
in God's Plantation, like those Trees which David speaks of, Psalm. 1.3. Trees
planted by the rivers of waters, which bring forth fruit in their season, and
their leaves wither not.] Living, fruit-bearing, flourishing trees. [Those that
be planted in the House of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God.
They shall bring forth fruit in their age, they shall be fat and flourishing.]
(so the Psalmist there goes on,) Psalm. 92.13, 14.] And whence have they this?
That when other trees wither and die, (so do Hypocrites, who in the day of
Tentation, or Persecution, cast their leaves of an outward profession, losing
what ever show of piety and holiness they once had,) yet these Trees of
Righteousness should not only live, but flourish: Why, thanks to the Root,
the Stock into which they are ingrafted. Thanks unto Jesus Christ, who of his
fullness thus communicates unto them: giving unto them that water of life;
whereof himself speaks, John 4.13. that influence of his grace and Spirit,
which whosoever drinks of, shall never thirst more; (that is, he shall not
need to go seek for any thing out of Jesus Christ; (as the graft seeks for
nothing out of the stock;) for that water which he shall give him, shall be
unto him a well of water springing up unto everlasting life.

Use 2. Use 2. Come unto Jesus Christ for nourishment.
What remains then, but that every of us, who would have our souls thus
nourished, come unto Jesus Christ? Come we unto him, even as the sons of Jacob
came unto their brother Joseph, who nourished them, and theirs with bread
according to their families, Genesis 47.12. So come we unto our Joseph, As
Joseph's Brethrem came unto him.
the Lord Jesus Christ, of whom Joseph, (as in many other, so) in that
particular was a Type. Come we unto him. And that

1. 1. In the sense of our wants.
As they came unto Joseph, in the present sense of our wants, not knowing where
else to find a supply. Come unto Jesus Christ, hungring and thirsting after
him, earnestly desiring to partake of his fullness; [ He fills the hungry
with good things, Luke 1.53.]

2. In obedience to our Fathers Commandment. 2. In obedience to our Fathers
Commandment.
So went they the first and second time to their Joseph, by the direction and
command of their father Jacob, Genesis 42.1, 2. So come we unto our Joseph, in
obedience to the direction and command of our Heavenly Father, [This is his
Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, 1
John 3.23.

3. At Christ's own Invitation. 3. At Christ's own Invitation.
So came they unto Joseph the third time, being by him invited thereunto, Genesis
44. and 45. Thus come we unto our Joseph, the Lord Jesus Christ, whose gracious
Invitation we may read, John 7.37. In the last day, the great day of the Feast,
Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and
drink. This spoke he of the spirit, which they that believe on him should
receive, ver. 39.

4. But come not as they came, with money in our hands: 4. Come not as they,
with money in our hands.
So came they the first and second time; not intending to be beholding, but to
pay for what they had. But thus may not we come to Jesus Christ: Genesis 42.2. and
43.15.
We know how the Proclamation runs, Isai. 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts,
come unto the waters, and he that has no money, come; Buy wine and milk
without money, or without price.] A gracious invitation, wherein Christ
proclaims a free-Mart to all those that feel themselves to stand in need of
true grace, and sound comfort, and desire a supply thereof, let them come unto
him; but come emptie-handed, without money, or moneys worth; bringing nothing
of their own with them: nothing but hungring and thirsting souls. So shall they
be supplied with wine and milk, all things needful to their spiritual
refreshment and nourishment.

5. And thus coming to him, now cast our selves upon him, 5. Cast our selves
upon him.
depend upon him. So did Joseph's brethren at their last coming, now they cast
themselves upon Joseph, depending upon him for provision for them, and theirs.
The like do we; not knowing where else to have our wants supplied; (Master,
John 6.68.
whither shall we go, (says Peter) thou have the words of eternal life:) come
we unto Jesus Christ, and cast our selves upon him, in a confident assurance of
being nourished by him. As David says of temporal food, Psalm. 37.3. Trust in
the Lord, etc: and verily thou shall be fed.] So say I of spiritual; Trust in
the Lord, rest upon Jesus Christ, and verily thou shall be fed. So does the
graft upon the stock, it rests upon it, and depends upon it for nourishment,
which by an attractive virtue, being hungry (as it were) it sucks and draws
from it. And the like do we from Jesus Christ, coming unto him in the sense of
our wants; set faith awork (which is an attractive grace;) thereby as it were,
sucking and drawing this nutritive virtue from him.

6. Give glory and honor unto Jesus Christ.
6. Which being in our measure made partakers of, now give praise, honor, and
glory to Jesus Christ; offering unto him the best that we have. So Jacob
directs his sons at their return into Egypt. In as much as they had received
such special and undeserved favor from the Governor of the Land, to furnish
them with corn without money, he orders them to take the best fruits in the
land in their vessels, and carry down the man a present, a little balm, and a
little honey, etc. Genesis 43.11. The like do we; having tasted of this so
undeserved a favor, this special grace of Jesus Christ, in the communication
of his saving, sanctifying Spirit unto us in any measure, now present him with
such as we have, Praise, Honor, Glory, Service, Obedience.

Bringing forth fru t answerable.
Above all, endeavoring to bring forth fruits answerable to what we have
received. This is the greatest honor that the graft can do to the stock, to
bring forth fruit in it, answerable to that nourishment which it has received
from it: And this is the greatest honor that we can do to Jesus Christ, when
we show forth his virtues, his praises, as Saint Peter has it, 1 Pet. 2.9. And
this do we not only in word, speaking well of the Name of Christ, extolling,
and magnifying his power, his virtue, put forth in and upon us: But also, and
chiefly, in deed, by expressing that power, those virtues in the course of our
lives and conversations; bringing forth fruits in measure worthy of, suitable to
such a Stock. But of this (God willing) more hereafter. Here is the first of
these subordinate benefits, which accrue unto the believer from his communion
with Jesus Christ; being ingrafted into him, he receives nourishment from him.
A second follows, viz. Augmentation.

The Graft being put into the Stock, and receiving nourishment from it, 7.
Resembl. A second Benefit, Augmentation.
now it grows up in it. And the like does the Believer in the Lord Jesus
Christ: being ingrafted into him, and receiving spiritual nourishment from
him, now he grows up in him. Ex iisdem and nutrimur, and crescimus. Nutrition
and Augmentation are both from the same cause. That which plants are nourished
by, that they grow by. Christians receiving nourishment from Christ, they grow
and increase in him. So it follows in that forecited Text of the Apostle,
Col. 2.19. Where speaking of the mystical Body of Christ, the Church, he
says, that having nourishment ministered to it from the Head, it increases
with the increase of God.] Thus does the mystical Body of Christ grow, not
only Extensively, in regard of the daily addition of new members to it; there
being daily added to the Church such as shall be saved: Acts 2.47.
In which respect the Apostle says, that it grows unto an holy Temple,
Ephesians. 2.21. But also Intensively, in regard of the growth of every member.
This is true Augmentation, when it is secundum omnes parts; when every member
of the body, every branch of the tree grows and increases in the several
dimensions thereof. And thus grows the Body of Christ, the Church. Every
member of it grows, increases with the Increase of God; that is, a
spiritual Increase, which is both from God, and to God. From God, as the
principal Efficient Cause of it. Paul planteth, Apollos waters, but God
gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3.6. And it tends to God, to his Glory, as the
ultimate end of it. And besides, for the kind of it, it is a divine Increase;
not in the things of this world, but in the things of God. In all which
respects, it is called the Increase of God.

Whereof all living Branches are made partakers. Christ himself.
And with this Increase do all the true members of this mystical Body, all the
living Branches ingrafted into this Stock, grow and increase. Thus did Christ
himself, (who in respect of his Manhood was a Branch) grow and increase: So it
was foretold that he should do, Isai. 53.2. He shall grow up before him as a
tender plant.] Which is to be understood both of his Person, and Kingdom: Both
which were of small beginnings, but growing. So did Christ in his Person;
according to his humane nature, he grew and increased; and that as in the
outward, so in the inward man: as in stature, so in Grace. So you have it
attested, Luke 2.40. And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled
with wisdom, and the Grace of God was upon him.] and again ver. last. [And
Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and man.] Thus
did he grow; the Graces of the Divinity, breaking forth and showing themselves
by little and little through the lanthorn of the Humanity, according to the
maturity of the faculties thereof. Herein was Christ a Pattern, and sampler to
the Believer; who being in Christ, is in his measure made conformable to him,
growing up in him.

It is one of the properties which the Psalmist gives of the righteous man,
Every righteous person.
Psalm. 92.12. He shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon.] Cedars are growing trees,
every year putting forth a new set of shoots, till they come to their full
perfection. And thus is it (or at least ought to be) with the true Christian.
He grows from one degree and measure of grace to another, until he come unto
a perfect man, Ephesians. 4.13.
to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. In this, like the
morning Sun; That is the Wise man's comparison, Pro. 4.18. The path of the
righteous is as the shining light, (the morning brightness.) that shines more
and more unto the perfect day.] Thus does the light of the morning break forth,
the Sun still climing higher and higher, until it come to its Zenith, the
mid-heavens. And such is the way, the course of the righteous man; he grows
in grace, until he attain to the height of eternal glory.

This is of the nature of true Grace so to do. It is of the nature of true
Grace to grow.
And thence it is compared to Seed, Mark 4.26. So is the Kingdom of God, as if
a man should cast seed into the ground; which springs and grows up night
and day.] And a little after to a Grain of Mustard seed, which being the least
of all seeds (one of the least, or least among those which were then commonly
known in Judea,) yet being sown, it grows up, and becomes greater then all
herbs.] Even so is it with the Kingdom of Jesus Christ: As with his Political
Kingdom, his Church visible, so with his Spiritual Kingdom, the work of Grace
in the hearts of his chosen; being small at the first, it grows and
increases unto great perfection. I shall not give way to inlargements.

Hereby try the truth of our Engrafting into Christ.
Applic. Every of us bring this home to our selves, and hereby try whether we
be truly engrafted into Jesus Christ, or no. If the Graft grow in the stock,
it is a sure evidence of its Insition. Spiritual Augmentation is as clear, and
an evidence of a Mystical Implantation. Growing up in Christ presupposes
Union and Communion with him. A comfortable truth to all those who do find
any such growth in themselves; a growth in Grace, in Knowledge, Faith, Love,
Patience, Humility, in victory over corruptions, in desires and endeavors
after holiness. Let this assure to them their inbeing in Christ. But not so to
others. Dwarfes, and nurlings in Christianity; such as stand at a stay, grow
not at all; such have just cause to suspect themselves that they are not such
as they would be thought to be, and persuade their own hearts that they are. If
we see a graft in the spring time not putting forth, not growing at all, (the
stock being alive) we suspect thereupon, that however it was put into the
stock, yet it did not take, there is no Coalition, no true union betwixt them.
And the like may we say of not growing Christians. Such have just cause to
suspect themselves, that however they are outwardly and visibly ingrafted into
Christ, in respect of a formal profession, yet inwardly they are not so. They
have no true Union, or Communion with him.

But what shall we then think of those who, Apostates to be suspected.
in stead of growing, decay, wither, decline, fall away? In stead of going from
strength to strength, they go from strength to weakness, from zeal to
lukewarmness; from forwardness to remissness, losing their first love, and what
they have wrought. Having begun in the spirit, they end in the flesh. Such
Apostates there are too many to be found. Such as having for a time run well,
are let, turned back, or turned aside, with Demas, embracing the present
world. Casting off, if not the Cloak of profession, yet all Care and Conscience
of close walking with God. Of all others, such have greatest cause to suspect
themselves, that they were never truly engrafted into Christ. Falling stars
were never true. Christians, who having shined as lights in the world, do lose
all their heat and luster, falling away totally from the grace seemingly
received, surely at the best, they were but (...), Meteors, apparences; no true
stars: No true engrafted branches; only tied on to the stock, adhering unto
Christ in an outward profession, out of some by, sinister respect. They were
never rightly closed with, united to him: Neither can they expect to receive
any benefit by him. So much they may learn from those known, terrible Texts,
Heb. 6.6. and 10.26. Where the Apostle speaking of desperate Apostates, such as
having been enlightened (with the knowledge of the Truth) and having tasted of
the heavenly gift (inward peace of Conscience, arising from an apprehenhension
of their reconciliation with God,) and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost
(of the gifts of the Holy Ghost, such as those mentioned cap. 2. ver. 4.) etc.
If they fall away (viz. totally, by an universal Apostacy) It is impossible
(says he) to renew them again to Repentance. [ For such there remains no
more sacrifice for sins, cap. 10.26.

Their condition most desperate.
Hearken you revolters and Backsliders. Of all others, your condition is most
dangerous, most desperare. This your drawing back carries a dreadful presage
with it. [ If any man draw back (says the Lord) my soul shall have no pleasure
in him: verse. 38. of that Chapter.] [No pleasure in him] There is a (...) in
the phrase, less said then intended. Gods soul hates and abhors such an one.
They which so draw back, draw back unto perdition. So it follows v. 39. [We
are not of them which draw back unto perdition.] (...) are (...), Backsliding
children are sons of perdition. Those branches which wither and die in the
stock wherinto they were put, John 15.6.
are thenceforth fit for nothing but the fire.

Use. 2. Let the fear of the Lord our God then be upon every of us, Let us grow
up in Christ.
who have given up our names unto Jesus Christ; and have had his name called
upon us. As we would evidence to our own souls, and to the world, the truth of
our Insition, engrafting into him, and as we would receive any benefit by him,
see that we grow up in him. This Christ expects from all those who give up
their names unto him, that they should grow up in him. [That ye may grow up
into him] says the Apostle Ephesians. 4.15. (...) (says Grotius) put for (...),
Into him, for In him: As Branches grow up in the stock, so Grow we up in
Christ; Growing in Grace,
growing in grace. That is the Exhortation wherewith St. Peter closes up his
later Epistle. [ But grow in grace, 2 Pet. 3.18. Every of us endeavor after
such a growth.

A growth in Grace, in all Grace. In all Grace.
That is the Apostles addition in that place forenamed, Ephesians. 4.15. That ye may
grow up into him in all things.] (...), In all the parts of spiritual life; in
all spiritual graces. Such is true Augmentation (as I told you,) when a thing
grows proportionably in all the dimensions of it. Thus grow the members of
the natural body; and thus grow the Branches of a tree; they grow in height,
and they grow in thickness. See that our growth be such, that we grow in every
grace. Grow in knowledge. It is Paul's prayer for his Colossians, that being
fruitful in every good work, they might increase in knowledge, Col. 1.10. Grow
in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet
3.18.] In knowledge; And that not only Speculative; (which yet is requisite. [
Leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on to perfection,
Heb. 6.1.) but experimental. [That I may know him, and the virtue of his
resurrection, (says the Apostle) Phi. 3.10.] Grow in faith: it is Paul's
gratulation on the behalf of his Thessalonians, that their faith did grow
exceedingly, 2 The. 1.9. This is the Apostles desire, Lord increase our faith.
Lu. 17.5. And let it be the desire of every of us, to grow in faith. In the
Assurance of faith, We desire (says the Apostle) that every one of you do give
all diligence to the full assurance of Hope unto the end, Heb. 6.11.] In the
exercise of faith, in learning to live by faith in all conditions. The just
shall live by faith, Heb. 10.38. The life which I now live in the flesh (says
Paul) I live by the faith of the son of God, Gal. 2.20. Grow in Love. This is
the grace which the Apostle desires that his Thessalonians might specially
grow in, 1 These. 4.10. we beseech you brethren, that ye increase more and more.
viz. in brotherly love. Grow in holiness. [Perfecting holiness in the fear of
God, 2 Cor. 7.1.] Grow in heavenly mindedness. [Seek the things which are
above. Col. 3.1] So grows the plant; and so should the christian grow, upward,
heavenward. [Our conversation is in heaven Phi. 3.20.] Grow in contentation. [I
have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content, Phi. 4.11.] Grow
in a close and conscionable walking with God. [We beseech you brethren, and
exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us how ye ought to
walk, and to please God, so ye would abound more and more, [Thes. 4.1.] And so
in the rest. Adding one Grace to another, To faith virtue, to virtue knowledge,
etc. 2 Pet. 1.4. And one degree of Grace to another. The righteousness of God
is revealed from faith to faith.] Romans 1.17. that is from one degree of Faith
to another.

This is the glory of Christianity, Growth the glory of Christianity, and
Honor of Christ. Grow continually. In this not like Grafts
and the honor of Christ. As it is the glory of the stock when the grafts grow
and thrive in it. Even so is it the glory of Christ, when those that are in
him, do thus grow up in him. Let it be the desire and endeavor of every of us
that we may so do.

And that continually. In this not like unto grafts, which shoot forth much in
the first two or three first years, more then afterward; and when they are
come to their height, stand at a stay. So fares it too often with christians;
At their first conversion and calling they grow exceedingly, but afterward
stand at a stay, if not decline. But thus it should not be. Christians must
have no consistency.
Though trees and men have their consistency, yet so should not christians
have. They should ever be going on from strength to strength, til they come to
appear before God in Zion: Ps. 84.7. Ever growing in grace, until they come to
a state of perfection in glory.

Q. But who is there that thus grows? If none be truly ingrafted into Christ,
but those who thus grow: who is there but has cause to suspect his Condition?

Doubts about Growth cleared from the Metaphor.
Ans. For answer. The Metaphor we have in hand will suggest unto us somewhat
which may give quiet to the soul in this case. Grafts grow, but first it is
insensibly. A man may see that they have grown, but not see them growing. And
secondly, They grow, but not in winter. And such is the Christians growth.

1. Growth may be insensible, yet true.
1. Sometimes it may be an Insensible, and yet a true Growth. The Christian may
grow, though neither others, nor himself perceive it. That he is grown, that
he may know by comparing himself with himself; his present with his former
condition: Though his present growth be insensible.

2. Christians have their winters; wherein it may be they do not grow: But,
2. Again, Christians have their winters. Their winter of Affliction, their
winter of Temptation, their winter of spiritual Desertion. Now in these
winters they may seem in their own apprehension not to grow, but rather to
decline: Nay, in truth, they may so do. I, but,

1. This is a winter to them.
1. This is a winter to them, when God makes them sensible of their estate: A
sad time, wherein the soul goes heavily, not content with their condition, but
drooping under it. Such is the winter to the Graft, a nipping time. And such
are these winters to the Christian.

2. They grow downwards.
2. Though Christians in these times do not grow upwards, yet downwards they
may. So does the Graft in the winter, it grows into the Stock, into which the
sap is gone down. And so grows the Christian in the winter of affliction, and
spiritual desertion. He now grows downwards. Grows, though in no other
grace, yet in Humility: being brought hereby to think more meanly of himself.
And he grows into the Stock; grows more into Christ, in whom, and with
whom, Col. 9.3.
his life is for the present hid.

3. And (3dly) though he do not at present actually grow, 3. They have a
Principle of Germination.
yet he keeps a principle of germination in him, a disposition and
inclination to grow, which upon the return of the Spirit, puts forth it
self. Even as the Graft, though in the winter it does not grow, yet it has a
germinating principle in it, which upon the return of the Sun, and the rising
of the sap, shows forth it self. So is it with the Christian; However upon
the withdrawing of the wonted heat and influence of the Spirit of grace from
the soul, for a time he do not grow, but rather decline, yet there is a
principle of grace in him, a seed (as Saint John calls it, 1 John 3.9.) viz.
that grace of the holy Spirit whereby he was regenerated, which inclines him
to a spiritual germination, and which upon the rising of the Sun of
Righteousness upon the soul, and return of the Spirit, will put forth it self
as formerly. In the mean time, there is in the soul an inclination to such a
growth, and (if it be it self) a constant desire after it.

II. And by this, Christians are to judge of themselves; not by their present
proficiency, but by the reality and constancy of their affections and
endeavors. Thus God judges of them; not according to what they are, 2 Cor.
8.12.
but would be. And thus are Christians to judge of themselves. Desires after
growth, if real and constant, putting forth themselves in answerable
endeavors, may evidence to the soul the truth of grace in the want of better
performances.

3. It may be the Soil is barren.
3. To these I might add, It may be the soil is barren; If so, though the Stock
be good, and the Graft alive, yet it is not to be wondered if it do not grow, or
grow but little. Thus fares it sometimes with Christians, Providence, it may
be, casts them upon a barren soil, (like Paul when he was cast upon the Island
Melita amongst the Barbarians, Acts 28.1, 2.) where they are deprived of the
means of growth, deprived of public Ordinances, deprived of private Society,
and Communion of Saints. On the other hand, they are encompassed with briers
and thorns, with many temptations, and back friends to their spiritual growth.
In this case, if they do not grow as formerly, it is not to be wondered at. But
in the enjoyment of means of growth, being planted by the rivers of waters, now
they grow: Psalm. 92.12.
Being planted in the House of the Lord, now they flourish in the Courts of
their God.

Hindrances of spiritual Growth set forth from the Metaphor.
As for us then, who through the mercy and goodness of God, enjoy means of
growth, see that we grow. Which that we may do, take heed of impediments,
hindrances of growth. Diverse things there are which hinder the growth of a
Graft. I shall instance in some of the most obvious. 1. If it do not stand fast
in the stock. 2. If it be not sound at the pith. 3. If there be suckers to
divert and draw away the nourishment from it. 4. If it be canker-fretted. 5. If
it be overgrown with moss. 6. If it be planted in a dry soil. And the like
impediments there are, which if not looked to, will hinder the Christians
growing up in Christ.

1. If he do not stand fast in the Stock. 1. Not standing fast in the Stock.
Unsetlednesse.
If he be not settled and established in the truth of God; but shaken to and
fro. This will marvellously hinder a Christians growth. So much the Apostle
insinuates, Ephesians. 4.14, 15. where, putting believers upon growing up in
Christ, he first gives them this Caveat, That henceforth ye be no more
children, tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine, by the slight of men,
etc.] Unsettled, unstable Christians, who are ready to relinquish the old
received truths of God, and to embrace every new doctrine that is held forth
unto them under any specious and plausible pretext, they will never grow up in
Christ. And therefore that we may grow up in the faith, be we established in
it. So the same Apostle exhorts his Colossians, Col. 2.6, 7. As ye have
received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him: Rooted and built up in him,
and stablished in the faith, as ye have been taught, abounding therein.] If the
Graft stand not fast in the Stock, it will never grow.

2. Nor yet (in the 2d place) if it be not sound at the pith. Possibly it may
seem to spring for a time, 2. Not sound at the pith. Insincerity.
but it will never hold. No more will the unsound Christian that wants inward
sincerity. He may make some show for a time, but he will never grow up to
maturity. So much the Apostle insinuates Ep. 4.15. where putting Christians
upon growing up in Christ, he bids them first [ Truth it in Love. So the
Original has it. (...); Being sincere in Love, ye may grow up in him.] Where
there is not sincerity of Affection to God, to Christ, to his Saints, to his
Truth, there will never be growing up in Christ. And therefore amongst other
things which Saint Peter wills Christians to lay aside, that they may grow,
he reckons up Hypocrisy, and Guile, 1 Pet. 2.1. Grafts rotten, or not sound
at the pith, will never grow.

3. Suckers drawing away the nourishment. Inordinate Lusts.
3. Nor yet (in the 3d place) if there be Suckers to divert and draw away the
nourishment from them. And such are all sinful and inordinate lusts; whatever
it is that the soul is inordinatly affected with, or carried toward, be it
profit, or pleasure, or honor, or the like; this will hinder the growth of
Grace. And therefore that we may grow up heavenward, see that we mortify our
members which are upon Earth, Col. 3.1, 2, 5. That we may run with patience the
race which is set before us, lay we aside every weight, and the sin which
hangs so fast on, Heb. 12.1. That we may perfect Holiness in the fear of
God, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor.
7.1.

4. Canker-fret.
4. A fourth Impediment to the growing of the Graft, is the Canker-fret. And
such is Malice and Envy to the Christian. Malice and Envy.
And therefore (as the Apostle directs, 1 Pet. 2.1.) to be laid aside by those
who would grow in grace. Where these lodge in the soul, they will be like the
Canker-worm to the plant, which hinders the growth thereof.

5. And so (in the fifth place) will Moss overgrowing it. And such is carnal
security, 5. Moss overgrown: Carnal Security.
and spirtuall slothfulness unto the Christian. Security, when Christians are
overgrowne (as it were) with a good opinion of themselves and their own
estates; this will keep them from growing in Grace. So it did the church of
Laodicea. She said she was rich, and increased in goods, etc. and that it was
which kept her so poor, Rev. 3. Whilst the five foolish virgins slept, they
looked not out for oil for their lamps, Matthew 25. Nothing more banefull to
spiritual growth then this.

And slothfulness the like. Spiritual Slothfulness.
This we see is a moth, a worm to a man's temporal estate. [ A slothful
person (says Solomon) is brother to a great Waster] Pro. 18.9. And so is it to
a man's spiritual estate; when men are (as it were) settled upon their lees,
living at ease, loath to pull their hands out of their bosoms, to put forth
themselves in duties and endeavors. A slothful person is like a tree
overgrown with Moss, which will never thrive: and therefore, amongst other
Impediments, take we heed of this. So the Apostle gives the Caveat, Hebr.
6.12: Having in the verse foregoing exhorted Christians to show all diligence
to the full assurance of Hope unto the end, he adds, That ye be not slothful.]

6. A barren soil. Without, or Under dead Ordinances.
6. The last impediment is a barren soil. This I touched upon before. If the
soil be dry and barren, there is no hope the plantation should prosper. No
more is there that Christians should grow and thrive in their spiritual estate,
living in a barren soil. Living (I mean) without Ordinances, or under flat and
dead Ordinances; or living in a neglect of Ordinances, where there are no means
for spiritual growth, or as good as none. Where Christians, merely for
temporal accomodations, and advantages, are content to live in Meshek, Psalm.
120.5.
and have their habitations in the tents of Kedar, in places where they cannot
enjoy God in his public ordinances, or else fancying to themselves a state of
perfection, shall lay aside Ordinances, looking upon them (as some at this day
call them) as flat and low dispensations, Laying aside Ordinances.
pretending to live above them by an immediate Communion with Jesus Christ;
alas, in so doing they consult evil to their own souls. As soon may a graft
prosper in a dry, barren soil, where it has no water, as for a Christian in
an ordinary way to grow in Grace without Ordinances. No, they that are planted
in the house of the Lord, Psalm. 29.12.
if they will flourish, it must be in the Courts of their God; that is, under
public Ordinances. Being engrafted by Ordinances, they must grow up under
Ordinances.

That we may do so, That we may grow, be conscionable in the use of all
Ordinances.
content not our selves with the bare enjoyment of them, but make use of them.
Conscionably attending upon the Word in the public Ministry thereof, As new
born Babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that we may grow thereby, 1
Pet. 2.1. To this join the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, an Ordinance (as I
said) instituted by Christ, as to confirm unto the Christian his union and
communion with Jesus Christ, so to further his growing up in him. To these add
Prayer, Meditation, Communion of Saints.

Above all, Still seeking a nearer Union with Jesus Christ.
seeking still after a nearer union with Jesus Christ. I conceive it is not
without an Emphasis that the Apostle in the forecited place, Ephesians. 4.15.
calls the Christians growth in grace, a growing up into Christ. (...), not
only a growing up in him, but into him. Intimating, that they who would grow up
in Christ, must grow more and more into him. So does the Graft, That it may
grow upwards, it grows downwards, it grows into the Stock. And labor we to
do the like. That we may grow in grace, labor to grow into Christ daily: going
more and more out of our selves, in the renouncing of our selves, our own
righteousness, worthiness, abilities, graces: (viz. in respect of affiance,
confidence in them;) grow into Christ, making him our all in all; fetching rom
him that nourishment, whereby we may grow up unto eternal life. Thus have I
done with a seventh Resemblance, wherein I have insisted far beyond what I
purposed when I took it up, the sweetness of the Subject having drawn forth my
Meditations beyond their intended staple. I shall be more brief in those two
other which remain.

8. Resemb. A third Benefit, Fructification. Fructification a Benefit.
A third Benefit which flows unto the believer from his union and communion
with Jesus Christ, is Fructification, Fruitfulness. I call it a Benefit, and
so it is; There being nothing more beneficial unto the believer then this.
Herein these Trees of Righteousness differ from other trees: Other trees, if
they bear fruit, all the benefit is the Owners: Not so here; God is no gainer
by the fruits of these Trees of Righteousness. Can a man be profitable unto
God, (says Eliphaz in Job, chap. 22.2, 3.) as he that is wise may be
profitable for himself? Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art
righteous? or is it gain to him that thou make thy way perfect?] If thou be
righteous (says Elihu, chap. 35.7.) what give thou him, or what receives he
of thine hand?] No, My goodness extends not unto thee, (says David, Psalm.
16.2.) The chief profit and benefit of what duty and service a Christian does
to his God, is his own. If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self,
(says Solomon to his son) Prove. 9.12.] If he would hearken to his fathers
instruction, the good, the benefit should be his own. In this sense Christians
bringing forth fruit unto God, bring forth fruit unto themselves. The Benefit
is their own.

And this Benefit are all they made partakers of who are engrafted into Christ.
Of which all believers, being ingrafted into Christ, are made partakers.
The Graft being put into the Stock, and growing up in it, it brings forth
fruit in it. So does the believer in Christ. So our Savior himself,
prosecuting this similitude, gives us the Resemblance, John 15.5. He that
abides in me, and I in him, he brings forth much fruit.]

Object. But what, Objection answered.
does every Branch that is engrafted in this Stock so? what say we then to the
second verse of that Chapter? where our Savior says, that Every branch in me
which bareth not fruit, shall be taken away.] So that it seems there may be
some branches belonging to this Stock, which yet remain barren, not
fruit-bearing.

Ans. A twofold Implantation,
To that it is easily answered by distinguishing. There is a twofold
Implantation, a twofold engrafting into Christ. Outward, Inward.
The one Exterior, and outward; the other interior, and inward. The former is,
when men cleave unto Christ only in an outward profession, like branches tied
on to the stock, and so seem to be engrafted into him; seem so, both to
themselves, and others; but are not so in truth. The later is, a Real
Insition; when men are truly incorporated into Christ, by the work of the
Spirit through faith. Now as for the former of these, if they be barren and
fruitless, it is not to be wondered at; they being but dead branches, having no
true union and communion with the Stock. But so are not the other. Those that
are truly engrafted into Christ, none of them but are in their measure
fruitful.

It is that which David says of the righteous man, Psalm. 8.8.14. Isai. 5.2.
John 15.1, 2. Psalm. 128.3. Isai. 32.12.
Psalm. 1.3. He shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that
brings forth fruit.] They which are planted in the House of the Lord, they
shall bring forth fruit. Psalm. 92.13, 14.] Hence is it that God's people are so
often compared unto that Tree, whose Epethite is, The fruitful Vine.

Quest. But what are these fruits which these engrafted Branches bring forth?

Gospel fruits, good works.
Ans. I answer, The fruits of good works. So the Apostle explaineth it, Col.
1.10. Being fruitful in every good work.] These are the fruits of these Trees
of Righteousness; even fruits of Holiness and Righteousness. [Ye have your
fruit unto holiness,] Romans 6.22. [Being filled with the fruits of
Righteousness,] Phil. 1.11. These are the fruits which grow upon these
engrafted branches. Inward graces [The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance:] (as the
Apostle reckons them up, Gal. 5.22.) showing forth themselves in outward
operations, and exercises of the duties of Piety toward God, Justice, Charity,
Mercy toward men: Tit. 2.12. Not unfitly called Fruits, being
in walking righteously, soberly, godly. These are Gospel-fruits; and not
unfitly so called. Fruits, being

1. Delectable. So are fruits unto man: delectable to the eye, to the palate.
1. Delectable Genesis 3.6.
And so are good works unto God: Fruits of holiness and righteousness,
brought forth by a Tree of righteousness; good works performed by a justified
person, they are grateful, they are acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet.
2.5. With such sacrifice God is well pleased, Heb. 13.16. And

2. Profitable. So are good fruits, 2. Profitable.
and so are good works: As delectable to God, so profitable to man. Godliness
is profitable for all things, 1 Timothy 4.8. (...), Nusquam non, and nunquam non
utilis. Grotius ad loc.
Profitable at all times, in all places, in all occasions. The tree brings
forth fruit upwards, but it is for the benefit of those which are below. A
Christian brings forth fruit unto God, Romans 7.4.
but the comfort and benefit thereof extends to himself, and others. My
goodness extends not unto thee, but unto the Saints which are upon earth,
Psalm. 16.2.

3. Again, 3. Giving evidence to the Tree.
Fruits give evidence to the Tree which bears them; showing it to be a living
tree, and of what kind it is; The tree is known by its fruits, Mat. 12.33. And
of such use are good works to the Christian: They are evidences discovering a
man to himself, and others; showing him to be a living tree, and a good tree,
a Tree of Righteousness, a branch of that generous Vine, one truly engrafted
into Jesus Christ. Such fruits do all these engrafted branches bring forth.

This Benefit Believers have from their engrafting into Christ.
And this benefit they have from their engrafting into Christ. Fructification is
a consequent of Insition. That Christians are thus fruitful, it flows from
that communion which they have with Jesus Christ. Two things there are, (as I
showed you) wherein the Christian has communion with Christ: viz. in his
Merit, and Spirit. His Merit unto Justification; his Spirit unto
Sanctification. And from hence is it they bring forth such fruits, fruits
acceptable to God.

1. Through his Merit.
1. This they have from the Merit of Christ. Thereby their persons are
justified, and themselves made good trees: which they must be, before their
fruits can be good: Make the tree good, and his fruit good, Mat. 12.33. Hereby
their persons come to be accepted, and consequently their Works. God had a
respect unto Abel, and to his offering, Genesis 4.8. First, the Person, then the
Sacrifice. Works performed by an unjustified person, whatever they be
materially in themselves, yet formally they cannot be good; so good as to find
acceptance with God.

2. By his Spirit,
2. And (secondly) This they have from the Spirit of Christ. This it is that
works all these works in, and for the believer; who is but (...), a
reasonable Instrument, acted by the Spirit of God, in supernatural
performances. So as these fruits are more properly the fruits of the Spirit,
then of the Believer: Col. 5.22.
The fruits of the Spirit are love, and peace, etc.] This benefit the Graft
receives from the Stock communicating sap, and moisture unto it. And this
benefit does the believer receive from Jesus Christ, communicating his Spirit
unto him.

Applic. By this try our mystical Implantation.
By this then (to make some Application of this Resemblance,) try we our
selves, whether we be truly engrafted into Jesus Christ, or no. Do we bring
forth fruit, and such fruit? If not; feed not our selves with a fancy of Faith,
or Justification by faith. Saint James has put it beyond all controversy, in
his second Chapter of his Epistle, were he tells us, ver. 17. That Faith, if it
have not works, is dead, being alone.] Again, Faith without works, Dead.
ver. 26. As the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is
dead also.] Dead, viz. as to Justification, and Salvation. As Abraham and
Sarah's bodies were said to be dead, in that they were unapt for generation,
Romans 4.19. Even so faith without works is said to be dead, in as much as it is
unapt and unable to produce those desired and intended effects, to justify, to
save. True it is, works are not properly a Cause of Justification, as faith is
commonly said to be, ( viz. an isntrumental cause:) yet they are a necessary
concomitant of that faith which justifies; requisite qualifications in the
person justified. That trite distinction of fides sola, and solitaria, clears
this point well: Though faith alone justify, yet not that faith which is
alone. If faith justify the person, it is works that must justify that faith.
[Shew me thy faith without works, (says Saint James,) And I will show thee my
faith by my works, ver. 18. The former impossible; the later infallible. An
Evangelicall Obedience, that is, an uniform, impartial, universal obedience,
(such in desire and endeavor, though not in performance,) is an undoubted
evidence of a true saving justifying faith. Such an one may conclude to the
comfort of his own soul, that he is truly engrafted into Christ.

Barren Christians, no true ingrafted Branches.
But so cannot others: Barren Christians, such as have nothing to speak for
them, but the leaves of an outward profession, (if that;) only the Name of
Christ called upon them; In the mean time expressing nothing of the power and
life of Christ, in the course of their lives and conversations: All they can
say for themselves is no more then the proud Pharisee's boast, Luke 18.11.
They are not as others are; They are free from gross; open, and scandalous
evils; no Drunkards, no Sweaters, no Adulterers; (I wish all that hear me this
day could but say so much,) Negative Christians: But as for positive acts of
Holiness and Righteousness, works of Piety, Charity, Mercy, they have no
acquaintance with them: Let not such deceive themselves; certainly they are yet
strangers unto this Mystical Implantation, they have no part nor portion in
this blessed Privilege.

Much less such as are fruitful in evil works.
But what then shall we say to those who are fruitful in evil works? whose
fruit tends all to sin, (as Solomon speaks, Pro. 10.16.) Fruitful in the
works of the flesh, such as those reckoned up by the Apostle in that black
list, Gal. 5.19. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these,
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft,
Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings,
Murder, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like.] Where these, any of these
reigning evils are to be found, there shall need no other evidence to discover
what Stock a man belongs to; viz. the Old Stock, the Old Adam, the Stock of
corrupted nature. Were a man engrafted into Jesus Christ, that grace of God
which has appeared to him, would teach him another lesson, and effectually
teach it him: viz. to deny ungodliness, and worldy lusts, Tit. 2.12.
and to live soberly, and righteously, and godly, in this present world. Every
of us put our selves upon the trial, and pass sentence according to evidence.

Use By way of Exhortation, Evidence our ingrafting into Christ by our
fruitfulness.
(in the second place,) As many of us as persuade our selves of an interest in
this privilege; that we are thus planted together with Christ, see that we
evidence it to our own souls, and to the world, by bringing forth fruits worthy
of such a Stock. So the Apostle presses it upon his Colossians, Col. 1.10.
That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing:] (...), worthy of the
Lord; that is, so as becomes those who have so near a relation to Jesus
Christ; those who have union and communion with him. All of us who lay claim to
this Privilege, this Dignity, let us so walk. And how shall we do it? why,
Being fruitful in every good work.] So it follows.

1. Being fruitful in good works: which
1. Being fruitful in good works. 1. This is the end of this mystical
Insition: viz. Fructification. Wherefore does the Planter put Grafts into a
Stock? 1. Is God's end in our Ingrafting.
but for Fructification, Multiplication, Melioration; that they may bring forth
fruit, and much fruit, and good fruit: This is God's end in engrafting men into
this noble Stock, the Lord Jesus, that they might bring forth such fruit in
him. [ Ye are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, 2. This
he expects, and will require.
Ephesians. 2.10. 2. This being God's end, he expects it, and will require it. The
Husbandman having planted his Vine in a fruitful hill, he looked that it
should bring forth grapes, Isai. 5.2. And the Owner in the Gospel, having let
out his vineyard, he sends his servants to demand the fruits thereof, Luke
20.10. When our Savior came to the fig tree, he came looking for fruit, Mat.
21.19. And John the Baptist preaching to the Pharisees and Sadduces, he calls
upon them to bring forth fruits meet for repentance, Mat. 3.8. 3. To this end
it is that God exercises such long-suffering and patience toward the sons of
men, 3. To this end he exercises patience.
that they might have time to bring forth fruit. The Husbandman, Luke 13.6.
came year after year, 4. Barren trees shall be cut down.
three years succesively, to his fig tree, still waiting for fruit. 4. Which
not finding, he orders it to be cut down: [ Cut it down, why cumbreth it the
ground? ver. 7.] Barren Christians are but a cumber to the grond that bears
them, a burden to the earth they tread upon. And still remaining unfruitful,
and that under the means of fruitfulness, they have just cause to look for the
Axe: [Now is the axe laid to the root of the trees: Every tree which brings
not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down, Mat. 3.10.] Every branch in me which
bears not fruit, my Father takes away, John 15.2.] 5. Whereas fruit-bearing
Grafts, 5. Fruit-bearing Grafts shall want nothing to make them more fruitful.
being an honor both to the Planter, and the Stock, they shall be pruned, they
shall be manured, they shall want nothing to make them more fruitful. So shall
it be with fruit-bearing Christians; They being an honor to their God: [Herein
is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, John 15.8.] And an honor unto
Christ their Head, their Root, their Stock: they shall want nothing to make
them more fruitful. [ Every branch that bears fruit, my Father purges it,
that it may bring forth, more fruit, John 15.2.] And 6. Having their fruit unto
holiness here, 6. They shall have their fruit unto happiness.
they shall have their fruit unto happiness hereafter: [ Now being mde free
from sin, and become servants unto God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and
the end everlasting life, Romans 6.22.] Let these motive be to us effectual
persuasions to take out this lesson. Be we fruitful in good works.

2. And (secondly,) In every good work: 2. In every good work.
Other Trees bare but one kind of fruit; these Trees of Righteousness must
bear many. That Tree of life in the midst of the Paradise of God, spoken of,
Revel. 22.1, 2. is said to bear twelve manner of fruits. Such should these
Trees of Righteousness be, fruitful in all kinds of good works: not only in
works of Piety toward God, but also of Charity, and Mercy, toward men.

The Exhortation pressed upon young and old: Be fruitful.
And this let me in the Name of God press upon every soul here present, both
young and old. Let not the one say, it is too soon, The time of fruit is not
yet. It is noted in the Gospel by Saint Mark, (and it is worth our noting,)
that when Christ came to the fig tree, it is said, [The time of figs was not
yet:] yet he cursed it, because it had deceived him with a flourishing show,
making show of bearing fruit sooner then ordinary, but yet was barren.
Christians! none of us know how soon Christ may come unto us in the way of
general, or particular Judgment, looking for fruit. Let none therefore say,
The time of fruit is not yet: nor let any say, It is past. The Trees of God's
planting, Trees of Righteousness, are never superannated, never past bearing,
so long as they stand: [ They that are planted in the House of the Lord, etc:
they shall bring forth fruit in their age, Psalm. 92.12, 13] Be we fruitful
then, and at all times fruitful: Like that Tree in the Revelation, which
brings forth fruit every month: Or like the Lemmon, and some other trees of
like nature, which bear fruit all the year long.

1. Now that we may do so, Direction 1. Make sure our Insition into Christ.
Let our first work be (let me press that again, which can never be pressed
too much) to make sure our Insition, that we are engrafted into Christ, united
to him by faith: Till this be done, it is but a preposterous course to think of
doing any other good work. So much our Savior insinuates in that answer which
he returned to some of the Jews, John 6.28, 29. when they demanded of him, What
shall we do, that we might work the works of God? Why, (says he,) This is the
work of God, that ye believe on him whom he has sent.] This is that first
work, and the great work; without which it is in vain to go about any other
work. In as much as, Without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6.
The Graft may as soon bear fruit out of the Stock; as the Christian out of
Christ: Ye are created in Christ Jesus unto good works, (says the Apostle,)
Ephesians. 2.10. A Virgin must be married before she can bring forth children to
the joy of her Parents. So must Christians be first married unto Christ before
they can bring forth fruits unto God, Romans 7.4.

2. Being in Christ, abide in him: Direction 2. Abide in him.
[ Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self,
except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me, John 15.4.
Abide in Christ, and that not only (according to Grotius his Socinian Gloss;
H. Grotius ad loc.
) Obediendi, Imitandique proposito, by a constant purpose of obeying and
imitating him. This is a truth, but not the whole truth: Abide in him, scil.
per fidem; by persevering in a true and lively faith; Piscator. Diodat. ad loc.
continually resting upon him for whatever it is we stand in need of. So does
the Branch abide in the Stock; and so abide we in Jesus Christ.

3. Direction. Imitate him.
3. And thus abiding in him, now imitate him. Now propound him as a pattern for
our Imitation: [ He that says, he abides in him, (says Saint John,) ought
himself also so to walk, even as he walked, 1 John 2.6.] In this the
Spiritual engrafting (as I once before told you) differs from the natural.
There the Graft brings forth fruit after its own kind. Not so here; Here the
Graft must follow the genius of the Stock. The Christian must show forth the
virtues of Christ, 1 Pet. 2.9. bringing forth such fruit as Christ himself
brought forth. What Saint Peter says of the passive Obedience of Christ, 1
Pet. 2.21. [He suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that we should follow
his steps;] may as truly be said of his Active. He was made under the Law,
yiedling obedience to it for our sakes, that we should follow his steps. Thus
having washed his Disciples feet, John 13.13, 15. he tells them, I have given
you an Example, that ye should do as I have done unto you:] viz. Be ready to
serve one another in love. Thus propound we Jesus Christ as a Pattern for our
Imitation.

4. And thus abiding in him, 4. Direction Bring forth fruit in him.
imitating him; now, bring forth fruit in him: [Every Branch that bears not
fruit in me, my Father takes away. (...). John 15.2.
] So the former Translation (not without warrant from the Original) reads
that 2d verse of the 15th of John: It is not enough for a man to be in Christ,
and to bear fruit; but he must bear fruit [in him:] fetching power and virtue
from him; acting what he does in his strength; even as the Graft bears fruit
in the Stock, by a power derived from the Stock.

5. And this fruit bring we forth unto God. 5. Direction. Bring forth fruit
unto God.
To this end it is that we are married unto Christ, (as the Apostle tells us,)
viz. That we should bring forth fruit unto God, Romans 7.4.] Vunto God; with an
eye 1. To his Command, making that both the Spring and Rule of our obedience.
2. To his Glory, making that our end, our ultimate and last end. 3. To his
Reward; expecting from him the fruit of our fruit; that (...), (as the Apostle
phraseth it, Heb. 11.26.) that Recompense of Reward, that Crown of Glory,
wherewith God will crown this his own grace, in those who so glorify him, by
rendering to every one, (though not propter, yet secundum; though not for, yet)
according to his deeds; [To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek
for glory, honor, and immortality, eternal life, Romans 2.6, 7. Those who have
their fruit unto Holiness here, their end shall be everlasting life, Rom 6.22.
And thus have I done with this third Benefit. The fourth is yet behind, which I
shall but lightly touch upon, having occasionally glanced at it before. And
that is,

9. Resemb. A fourth Benefit. Sustentation.
4. Sustentation. This benefit the Graft receives from the Stock; being weak
and tender of it self, it is supported, and upheld by it. The like benefit
does the Christian receive from Christ; being engrafted into him, he receives
sustentation, supportation from him. This is that which the Apostle tells the
Gentiles, Romans 11.18. They being engrafted into the Stock of Abraham; Now,
(says he,) thou bear not the root, but the root thee.] So it did, in as
much as their salvation depended upon the Covenant of God, made with Abraham.
And thus does Jesus Christ bear all those who are truly engrafted into him: In
which respects, he is called sometimes by the name of a Foundation: [Other
Foundation can no man lay, (says Paul) then that is laid, which is Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11.] Christ a Foundation, Christ a Foundation, How. Christi
historia, pracepta and promissa. Grotius ad loc.
and that not only in respect of his Doctrine, Precepts, Promises, (as Grotius
carries it) but most properly in respect of his Person and Office. In the
former way, the Apostles are called a Foundation: [Ye are built upon the
Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20.] viz. In respect of their
Doctrine. So they were a secondary and subordinate Foundation, laying the Elect
upon Christ, upon whom also themselves were laid. Christ is a Foundation in the
later way; viz. In respect of his Person and Office: the Foundation of
foundations, bearing up his Church, and every member of it; as the Foundation
does the stones and timbers which are laid upon it; Or, (to hold to the
Metaphor in the Text,) As the Stock supporteth and bears up the Graft; which
it does against all wind and weather.

Applic. Consolation to all that are in Christ.
A ground of strong consolation to all that are in Christ Jesus, thus truly
engrafted into him: being thus made one with him, they shall be supported by
him, so as nothing shall be able to separate them from him, or from the love of
God in him. They shall be supported by him.
So does the Stock support the Graft. The Graft being put into it, and
incorporated in it, embodied with it, now it is safe in the Stock: So as
however the leaves may be stripped off and the top broken off, yet there is no
severing it from the Stock. The union betwixt Christ and the believer
inseparable.
Such is the inseparable union betwixt Christ and the believer, even like that
personal union, betwixt the two natures in Christ himself: The Humanity being
once engrafted into the Stock of the Divinity, thenceforth they were no more to
be severed. Death separated the soul from the body, but neither from the
Godhead. Even such is the mystical union betwixt Christ and the believer:
being once ingrafted, incorporated into Christ, now he stands sure. [ By him
we have access by faith into this grace, wherein we stand, (says the
Apostle,) Romans 5.2.] However he may suffer in the outward man, be stripped of
his leaves, of his estate; deprived of outward accommodations and comforts; and
in the end be cut down by death: And suffer in the inward man by the buffetings
of Satan: yet nothing shall be able to sever him from the Stock, to separate
him from Christ. Paul's wishing himself separated from Christ, for his
country men the Jews sake, Romans 9.3. does not imply a possibility in the
thing, but only imports the ardency of his affection for the glory of God, and
the salvation of his brethren: for which, (had it been possible) he could have
been contended to have been so separated. But that cannot be; Once in Christ,
and ever in Christ. No separating of the believer and him. Who shall separate
us from the love of Christ? Romans 8.35, 36.
(says the Apostle, Romans 8.35.) Shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? These, all these,
God's Saints are here subject to, [As it is written, For thy sake we are killed
all the day long.] But it is not any of them, all of them, that can sever the
believer from Christ. Nay, In all these we are more then conquerours, (i. e.
triumphant Conquerours) through him that loved us; through Christ. Nothing
shall separate the believer from Christ, or from the love of God in Christ. So
it follows, Ver. 38, 39.
I am persuaded that neither life, nor death, etc. shall be able to separate us
from the love of God in Jesus Christ. The Stability of a regenerate man's
estate.


Such is the Stability of a regenerate man's estate, that being in Christ, he
may now bid defiance to whatever it is that threatens his salvation. As the
Graft being grown into the Stock, and made one with it, it stands firm
against all storms and tempests. Being committed unto the Stock, it is now in
safe custody. So are they who have by faith committed their souls unto Jesus
Christ, receiving him as their Savior and Lord, they are now in his custody.
Even as the Stock takes the Graft into custody, apprehending, and holding it
fast: so does Christ the believer. The believer apprehending, and applying
Christ, is apprehended of him: As Paul says of himself, Phil. 3.12. I follow
after, if that I may apprehend that for which I am also apprehended of Christ
Jesus.] And this custody is a safe custody. Christ will keep what is committed
to him: [ Of all that thou have given me, I have lost none, but the son of
perdition, Judas never given to Christ, as the other Apostles were.
(says he to his Father) John 17.12. Judas, the son of perdition, so called,
(I will not say with Grotius, Non ex ulla Dei destinatione, sed ex merito: Not
at all by God's Predestination, but his own merit, (so indeed the Arminian
would have it:) but more soundly with Beza and others,) Et destinatione, and
merito: both by destination and merit; one ordain to perdition, to just
condemnation for his malicious wickedness: He miscarried indeed, being never
given unto Christ, as the rest were. As for the rest, he kept them, he lost
none of them. No more will he any of those who are given unto him actually to
believe on him. [ This is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all
which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at
the last day, John 6.39.] Raise it up, and that unto life, eternal life. This
is the Father's will; and this the Son will faithfully perform. So it
follows, [ This is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees
the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting life; and him will I raise
up at the last day, ver. 36.] Thus does the Stock (as it were) raise up the
Graft in the Spring time, Christ raises up the believer, as the Stock the
Graft.
by sending up into it that sap, which during the winter was hid in it self,
being gone down into the Root. And thus will Jesus Christ raise up all that are
in him. Having raised them up unto a spiritual life here, he will raise them
up to an everlasting life hereafter: which he will do by communicating unto
them that virtue of his Resurrection, (as Paul calls it, Phil. 3.10.) that
Spirit and that Power, whereby himself was raised from the dead.

Commit our souls unto Jesus Christ.
Use 2. What remains then, but that all of us commit our souls unto Jesus
Christ, by faith rolling and casting them upon him, in a full assurance of
being safely kept by him. [ I know whom I have believed (says Paul,) and I am
persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against
that day, 2 Timothy 1.12.] He is able to do it, and he will do it. Faithful is he
who has promised, Heb. 10.23. Faithful is he who has called you, who also
will do it, 1 These. 5.24. What will he do? Preserve your spirit, soul and body
blameless unto his coming.] Were our souls in our own custody, how apt would
they be to miscarry? An experiment whereof we have in our first Parents. But
being thus committed unto Jesus Christ, they shall now be kept by the power of
God, through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. And thus have I done also with
this fourth and last Benefit, which makes up a ninth Resemblance.

There is yet one more behind, 10. Resemb.
and that is that which the Apostle himself here instanceth in; viz. Communion
in life and death.
that Communion which is betwixt Christ and the believer in life, and death. So
is it betwixt the Graft and the Stock: being planted together, they live and
die together. And so is it betwixt Christ and the believer; The believer being
engrafted into him, he has communion with him, and is made conformable to him;
first in his death, then in his life. So it follows in the Text, [ For if we
have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in
the likeness of his Resurrection. Upon these two I shall insist severally;
beginning with the former, wherein we have the second Doctrinall Proposition,
which I took notice of in the Text.

Believer are planted together with Christ in the similitude of his death.
Propos. 2.
] In the Similitude; So the Original has it, (...), Believers planted with
Christ in the likeness of his death.
which is to be construed here not Datively, as the Vulgar Latin reads it,
Beza Gr. Annot.
Similitudini; To the likeness: But Ablatively, Similitudine, or
Conformatione; In the likeness, or conformablenesse of his death.

The phrase explained.
Quest. But what is here meant by this phrase? Or how are Christians siad to be
thus engrafted in the likeness of the death of Christ?

Ans. In way of answer, I might here show you the different opinions of
Expositors, whom I find not agreed about it.

1. Cyrill apprehends that Christians are said to be engrafted in the
Similitude of Christ's death; because (says he) Christ's death was rather a
similitude, a likeness of a death, then a true death: In as much as he was so
quickly raised up from the grace, as if he had been rather asleep, then dead.
But this construction Beza looks upon not only as forced, Beza Gr. Annot. in
Text.
and making nothing to the Apostles purpose in the Text, but also dangerous.

2. Basil (in the second place) conceives the Apostle in this expression to
point at the Isntrumental Cause of our spiritual Insition, and engrafting
into Christ; which is Baptism. This (says he) is here called (...), the
Similitude of the death of Christ, in as much as it carries a representation
and resemblance of his death. And so by engrafting in the similitude of his
death, should be no more but to be incorporated into Christ by Baptism, which
is a similitude of his death. But this Interpretation, though pious and safe,
yet here it cannot be admitted. Beza's reason is convincing: Beza ibid.
Baptism carries a representation, not only of the Death of Christ, but also
of his Resurrection; and so not only of the Christian's Mortification, but also
of his Vivification: Which two the Apostle here plainly distinguishes the one
from the other.

3. Chrysostom (in the third place) conceives that there is no Emphasis at all
in the phrase. The Similitude of Christ's death (says he) is the same with the
death of Christ. And so indeed the phrase is to be understood in that 2d of
Philip. 7. where it is said of Christ, that he was (...), made in the likeness
of men;] that is, Heb. 4.5.
he was made a true man, like unto others in all things, sin only excepted.
But here we shall find the phrase importing somewhat more.

4. Not to hold you any longer in suspense: Conclude we it with Calvin, Beza,
Martyr, C. Lapide, and others. Believers are said to be engrafted with Christ
in the likeness of his death in a twofold respect. The phrase imports two
things.
The phrase imports two things: 1. A conformity of the one to the other. 2. The
ground, and rise, and cause of that conformity. The Christian's conformity with
Christ in his death: He is engrafted in the similitude thereof, made like unto
Christ in his death: dying though not the same kind of death, yet a death like
it. The ground and cause of his conformity is, Christ himself, and his death,
from whence the believer receives that power, that virtue to do what he does,
as the Graft, does from the Stock. He is grafted together with Christ in the
likeness of his death. Put these together, and they give us the full force and
Emphasis of this elegant and comprehensive expression. I shall handle them
severally. At this time of the former, The believers conformity to Christ in
his death.

1. The Christian's conformity to Christ in his death.
He is engrafted in the likeness of Christ's death:] that is, he is made
conformable to Christ in his death. This is that which Paul wishes for
himself, Phil. 3.10. That I may know him, (viz. Christ,) etc: being made
conformable unto his death; (...). And this all true believers are in their
measure made partakers of: They are conformed unto Christ in his death;
carrying a representation and resemblance of his death. Quod in Christo factum
est per naturam, P. Martyr ad loc.
id in nobis fit per Analogiam and proportionem: (as Martyr borrows it from
Chrysostom.) What was done in Christ in a natural way, is done and performed
in the believer by way of Analogy, proportion, resemblance. Christ died, and so
the believer dies; the one a natural, the other a spiritual death; the one
carrying a similitude of the other.

Christ's and the Christian's death, a death unto sin.
Quest. But what Death is this?

Ans. Why, in one word, A death unto sin. So the Apostle himself explaines his
own meaning, ver. 2. How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer
therein? So again, ver. 10, 11. where first speaking of Christ, he says, In
that he died, he died unto sin;] and then speaking of Christians in the next
verse, he bids them, [Reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto
sin.] Christ died, and the believer dies; both unto sin; the one by way of
Expiation, The one by way of Expiation, the other of Mortification.
suffering and satisfying for the sins of others; the other by way of
Mortification, killing and crucifying his own sins. This is the death which
carries with it a resemblance of the death of Christ. And of this death all
true believers are made partakers in their measure. Thus this main Proposition
again subdivides and branches it self into two distinct Doctrinall
Conclusions, which I shall insist upon severally, beginning with the former;
which informs us that,

The Christian's death unto sin, Doct. 1. True Mortification carries a
Resemblance of the death of Christ in five particulars.
carries a Representation of the death of Christ. It is (...). It is the
similitude of his death; carrying a lively resemblance of it. That it does so,
will clearly appear, if we bring them together, and compare the one with the
other.

For the Death of Christ, we know, or may know, what kind of death it was.
Diverse particulars are observable and considerable about it. To let pass
others, Take we notice of these five, which are useful to our present purpose.
The Death of Christ was 1. A true death. 2. A voluntary death. 3. A violent
death. 4. A painful death. 5. A lingering death. Such was his natural death;
and such is the Christian's spiritual death: His death for sin, and the
Christian's death to sin. Touch upon the particulars.

1. Resemb. A true Death.
1. A true Death. Such was the death of Jesus Christ, his natural death; not a
putative, seeming death: (as those old Heretics, the Marcionites, and
Manichees imagined,) but a true real death. A true separation of his soul from
his body. He powered out his soul unto death, (says the Prophet) Isai. 53.12.
He gave up the Ghost, (says the Evangelist) Mark 15.37. And such is this
spiritual death in the believer, his death unto sin; A Separation of the soul
from the body of sin.
a true death, a true separation of the soul from the body of sin. Such is the
work of true conversion in the soul, which is a turning of the soul from all
sin unto God. [Repent, and turn your selves from all your transgressions, Ezekiel.
18.30. Not only from one sin, but from all. As in death, the soul is separated
not only from one member of the body, (as it is in a Paralysis, a numbe Palsy,
where one part is dead, being deprived of sense and motion,) but from all. So
is it in true conversion. The soul is separated from the whole body of sin, and
every member of it. So separated from it, that it hates and abhors it. [ Ye
that love the Lord, hate evil, Psalm. 97.10. I hate every false way, Psalm.
119.104. What I hate, that I do, (says Saint Paul) Romans 7.15. Such is the work
of true conversion in the heart of a regenerate person: it causes a real
separation of the soul from the body of sin.

Applic. False Mortification discovered.
Which discords (to make some short Application, as I go) make many to be as
yet strangers unto this blessed work: It may be they have parted with some
sins, but they are not dead to sin: No, their souls are not separated from the
body of sin. Those sins, (which it may be) they have left for fear, or shame,
or some other sinister respects, yet they have their hearts still. Like a dear
wife, who carries her affectionate Husband's heart into the grave with her.

-- Illa habeat secum, servetque sepulchro. Thus do men's hearts oft-times
cleave to their sins, which in respect of actual communion, they are separated
from. They do not hate them, nor yet any sin, as sin: For then they would hate
all sin, A quatenus ad omne, etc. He that hates any sin as sin, hates all
sin. But so do not they: No, However (it may be) there is a kind of Antipathy
in their natures, by reason of their Constitution, or Education, against some
sins, yet there are others which are sweet and delightful to them. Now, as for
such, they are not made conformable unto Christ in his death. His death was a
true death, a separation of the soul from his body.

Secondly, A Voluntary Death. 2. Resemb. A Voluntary Death.
Such was the Death of Jesus Christ. [He poured forth his soul unto death,]
Isai. 53.12. He gave himself for our sins, Gal. 1.4. Laying down his life.
[Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life, John 10.17. No
man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self, verse 18.] This he did in
way of voluntary obedience unto his Father. He was obedient unto the death,
etc. Philip 2.8. What herein he did, all the men and devils in the world could
not have enforced him to. His Death was a voluntary and spontaneous act. And
herein it was a pattern of true Mortification; Such is true Mortification a
voluntary act.
which is a voluntary and willing death. Whatever Gods people do in way of duty
to God, they do it willingly: [Thy people shall come willingly in the day of
thy power, Psa. 110.3.] And as in all other actions, and services, so in this;
they are a willing people. In Mortification a Christian dies unto sin, is not
put to death. So much is imported in those phrases of Mortifying, and
Crucifying of sin. [If ye through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the
flesh, ye shall live, Romans 8.] They that are Christ's hove crucified the
flesh, with the lusts and affections thereof, Gal. 5.24.] And so, of putting
off the old man; [That ye put off concerning the former Conversation, the old
man, Ephesians. 4.22.] All voluntary, and spontaneous acts: Such is true
Mortification. Not when sin dies of it self; or is put to death accidentally
by some other means; but when the man himself puts it to death. When a man
puts off the rags of the old Adam: not when he is stripped of them. In this
resembling the death of Christ, which was a voluntary death.

Applic. And if so, Counterfeit Mortification discovered: being enforced,
what a deal of Counterfeit Mortification will this one touchstone discover?
Many there are, who seem to have left their sins, but it is against their
wills. No thanks to them. They are enforced to do what they do. Enforced,

1. It may be, 1 By the sense of some temporal Inconvenience
through the present sense of some temporal inconvenience they see attending
upon them. Thus the prodigal waster happily leaves his riotous and luxurious
courses of drinking and gaming: How so? Because he finds them prejudicial to
his estate, to his health.

2. It may be they have a clamorous conscience, 2. Through clamours of
conscience.
which will not let them be quiet, but continually dogs them. And thereupon
they are feign to let go their sins, parting with them as a night-robber does
with his prey, which he leaves behind him, because the dogs come with open
mouth at him. Upon this account it was that Judas was so willing to be rid of
his thirty pieces of silver. No thanks to him; they were too hot for him to
hold. Thus do many men part with their sins, as a sick man parts with his meat,
or Medicine: which he would feign keep, but it makes him sick, and thereupon
his stomach eases it self of it.

3. Happily they part with them not out of any dislike they have of them; but
for fear, servile fear: 3 Through fear of punishment. Temporal: from Man, or
God.
Fear of punishment. Punishment Temporal, or Eternal. Temporal from Man, or
from God. Of the former kind, how many? They abstain from such and such evils;
but no thanks to them: They dare do no otherwise. The fear of man is upon them.
The penalty of the law deterrs them. Of the latter not a few. They see wrath is
gone out against them from the Lord. Some temporal Judgment hangs over their
heads, like Dam ocles his sword, threatening of them. This makes them to let go
their sins, parting with them as the dog with his bone, when the whip is over
him. This it was that made Ahab for a time act the part of a penitent. Who,
that looks upon him in that penitential garb, 1 King. 21.17.
clothed with sackcloth, fasting, and walking so demurely, but would take him
for a Mortified Convert. But no thanks to him; the Prophet had rung him such a
peal as made both his ears to tingle. He had denounced the judgments of God
against him in such a terrible manner as made him for the time to put on that
disguize. Eternal.
Or, happily, the fear of eternal punishment is upon them. Upon this account do
men sometimes part with their sins. Even as seamen in a stress, part with
their goods, which they cast overboard with their own hands: Not that they
are out of love with them, but because they love their lives better. they see
they must either part with them, or perish with them. Or like a Cutpurse, who
being apprehended by a Sergeant, drops the purse which he has cut or drawn:
not that he is weary of it, but because he knows if that should be found
about him, it would hang him. Even thus do many part with their sins, when
conscience being awakened, they see hell gaping upon them. It may be, God's
Sergeant [Death,] in their apprehensions, has arrested them, ready to carry
them before the dreadful Tribunal of a just and terrible God; And they know
that if such and such sins be found about them, there is no way but eternal
condemnation for them. And hereupon they cast them away, it may be, seriously
resolving never more to own them, or to have any acquaintance with them.

Thus many seem to leave their sins, All far from true Mortification.
to part with them, who are yet far from mortifying of them. When men shall
leave sin, being enforced so to do, through the sense of some present
inconvenience, or through the clamorousnesse of an accusing conscience, or
merely through fear of punishment temporal, or eternal; this is but a
counterfeit Mortification. True Mortification must be a voluntary action; not
Involuntary, nor yet Mixed. I call that a mixed action, which is partly
voluntary, and partly involuntary. As in that forenamed instance of the
Seaman, casting his goods overboard; Mortification altogether voluntary.
which he does partly with his will, and partly against it. This must be
altogether voluntary.

Not but that there may be some reluctance betwixt the flesh and spirit about
this work. Such a reluctance we find in the humane nature of Christ about his
natural death. When he saw that bitter cup coming toward him, he passionately
deprecates it in that thrice repeated Petition; Father, if it be possible, let
this cup pass from me, Mat. 26.39.] yet was his death a true voluntary death.
So in the Christian's death unto sin; there may be a reluctance betwixt the
flesh and the spirit, Notwithstanding some reluctance in the flesh.
and yet the action a voluntary action. An action is said to be voluntary, or
involuntary; according to the superior faculties of the soul, not the
inferior. If the reasonable part be consenting, the action may be called
voluntary, though there be some reluctance in the sensitive appetite. Thus in
the Christian, in whom there is nature and grace, flesh and spirit, an
unregenerate, and a regenerate part, if the superior and better part be
willing; and that will, not a velleitas, but a volitio, not a wishing, but a
willing; an advised, deliberate will, with full consent of the inward man: now
though there be some reluctance in the flesh, in the unregenerate part, yet may
this be said a true voluntary act.

And is our Mortification such? Can we say with the blessed Apostle, Romans 7.
ult. that, However with our flesh we serve the law of sin, yet with our mind we
serve the Law of God?] Delighting in it after the inward man, ver. 22. So that
we are dead to sin, according to the inward man, the regenerate part. If so,
now though we find a Law in our members rebelling against the Law of our minds;
yet be not discouraged, this in God's acceptance shall go for true
Mortification, a true death unto sin; In as much as it carries with it this
resemblance of the death of Christ, which was a voluntary death.

Thirdly, 3. Resemb. A violent Death.
The Death of Christ was a violent death: though voluntary, yet violent.
Violent, because not natural. He did not die alone, but was put to death. So
says Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 3.18. He was put to death in the flesh: (...). In
course of nature Christ might have lived many a year upon the earth, when he
was crucified, being then but about the three and thirtieth year of his age.
His death was a violent death: He was brought as a lamb to the slaughter, Isai.
53.7. The material Temple did not fall down alone, it was pulled down: And so
was the mystical Temple of Christ's Body. [Destroy this Body, John 2.19.] And
herein again was his death a true pattern of the Christian's Mortification, his
dying unto sin: which is both voluntary, and violent. Voluntary, in respect of
the Person, but violent in respect of the Sin. Not when sin dies alone, but
when it is put to death; and that whilst it might yet live longer. It is
nothing to die to sin, when sin dies to us, in us. Herein lies, (as I may
say,) the life of this death, herein is the truth of Mortification, when a man
(as it were) lays violent hands upon his sins; cutteth them off being yet in
their flower, strength, vigor: not when they die for age. When he pulls up
these weeds, not when they wither of themselves. So much is insinuated in these
forenamed expressions of mortifying, of crucifying the flesh, the body of sin,
etc: each importing a violent death. Such is the death of sin in the Christian,
a violent death.

Another touchstone for Mortification.
Applic. And is it so? Here then we have another touchstone, whereby we may
discover a great deal of false and counterfeit mortification in the world. Many
have left their sins, who have not mortified them: No, if their sins be dead,
they died a natural death, they died alone. As for them, they were so far from
offering violence to their lusts, from putting them to death, that they would
willingly have saved their lives, if it had lain in their power. And being
dead, they follow them to their graves, as they do their dear friends, mourning
and lamenting over them that they must part. Thus does the aged Adulterer part
with his inordinate lust; Romans 4.19.
being now gray headed, and his body dead, (as it is said of Abraham's,) he
leaves the tricks of his youth, (as he counts and calls them.) But no thanks
to him: they have left him. His sin dies according to the course of nature,
dies for age. And thus a man that was intemperate in his youth, (which yet is
not ordinary,) sometimes he becomes sober, and abstemious in his age. But what
is the cause of it? why the reason inducing him to it is no other, then that
which old Barzillai gave unto David, why he was not willing to follow the
Court, 2 Samuel 19.34. He was now grown old, so as he could not discern betwixt
good and evil, he had no taste in that he eat, or in that he drunk. Upon the
like ground the aged sinner leaves his intemperance; Time having snowed upon
his head, and plowed upon his forehead, he cannot now find that sweetness,
that delight in his sin, which formerly he did. And upon this account they two
part. Sin dying to him, not he to his sin.

Now here give me leave, Applied to aged sinners.
(I beseech you) to make bold with every hoary head,) every wrinckled face that
hears me, that looks upon me this day; and put you upon the trial a
little, whether you be truly dead to sin, or no. It may be your sins, the sins
of your youth, and you, are parted; but let me ask you the question, Upon what
terms did ye part? Whether did you forsake them, or they you? Which is it that
stands chargeable with this desertion? Which was it that gave the bill of
divorce to the other? you to your lusts, or your lusts to you? Your sins are
dead; but what death died they? A natural, or a violent death? If the former;
that is no true Mortification. For all this, you may yet be alive to your sins,
though they be dead to you. Hence is it that late repentance in an aged sinner,
is always looked upon as suspicious, and seldom found to be true; because
that sins then die alone, without any violence offered to them.

Enquire how our sins died, whether a natural, or violent death.
Christians! you cannot be too jealous, too suspicious of your selves in a
matter of so great consequence as this. Too credulous you may easily be, too
cautelous ye cannot. And therefore, if some sins be dead within you, impannell
a Jury, call a Coroners enquest upon them in your own souls, and make enquiry
how they came by their death: Whether they died a violent, or a natural death.
Search what wounds they have received; and whether they were deadly wounds, or
no. Enquire what weapon it was that slew them: whether the Sword of the Spirit,
that two edged Sword, the Word of God. What purposes, what resolutions have
been taken up and levelled against them: What prayers, and tears have been
spent upon them. If you find not these signs, you may give in your verdict,
that they died a natural death; which is no true Mortification, in as much as
it does not carry the similitude of the death of Christ in this particular,
which was a violent death.

What to be done when some sins are dead alone.
Quest. But here happily some may say, In this case, what shall we do? finding
our sins to be dead alone, in what way shall we now attain unto true
Mortification?

Ans. 1. To this I shall answer in a word. 1. Bury them out of sight.
1. If they be dead, then bury them. Bury them out of the sight of God, and out
of the sight of your consciences; and that by suing forth the pardon of them in
the Name of Christ; never resting until God has been pleased to cast in a
Quietus est into your bosoms, assuring you that as they are dead to you, so
they are dead to him, and shall never rise up in judgment against you. If they
be dead, bestow your prayers upon them for the covering of them. So does David
upon the sins of his youth, which he desires God not to remember: Remember not
the sins of my youth, Psalm. 25.7. Bury them.

2, 2. Cast stones upon their graves.
And bury them as the use is to bury those whom we call Felones de se, those
who are their own executioners, make away themselves; Drive a stake through
them, and cast stones upon their graves: Show your detestation of them after
they are dead. If your sins be dead already, so as you cannot take vengeance on
them as you desire, yet deal with them as the soldiers dealt with our Savior,
John 19.32, 33, 34. who when they came and found that he was already dead, and
so had prevented their intentions in breaking of his legs, according as the
custom was, they pierced his side, and let out his heart blood, to make him
sure for reviving again: Or as those enraged persecuters in the Marian days,
dealt with that man of God, that renowned Confessor Martin Bucer, who being
long before dead and buried, and so out of the reach of their malice, they took
up his bones, and burnt them, taking vengeance (as they thought) upon his
Relics. After the like manner let aged sinners deal with their sins. Are they
dead by the course of nature; and so have prevented your mortifying of them;
your breaking of their bones? yet pierce the pericardium of your own souls,
pierce your own hearts by true and unfeigned repentance for them, letting out
the life blood of them, working your hearts to an utter abhorrence and
detestation of them, making them sure for ever reviving again. And take
vengeance upon the relics, the remainders of them. You are dead to such or
such a sin, as touching the outward act: never rest till you be dead to it also
as touching the inward affection; till you have brought your hearts to this
frame and temper, that you cannot think of the sins of your youth without
abhorrence, and loathing of them, and your selves for them. Thus deal with
those sins that are dead already.

3. Fall upon those which are alive.
3. As for those which are yet alive, fall upon them, speedily bringing them
forth to execution. There is no natural man, but has some sin or other still
ruling and reigning in him. As in an aged sinner, in whom many other sins are
dead, yet it may be covetousness lives, (for that sin many times begins to
live, when many other sins begin to die,) or malice lives and reigns in him,
etc. Now if you would be avenged of your sins, execute the Survivour. As in a
treasonable conspiracy, which is not detected till long after the plotting and
acting of it, the surviving traitor suffers for all the rest; So let it be
here. Your sins have conspired against you, sought your ruin and destruction
all your days; This (it may be) has been hid from you, you have not been
aware of it, and so have walked upon the pits brink, the brink of hell, not
fearing any thing, and so let your sins alone: But now arise, for the
Philistines are upon you. Behold the traitors, (your lusts) they are in your
bosom: Thereof (happily) some are dead, but bring forth the Survivours; let
them suffer for the rest; let not them also go in peace to their graves. If
covetousness, or malice, or any other sin be yet alive, make sure it die a
violent death. This will only minister comfort unto you, that you are truly
mortified persons, truly dead unto sin, when you are in this particular made
conformable to Christ in his death, when your sins die a voluntary, but withal
a violent death.

And what I say unto you, The same counsel given to all.
let me speak it unto all. All that hear me this day, be they old or young, let
me speak unto you concerning your sins, as Gideon once said to his son Jether,
concerning the two captivated Princes of Midian, Zeba, and Zalmunnah, Judge.
8.20.
Up and slay them: Or as Elijah to the men of Israel, concerning the Idolatrous
Priests, and Prophets of Baal, 1 King. 18.40. Take them, and let not one of
them escape. You can never have any true comfort or safety, until your sins
have received their death's wound. And therefore fall upon them, and let them
not die alone. I remember what a true Christian Virago, Acts and Monuments.
a good woman, once wrote to that bloody Bonner, Bishop of London, concerning
the Martyrs which he starved in prison, that it would be more for his honor,
to bring them to the stake when they were fat and well liking, then to starve
them, and let them die alone in the prison. Let me apply this counsel of hers
to my present purpose, and tell every one that hears me this day, that it
will be more for your honor and comfort to bring forth these true traitors,
(your sins, your lusts, I mean) to bring them to the stake, to execution, and
put them to death, then to let them pine and languish, and be starved in the
prisons of your bodies, and so to die alone. Herein is the honor and glory of
a young man, when he can subdue and mortify the sins of his youth, and that
whilst they are vigorous and strong, not when they are pined and starved with
age or sickness. Be not therefore over pitiful or merciful to your sins,
lest you be cruel and merciless to your own souls. As long as they live, you
cannot be in safety. And therefore forthwith bring them forth, sacrificing them
to the Lord now they are fat and flourishing. The fat and young beasts under
the Law were fittest for sacrifice. The younger and more flourishing your sins
are, the more acceptable will the oblation be. True mortification of sin is one
of those sacrifices of righteousness, which the Prophet David speaks of
Psalm. 51.19. which the Lord will accept. Herein the sin is the sacrifice, and
every Christian must be a Priest to slay this sacrifice. Sacrifices under the
Law, must not die alone: No more must it be in this Evangelicall Sacrifice;
Sins must not die alone. It was a Leviticall Prohibition, Deuteronomy. 14.21. The
people must not eat any thing that died alone. Such a Mortification, where sins
die alone, shall never find acceptance with God.

I beseech you think upon this a little, To reprieve lusts, dangerous.
you that willingly reprieve your lusts, spare them, suffer them to live, and
rule, and reign in you now, hoping and resolving to take a course with them
hereafter; you will repent in your age. How can you expect that God should ever
accept of such a dead sacrifice; that ever he should smell a sweet savor from
such a Mortification, such a Carrion, a sacrifice that died alone? And
therefore, that you may find acceptance with him, sacrifice your sins now, now
before they be a day older: let them not live till to morrow, for fear they
should die alone, or your selves die before them: Now bring them forth in the
sight and presence of God, Arraign, condemn, crucify, mortify them, whilst
they might yet live. This is true Mortification, when the body of sin dies as
Christ died, a violent death.

4. Resemb. A painful Death. Such was the death of Christ: Painful to his
body. Rabbini aiunt, Non fuit mos in Israele, ut clavos figerent in pedibus,
aut manibus hominum qui lapidati, aut suspensi fuissent: Martinius in Symbolum.
Dolorous to his soul.
In the fourth place, it is also a painful death. Such was the death of Jesus
Christ, a dolorous and painful death: Painful in his body. The Jews and
Romans had many kinds of death: Amongst all, none more painful then
crucifying, specially after the Roman manner: where the malefactor was fastened
alive to the Cross, his hands and feet being nailed thereunto, and so bearing
the whole bulk of his body distended after that manner. Such was the death of
Jesus Christ; being put to death under a Roman Power, he was crucified after
the Roman manner: a painful death. And as painful, so dolorous: It pleased
the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief, (says the Prophet Isaiah,)
Isai. 53.10. As painful to his body, so dolorous to his soul; attended with
Agonies, both antecedent, and concomitant; before it, and in it. Before it:
What an agony do we find him in in the Garden? In the Garden.
Luke 22.44. Being in an agony (says the Text) his sweat was it were great
drops of blood.] Whether a bloody sweat or no, cannot from thence certainly be
concluded (as Grotius notes it out of Theophylact, and Euthimius.) The Text
says only, It was (...), as it were drops of blood. But however, Sudor vix
solet (...). Grotius ad loc.
a strange and extraordinary kind of sweat it was, arguing a vehement conflict
of soul, caused by a deep apprehension and sense of his Fathers wrath due unto
sin and sinners, whose Surety he then was.

And as before his death, so in it. Upon the Cross.
As in the Garden, so upon the Cross. There also Christ had his agonies, his
soul-conflicts. These were those (...), those pains (or pangs) of death, from
which Saint Peter tells us, Christ was loosed, Acts 2.24. (...). The word
properly signifies the pains of a woman in travel. Such were the pains of
Jesus Christ in his death, Gravissimi dolores, quales esse solent mulierum in
partu morientium. Grotius ad Act. 2.44.
(which the Prophet calls the travel of his soul, Isai. 53.11.) like the
pains of a woman dying in travel: which the Psalmist calls the pains of
hell. So he speaks of himself, being a Type of Christ, Psalm. 116.3. The
sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell gat hold upon me.] Not
only the sorrows, or cords of death, Kebli Maveth, the [Cables] of death, (as
our English word answers the Hebrew, both in sound and sense;) but the pains of
hell took hold upon him. The one upon his body, (as malefactors who are
pinioned with cords when they are led to execution, Vide Diodat. in Psalm. 18.5.
or as dead bodies that lie bound in the grave, as the story tells us of
Lazarus, John 11.44.) The other upon his soul: And such were the pains which
took hold upon our blessed Savior in his Passion; which extorted from him that
passionate expostulation, My God, my God, Mat. 27.46.
why have thou forsaken me? complaining of that which was more grievous to him
then a thousand deaths, his Fathers present dereliction, withdrawing his wonted
presence from him. Such was the death of Jesus Christ

A pattern of Mortification, which is a painful work.
And herein again behold it a true pattern of the Christian's Mortification, his
death unto sin: which is also a painful death. Mortification is a painful
work: The very word imports no less. To kill a man, or mortify a member, will
not be without pain. And so much is insinuated in those other expressions which
the Spirit of God makes use of to set forth the nature of this work: as where
it is called a Circumcision; Be circumcised to the Lord, and take away the
foreskin of your hearts, says the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer. 4.4. By that allusive
Periphrasis setting forth the nature of true Mortification; which is a
spiritual Circumcision, a cutting off of the superfluity of sinful and
inordinate lusts. Now Circumcision was a painful work, specially to aged
persons: so the Shechemites found it, of whom the story tells us, Genesis 34.25.
that being circumcised, they were so soar the third day after, as that they
were not able to stir to defend themselves. Such is the spiritual
Circumcision, a painful work, specially in aged, confirmed sinners, causing a
soarnesse in the soul.

Elsewhere it is called, a Suffering in the flesh: So Saint Peter phraseth it,
1 Pet. 4.1. He that has suffered in the flesh, has ceased from sin:] Meaning
thereby the Christians Mortification, which is a suffering in the flesh, an
irksom and painful work to flesh and blood. And as a suffering in the flesh,
so a Crucifying of the flesh, Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's, have crucified
the flesh.] Now crucifying (as I showed you) is a painful death. Elsewhere we
find it compared to a Plucking out the right eye, a Cutting off the right
hand, Matthew. 29.30. Such is the mortifying of the members of the Body of sin,
inordinate lusts, some of which may be as near and dear to a man, as his right
eye, or hand: A painful work.

Thus does this death unto sin carry with it a likeness to the death of
Christ: Attended with Agonies
it is attended with agonies and soul-conflicts. Agonies before conversion and
after.

Before it. Before Conversion:
Ordinarily this work is not wrought without some compunction of spirit, some
pricking of the heart: so were the Jews affected at the hearing of Peter's
Sermon, Acts 2.37. (...), They were pricked at their hearts. They were inwardly
touched, and deeply affected with the apprehension of the heinousness of that
sin of theirs, in crucifying the Lord of life, and of the wrath of God hanging
over their heads for it. In like manner the Jailer, in that known place, Acts
16.30. What an agony do we there find him in? when he came trembling, and fell
down at the Apostles feet, crying out, Sirs, what shall I do to be saved? Such
agonies the beginning of Conversion is ordinarily attended with.

True indeed, it must be acknowledged, Which are not alike in all.
that these Agonies are not alike in all, whether for degree and measure, or
continuance of them: yet in an ordinary way, true and sound conversion is not
without some of them. As in the natural birth, so in this new birth, all have
not the like pains and throws, yet none but are in some degree sensible of some
of them: some soul-conflicts, some remorse of conscience for sin, whereby the
heart is pricked, nay, rent and broken: So it is in true Repentance; Rent your
hearts, and not your garments, Joel 2.13. A broken and a contrite heart O God
thou will not despise, Psalm. 51.17. viz. a heart broken and rent with a kindly
apprehension of sin, and of Gods just displeasure against it: such agonies is
the soul subject to in the beginning of Conversion.

And the like afterward. As in the natural, Agonies after Conversion.
so in this new birth, there are after-pains, after-throws: The Christian,
though the main work be done, though he be delivered of sin in respect of the
guilt, and reigning power of it; yet he has still some remainders of sinful
corruption left in him, which draw many a groan, many a sigh from his heart.
We also which have the first fruits of the Spirit (says the Apostle, Romans
8.23.) even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption,
etc. [We,] we believers; [which have the first fruits of the Spirit,] the first
degree of Regeneration conferred upon us here, as a pledge and assurance of the
full crop of perfect Glorification hereafter; [even we our selves groan
within our selves:] That which the frame of heaven and earth do by a kind of
secret sympathy and instinct, we do out of a certain knowledge, and well
grounded judgment, sighing and groaning under the burden of sin, which lies
upon us, earnestly desiring a full and final deliverance, with a fruition of
that glorious inheritance which is entailed upon us in and by our Adoption.
Such are the groans of mortified Saints, Saints dying unto sin: like the groans
of dying men, whose souls being weary of their bodies, earnestly desire a
dissolution. Thus do God's Saints groan within themselves, (or rather, his
Spirit within them,) earnestly desiring to be freed from the body of sin: O
wretched man that I am, (says the Apostle,) who shall deliver me from the body
of this death! Romans 7.24. Thus does he cry out, being wearied by continual
conflicts with the remainders of sinful corruption; that body of sin, Romans 6.6.
(as he calls it, ver. 6. of the Chapter foregoing:) This he there calls
the body of death, Corpus mortis, i.e. Corpus mortiferum; because it was as a
death to him to be so infested with it, (like a living man tied to a dead)
threatening him with spiritual and eternal death; And therefore he earnestly
desires to be freed from it, accounting himself a wretched and unhappy man,
so long as he was in any degree so molested by it. Thus does this death unto
sin carry with it a conformity to the death of Jesus Christ, being as his was,
a dolorous and painful death.

Applic. Which may serve us yet as another touchstone to discover a great deal
of counterfeit Mortification by. Counterfeit Mortification discovered.
Many think they are dead unto sin, who are in truth nothinglesse. It may be,
sin is asleep in them: It may be, it is dead to them; but they are not dead to
it. So much appears in that there were no pangs in this death. It is a
difference betwixt death and sleep; There are pangs in the one, not so in the
other. And the like difference there is betwixt a natural, and a violent
death. In the former, when a man dies according to the course of nature, (the
light of life going out like a lamp when the oil is spent,) there is no great
pain. As David speaking of wicked men, who sometimes live in pleasure, and die
with ease, he says, they have no bands in their death, Psalm. 73.4. But violent
Deaths, they have their bands, and their pangs. And so has this spiritual
death, this death unto sin: being (as I showed you in the last resemblance,) a
violent death, it will not be without some pangs or other. Sin has a strong
heart, and so there will be pangs in this death.

Examine what Agonies we have felt for, or about sin.
I beseech you, bring it home to your selves, you that suppose your selves to be
thus dead unto sin: Examine your own hearts; what pangs were there in this
death? what agonies, what soul-conflicts have you at any time felt? what
compunction of heart, what affliction of spirit have you suffered for sin? And
that not only for the guilt of it; That may, and often is to be found in a
Reprobate: we see it in Judas. When he had betrayed his Lord and Master; what a
compunction of spirit did the apprehension of the guilt of that sin work in
him?) But for the power of it: This it was that troubled Paul; to find the body
of sin so vigorous and active in him: to find such a law in his members
rebelling against the law of his mind, and bringing him into captivity to the
law of sin, Romans 7, 23. And this it is that troubles the Christian. Though the
guilt of sin be taken away, yet is he not wholly freed from the power of it.
Though it do not rule in him as a Prince, yet it tyrannizeth over him,
oft-times carrying him, contrary to the bent of his regenerate mind, to the
omitting of what he would do, the committing of what he would not. And this to
him is an affliction of spirit, causing frequent conflicts within him. Now,
have you found, do you find the like symptoms in your selves? Surely, where
the soul never felt any of these pangs, these agonies, it may well suspect that
sin may be asleep, or (it may be) dead to the man, but the man is not dead to
it.

True indeed, No death unto sin without some agonies.
(as I said) these pangs are not alike in all. As in the death of the body,
some have an (...), (as Physicians call it) a more gentle and easy death then
others: so is it in this spiritual death, this death unto sin; to some it is
more easy then to others; God according to his various dispensations brings
off the work of Regeneration, and Mortification, in a more easy way to one
then to another. Yet is there no death specially a violent death, (and such is
this death unto sin,) but it has some pangs, some agonies.

The least Agonies in true conversion.
Quest. But happily here some may say, What are the least of these pangs, these
agonies, that may be in this death? What is the least measure of this
compunction of spirit, this soul-affliction, that is requisite unto true
Mortification?

Ans. To this I answer, (and I shall do it with as much indulgence and
tenderness as may be.) There must be

1. A sense of sin, and wrath.
1. A sense of sin, and of the wrath of God due unto it. Such a sense we find in
Jesus Christ: He was very sensible of the weight and burden of those sins which
lay upon him, and of the wrath of God his Father due unto them. This it was
that put him into that preternaturall, if not supernatural sweat. And such a
sense in measure there must be in the soul of every Christian before he come to
die unto sin. He must first feel sin as a Burden; Mat. 11.28.
(Come unto me, ye that are weary and heavy laden; viz. under the weight and
burden of sin:) a burden ready to sink him into hell; subjecting him to the
wrath and displeasure of God.

2. A sorrow for sin.
2. From this sense of sin kindly working upon the soul, there arises an inward
sorrow for sin. Such an affection we find also in our blessed Savior before
his passion, My soul, (says he, speaking to his Apostles) is exceeding heavy,
((...), undiquaque tristis, Mat. 26.38.
beset and surrounded with sorrows,) even unto death. And such an affection in
measure there is in every true convert, every mortified sinner. The
apprehension of sin works in him an inward sorrow and grief, even that godly
sorrow, (as the Apostle calls it, 2 Cor. 10.7.) (...), a sorrow according to
God, that is, 1. Coming from God. 2. Well pleasing to God. 3. For offending of
God. 4. Bringing the sinner unto God. Such a sorrow the Apostle there makes a
necessary ingredient to that Repentance which is not to be repented of.

3. From this sorrow for sin, 3. A desire of being freed from the guilt and
power of it.
(in the third place) springs a serious and unfeigned desire of being freed,
and delivered from it. Such an affection also we find in our blessed Savior.
Feeling the burden of the sins of the world lying upon him, he was very
desirous to be freed from it. I have a baptism to be baptized with, (says he
to his Apostles, meaning his passion, his death,) and how am I straightened until
it be accomplished? Luke 12.50. And the like affection shall we find in a
regenerate soul, viz. a serious and earnest desire of being freed and delivered
from that sin, whereof it is made so sensible; And that not only from the
guilt and punishment, but also from the power and dominion, tyranny and
molestation of it, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body
of this death?

4. And fourthly, 4. A striving against sin.
This desire being unfeigned, it will express and put forth it self in
answerable endeavors, in effectual strivings against sin: Ye have not yet
resisted unto blood, striving against sin, Heb. 12.4. How did our blessed
Savior wrestle in the Garden? offering up prayers and supplications, with
strong crying and tears, to him that was able to save him, Heb. 5.7. Thus will
a regenerate soul wrestle with God about the death of sin; praying against it;
watching against it; going out in the strength of God against it; engaging in a
continual war, a deadly feud against it.

Now these are the least of these soul-conflicts, wherewith this spiritual
death, this death unto sin is attended. And are we strangers unto these? Do we
not know what it is to be thus sensible of sin; to be thus affected with sin;
to be thus desirous of deliverance from sin; to be thus engaged against sin?
Deceive not our selves, we are as yet strangers unto this blessed work; we do
not yet know what this true death unto sin means; which also in this
particular resembles the death of Jesus Christ: It is a painful death.

5. Resemb. A lingering death.
The last particular is yet behind, wherein I shall be brief. This death is a
lingering death. Such was the death of Jesus Christ: Crucifying is a lingering
death. Christ hung diverse hours upon the Cross, three at the least; from the
sixth hour to the ninth, (says Saint Matthew, cap. 27. ver. 45.) that is, from
our twelve to three, before he gave up the Ghost. And herein again does the
Christan's death unto sin carry a resemblance of that his death; It is also a
lingering death; wherein sin is not put to death all at once, but languisheth by
little and little. This is looked upon as one of the main differences betwixt
Justification, Justification perfected at once.
and Sanctification. The former is a perfect work, admitting of no degrees.
True indeed, in respect of manifestation, and in the sense of the person
justified, it is graduall; but not in it self. The person justified may
apprehend his justification more clearly then he did; but he cannot be more
justified then he was. Justification being a plenary absolution, a full
discharge of the sinner from the guilt and satisfactory punishment of all his
sins, past, present, and to come. True, there is a difference betwixt the one
and the other. Sins past, Vide Ames. Medul. cap. 27. sec. 23, 24.
and present, are actually pardoned, by a formal Application of the general
pardon unto them; sins past only virtually. The former in them selves; the
later in the subject, or person sinning; from whom it is required only to show
forth that pardon which is granted, and by faith to apply it to himself in
respect of the renewed particular acts of sin. In the mean time, the Grant is
perfect and full, Numb. 23.21.
So as God beholds no iniquity in Jacob, neither does he see any perverseness
in Israel: viz. so as to impute it unto condemnation: Not so Sanctification.
but so is not Sanctification: The believer, though he be perfectly freed from
the guilt of sin, yet not so from the power of it: still sin dwells in him.
It is no more I, (says the Apostle) but sin that dwells in me, Romans 7.17.
Thus is sin to the Christian, not only a lodger for a night, but a dweller,
like a rebellious Tenant, that will keep possession in despite of his Owner,
till the house be pulled down over his head. And as dwelling, so acting,
working: Though not ruling as a Lord, yet molesting, and tyrannizing. I see
another law in my members, rebelling against the law of my mind, (says
regenerate Paul, meaning the law of sin, Romans 7.23.) Thus is the believers
sanctification (whereof mortification is a part,) an imperfect work.

In Mortification, sin receives its deaths-wound, but is not quite dead.
True it is, in a regenerate soul, the body of sin has received its
deaths-wound; and in that respect it may be said to be dead; (as we say of a
man that is mortally wounded, that he is a dead man;) but it is not quite dead.
Still it stirs and moves; dying but by degrees. What the Apostle says of
the renewing of the new man, 2 Cor. 4.16. The inward man is renewed day by
day.] we may say it of the destroying of the old man; It is destroyed day by
day. As Paul says of himself in respect of afflictions, 1 Cor. 15.31. I die
daily, (which he did, as in regard of his continual expectation of, and
preparation for death, so in respect of the many crosses and tribulations
wherewith he was continually assaulted, which rendered his life a dying life, or
a living death;) so may we say of the Christian in respect of his sins; he
dies daily. His death unto sin, is a dying, a continued act. Death unto sin a
dying.
So much the Apostle insinuates, Col. 3. where he puts persons mortified upon
the duty of Mortification. Such were his believing Colossians, to whom he there
writes; They were dead, (as he tells them) ver. 3. [Ye are dead;] dead to
the world, and dead to the flesh; dead to sin; yet he puts them upon this duty,
Mortify ye your members which are on the earth,] ver. 5. The like he says to
his Romans, chap. 8. whom in the 9th verse he approves, that they were not in
the flesh; yet in the 13th verse, he puts them upon this duty; If ye mortify
the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live. There is not the most sanctified soul
upon earth, but has some remainders of corruption left in it; which God in his
wise providence permits for the 1. Trying. 2. Exercising. 3. Humbling. 4. The
making his own rich grace so much the more glorious by renewing and multiplying
of pardons unto them. Thus is this death unto sin like unto the death of Jesus
Christ, a lingering death.

Applic. And is it so? Consolation against the stirrings of sin
Here is a ground of consolation to a drooping and dejected soul; which feeling
the stirring and vigorous acting of sin in it, thereupon questions its own
estate, calls in question the truth of its mortification, whether it be truly
dead unto sin, or no. Let not this discourage: Jesus Christ was not dead as
soon as he was fastened to the Cross. Is the work of Mortification begun? Have
thou taken the same course with the body of sin, that the Jews did with the
Body of Christ? Have thou arraigned, accused, condemned it, and fastened it to
the Cross? Arraigned it at the Bar of God's Judgment; Accused it by way of
humble and hearty confession; Condemned it, passing the sentence of eternal
condemnation upon thy self for it; and then fastened it to the Cross, begun
the execution of it, set upon the mortification of it, with a serious and
unfeigned resolution of using all means for the destroying, and killing, and
abolishing thereof? If so, now though it still strive and struggle, let not
that dishearten: So will a crucified man do; and yet in the eye of the Law, and
in the account of all that see him, he is a dead man. And so is the body of
sin, when it is thus crucified; Though it do still move and stir, yet upon a
Gospel-account, and in God's estimation, it is dead: and it shall certainly
die. The crucified man, by little and little he bled to death: So shall this
old man; where the work of Mortification is once truly begun, it shall bleed to
death; the strength of it daily decaying. As Haman's wife and friends once told
him concerning Mordecai, Hest. 6. 13. If Mordecai were of the seed of the
Jews, before whom he had begun to fall, he should not prevail, but should
surely fall before him: So may it be said of a regenerate person: Being of the
Seed of Abraham, according to the Spirit, a Jew inwardly, (as the Apostle
calls Believers, Romans 2. last.) of the faith of Abraham, having an inward
principle of true grace in his soul, now that body of sin which has begun to
fall before him, it shall not prevail, Romans 6.14.
(thenceforth it shall not have dominion over him,) but it shall surely fall.
Having received the deaths-wound, it shall decay and languish more and more. As
it was betwixt the two houses of David and Saul in the same Kingdom, 2 Samuel
3.1. So shall it be betwixt the regenerate and unregenerate part in the same
person. The one shall wax stronger and stronger, the other weaker and weaker.
The promise is express, He that has begun the good work (whereof
mortification is a part) he will perfect it to the day of Jesus Christ. This
Paul was confident of in the behalf of his Philippians, Phil. 1.6. And this
let all true believers rest confident of in respect of themselves.

Use 2. Only continue the endeavors of Mortifying it.
Only let not this confidence make any secure, fearlesse, careless. God will
perfect this good work in you, but how? Nempe vobis cooperantibus (as Grotius
glosseth upon it,) You working together with his grace. And this let all
believers be excited unto. Having received this grace of God, now work we
together with that grace, setting our selves to this mortifying work. Not
looking upon it as the work of a day, or a month, or a year, but of our whole
life time; continue we our endeavors, making a daily progress in this work;
every day laboring to weaken the body of sin more and more; praying against
it, watching against it, striving against it. Think it not enough that sin has
received the deaths wound. A Wild beast, though mortally wounded, may yet turn
again, and endanger him that lanced him: And so may sin the soul of a
regenerate person. And therefore having begun this good work, the mortifying of
sin, go on in it. As the Romans were wont to deal with their Malefactors;
Having fastened them to the Cross, then they brake their legs, and peirced
their side, to let out their vital blood. Even thus deal we with the body of
sin, using all means for the through mortification of it; breaking the bones,
the power and strength of sin, and peircing the heart of it by renewed
contrition and repentance; letting out the vital blood of it; never resting
till we have let sin wholly out of our heart, till the heart be brought to an
inward loathing and detestation of all sin; and so to feel the whole body of
sin daily decaying, languishing, dying. Such is the Christians death, a copy
and counterpane of the death of Jesus Christ, resembling it in the properties
thereof, a True, voluntary, violent, painful, lingering death. And thus have I
done with the former of these conclusions, which informs us, that The
Christians death unto sin, carries with it a resemblance of the death of Christ
for sin, It is (...), the likeness or Representation of his death. The second
and third follow.

All true Believers are partners in this death; and that, by a virtue flowing
from Jesus Christ. Upon these two I shall insist severally by way of Doctrinall
Explication, and Illustration, jointly by way of practical Application: Begin
with the former.

All true believers are partners in this death. Doctrine 2. All believers are
dead unto sin.
All that are in Jesus Christ, are thus conformable to him in his death. This
the Apostle here lays down by way of supposition, [If we have been planted
together in the likeness of his death;] Taking it for granted, that all who
are ingrafted into Christ, have a mystical union with him, they have also a
communion with him, and that first in his Death. This is that which he has
told us in the two verses foregoing. [Know ye not (says the 3d verse) that so
many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death?
Again, ver. 4. Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death. And
thus he here inculcates again the same thing under a different expression, [If
we have been planted together in the likeness of his death.] So are all true
believers. Being in Christ, they die with him: being dead to sin, as he died
for sin.

That they are so, Confirmat.
we find it often asserted by this Apostle, as in this chapter, ver. 2. How
shall we that are dead to sin (says he) live any longer therein? and again
ver. 11. Likewise reckon ye your selves to be dead indeed unto sin.] So
elsewhere; This is that he tells his Colossians Colos. 3.3. For ye are dead] dead
to the world, to the flesh, to sin. This he says of himself Gal. 6.14. The
world is crucified to me, and I unto the world.] And the like of all others,
Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh.] All in effect
speaking one and the same thing with this in the Text; that all which are in
Christ, are ingrafted with him in the likeness of his death; being dead to
sin, as he died for sin.

Explication.
Quest. But what is this death unto sin? Or how are Christians said to be dead
unto sin?

What this death unto sin is.
Ans. It is not my purpose here largely to insist upon the Doctrine of
Mortification, which, as I have touched upon already, in handling of the verses
foregoing, so I shall meet with again and again in the verses following.
Briefly, To be dead unto sin, is not to be wholly freed from the Inhabitation,
and molestation of it; to be delivered from the body of sin, to have it
eradicated, plucked up by the roots. No, that is contrary to universal
experience: None but find and feel that fomes peccati, corruption of nature,
the body of sin, still dwelling, and living, and working in them; But to be
freed from the dominion, the reigning power of sin. To have the vigor and
strength of sin, (which is the life of sin) so broken, so enervated and weakened
by the work of the Spirit of grace dwelling in the soul, as that it does not
rule, and reign, and bear sway as it did before regeneration. This it is to be
dead to sin. So much we may learn from this Apostle, who explains his own
meaning in the 12th verse of this Chapter: Having in the former verse bid his
Romans, Reckon themselves dead unto sin, he adds in this verse, Let not
therefore sin reign in your mortal bodies, that ye should obey it in the lusts
thereof.] This reigning power of sin, when it has the upper hand of the
motions of the Spirit of God in the soul, bears such a sovereign,
incontroulable sway in it, so overpowring the faculties of it, as that the man
is wholly overcome by it, made a servant, yiedling a willing and spontaneous
obedience to it, making either none, or, at best, a weak and vain resistance
against it: this is the life of sin. Now when this power is broken, when it is
conquered by a superior power, the power of the Spirit of grace, so as the
believer is freed from the dominion of sin; now though sin do still live in
him, yet he is said to be dead to it.

And he may be said so to be, The regenerate person dead unto sin, three ways.
1. In regard of God's acceptance.
and that in a threefold respect. In regard of Acceptance, Inchoation,
Assurance.

1. In regard of Acceptance. God beholding the believer in and through Christ,
he beholds him not as he is in himself, but as he is in Christ; and so he
beholds him as crucified, as dead with Christ. Besides, where there is a
willing and ready mind, God accepts a man according to what he has, and not
according to what he has not. So the Apostle informs us, 2 Cor. 8.12. God
measures men's bounty, and liberality, (for of that the Apostle there
speaks,) not by their hands, or purses, but by their hearts. And so is it in
all other duties, and services. Desires and endeavors (where they are real,)
with God go for actual performances. Now this is the Christian's desire: He
desires nothing more then to be freed from the body of sin, O wretched man
that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death? And this he
seriously endeavors; he does what in him lies to kill and destroy it. Now
this in God's gracious acceptance is death unto sin.

As it is in the committing of sin, Intentions in God's account go for actions:
Wanton looks are Adultery: Whosoever looks on a woman, to lust after her,
has committed adultery with her already in his heart, Mat. 5.28. Murdering
intentions are murder: Whosoever hates his brother is a murderer, 1 John 3.15.
He is so, though not before man, yet before God; who judges men by their
hearts. Even so is it in the killing, mortifying of sin: He that has designed
the death of it, desiring and endeavoring it, he is in God's gracious
acceptance looked upon as dead to sin.

2. In regard of Inchoation.
2. In regard of Inchoation. The work of Mortification is begun: In a regenerate
person sin has received a deadly wound, and it begins to die; It has already
lost much of that power and strength which it had. And in this respect it may
be said to be dead to him, and he to it. Even as a man that is in a
consumption, having lost his bodily strength, and his radical moisture being
in great measure exhausted and spent, such a one may be said to be a dead man,
dead whilst he lives. So, though sin do still live in a regenerate person,
yet in as much as it is in a consumption, the power and strength of it gone, it
may be said to be dead. It lies a dying. Now we say of a man in that case, a
man that is drawing home, that he is a dead man. He has begun to die.

3. In respect of Assurance. 3. In respect of Assurance
Sin in a regenerate person having begun to die, it shall certainly die, it
shall speedily die. Certainly, The wound which it has received is incurable, a
deadly wound, so as though it may live for a time, yet it shall languish and
decay more and more till it be utterly extinct: which it shall be, and that
speedily; The death of sin is not far off to such a one. The story in the
Gospel tells us of a certain Disciple, who asked leave of his Master Christ,
that before such time as he followed him, he might first go and bury his
Father, Mat. 8.21. Now here some move the question, What, was his Father dead,
that he would go bury him? Most probably he was not, only he was very aged,
having one foot in the grave, so as in course of nature he could not live long,
and in that regard he looks upon him, and speaks of him as a dead man,
ready for the grave. So is it with the body of sin in a regenerate person; It
is dying, and cannot live long: It is much infeebled already, and by death
(which is not far off from any) it shall utterly be extinguished and abolished.
Death separating the soul from the body, shall separate sin from both. He that
is dead is freed from sin, (says the Apostle, ver. 7. of this Chapter:) which
is true (as to the regenerate) in a literal, as well as a mystical sense.
Thus you see the former of these Propositions briefly opened and cleared: All
that are Christ's, are dead to sin, as he died for sin. As briefly of the later.

Doct. 3. The Believer death to sin, is from the death of Christ.
D. 3. This their death to sin, is from the death of Christ for sin.] So much
the Metaphor in the Text imports. Believers are planted together with Christ in
the likeness of his death; that is, they are made conformable to Christ in his
death, and that by a virtue flowing from his death. Thus the Graft dies with
the Stock; it dies in it, and by it. The death of the one is the cause of
death in the other. Thus is the believer said to be engrafted with Christ in
the likeness of his death; he dies with Christ, and the death of Christ is
the cause of that death in him. This is that which the Apostle says of
himself, Gal. 6.14. God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified to me, and I unto the world.]
Paul was a mortified man, dead to the world, and dead to sin; But how came he
so to be? why this he attributes to the Cross of Jesus Christ; (...), by whom,
or by which; it may be referred to either. The death of Christ the cause of
this death;
It was the Cross of Christ, the Death of Jesus Christ, which was the cause of
this death in him. And so is it in all other believers. The Cause of it. And
that not only, Not only, 1. Meritorious.


1. The Meritorious Cause. True, so it is. This is one of the benefits which
Jesus Christ merited and purchased for his Elect by his death, that they might
die unto sin; He bare our sins in his own body upon the tree, that we being
dead unto sin, should live unto righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.24. Christ by his
death merited for his people not only a deliverance from the guilt, but also
from the power of sin. But not only so;

2. Nor yet only the Exemplsry 2. Exemplary.
Cause of it, (as Pelagians of old, and Socinians at this day would have it.)
True, it is so also; Christ was a pattern and example to the Christian, as in
his life, so in his death: He suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we
should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21. He died for us, leaving us an example,
that we should die to sin, as he died for sin. But this is not all.

3. In the third place then, 3. But also, Efficient.
it is the Efficient Cause, working this death in the believer, by a secret
virtue issuing from it. Thus are Christians here said to be engrafted with
Christ in the likeness of his death; Non tantum imitatione, Beza Gr. Annot. in
Text.
sed and virtute, (as Beza rightly,) not only by way of Imitation, conforming
themselves unto his death, as the pattern of their Mortification; but also by
way of Efficacy, being conformed thereunto by a virtue flowing from Christ, and
his death. And so much the word in the Text, (as Beza notes upon it) does here
insinuate, which is not (...), but (...), Ibid.
a word (says he) of passive signification, importing not barely a conformity,
Conformatione mortis ejus. Beza.
but a conformation, (as he renders it,) not only a being like, but being made
like, and that by a power and virtue out of themselves; viz. the power and
virtue of Christ, and his death, working an answerable death in them. And so
much that word used by the Apostle to the same purpose, Phil. 3.10. implies,
Being made conformable unto his death; (...), conformis factus, or
configuratus; not conforming my self, viz. by way of Imitation, but being made
conformable, viz. by a power out of my self, the power and virtue of Christ's
death. And this is that which the Author to the Hebrews plainly asserts, Heb.
9.14. where he lays down this as one of the fruits of Christ's death, The
blood of Jesus Christ purges our consciences from dead works, to serve the
living God.] Dead works; So he calls sinful lusts, not formally, as if they
had no life, no activity in them; but effectively, because they are deadly
works, bringing death upon the sinner that lives in them. Now, from these,
(says the Apostle) the Blood of Christ cleanses the conscience of the sinner;
and so it does not only in respect of the guilt of sin in Justification, but
also the power of it in Sanctification; from which it so freeth the sinner, as
that he may now serve the living God. The former of these is done by the merit;
the later by the virtue of Christ's death. The death of Christ being applied
unto the soul by faith, there issues a virtue from him, a mortifying virtue,
causing such a death unto sin in the believer. Thus are they ingrafted in the
likeness of his death.

Q. but how then is this work attributed unto them? How believers are said
themselves to mortify sin.
If it be wrought in them by a foreign power, by a virtue flowing from
Christ's death, how then are they said to mortify and crucify sin? Mortify
ye your members which are on the earth, Col. 3.5. If ye mortify the deeds of
the flesh, ye shall live, Romans 8.13. They which are Christ's, have crucified
the flesh, Gal. 5.24. So that it seems, there is some power in a man's self
to effect this work.

Answ. For answer hereunto, They cooperate with grace received.
the Solution will be easy, if we do but take notice who, and what manner of
persons they are, of whom, and to whom the Apostle there speaks: They were
not mere carnal men, men dead in sins; but they were Christians, such as he
presumed to be already dead to sin, (as he says of his Colossians, Col. 3 3.)
such as were already made partakers of the grace and spirit of God; now being
such, he speaks of them, and to them, as men who through the assistance and
inablement of the Spirit, that grace received, were enabled to do what he there
speaks of. But so are not others: Mere carnal men, being destitute of the
Spirit of Christ, however they may out of moral Principles do somewhat to the
restraining of sin, yet to the mortifying of it, they can do nothing: No; this
is the work of that Spirit, which works all the works of regenerate persons
in them and for them: Not that we are sufficient of our selves, (says the
Apostle) to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God, 2
Cor. 3.5. Without me (or, severed from me) ye can do nothing (says our
Savior to his Apostles) John 15.5. nothing which belongs to true Piety: It
is God that works in us both to will and to do, of his good pleasure, Phil.
2.13. Mortification is a supernatural work, the work of an almighty Power,
wherein men are but Instruments, the Spirit of Christ the principal Agent: If
ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live, Romans
8.13.

A twofold Mortification: 1 Habitual. 2 Actual.
For further Resolution, I might yet mind you of an useful Distinction. There
is a twofold Mortification; the one Habitual, the other Practical. The former
habitual and inward, consisting in a change of the heart, turning the bent and
inclination of it from and against all sin: Now this is the immediate and only
work of the Spirit of grace, breathing and working where it will The later is
practical, or outward (or rather, actual) mortification; viz. the exercise or
putting forth of that inward grace, the acting of that principle in resisting
of Temptations, in suppressing and subduing, bringing under and keeping under
inordinate lusts, watching against sinful and inordinate acts: Now this is the
work of a regenerate person himself cooperating, working together with the
Spirit of God, as a Rational Instrument with the principal Agent; acting out of
that supernatural principle of grace which he has received; so showing forth
the virtue of Christ, even that virtue which is derived from the death of
Christ. So as still this Truth remains unshaken, that Mortificatoin, or this
death unto sin, is wrought in the Believer by a virtue flowing from Christ and
his Death, as from the stock to the graft implanted in it. And thus have I
(with as much brevity as might be) passed through the Doctrinall part of these
two Propositions. That which remains is the Application, wherein I will not be
long. Examine whether we be dead unto sin.


Applic. In the first place, Every of us bring it home to our selves, enquiring
concerning this Conformity, whether we be thus planted together with Christ in
his death, made thus conformable to him in his death, or no: Are we thus dead
to sin, or no? It is a Question of high concernment: Great are the things which
depend upon this Qualification; no less then life it self: If we be dead with
Christ, we shall also live with him; so you have it in the 8th verse of this
Chapt. This our dying to sin insures our resurrection to life, eternal life;
For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be
also in the likness of his resurrection.] Every of us then enquire as
concerning this Death, whether we be made partakers of it, whether we be thus
dead unto sin, or no?

Qu. But how shall we know it?

Answ. Evidence of it, A freedom from the service of it.
Here I shall not trouble you with many Evidences. In the verse next but one
after the Text ( ver. 7.) you shall meet with one, which may serve in stead of
many: He that is dead (says the Apostle) is freed from sin. Romans 6.7.
] Mark it; He that is dead to sin, is freed from sin. How freed from it? Why,
not only in respect of guilt, justified from it (as the Margin in our
Translation reads it, according to the proper signification of the word
(...)) but also in respect of service. This it is which the Apostle there
principally aims at, as appears from the words foregoing, where he tells us,
that our old man is crucified with Christ, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, Ver. 6.
that henceforth we should not serve sin: For he that is dead, is freed from
sin: viz. from the service of it. He cease from sin; so S. Peter has it, 1
Pet. 4.1. He that has suffered in the flesh, has ceased from sin:] that is,
he which is crucified with Christ, dead with him, (for that is there meant by
suffering in the flesh) he has ceased from sin. How ceased from it? What,
wholly from the committing of it? Not so: through infirmity he falls into sin
now and then; aye, but he does not make a practice of it; he does not live in
it (as the verse following explains it,) He that is dead, is freed from sin,
that he no longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh (in this mortal
life) to the lusts of men. Thus the mortified person cease from sin: though
through the infirmity of the flesh he may fall into it, yet he does not live in
it, make a practice of it, devote himself to the service of it, so as to make
it his business. Now, do we find such a cessation from sin in our selves?

Q. But may there not be a Cessation, where there is no Mortification? True
cessation from sin is,
may there not be a cessation from sin, where there is no mortification of sin?

A. Yes, there may. Let me therefore in a few words show you what kind of
cessation that must be which gives evidence to the truth of mortification.
Briefly, It is an universal cessation, arising from an inward Principle.

1. An universal 1. Universal.
cessation; not in respect of the Acts, but the Kinds of sin. He that is dead
is feed from sin, (...), from Sin; not this sin, or that sin, but all sin: no
more living to the lusts of men; any lusts: So much is insinuated, where
Mortification is called a putting off of the body of sins, Col. 2.11. Not a
member of this body, but the whole body. Death is a supersedeas to all natural
operations, it runs through the whole man, and every part of it, closing the
ey, deafning the ear, binding the tongue, the hand, the foot, etc. Such is true
mortification, a through work, running through the whole man, and through the
whole body of sin. Through the whole man; not only the outward man, but the
inward, causing a cessation from sin not only in the outward Action, but in the
inward Affection. (...) (says the Heathen Poet,) The dead man longs not:
Anacreon, citat. per Bezam in Romans 6.7.
Even so does this spiritual death, it puts an end to all the inordinate
longings of the soul; so as sinful affections do not find that allowance which
sometimes they did. They which are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the
lusts and affections thereof, Gal. 5.24. viz, the inward affections of the soul,
whether irascible or concupiscible (as Grot. explains that place.) A mortified
person cease not only from practical, but contemplative wickedness. He does
not regard iniquity in his heart, (as David speaks of himself, Psalm. 66.18.)
And as it runs through the whole man, so through the whole Body of sin. Not
killing one sin and sparing another; 1 Samuel 15.15.
like Saul, who made a Cull amongst the cattle, sparing the fattest. So indeed
do some deal by their lusts, mortifying some, not others; their fat,
pleasurable, profitable sins, these they will spare, as serviceable to them. So
does not the true mortified person. He deals impartially; setting himself
against all sin, secret sins as well as open, small sins as well as great. He
does not willingly spare any. Where this work is partial, it evidenceth it not
to be right. Dying to sin imports an universal Cessation from sin.

2. Springing from an inward Principle.
2. It springs from an inward principle, from an inward change in the heart.
This is the difference betwixt a man that is bound and a man that is dead. Each
cease from motion; but the one (the dead man) does it from an inward
principle; he has neither power, nor will to move: The other from outward
restraint; He would move, but cannot. Thus do wicked men sometimes cease from
sin, abstain from the outward Acts of sin; but no thanks to them, there are
some restraints upon them: In the mean time their will is the same that ever it
was. As it is with a thief in the Prison, being manacled, and shackled, now he
cease from robbing, and pilfering; but yet it may be he is as very a thief as
ever he was. The outward act is restrained, but the inward disposition not
changed. But in a regenerate person there is an inward change, from whence this
cessation proceeds. This Practical Mortification springs from an Habitual
Mortification. His heart is turned from, and against all sin, dead to it. He
does not find that taste, that sweetness in sin which sometimes he did: Nay,
he loatheth, abhors it, he has a secret Antipathy against it; against sin
as sin. And thereupon it is that he endeavors the Mortification of it; As a
man that kills a snake, not out of any particular quarrel which he has
against it, but out of that general enmity that is betwixt his nature and the
whole brood of Serpents. Genesis 3.15.


Now bring we our supposed Mortification to these Touch-stones. Is it so
Universal? springing from such an inward Principle in the soul? Reaching to
all sins? proceeding from an inward change in the heart? If so, now conclude
it, we are in the number of those who are planted together with Christ in the
likeness of his Death. Otherwise, our Cessation from sin being only partial or
occasional, this evidenceth it to be no true Mortification.

This Trial being made, now two sorts of persons come to be dealt with. Such
in whom this work is begun: Such in whom it is wanting: A word or two to Each.

Use. 2. For the former, let them be taught whither to give the praise and
glory of this work; Application to mortified persons: Let them glory in Christ
viz. to Jesus Christ. He it was that merited this benefit for them; and he it
is that effects it in them, by letting out and sending forth the virtue of
his death, making it efficacious in them for the killing of the Body of sin.
This could we never have done of our selves; If it be done, If the work of
Mortification be begun, If there be an Habitual Mortification wrought in the
soul, this is the work of Jesus Christ, a fruit and effect of his Death. That
is the Stock from whence this Mortifying virtue issued; And therefore not unto
our selves, but unto him be the glory of the work: Paul will glory in nothing
but in the Cross of Christ, by which he was crucified to the world, Gal. 6.14.

Application to unregenerate persons: who are
Use. 3. For those which want it. Let them be first Exhorted, then Directed.

1. Exhorted to seek after this blessed work; 1 Exhorted to seek after this
work.
never to give rest unto their souls until they find such an habitual
Mortification wrought in them. Arguments or Motives I shall need no other then
those which I have hinted already: If we be not thus dead with Christ, we shall
never live with him: If we be not thus Crucified, mortified with him, we shall
never be glorified with him. If we be not thus ingrafted in the likeness of
his death, we never shall be in the likeness of his resurrection.

2 Directed to go to the cross of Christ.
2. Directed how to attain what they desire: in what way, and by what means this
blessed work may be both begun and carried on. Go to the Cross of Jesus
Christ: That is the Stock from whence must issue this mortifying virtue, for
the crucifying, killing of sin. It is not all our own Purposes, Resolutions,
Promises, Vows, Covenants, Endeavors, Undertakings in our own strength, that
will effect the mortifying of sin: No, this is the work of a supernatural
power, a fruit and effect of the death of Jesus Christ. And therefore whoever
of us would have this work wrought in us, let us have recourse to his Cross,
his Death; and that in a threefold way; By way of Meditation, Application,
Imitation.

1. By way of Meditation: Seriously, 1 By way of Meditation.
upon sad and deliberate thoughts consider and contemplate the Death of Jesus
Christ; how shameful, how painful, how bitter it was: How he being the
Eternal Son of God, drank the Cup of his Father's wrath, and that for the sins
of the World; to the end that he might free and deliver sinners from sin; not
only from the guilt, but also from the power of it. He died unto sin once (as
the Apostle speaks in ver. 10. of this Chapt) for the expiating, for the
abolishing of sin: And shall we live in that for which he died? What were this,
but (in as much as in us lies) to make the death of Christ of none effect?
This Meditation being seriously wrought upon the heart, will be of special
force to cause it to rise against sin. What, did sin cost the Lord of life so
deer? Was the nature of sin so heinous, that nothing but the blood of the Son
of God, could expiate it? Did sin cast him into such a bloody agony, such a
hell of sorrows? What, was he made a curse for sin; and shall we yet live in
it? Did he die for sin, and shall not we die to it? Suffer we this Mediation to
sit upon our hearts, until it has made an impression upon them.

2. By way of Application.
2. To Meditation join Application. Generalities do not affect. And therefore
bring we this general truth home to our selves by a particular Application.
Thus Christ died for the sins of the world, and for my sins: Who gave himself
for our sins, (Gal. 1.4.) that he might deliver us from this present evil
world.] Who loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2.20. Thus bring we home
the death of Jesus Christ by faith. Applying first the merit of it unto our
selves. By the eye of faith behold we all our sins fastened to the Cross of
Jesus Christ, and our selves discharged from the guilt of them by that plenary
satisfaction imputed unto us through faith. Then hang upon the Cross of
Christ, by faith sucking virtue from it: as the Graft sucketh juice from the
Stock wherein it is engrafted, so suck we virtue from Christ, and his death,
for the mortifying of sin; by faith depending upon him for a continued
influence of his grace and Spirit, that so he may work that in us which he has
merited from us; freeing us from the power, as well as for the guilt of sin.

3. By way of Imitation.
3. To Application (in the third place,) now add Imitation, which now comes in
the right place. We have seen how Christ died, what kind of death his was. His
death was a true death, a voluntary death, a violent death, a painful death, a
lingering death. Propound we this as a pattern for our Imitation: writing after
this Copy, endeavoring to find the like death in our selves in respect of
sin. A true death, a true separation of our souls from the body of sin. A
voluntary death, that we may willingly die unto sin, in obedience to the Will
and Command of our heavenly Father. A violent death, that we mortify sin
whilst it might yet live. A painful death, that we affect and afflict our own
hearts with godly sorrow for those sins, whereby we have offended so gracious a
God. A lingering death, that we die daily, every day endeavoring to weaken the
body of sin more and more. So dying, we shall live, live the life of Grace
here, and Glory hereafter. So much the later part of the Text assures us, to
which I now come: If we have been planted together in the likeness of his
death,

We shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection.] The second Part of the
Text.


Here have we the second Part of the Text; and therein the Apostles Position,
or Inference deduced from, and built upon his former Supposition. If we have
been, etc: we shall be also, etc. The words explained. Vide Bezam. Gr. Annot.


We shall be also.] (...) (says the Original,) which the Vulgar Latin, (by a
small mistake (as may be supposed) reading for (...)) renders Simul etiam,
Together also; but more properly Erasmus, and after him Beza, Nimirum etiam;
Even so, so also.

(...).
We shall be in the likeness of his Resurrection.] In the Original the
sentence is Elleipticall, and imperfect: the words running thus, [We shall be
of his Resurrection.] Now what word, or words shall be called in for the making
up this defect, and completing of the sense, is a question. Erasmus supplies it
by Participes erimus, [Even so we shall be partakers of his Resurrection:] that
is, we shall be in the number of those to whom the Resurrection of Christ, (the
benefit thereof,) does appertain. But (as Beza notes upon it) the Phrase in the
Original, ((...), to be of his Resurrection,) will hardly admit that sense.
Others more fitly make up the defect, by calling in those words in the former
part of the verse, the Antecedent part of the Proposition, which are to be
repeated (...), in common, viz. We shall be planted together in the likeness.
[If we be planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also
planted together in the likeness of his resurrection.] The like defective
expression (as Beza parallels it) we meet with, John 5.36. I have a Testimony,
(says our Savior) greater then of John.] So the Original has it, (...),
majus Johannis, greater then of John, viz. then that Testimony of John. So
here; If we have been planted together in the likeness of his death; even so,
(...) (...). We shall be also planted together in the likeness of his
Resurrection.

The words being thus rendered and opened, they hold forth unto us two main
Doctrinall Propositions, answerable to those in the former part.

1. Two Doctrinall Propositions.
That all true believers being made conformable to Christ in his death, they
shall be also in his Resurrection.

2. This their conformity with Christ in his Resurrection, is wrought in them
by a virtue flowing from Christ and his Resurrection.

Thus is it betwixt the Graft and the Stock. The Graft being dead with the
Stock, (seeming so to be) in the winter, it reviveth with it in the Spring.
After the Winters death, it partakes of the Springs Resurrection: And this it
obtains by a virtue issuing from the Stock, transfusing sap and juice into it.
Even thus is it betwixt Christ and the believer: The beleiever being dead with
Christ here, (dead to sin, as he died for sin,) he shall be raised with him.
Being conformed to him in his death, he shall be also in his Resurrection; And
that by a virtue flowing from him, and his Resurrection. Both comprehended
under this phrase of being [engrafted in the likeness of his Resurrection.] I
shall insist upon them severally. Begin with the former.

Believers being made conformable to Christ in his death, Proposit. 1.
Believers conformable to Christ in his Resurrection.
they shall be also in his Resurrection.] Being engrafted in the likeness of
the one, they shall be also in the likeness of the other. They shall be
engrafted in the likeness of his Resurrection; that is, they shall be made
partakers of a Resurrection which carries with it a resemblance, Instar ejus
resurgent. H. Grotius ad Text.
a likeness of his Resurrection.

Quest. But what Resurrection is this? Here is the first and main Question.

A twofold Resurrection. Corporal. Spiritual.
Ans. For answer whereunto, we may take notice of a twofold Resurrection
spoken of in Scripture; a corporal, a spiritual Resurrection; the one of the
Body, the other of the Soul. The later of these is the first Resurrection, so
called (as it is commonly taken) by Saint John, Revel. 20.6. where he
pronounces them blessed, who have their part in the first Resurrection.] True
indeed, the Resurrection there spoken of, is properly a general Resurrection
of whole Churches and Nations; like that of the restoring of the people of the
Jews, which was represented unto the Prophet Ezekiel, by the resurrection of
those dry bones, Ezekiel. 37. And is called by the Apostle, Life from the dead,
Rom, 11.15. Such a Resurrection shall there be of the Church after the thousand
years, (a set time determined and appointed by God;) it shall be raised up from
a low estate to a flourishing condition, chiefly in regard of spiritual
Privileges. This is the first Resurrection, (says the verse foregoing.) But
to have part in this first Resurrection, is, not barely to live in those times,
to be eyewitnesses of that Church State, but to share in it; to feel the power
and efficacy of those means, those Ordinances, which shall then be plentifully
afforded, and powerfully dispensed, in the quickening of them spiritually, in
raising them up from the death of sin, to the life of grace. This is a
Resurrection, the first Resurrection, the Resurrection of the soul: The other,
the second Resurrection, the Resurrection of the body; of which the Apostle
discourses in that 1 Cor. 1^. and frequently elsewhere.

Quest. Now which of these shall we conceive the Apostle to aim at here in the
Text? And which of these is it that carries such a Resemblance of the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ?

Ans. To this it is variously answered. The Text by some understood of the
former.
Amongst expositours, some are for the one; others for the other. Chrysostom,
Origin, Tertullian, with diverse other after them, understand it of the former,
the second Resurrection. And they contend, it must be so understood. How else
says the Apostle here, We shall be also of his Resurrection? speaking not in
the present, but in the future tense; not sumus, but erimus; not we are, but we
shall be. Now (say they,) as for that first Resurrection, that is past already
with believers. In this sense Hymenaeus and Philetus, and their followers, were
not mistaken, when they held that the Resurrection was past already, 2 Timothy
2.18. True, it is so, being understood only of the first Resurrection, the
Resurrection of the soul, that is past in a regenerate person, in whom the work
of Sanctification is begun, he is already raised from death to life. But there
is a second Resurrection, a Resurrection of the body, which they heretically
denied, and that is to come: And of that (say they) speaks the Apostle here
in the Text, [If we have been planted together in the likeness of his death,
we shall be also of his Resurrection.]

By others of the later.
2. Others, and that the greatest part, understand it rather of the former of
these, the first Resurrection, the Resurrection of the soul, when it is raised
from the death of sin, to the life of righteousness. Of this speaks the
Apostle in the verse foregoing, [That like as Christ was raised from the dead
by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life.]
And of this Resurrection it is, (say they) that here he speaks; the first
Resurrection.

Object. But how then, says he, We shall be; Why the Apostle here uses the
future tense?
speaking of believers? We shall be planted in the likeness of his
Resurrection? What, are they not so already? Upon their believing on Christ
they are engrafted with him in the likeness of both these; both of his Death,
and Resurrection. Being regenerated, they have both the parts of Sanctification
wrought in them; not only Mortification, but also Vivification. As they are
dead to sin, so they are quickened, and raised to a new life.

The first Re^^rection im^
Ans. To this Beza returns answer. True, they are so, but they are so but in
part. The work is but imperfect in them. As they are but in part dead, so they
are but in part raised to newness of life. Such a mutual, both Relation, and
Proportion, there is betwixt these two; this death, and this life; this death
of sin, this life of grace. Where the one is, the other is. But as the one is
imperfect, so is the other: And so as the one increases, so does the other.
And hereupon (says he) the Apostle chooses rather to speak in the future,
then in the present tense: rather we shall be, then we are, or have been:
because as we are not yet quite dead unto sin, there being still some
remainders of corruption left in the soul; so neither are we wholly raised from
the dead to a new life. Only the work is begun, daily increasing more and more,
until it shall come to full perfection in heaven. And therefore, says the
Apostle, We shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection.

Quest. Now, which of these ways shall we take? Which of these Expositions
shall we pitch upon?

Ans. Truth is, Both may here be understood, though principally the later.
Each carries a fair aspect with it. And (for my own part) I see no
inconvenience in taking them in both: Only I must acknowledge, the later of
them I look upon as most properly and principally intended and aimed at by the
Apostle; yet so as not excluding the former. In such a joint sense that phrase
of the Apostles is expounded, Phil. 3.10. where he makes it his wish, that he
might know the power of Christ's Resurrection; that is, that he might by
experience find the same power put forth in him, which raised Christ from the
dead, working in him a double Resurrection; first, raising him from the death
of sin to the life of grace here, and then from the death of nature to the life
of glory hereafter. And in a like joint sense are we to understand the same
Apostle in the 8th verse of this Romans 6. If now we be dead with Christ, we
believe that we shall also live with him.] Live with him, viz. in the life of
grace on earth, and glory in heaven: Both which make up one and the same life;
only differing in degree; whence it is that they are both comprehended under
that one word of Glorification, Romans 8.30. Whom he justified, them also he
glorified;] Glorifieth here in this life in Sanctification begun, in the life
to come in Sanctification perfect: Grace is Glory inchoated, Glory is Grace
consummated. And thus not unfitly may we understand the language of the Text,
as intending this twofold Resurrection; the first Resurrection, whereof
Christians in measure already are, and shall be made partakers in this life:
the second Resurrection, whereof they shall be made partakers in the life to
come. And of each of these, we shall find it true which the Apostle here
insinuates in the Text, that they carry with them a Resemblance of the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ: Each carrying a Resemblance of Christ's
Resurrection.
Each of them is (...), a Representation of his Resurrection. The truth hereof
I shall show you, by comparing the one with the other: And this I shall do
severally; beginning first with the first.

1. The first Resurrection, 1. The spiritual Resurrection carries a
resemblance,
the raising up of the soul from the death of sin to the life of
righteousness; this is a work which carries with it a resemblance of the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ. A resemblance of a Resurrection, and of his
Resurrection. Of a Resurrection in general; of his Resurrection in particular.
Touch upon each distinctly.

1. In the general. 1. In general, of a corporal Resurrection.
This spiritual Resurrection carries with it a resemblance of a corporal
Resurrection. It is (...): And hence it is that we find it so familiarly set
forth under this expression: If you be risen with Christ, Col. 3 1. He has
raised us up together, Ephesians. 2.6. Bring them together, we shall find the one
answering to the other. See it in five or six particulars.

1. They are alike in the Order of the work. 1. Resemb. In the Order of the
work.
Resurrection presupposes a Death going before it: A man must first die before
he can be capable of a Resurrection. Herein lies the difference betwixt
Resurrection and Resuscitation; the raising a man from his bed, and from his
grave. In the one he is raised only from sleep, in the other from death. This
is peculiarly (...), resurrection: Which word, however it may be sometimes used
for any kind of raising again, As Luke 2.34. it is opposed to falling: [Behold
this Child (meaning Jesus) is set for the falling and rising again of many in
Israel.] (...) opposed to (...); yet most commonly in Scripture phrase it
imports a raising from the dead. And such is this spiritual Resurrection. It
is such a Resurrection as presupposes a Death: So much the Text gives us
clearly to understand, [If we have been engrafted in the likeness of his
death, we shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection.] Such was the
Resurrection of Christ; He first died, before he rose again. And such is the
Resurrection of the Christian, a resurrection which in order followeeh a death:
The Christian must first die to sin, before he can be raised up to this new
life, this life of Righteousness. This is the order which the Spirit of God in
Scripture every where prescribes and lays down, Psalm. 34.14. Depart from
evil, and do good, Isai. 1.16, 17. Cease to do evil, learn to do well, 1 Pet.
3.11. If any man will love life, and see good days, let him eschew evil, and
do good. As in natural works, Privation goes before Generation; so in this
spiritual work, Privation must go before Regeneration. A thing must put off
its old form, and cease to be what it was, before it can put on another form,
and become what it was not. Thus must a Christian first put off the old man,
before he can put on the new, Ephesians. 4.22, 24. He must cease to live the life
of sin, before he can live the life of grace.

True, in time, these two go together; but in order, the one goes before the
other; as Death does before Resurrection. A man is not capable of a corporal
Resurrection until he be dead; There must first be a separation of the soul
from the body: And so must it be here. Before man can be made partaker of this
spiritual Resurrection, he must die to sin; There must be a separation of his
soul from the body of sin; otherwise he can never live unto God. Mortification
in order goes before Vivification.

Applic. Some convinced to be strangers to this Resurrection.
Which (by the way) may convince many to be as yet strangers unto this blessed
life: However (happily) they may perform many duties and services unto God, yet
they do not live unto God. How should they? they never yet knew what it was to
die, to die unto sin. Their souls are not yet separated from the body of sin:
they are not turned from, and against all sin. Some sins there are which their
souls do yet cleave unto, are wedded to; they like them, love them, and live
in them. Against such the evidence is too clear, they are strangers unto this
Resurrection, which in order follows after death. Here is a first resemblance.

2. 2. Resemb. In the Nature of the work.
This spiritual resembles a corporal Resurrection, as in the Order, so in the
Nature of the work. What is the Resurrection of the body? but a motion from
death to life; a raising of a dead body from the grave of the earth to a new
life, and that by the return of the soul unto it, which was for a time
separated from it; inabling it to exercise the operations of a natural life.
And such is the spiritual Resurrection; a motion from death to life, from the
death of sin, to the life of righteousness, caused by the return of the Spirit
of God unto the soul, inabling it to exercise the operations of a spiritual
life. Mark it: Such is this spiritual Resurrection.

Spiritual Resurrection, what.
The quickening and raising up of a dead soul. Such are all men by nature, dead
men. The hour comes, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son
of God, etc. John 5.25. The dead, men dead while they live; living corporally,
but dead spiritually: Dead in trespasses and sins, as Paul has it, Ephesians. 2.1.
having no more power to do any work of the spiritual life, then a dead man of
the natural. And as dead, so buried. Their souls daily (as it were) putrefying
and rotting in the grave of sinful corruption. Such is the state of all men in
their natural condition, before the grace of God meet with them. Now this
grace meeting with them, it quickens and raises them: [Even when we were dead
in sins, he has quickened us together with Christ, and raised us up together:]
Ephesians. 2.5, 6. Thus in the work of Regeneration, there is a new life put into
the soul: And that by the return of the Spirit of God into it. At the first
Creation of man, man himself being made after the Image of God his soul was
then a Temple, an habitation for the Spirit; which was to the soul, as the soul
to the body, the very life of it. But upon man's fall, this Spirit forsook that
habitation, and thereupon followed a spiritual death, the soul of man died.
And in that state it continues, under the power of this spiritual death,
until that Spirit return again; which it does in the work of Regeneration. And
so returning, now it restores it to life again, enabling it to live unto God,
and to exercise the operations of a spiritual life; to live in the Spirit; and
to walk in the Spirit, (as the Apostle phraseth it Gal. 5.16, 25.) to live no
longer to the lusts of men, but to the will of God, (as St Peter has it,) 1
Pet. 4.2. Such is this work of Renovation, and in this respect not unlike a
Resurrection.

3. In the third place, Resemb. 3. In the Integrity of the work.
This Spiritual resembles the Corporal Resurrection, as in the Order and
Nature, so in the Integrity of the work. Such is the Corporal Resurrection, a
raising up, not of some one, or more members only, but of the whole body. And
such is this Spiritual Resurrection; It is a raising up of the whole man. Even
as I said before of Mortification; It is an entire work, running through the
whole man, and through the whole body of sin: A separating of the soul not only
from some one sin, or many sins, but all sins. Even so is Vivification a
through work, going through the whole man. Hence is it that we find it called
a Putting on the New man, Ephesians. 4.24. intimating that this work of Renovation it
is an entire work; passing through the whole man; through all the faculties of
the soul, all the members of the Body. It is Paul's prayer for his
Thessalonians, 1 These. 5.23. Now the very God of peace sanctify you wholly,
((...), the whole man in every part;) and I pray God that your whole Spirit,
Soul and Body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ.] Where truth of Sanctification is vouchsafed, the whole man partakes of
it. No part of soul or body in a Regenerate person but feels the virtue of the
spirit of Grace purging out old corruption, infusing new qualities. In the
Soul, the understanding, that is renewed, [ Be ye renewed in the spirit of your
mind, Ephesians. 4.23.] and that by putting a new light into it, [ Ye were sometimes
darkness, but now ye are light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8. The Will and
Affections they are renewed, having new Motions, new Inclinations, new
Dispositions put into them; new desires, new fears, new loves, new joys, new
sorrows, new hopes, new confidences. In the Body, all the members are renewed
in respect of their Obedientiall faculty, being no longer what they were,
Instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, but Instruments of Righteousness
unto Holiness, Romans 6.13. Thus the believer being in Christ, he is made a New
Creature. Old things are past away, All things are become new, 2 Corinthians
5.17. Thus does the Grace of Christ, equalize the sin of Adam. Adams sin, like
a desperate poison, it spread it self through the whole man, infecting all,
bringing death upon all. So does the Grace of Christ; like a Sovereign
antidote, it diffuseth it self through the whole man, healing, restoring,
renewing all: The salve is as large as the soar. Here is a third Resemblance,
in the Integrity of the work.

4. See a fourth, Resemb. 4. The difficulty of the work.
in the Difficulty of the work. Resurrection is a work of difficulty. To raise
up a dead body from the Grave, is a work that transcends the power of nature.
In no one thing did Christ more manifestly, and mightily declare himself to be
the Son of God then in this, in raising up others and himself from death to
life. Declared to be the Son of God with power, by the Resurrection from the
dead, Romans 1.4.] And such is this spiritual Resurrection; the raising up of
a dead soul from the grave of sin, to an heavenly life: It is a work which men
or Angels cannot do; In respect of difficulty, no ways inferior to a
Resurrection: A work of a mighty, almighty power. So the Apostle sets it
forth, Ephesians 1.19, 20. Where he prays for his Ephesians, that, amongst
other things, they might know (know by experience,) what is the exceeding
greatness of his power toward them which believe: According to the working of
his mighty power which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the
dead.] Such is that power which God manifests in raising up dead souls from the
death of sin to the life of Righteousness, it is (...), exceeding greatness
of power, no less then that (...), that effectual working of the power of his
might, which he put forth in raising Christ from the grave.

Applic. Much then are they mistaken, who conceive the work of the holy Ghost,
Conversion more then a Moral swasion.
in producing and breeding faith and Holiness in the soul, to be no more but a
moral swasion, to which it is in the power and choice of man himself to yield
or not to yield. Surely such a swasion cannot be said to be the working of Gods
mighty power, like that whereby he raised Christ from the dead. Resurrection
imports more then a swasion. They are not all the Arguments and persuasions
that can be used, that will raise a dead man from his grave: There must be a
new principle of life put into that liveless carcass to give motion to it. So
is it here. They are not all the most persuasive Arguments that can be
suggested to, and pressed upon a dead soul, that can cause it to arise from the
dead. There must be a principle of a spiritual life breathed in the face of
it, by the Spirit of God, before it can awake and arise. Why men are called
upon to arise, which of themselves they are not able to do.


Obj. But why then are men themselves called upon so to do? Awake thou that
sleep, and stand up from the dead, etc. So the Apostle exhorts Ephesians 5.14.
speaking from the prophet Isa. cap. 60.1. (as it is commonly taken,) or rather
(as Beza notes it) cap. 26.19. It should seem then, that man has some power in
himself to perform what here he is put upon. The Exhortation Ephesians. 5.14 directed
to Believers.


A. To this it is answered. As for that exhortation, it may be conceived to be
directed to believers; Even they sometimes sleep: So did the five wise Virgins,
as well as the foolish. All slumbred and slept, Mat. 25.5. And they may seem
sometimes to fall into a dead sleep, through the surprizall of carnal security.
Now, as for them, the Exhortation is not vain, to call upon them to awake and
arise, in as much as they are able to do this by the power of that spirit which
they have already received. But suppose it be directed to others, men dead in
trespasses and sins, Such exhortations not useless to others.
yet such Exhortations are not useless unto them; In as much as through those
channels God is pleased to convey his grace and spirit, whereby he enables them
to do what he requires from them. Thus in raising Jairus his daughter from
the Deathbed, our Savior calls to her, Talitha Cumi, Damsel, arise; Mark.
5.41. And in raising Lazarus from the grave, he cries unto him, Lazarus come
forth, Joh. 11.43. not that either the one, or the other had power of
themselves to do what was commanded, but there was a power went forth together
with the word; like that which went forth with that Creating word at the first;
God said, Let there be light, and there was light, Genesis 1. There was a power
went forth with the word, giving a being to that which was not. Thus does God
call things which are not, as if they were, Romans 4.17. By his word making things
to be what they were not. And thus does be call upon dead souls to awake and
arise; by and through his word conveying that spirit and power unto his Elect,
whereby they are enabled to do what of themselves they cannot. The first
Resurrection is a work of no less power, no less difficulty then the second.

5. To these add, in the fifth place, Resemb. 5.
This spiritual resembles the corporal Resurrection in the Indisposition of
the Subject. In the indisposition of the Subject.
A dead Corpse lying in the grave, it has no disposition, no aptitude, no
inclination to rise again. As it cannot raise it self, so neither can it do
any thing in a way of tendency toward its own resurrection. It can no ways
fit, or prepare it self for it: Nay, it cannot so much as will, or desire it.
Even such an indisposition is there in a dead soul to this first Resurrection.
A soul dead in sin, as it cannot raise it self to the life of grace, so
neither can it do any thing which tends that way. Such an Impotency is there
in man since the fall: All are now by nature (...), without power: [When we
were yet without strength, Christ died for us, Romans 5.6.] Not able to
contribute ought toward this blessed change. Not able to do any thing by way
of preparation, to fit themselves for the receiving of the grace of God: no,
nor yet so much as will and desire it: when the grace of God first meets with
man, it finds him a mere patient, like a dead body lying in the grave, having
only a passive capacity, rendering him a subject capable of receiving the
impressions of grace, and so of having a new life put into him.

Man has not only an outward, but an inward Impediment to this Resurrection.
So indisposed is man naturally to the work of God's grace; not only having an
outward Impediment, (as Papists and Arminians would have it,) like a Prisoner,
(as some of them frame the similitude,) who having fetters upon his legs,
cannot walk; but yet he has an inward power in himself so to do, if that
outward impediment were removed. Not only so, but man has also an inward
impediment: Being like a dead carcass lying in the grave, which though all the
grave-clothes be taken from it, yet it cannot move nor stir, until a new life
be put into it: Until God does breathe the breath of a new life into the soul,
the man is whole indisposed unto this blessed change.

I might go a step further, Man not only indisposed, but averse to this
Resurrection.
and show you how he is not only indisposed to this life, but averse to it. In
which respect the first Resurrection goes beyond the second. The second
Resurrection meets with a Body, which though of it self it be indisposed to
live again, yet it makes no resistance, no opposition against its own
resurrection. But in the first Resurrection, when God comes to raise up a dead
soul from the grave of sin, he finds it not only indisposed, but opposite to
it, making resistance against the work of his grace: Ye stiff-necked and
uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost: As your
fathers did, so do ye, (says Saint Stephen to the Jews,) Acts 7.51. To these
I might yet add one more.

6. This spiritual resembles the corporal Resurrection in the efficient
causes of it; Resemb. 6. The Efficient Causes of it.
and that both Principal, and Ministerial, and Isntrumental. In the second
Resurrection, the Resurrection of the body, the Principal Efficient is God
himself; the Ministerial, the Angels, the Isntrumental, the sound of a
Trumpet. You have them all together, 1 These. 4.16. The Lord himself shall
descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of an Archangel, and with the
Trumpet of God, and the dead in Christ shall arise.] Now see a resemblance of
all these in the first Resurrection. The same Principal Efficient; God. God
quickneth the dead, Romans 4.17. as dead bodies, so dead souls. The like
Ministerial, and Isntrumental Cause. Herein God makes use of his Angels,
Revel. 2. and 3.
and of his Trumpet: His Angels, the Angels of the Churches, the Ministers of
the Gospel, whom he now sends forth to gather together his Elect from the
four winds, from one end of Heaven to the other, Mat. 24.31. His Trumpet, is
his word in the mouth of his Ministers. A spiritual Trumpet, shadowed out by
those silver Trumpets under the Law, by the sounding whereof the Priests called
the people to the public Assemblies on earth. Numb. 10.2.
Thus do the Ministers of the Gospel, by lifting up their voice like a Trumpet,
(as it is given in charge to the Prophet Isaiah, Isai. 58.1.) by preaching and
publishing the Gospel, they call men to the Kingdom of God; Hereby awakening
and raising them up. The hour is coming, and now is, (says our Savior) when
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they which hear it shall
live, John 5.25. Men dead in sin hear the voice of Christ in the Ministry of
his Word, and thereby (the Spirit concurring with the Ordinance, and giving
efficacy to it,) they are quickened and raised up to a new, spiritual, and
heavenly life; Even as dead bodies shall be at the last day raised from their
graves by the voice of an Archangel, and sound of a Trumpet.

Thus then you see this General made out: How that the first resurrection, the
resurrection of the soul from the death of sin, to the life of righteousness,
carries with it the resemblance of [a] Resurrection, resembling it in the
Order, in the Nature, in the Integrity, in the Difficulty of the work, in the
Indisposition of the Subject, in the Efficient Causes of it, both Principal;
Ministerial, and Isntrumental.

Now come we (in the second place) to see how it resembles the Resurrection of
Christ, 2. The spiritual Resurrection resembles the Resurrection of Christ.
So it does. It is (...), the similitude of his resurrection. That it is so,
will appear in four or five particulars: The Principals whereof we shall find
hinted unto us in the verse before the Text, in the later part of it; where the
Apostle says, that We are buried with Christ by baptism into death.] That
like as he was raised from the dead to the Glory of the Father, so we also
should walk in newness of life.] In which passage we may take notice of two
things touching the Resurrection of Christ, Two general Resemblances taken
from the verse foregoing.
both useful to our present purpose. 1. That he was raised to a new life. 2.
That he was raised up to the Glory of God the Father. The former of these is
insinuated: [Like as Christ was raised from the dead, so we also should walk in
newness of life:] intimating, that Christ was raised up to a new life. The
other expressed, [Christ was raised from the dead to the Glory of the Father.]
So Beza, and others read it, [To the Glory,] conceiving the Preposition (...)
put for (...), By for To. The like we find 2 Pet. 1.3. [Him that has called us
to glory and virtue.] The Original has it, (...), by glory, put for (...), to
glory, as our Translation renders it. So here, Christ was raised from the dead
by the Glory, i. e. to the Glory of the Father. And in both these we shall find
the Christian's spiritual Resurrection resembling his corporal Resurrection.

General 1. In the newness of his life.
1. In the newness of life whereunto he is raised. Christ was raised to a new
life, a life different from that which before he lived. Herein did his
Resurrection differ from the Resurrection of those others whom we read to have
been raised again from the dead. Such was the the life of Christ after his
Resurrection.
In the Old Testament, the son of the widow of Zarephath, 1 King. 17.22. the
Shunamites son, 2 King. 35.36. the man that was cast into Elisha's Sepulcher,
and touched his bones, 2 King. 13.21. In the New Testament, the son of the
widow of Naim, Luke 7.15. Jairus his daughter, Mat. 9.25. Lazarus, John 11.43.
Tabitha, or Dorcas, Acts 9.40. All these were raised from the dead, but they
were raised to the same life which formerly they lived. But so was not the Lord
Jesus: He was raised up to a new life, new both for kind and continuance. For
kind, he was raised from a natural, to a spiritual life: for continuance, he
was raised from a mortal, Such is the Christian's life.
to an immortal life. And herein the Christian's first Resurrection carries
with it a resemblance of his Resurrection. Being

1. In the General, 1. In the general, a new life.
a raising up of the soul to a new life: [That we should walk in newness of
life,] (...), put for (...); Newness of life, for a new life. Such is the
Christian's life, to which he is raised in and by his spiritual Regeneration; A
new life. That it is so, and in what respects it may be said so to be, I showed
you at large in opening of the former verse: I shall now only remind you of the
heads. It is a new life, having a new principle, a new rule, a new end, ordered
after a new manner.

1. Having a new Principle. 1. Having a new Principle.
Before regeneration, what was the principle of his life? why, the Flesh. The
unregenerate person is one that walks after the flesh, Romans 8.1. that is,
sinful corruption; whereunto all mere natural men are servants, (as Peter
describes those pernicious seducers, 2 Pet. 2.19.) Out of this principle it is
that they act, being themselves acted by the spirit of Satan, as Paul says of
his Ephesians, Ephesians. 2.3. In times past ye walked after the Prince of the air,
the spirit that works in the children of disobedience.] This was the old
Principle. But now behold a new Principle: even the Spirit of God, that Spirit
of Holiness, or Sanctification, (as Paul calls it, Romans 1.4. (...), that
Spirit which dwelt in the humane nature of Christ, and raised him, that also
dwells in every true believer. So says the Apostle, Romans 8.11. 2 Timothy 1.14.
where speaking of the Spirit of God, he calls it an indwelling Spirit. Even
as the soul dwells in the body, so does this spirit dwell in the soul of a
regenerate person, animating and actuating it. Whence it is that the believer
is said to live in the spirit, Gal. 5.25. and to walk in the spirit, ver. 16.
and to walk after the spirit, Romans 8.1. and to be led by the spirit, ver. 14.
and to serve in newness of spirit, Romans 7.6. (...), put for (...); newness of
spirit, for a new spirit; even the Spirit of God, by which believers are acted,
and according to the dictates, directions, motions whereof they now order the
course of their lives, and conversations. Thus is the regenerate man's life a
new life, having a new Principle.

2. A new Rule.
2. And secondly, a new Rule. What is the unregenerate man's rule which he
walks by? Why, at the best, carnal reason. It may be, the precepts of men,
humane Laws and Constitutions, which he dare not transgress for fear of the
penalty. It may be, example; Vivitur exemplo --; the custom of the times, the
course of the world: [In times past, ye walked according to the course of the
world, Ephesians. 2.2. (...), Mundane itatem mundi, (as the Syrian Interpreter, and
Tremelius render it,) the worldliness of the world. It may be his rule is to
walk without rule: Such is the course of licentious persons, who walk (as Paul
says of some of his Thessalonians, 2 These. 3.11.) (...), irregularly,
disorderly, making their will their rule. But so does not the regenerate
person: His life is a regular life; his conversation is an orderly
conversation. So David describes the righteous man, Psalm. 50.23. He is one
that disposes his way, (as the Hebrew has it,) that orders his
conversation; walking by rule. And what rule? Why, the rule of the new
creature: [As many as walk according to this rule, peace shall be upon them,
and mercy, Gal. 6.16.] which is the rule of the word, the rule of faith and
obedience: According to this rule does the regenerate person walk. It is
David's prayer unto God for himself, Psalm. 119.133. Order my steps in (or,
according to) thy word. And in the 9th verse of that Psalm, propounding the
question, Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? he answers, By taking
heed thereunto according to thy word. Here is a new rule.

3. A new End. 3. A new End.
What is the unregenerate man's end? In living he lives to himself, to his
own honor, profit, pleasure, ease. Still in whatever he does, he reflects upon
himself, making self the ultimate and last end of all. But now the new
creature has a new end of his life; not himself, but God: None of us lives
to himself, (says the Apostle, Romans 14.7, 8.) but whether we live, we live
unto the Lord, etc. Thus does the true Christian live; He lives to the Lord.
1. Acknowledging him to be his Sovereign Lord, and himself his servant, in
duty bound to yield obedience to him in doing, in suffering his will. 2.
Framing and ordering his life and conversation according to his will in all
things. 3. Depending upon him for protection, provision, wages. 4. Referring
and applying his life in the whole course of it to his honor and glory:
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God, 1
Cor. 10.31. This a Christian should do: And this, so far as he is regenerate,
he does. And thus is his life a new life, having a new end.

4. Ordered after a new manner.
4. Ordered after a new manner. His conversation is a new conversation, far
different from what it was. Time was, when it was a vain conversation. So Saint
Peter calls the conversation of all men before the grace of God meet with
them, 1 Pet. 1.18. (...), a vain conversation: And so it is: 1. Proceeding from
the vanity of their minds, Ephesians. 4.17. And 2dly, In regard of the
unprofitablenesse, fruitlesnesse of it: Men weary themselves for very vanity,
(as Habakuk speaks, Hab. 2.13.) What fruit had ye in those things whereof ye
are now ashamed? (says Paul to his Romans here,) ver. 21. of this Chapter. A
vain, and a carnal conversation, intending chiefly the fulfilling the lusts of
the flesh: We in times past had our conversation in the lusts of our flesh,
Ephesians. 2.3. Perhaps it was a filthy conversation, like that of those wicked
Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2.7. It may be, a blind, superstitious conversation, like
that of Paul's before his conversion, Gal. 1.13. zealously bent against God,
against his truth, servants, purity of worship, power of godliness: Such it
was. But now behold a new life, a new conversation, viz. such a conversation,
as becomes the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. a good conversation, Jam. 3.13. an honest
conversation, 1 Pet. 2.12. a profitable conversation he that was (...),
unprofitable before, is now (...), profitable to himself, and others, (as Paul
says of Onesimus,) Philem. 11, 12. And upright conversation, Psalm. 37.14. an
holy conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15. an heavenly conversation, Phil. 3.20. Thus is
the believer raised as Christ was, to a new life. This in the General.

2. In Particular: 2. In particular, Resembling the life of Christ; being as
his was.
This new life to which the believer is raised, resembles the life of Christ,
both for kind, and continuance: For kind, it is a spiritual life; for
continuance, an immortal life. Such was the life to which Christ was raised;
therein differing from the life of others whom we read to have been raised
again. They were raised up to the same life which they lived before, to a
natural life, to a mortal life. A natural life, so as they stood in need of
meats and drinks, and such other supports of nature as they did before: When
our Savior had raised Jairus his daughter, he presently commanded to give her
meat, Luke 8.55. And as a natural, so a mortal life: They all died again. But
it was otherwise with our blessed Savior; The life which he was raised to, was
a spiritual, an immortal life. A spiritual life, not upheld by
creature-supports and comforts, as formerly it was True, our Savior did use
some of the creatures after his Resurrection, as the story informs us of his
eating the broyled fish, and honey-combe, which his Disciples gave him, Luke
24.42. But this he did not out of any necessity of nature, but only for the
confirmation of his Disciples faith in the truth of his Resurrection, and
reality of his present apparition. He lived then a spiritual life; and that an
immortal life: He was raised from the dead, no more to return to corruption,
(as Paul has it in his Sermon at Antioch,) Acts 13.34. Christ being dead, he
dies no more, (says our Apostle, ver. 9. of this Chapter:) In that he died,
he died to sin once, ver. 10. And in both these does the Christian's spiritual
Resurrection carry a resemblance of his Resurrection; being a raising up of the
soul to a spiritual, to an immortal life.

1. To a spiritual life. 1. A spiritual life.
Such is the life of a regenerate person. He that before was only a natural
man, (as Paul calls the unregenerate person, 1 Cor. 2.14.) (...), nay (...), a
carnal man, (as Paul says of himself, so far forth as he was unregenerate,
Romans 7.14.) living only a natural, a carnal life; he is now made a
spiritual man, (as Paul calls him, 1 Cor. 2.15.) (...), endued with the Spirit
of God, and so living a spiritual life: Not living by sense, or yet by carnal
reason, as sometime he did; but by faith: The life which I now live in the
flesh, (says the Apostle,) I live by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20.
Paul still lived a natural life, he lived in the flesh; but it was after a
spiritual manner, he lived by faith. So does every regenerate person in
measure; so far forth as he is regenerate, he lives a spiritual and heavenly
life; having spiritual meat and drink: (as the Apostle calls the Manna, and
water in the wilderness, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4.) Seeking after spiritual, and
heavenly things: Whilst others mind nothing but earthly things, (as Paul says
of sensual persons, Phil. 3.19.) profits, and pleasures, and honors, curvae
in terras animae, etc. having their souls bowed downwards, grovelling upon the
earth, like the Serpents brood, feeding upon dust; the regenerate person, so
far forth as he is regenerate, he minds and seeks the things which are above,
Col. 3.2, 3. His conversation, his (...), his chief negotiation and business
is in heaven, Phil. 3.20. The chief things which his thoughts are most
seriously intent upon, and taken up about, are heavenly things.

How a Christian uses the things of this world.
As for the things of this world, true, he uses them: but how? why, even as our
Savior did the broyled fish and honey-combe, as as if he used them not. He
has learned that distinction of Augustines, or rather of Paul's, 1 Cor. 7.30,
31.) betwixt uti and frui, using and enjoying: He uses earth, and earthly
things; but he enjoys God, and heavenly things: making the one his viaticum,
his voyage-provision; the other his possession, his portion: Thou art my
portion, O Lord, (says David,) Psalm. 119.57. As for the things of this life,
his heart does not run after them in such an inordinate way, as sometimes it
did. This it is which our Savior means in Joh. 4.14. Whosoever shall drink
of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst.] So again, Joh. 6.35.
He that comes unto me shall never hunger, and he that believes in me shall
never thirst:] that is, he shall find a full satisfaction in me, as that he shall
not hunger and thirst after other things as sometimes he did; his soul shall not
run out inordinately after creature comforts, to seek for happiness and
contentment in them. Thus does the life of this new creature carry with it (in
measure) a conformity to the life of Jesus Christ after his Resurrection;
being, as his was, a spiritual life.

2. An immortal life.
2. And (secondly,) an immortal life. Thus was Christ raised, never to die
again. And so is the Christian raised: So the Apostle himself makes out this
Resemblance, ver. 9, 10, 11, 12. of this Chapter: Christ being raised from the
dead, dies no more; death has no more dominion over him, etc: Likewise reckon
ye your selves also dead unto sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal bodies, etc.] Christ being
raised from the grave, he returns no more to his old lodging, to his former
state. He never came under the power and dominion of death again. Even so the
Believer, being once raised up from the grave of sin, he dies no more.
Express to this purpose is that of our Savior, John. 11.25, 26. He that
believes on me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; And whosoever lives,
and believes on me, shall never die.] This are we to understand, not only of
the second Resurrection, (as Arminians would have it, who that they might
decline the evidence of this Text, make use of that subterfuge,) but also, and
most properly of the first Resurrection, the raising up of the soul to a
spiritual life: Of such a life speaks our Savior in Joh. 5.25. The hour
comes, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and
they which hear it, shall live.] Understand it not only of a corporal
Resurrection, (as Grotius would have it, in which sense yet it is true which is
there said, but of a) spiritual Resurrection. [The Dead] such as are
spiritually dead; dead in sin: [They shall hear the voice of the Son of God.]
They shall hear Christ speaking to them in the Ministry of his word. [And they
which hear this word,] hear it with faith, [They shall live,] live a spiritual
life, the life of grace here, and glory hereafter. And in a like sense, are we
to understand this passage in this 11th Chapter: wherein our Savior (as
Diodate observes upon it,) according to his usual custom, takes occasion
from the corporal Resurrection before spoken of, to instruct Martha in the
doctrine of the spiritual Resurrection. And speaking of this Resurrection, he
says, He that believes on me, though he were dead:] dead in trespasses and
sins, [yet shall he live,] live a spiritual life. [And whosoever (so) lives,
and believes on me, shall never die;] never die a spiritual death again,
never come under the power and dominion of sin again, never totally fall from
the grace which he has received. That incorruptible seed by which he is
regenerated, shall abide in him; that Spirit of grace which he has received,
shall maintain this spiritual life in him. True indeed, the body is still
subject unto death, but not so the soul. If Christ be in you, (says the
Apostle) the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life because of
righteousness, Romans 8.10. that is, (as Diodate and Beza, and others expound
it,) the body is yet subject to corporal death through the remainders of sin
that are in all regenerate persons; but [The spirit is life;] even that little
spark of the Spirit o grace, that is still life unto the soul here, and shall
be both to soul and body hereafter, through the most perfect righteousness of
Christ imputed unto them. Their bodies they are daily decaying, daily dying, as
Paul says of himself, 1 Cor. 15.31.) but not so their souls: Though our
outward man perish, yet our inward man is renewed day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16. And
as for the second death, that shall have no power over them: Blessed and holy
is he that has his part in the first Resurrection; on such the second death
shall have no power, Rev. 20.6. The second death is eternal death, so expounded
chap. 2. ver. 8. And from this death are they freed who have their part in this
first Resurrection. The Believer an immortal creature.


O the blessed condition of a Believer! The very day that he is raised up from
the death of sin to the life of grace, he is made an immortal creature: That
grace of God which brings this life, brings immortality with it, (as the
Apostle puts them together,) 2 Timothy 2.10. The believer dies no more: As for
the death of nature, it is not worth the name of death to him; being only an
entrance and passage into life, and the poison and bitterness of it being
taken away. As for those true and terrible deaths, spiritual death, the death
of the soul; eternal death, the death both of soul and body, these the
believer is no more subject to. Or though subject to them, (as in himself he
is,) yet he shall be so kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation,
as he shall never actually come under the power of them. He that will make a
believer being once risen with Christ, (raised from the grave of sin,) subject
to die again, subject to fall away from the grace of God totally and finally,
and so to be brought under the power of the second death, may as well make
Christ subject to death after his Resurrection. Christ being risen from the
dead, he dies no more. All the men and devils in the world could not drag him
to the grave again, being once risen from it. The soul that is once risen with
Christ, quickened by his Spirit, it is not all the power of hell that can bring
it to the grave of sin again, that can bring it under the power of a spiritual
and eternal death. Herein the Christian's first Resurrection, his
soul-Resurrection answers the bodily Resurrection of Jesus Christ. He is raised
as Christ was; in the general to a new life; in the particular, to a
spiritual, to an immortal life.

General 2. The believer raised to the glory of God his Father.
And thus also is he raised as Christ was, To the Glory of God the Fahter.]
There is the second General. Thus was Christ raised, To the Glory of his
Father, and that both actively, and passively: Actively, to the glorifying of
him. Thus was Christ raised. 1. Actively to glorify him.
Passively, to be glorified with him.

1. To glorify him: [Father, glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify
thee:] So our Savior begins his prayer, John 17.1. This Jesus Christ now does;
being risen from the dead, and living and reigning with his Father, he makes
it his work to glorify him. In that he lives, (says the Apostle, ver. 10. of
this Chapter,) he lives unto God; that is, with God, to the Glory of God.

2. To be glorified with him: [And now, 2. Passively, to be glorified with God.
O Father, glorify thy Son with the self same glory which I had with thee
before the world was: (So he goes on John 17.15.) This Glory, the Godhead of
Christ, the second Person, reassumed after his Resurrection; and the Manhood
was assumed to the participation of the same glory, in such a degree and
measure as it was capable of. Thus was Christ raised from the dead to the Glory
of the Father.

And in this, Thus is the believer raised.
the Christian's Resurrection carries with it a like resemblance of his
Resurrection. He is thus raised from the death of sin to the glory of God his
Father. Actively, to the glorifying of him: Passively, to be glorified with him.

1. To the glorifying of him. 1. Actively to the glorifying of God.
This is the end wherefore God bestows this his grace upon his Elect people,
viz. that they should be to the praise of his glory, Ephesians. 1.12. which they
are, when his grace shines forth in them. Now they are to the glory of God,
glorifying of him themselves: Therefore glorify God in your bodies, and in
your spirit, for they are Gods, 1 Cor. 6.20. And others glorify God on their
behalf: Let your light so shine before men, that others seeing your good
works, may glorify your Father which is in heaven, Mat. 5.16. Thus is the
believer raised to the glory of God, in as much as those fruits of
Righteousness and Holiness, which are conspicuous in his renewed
conversation, they are by Jesus Christ to the praise and glory of God, Phil.
1.11.

2. Passively, to be glorified with him.
2. He is raised to be glorified with God his Father. God has called us to
glory and virtue, (says Saint Peter,) 2 Pet. 1.3. to virtue on earth, to glory
in heaven. Thence is it (as I told you) that Sanctification is comprehended
under the name of Glorification, Romans 8.30. The one is a pledge of the other;
Grace ends in Glory. The glory which thou gave me, (says our Savior) I have
given them, John 17.22. speaking, not of that power of working miracles,
(called the glory of God, John 11.40.) which he gave unto his Apostles after
his Ascension, (as Grotius apprehends it,) but of that eternal glory which
himself was now to enter upon. This he had purchased for them, and all
believers; this he had promised to them, and this in due season he will confer
upon them: Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me
where I am, that they may behold my glory, ver. 24. This shall all believers
do: They shall continually be with the Lord, beholding his glory. And beholding
it, they shall be transformed into it. We all with open face as in a glass,
beholding the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to
glory, 2 Cor. 3. last. from grace to grace, and from grace to glory. To this
believers are called, to the obtaining of the glory of the Lord Jesus Christ, 2
These. 2.15. And this they shall have possession of, Christ waited for his Glory
after his Resurrection, and so does the Believer.


Though not presently: I might add that as another Resemblance, which I shall
only touch upon. Christ being raised from the dead, he was raised to the glory
of God his Father, yet was he not presently possessed of that Glory: He waited
for a time, during his forty days betwixt his Resurrection and Ascension. In
the mean time, he was not perfect, as he should be. So much he wills Mary to
take notice of, John 20.17. where he says to her, Touch me not, for I am not
yet ascended unto my Father;] intimating to her, that he would not have her to
fix her thoughts so much upon his present condition, in as much as that was not
the highest pitch of his Exaltation, which was to follow upon his Ascension.
Thus fares it with the Christian: though he be raised up to the glory of God
his Father, made an Heir of glory, as all true believers are, If children, then
heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with Jesus Christ, Romans 8.17. Through the
grace of God already vouchsafed to them, they are made in measure meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, (as the Apostle has it,
Col. 1.12.) yet is he an heir under age, having a Jus ad rem, but not in re, a
Right to heavenly glory through Christ, but not the actual possession of it.
For this he must wait: We which have the first fruits of the spirit, (says the
Apostle, Romans 8.23.) even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for
the Adoption, even the Redemption of our bodies.] Believers they have received
the first fruits of the spirit, those graces of the spirit which are to them a
pledge and assurance of the full crop of perfect glorification in due season:
But this they must wait for until the time appointed of the Father. They are
raised up to the glory of God the Father, but not presently glorified. I shall
proceed no further. Thus you see this Parallel made out; and withal the first
branch of the former Proposition made good, viz. that the Christian's first,
his spiritual Resurrection, carries with it a resemblance of Christ's
Resurrection.

2. The believers corporal Resurrection resembling Christ's.
And so shall his corporal resurrection. There is the 2d branch: upon which I
shall not insist long, looking upon the former as principally eyed by the
Apostle in this place. As the believer is comformable to the resurrection of
Christ in this first resurrection, the resurrection of his soul, so he shall be
in the second Resurrection, the resurrection of his body. This shall carry a
resemblance of Christ's Resurrection. As Christ was raised, so shall the
believer be raised. The Parallel or Comparison betwixt these two, I might show
you in diverse particulars: I shall mention some few of the principal, reducing
them to two heads. The Christian's Resurrection shall resemble the Resurrection
of Christ, both in the verity, and quality of it. Two general Resemblances. 1.
In the Verity of it.


1. In the Verity of it, It shall be a true Resurrection: Such was the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, a true Resurrection. The same body that was
buried, was raised again: Christ's Resurrection a true Resurrection.
Destroy this Temple, (says our Savior to the Jews,) and in three days I
will raise it up again, Joh. 2.19. This he spoke of the Temple of his Body,
(says the Evangelist, ver. 21. This Temple the Jews destroyed; and this Temple
he raised up again. Not another Temple, another Body in the room of it, but the
same body. That it was so, he sufficiently manifested it to his Disciples after
his Resurrection; conversing with them to that end, that they and others might
be assured of the truth of his Resurrection. To this end he not only spoke to
them, but eat with them; withal showing them his martyred, crucified body:
Behold my hands, and my feet, that it is I my self: handle me, and see, etc:
(so he speaks to his Disciples,) Luke 24.39, 40. And afterward, when Thomas,
not being at that time present with the rest, was not satisfied concerning it,
he so far condescended to his weakness, as to permit him to put his fingers
into the prints of the nails, and thrust his hand into his side, John 20.27.
Ipse and auditus, and visus, and ne phantasma crederetur, etiam contrectatus.
Tertul. advers. Praxeam.
Thus did Christ manifest the reality of his Resurrection, by audible, visible,
sensible demonstrations: He was both heard, and seen, and handled, that none
might ever question the truth of it. Such was his Resurrection. Such I shall
the Believer's be.


And such shall the Believers Resurrection be, a true Resurrection. The same
body which dies, shall rise again; not another created, and substituted in the
room of it, (as the Manichees, and some other Heretics of old fondly dreamed,)
but the same individual body. This was an Article of Job's faith, I know
(says he) that my Redeemer lives, and shall at the last day stand on the
earth: And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall
I see God, whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not
another, Job 19.25, 26, 27. Job was confident that that very body which he
should lay down in the grave, should be raised up at the last day. And hereof
Paul was as confident as he, 1 Cor. 15.53. This corruptible must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality:] (...): This
corruptible, this mortal. So the Apostle spoke, (says Tertullian, Tertul.
adversus Marcion.
) tenens utique carnem suam; touching or pointing at his own flesh: This very
flesh and blood, this Numericall, Identicall Body shall rise again: Tertul.
libro de Resurrectione.
Resurget caro, and quidem omnis, and quidem ipsa, and quidem integra, (so the
same Author.) There shall be a Resurrection of the flesh, of all flesh, of the
same flesh, and of the whole flesh.

The same body shall be raised again.
That it shall be so, and must be so, Paul's reason is convincing, 2 Cor. 5.10.
We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in the body, whether good, or evil.] This is the end
of the Resurrection, that there may be a compensation, a retribution; a
gracious remuneration, a just retaliation, according to what men have done in
the body. Now should there another body be substituted in the room of that
body, which was the souls companion here upon earth, this new body having done
neither good nor evil, what equity or congruity, that it should receive either
reward, or punishment? The same body that sinned, must suffer. The same body
that suffered for Christ, shall be glorified wiih Christ. And therefore the
same body shall rise again: As Christ was raised, so shall all Believers be,
for the verity of their Resurrection. But this is common with them to all
others.

2. In the second place, 2d General Resemblance. In the Quality of it: being
Their Resurrection shall resemble his in the Quality of it. His Resurrection
was a Resurrection unto life, and that life a spiritual life, and a glorious
life, and an eternal life. And such shall the Resurrection of all true
Believers be.

1. A Resurrection to life. 1. A Resurrection to life.
Therein differing from the Resurrection of others. So our Savior sets it
forth, John 5.29. The hour is coming in the which all that are in the graves,
shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the
Resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of
damnation.] Thus shall believers have a peculiar Resurrection: Whence it is
that they are called the Children of the Resurrection; Luke 20.36. because they
shall obtain a better Resurrection, (as the Author to the Hebrews calls it,
Heb. 11.35.) better then others. Their Resurrection shall not be a bare (...),
but an (...), not only a Resurrection, but a Resurrection to life. (...), (as
our Savior there calls it,) the Resurrection of life. Such shall be the
Resurrection of the just, (as our Savior calls it, Luke 14.14.) Such as are
Evangelically just, through the righteousness of Christ imputed to them,
themselves also endeavoring after righteousness. [They shall come forth to
the Resurrection of Life:] whereas others, [They that have done evil,] the
workers of iniquity (as our Savior describes them, Mat. 7.28. Luke 13.27.
therein speaking in the language of the Psalmist, Psalm. 5.5. and 125.5.) Such
as make a practice of sin, they shall come forth to the Resurrection of
Judgment, (so the Original has it, (...),) that is, of condemnation,
punishment. So it is explained Mat. 25. last. These shall go into everlasting
punishment, but the righteous into life eternal.] In this shall the
resurrection of believers resemble the resurrection of Christ, It shall be a
resurrection unto life. 2. And that life a spiritual life.


2. And that life (in the 2d place) shall be a spiritual Life. Such was the life
of Jesus Christ, (as I have shown you) after his Resurrection. And such shall
the lives of God's Saints then be. They shall then live a spiritual life, their
bodies being then made spiritual bodies: That is the Apostles Epethite, 1 Cor.
15.44. So shall it be in the Resurrection of the dead, (dead Saints.) It is sown
a natural, it is raised a spiritual body.] The body, whilst it lives here, is
a natural body, (...), an animal body, maintained by natural means, as meats
and drinks, and breathing and sleeping, as other Animals are; subject to all
the infirmities of impaired nature, sicknesses, age, death. Such it is. But in
the Resurrection it shall be elevated to an higher state of perfection, made a
spiritual body, (...). Not in respect of substance, as if the body should be
turned into a spirit, or into an Aerie, Ethereal Substance,, (as some have
fondly imagined,) but in respect of the Qualities and Perfections, which it
shall then be endued with. It shall then subsist without the help of natural
supports: neither shall it thenceforth be subject to any such natural
infirmities. That which was sown in weakness, shall be raised in power, 1 Cor.
15.43. The body shall be maintained in that state to which it is raised by the
continued efflux of a supernatural power, so as the person shall thenceforth
live after a sort an Angelical Life, according to that of our Savior, Mat.
22.30. In the Resurrection, they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but
are as the Angels of God in heaven.] Not standing in need of any natural, much
less carnal comforts, or contentments, such as the flesh was here delighted
in. In which respect also the body may be said then to be a spiritual body, in
as much as it shall then be freed from all carnal desires, being wholly subject
to, and ruled by the Spirit. Thus shall Believers be raised to a spiritual
life. 3. A glorious life.


3. And that (in the third place) a glorious life. Such was the life of Jesus
Christ, to which he was raised. A Praeludium whereof he showed unto some of his
Disciples in that his Transfiguration upon the Mount, Mat. 17.2. He was
transfigured before them, (says the Text,) and his face did shine as the sun,
and his raiment white was as the light.] A dark Representation of that
transcendent light of glory, whereinto he was to enter, and whereof he was to
be swallowed up after his Resurrection. Ought not Christ to suffer these
things, and so to enter into his glory? (says he to his Disciples.) Luke
24.26. This he did upon his Ascension into heaven. From thenceforth he enjoyed
a glorious life, even his body being made a glorious body, (as the Apostle
calls it,) Phil. 3.20. (...), a body of glory: Such was his Resurrection.

And herein shall the Believer's Resurrection answer his. It shall be a
Resurrection unto Glory [It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory, (says
the Apostle of the body of a believer,) 1 Cor. 15.43. To which that of the same
Apostle answers, Phil. 3. last. He shall change our vile body, that it may be
like unto his glorious body.] The bodies of God's Saints whilst they live, are
vile bodies, (...), Bodies of abasement, vileness, (as the Original there
has it,) subject to manifold infirmities, diseases; some of which are so
loathsome, as may well denominate them vile bodies: much more when they are
dead. The soul being departed, (which was as salt to them whilst it dwelt in
them,) now they become putrefying, stinking carcasses, fit for nothing but to
be removed out of sight. Thus are they sown in dishonor, buried out of sight,
that they may not be noisome and offensive to the living. But they shall be
raised in glory, glorious bodies; made in their measure conformable to the
glorious body of Jesus Christ, partaking with him in the same glory, the same
for kind, though not for degree. A representation hereof we see in Moses, who
having been with God for a time in the Mount, he came down with his face
shining, Exodus 34.30. Behold the skin of his face shone.] By the reflex of the
divine Glory which he there beheld, his face became glorious, (as the Greek
there translates it, and the Apostle alleges it, 2 Cor. 3.7.) Even so shall
the bodies of God's Saints, when they shall come to stand in the presence of
their glorified Savior, beholding his glory, (which they shall do, Father, I
will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me, where I am, that they
may behold my glory which thou have given me, John 17.24.) they shall be
transformed into it. [ We know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him,
(says Saint John,) for we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. Like him in
glory: When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we also appear with
him in glory, Col. 3.4.

4. An Eternal life.
4. Lastly, This life being a glorious life, it shall also be an eternal life.
Such was the life of Jesus Christ, (as I showed you:) Christ being risen from
the dead, dies no more. And such shall the Resurrection of all that are
Christ's be: This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put
on immortality, 1 Cor. 15.53. As the death of the wicked, to which they shall
be raised, shall be eternal; Their worm dies not, and their fire goes not
out, Mar. 9.44. So shall the life of the righteous: These shall go into
everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal, Mat. 25. last. In
this respect also they are said to be (...), like unto, or equal to the
Angels, Luke 20.35, 36. They which shall be accounted worthy to obtain this
world, and the Resurrection from the dead, (viz. this Resurrection of life)
They neither marry, nor are given in marriage, (there is no need of generation
in heaven, where there is no corruption,) neither can they die any more, for
they are equal unto the Angels, and are the children of God, being the children
of the Resurrection.] viz. of this blessed Resurrection, the Resurrection of
the just, which carries with it a resemblance of the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ. And thus I have dispatched the Doctrinal Part of this first Proposition
here held forth unto us: viz. That Believers are, and shall be made conformable
to Christ in his Resurrection. They are so here in their first, they shall be
hereafter in the second Resurrection.

And this Conformity of theirs flows from Christ and his resurrection.
Propos. 2. This Conformity flows from Christ, and his Resurrection.
] There is the secon Proposition, which I shall dispatch with all possible
brevity, and so come to the Application of both together. [The Believers
conformity to Christ in his resurrection, flows from Christ and his
resurrection.] So much is insinuated in the phrase in the Text (as I showed
you.) To be Ingrafted with Christ in the likeness of his resurrection, is to
be made partaker of such a resurrection as resembles his, and that by a virtue
flowing from him, and his resurrection. Thus does the Graft revive with the
Stock in the Spring time, and that by a virtue which it receives from the
Stock. And thus is the Christian raised by a virtue flowing from Christ, into
whom he is ingraffed: Christ himself being the principal Efficient cause of
this resurrection. That he is so, we shall need no other testimony then that
of his own, John 11.25. Christ the principal Efficient of this resurrection in
the believer.
I am the Resurrection and the Life:] that is, the author and worker of the
resurrection: so he is both of the first and second resurrection: The Author
both of spiritual and eternal life to the Believer. In him was life (says St
John, speaking of Christ) Joh. 1.4. It was so, and is so, and that originally,
as water in the fountain. Thus was natural life in the Father; thus is
spiritual and eternal life in the Son. As the Father has life in himself, so
he has given to the Son to have life in himself, John 5.26. God the Father
being himself the original and beginning of natural subsistencie and life in
all the creatures, be has given to his Son Christ as Mediator, that he should
be the Author of spiritual and eternal life to all that are given to him, to
all his Elect, quickening whom he pleases. As the Father raises up the dead,
and quickneth them, even so the Son quickneth whom he will: so you have it
ver. 21. of that 5th chap. And hence is it that he is called a quickening
spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45. The first man Adam was made a living soul, the last Adam
was made a quickening spirit, (...). Jesus Christ being the Head and Stock of
all his Elect, is appointed by God to be the author, and procurer, and conveyer
of spiritual and eternal life to all his offspring, by the communication of
his spirit to them; which both restores life unto the dead, and preserves it
in them perpetually: Neither of which the first Adam could do. He indeed lived
a natural life himself, and did, in a natural way, by way of propagation,
convey a natural life to his Posterity; but he could not preserve that life,
much less restore it to himself or them. He was only a living soul: But
Christ is a quickening spirit, quickening dead souls, and quickening dead bodies;
the Author both of the first and second resurrection.

Christ the author of the first Resurrection.
1. Of the first resurrection, the resurrection of the Soul: This believers
obtain from, by, and through Jesus Christ. So much our Apostle wills them to
take notice of, and acknowledge, ver. 11 of this Romans 6. Likewise reckon ye your
selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our
Lord.] That believers are alive unto God, that they live a spiritual life,
this they owe unto Jesus Christ; and are to attribute to him, as being the root
of their life. So much the phrase in the Original there imports, which is not
(...), but (...), In Jesus Christ: Even as the Graft lives in the Stock, so is
the believer alive unto God in Jesus Christ, receiving from him that virtue
whereby this life is begun, maintained, perfected in him. This it is to be
quickened with Christ, Col. 2.13. and to be risen with Christ, Col. 3.1. viz.
not only to be quickened and raised as Christ was, but to be quickened and
raised by a power and virtue flowing from him, and his resurrection. This is
that virtue which Paul so earnestly desired to be made partaker of, Phil. 3.10.
That I may know him, and the virtue of his resurrection, (...): that is, that
power and virtue whereby Christ himself was raised from the dead; or, a power
and virtue flowing from his resurrection, working the like effect in himself,
in raising him to the life of grace here, and glory hereafter. This spiritual
life is the fruit of Christ's resurrection; so may we understand that place of
the Apostle Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 1.4. where he says of believers, that They are
begotten again to a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ.] So they
are, not only in respect of assurance of their Resurrection unto eternal life,
whereof the Resurrection of Christ is the pledge; but also in regard of their
New Birth it self, which is a fruit of Christ's Resurrection, wrought in them
by a virtue flowing from Christ, being risen from the dead.

Of the second Resurrection.
2. And as their first, so their second Resurrection. Hereof the Resurrection of
Christ is not only the Pattern and Pledge, but also the Cause. So the Apostle
sets it forth, 1 Cor. 15.21. Since by man came death, by man also came the
Resurrection of the dead.] Adam being the Head and Root of all mankind, he
transmitted his sin and death unto all his Offspring, all that were in him
when he so sinned and died: Even so Christ the Head and Root of all his Elect,
he communicates his righteousness and life to all that are in him. This he
merited for them by his death; and this he applies and conveyeth to them
through his Resurrection. [ As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made
alive: (so the Apostle goes on,) ver. 22. All, viz. that are in Christ. As for
others, it is true, they shall be raised again, and that by Christ: viz. by the
power of Christ as a Judge. The hour is coming, in which all that are in the
graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, John 5.28, 29. But those which
are Christ's shall all be raised up in him, (...). Being in him, they shall be
raised up in him, by a virtue flowing from him, as from the Head to the
members; as from the root to the branches. Hereby shall their dead bodies be
quickened, raised, changed; He shall change our vile body, (says the Apostle)
Phil. 3. last. This is the work of Jesus Christ, which he shall effect,
According to the working whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself,]
(...), according to that efficacious working of a mighty power. A power not
unlike that which the story tells us, went forth from him upon the woman's
touching his garment, Mark 5.30. Jesus knowing that virtue had gone out of
him.] (...), not an Adventitious virtue, such as God was pleased to put forth
at the request of his Prophets; but it was a power residing in Christ, and so
issuing from him in an efficacious way for the healing of her infirmity. Even
such a power, such a virtue shall go forth from Jesus Christ at the last day,
for the quickening and raising up all those who have here touched him by a true
and lively faith. Such as are buried with him, shall be raised up by him. Even
as the story tells us of that dead man who was cast into the Prophet Elisha's
Sepulcher, 2 King. 13.21. upon the touch of his bones he revived, and stood
upon his feet. Even so shall all those who are here buried with Christ by
mortification, they shall be raised up unto a spiritual life here, and to an
eternal life hereafter; and all this by a virtue flowing from him. Being
engrafted in the likeness of his death, they shall be also in the likeness of
his resurrection. And thus I passed through the Doctrinal Part of these two
Propositions, or Conclusions. The Practical Part is yet behind; wherein I shall
desire you to go along with me with your best attentions, lending me not only
your ears, but your hearts.

Applic. Enquire whether we be made partakers of this Resurrection.
Use 1. What has been spoken (in the first place) I shall bring it home by way
of Enquiry. We have heard what ones all true believers, all that have union
with Jesus Christ, all that are truly engrafted into him, are: How they are
made conformable to him, (as in his death, so) in his resurrection: As in the
one by mortification, dying unto sin; so in the other by vivification, rising
to newness of life. Now every of us put the question to our selves, Numnam ego
talis? Am I such a one? Am I thus engrafted with Christ in the likeness of his
resurrection? This we are all of us Sacramentally in our Baptism; which being
a Sacrament of our Insition, or engrafting into Christ, represents unto us,
(according to the twofold Ceremony used in the first Institution of it, viz.
Immersion, and Emersion,) a twofold mystery, viz. Mortification, and
Vivification; both which we meet with in the verse before the Text. [We are
buried with Christ by baptism, that like as he was raised from the dead by the
glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life.] But are
we so really and spiritually? If so, then may we comfortably assure our selves
of our union with Jesus Christ, and consequently of our Interest in the merits
of his death, unto our Justification, of which the Apostle discourses in the
Chapter foregoing. Certainly, this communion is a fruit of our union: an
undoubted evidence that we are engrafted into Christ, if we be thus raised up
with him.

So are all, Which is common to all, and proper only to the members of Christ.
and only the true members of Jesus Christ. When Christ rose out of the grave,
he left none of his members behind him. True, the grave-cloaths he did: these
Peter and John found in the Sepulcher, when they came to visit their Lord
there, John 20.5, 6, 7. They saw the linen clothes lying, and the napkin which
was about his head, wrapped together in a place by it self.] But the body was
gone, not a member of it left. Thus there are many who cleave unto Christ, and
unto his mystical Body in an outward profession, (as those grave-cloaths did
to his natural body,) who upon a strict scrutiny, will be found still lying in
the grave of sin. But not so any of the true members of Christ. All that have a
true real spiritual union with him, they have also a communion with him, and
conformity to him in his resurrection. They are made partakers of this first
Resurrection, which carries with it a resemblance of his resurrection. Now, is
it so with us? Are we thus engrafted with him in the likeness of his
Resurrection? How this shall be known?


Quest. But how shall we know whether we be, or no?

An useful Question.
Ans. A Question not unusefull: The rather, in regard that there are many who
deceive themselves herein, taking shadows for substances. Even as Saul judged
of Samuel, and his Resurrection, 1 King. 28.12. He thought it to have been the
true Samuel, and a true Resurrection; when it was nothing but a spectrum, an
Illusion. And as Herod thought of John the Baptist, that he was risen from the
dead, when there was no such matter, Mat. 14.2. Thus do many judge of
themselves; they flatter their own hearts with an apprehension of a
Resurrection, that they are raised from the grave of sin, whereas in truth,
their souls still lie rotting, and putrefying, and stinking there. That none of
us may be mistaken in a matter of so great consequence, and concernment, let me
present you with some evidences whereby the truth of this Resurrection may be
discerned where it is, Evidences of the first Resurrection.
and our selves may certainly know whether we be made partakers of it, Enquiry,
1. Have we heard that voice of Christ.
or no.

1. In the first place then, Have we ever heard the voice of Christ, or no? By
this means it was that Lazarus his body was raised from the grave, John 11.43.
by the voice of Christ speaking to him, and calling upon him. And by the same
means shall the general Resurrection at the last day be effected. The hour is
coming, in which all that are in their graves shall hear his voice, and shall
come forth, John 5.28, 29. And by the like means is this first Resurrection
wrought. The hour comes, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of
the Son of God, and they that hear it, shall live: so you have it verse 25. of
that Chapter, our Savior there speaking of the first Resurrection, (as I have
already showed you.) Now, have we ever heard this voice of Christ? Have we
heard Christ speaking to us in his word? The voice of his Ministers we have
often heard, but have we ever heard the voice of Christ? Fares it not with some
of us as it did with young Samuel, who had often heard Elie's voice, but had
never heard the voice of the Lord: and therefore he is said as yet not to know
the Lord, 1 Samuel 3.7. viz. by way of extraordinary Revelation, by voice and
speech. Is it not so with some of us? we have often heard Elie's voice, but
have we ever heard the voice of the Lord? We have often heard the voice of
Christ's Ministers, but have we ever heard the voice of Christ himself? We
have heard the one sounding in our ears, but have we heard the other entering
into our hearts, awakening us from our dead sleep?

As it is in sleep, so it is in death, (whereof sleep is the image,) the body
first awaketh, before it rises out of the bed or grave: Many of them that
sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, (says Daniel, speaking of the
general Resurrection,) Dan. 12.2. And thus is it in this first Resurrection.
Before the soul can arise, it must awake: Awake thou that steepest, and stand
up from the dead, Ephesians. 5.14. Now, have we heard the voice of Christ awakening
us? Have we fonnd such an effectual work of the word upon our hearts? rousing
us out of the dead sleep of our sinful security, opening our eyes, making us
truly appehensive and sensible of our present condition, causing us to look
about us, and to entertain serious thoughts about a Resurrection, of getting
out of the state of sin, into a state of grace? Have we heard the voice of the
Law, and the voice of the Gospel? and Christ speaking in both?

In the Law.
Have we heard the voice of the Law? Christ speaking to us as he did to Israel
at Mount Sinai, where his voice shook the earth, Heb. 12.26. which it did both
literally, shaking the mountain, Exodus 19.18. and metonymically, shaking the
persons that heard it: So terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I
exceedingly fear, and shake, Heb. 12.21. Now, have we heard such a voice? Have
we found at any time such an effect in the word? so shaking us, making such an
earthquake, such a heart-quake in our souls? In the vision which Ezekiel saw
of the Resurrection of those dead and dry bones, Ezekiel. 37. he tells us that
before they were quickened and raised up, there was a noise, and a shaking, ver.
7. And the story informs us concerning those which seconded Christ, and
attended upon him in his Resurrection, Mat. 8.27. that before their
Resurrection, the earth did quake, and the rocks rent, and then the graves were
opened, and many bodies of Saints which slept arose, and came out of the
graves, etc. v. 51.52 53. Such Preparatives God is pleased oftimes, and for the
most part, to make use of, in the working of this first Resurrection. Not that
he is tied to an uniformity in his way of working, always to work after the
same manner. No, his dispensations (as in other of his works, so) in this are
various. But ordinarily so it is. Before dead souls arise and come out of the
grave of sin, there is a shaking, and an Earthquake, and a rending of the
Rocks. God prepares the hearts of his people for this blessed work by some
degree of a Legal contrition and compunction; giving the soul to feel somewhat
of the spirit of Bondage, letting into it some sense and apprehension of sin,
and the wrath of God due unto sin.

After this comes the still voice; In the Gospel.
As it was in Eliahs vision at Mount Horeb, 1 Kin. 19.11, 12. After the
whirlewind, and the Earthquake, and the fire, came the still small voice.] Thus
fares it ordinarily in the work of Conversion. After the Whirlewind, and the
Earthquake, and the fire of the Law, comes the still voice of the Gospel,
quieting the soul with the offers of grace and mercy, letting into it some
comfortable apprehension of Reconciliation with God through Christ; withal
exciting it to lay hold upon that mercy, and to endeavor to walk answerably to
it in newness of life. Now have we heard this voice of the Son of God? Have we
heard Christ thus speaking to our souls, making his word effectual unto us in
this way? If so, here is an hopeful evidence that this blessed change is
begun, and that we have a part in this first Resurrection. Whereas otherwise,
are we strangers to this voice? never felt any such power in the word? We may
justly conclude our selves strangers to this blessed work; surely we are as yet
in our graves, under the power of a spiritual death.

Enquiry. 2. Have we received the spirit of Christ.
2. Let a second enquiry be, Have we received the spirit of Christ? we know by
what means it is that the dead body is raised, by putting a spirit into it.
Thus we read of Jairus his daughter, Luke 8.55. After that Christ had called
upon her, saying, Maid arise, her spirit came again (says the Text) and she
arose straightway. By a like means does Jeses Christ effect this Resurrection
of the soul by putting his spirit into it. By this means was his own Body
raised, He was put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit, 1 Pet.
3.18. viz. that divine and eternal spirit which dwelt in his humane nature:
And by the same means are dead souls quickened. By this means were those dry
bones made to live again, Ezekiel. 37.5. Behold (says the Lord) I will cause
breath to enter into you, and you shall live. Now what were those dry bones?
and what was this Breath? you may see the Interpretation of both in the
sequels. These bones are the whole house of Israel, ver. 11. And ye shall know
that I am the Lord, when I have opened your graves, O my people, and brought
you up out of your graves, and shall put my spirit in you, and ye shall live,
ver. 13, 14. This is the Breath put into these dry bones, even the spirit of
God put upon his people being then in Babylon, causing them to live again,
restoring them to a flourishing condition. By the same means does Christ cause
dead souls (being Captives unto sin) to live, by putting his Spirit into them.
Hence is it that he is called a Quickening spirit, 1 Corin. 15.45. Because by
this means he shall quicken the dead Bodies of his Saints at the last day, He
shall quicken your mortal Bodies by his spirit which dwells in you, Romans
8.11. And by the same means he now quickneth dead souls, by communicating
his Spirit unto them: Which in this respect the Apostle calls, The Spirit of
life, Romans 8.2. Now then, have we received this Spirit? It was Paul's question
to those new Converts, Act. 19.2. Have ye received the Holy Ghost?] This he
spoke concerning the Extraordinary gifts of the Spirit which flourished in the
Church at that time. Let me propound the same question in a more ordinary
sense: Have we received the Holy Ghost? Have we received the Spirit of Christ?
As it was Paul's question to his Galatians, Gal. 3.2. Received ye the Spirit by
the works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith? Taking it for granted, that
they had received the Spirit. And so have all those who have any true union
with Jesus Christ, If any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his,
Romans 8.9. Now have we received this spirit by the hearing of faith? Have we so
heard the voice of Christ in the doctrine of faith, the Gospel, as that we
have received the spirit of Christ? If so, questionless this Spirit will have
the same operation and effect in our souls, that it had in the Body of Christ.
As it raised up the one, so it will raise up the other. Whereas otherwise,
being void and destitute of this Spirit of Christ, we may (like dreaming men)
fancy and imagine our selves to be risen, but we are yet in the grave. This
Quickening spirit how discerned.


Question. But the Question here will run on. How shall we know whether we have
received this Quickening Spirit, or no. A Question that will be very useful in
the resolution of it. The rather, because there are so many who pretend to this
spirit, (never more then at this day) who yet are mere strangers to it.

By the fruits and effects of it.
Answer. For your satisfaction, know, that this Quickening spirit, where it is,
discovers it self by the fruits and effects of it. Of these fruits and effects
I might name many. I shall only single out three of the Principal, which will
be properly useful to our present purpose. This Quickening Spirit, where it
dwells in the soul, Which in working this Resurrection, are three.
it is to it a Spirit of Illumination, a Spirit of Faith, a Spirit of
sanctification. A threefold work whereby the Spirit effects this first
Resurrection in the soul: being to it, first, a Spirit of Illumination:
secondly, of Faith: thirdly, Of Holiness.

1. A Spirit of Illumination. 1. It is a Spirit of Illumination.
Here is the beginning of this work, it begins in Light; Even as in the
first Creation, the first born of Gods works was Light. God said, Let there be
Light, Genesis 1.3. So is it in this new Creation, the first work is Light: The
Light shines in darkness, John 1.4. a new light shining into the soul of man,
which since the fall, is become a dungeon of darkness. As it was with Peter,
when God sent his Angel to fetch him out of Prison, Acts 12.7. he caused a
light to shine in the prison: So is it with dead souls, when God sends his
Angels, his Ministers, to fetch them out of the prison, the dungeon of the
grave, he causes a light to shine forth unto them; A supernatural light, the
light of divine and heavenly knowledge to shine forth into their Hearts. God who
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined into our hearts,
(says the Apostle,) to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in
the face of Jesus Christ, 2. Cor. 4.6. Gods Ministers (being his Instruments in
the work of Conversion) they communicate that light of knowledge unto others
which themselves have received, making known the glorious grace of God shining
in the face of Jesus Christ, revealed and manifested in and by him: without
which Illumination there is no Regeneration.

Baptism anciently called (...), Illumination, and why?
Hence was it that the Greek Fathers anciently called Baptism, (which is the
Sacrament of Regeneration,) by the name of (...), Illumination; taking the
ground of it (as is conceived) from that of the Apostle, Leigh. Critic. sacra.
Heb. 6.4. where he speaks of those that were once enlightened, (...), which the
Syriack renders, Grotius Beza ad loc.
qui ad baptismum descenderunt, such as had been baptized. And not unfitly may
it be so called, in as much as all those who are baptized with the Holy Ghost,
they have their minds illustrated with the beams of this divine and heavenly
light. Without such illumination, no regeneration. Hence is it that the twofold
state of man, the state of nature, and the state of grace, are called the one
darkness, and the other light: Ye were sometimes darkness, but now ye are
light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8. And the work of Conversion is described to be a
turning from darkness to light, Acts 26.18. and a calling out of darkness
into a mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. Now, have we received this Spirit of
Illumination? Has this light shined forth unto us? shined into our minds: and
shined into our hearts? Into our minds, enlightening our understandings with
some measure of speculative knowledge in spiritual and heavenly mysteries?
Certainly, without this there can be no true work of Conversion, no spiritual
Resurrection. God does not bring men out of their graves blindfold; He first
opens their eyes: Paul was sent to the Gentiles to open their eyes, Acts
26.18. to turn them from darkness to light; from the darkness of ignorance to
the light of knowledge, which shines into the mind. And into the heart; He
has shined in our hearts, (says the Apostle,) (...). And so he does in the
hearts of his people, giving them not only a speculative, but an affective
knowledge: not only to know the truth, but to be affected with it, to love it,
believe it, embrace it, to receive a love of the truth, (for the want of which
those Apostates fell away, 2 These. 2.10.) Now, has this light thus shined not
only into our minds, but into our hearts? then may we conclude, that we have
received the Spirit of Christ, even this quickening spirit, beginning this work
of a spiritual resurrection in our souls. Whereas otherwise, Do we still sit in
darkness? surely, we are as yet in the shadow of death.

2. This Quickening Spirit, 2. A Spirit of Faith.
is a Spirit of Faith. So it is to all who have any part in this first
Resurrection. We having the spirit of faith, (says Paul to his Corinthians) 2
Cor. 4.13. that is, the Spirit of God, working faith in the soul. This it does
in all whom it quickneth; first, revealing Christ unto them, then it inclines
their hearts to close with him upon those Gospel terms upon which he is
offered, to receive him as a Savior, and as a Lord. And so it uniteth them
unto him, ingrafting them into this Stock, from whence they receive this
quickening virtue, and are made conformable to Christ in his resurrection. This
is conveyed unto believers through faith. [That we might receive the promise of
the spirit through faith, (says the Apostle, Gal. 3.14.) The Promise he there
speaks of, is the promise of the Spirit of Regeneration, (as Diodate expounds
it.) This is the promise which the Prophets make such frequent mention of,
Isai. 44.3. Jer. 31.33. etc. Now this promise of the spirit is received by
faith, faith on Jesus Christ, which is the purifying grace, [Putrifying their
hearts by faith, Acts 15.9.] The sanctifying grace, [Them which are sanctified
by faith in me, Acts 26.18.] and the quickening grace, by and through which this
spiritual life is conveyed from Christ into the soul. Express is that of our
Savior, John 11.25. I am the resurrection and the life, He that believes on
me, though he were dead, yet shall he live.] Though he be dead in sin, yet
shall he live a spiritual life upon his believing. Which life is therefore
called the life of faith, because faith is both the beginning, and the
principal Act of this life, The just shall live by his faith, Romans 3.11. The
life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, Gal.
2.20. He that lives and believes on me, (says our Savior) ver. 26. of that
11th of John, speaking of this spiritual life, whereof says is both the first
and principal Act.

Now, have we received this Spirit of Faith? Have we felt this work of the
spirit upon our hearts, drawing and inclining them thus to receive Jesus
Christ, thus to close with him, thus to rest upon him, thus to give up our
selves unto him? If so, surely we are in the number of those that have part in
this first Resurrection. Otherwise, being yet in a state of unbelief, we are
also in a state of death.

3. 3. A Spirit of Holiness.
This Quickening Spirit is also a sanctifying spirit, a spirit of
sanctification. Such was the spirit whereby Jesus Cbrist was raised. He was
declared mightily to be the Son of God, according to the spirit of
sanctification, by the resurrection from the dead, Romans 1.4. That Spirit which
raised up Jesus Christ, was the same divine spirit which sanctified his humane
nature wherein it dwelt. And such is this quickening Spirit to all in whom it
dwells. Being to them a Spirit of Faith, it is also to them a Spirit of
Sanctification, purifying their hearts through faith. Hence is it that the
Apostle puts these two together, Sanctification of the spirit, and belief of
the truth, 2 These. 2.13. Faith and Holiness never go asunder. Where the Spirit
of Christ is a Spirit of faith, it is also a Spirit of holiness, changing the
heart, putting into it a new quality of holiness, turning the bent of it from
and against all sin unto holiness and righteousness, working in it an
unfeigned hatred of the one, and love to the other.

Now, have we received this Spirit also? Do we find such an inward change
wrought in our hearts? Do we find the Law of God, a Law of Holiness written
upon them? A law contrary to the law of sin; so the Apostle calls that
sinful corruption which dwells and reigns in all unregenerate persons,
commanding evil actions, as it were, with authority, putting the sinner upon
them, inclining, and after a sort, forcing him to the committing of sin, Romans
7.23. The law of sin which is in my members.] Now, have we received a law
contrary to this? a law of holiness, having the clean contrary effects,
commanding with authority that which is holy and good, putting us upon it,
carrying the soul with a strong impulsion toward it, turning the bent of the
heart that way? so as that we can say with the Apostle, that with or inward man
we delight in the law of God, Romans 7.22. that with our mind we serve the law of
God? ver. 25. If so, surely, this is no other but that law of the spirit of
life in Christ Jesus,] (as the same Apostle calls it,) Romans 8.2. The law of
this quickening spirit communicated from Christ, as from the Head unto his
members, quickening and raising them up unto this spiritual life. Whereas
otherwise, are we still under the law of sin? certainly, we are also under the
power of death. So much the Apostle insinuates in the next words, where he puts
these together; [the law of sin, and death:] He that is freed from the one, is
freed from the other. But he that is under the power of the one, under the
power of sin, is also under the power of the other, under the power of death.
Thus have you a second evidence whereby we may all of us judge of our selves,
whether we be engrafted with Christ in the likeness of his Resurrection: viz.
Have we received the Spirit of Christ? a Spirit of Illumination, Faith,
Sanctification?

Take a third. Do we live the life of Christ? Enquiry 3. Do we live the life of
Christ?
This do all that are raised with Christ, they are in their measure made
conformable to him in his life; In their lives expressing his virtues: [Ye are
a chosen generation, etc. (says Saint Peter, speaking to believers,) that ye
should show forth the virtues of him who has called you out of darkness into
his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. This do those who are raised with Christ,
they show forth the virtues of Christ; Showing forth his virtues by way of
imitation.
that is, (as some expound it, and that not improperly,) they do in their lives
and conversations express those graces and virtues which were so eminent and
exemplary in him. They not only have them, but they hold them forth. They do
(...), the word properly signifies praedicare, to preach. So clearly do they
express the virtues of Christ, as that their lives are as so many Sermons upon
the life of Christ: each a counterpane to that Original. This do all who are
risen with Christ, they propound Christ as a pattern for their imitation,
practicing his virtues to the life.

Quest. What virtues?

Imitable virtues in Christ.
Ans. The imitable virtues in Christ were many: I shall instance in some of the
chief; and those I shall but touch. His Inoffensivenesse, Meekness, Patience,
Humility, Obedience, Love, Mercy, Contempt of the world, Heavenly-mindednesse:
All these were eminent in the life of Christ, and all these does the true
believer that is risen with Christ show forth in his life and conversation. 1.
Inoffensivenesse.


1. Walking inoffensively. So did our blessed Savior: In his whole course he
was inoffensive, harmless: He did no sin, neither was their guile found in his
mouth, 1 Pet. 2.22. He was holy, harmless, undefiled, Heb. 7.26. In which
respect he is so often called by the name of that most innocent of creatures,
The Lamb of God, John 1.29. etc. And this virtue they which are risen with
Christ do express; being also innocent, harmless: [Harmlesse as Doves, Mat.
10.16. Inoffensive, [Herein do I exercise my self, to have always a conscience
void of offense toward God, and toward men, (says Paul) Acts 24.16. True it
is, the world takes offense at them, (and so it did at Jesus Christ,) but their
desire and care is not to give any just offense.

2. Meekness.
2. They imitate Christ in his Meekness: a virtue eminent in him: He comes
unto thee, meek.] It is spoken of Sion's King, Mat. 21.5. I beseech you by the
meekness and gentleness of Christ, (says Paul) 2 Cor. 10.2. In this respect
also he is compared to the Lamb: He was led as a lamb to the slaughter, etc.
Isai. 58. And this virtue the true Christian in his measure expresses. He is
one of the meek of the earth, Zeph. 2.3. One that shows out of a good
conversation his works, with meekness of wisdom, Jam. 3.13. One that
endeavors to restrain and bridle the passions of his heart, not casting the
reins upon their necks, suffering them in a customary way to break forth in an
inordinate manner. One that in the purpose of his heart lays aside wrath,
anger, malice, 1 Pet. 2.1. One that is gentle, and easy to be entreated, ready
to forgive, and forget injuries: all which were eminent in Jesus Christ.

3. In Patience. 3. Patience.
In this respect also was Christ a lamb, a sheep. His patience in sufferings
was most exemplary: He was led as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep that
is dumb before the shearer, so opened he not his mouth, Isai. 53. When he was
reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, etc. 1 Pet.
2.23. And herein the true Christian carries some resemblance of him: He is one
that in patience possesses his soul, Luke 21.19. Exercising this grace in all
changes of conditions. Tribulation in him works patience, Romans 5.3. Here is
the patience of Saints, Rev. 13.10. and 14.12. They are companions in the
patience of Jesus Christ, Revel. 1.9.

4. Humility. 4. Humility.
A virtue also most eminent in Christ: Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly,
Mat. 11.29. However, being in the form of God, he thought it no robbery to be
equal with God, (without any usurpation he might have challenged an equality
with God his Father, being co-essentiall and co-equall with him in respect of
his divine nature,) yet he made himself of no reputation, and took upon him
the form of a Servant; He humbled himself, etc. Phil. 2.6, 7. And herein does
the true Christian resemble him, being one of a contrite and humble spirit,
Isai. 57.15. One that humbles himself in the sight of God, Jam. 4.16. Not
doing what he does through vain glory, but in lowliness of mind preferring
others before himself, Phil. 2.3. This did Jesus Christ, and this those which
are risen with Christ at least desire to do. 5. Obedience.


5. Obedience: Hereof was Christ the great Exemplar, and Pattern. He humbled
himself, and became obedient even to the death, etc. Phil. 2.7. He sought not
his own will, but the will of him that sent him, John 5.30. and 6.38. the will
of his Father. This he did, and this he suffered, both out of a principle of
voluntary obedience: And in this those who are his, resemble him; they are a
people willing and obedient, Isai. 1.19. willingly obeying God for himself,
and those which are set over them under him, for his sake.

6. Love.
6. Love: Walk in love as Christ also has loved us, Ephesians. 5.2. He loved the
Church, and gave himself for it, ver. 25. Greater love has no man then this,
that a man should lay down his life for his friends, John 15.13. This has
Christ done, and more: While we were yet sinners, (enemies,) Christ died for
us, Romans 5.8. And herein are those which are Christ's, conformable to Christ in
their measure: They are all (in a good sense) of the Family of Love. Such as
love God above all, with all their heart, etc: and their neighbors as
themselves, Mat. 22.37, 39. The true Christian is one that loves the Lord
Jesus in sincerity, Ephesians. 6.24. One that loves the Saints, and that because
they are Saints, and so consequently, all Saints, Ephesians. 1.15. One that loves
and imbraceth the Image of God, wherever he meets with it: One that loves
his enemies, ready to do good to them that hate him; praying for those which
despitefully use him, Mat. 5.45. Thus the same mind is in those who are
engrafted into Christ, which was in Christ himself, Phil. 2.4.

7. Mercy: 7. Mercy.
Jesus Christ was and is a merciful High Priest, Heb. 2.17. In the days of
his flesh he was ready to show mercy both to the souls and bodies of all those
that sought it from him: The like bowels of mercy there are (in measure) to be
found in all that are Christ's: they are such as have put on bowels of mercy,
Col. 2.12. The wisdom which is from above is full of mercy, Jam. 3.17.

8. Contempt of the world: 8. Contempt of the world.
Christ was neither covetous, nor ambitious: He professes his Kingdom was not
of this world, John 18.36. And therefore when a Crown was offered him, and
forced upon him, he refused it, John 6.15. Disdaining to do any homage to
Satan, though it were for all the Kingdoms upon earth, Mat. 4.8. In this those
which are Christ's resemble him: They looking upon the fashion of this world as
transitory, passing away, they use it as not abusing it, 1 Cor. 7.31. Not
suffering their affections to run out inordinately after the things thereof:
not seeking great things for themselves; not placing their happiness here
below.

9. Heavenly-mindednesse.
9. Lastly, Heavenly-mindednesse: In this sense, (though not only in this, as
Grotius would have it,) Christ says of himself that he was in heaven whilst
he was upon earth; so he tells the Jews, Grotius Com. in John 3.13.
John 3.13. The Son of man which is in heaven:] So he was properly according to
his Godhead, which still kept residence in heaven; and so he was according to
his Manhood, having his affections, and his conversation there: So much his
continual discourse showed, which from earthly things still ascended up to
heavenly. And in this those which are risen with Christ, resemble him in their
measure; having their (...), their chief negotiation and business in Heaven,
(as I showed you lately from Phil. 3.20.

Thus we see how they who are risen with Christ, live the life of Christ,
expressing all the aforesaid virtues in the course of their lives and
conversations. Now, put the Question to our selves, Do we this in our measure?
Are the like fruits to be found in us? If so, surely these are no other but
fruits and consequences of this first Resurrection: But if otherwise, If our
lives carry no such, but contrary impressions; not expressing the virtues of
the second, but altogether the vices of the first and old Adam; certainly, we
are as yet under the power of the first, bound over unto the second death. Many
other Shibboleths might I give you, whereby those which have any part in this
first Resurrection, may be differenced from them which have not. But these may
be sufficient.

This trial being made, two sorts of persons will come now to be dealt
withal: Such as yet have no part in this first Resurrection: Such as have. Let
me speak to them severally: I begin with the former. 1. Application to such as
are yet in the grave of sin.


1. Such as are yet in the grave of sin; under the power of a spiritual death,
strangers to this first Resurrection: let me speak unto you in the like
language that our Savior did once to Lazarus, John 11.43. Let them awake and
arise from the dead.
Lazarus, come forth: or as Peter did to Dorcas, Acts 9.40. Tabitha, arise:]
Come ye forth of that grave of sin, wherein your souls lie putrefying and
corrupting: Arise, stand up from the dead. So the Apostle calls upon those in
your condition, Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the
dead.] Awake, (...), the word (as both Beza and Grotius note upon it) properly
signifies the awakening of a drunken man, that is, somno vinoque sepultus,
buried (as it were) in sleep, and wine; his coming to himself again. As it is
said of Noah, Genesis 9.24. Noah awoke from his wine. And so the Prophet Joel
speaking to the Drunkards of his time, he bids them awake: Awake ye drunkards,
Joel 1.5. In the like language the Apostle there speaks to the Christians of
his time, who were corrupted in their judgments with that pestilent error of
Saducaisme, denying the Resurrection of the dead, affirming the Resurrection
mentioned in Scripture to be no other but the renewing of the world by the
Gospel, and the spiritual Regeneration of the soul by the grace of God, (an
error hatched in those times, and revived in ours, even amongst our selves.)
This error the Apostle there looks upon, (as we may do upon all error) as
having in it an inebriating property, intoxicating and stupifying the souls of
them that were possessed with it; and thereupon he calls upon them to awake
from that drunkenness. (...), Awake unto righteousness, or righteously: that
is, so awake, as that you may henceforth live and walk as becomes Saints, in
holiness and righteousness. The same say I to all habitual and customary
sinners; such whose souls are cast into this dead sleep, in whom custom in
sinning has taken away the sense of sin; (and I wish I could speak loud
enough, so speak as you might hear me:) Awake you, Awake from sin unto
righteousness, Awake, arise, stand up from the dead, that Christ may give you
light and life.

Motives to press this Motion, Motive. Better never rise, then not thus arise.
I shall not use many: Take one for all. Except you thus arise, better never
arise: Except you thus arise here, better never arise hereafter: Unless you
have your part in this first Resurrection, better you should never have your
part in the second Resurrection. This later you shall have, your bodies shall
be raised again at the last day: O that you may then awake unto life, that your
Resurrection may be unto you a Resurrection of life; awake, arise here: Many
that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, (says Daniel,) but how? some
to everlasting life, and some to everlasting shame and contempt, Dan. 12.2.
Now, I know there is none of you, but would willingly have your portion with
the former of these, to awake in the Morning of the Resurrection unto
everlasting life: That you may so do, awake here; Awake and arise from sin,
unto righteousness and holiness here; otherwise, never look to awake to life
and happiness hereafter: They, and only they shall be exempted from the power
of the second death, who have their part in this first Resurrection, Rev. 20.6.

To let in the Motion, A twofold Evasion met with, and answered.
that it may enter and take place with those whom it concerns, give me leave
in the next place, to meet with a shift or two, whereby men do use to bear off
the blow, to evade the force of this Exhortation: We will awake and arise, (say
some,) but it is yet too soon. We would awake and arise, (say others,) but we
fear it is now too late. Thus, while the one presumes, and the other
despaireth, both lie still in the same grave. To meet with both these briefly.

Evasion 1. The presuming shift: It is too soon to arise.
1 For the presuming shift: We will awake and arise; but it is yet too soon.
Thus did the people in Haggai's time put off the raising and building of the
material Temple with a nondum tempus; This people says, The time is not come,
the time that the Lord's house should be built, Hag. 1.2. Thus do many put off
the raising up of this spiritual Temple: They will arise, but the time is not
yet come. A shift like that which Solomon's sluggard makes use of, Prove. 6.
Being called upon to awake and arise, verse 9. How long will thou sleep, O
sluggard? When will thou arise out of thy sleep? He replyeth in the next verse,
verse. 10. Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands
to sleep: He will arise, but not yet. Even thus do many poor sinners put off the
call of God, calling upon them to awake and arise out of the dead sleep of sin;
Yet a little more sleep, etc. They will arise from sin to righteousness; but
not yet. Modo and modo, By and by, hereafter. It may be, they think it is yet
early day with them; their sun is but new risen: It is but the morning of their
age, their youthful season, and they must give youth the swinge: They think it
is with Men as with Horses, If they are broke too soon, they are spoiled. They
are afraid lest that impious Proverb, which was never yet verified in any,
should prove true in them, Young Saints, old Devils; and therefore they will
leave this work to their old age. When they have nothing else to do, then they
will begin to think of this work, to look toward God; when they are about to
leave the earth, then they will begin to think of heaven.

Ans. Fond men! Old age the unfittest time for this work.
Is this the time to begin to live, when you are ready to die? Is this the time
to rise from the grave of sin, when you are falling into the grave of the
earth? Is this the time to rise to righteousness, when you cannot rise from
your bed, or couch? Is this the time to begin to look toward heaven, when you
begin to stoop, and look downwards toward the earth? Of all other, old age
will be found to be the unfittest time for this work. You know whose
Exhortation it is, Eccl. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy
youth, while the evil days come not.] Such are the days of old age; evil
days, in respect of the manifold infirmities, diseases, aylements which attend
upon it: Ipsa senectus morbus est; Old age it self is a disease: and being so,
it is the most improper time for this work of Repentance and Amendment of life.
How can a man be borne when he is old? (says Nicodemus, speaking of himself)
John 3.4. So may we say of being born again; Regeneration deferred to old age,
is
How shall an old sinner be made a young Saint? The work of Regeneration being
deferred until old age, will then be found both difficult and suspicious.

1. Difficult.
1. Difficult. The Grave of sin is like the Grave of the earth. The longer a man
lies in it, the more difficult will his Resurrection be. When Lazarus had lain
four days in the grave, Martha thought that Christ came too late, that there
was no possibility of a recovery. Lord, (says she) By this time he stinketh,
for he has been dead four days. John 11.39. The like we may say of aged
confirmed sinners, who have lain not four days, but (it may be) forty, sixty,
eighty years rotting and putrefying in the grave of sin, so as they stink
already, their lives and conversations have been scandalous and offensive to
all that have come near them many a day; How do we think that such putrified
souls should ever be raised again? In such the work of Regeneration cannot but
be apprehended to be a difficult work. It was the speech of Sarah, when the
Angel told her she should conceive and bring forth a son in her old age,
having been to that day barren, What (says she) shall I, after that I am waxen
old, have pleasure? Genesis 18.12. So may an aged sinner say concerning the work
of Regeneration. What, shall I who am now waxen old, gray headed in sin, shall
I now have pleasure? shall I find delight in spiritual and heavenly things,
which to me hitherto have been dry and saplesse? Shall the Immortal seed of
the word become fruitful in me? Shall the new man be conceived, shall Christ
be formed in my soul, which has hitherto been as barren, as dead, as ever
Sarahs womb was? This, though to God it is possible, and easy; yet to man it
will be found a difficult work. Women who never had a child till their age,
oftimes pay dear for it, before they see it. Aged sinners will find
Repentance to be bitter, the work of Regeneration difficult. 2 Suspicious.


2. And as difficult, so suspicious. True Repentance is never too late, but
late Repentance is seldom true, seldom sincere. Aged sinners, if they begin
to forsake their sins, and look toward God, and toward heaven, it may be
suspected that it is not love to God, that draws them, but fear of Hell that
drives them to it.

Upon these grounds let all be persuaded not to put off the call of God. Put
not off the call of God.
Does Christ by the Trumpet of his word summon you (as at this time he does) to
arise and come forth of the grave of sin? do not say that it is too soon. Will
you think thus to put off the Archangel at the last day, when you shall hear
the dismal sound of his Trumpet, Surgite Mortui, Arise ye dead, and come to
Judgment? will you then plead that it is too soon to arise? you will arise
herafter? I beseech you think upon this now, what answer you must then return
to the summons of your Corporal Resurrection, and return the same now to this
summons of your spiritual Resurrection. Does Christ call unto you, and bid you
arise from sin? (He does so:) do not put him off with delays. To day, if ye
will hear his voice, (says the Author to the Hebrews, Hebr. 3.7. citing the
words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 95.7.) Now whilst salvation is offered, now take
the present opportunity, and make use of it: (...), To day. The time of this
life is but a Day. Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, (says our
Savior, speaking of the term of his own life upon earth) John 8.56. And this
day is the day of our first Resurrection. Arise therefore whilst this day
lasts. This is the great work which we have to do, every of us, while we are
here upon earth: and therefore work this work of God whilst this day lasts,
knowing, that the night is coming, wherein there is no working (as our Savior
tells his disciples, John 9.4.) And how much of this day is yet behind, how
nigh this night may be, who can tell? How know thou, but that thy Sun may go
down at noon? and therefore defer not to answer the call of Christ, calling
upon thee to arise.

None know whether God will call again.
Which if thou shall do; How know thou whether ever he will call again, or
no? We know what our Savior once said to his Disciples, when he had twice
awakened them, and yet coming to them the third time and found them sleeping;
Sleep on now, (says he) and take your rest, Matthew. 26.45. As if he should
have said, Now take your course; ye may sleep, for me, as long as you will, I
will never awaken you more; or you will have little list to sleep ere long,
whether I awake you or no. Christians! there is none of you but Christ has
come unto you once and again, many times, calling upon you in the Ministry of
his word, bidding you awake, arise. Now, what do you yet sleep? Take heed lest
that terrible doom proceed out of his lips, Sleep henceforth, and take your
rest. A restless Rest. There is a time when Christ will call no more. My
spirit shall not ever strive with man, Genesis 5.3. And what know thou whether
this be not the last time of asking. And therefore, if he do now knock at the
door of any of your hearts, call upon you by the inward motions of his spirit,
as he does by the outward Ministry of his word, do not put him off as Felix
did Paul, Act. 24.25. saying, you will hear him another time; when you have a
convenient leisure you will call for him: So you may, and yet he not answer.
Because I have called, and ye refused, (says Wisdom) therefore ye shall call
upon me, but I will not answer, Prove. 1.24, 28. So dangerous a thing is it to
try conclusions with Jesus Christ; to try whether the wind will blow again,
whether the Cock will crow again, whether the Trumpet will sound again. Does it
now sound in any of your hearts, as it does in your ears, calling upon you to
arise from sin unto righteousness? do not say, It is too soon.

Evasion 2. The despairing shift.
2. But is it now too late? There is the second shift, no less dangerous then
the former: I have lien a long time in the grave of sin, rotting and putrefying
there; I am an habituated, inveterate sinner. Is there yet any hope for me?
Repentance in age difficult to man, not to God.


Ans. This was the Argument that shook Martha's faith. Her brother had lien
four days in the grave. But what says our Savior to her? Said I not unto
thee, If thou would believe, thou should see the glory of God? John
11.40. The like I say unto thee: Art thou an aged sinner? Suppose one of those
the Prophet Isai. speaks of, Isai. 65.20. A sinner of an hundred years old?
yet only believe, and thou shall see, thou shall feel the glory of God, the
glorious power and grace of God in changing thee yet before thy change comes,
working this Resurrection in thee, and for thee. To thee this work is now more
difficult; not so to him who is the Resurrection and life. It was all one to
Christ in the days of his flesh, to raise up the Courtiers son from the
sickbed, John 4.46. and Jairus his daughter from the deathbed, Mat. 9.25. and
the widow of Naim's son from the Biere, Luke 7.14. and Lazarus from the grave,
and that after his three days burial, John 11.43. True indeed, in the last of
these, it is said, that he groaned in himself once, and again, ver. 33, 38.
But this he did, either by way of sympathy, expressing his grief and
compassion toward Mary, and the rest of the mourners; or else by way of
Antipathie, expressing his anger and indignation against Martha, and the rest
of those faithless ones, who so far questioned his power in effecting what he
had undertaken; not in regard of any apprehended difficulty in the work: which,
when he came to it, he effected with a word, Lazarus, come forth. Is it so,
that you are not only dead in sin, but have lain long in that state, under the
power of this death; yet despair not.

But in this state I have often withstood the Call of God; Doubts Answered.
Repl. 1. Resisting the call of God.
Often have I heard the voice of Christ, but have not answered it. Often have I
felt the strivings of the Spirit of grace, but have checked, resisted, quenched
the motions thereof.

And so had the Jews done, Ans.
as Stephen tells them to their face, Acts 7.51. Ye stiff-necked, and
uncircumcised in hearts and ears, ye do always resist the holy Ghost;] yet
Peter invites them to repentance, with assured hopes of mercy upon their coming
in, and accepting the offer, Act. 2.38. Repent ye therefore, and be baptized
every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and
ye shall received the gifts of the holy Ghost. Of which gifts, the chiefest is
this of Regeneration.

But I fear, Repl. 2. The case of Apostasy.
I am in the number of those of whom St Jude speaks ver. 12. of his Epistle, A
Tree that is twice dead; a relapsed Apostate, one that has fallen away from
the grace of God after that I was once enlightened: one that has fallen back
again into a state of sin and death, after that in my own and others
apprehensions I had begun to live the life of grace. So as I fear, I am also
(as he speaks) plucked up by the roots, for ever cut off from all hope of
spiritual union or Communion with Jesus Christ, under an impossibility of ever
being renewed, of ever partaking in a second spiritual Resurrection.

Answ.
Answ. Still this makes the case more difficult: yet despair not. Surely,
Lazarus died again after his first resurrection; yet shall his body be raised
again at the last day. Believe it, Christ is able to do as much for thy Soul,
as he will do for his Body. And this, if thou be not still wanting to his
grace, he will do; Restore thee from thine Apostasy.

Quest.
Quest. But what then shall I do, that I may be made partaker of this grace?
that I may have my part in this first resurrection? What to be done to attain
this Resurrection.
nay, being a dead man, what can I do? A dead man is a mere patient in the work
of his own resurrection.

Ans.
Answ. True, and so is a sinner in the first act of his own Conversion, (as I
have before showed you.) In thine own strength without Christ, thou can do
nothing in this way, (as our Savior tells his Disciples, John 15.5.) what Paul
says of a dead Body, 1 Cor. 15.43. we may say of a dead Soul, It is sown in
weakness: Being dead in sin, it is in a state of impotency, not able to raise
it self, or to contribute ought toward it own resurrection. But yet this thou
may do, and this be thou directed to do.

1. Wait and attend upon God in the use of whereby he ordinarily effects this
Resurrection: This could that poor, Wait upon God in the use of means.
impotent, bedridden man in the Gospel do, John 5. Though he could not put
himself into the waters, yet he could lie at the pool. And the like may thou
do: Though thou can not quicken and raise up thy self; yet thou may attend
upon those means whereby God is wont to convey that grace, whereby he effects
this work; which is the Ministry of the word. By this means it was that those
dead bones were quickened, Ezekiel. 37. viz. by the Prophets prophesying upon them,
verse 4. He said unto me, Prophecy upon those bones, and say unto them, O ye
dry bones, hear the word of the Lord.] And by this means it is that dead souls
are quickened; by the Ministry of the word. This is the Trumpet of Jesus Christ:
Here is the voice of Christ to be heard, whereby he quickneth the dead: And
therefore with care, diligence, conscience attend upon this Ordinance,
harkening and listening to hear the voice of Jesus Christ.

2. Not hardening our hearts. Not hardening the heart.
Let that be a second direction. To day, if you will hear his voice, harden not
your hearts, Heb. 3.7. This men of themselves can do. Though they cannot soften
their own hearts, yet they can harden them; and that by resisting the motions
of the spirit of grace. Now, would you have your part in this first
Resurrection? take heed of thus hardening your hearts, take heed of resisting,
quenching the first Motions of this spirit; but give way to them; let in the
voice of Christ into your souls. Let in the voice both of the Law and Gospel.

Let in the voice of the Law.
The voice of the Law for the awakening of you. This is the first use of the
Law, to rouse and awaken dead souls, to convince poor sinners of the
sinfulness and misery of their Natural Condition. Let it be useful to you
in this way. Give way to the spirit of conviction for the awakening of you.
Were it possible that a dead man could be awakened, and made apprehensive and
sensible of that state wherein he is, being under the power of death; to see
how he has the grave for his house, and makes his Bed in the darkness, where
corruption and the worm claim kindred of him, being his only Companions (as
Job describes that state, Job 17.14.) he should not need to be persuaded to
arise, and come forth, and to accept of a Resurrection, being tendered to him.
Surely so would it be with poor sinners. Were their consciences but once
thoroughly awakened, and themselves made apprehensive of the misery of their
natural condition, how their souls ly putrefying and stinking in the grave of
sin, they should need no other argument to induce them to come out from thence,
and to accept of this new life offered and tendered unto them. Suffer your
selves therefore to be thus awakened. Give way to the discoveries of the Law;
bringing them home to your selves in your own particular, that so you may see
and feel your selves in a state of sin and death, under the power of a
spiritual death, bound over unto Eternal death. Let in the voice of the
Gospel, Answering it.


Being thus awakened by the Law, now hearken to the sweet voice of Christ in
the Gospel, calling upon you and commanding you to arise and stand up from the
dead. Lending not only your ears, but your hearts to this call; closing with
it, returning answer to it, as old Elie advises young Samuel to do in a like
case, 1 Samuel 3.9. speak Lord, for thy servant hears. Thus when Christ shall
be pleased to call upon you outwardly in the Ministry of his word, inwardly by
the motions of his spirit, inviting, persuading, requiring you to arise from
sin to Righteousness, give entertainment to this call of his, accepting this
offer of grace, by faith receiving Christ himself into your hearts, yielding
up your selves unto him to be framed and fashioned according to his will. So
doing, he will communicate himself unto you in this blessed way, being unto you
Resurrection and life. For this you have his express promise, with an Ecce, a
(Behold) before it, that you may take the better notice of it, Revelation 3.20.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock? If any man hear my voice, and open the
door, I will come in and sup with him, and he with me.] The [Doore] there
spoken of is the door of men's Consciences. At this door Jesus Christ
[standeth] attending and waiting with much patience upon poor sinners. Thus
standing at this Door, he [knocketh;] this he does by outward means, and
inward Motions, as one desirous of admittance. Now (says he,) [If any one hear
my voyce] not only gives me the bare hearing, but hearkneth, attends to what
I say, [And opens the door,] thereupon letting me into his heart, receiving
me by faith, accepting me as a Savior and a Lord, [I will come and sup with
him, etc. I will now communicate my self unto him in the most intimate way,
letting into his soul the sweetest and most efficacious influences of my grace
and spirit for the carrying on and perfecting that blessed work which is there
begun. This will Jesus Christ do to the soul that thus hearkneth to his voice,
to his Admonitions, Exhortations, Offers, Promises, receiving him by faith,
cleaving to him by Love, submitting to him by Obedience, he will be to it
Resurrection and Life.

The main work is to close with Jesus Christ.
And therefore let your first and main work be thus to close with Jesus Christ,
thus to let him into your souls; thus to receive him, that so you may come to
have union with him. From that union will flow this blessed Communion: Having
union with his Person, you shall have Communion in his Resurrection. So has
the Graft with the Stock. Having union with it, it has also communion with it
in the springs Resurrection, and that by participating in that sap and juice
which is in it. Thus being made one with Christ by faith, ye shall be made
partakers of that same spirit whereby Christ himself was raised from the dead,
which will have the same effect in you that it had in him.

And therefore again and again, be persuaded to close with the Lord Jesus: Not
thinking it enough that you are put into him by a Sacramental Insition, as all
persons Baptized are: or that you cleave unto him by an outward visible
profession, as all Hypocrites and carnal Gospellers do; but that you may have a
true spiritual coalition, a real Mystical union with him. Being thus
ingrafted into him, you shall be made conformable to him in his Resurrection:
you shall be raised from this death of sin, to this Life of grace, as he was
from the death of nature to the life of Glory.

But all this while I must remember I have been speaking to dead men; Without
his concurrence, all motions or endeavors this way are in vain.
and consequently, that unless Jesus Christ himself shall please to second
this word with his own spirit, all that I have said, or can say in this case,
will prove but lost labor. As it was in the raising of the Shunamites son, 2
Kings. 4.31. Gehezi, Elisha's servant, he comes first, and lays his Masters
staff upon the face of the Child, and this he did by his Masters direction and
appointment, verse 29. but all in vain: Til Elisha himself come, and stretch
himself upon the child, putting his face to his face, etc. there was no
awakening, no reviving; verse 31. Thus have I, as a poor servant, a Minister
of Jesus Christ, laid a Gospel command upon you, requiring you in his name to
awake, and arise; but unless my Master himself, the Lord Jesus (the true
Elisha, (...) ab (...) Deus, and (...) Salus.
the Health of God, as the word signifies) unless he come, and make an
effectual Application of himself unto your souls, breathing into the face of
them the breath of a new life, all my endeavors will be to no purpose. And
therefore let me (in the close of this Point) direct and desire you to look up
unto him who is the Resurrection and life, earnestly imploring this grace and
favor from him, that he himself would be pleased to undertake this work;
communicating unto you that Quickening spirit, whereby your hearts may be
inclined, and your selves enabled to arise and stand up from the dead; to awake
and arise from sin unto Righteousness, which of your selves you are not able to
do. I have done with the former sort, such as are as yet strangers to this
first Resurrection. Application to such as are thus risen with Christ.


Come we now to the later: Such as are in their measure made partakers of it.
As for thankful acknowledgment of this so great a mercy. Be thankful for
this Mercy.
This is the end of all that Grace which God is pleased to exercise upon his
people, viz. that They should be to the praise of his Glory, Ephesians. 1.12, 14.
That they should show forth the praises of him who has called them out of
darkness into a mavelous light: So our new Translation reads that of St
Peter, 1 Pet. 2.9. And the Original will bear it; The word (...) signifying
both virtues and Praises. And this be you excited to do; you that are made
partakers of this so peculiar a favor. Which, whether it be a mercy worth the
acknowledgment, The first Resurrection a mercy worth the acknowledging.
do but consider the greatness of the work, the Freeness of the Agent; and the
Indisposition of the subject, and then give sentence. For the greatness of the
work, it is a Resurrection. For the freeness of the Agent, it is a
Resurrection. For the Indisposition of the subject, still, (I say no more) it is
a Resurrection. Resurrection is a great work. It is so to raise up a dead body.
It is no less to raise up a dead soul. A work of a mighty, almighty power;
even of that (...), that exceeding greatness of power, (as the Apostle calls
it) Ephesians. 1.19. No less then that effectual working of that mighty power of
God, which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead. And what is
it that should move God to exercise this power upon you, rather then upon
others? surely, not any thing in your selves. Dead bodies are all alike
indisposed to a Resurrection: And so are dead souls. That God has made you the
objects of this power, it is only his free grace that moved him to it. All the
sons of Adam by nature are like so many carcasses buried together in the same
Churchyard, or lying together in the same Golgotha, or Calvery, the same
Charnell-house. You that are now made alive unto God, time was when you were in
the same condition with the rest of the world, Dead in trespasses and sins,
even as others, Ephesians. 2.1, 3. Now, how is it that Christ has been pleased to
sound the Trumpet (as it were) upon your graves? to pick and single you out
from the common heap? to make you the objects of his power and mercy, whilst
in the mean time he has suffered so many millions of souls on each side of you
to sleep in eternal death? Surely, this is no other but that which the same
Apostle calls (...), Ephesians. 2.7. the exceeding riches of his grace in his
kindness toward you in Christ Jesus.] Who but will acknowledge it a special
favor, a singular kindness which Christ showed unto Lazarus, in coming unto
him, and that before he was sent for, to raise him up from the dead? He might
have had far more noble Patients to have done so miraculous a cure upon: He
might have manifested this his power upon the Kings and Princes, and Potentates
of the earth, from whom he might have expected a better recompense then he
could from Lazarus: yet he neglects them, and singles out him. Here you will
say, (as the Jews did, when they saw Christ weeping for this his deceased
friend,) Behold how he loved him, John 11.36. This was a declaration of
singular affection unto Lazarus: no less is that affection which he has
manifested unto you: you were as truly dead as ever Lazarus was; you in your
souls, as he in his body. Now, Christ has come unto you, and that before he
was sent for, (otherwise he had never come) working the same, nay, a greater
work upon you: raising you up from the grave of sin, not to a temporary, (as he
did Lazarus,) but to an eternal, an immortal life: Sure I am, he might have
had more noble Patients; he might have made choice of the Princes and
Potentates of the world, the wise, the rich, etc. But them he has passed by,
many of them, most of them: Not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty,
not many noble are called, 1 Cor. 1.26. You has he singled out to be the
objects of this power and mercy. Herein acknowledge the exceeding riches of his
grace, and give him the glory of it by a thankful acknowledgement.

To raise up your hearts whereunto, Diverse considerations raising up the heart
to this acknowledgement.
look first downwards, into the hideous, darksome, loathsome dungeon of the
grave, from which you are raised; that wretched state of sin and death from
whence you are delivered. Then look upwards, to that blessed state, this
blessed life to which ye are raised: Look inwards, into your selves, and there
behold the Image of God in measure restored, the first fruits of the spirit
already laid in, assuring to you the full crop of heavenly glory in due season.
Look about you, and behold on each side millions of souls still sleeping,
rotting, stinking in the grave, abiding under the power of sin and death; and
then see whether here be not matter for a thankful Gratulation. When the
Israelites saw the Egyptians lie dead upon the sea-shoar, themselves being come
safe to land, they could not but break forth into praising and magnifying of
God: Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the Lord, Exodus
14.30. and 15.1. Such a difference has God put betwixt you and others: raised
you from the grave, where others lie dead. Give unto him the praise and glory
of this his free and rich grace: Inwardly acknowledging it, outwardly
expressing that acknowledegment, by speaking to his praise, and living to his
praise: so living, as Christ himself lived after his Resurrection.

first Resurrection? Are you risen with Christ? then walk as you have Jesus
Christ himself for an Example, so living as Christ himself lived after his
Resurrection. Live as Christ lived after his Resurrection.


Quest. But how is that?

Ans. Take it in three or four particulars.

1. No more returning to the grave again.
1. See that you return to the grave no more. This did Lazarus. And this, it is
supposed, did those Saints which accompanied and attended upon Christ in his
Resurrection. They returned to their graves again, they died again: But so did
not Christ himself; Christ being risen from the dead, he dies no more, ver.
9. of this Chapter. No more do you. Has God begun to raise you from the grave
of sin? do not return thither again. Take heed of ever returning to your former
state.

Object. But happily, (some may say:) What need such a Caveat as this, A Caveat
not useless, though Saints be not subject to total and final Apostasy.
There being no fear of such an Apostasy? Those who are once raised with
Christ, shall never die again: He that lives and believes on me, shall never
die, John 11.26. They who have once their part in this first Resurrection,
shall never come under the power of a second death. Such cannot fall away
totally and finally from this grace of God.

Ans. What then? Shall any hereupon take liberty to continue in sin, 1. To
continue in sin that grace may abound, a desperate conclusion.
and to live as they list? Surely then, whoever thou art, that shall dare thus
to turn the grace of God into wantonness; that make such desperate use of so
comfortable a Doctrine; drawest such poisonous and damnable inferences and
consequences from such sweet and comfortable premises, thou may take that
unto thy self which Simon Peter once said to Simon Magus, Acts 8.21. and
conclude, that as yet, Thou have no part, nor lot in this matter.] Thou art as
yet a stranger to this mystical Resurrection: and it may be feared, art like
so to be. Paul will tell such perverters and abusers of this grace of God, that
their damnation is just, Romans 3.8. And Saint Jude makes this a character of a
man ordained of old to condemnation, that shall dare thus to turn the grace of
God into lasciviousness, Jude ver. 4. This for you.

2 Saints may fall foully, and fearfully, though not totally and finally.
2. In the second place, as for true Believers, such as are made partakers of
this grace (the grace of Regeneration) it is true, they shall be so upheld by
that Manutenentia Divina, so kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation, as that they shall never totally and finally fall from it; but yet
they may fall foully and fearfully: so fall, as the story tells us that Eutichus
did, who fell from the third loft, Acts 20.9. so as they may be taken up for
dead. Though their life may be still in them, (as Paul says of him, ver. 10.)
yet they may be dead in their own and others apprehensions: They may lose that
strength and vigor, with that sense and feeling which sometimes they had; so
as though they do not return to the grave again, yet their life may draw nigh
to the grave; so as they may be accounted both by themselves and others,
amongst them that go down to the pit, free among the dead (as Heman says of
himself, Psalm. 85.3, 4, 5.) They may be brought to the gates of the grave (as
Hezekiah said of himself, Isa. 38.10.) Such may the condition of a true
believer be.

3ly As for others, such as have a name to live, they may die again: 3. Such as
have a name to live, may die again.
Self-deceiving hypocrites, those walking ghosts, who seemed to have been
partakers of this Resurrection, they may return to the grave again, losing all
that which they seeemed to have, (as our Savior says of the formal
Professor) Luke 8.18. losing all those common graces, which (like Bristol
Diamonds) for a time sparkled, and shone forth in them: Such Apostacy is no
Raritie. Saint Peter can tell us of Dogs returning to their vomit again; and
Swine, after they have be washen, returning to their wallowing in the mire
again. Such as, After they have escaped the pollution of the world, through the
knowledge (or acknowledgment) of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, yet are again
entangled therein, and overcome, 2 Pet. 2.20.21. And the Author to the Hebrews
will tell us of some, who having been once enlightened (by the word) and have
tasted of the heavenly gift, (have felt some flashes of inward peace and joy)
and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, (the common gifts and graces of the
Spirit) and have tasted the good word of God, (have found some relish in the
sweet and saving promises of the Gospel) and the powers of the world to come,
(have had some ravishing apprehensions of the joys and glory of heaven) yet
they fall away (by a total apostacy, returning to their former condition,
being brought wholly under the power of sin again;) so you have it Hebr. 6.4,
5, 6. Now in the fear of God, take heed this prove not your condition. The
conditions of Apostates most desperate.
Which, if it do, mark what follows; Your later end will be worse then your
beginning: and it would have been better for you never to have known the way of
righteousness, them having known it, to turn from the holy Commandment; so
you shall find it, 2 Pet. 2.20. This will put you into a desperate state,
under an impossibility (in an ordinary way) of ever being renewed again unto
repentance: so you have it, Heb. 6.4, 6. If ye shall thus sin wilfully, after
that ye have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains for you no
more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and
fiery indignation: so you may read it, Hebr. 10.26, 27. Trees which are twice
dead, what can they look for, but to be plucked up by the roots, cut off from
all union and communion with Jesus Christ? Jude 12. So desperate is the
condition of wilful Apostates, such as having been in measure wrought upon by
the grace and spirit of Christ illuminating, convincing, and in measure
changing and reforming, (though not regenerating) them; If they shall willingly
and wilfully return to their former state, it puts them into a most dangerous
and desperate condition.

Being raised, come not nigh the Brink of the grave again.
And therefore, Is it so, that God has begun this work, this change in any of
you? Take heed of looking back: Come not nigh the verge, the brink of the grave
again: do not henceforth give way to any one sin, so as to live in it, to
continue in it. This the Apostle here in the former part of this chapter
presses upon these his Romans; How shall we that are dead unto sin live any
longer therein? ver. 2. Believers are dead to sin; nay risen from sin; how
shall they live, or ly in it? we would account it a madness in a man that is
raised from the grave, to return thither again, and to make his abode there. It
is no less for Christians that are risen from the grave of sin, to return to
it, to live and continue in it. In this imitate your heavenly pattern, who
being raised from the dead, dyed no more.

2. Being raised from the dead, evidence Evidence this Resurrections by the
action of a spiritual life.
So did your Savior. Being raised from the grave, he evidenced the truth of
his Corporal Resurrection, showing himself alive after his Passion by many
infallible proofs (as the Evangelist has it) Act. 1.3. specially by doing the
actions of a natural life, speaking to his Disciples, and eating with them.
Thus do you evidence the truth of your spiritual Resurrection. Evidence it
both to your selves and others, and that by doing the Actions of a spiritual
life; approving your selves unto God and man in all duties of Piety, charity.
Being delivered out of the hands of these your enemies, Sin, Satan, Hell,
Death, now serve God in Holiness and Righteousness all the days of your life.]
Thus yield up your selves unto God, as those that are alive from the dead, and
your members as instruments of Righteousness unto God (as the Apostle
presses, ver. 13. of this Chapter.) Thus being now brought into a new state,
walk answerable to it, and that by living a new life: so did our blessed
Savior after his Resurrection (as I have showed you.) He lived after another
manner then before he did: Do you the like. Hic dies aliam vitam adfert, alios
mores postulat: This new state calls for a new life and conversation. Herein
lies the principal part of a Christians conformity to Christ in his
Resurrection; That like as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the
Father, so he also should walk in newness of life; so you have it in the words
before the Text.) And therefore, As concerning your former conversation, put
off the old man, and put on the new; so you have the Exhortation, Ephesians. 4.22,
24. You were sometimes darkness, (you were so during your abode in the grave of
sin;) but now (being risen) ye are light in the Lord; walk therefore as
children of light: so it follows, Ephesians. 5.8. In times past ye walked according
to the course of this world, etc. (so the Apostle describes your former state,
Ephesians. 2.3.) but now, being brought into a new state, henceforth be not conformed
to this world, but be ye transformed, etc. (so the same Apostle presses it,
Romans 12.2.) Be ye metamorphosed; so living now as becomes men of another
world. So did your Savior after his Resurrection (as I showed you:) and so do
you. As for the comforts of this present world, use them; but not abusing them:
so use them as not using them. Seeking after spiritual things, spiritual
Meats and Drinks, spiritual riches spiritual pleasures and delights. These are
suitable to your new state. If ye be risen with Christ, seek the things which
are above, Col. 3.1. Hereby evidence that you have your part in this first
resurrection by walking answerably to this new condition. With all, living to
the Glory of God. So did your Savior (as I have showen you in opening of the
former verse,) he was raised from the dead (as by, so) to the Glory of God his
Father, that he might glorify him. Herein be you conform to your pattern.
Being raised from the dead by the glory of God, now be you to his glory, making
this the end of your life, to glorify God; Glorify him both with your
spirits, and with your Bodies, both which are his by more then a single right.

3. Are you thus risen? then wait for the the day of your Translation. Wait
for the day of Translation.
So did your blessed Savior after his Resurrection; he made his abode here
upon earth for forty days, waiting for his Ascension. Do you the like who are
made partakers of this first Resurrection. The day of your Translation is not
far off; Forty days; At most, a few years: In the mean time wait for it.
So do all they who have received the first fruits of the Spirit. They wait for
the Adoption, viz. the Redemption of their Bodies, Romans 8.23. There is a
twofold Adoption, and a twofold Redemption: Duplex (...), duplex (...). A
twofold Adoption; the former inchoate, which gives a Jus ad rem, a right unto
the Inheritance. The other complete and perfect, which gives a Jus in re,
puts the person adopted into the actual possession of that Inheritance,
which was insured upon him in his Adoption. In like manner a twofold
Redemption; The one of the soul, when it is delivered from the power and
dominion of Sin; the other of the Body, when it shall be delivered from the
power of Death: the one is the first fruits, the other the crop. You who have
received the former, wait for the later; wait for the coming of Jesus Christ.
This is the testimony which Paul gives to his believing Corinthians, 1 Cor.
1.7. They came behind in no gift, waiting for the coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ.] There a is twofold coming of Christ, (besides his coming in the flesh,
and in the spirit) viz. his coming in particular, and in general Judgment. In
the former way he comes at the day of death: In the later at the day of the
general Resurrection. Now wait ye for both these. Wait for your particular
change: All the days of mine appointed time will I wait till my change shall
come, says Job, chapter 14. verse 14.) wait for that general change. This is
the coming of Christ which the Apostle there aims at; calling it (...); The
Revelation of the Lord Jesus. Then shall Christ be revealed to be what he is:
And then shall those who are his, participate in the same Revelation; they
shall be revealed to be what they are. Now are we the sons of God, (says Saint
John) and it does not appear what we shall be. But we know, that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him, 1 John 3.2. Like him in Glory. When Christ who
is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory,
Collossians 3.4. Wait therefore for this Revelation. Wait for it, and that
first with Patience, then with Assurance.

1. With Patience. 1. With Patience.
So will they who have a lively and well grounded hope, they will wait with
patience for the thing hoped for. So says the Apostle, Romans 8.25. If we hope
for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it.] Thus wait ye for
the second Resurrection. Your souls being raised, wait ye for the
Resurrection of your Bodies; that blessed Resurrection unto life, whereof this
first Resurrection is the pledge, and assurance. Wait for it with patience. What
though God do deferr it for a time, holding you in suspense, under hope? It is
no more then he did to his own Son, who after his Resurrection was not
presently translated, presently glorified, he tarried his time, his forty
days. Think not much that you do the like. Nay suppose he be pleased to
exercise you with many kinds of trials and Tribulations, during your abode here
upon earth, yet gird up the loins of your mind, and hope unto the end, for the
grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ, (as
Saint Peter exhorts) 1 Pet. 1.13. The grace which shall then be brought, is
that grace of life, (as he calls it, cap. 3. ver. 7.) even eternal life. For
this grace wait unto the end, and that with patience.

2. With Assurance.
2. And as with patience, so with Assurance. Having your part in this first
Resurrection, ye shall have your part in the second, even in that Resurrection
of life. The one is a pledge of the other: being in your measure made
conformable unto Christ in his resurrection here, ye shall be fully hereafter;
when you shall be raised up to the participation of the same glory, which
Christ after his Resurrection in due season entered into. This the Spirit of God
in Scripture lays down as an unquestionable truth, which all true believers
may be confidently assured of: We know, (says Saint John,) that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him, etc. 1 John 3.2. We know, (says Saint Paul,)
that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building
of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. And
hereupon, (says he,) We that are in this Tabernacle do groan, being burdened,
not that we would be uncloathed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be
swallowed up of life, ver. 4. which it shall be at the day of the general
Resurrection. In the confident assurance whereof, let all those who have their
part in this first Resurrection, wait and look out for that day. In this we
groan earnestly, (says the same Apostle there, ver. 2.) desiring to be
clothed upon with our house which is from heaven.] So shall the soul, upon the
separation of it from the body; and so shall the whole man, upon the
resurrection of the body. Then shall soul and body be clothed with celestial
glory. Let all the Lord's people in a confident expectation hereof wait for it.

4. And waiting for it, (in the fourth place,) Prepare for it: Prepare for it.
and that by finishing the work which you have here to do upon earth. So did
your blessed Savior prepare for his Ascension. After his Resurrection he had
yet some works to do upon earth; as viz. to confirm the faith of his Disciples
of the present and succeeding ages, in the truth of his own Resurrection; to
empower and commissionate them, and their successors, for teaching and
baptizing of all nations; and to instruct them in some other things pertaining
to the Kingdom of God. And all this he does, (as you may see, Acts 1.3. Mat.
28.18, 19.) so finishing the remainder of that work which his Father had given
him to do before his Ascension. Look you upon him, and do likewise: Whilst you
are upon earth, work the works of God: you know not how nigh the time of your
dissolution, your translation may be; and therefore do good while you may; not
neglecting, not letting slip any opportunity which God offers you for doing
any service to him, or to his Church: that so, when the time of your
dissolution shall approach, you may be able to say with the blessed Apostle, 2 Timothy 4.8. We have fought the good fight, we have finished our course, we have
kept the faith:] Which whosoever can say in truth, and sincerity, though it
has been in great weakness, yet may he go on, and apply what follows;
Henceforth, there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord,
the righteous Judge shall give unto me at that day.] Thus being risen with
Christ, imitate him, so living as Christ lived after his Resurrection.

Rise more and more.
and you. In the third place, Are you in your measure made partakers of this
Resurrection? then labor daily to rise more and more. Herein the spiritual
Resurrection differs from the corporal: The corporal Resurrection is
perfected at once, uno actu: it admits of no degrees. It is otherwise in the
spiritual Resurrection: This is graduall, never perfected, till grace be
swallowed up of glory. The Christian's rising to newness of life, is like the
Suns rising upon the earth, which is by degrees, higher and higher, till it
comes to the Zenith, the mid-heavens. The comparison is Solomon's, Prove. 4.18.
The path of the just is as the shining light, which shines more and more unto
the perfect day. Such is the path of the righteous in the work of
Sanctification; herein he makes a progression, going as the Travelers did to
Sion, from step to step, from strength to strength, Psalm. 84.7. This is a work
not perfected at once, The inward man is renewed day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16. So
much, (as I told you,) the Apostle here in the Text insinuates, where speaking
of this first Resurrection, he speaks of it not in the present, or
preterperfect, but in the future tense: not we are, but we shall be planted
together in the likeness of his Resurrection.] Thus is it with Mortification,
in the best it is an imperfect work: Nondum prorsus mortui sumus peccato,
(says Beza upon the Text:) We are not as yet wholly dead unto sin. However the
relics and remainders thereof are not imputed to believers, yet they are not
altogether freed from the power of it. And so is it with Vivification, this
first Resurrection; They who have their part in it, are not yet wholly risen.
Here the School distinction takes place, Totus homo, sed non totum hominis, The
whole man is risen, but not the whole of the man. In a regenerate person, the
whole man is renewed, every part, spirit, soul, and body; but not wholly: still
there are some relics of the old man, some remainders of corruption left in
him: still he does haerere in luto, his feet do still after a sort stick fast
in the mire of corruption: alluding whereunto, (as may be conceived,) our
Savior tells his Disciples, John 13.10. that, He who is washen needs not,
save only to wash his feet. A metaphor or similitude, taken from a man washing
himself in a river, whose body is washen and clean, only his feet being in
the mire, still need washing: Or (as Grotius apprehends it,) from a man coming
out of a Bath barefoot; his body is clean, only his feet are soiled with
dust. So is it with believers who are washen in the blood of Christ, they are
freed from the guilt of sin, and they are freed from the regning power and
dominion of sin. The whole man, the person is washen, but not the whole of the
man; still there is some soil which cleaves unto their feet; some relics of
sinful corruption remaining to be washen away: They which are risen, have yet
need to rise more and more. And this do you: Are you risen? yet rise; rise
daily: As Paul says of his dying, 1 Cor. 15.31. He died daily. So let it be
with your rising from sin to righteousness, Rise daily: And that

1. In respect of the acts of sin.
1. In respect of the Acts of sin. You daily fall into sin, and therefore rise
daily from sin: The just man falls seven times a day, and rises up again,
(says the Wiseman,) Pro. 24.16. It is true, as well of falling into the evil
of sin, as of misery. Thus he falls seven times a day, that is, often. Now,
daily falling, rise again daily by the renewed acts of repentance, renewing
your sorrow for sin, your resolution against it.

2. In respect of carnal and sinful security.
Secondly, In respect of carnal and sinful security, wherewith the most
sanctified souls are subject to be surprised and overtaken. Even the five wise
virgins slept, as well as the foolish, Mat. 25.5. From this sleep arise daily:
Awake, thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, (says the Apostle,
speaking to believers, as well as others,) Ephesians. 5.14. Though they do not sleep
as others, 1 These. 5.6. yet they are subject to sleep as well as others: though
they do not sleep a dead sleep, as Lazarus did, of whom our Savior says, I go
to to awake him out of sleep, John 11.32. (Such is the sleep of unregenerate
persons,) yet they may sleep a deep sleep, such as Peter, and James, and John
did in the Mount, where their Master was transfigured, Luke 9.32. and the rest
of the Disciples in the Garden, where their Master was apprehended; of whom it
is said, they were heavy asleep, Mat. 26.43. Though they do not sleep in a
state of sin, yet they may for a time sleep in some particular sin. So did
David, who lay diverse months in those foul sins of his: And so did Peter for
a while, till the crowing of the cock awakened him. In this respect, then
awake, and arise daily: shaking off this sinful security; stirring up your
selves to an holy vigilance and watchfulness over your hearts and lives.

3. And (thirdly,) thus arise also in respect of the power of sin: 3. In
respect of the power of sin.
Still there are, and will be some relics of habitual corruption left in the
soul; somewhat of the old Adam remaining to be put off: [That ye put off the
old man,] says the Apostle, speaking to his believing Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.22.
In this the Believer's Resurrection is like unto Lazarus his, who coming out of
the grave, brought his grave-clothes with him, John 11.44. Thus is it in this
first Resurrection; though the person be brought out of the grave of sin, yet
he has the grave-clothes still hanging about him; some remainders of
corruption which are yet to be put off. Paul writing to his Colossians, Col. 3.
though for the main, he looked upon them as such as had put off the old man,
(as he says, ver. 9.) yet he presses upon them a further degree of
mortification; [But now put you off all these things, anger, wrath, malice,
etc. ver. 8.] Lo here, what are the rags of the old man; even all sinful
lusts, inordinate affections. And these are Christians to be daily putting off
more and more. This do you who are risen with Christ; every day labor to get
more and more strength against your corruptions, a more full conquest over
them: that you may find your souls daily advancing to a further distance from
the state of sin, rising more and more out of this grave.

4. In respect of newness of life.
4. And thus arising from sin, rise daily to newness of life; endeavoring a
further renovation of the new man: That it may be renewed more and more, as in
knowledge, [Ye have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, (says
the Apostle,) Col. 3.10. so in holiness and righteousness, which are the
other parts of this new man, as the Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 4.24. Have you
begun to put on this new man? put it on daily more and more, by endeavoring to
grow in grace, and in the knowledge of your Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, (as
Saint Peter exhorts in the close of his second Epistle,) Adding one grace to
another; to faith, virtue; to virtue, knowledge; to knowledge, temperance; to
temperance, patience; to patience, godliness, etc: (as the same Apostle
directs, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6.) That so you may come behind in no grace, no gift, (as
Paul says of his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.7.) Then adding one degree of grace to
another, faith to faith. The righteousness of God, (says the Apostle) is
revealed from faith to faith, Romans 1.17. that is, from one degree and measure
of faith to another. According as faith is revealed more and more, so is the
Righteousness of Justification more assured unto the soul. Labor to get your
faith, (which is the radical grace, the very heart of this new-man,) confirmed
and strengthened daily: not neglecting such means as God has appointed for
that end: amongst which, the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, (whereof some of
you have this day been made partakers,) is a chief and principal one. Then
seek after the like growth and increase in love, in humility, in patience, and
so in all other graces. These are the members of this new man; let it be your
care that (as it is in true Augmentatation, which is secundum omnes parts, a
proportionable growth in every part,) every of these may grow and increase with
the increase of God: Thus do you perfect holiness in the fear of God: (as the
Apostle exhorts, 2 Cor 7.1.) Being thus changed into the Image of Christ from
glory to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord, (as you have it v. last of the
3d. chap. of that Epistle.

5. In respect of heavenlimindedness.
5. And lastly: Rise more and more in respect of Heavenlimindednesse. Your
hearts are like ponderous bodies, still tending downwards toward the Earth:
And therefore let it be your daily work to raise and scrue them upwards by
frequent Meditation, and Contemplation of Heaven, and Heavenly things; and in
particular, of that heavenly Glory to which Christ is raised [Beholding as in a
glass the glory of the Lord] says the Apostle in the place last named, 2
Corin. 3. last.) which Grotius expounds of the Glory of Christ in his Kingdom
of Glory. This [Behold as in a glass,] that is (says he) seriously and
attentively consider and contemplate it. With all laboring to raise your
Affections thither. If ye be risen with Christ, etc. Set your Affections on
things which are above; and not on things on the earth, Col. 3.1, 2. (...),
Mind things above, and let them have your Hearts, your Affections. As for the
things of this world: labor daily to sit more loose to them, that so you may
be willing to part with them, when ever God shall be pleased to call you
hence. Thus being Risen, yet rise daily more and more.

Which that you may do, still seek after a further and more intimate Union and
Communion with the Lord Jesus Christ, Still seeking after a more intimate union
and full communion with Jesus Christ.
by whose spirit it is that you are, and must be raised: That you may more and
more participate of that virtue which is in him. Paul had no small share in
this virtue, yet he desires that he might still have further experience of
it. [That I may know him, and the virtue of his Resurrection.] Philip. 3.10.
Let the same be your desire and endeavor, that you may daily feel this divine
virtue put forth in you more and more, raising you up more and more from the
death of sin to the Life of grace here. Then rest assured, the same virtue
shall at the last day raise you up from the death of nature to the Life of
Glory. Being here made conformable unto Christ in your first Resurrection, you
shall be also in the second, which shall be to you a Resurrection of life.

And thus I have at the length, through the good hand of God leading and
conducting me, passed thorough this excellent portion of Scripture, wherein you
have held forth unto you that great Gospel Mystery of the Christians Union and
Communion with, and conformity to Jesus Christ, both in his death and
Resurrection. The sweetness of the subject has drawn forth my meditations
beyond the staple which I first intended them. May but my labors herein prove
acceptable and profitable unto you, I have what I aimed at. Which that they may
be, let us Pray.

FINIS.

