BRITANICUS HIS BLESSING.
HElls blessings on thee, my blasphemous son,
Thou have thy brother Rabshekah outdone.
Shimei was Courtly, (if compared to thee)
Thou every week writ'st higher Blasphemy.
Korah's gainsaying, if compared to thine,
Was Petit-treason: Thou in every line
Out-vy'st all these. Thou bravely play'st thy part,
And to our service show a loyal heart
All I can promise, is, when thou shall come,
Thou shall be glorious for thy martyrdom.
Nay thou shall set thy house in order too,
And in thy death Achitophel out-doe.
Thou taught'st the people better to rebel,
Then why should thou not in thy death excel?
Both him and all those who came here before,
Since thou (dear son) have done for us much more,
Vicisti Galilaee thou shall cry
(As Julian did) and cast thy blood on hie.
Or thou shall die like Arrius, who withstood
The Nazarite, voiding both thy guts and blood.
Yet we will write for thee an Epitaph,
Which who ere reads, he shall not choose but laffe:
Hic jacet Britannicus, Scurra, Rabula, Lixa, Lanista,
Et filius Belial, and Regis Antagonista.
Here lies Britannicus that snarling cur,
That son of Belial, who kept such a stur:
Who every Monday spent his stock of spleen
In venomous railing on the King and Queen:
Whom though they both in goodness should forgive,
Yet we have vowed Britannicus must not live.
BRITANICUS HIS VVELCOME.
I Joy to think what Bone-fires shall be made,
When thou shall come, great Master of our trade.
Hells brazen gates shall be set open for thee,
And churlish Cerberus shall refuse his fee.
And when thy soul shall enter into hell,
It shall be welcomed with a hideous yell.
We will prepare such Music for thine ear
As that which pleased Caligula to hear.
He took delight to hear the parting groans
Of tortured vvretches, and would praise their tones.
And now the meanest soul imprisoned here,
Will in his tortures great Caligula jeere:
For we confess it is our greatest pleasure
To see our tallyes struck, and equal measure.
Our inner rooms shall be perfumed for thee,
With Auri calcus, Sulphur, Mercury.
And for the strength of it I dare presume
Nor Spain, nor Rome, has any such perfume.
Of Sodoms Apples we will Lambs-wool make,
And drink carouses of the Stygian Lake.
This must thy Garnish (son) thy welcome be,
And all my Legions shall attend on thee.
Nay more, to show thou art a welcome guest,
We will prepare for thee a royal Feast.
Two fat Presbyters sides, collerd in Lawne,
In Jesuits urin souc'd, shall be thy Brawne.
With Aqua Regis we will grind thy mustard,
And of Hienna's milk we will make thy custard,
With th'egges of Aspes. O it is a curious dish!
And for a Gusto does exceed man's wish.
Flapdragon we will drink instead of Wine,
For to this Brawne we drink this Muscadine.
This liquor is by cunning Chemists drawn
From several Mineralls to digest the Brawn.
This with our very breaths to flames will turn,
And like Flapdragon in our stomachs burn.
An Ollio we must have, a dish of State,
(A Spanish dish) never heard of till of late.
The Nymphaes of six vvanton sisters vvombes,
In their own liquor stewed with Stygean plummes.
Twelve Roundheads inchpinnes of the largest size,
Minced with the marrow of a Letchers thighs.
Two dozen of pious preaching Sisters tongues,
As many Woodcocks heads, two Foxes lungs.
Who eats this Ollio, he shall quickly find
A strange increase of brain, and length of wind.
Twelve Independents Gammons shall be set
Upon the board, well smoked, and black as jet.
(For the Westphalians learnt this art of me,
I was the first ere used this Cookerie.)
My costly Hogoost I remembered not,
Which is a dish that must not be forgot.
Six Anabaptists hearts with Garlic stuck:
Two Jesuits brains, a sincere Brownists Pluck,
Stewed in a Traitors skull with sublimate:
We with this Hogoost poison many a State.
We for our Fruit will of those Apples have
Which Eve our Mother unto Adam gave.
Our Cheese must be rebellious too, and made
Among those States where you have learnt your trade
Then we will conclude our Feast; and drink a Health
In Royal blood to our new Commonwealth.
Thus you may see what honor shall be done
To him the Devil styles his dearest son.
FINIS.
AT CAMBRIDGE, Imprinted by ROGER DANIEL, Printer to the University.

1646.


