(...).

THE Unsearchable Riches OF CHRIST.

OR, Meat for Strong men. Milk Babes.

Held forth in Twenty two SERMONS From Ephesians 3. 8.

By THOMAS, BROOKS, Preacher of the Word at Margarets New-Fishstreet.

Ipse unus erit tibi omnia, quia in ipso uno bono, bona sunt omnia. Aug.

It pleased the father, that in him should all fulness dwell, Collos. 1. 19.

In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Chap. 2. 3.

LONDON: Printed by Mary Simmons, for John Hancook, at the first Shop in
Popes-head-Alley, next to Cornhill. 1655.

The unsearchable Riches of Christ.

TO ALL TRVE ISRAELITES, In whom there is no guile.
Grace, Mercy, and Peace, from God the Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ,
be multiplied.

Dear hearts;
MY design (in appearing once more in Print) is not to please the captious
Critic, or the sullen Cinnick, but to heighten your fellowship with the
Father, 1 John 1. 3, 4.
and the Son, and to further you in a closer walking with God, and to ripen you
more and more for Reigning with God, when you shall be here no more.

Beloved in our Lord, there are two sad and great evils (Oh that there were no
more!) among the Saints this day, The strong are very apt, yea, they make
little of offending the weak; And the weak are as Romans 14. 1. ^^ult.
apt, and make as little of judging and condemning the strong. The serious and
conscientious perusal of this Treatise, may (by Invalidum omne natura
queru'um. Sen. Weak spirits are ever quarrelling and contending.
the blessing of the Lord) contribute much to the preventing of those sad
evils. You that are weak, may, in this Treatise, as in a Glass, see your
weaknesses, your mercies, your graces, your duties, your privileges, and your
comforts. You that are weak in grace, may here find many Questions answered,
and doubts resolved, that tend to the satisfying, quieting, settling, and
establishing of your precious souls in peace, joy, and assurance. You that are
weak in grace, may here find a staff to support you, a light to direct you, a
sword to defend you, and a Cordial to strengthen you, etc. And you that are
strong in grace, may here see what is your way, what is your work, and what at
last shall be your reward. Here you will find that which tends to the discovery
of spirits, the sweetning of spirits, the uniting of spirits, the healing of
spirits, and the making up of breaches, etc.

Here you will find Meat for strong men, and Milk for Babes. Here you will
find who is more motion, then notion; more heart then head, more spirit then
flesh, more inside then outside, etc.

Here you will find The Unsearchable Riches of Christ (which of all boxes of
precious Ointment, is the most precious) opened, and Oh how sweet must he be,
that is the sweetest of sweets! In Christ are riches of Justification, in
Christ are riches of Sanctification, riches of Consolation, and riches of
Glorification: And this following Treatise may serve as a key (I say not as a
golden one) to open the door, that you may come where these Treasures lie.
Christ's riches are like the eternal Springs of the earth, that cannot dry up,
but are and shall be diffused by his spirit and Gospel, until his whole house
be filled with them.

The excellency and usefullnesse of the Riches of Christ, and Answers to many
weighty Queries about his Unsearchable Riches, is more then hinted at in this
Tract. In this Tract much is spoken concerning the Nature, Properties, and
Excellencies of Humility, which is both the beautifier and preserver Humility
is (Conservatrix virtutum, says Barnard) that which keeps all graces together.
Humil^as any mi, subtimitas Christiani.
of all other graces.

Here you may see, that Those that are lowest in their own esteem, are
highest in Gods esteem. Here you may see, that Humble souls are not so low
and contemptible in the eyes of the world, as they are honorable in the eyes
of God.

And if ever there were an Age since Christ was on earth, wherein 'twas
needful to Preach, press, and print this great doctrine of Humility, of
self, of soule-abasement, this is the Age wherein we live. Oh the pride, the
stateliness, of the professors of this Age! But because this point is largely
spoken to in this Tract, I shall satisfy my self with this touch.

There are many other weighty things treated on, which for brevity sake I shall
omit: Only give me leave to acquaint you with a few things about this ensuing
Tract, and then I shall draw to a close.

First, That it is the substance of twenty-two Sermons Preached by me about
three years ago, on the Lecture nights at this place where now I Preach.

Secondly, That there is in it several other things of no small concernment to
souls, that I did not then deliver, but have been given in since from that
Fountain that fills all in all.

Thirdly, That though I have been much A Sermon Preached ser^eth but an
Auditory, a Sermon Printed may serve many Auditories.
pressed to Print these Sermons, yet I should never have yielded, had I not
been thoroughly convinced and persuaded in my judgment and conscience, that
they may (by the blessing of the Lord upon them) prove many ways useful and
serviceable, to all those honest Nithanaels, into whose hands they may fall.
Else they had been buried in the dark, and never come to public light.

I have only a few Requests to make to you, and then I shall take my leave of
you.

And my first Request is this, That you would meditate and dwell upon what you
read, otherwise your pains (I say not your souls) and mine will be lost.
Lectio sine meditatione arida est, meditatio sine lectione err^na est, oration
sine meditatione tepida est Aug. simely


It Is a Law among the Persees in India, To use premeditation in what they are
to do, that if it be bad, to reject it, if good, to act it. The Application is
easy. The more any man is in the contemplation of truth, the more fairer and
firmer Impression is made upon his heart by truth. Christians must be like the
clean Beasts, that parted the hoose, and chewed the cud: They must by heavenly
meditation chew truths, and concockt truths, or else they will never taste the
sweetness that is in Divine truths.

Mary pondered the sayings of the Shepherds in her heart, Luke 2. 19. Not they
that eat most, but they that digest most, are The Angels are much in meditation.
the most healthful. Not they that get most, but they that keep most, are
richest: So not they that hear most, or read most, but they that meditate most,
are most edified and enriched.

My second Request to you, is this, That Your actions in passing pass not
away; for every good work is a grain of seed for eternal life.
you will make conscience of living out those truths you read.

To read much, and practice nothing, is to hunt much, and catch nothing.

Suetonius reports of Julius Caesar, That seeing Alexanders statue, he fetched
a deep sigh, because he at that Age had done so little.

Ah! what cause have most to sigh, that they have heard so much, and read so
much, and yet done so little? Surely it is more honorable to do great things,
then to speak or read great things. It Is the doer that will 'Twas a saying of
Augustine, one thousand two hundred years ago, That we must take heed (least
whilst we fear our exhortation being cooled) prayer be not ^amped, and pride
inflamed.
be most happy at last, John 13. 17. In vitae libro Scribuntur qui quod possunt
faciunt, and si quod debent, non possunt. B^rn. They are written in the Book of
Life, that do what good they can, though they cannot do as they would.

I have read of a good man, coming from a public Lecture, and being asked by
one, whether the Sermon was done, answered with a sad sigh, Ah! it is said, but
not done.

My third Request is this, That you will pray over what you read.

Many read much, and pray little, and therefore get little by all they read.

Galen writes of a Fish called Vrana Scopos, that has but one eye, and yet
looks continually up to Heaven. When a Christian has one eye upon his Book,
the other should be looking up to Heaven for a blessing upon what he reads.

When one heard what admirable Victories Scanderbeg's Sword had wrought, he
would needs see it, and when he saw it, says he, This is but an ordinary
sword, alas! what can this do? Scanderbeg sent him word, I have sent thee my
Sword, but I have the arm that did all by it.

Alas! what can Christ's Sword, Christ's word do without his arm? Therefore
look up to Christ's arm in prayer, that so his Sword, his word, may do great
things in your souls.

Luther professes, That he profited more by prayer in a short space, then by
study in a longer; as John by weeping got the sealed Book open

My fourth Request to you, is this, That Ingratitude (say some) is a monster in
nature, a solicisme in manners, and a Paradox in grace, damning up the course
of Donations, Divine and humane.
if by the blessing of the Lord upon my weak endeavors, any leaf or line
should drop myrrh, or mercy, marrow or fatness upon your spirits, that you
will give all the glory to the God of Heaven; for to him alone it does belong.

Through grace I know I am a poor Worm, I am nothing, I have nothing, but
what I have received. The Crown becomes no head but Christ's. Let him who is
our all in all, have the honor and the glory of all, and I have my end.

Pliny tells of some in the remote parts of India, that have no mouths, and yet
live on the smell of Herbs, and sweet Flowers: But I hope better things of
you, even such as accompany salvation.

My fifth Request to you, is this, That you would let me lie near your hearts,
when you are in the Mount (especially.) 1 Thessalonians. 5. 25. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1. Heb. 13.
18. Col. 4. 3. Phil. 1. 19. ^ Cor. 1. 11. Acts 12. 5.


O pray pray hard for me, that the spirit of the Lord may be redoubled upon me;
that his word may prosper in my mouth, that it may run, and be glorified, and
that I may be high in my communion with God, and holy and unblameable in my
walkings with God; and that it may be still day with my soul; that I may live
and dye in the joys and comforts of the holy Ghost; and that when my Sun is
set, my glass out, my work done, my race run, I may rest in the Rev. 14. 13.
everlasting arms of Divine love, etc.

My last and least Request to you, is this, That you will please to cast a
Mantle of love In every Pomgranate there is at least one rotten kernel to be
found said Grates the Philosopher.
over the mistakes of the Press, and do me that right, and your selves the
courtesy, as before you read, to correct any material faults that you shall
find pointed at in the Errata.

Gods easy passing over the many and daily Errata's of your lives, cannot but
make you so ingenuous as readily to pass over the Errata's in this Book.

You are choice Jewels in my eye, you lie near unto my heart, I am willing to
spend and be spent for your sakes. My earnest and humble desire is, That my
service and Romans 15. 31.
labor of love may be accepted by you; and that it may work much for your
internal and eternal welfare. And that an abundant 2 Pet. 1. 11. Chapter 1. 8.
entrance may be administered to you, into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. And that you may be filled with joy unspeakable, and
full of glory, and with that peace that passes understanding. This is, and by
grace shall be the Prayer of him who desires to approve himself faithful to
Christ, his truths, his interests, and his people, and who is

Your souls servant in all Gospel Engagements. THOMAS BROOKS.

THE Contents.
THE words opened. Page 1, 2.
The first Doctrine.
Those that are lowest in their own esteem, are highest in Gods estem. Proved.
3, etc. Eighteen Properties of an humble soul. 6. to 27. Five Reasons of the
Point. 27 30 Eight Motives to provoke persons to be humble. 31 41 Nine
Directions and Helps to keep us humble and low in our own eyes. 41 49 The
dangerous Nature of Pride, held forth in nine Propositions. Also six ways
wherein Pride shows it self. 49 58
The second Doctrine.
All Saints are not of an equal cize and growth in grace and holiness. 58, 59
Twelve things by which souls weak in grace are discovered, and deciphered. 59
75 Twelve Supports and Comforts to uphold Weak Christians. Wherein also you
may see how Christ and they are sharers. 75 96 Six Duties that lie upon weak
Siants. And in the opening of them, several weighty Questions are propounded,
and answered. 96-124 The Duties of strong Saints, to the weak, showed in
eleven particulars. 124-136
The third Doctrine.
That the Lord gives the bests gifts to his best beloved ones. 136, 137. What
those best gifts are, that Christ bestows upon his dearest ones, showed in ten
particulars. 137-147. The Difference between Christ's giving, and the worlds
giving, showed in six things. 147-149. The Excellency of those gifts that
Christ gives, above all other gifts that the world gives, showed in five things
149-151 Six Reasons why God gives the best gifts to his dearest ones. 151-157
Eight Inferences or Uses, made of this Point. 157-165 A Word to Sinners.
165-168
The fourth Doctrine.
That the gifts and graces that God bestows upon his people, should be
improved, employed, and exercised by his people. This Point proved and opened.
168-170 Twelve Reasons why gracious souls should exercise and improve their
gifts and graces. In the handling and opening of which Reasons, several other
considerable things fall in. 170-186 Three special Ends that the gifts and
graces that God has bestowed upon Believers, should be exercised and improved
to. 186-192 The maine Use is, To stir up all Christians to make a blessed
improvement of their gifts, and graces. 192 Seven Considerations, or Motives to
stir Saints up to improve their Talents. 192-201 Quest. When may a soul be
said to be excellent in grace, or to have highly improved grace? This Question
receives ten Answers. 201-206
The fifth Doctrine.
That the Lord Jesus Christ is very rich. This Point is opened and proved by
eight Arguments. 206-213 Four Grounds and Reasons why the Lord Jesus Christ is
held forth in the Word to be so very rich. 213-215 The Excellency of the riches
of Christ, above all other riches in the World, held forth in seven
particulars. 216-221 1 Use is To exhort Christians to labor to be spiritually
rich. Six Considerations, or Motives, to work Christians to this. In the
handling of which, several weighty Questions are answered. 221-239 Quest. What
means must Christians use, that they may grow rich in grace? Answered, in eight
things. 239-249 Seven Propositions concerning spiritual riches. The serious
minding of them may give to many much satisfaction, and prevent many
Objections. 249-265 Five Notes, or Signs of a person that is spiritually rich.
265-268 2 Use. Don't join any thing with Christ, in the great work of your
redemption and salvation. 268, 269 3 Use. If Christ be so rich, then take heed
of three things Vide. 269, 270, 271 4 Use. If Christ be so rich, O then open to
Christ when he knocks. 271, 272 5 Use. If Christ be so rich, then sit down and
wonder at his condiscending love. 272, 273 6 Use. If Christ be so rich, then
prize Christ above all. Five Considerations to work Christians to a high
prizing of Christ. 273-277 7 Use. Then trust to Christ, if he be so rich. Trust
him with your best treasure. Trust him for power against the remainers of
corruption. Trust him to bring you into the Land of rest. 277, 278 8 Use. If
Christ be so rich, then don't leave him. Don't forsake him, don't turn your
backs upon him. 278, 279 9 Use. If Christ be so rich, O then let Christians
strive more and more to clear up their interest in Christ. Six Directions
herein. 279-283 A Word to sinners. 283, 284 Nine Directions to poor souls
that would feign get an interest in Christ. 285-291
The sixth Doctrine.
That it is the great Duty of Preachers or Ministers, to Preach Jesus Christ to
the people. Proved. 291, 292 Five Reasons why Ministers must Preach Christ to
the people. 292-296 How Christ is to be Preached, showed in eleven things* 1 He
must be Preached plainly, perspicuously. 296, 297, 298 2 He must be Preached
faithfully. 298, 299 3 He must be Preached humbly. 299, 300 4 He must be
Preached wisely. 300, 301 5 He must be Preached zealously. 301, 302 6 He must
be Preached laboriously. 302, 303 7 He must be Preached exemplarily. 303, 304,
305 8 He must be Preached feelingly, experimentally. 305, 306 9 He must be
Preached rightly. 306, 307 10 He must be Preached acceptably. 307, 308 11 He
must be Preached constantly. They must not lay down the Bible, to take up the
sword, etc. 308, 309 Three Rnles or Directions that such are to observe, as
would Preach Christ aright to the people. 1 They must get a Christ within. 310,
311 2 They must mind more, and study more Scripture-truths, Scripture
Mysteries, then humane Histories. No Histories comparable to the Histories of
the Scriptures, hinted in seven things. 311, 312 3 They should dwell much upon
the vanity of Humane doctrines, the vanity of which Doctrines is discovered in
five things. 312, 313
The last Doctrine.
That the Office of a faithful Minister is an honorable Office. Two things
are premised for a right understanding of the Point. 314, 315 Seven things
speak them out to be honorable. 1 The several worthy Names and Titles that
are given them in Scripture, speak them out to be honorable. 2 Their work is
honorable. 3 They are Fellow Laborers with God, in the salvation of sinners.
And what greater honor, then to be (...) Co-worker with God? 4 The honorable
account that God has of them, speaks out their Office to be honorable. 5 They
serve an honorable Master. 6 Their very work and service is honorable. 7
Their reward is honorable. 316-319 2 What honor that is that is due to
faithful Ministers, showed in three things. 1 Honorable Countenance is due to
them. 319-321 2 Honorable Maintenance. 321, 322 3 Honorable Obedience.
322-324 A short Use. 324 Quest. How must Christians honor their faithful
Ministers? Showed in five things. 1 By hearing them, and giving credit to their
Messages, which they deliver from the Lord. 324, 325 2 By standing fast in the
doctrine of the Lord delivered by them. 325 3 By being followers of them, so
far as they are followers of Christ. ibid. 4 By bearing them upon your hearts,
when you are in the Mount. 325, 326 5 By adhering to them, and abiding with
them, in all their Trials, etc. 326 The Use of all. 326-ult.
March 26. 1655.
Imprimater.

Joseph Caryl.

ERRATA.
PAge 1. Margent. read Minimissimus. p. 2. marg. r. (...). mar. r. quia in
ipso. p. 4. m. r. salus. p. 10. mg. (...) p. 14. m. r. (...) p. 15. m. r. (...)
p. 16 m r. damam. p. 17. r. vivimus ut. p. 22. m. r. soles. p. 72. m. (...) p
75. l. 6. r. up. of p. 77. m. r. mutae. p. 91. l. 28. r. gradually. p. 93. l.
11. r. sensible p. 97. l. 23. r. injustice. p. 98. l. 32. r. ingenuity p 99. l.
4. r. works. l. 9. r. ingenuity. l. 11. r. ingenuity. p. 102. m. r. lenonem. p.
107. l. 25. dele therefore. p. 110. m. r. totam. p. 111. l. 23. r. operation.
l. 34. r. beauty. p. 119. l. 5. r. in. p 130. l. ^^ r. the. p. 131. l. 21. dele
he. p. 143. l. 17. r. samach. p. 152. m. r. peneten tes eum sunt canes. p. 153.
m. r. Eben hhen p. 179. m. r. (...). p. 197. m. r. (...) from (...). p. 212. m.
r. es. p. 219. m. r. Hon. p. 225. m r. dues. p. 227. m. r. lenonem. p. 228. m.
r. bona. p 238. l. 7. r add he p. 261. l. 8. r. down. p. 288. m. r.
Scripturarum. p. 298. m. r. Biblicus. p. 307. m. r. in. p. 318. l. 29. r.
forth. p. 323. l. 29. r. Ministrorum.

Books Printed, and to be sold by John Hancock, at the first Shop in
Pope's Head Alley, next to Cornhill.
TWo other Books lately published by Mr. Brooks. Viz.

Precious Remedies against Satan's Devices. Being a Companion for all that are
in Christ, etc.

Heaven on Earth: Or, A serious discourse touchinga well-grounded Assurance of
men's everlasting happiness, and blessedness.

A Book of Short-Writing, the most easy, exact, and speedy method, by
Theophilus Metcalfe.

A Copy-Book, teaching to write several hands.

A Treatise of Christ's Personal Reign on Earth, written by Mr. Robert Maton.

Another, by Mr. Farmer.

A Description of the State of Great Britain, written eleven hundred years
since, by that famous Author, Gildas, Sir-named, the Wise.

Satan's Stratagems, or, The Devils Cabinet Council discovered, showing the way
to end Controversies in Religion, by Jacobus Accontius.

A Treatise of Church Government, by several Ministers.

A Treatise of Civil Government, by Robert Spy.

A Glass for the times, confuting diverse Errors.

A Sermon before the Parliament, by Samuel Gibson, Entitled, The Ruin of the
Authors and fomenters of Civil Wars.

The Life and Death of William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury.

A Speech by Sir Francis Bacon, in Parliament, Quinto Jacobi, concerning the
Scottish Nation.

An Heavenly Wonder, or a Christian Clothed with Christ. Purposely penned to
comfort Christ's sinsick Spouse, by Samuel More, sometimes Minister at Brides.

The New Creature: With a Description of the true Marks and Characters thereof.
Several Arguments for the unity of all true Believers, by Richard Bartlet.
Which is a seasonable Duty, and very necessary to be studied and practiced by
all that love truth and peace; declared by many Scriptures. Sirs, ye are
brethren, why do ye wrong one another? Acts 7. 26. Phil. 2. 3. Jam. 3. 14, 15,
16, 17. Romans 14. 19. Let us then follow those things which make for peace, and
wherewith one may edify another.

THE Unsearchable Riches OF CHRIST.
EPHESIANS. 3. 8. Unto me who am less then the least of all Saints is this grace
given, that I should preach among the Gentiles, the Unsearchable Riches of
Christ.

Unto me who am less then the least of all Saints.


THE Greek is a Comparative made of (...) Minissimus, Estius.
a Superlative. Less then the least of all Saints is a double diminitive, and
signifies lesser then the least, if lesser might be. Here you have the greatest
Qui parvus est in reputatione propria, magnus est in reputatione divina.
Gregory. He that is little in his own account, is great in Gods esteem.
Apostle descending down to the lowest step of humility. Great Paul is least
of Saints, last of the Apostles, and greatest of sinners. The choycest
Buildings have the lowest foundations; the best Balsome sinkes to the bottom;
those ears of Corn, and boughs of Trees that are most filled, and best
laden, bow lowest: So do those souls that are most laden with the fruits of
Paradise. Unto me who am less then the least of all Saints.

Is this Grace given. (...) is always taken in Scripture for a free gift a
grace gift: but (...) is taken not only for the favor of God, but also for his
gracious gifts. (...) a (...). Mat. 25. 32. Cha. 28. 19. Io 11. 48. 50. 51.
Acts 10. 22. Mat. 6. 32. Ipse unus erit tibi omnia, quia ipso uno bono, bona
sunt omnia. Aug. One Christ will be to the instead of all things else, because
in him are all good things to be found. Gal. 1. 16. (...) Nec Christus nec
coelum patitur hype bolen. A man cannot hyper bolize in speaking of Christ and
Heaven.
In the Greek, or was this Grace given. The word that is here rendered Grace, is
taken in Scripture, not only for the favor of God, but also for his Gracious
gifts; and so you are to understand it in this place: Grace is taken for the
gifts of Grace, and they are twofold: Common; or Special. Some are Common to
Believers and Hypocrites; as knowledge, tongues, a gift of prayer, etc. Some
are Special and peculiar to the Saints, as fear, love, faith, etc. Now Paul
had all these, the better to fit him for that high and noble Service to which
he was called. That I should Preach.

That is, declare good news, or glad tidings. The Greek word answers to the
Hebrew word which signifies good news, glad tidings, and a Joyful Message.
That I should Preach among the Gentiles.

Sometimes this Greek word is generally used for all men, or for all Nations.
Sometimes the word is used more especially for the people of the Jews.
Sometimes it is used for the Gentiles distinguished from the Jews, so it is
used, Mat. 6. 32. For after all these things do the Gentiles seek; and so
it is used here; those that are without God in the world, that stand in Arms
against God, that are ignorant of those riches of Grace that are in Christ:
This Grace is given to me, that I should preach among the poor Heathens, the
unsearchable riches of Christ.

That I might Preach among the Gentiles. What? my self? No, but The
unsearchable riches of Christ.

The Greek word signifies, Not to be traced out. Here Is Rhetoric indeed!
here is riches, unsearchable riches, unsearchable riches of Christ. Riches
always imply two things. First, Abundance. Secondly, Abundance of such things
as be of worth. Now in the Lord Jesus Christ is the greatest riches, the best
riches, the choycest riches; in Christ are riches of Justification, Tit. 2. 14.
in Christ are riches of Sanctification, Phil. 4. 12, 13. in Christ are riches
of Consolation, 2 Cor. 12. 9. and in Christ are riches of Glorification, 1 Pet.
1. But of these glorious unsearchable riches of Christ, we shall speak
Omnebonum in summo bono. All good is in the chiefest good.
hereafter.

I shall begin at this time with the first words: Unto me who am less then the
least of all Saints. There are these two Observations that naturally flow from
these words. First, That the most holy men are always the most Observat. 1.
humble men,

None so humble on Earth, as those that live highest in Heaven.

Or if you will, take the Observation thus,

That those that are the most highly valued and esteemed of by God, are lowest
and least in their own esteem. Unto me who am less then the least of all
Saints, etc.
The Second Observation is, That there are weak Saints as well as strong,
little Observat. 2.
Saints as well as great. Or thus:

All Saints are not of an equal growth, or stature.

I shall begin with the first Observation, That the most holy men, are always
the most humble men; Souls that are the most highly esteemed and valued by
God, do set the least and lowest esteem upon themselves. Unto me who am less
then the least of all Saints, etc.

In the handling of this Point I shall do these three things.

1 I shall prove that the most holy souls are always the most humble souls.
2 I shall show you the Properties of souls truly humble. 3 I shall show you
the Reasons, why those that are the most highly prized and esteemed of God, do
set so low a price upon themselves.
And then the Use. Job 1. 8. Job was a nonesuch in regard of those perfections
and degrees of grace that he had attained to beyond a^ny other Saints on earth.
Job was high in worth, and humble in heart. Job 42. 5, 6. Humilitas animi,
sublimitas Christiani. (...) A me, me salva Domine Aug. Deliver me O Lord from
that evil man my self. 2 Cor. 12. 1. 7 vid. Bezim (...) Wordless words, such,
as words are too weak to utter. Isa. 6. 1. 5, 6. compared. The clearest sight
and vision of God does always give a man the fullest sight of his own
emptiness, sinfulness, and nothingnesse. (...) a I am out off. Luke 5. 8.
(...), a man, a sinner, a very mixture and compound of dirt and sin.


For the first, That this is so, I shall give you most clear proofs, and open
them to you.

See it in Job; no man ever received a fairer, or a more valuable Certificate
under the hand of God, or the broad Seal of Heaven, for his being a soul
famous in grace and holiness, then Job; as you may see, Job 1. 8. And the Lord
said unto Satan, have thou considered my Servant Job, that there is none like
him in the Earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that fears God, and
escheweth evil. And yet no man could speak more undervaluingly of himself,
then Job did, Job 42. 5, 6. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear,
but now mine eye sees thee, I abhor my self in dust and ashes. This
expression, is the deepest act of abhorrency. Abhorrency strictly taken, is
hatred wound up to the height. I abhor my self, the word that is rendered Abhor,
signifies to reject, to disdain, to contemn, and to cast off. Ah says Job, I
abhor my self, I reject my self, I disdain my self, I cast off my self, I
have a vile esteem of my self. So our blessed Apostle, who had been caught up
into the third Heavens, and had such glorious Revelations as could not be
uttered; yet he accounted himself less then the least of all Saints. Not that
any thing can be less then the least, the Apostles holy Rhetoric does not
cross Aristotle's Philosophy; but the Original word being a double
diminitive, his meaning is, that he was as little as could be; therefore he put
himself down so little, as could not be less then the least.

Another proof you have, Isa. 6. 1, 5, 6. As Paul among the Apostles was the
greatest; so Esaias among the Prophets was the clearest and choycest
Gospel-Preacher, and holds out more of Christ, and of his Kingdom and glory,
then all the other Prophets do. Isa. 6. 1. he sees the glory of the Lord in a
Vision, and this makes him cry out, verse. 5. We is me, for I am undone,
because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of
unclean lips, for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts. I am
undone, the Hebrew is, I am cut off, I am a forlorn man, why? For I have seen
the King, the Lord of Hosts. Here you have the highest and choycest among the
Prophets (as you had Paul before among the Apostles) abasing and laying low
himself.

So Peter, Luke 5. 8. Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord. When he
saw that glorious Miracle wrought by the Lord Jesus, he cries out as one very
sensible of his own weakness and sinfullnesse, Depart from me, for I am a
sinful man. Ah I am not worthy to be near such Majesty and glory, who am a
mere bundle of vice and vanity, of folly and iniquity.

Take another clear instance, Genesis 18. And Abraham answered, Genesis 18. 27. (...)
Gnaphar vae pher, dust and ashes, i. e. base, vile, worthles. Solemnly think
that thou art dust and ashes, and be p^oud if thou can. Isa. 6. 1, 2. Genesis
32. 10 (...) I am less then all meretes, to wit, in worth or weight, etc.
and said, Behold I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, who am but dust
and ashes. Here you have the Father of the Faithful, the greatest Believer in
the world, accounting himself dust and ashes. Dust notes the baseness of his
Original, and Ashes notes his deserving to be burnt to ashes, if God should
deal with him in justice, rather then in mercy. The nearer any soul draws to
God, the more humble will that soul lie before God. None so near God as the
Angels, nor none so humble before God, as the Angels.

So Jacob, Genesis 32. 10. I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and
all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant, etc. Jacob a man eminent
in his prevailing with God, a Prince that had the honor and the happiness to
overcome the God of mercy, yet judges himself unworthy of the least mercy. Ah,
how low is that soul in his own eyes, that is most honorable in Gods eyes?

David you know was a man after Gods own heart, a man highly honored, much
beloved, and dearly prized by the 1 Kings 15. 5.
Lord, yet 1 Samuel 26. 20. He counts himself a Flea, and what 1 Samuel 26. 20.
Psalm. 22. 6. (...) Tolagnath. An humble soul is a little, little, nothing in
his own eyes.
is more contemptible then a Flea? In Psalm. 22. 6. I am a worm (says he) and
no man. The word that is there rendered Worm, is a word that signifies a very
little Worm which breeds in Scarlet, a Worm that is so little that a man can
hardly see or perceive it. A Worm is the most despicable Creature in the
world, trampled under foot by every one. Says he, I am a despicable worm in
my own eyes, and in my enemies eyes.

And thus you see the point proved, that the most holy men have been always
the most humble men.

The second thing that I am to do, is, To show you the Properties of humble
souls. I confess, when I look abroad in the world, and observe the carriage
of all sorts of men, my heart is stirred to speak as fully and as home to this
point, as Christ shall help me. It Is very, very sad to consider, how few humble
souls there be in these days: Ah, the damnable pride that reigns and rules
in the hearts and lives of most men; God loves to hear this as a parcel of
his praise, Pa^cere subjectis and debellare superbos, to spare the lowly and
strike down the proud. Isa. 23. 9.
I think it is far greater then has been known in the Generations before us.
Ah England! England! what folly, what damnable wickedness is this, that thou
should be a lifting thy self up in pride, when God is a staining the pride
of all glory, and bringing into contempt the honorable of the Earth, and a
setting his feet upon the neck of pride.

Now the first property that I shall lay down of an humble soul, is this, An
humble soul under the highest spiritual discoveries, and under the greatest
outward mercies, forgets not his former sinfullnesse, and his former outward
meannesse. Paul 1 Property. 2 Cor. 12 1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Timothy 1. 13. Chrysostom
observes it of Paul, as his greatest honor, that although he had obtained
pardon of God for his sins, yet he is not ashamed to reckon them up to the
world. Romans 7. 23. The Spouse of Christ, under all the kisses and embraces of
Christ, acknowledges her self to be black. Cant. 1. 2. 5. compared. Gen 32.
10. Omnia mea me cum porto. All my Goods I carry with me.
had been taken up into the third Heavens, and had glorious revelations and
manifestations of God, he cries out, I was a Blasphemer, a Persecuter, and
Injurious. Under the choycest discoveries, he remembers his former blasphemies.
So Romans 7. 23. I see a Law in my members warring against the Law of my mind,
and bringing me into captivity to the Law of sin, which is in my members. He
had been at this time about fourteen years converted, as some judge. He was a
man that lived at as high a rate in God, as any we read of, a man that was
filled with glorious discoveries and revelations, and yet under all discoveries
and revelations, he remembers that body of sin and death, that made him cry
out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me? Who shall ease me of my
burden? who shall knock off these Chains that make my life a hell? I will by a
few instances prove the other branch, Genesis 32. 10. I am not worthy of the least
of all the mercies (says Jacob) for with my staff I passed over this Jordan,
and now I am become two bands. I remember, says he, when I went over Jordan, I
was as a footman that carried all his wealth with him. Under his outward
greatness he forgets not his former meannesse. An humble soul is good at
looking back upon his former low estate, upon his threadbare Coat that was his
best and only Robe.

So David, 1 Chronicles. 17. 16, 17. And David the King came and sat before the
Lord, and said, What am I O Lord God, and what is mine house, that thou have
brought me hitherto? And yet this was a small thing in thine eyes, O God; for
thou have also spoken of thy servants house for a great while to come, said
Bias, one of the seven wise men of Greece. 1 Chronicles. 17. 16, 17. Iphicrares that
noble Captain ^ryed ou^, From how small to how great an estate am I raised? So
does the humble soul, when God turns his brass into silver, his iron into
gold, his pence into pounds. Agathocles who of a Potters son was made King of
Sicily, would always be served in earthen vessels. Psa. 73. 3. 13 Job 21. 7.
16 Verse. 14, 15.
and have regarded me according to the state of a man of high degree. Who am I
O Lord God, and what is mine house? David remembered the meannesse of his birth,
he remembered his Shepherds Crook, as Jacob did his Traveling Staff. Mercies
make an humble soul glad, but not proud. An humble soul is lowest, when his
mercies are highest, he is least when he is greatest, he is lowest when he is
highest, he is most poor, when he is most rich: Nothing melts like mercy,
nothing draws like mercy, nothing humbles like mercy; mercy gives the humble
soul such excellent Counsel, as Plasilla the Empress gave her Husband
Theodosius, Remember Oh Husband (says she) what lately you were, and what now
you are, so shall you Govern well the Empire, and give God his due praise for
so great an advancement. The voice of mercy is, Remember what lately thou were,
and what now thou art, and be humble. Now proud men that are lifted up from the
dunghill, that abound in worldly wealth, ah how does their blood rise with
their outward good, the more mercies they have, the more proud they are;
mercies do but puff and swell such souls; in a crowd of mercies, they cry
out in the pride of their hearts, Depart from us, O God, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways. What is the Almighty that we should serve him? and what
profit shall we have if we pray unto him?

A second Property of an humble soul, is this, He overlookes his own
righteousness, and lives upon the righteousness of another, to wit, the Lord
Jesus. So the Apostle, Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10. overlooks his own righteousness,
and lives wholly 2 Property, Phil. 3. 8, 9, 10 ver. 8. (...) Dogsmeat, i. e.
cour^ and contemptible. Isa. 64. 6.
upon the righteousness of Christ. I desire to be found in him, (says he) not
having mine own righteousness, (away with it, it is dross, it is dung, it is
dogs-meat, it is a rotten righteousness, an imperfect righteousness, a weak
righteousness) which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by Faith: That is a spotless
righteousness, a pure righteousness, a complete righteousness, an
incomparable righteousness: And therefore an Cant. 4. 2. Rev. 14. 5. Col. 2.
10.
humble soul overlookes his own righteousness, and lives upon Christ's
righteousness. Remember this, all the sighing, mourning, sobbing, and
complaining in the world, does not so undeniably evidence a man to be humble,
as his overlooking his own righteousness, and living really and purely upon
the righteousness of Christ. This is the greatest demonstration of humility
that can be shown by man: Men may do much, hear much, pray much, fast much,
and give much, etc. Mat. 6 and Chap. 23. Isa. 58.
and yet be as proud as Lucifer; as you may see in the Scribes, Pharisees, and
those in Isa, 58. who in the pride of their hearts made an Idol of their own
righteousness. Wherefore have we fasted (say they) and thou see it not,
wherefore Verse. 3.
have we afflicted our souls, and thou take no knowledge? O! but for a man
now to trample upon his own righteousness, and to live wholly upon the
righteousness of another, this speaks out a man to be humble indeed; there is
nothing that the heart of man stands more averse to, then this, of coming off
from his own righteousness. Man is a Creature apt to warm himself with the
sparks of his own fire, though he does lie down for it in (Eternal) sorrow.
Man is naturally Isa. 50. 11. Romans 10. 4.
prone to go about to establish his own righteousness, that he might not
subject to the righteousness of Christ; he will labor, as for life, to lift
up his own righteousness, and to make a Savior of it. I but an humble soul
disclaimes his own righteousness, All our righteousness is as filthy rags
-- Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall Psalm. 143.
2.
no man living be justified. So Job, Though I were righteous, yet would I not
answer, but I would make supplication to my Job 9. 15.
Judge. Proud Pharisees bless themselves in their own righteousness, I thank
God I am not as this Publican, I fast twice Lu. 18. 11, 12 A proud heart eyes
more his seeming worth, then his real want. Rev. 4 10, 11. Non decet
Christianum in hac vita coronari, said the Christian Soldier.
in the week, etc. I but now a soul truly humbled, blushes to see his own
righteousness, and glories in this, that he has the righteousness of Christ
to live upon. Rev. 4. 10, 11. the twenty four Elders throw down their Crowns
at the feet of Christ: By their Crowns, you may understand their gifts, their
excellencies, their righteousness; they throw down these before Christ's
Throne, to note to us, that they did not put confidence in them, and that
Christ was the Crown of Crowns, and the top of all their Royalty and glory.
An humble soul looks upon Christ's righteousness as his holy Crown.

Thirdly, The lowest and the meanest good work is not below V. 19. (...)
signifies to gain with joy and delight of heart. Ah! says Paul, it is my
greatest joy, my greatest delighttogain souls to Christ The word also signifies
craft or guile. Ah! humble Paul will use a holy craft, a holy guile to win
souls. To know the Art of Alms is greater then to be crowned with the Diadem
of Kings and yet to convert one soul, is greater then to pour out ten thousand
Talents into the baske^s of the poor. Chrysostom. John 13. 4. 1 Cor. 2. 8.
Phil. 2. 6. Col. 1. 19. 2. 3. John 13. 5. Proud hearts cannot stoop to low
services; they say this work and that is below their parts, place, parentage,
and employments Cirius and Scipi^. These Heathens will rise in judgment
against many proud profess^rs in these days, who scorn to stoopto mean
services, etc. 4 Property. Veniat, veniat ver bam Domini, and submittemus illi,
sex cenia s^ nobis essent colla. Said Baldassar a German Minister. So it is with
all that are high in worth, and humble in heart. Lev. 10. 2, 3. God will be
sanctified either actively, or passively (Aut a nobis aut in nos) either in us,
or upon us. (...) The word often signifies a modest quietness of mind, the
troubled affections being allayed. So here. In Lam. 3. 27, 28, 29. It signifies
to submit unto God, and to be patient in affliction; and so it may betaken
here. Nunquam nimis dicitur, quod nanquam satis discitur, we can never hear
that too often, that we can never learn too well. Militi multa agenda patienda
plura The christian soldier must do many things, and suffer more 5 Property,
If Seneca said of his wise man, Majore part illic est, unde descendit. He is
more in Heaven then in earth; this is much more true of humble holysouls. Dulce
nomen Christi Sweet is the name of Christ. Christ may well be compared to the
trees of the Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 47 12. which were both for meat and Medicine.
an humble soul. An humble David will dance before the Ark, he enjoyed so much
of God in it, that it caused him to leap and dance before it: but Michal his
wife despised him for a fool, and counted him as a simple vain fellow,
looking upon his carriage as vain and light, and not becoming the might,
Majesty, and glory, of so glorious a Prince. Well says this humble soul, if
this be to be vile, I will be more vile.

Great Paul, yet being humble and low in his own eyes, he can stoop to do
service to the least and the meanest Saint.

1 Cor. 9. 19, 20, 21. For though I be free from all men, yet have I made my
self servant unto all, that I might gain the more: And unto the Jews I
became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews: To them that are under the Law,
as under the Law, that I might gain them that are under the Law: To them that
are without Law, as without Law, (being not without Law to God, but under the
Law to Christ) that I might gain them that are without Law. To the weak
became I as weak, that I might gain the weak. I am made all things to all
men, that I might by all means gain some. Here you have an humble soul bowing
and stooping to the meanest Saints, and the lowest services, that he might win
souls. So the Lord Jesus himself was famous in this, John 13. 4. Though he
was the Lord of glory, and one that thought it no robbery to be equal with
God, one that had all perfection and fulness in himself, yet the lowest work
is not below this King of Kings, witness his washing his Disciples feet, and
wiping them with a Towell.

Bonaventure, though he was born of great Parentage, and a great Scholar, yet,
to keep his mind from swelling, he would often sweep rooms, wash vessels, and
make beds.

So that famous Italian Marquess, when God was pleased by the Ministry of his
word to convert him, the lowest work was not below him; though he might have
lived like a King in his own Country, yet having tasted of that life and
sweet that was in Jesus, he was so humble that he would go to Market, and
carry home the meanest and the poorest things the Market yielded. There was
nothing below him when God had changed him, and humbled him.

It Is recorded to the glory of some ancient Generals, that they were able to
call every common Soldier by his own name, and were careful to provide
money, not only for their Captains and Soldiers, but litter also for the
meanest Beast. There is not the lowest good that is below the humble soul. If
the work be good, though never so low, humility will put a hand to it; so will
not pride.

A fourth Property of an humbled heart is this, An humble heart will submit to
every truth of God, that is made known to it; even to those Divine truths that
are most cross to flesh and blood. 1 Samuel 3. 17. Eli would feign know what God
had discovered to Samuel concerning him; Samuel tells him, that he must break
his neck, that the Priesthood must be taken away from him, and his Sons must be
slain in the war: why it is the Lord (says he) let him do what seems him
good. So in Levit. 10. the Lord by fire from Heaven destroys Aarons two Sons,
Then Moses said unto Aaron, this is it that the Lord spoke, saying, I will be
sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all the people I will be
glorified; and Aaron held his peace. If God miss of his honor one way, he
will rain hell out of Heaven, but he will have it another way; this Aaron
knew, and therefore he held his peace, when God showed himself to be a
consuming fire. The Hebrew word that is here rendered Peace, signifies the
quietness and silence of his mind, he did not hold his tongue only (for many
a man may hold his tongue, and yet his mind and heart may kick and swell
against God) but his very mind was quiet and still; there was a heavenly calm
in his Spirit, he was dumb and silent because the Lord had done it. So in Acts
10. 33. We are all here present before God, to hear all things that are
commanded thee of God. We are not here to hear what may tickle our ears, or
please our fancies, or satisfy our lusts; no, but we are here to hear what God
will say, our hearts stand ready pressed to subject themselves to whatever God
shall declare to be his will; we are willing to hear that we may do, that we
may obey sincerely and universally the good pleasure of our God, knowing that
it is as well our dignity as our duty so to do.

There are three things in an humble soul that do strongly incline it to duty.

The first is Divine Love. The second is Divine Presence. The third is Divine
Glory.
The Dove made use of her wings to fly to the Ark, so does an humble soul of
his duties to fly to Christ. Though the Dove did use her wings, yet she did not
trust in her wings, but in the Ark: So though an humble soul does use duties,
yet he does not trust in his duties, but in his Jesus. But now proud hearts
they hate the truth, they cry out, Who is the Lord that we should obey him? And
what are his Commandments that we should submit to them? I but an humble soul
falls under the power of truth, and counts it his greatest glory to be obedient
to all truth.

A fifth property of an humble soul is this, An humble soul lives not upon
himself, nor upon his own actings, but upon the Lord Jesus, and his actings.
Poor men, you know, they do not live upon themselves, they live upon others,
they live upon the care of others, the love of others, the provision of others;
why, thus an humble soul lives upon the care of Christ, the love of Christ,
the promise of Christ, the faithfulness of Christ, the discoveries of Christ;
he lives upon Christ for his Justification, Phil. 3. from ver. 7. to 10 -- He
lives upon Christ for his Sanctification, Cant. 4. 16. Awake O North wind, and
come thou South, blow upon my Garden that the spices thereof may flow out --
And he lives upon Christ for his Consolation, Cant 2. 3. As the Apple Tree
among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the Sons. I sat down
under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste -- And
he lives upon Christ for the performance of all holy actions, Phil. 4. 13. I
can do all things through Christ which strengthens me. Gal. 2. 20. I live,
yet not I but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I
live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. An
humble soul sees in Christ Plenitudo abundantiae, and plenitudo redandantiae.
Omne bonum in summo bono. All good is in the chiefest good. Christ is quicquid
appetibile, as Origin speaks, whatever we can desire. Isa. 58. 2. 7. Luke 7. 4,
5, 6, 7. 6 Property. A proud heart resists, and is resisted, this is duro
durum, flint to flint, fire to fire. Job 13. 25. An humble soul blesses God as
well for crosses, as mercies; as well for adversity as for prosperity, as well
for frowns, as for smiles, etc. because he judges himself unworthy of the least
rebukes from God.
a fulness of Abundance, and a fulness of redundancy, and here his soul
lives and feeds. An humble soul sees that all his stock is in the hands of
Christ; his stock of Graces, his stock of Comforts, his stock of experiences
are in the hands of Jesus Christ, who is the Great Lord Keeper of all a
Believers Graces, and of all his Comforts, and therefore as Children live upon
them in whose hand their stock is, be it a Brother or a Friend: Why, so an
humble soul, sees its stock is in the hand of the Lord Jesus, and therefore he
lives upon Christ, upon his love, and his provision, and his undertakings, etc.
But now proud hearts live not upon the Lord Jesus Christ, they live upon
themselves, and upon their own duties, their own righteousness, their own
actings, as the Scripture evidences. Christ dwells in that heart most
eminently, that has emptied it self of it self. Christ is the humble man's
Manna, upon which he lives, and by which he thrives.

A sixth Property of an humble soul is this, He judges himself to be below
the wrath and judgments of God. An humble soul looks upon himself as one not
worthy that God should spend a rodd upon him, in order to his reformation,
edification, or salvation. As I am unworthy, says an humble soul, that God
should smile upon me, so I am unworthy that he should spend a frown upon me.
Job 13. 25. Will thou break a leaf driven too and fro? and will thou pursue
the dry stubble? Why I am but a leaf, I am but a little dry stubble, I am below
thy wrath, I am so very, very bad, that I wonder that thou should so much as
spend a rod upon me. What more weak, worthless, slight, and contemptible then
a leaf? then dry stubble? why Lord, says Job, I am a poor, weak, and
worthless Creature, I wonder that thou should take any pains to do me
good, I cannot but count and call every thing a mercy that is less then hell.

So David, in 1 Samuel 24. 14. After whom is the King of Israel come out? after
whom do thou pursue? after a dead Dog, after a Flea. The language of a
humble soul when God begins to be angry, is this, Lord I can bless thee that
thou will take any pains with me; but I humbly acknowledge that I am below the
least rodd, I am not worthy that thou should frown upon me, threaten me,
strike me, or whip me, for my internal and eternal good. But proud hearts
think themselves wronged when they are afflicted, they cry out with Cain, Our
punishment is greater then we can bear. Genesis 4. 13. 7 Property.


Another Property of an humble soul is this, An humble soul does highly prize
the least of Christ. The least smile, the least good word, the least good look,
the least truth, the least mercy is highly valued by an humble soul.

The Cananitish woman in the 15 of Matthew, sets a high Verse. 27. Faith will
pick an Argument out of a repulse, and turn discouragements into
encouragements. Luther would not take all the world for one leaf of the Bible,
such a price he set upon it, from the sweet that he found in it. Song 1. 3.
John 10. 4, 5. Psalm. 27. 4. Mat. 9. 20. 21. Acts 24. 14. 1 Cor. ^9. 22. Austin
loved Tully before his Co^version, but not so much after (quia nomen Jesu non
erat ibi) because the name of Christ was not there. 8 Property.
price upon a crum of mercy. Ah Lord, says the humble soul, if I may not have
a loaf of mercy, give me a piece of mercy? if not a piece of mercy, give me a
crum of mercy? If I may not have Sun-light, let me have Moonlight? if not
Moonlight, let me have starlight? if not starlight, let me have candlelight?
and for that I will bless thee.

In the time of the Law, the meanest things that were consecrated, were very
highly prized, as leather, or wood that was in the Tabernacle. An humble soul
looks upon all the things of God as Consecrated things. Every truth of God is a
consecrated truth, it is consecrated to a holy use, and this causes the soul
highly to prize it; and so every smile of God, and every discovery of God, and
every drop of mercy from God, is very highly prised by a soul that walks
humbly with God. The name of Christ, the voice of Christ, the footsteps of
Christ, the least touch of the Garment of Christ, the least regarded truth of
Christ, the meanest and least regarded among the flock of Christ, is highly
prized by humble souls that are interested in Christ. An humble soul cannot,
an humble soul dares not call any thing litrle that has Christ in it; neither
can an humble soul call or count any thing great, wherein he sees not Christ,
wherein he enjoyes not Christ. An humble soul highly prizes the least nodd,
the least love-token, the least courtesy from Christ; but proud hearts count
great mercies small mercies, and small mercies, no mercies; yea pride does so
unman them, that they often call mercy, misery, etc.

The eighth Property of an humble soul is this, It can never be good enough;
it can never pray enough, nor hear enough, nor mourn enough, nor believe
enough, nor love enough, nor fear enough, nor joy enough, nor repent enough,
nor loath sin enough, nor be humble enough, etc.

Humble Paul looks upon his great all as nothing at all, he Phil. 3. 11, 12,
13, 14. (...), it signifies ^ straining of the whole body, a stretching out
head and hands, as runners in a race do, to lay hold on the mark or price
proposed. Psalm 10. 17. Desires. Iaavath, from Avah, that signifies so to desire
and long after a thing, as to have ones teeth water at it; so in Mic. 7. 1. But
proud hearts sit down and pride themselves and bless themselves as if they
had attained to much, when hev have attained to nothing that can raise them
above the lowest step of misery. Rev. 3. 17. Isa. 65. 5. Lu. 18. 11, 12
forgets those things that are behind, and reaches forth to those things which
are before, That if by any means he might attain unto the resurrection of the
dead; that is, that perfection of holiness which the dead shall attain unto
in the morning of the resurrection; by a Metonomie of the subject for the
adjunct.

No holiness below that matchless, peerlesse, spotless, perfect holiness
that Saints shall have in the glorious day of Christ's appearing, will satisfy
this humble soul. An humble heart is an aspiring heart, he cannot be contented
to get up some rounds in Jacobs Ladder, but he must get to the very top of the
Ladder, to the very top of holiness. An humble heart cannot be satisfied with
so much Grace as will bring him to glory, with so much of Heaven as will keep
him from dropping into Hell, he is still a crying out, Give Lord give, give me
more of thy self, more of thy Son, more of thy Spirit, give me more light,
more life, more love, etc. Caesar in warlike matters, minded more what was to
conquer, then what was conquered; what was to gain, then what was gained: So
does an humble soul mind more what he should be, then what he is, what is to
be done, then what is done. Verily Heaven is for that man, and that man is for
Heaven, that sets up for his mark the perfection of holiness. Poor men are
full of desires, they are often a sighing it out, O! that we had bread to
strengthen us, drink to refresh us, cloths to cover us, friends to visit us,
and houses to shelter us, etc. So souls that are spiritually poor, they are
often a sighing it out, O! that we had more of Christ to strengthen us, more of
Christ to refresh us, more of Christ to be a covering and shelter to us, etc. I
had rather, says the humble soul, be a poor man and a rich Christian, then a
rich man and a poor Christian. Lord says the humble soul, I had rather do
any thing, I had rather bear any thing, I had rather be any thing, then to be a
Dwarse in Grace. The light and glory of humble Christians rises by degrees,
Cant. 6. 1. 1. Looking forth as the morning, with a little light. 2 Fair as
the Moon, more light. 3 Clear as the Sun, i. e. Come up to a higher degree of
spiritual light, life, and glory. Lord says the humble soul, give me much
grace, and then a little gold will serve my turn, give me much of Heaven, and
a little of earth will content me; give me much of the Springs above, and a
little of the Springs below will satisfy me, etc.

The ninth Property of an humble soul is this, It will smite 9 Property. 1 Samuel 24. ^. (...)
and strike for small sins, as well as for great: For those the world count no
sins, as well as for those that they count gross sins.

When David had but cut off the lap of Saul's garment, his A good man's heart
when kindly awakened, may smite him for those actions that at fi^sthe judged
very prudent and politic. How great a pain not to be born c^ms from the prick
of this small thorn. Little sins have put several to their wits ends, when
they have been set home upon their consciences.
heart smote him as if he had cut off his head. The Hebrew word signifies to
smite, wound, or chastize. Ah! his heart struck him, his heart chastised him,
his heart wounded him for cutting off Saul's skirt, though he did it upon noble
grounds, viz. to convince Saul of his false jealousies, and to evidence his
own innocence and integrity. And so, at another time, his heart smote him for
numbering the people, as if he had murdered the people, 2 Samuel 24. 10. And
David's heart smote him, after that he had numbered the people; and David said
unto the Lord, I have sinned greatly in that I have done: And now I beseech
thee, O Lord, take away the iniquity of thy servant, for I have done very
foolishly. An humble soul knows that little sins (if I may so call any) cost
Christ his blood, and that they make way for greater; and that little sins
multiplied become great, as a little sum multiplied is great; that they cloud
the face of God, wound conscience, grieve the spirit, rejoice Satan, and make
work for Repentance, etc. An humble soul knows that little sins (suppose them
so) are very dangerous; a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump; a little
staff may kill one, a little poison may poison one, a little leak in a ship,
sinkes it; a little Fly in the box of Ointment spoils it; a little flaw in a
good cause, marres it: So a little sin may at once bar the door of Heaven,
and open the gates of Hell; and therefore an humble soul smites and strikes it
self for the least, as well as the greatest. Though a head of Garlike be
little, yet it will poison the Leopard, though he be great. Though a Mouse is
but little, yet it will kill an Elephant, if he gets up into his Trunk. Though
the Scorpion be little, yet it will sting a Lion to death; and so will the
least sin, if not pardoned by the death of Christ.

A proud heart counts great sins small, and small sins no sins, and so disarmes
Conscience (for a time) of its whipping and wounding power; but at death, or in
Hell, conscience will take up an iron rod, with which it will lash the sinner
for ever; and then, though too late, the sinner shall acknowledge his little
sins to be very great, and his great sins to be exceeding grievous and odious,
etc.

The tenth Property of an humble soul is this, It will quietly 10 Property
Psalm. 39. 9. (...) from Alam, which signifies to be mute or tongue-tied. Lev.
10. 1, 2, 3 Vaiidem, from Clam am, which signifies the quietness of the mind,
the troubled affections being allayed. 1 Samuel 3. 11-19. 2 Samuel 16. 5-14.
Gallesius observes upon Exodus 22. 28. the exceeding patience of those three
Emperors, Theodosius, Honorius, and Arcadius, toward those that spoke evil
of them.
bear burdens, and patiently take blows and knocks, and make no noise. An
humble soul sees God through man, he sees God through all the actions and
carriages of men. I was dumb (says the Prophet) I opened not my mouth, because
thou did it. An humble soul looks through secondary causes, and sees the
hand of God, and then lays his own hand upon his mouth. An humble soul is a
mute soul, a tonguetied soul, when he looks through secondary causes, to the
supreme cause. So Aaron, when he saw his Sons suddenly surprised by a dreadful
and doleful death, he held his peace, he bridled his passions, he sits silent
under a terrible stroke of Divine Justice, because the fire that devoured them,
went out from the Lord. So when Samuel had told Eli, that God would judge his
house for ever, and that he had sworn that the iniquity of his house should not
be purged with sacrifice, nor offering for ever, etc. It is the Lord (says
Eli) let him do what seems him good. Eli humbly and patiently lays his neck
upon the block, it is the Lord, let him strike, let him kill, etc. says Eli.

So David; when Shimei manifested his desperate fury and folly, malice and
madness, in raving and raging at him, in cursing and reproaching of him, says
he, Let him alone, and let him curse, for the Lord has bidden him. God (says
he) will by his wise providence turn his cursing into blessing. I see the
Justice of God in his cursing, therefore let him alone, let him curse, says
David.

Cassianus reports, that when a certain Christian was held Captive by the
Infidels, and tormented by diverse pains, and ignominious taunts, being
demanded by way of scorn and reproach, Tell us what Christ has done for you,
answered, He Acts and Mon. fol. 811.
has done what you see, that I am not moved at all the cruelties and
contumelies you cast upon me.

So that blessed Martyr, Gyles of Brussells, when the Friars By long so
thingour own wills, we have forsaken (as Cassian says) the very shadow of
patience.
(sent to reduce him) did at any time miscall him, he ever held his peace;
insomuch that those wretches would say abroad, that he had a dumb Devil in him.
Full Vessels will bear many a knock, many a stroke, and yet make no noise: So
Christians that are full of Christ, that are full of the Spirit, will bare many
a knock, many a stroke, and yet make no noise.

An humble soul may groan under afflictions, but he will not grumble in
calmes. Proud hearts discourse of patience, but in storms humble hearts
exercise patience. Philosophers have much commended it, but in the hour of
darkness it is only the humble Christian that acts it. I am afflicted, says
the humble soul, but it is mercy I am not destroyed: I am fallen into the pit,
it is free grace I am not fallen into Hell. God is too just to wrong me, and too
gracious to harm me, and therefore I will be still and quiet, let him do what
he will Isa. 58. 1, 2, 3.
with me, says the humble soul. But proud souls resist when they are
resisted, they strike when they are stricken. Who is Non sic deos coluimus aut
sic viximus, ut ille nos vinceret, said the Emperor An onius Philosophus.
the Lord (says lofty Pharaoh) that I should obey him? and Cain cries out, My
punishment is greater then I am able to bear. Well, remember this, though it
be not easy in afflictions and tribulations to hold our peace, yet it is very
advantageous; which the Heathens seemed to intimate, in placing the Image of
Angeronia with the mouth bound, upon the Altar of Volupia; to show, that those
that do prudently and humbly conceal their sorrows and anxieties by
patience, shall attain comfort and refreshment.

The eleventh Property of an humble soul, is this, In all 11 Property. John
14. 13. and Chapter 15. 16. and 16. 23, 26. The name of Jesus has a
thousandtreasures of joy and comfort in it, says Chrysostom. And is therefore
used by Paul five hundred times, as some have reckoned.
Religious duties and services, he trades with God upon the credit of Christ.
Lord, says the humble soul, I need power against such and such sins, give it
me upon the credit of Christ's blood. I need strength to such and such services,
give it me upon the credit of Christ's word. I need such and such mercies for
the cheering, refreshing, quickening and strengthening of me, give them into my
bosom upon the credit of Christ's intercession. As a poor man lives and deals
upon the credites of others; so does an humble soul, live and deal with God,
for the strengthening of every grace, and for the supply of every mercy, upon
the credit of the Lord Jesus. An humble soul knows, that since he broke with
God in Innocence, God will trust him no more, he will take his word no more;
and therefore when he goes to God for mercy, he brings his Benjamin, his Jesus
in his arms, and pleads for mercy upon the account of Jesus. So Themystocles
did, when he sought the favor of K^: Admetus.


Plutarch reports, that 'twas wont to be the way of the Molossians, when they
would seek the favor of their Prince, they took up the Kings Son in their
arms, and so went and kneeled before the King, and by this means overcame him.
So do humble souls, make a conquest upon God, with Christ in The name of a
Savior, says Bernard, is honey in the mouth, and music in the ear, and a
Jubilee in the heart. The boy that was a Monitor, cried aloud to him that rode
in Triumph, Memento te esse hominem, Remember thy self to be a man
their arms; the father will not give that soul the repulse, that brings
Christ in his arms. The humble soul knows, that God out of Christ is
incommunicable, that God out of Christ is incomprehensible, that God out of
Christ is very terrible, and that God out of Christ is unaccessible; and
therefore he still brings Christ with him, and presents all his requests in his
name, and so prevails, etc. O but proud souls deal with God upon the credit
of their own worthiness, righteousness, services, prayers, tears, fastings,
etc. as the proud Pharisees, and those wrangling Hypocrites in Isa. 58. 1, 2, 3.

'Twas a very proud saying of one (Coelum gratis non accipiam) I will not have
Heaven, but at a rate; and therefore well did the Father call Vainglory a
pleasant Thief, and the sweet spoyler of spiritual excellencies.

The twelfth Property of an humble soul is this, It endeavors more, how to
honor and glorify God in afflictions, then how to get out of afflictions. So
Daniel; the three Children; the Apostles; 12 Property. Dan 3. and chapter 6. Acts
5. 41, 42. Acts 4. 29. Heb. 11. Ephesians. 6. 19, 20. Phil. 1. 13, 19.
and those worthies, of whom this world was not worthy; they were not curious
about getting out of affliction, but studious how to glorify God in their
afflictions. They were willing to be any thing, and to bear any thing, that in
every thing God might be glorified. They made it their business to glorify
God, in the fire, in the Prison, in the Den, on the wrack, and under the sword,
etc. Lord says the humble Prorsus Satan est Lutherus, sed Christus vivit and
regnat, Amen; said Luther, in writing to his friend Spalatinus.
soul, do but keep down my sins, and keep up my heart in a way of honoring
of thee, under all my troubles, and then my troubles will be no troubles, my
afflictions will be no afflictions. Though my burdens be doubled, and my
troubles be multiplied, yet do but help me to honor thee, by believing in
thee, by waiting on thee, and by submitting to thee, and I shall sing care
away, I shall say it is enough.

When Valens the Emperor sent Messengers to win Euscbius Happy is that soul,
and to be equalled with Angels, who is willing to suffer, if it were possible,
as great things for Christ, as Christ has suffered for it, said Jerome.
to Heresy by fair words and large promises; he answered, Alas Sir, these
speeches are fit to catch little Children that look after such things: but we
that are taught, and nourished by the holy Scriptures, are readier to suffer a
thousand deaths, then to suffer one syllable or tittle of the Scripture to be
altered. And when the Emperor threatened to Confiscate his Goods, to torment
him, to banish him, or to kill him; he answered, He need not fear
Confiscation, that has nothing to loose; nor Banishment, to whom Heaven only
is a Country; nor torments, when his body will be dashed with one blow; nor
death, which is the only way to set him at liberty from sin and sorrow. O
but when a proud man is under troubles and afflictions, his head, and heart,
are full of plots, and projects, how to get off his Chains, and how to get out
of the Furnace, etc. A proud heart will say any thing, and do any thing, and
be any thing, to free himself from the burdens that press him; as you see in
Pharaoh, etc. But an humble soul, is willing to Job 1. 20, 21.
bear the cross, as long as he can get strength from Heaven; to kiss the
cross, to bless God for the cross, and to glorify God under the cross, etc.

The thirteenth Property of an humble soul, is this, It seeks 13 Property.
not, it looks not after great things. A little will satisfy Nature, less
will satisfy Grace, but nothing will satisfy a proud Galen.
man's Lusts. Lord, says the humble soul, if thou will but give me bread to
eat, and raiment to put on, thou shall be Genesis 28. 20, 21, 22.
my God. Let the men of the world (says the humble soul) take the world in all
its greatness and glory, and divide it Vir bonus pauis indiges.
among themselves; let me have much of Christ and Heaven in my heart, and food
convenient to support my natural life, Psalm. 4. 6, 7. Prove 30. 8. Luther ^
made many a meal of a Herring. And ^unius of an Egg.
and it shall be enough. Job 22. 29. When men are cast down, then thou shall
say there is lifting up: And he shall save the humble person, or as the Hebrew
has it (Ne shahh gnenaim) Him that has low eyes: Nothing to us, that an
humble soul looks not after high things. So in Psalm. 131. 1, 2. Lord my heart
is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty: (But how do you know that David? why
says he) I do not exercise my self in great matters, or in things too high,
or too wonderful for me. (...)
Surely, I behaved and quieted my self. Hebr. My soul is as a Child that is
weaned of his mother: My soul is even as a weaned Child. As a great shoe fits
not a little foot, nor a great sail a little ship, nor a great ring a little
finger; so a great estate fits not an humble soul.

It was a prudent speech of that Indian King Taxiles, to the invading
Alexander; What should we need (said he) to Plutarch.
fight and make war one with another, if thou come not to take away our water
and our necessaries by which we must live -- as for other Goods, if I be richer
then thou, I am ready to give thee of mine; and if I have less, I will not
think scorn to thank thee if thou will give me some of thine. Oh but proud
Absalom, cannot be content to be the Kings Son, unless he may have the Crown
presently, from his Fathers head. Caesar can abide no Superior; nor Pompey an
equal. A proud soul is content with nothing.

A Crown could not content Ahab, but he must have Naboths Vineyard, though he
swim to it in blood. Diogenes had more content with his Tub, to shelter him
from the injuries of the weather, and with his wooden dish, to eat and drink
in; then Alexander had, with the Conquest of half the world; and the fruition
of all the treasures, pleasures, and glories of Asia. So an humble soul is
more contented and satisfied with Daniel's pulse, and John's Coat, then proud
Princes are, with their glistering Crowns, and golden Scepters.

The fourteenth Property of an humble soul is this, It can 14 Property.
rejoice in the graces and gracious actings of others, as well as in its own.
An humble Moses could say, when Eldad and Medad Prophesied in the Camp, Would
God that all the Lords people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his
Spirit upon Numb. 11. 26-30.
them. So humble Paul in Acts 26. 29. And Paul said, I would to God, that not
only thou, but also all that hear me this (...). A little, and a great way.
day, were both almost and altogether such as I am, except these bonds. I
heartily wish and pray for thine own sake, that, not only in a low, but in an
eminent degree, both thou and all that are here present, were as far Christians
as I am: Only, I The Ancient Church had her Dipty^hs, or public tables,
wherein the persons most noted for piety, were recorded. Plato called Aristotle
the Intelligent Reader^ and Aristotle set up an Altar in honor of Plato.
would not wish them Imprisoned, as I am. An humble soul is no churl, there
is no envy in spiritual things, one may have as much of spirituals as another,
and all alike. So in 1 Thessalonians. 1. 2, 3. We give thanks to God always for you
all, making mention of you in our prayers; Remembering without ceasing your
work of faith, and labor of love, and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus
Christ, in the sight of God and our father. So in the 2 Epistle, 1. 2, 3, 4.
Grace be unto you, and peace from God our father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. We
are bound to thank God always for you, brethren, as it is meet, because that
your faith grows exceedingly, and the charity of every one of you all toward
each other abounds: So that we our selves glory in you, in the Churches of
God, for your patience and faith in all your persecutions and tribulations that
you endure. Ezekiel can commend Daniel, his contemporary; matching him with
Noah, Ezekiel. 14. 14. 2 Pet. 3. etc.
and Job, for his power in prayer. And Peter highly praises Paul's Epistles,
though he had been sharply reproved in one of them. Oh! but proud souls, will
be still a casting disgrace and contempt, upon those excellencies in others,
that they want Caesar B^rg^ a emulating and imitating Julius Caesar, used to
say, Aut Caesar, aut nullut. But not long after he was slain in the Kingdom
of Navarre.
in themselves.

A proud Cardinal, in Luthers time, said, Indeed a reformation is needful,
and to be desired, but that Luther, a rascally Friar, should be the man should
do it, is intolerable. Pride, is like certain Flies, called Cantharides, who
light especially, upon the fairest wheat, and the most blown Roses.

Though Licinius (who was joined with Galerius in the Empire) was so ignorant
that he could not write his own name, yet as Eusebius reports, he called the
Liberal Arts a public poison.

This age is full of such Monsters, that envy every light that outshines their
own, and that throw dirt upon the graces and excellencies of others, that
themselves may only shine. Pride is notable, both at Substraction, and at
Multiplication. A proud heart always prizes himself above the Market; he
reckons his own pence for pounds, and others pounds for pence; he looks upon
his own Counters as gold, and upon others gold as Counters. All Pearls are
counterfeit, but what he wears.

The fifteenth Property of an humble soul, is, He will rather 15 Property. Psalm
94. 1. Romans 12. 19. I maytruly say of thehumble soul, what Tul ly said of
Caesar, Nihil obli visci solet, nisi injurias; that he forgot nothing but
injuries.
bear wrongs, then revenge wrongs offered. The humble soul knows that
Vengeance is the Lords, and that he will repay, etc, The humble soul loves not
to take the sword into his own hand; he knows the day is a coming, wherein
the Lord will give his Enemies two blows for one, and here he rests. An humble
soul, when wrongs are offered, is like a man with a sword in one hand, and a
salve in the other; could wound, but will heal. Psalm. 35. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16. False witnesses did rise up, they laid to my charge things that I knew not.
They rewarded me evil for good, to the spoiling of my soul. But as for me,
when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth. I humbled my soul with
fasting, and my prayer returned into my own A^gustus Caesar (in whose time
Christ was born) bid Catullus the ^ai^ing Poet, to supper, to show that he had
forgiven him.
bosom. I behaved my self, as though he had been my friend, or brother. I
bowed down heavily, as one that mourns for his mother, etc. The Scripture
abounds in instances of this nature.

Dyonisius, having not very well used Plato at the Court, when he was gone,
fearing least he should write against him, he sent after him to bid him not to
write against him: Says he, Tell Dyonisius that I have not so much leisure as
to think of him. So humble, wronged souls, are not at leisure, to think of the
wrongs, and injuries that others do them.

Mr. Fox, that wrote the Book of Martyrs, would be sure to do him a kindness,
that had done him an injury: So that it used to be a Proverb, If a man would
have Mr. Fox do him a kindness, let him do him an injury. An humble soul,
is often in looking over the wrongs and injuries that he has done to God, and
the sweet and tender carraiage of God toward him, notwithstanding those wrongs
and injuries; and this wins him, and works him to be more willing and ready to
bear wrongs, and forgive wrongs, then to revenge any offered wrongs.

The sixteenth Property of an humble soul is this, An humble soul, though he
be of never so rare abilities; yet he will not 16 Property. Isa. 11. 6.
disdain to be taught what he knows not, by the meanest persons. A Child
shall lead the humble soul in the way that is good, he cares not how mean and
contemptible the person is, if a guide, or an instructor to him.

Apollo, an Eloquent man, and mighty in the Scripture, a Master in Israel, yet
sits by an Aquilla, a Tent-maker, and Vide Beza on the words.
Priscilla his wife, to be instructed by them, Acts 18. 24, 25, 26. Sometimes
the poorest, and the meanest Christian, may, for counsel, and comfort, be a God
to another; as Moses was to Aaron. As an humble soul knows, that the Stars
have their situation in Heaven, though sometimes he sees them by their
reflection in a puddle, in the bottom of a well, or in a stinking ditch: So he
knows that godly souls, though never so poor, low, and contemptible, as to
the things of this world, Ephesians. 2. 6.
are fixed in Heaven, in the Region above; and therefore their poverty, and
meannesse, is no bar to hinder him from learning of them.

Though John was poor in the world, yet many humble souls did not disdain, but
rejoice in his Ministry. Christ lived poor, and dyed poor, Mat. 8. 20. As he
was borne in another man's house, so he was buried in another man's Tomb. Austin
observes, when Christ dyed, he made no will, he had no Crown Lands, only his
Coat was left, and that the Soldiers parted among them; and yet those that
were meek and lowly in heart, counted it their Heaven, their happiness, to be
taught and instructed by him.

The seventeenth Property of an humble soul is this, 17 Property. Tully calls
gra^tude, Maximam, imo ma^em omnium virtutum reliquarum. The greatest, yea the
mother of all virtues.
An humble soul will bless God, and be thankful to God, as well under
misery, as under mercy: As well when God frowns, as when he smiles, as well
when God takes, as when he gives; as well under crosses and losses, as under
blessings and mercies. Job 1. 21. The Lord gives, and the Lord takes, blessed
be the name of the Lord. He does not cry out upon the Sabeans, and the
Chaldeans, but he looks through all secondary Causes, and sees the hand of The
Jews have a Prove: That we must leap up to Mount Gerizim, which was a Mount of
Blessings: But creep into Mount Ebal, which was a Mount of Curses. To show,
that we must be ready to bless, but backward to curse. An humble soul can
extract one contrary out of another; honey out of the rock, gold out of iron,
etc. Afflictions to humble souls are the Lords Plow, the Lords Harrow, the
Lords Flaile, the Lords drawing Plasters, the Lords p^u^ing knise, the Lords
Potion, the Lords Soap, and therefore they can sit dowae and bless the Lord,
and kiss the rod.
God; and then he lays his hand upon his own heart, and sweetly sings it out,
The Lord gives, and the Lord takes, blessed be the name of the Lord. An humble
soul, in every condition, blesses God, as the Apostle commands, in the 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. In every thing, give thanks to God. So 1 Cor. 4. Being reviled,
we bless; being persecuted, we suffer. The language of an humble soul is; If
it be thy will, says an humble soul, I should be in darkness, I will bless
thee; and if it be thy will, I should be again in light, I will bless thee;
If thou will comfort me, I will bless thee; and if thou will afflict me, I
will bless thee; if thou will make me poor, I will bless thee; if thou will
make me rich, I will bless thee; if thou will give me the least mercy, I will
bless thee; if thou will give me no mercy, I will bless thee. An humble soul
is quicksighted, he sees the rod in a fathers hand; he sees honey upon the top
of every twigg, and so can bless God; he sees Sugar at the bottom of the
bitterest cup, that God does put into his hand; he knows, that Gods House of
Correction, is a School of Instruction; and so he can sit down, and bless,
when the rodd is upon his back. An humble soul knows, that the design of God
in all, is his Instruction, his Reformation, and his Salvation.

It was a sweet saying of holy Bradford, If the Queen will give me my life, I
will thank her; if she will Banish me, I will thank her; if she will burn me,
I will thank her; if she will condemn me to perpetual imprisonment, I will
thank her. I, this is the temper of an humble heart. An humble soul knows,
that to bless God in prosperity, is the way to increase it; and to bless God
in adversity, is the way to remove it. An humble soul knows, that if he
blesses God under mercies, he has paid his debt; but if he blesses God under
crosses, he has made God a debtor. But oh the pride of men's hearts, when the
rod is upon their backs! You have many Professors, that are seemingly humble,
while the Sun shines, while God gives, and smiles, and strokes; but when his
smiles are turned into frowns, when he strikes, and lays on, oh the
murmurings! the disputings! the frettings! and wranglings of proud souls, they
always kick when God strikes.

The last Property of an humble soul, is this, An humble 18 Property.
soul will wisely and patiently bear reproof. Prove. 25. 12. As an ear-ring of
gold, and an Ornament of fine gold. so is a wise reprover upon an obedient ear.
A seasonable reproof falling upon an humble soul, has a redoubled Grace with
it. It is as an ear-ring of gold; and as an Ornament of fine gold, or as a
Diamond in a Diadem,

An humble David can say, Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness;
and let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent Psalm. 14. 5. Oil is here
Metaphorically taken for wo^ds of rep^o^f, with ^ay be said (figura^ively) to
break the head, vide Job 19 2. (...)
Oil, which shall not break my head. David compares the faithful reproof of
the righteous, to the excellent Oil that they used about their heads. Some
Translate it, Let it never cease from my head: That is, let me never want it;
and so the Original will bear too, I would never want reproofs whatsoever I
want. But yet my prayer shall be in their calamities, I will requite their
reproofs with my best prayers, in the day of their Calamity, says David:
Whereas a proud heart will neither pray for such, nor with such as reprove
them, but in their calamities will most insult over them.

Some Translate it more emphatically, The more they do, the more I shall think
my self bound unto them. And this was In vit Jo. Gers. So Alipius loved Austin
for reproving him. So did David, Nathan, 1 Kings 1. 2 Samuel 12. 12, 13. and 24.
13, 14 That Is a choice and ^ender spirit, that can meekly and humbly embrace
re^roofs, and bless God sor reproofs.
Gersomes disposition, of whom it is recorded, That he rejoiced in nothing more
then if he were freely and friendly reproved by any. Prove. 9. 8, 9. Rebuke a
wise man, and he will love thee; give instruction to a wise man. and he will be
yet wiser. Prove. 19. 25. Reprove one that has understanding, and he will
understand knowledge. You know how sweetly David carries it toward Abigall, 1 Samuel 25. 32, 33. she wisely meets him, and puts him in mind of what he was
going about, and he falls a blessing of her presently. Blessed be the Lord God
of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me; and blessed be thy advice, and
blessed be thou which have kept me this day from coming to shed blood. I was
resolved in my passion, and in the heat of my spirit, that I would not leave a
man alive, but blessed be God, and blessed be thy Counsel. An humble soul can
sit down, and bless God, under reproofs. An humble soul is like the Scythian
King that went naked in the snow; and when Alexander wondered how he could
endure it; he answered, I am not ashamed, for I am all forehead. Manasses King
of Jud^h, being reproved by the Aged Princely Prophet Isaiah, caused him near
to the Fountain of Silce, to be sawen in sunder with a wooden Saw, in the
eightieth year os his age. For which cruel fact, amongst other of his sins,
he was sorely punished by God, 2 Chronicles. 33. 11 So Cambyses King of Persia hated
Prexaspes, one of his Nobles that was familiar with him, for reproving his
drunkenness.
An humble soul is all forehead, able to bear reproves, with much wisdom and
patience. Oh! but a proud heart cannot bear reproofs, he scorns the Reprover,
and his Reproofs too.

Prove. 15. 12. A scorner loves not one that reproves him, neither will he go
unto the wise. Amos 5. 10. They hate him that reproves in the gate; as Ahab
did good Micaiah; and Herod did John Baptist, and the Pharisees our Savior,
Luke 16. 13. Christ being to deal with the covetous Scribes and Pharisees, he
lays the Law home, and tells them plainly, that they could not serve God, and
Mammon. Here Christ strikes at their right eye; but how do they bear this?
mark in the 14 verse, The Pharisees also, who were covetous, heard all these
things, and they derided him. The Pharisees did not simply laugh at Christ, but
gave also external signs of scorn, in their countenance and gestures.
Exemukterizon, they blowed their nose at him, manifesting thereby their
scorning at what he said. Exodus 2. 13, 14
They blew their nose at him, for that is the meaning of the Original word. By
their gestures they did demonstrate their horrid deriding of him; they fleared
and jeared, when they should have feared and trembled, at the wrath to come. In
Isa. 28. 10. For precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept; line upon
line, line upon line; here a little, and there a little. One observes, that
that was a scoff put upon the Prophet; and is as if they should say, Here is
nothing but precept upon precept, line upon line: And indeed the very sound of
the words in the Original, carries a taunt (Zau le zau, kau lakau) as scornful
people, by the tone of their voice, and riming words, scorn at such as they
despise. Pride, and passion, and other vices, in these days, go armed, touch
them never so gently, yet, like the nettle, they will sting you; and if you
deal with them roundly, roughly, cuttingly, as the Apostle speaks, they will
swagger with you, as the Hebrew did with Moses, Who made thee a Judge over us?

And thus much for the Properties of an humble soul.

I come now to the next thing, and that is, to show you the Reasons, why the
best men are the most humble men.

First, Because they see themselves the greatest debtors to God, 1 Reason.
for what they do enjoy.

There Is no man on Earth that sees himself such a debtor to God, as the humble
man. Every smile makes him a debtor to God; and every good word from Heaven
makes him a When a Knight died at Rome, that was much in debt, Augustus the
Emperor sent to buy his bed, concei^ing that there must needs be some
extraordinary virtue in it, it he that was so much in debt, could take any rest
upon it. An humble soul sees himself so much in debt for mercies in hand, and
mercies in hope, that he cannot sleep without blessing and admiring of God. I
have read of a Stork that cast a pearl into the bosom of a Maid which had
healed her of a wound: So humble souls cast the pearl of praise into the bosom
of God for all his favors toward them. Guc. Hist. l. 4. 2 Reason.
debtor to God; he looks upon all his temporals, as health, wealth, Wife,
Child, Friend, etc. and sees himself deeply indebted for all: He looks upon
his spiritual mercies, and sees himself a great debtor to God for them; he
looks upon his Graces, and sees himself a debtor for them; he looks upon his
Experiences, and sees himself a debtor for them; he looks upon all his
privileges, and sees himself a debtor for them; he looks upon hi^ incomes,
and sees himself a debtor for them: The more mercy he has received, the more
he looks upon himself indebted, and obliged, to pay duty and tribute to God,
as you may see in Psalm. 116. 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14 verses compared. In the 6, 7,
8 verses, he tells you of the mercies he had received from God, and in the 12
and 13 verses, says he, What shall I render to the Lord, for all his benefits
toward me? I see my self (says he) wonderfully indebted; well, what then?
why, I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord; I
will pay my vows unto the Lord, in the presence of all his people, etc. The
same you have in the 16, 17, and 18 verses, of the same Psalm.

So David, Psalm. 103. 1, 2, 3, 4. casts his eyes upon his temporal, and his
spiritual mercies, and then calls upon his soul, O my soul bless the Lord,
and all that is within me, bless his holy name. Bless the Lord, O my soul,
and forget not all his benefits. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities; who
heals all thy diseases, etc. An humble soul knows, that it is a strange
folly to be proud of being more in debt, then another. It Is true, says he, I
have this and that mercy, in possession; and such and such mercies, in
reversion; but by all, I am the more a debtor to God.

Caesar admired at that mad Soldier, who was very much in debt, and yet slept
so quietly: So does an humble soul wonder and admire, to see men that are so
much indebted to God, for mercies (as many are) and yet sleep so quietly, and
be so mindlesse, and careless, in blessing and praising of God. There is
nothing (says one) that endures so small a time, as the memory of mercies
received; and the more great they are, the more commonly they are recompensed
with ingratitude.

Secondly, it is Because in this life they have but a taste of God.

In the 1 Pet. 2. 2, 3. As newborn Babes, desire the sincere milk of the
word, that ye may grow thereby. If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is
gracious. The best of men on this side Heaven, have but a taste; he is but in a
tasting, desiring, hungring, thirsting, and growing condition. Job 26. ult.
These are part of his ways, but how little a portion is heard of him? So in 1
Cor. 13. 9, 10, 12. We knew but in part, and we prophecy but in part; now we
see through a glass darkly; but then face to face. The Lord gives out but
little of himself here, we have but a taste of Divine sweetness here; we see
but the back parts of God; the day is not far off, when we shall see his face.
The best of Christ is behind, as the sweetest Honey lies in the bottom. Our
greatest knowledge here, is to know that we know nothing.

The Rabbis, in their Comments upon Scripture, when they meet with hard knots
that they cannot explicate, they Elias cum v^nerit solvet omnia.
salve all with this, When Elias comes, he will resolve all things. The best
men are in the dark, and will be in the dark, till the Lord comes to shine
forth upon them in more grace and glory. The best men on this side Heaven, are
narrow Vessels, they are able to receive and take in but little of God. The
best men are so full of the world. and the vanities thereof, that they are able
to take in but little of God. Here God gives his people some tastes that they
may not faint; and he gives them but a taste, that they may long to be at home;
that they may keep humble; that they may set loose from things below; that they
may not break and despise bruised reeds; and that Heaven may be the more sweet
to them at last, etc.

A third reason why the best men are the most humble; and 3 Reason.
that is, Because the best men dwell more upon their wonser part, their ignoble
part, then they do upon their noble part, their better part.

In Isa. 6. 5. I am a man of unclean lips, says that humble soul. So humble
Job cries out, of the iniquity of his youth; Job 13. 26. Job 40. 50.
and says he, Once have I spoken foolishly, yea twice, but I will do so no
more. Humble David, Psalm. 51. 3. sighs it out, My sin is ever before me. So
humble Paul, Romans 7. 22, 23. complains, that he has a law in his members,
warring against the Law of his mind, and leading him captive to the Law of sin;
Ten^o in m^^ia^s^rib^ in Charta, sed non habe^ in vi^a. Aug.
and that when he would do good, evil was present with him. An humble soul
sees that he can stay no more from sin, then the heart can from panting, and
the pulse from beating; he sees his heart and life to be fuller of sin, then
the firmament is of Stars; and this keeps him low. He sees that sin is so
bred in the bone, that till his bones, as Joseph's, be carried out of the Egypt
of this world, it will not out: He every day finds these Jebusites and
Canaanites to be as thorns in his eyes, and As Hagar would dwell with Sarah,
til she beat her out of doors, so will sin dwell with Grace till death-beat
it out of doors.
as goades in his sides; he finds sin an ill inmate, that will not out, till
the house falls on the head of it: As the fretting Leprosy, in the walls of
the house, would not out, till the house it self was demolisht -- Though Sin
and Grace were never borne together, and though they shall not dye together;
yet while the Believer lives, these two must live together; and this keeps them
humble.

As the Peacock looking upon his black feet, lets fall his Plumes: So the poor
soul, when he looks upon his black feet, the vanity of his mind, the body of
sin that is in him, his This duplication (as well as the Ecce) is sull of
attention and admiration, and Christ by praising perfects his own work; for
(Locutio verbi infusio doni) to call her fair, is to make her so, etc.
proud Spirit falls low.

Epiminondas an Athenian Captain, being asked why he was so sad the day after a
great Victory; answered, Yesterday I was tickled with much vain glory,
therefore I correct my self for it to day. That Is the temper of an humble
soul. It Is very observable, that the Saints are pressed to take notice of
their better part, Cant. 1. 15. Behold thou art fair my Love, behold thou art
fair. And so, Chap. 4. 1. Behold thou art fair, behold thou art fair. God
has much ado to get a gracious heart to mind his spiritual beauty, to take
notice of the inward excellency that he has wrought in it. Though the Kings
Daughter be all glorious within, yet God has much ado to bring her to see and
take notice of her inward beauty and glory: The humble soul is more set to eye
and dwell upon its deformity, then it is upon that beauty and glory, that God
has stamped upon it: And this makes the man little and low in his own eyes.

Fourthly, Because they have the cleerest sight and vision of 4 Reason.
God, and have the nearest and highest communion with God.

None on earth are so near to God, and so high in their communion with God, as
humble souls. And as they have the cleerest Visions of God, so those actions
of God give them the fullest sight and knowledge of their own sinfullnesse and
nothingnesse. So in Job 42. 4, 5. I have heard of thee with the hearing of the
ear, but now mine eye has seen (...) from (...) Which signifies to reject,
to despise, to cast of; o contemn.
thee, I abhor my self in dust and ashes. Isa. 6. 1. 5. In a Vision the Lord
discovers his glory to the Prophet, then verse. 5. Woe is me (says he) for I am
undone (Or I am cut off) why? because I am a man of unclean lips, and have
seen the King, the Lord of Hosts. Oh the Vision that I have had of the glory
of God, has given me such a clear and full sight of my own vileness and
baseness, that I cannot but loath and abhor my self. When Abraham draws near
to God, then he accounts himself but dust and ashes, Genesis 18. 26, 27. The
Angels that are near God, that stand before him, they cover their faces with
two wings, as with a double Scarf, in the 6 of Isa. ver. 2.

The fifth and last Reason why those are most humble that 5 Reason. As one
fire, so one fear drives out another. As the Sunshine puts out fire, so does
the fear of God, the fire of lusts.
are most holy, is; Because they maintain in themselves a holy fear of
sinning.

And the more this holy fear of falling is maintained, the more the soul is
humbled. Prove. 14. 16. A wise man fears, and departs from evil. And Chap.
28. 14. Happy is the man that fears always, but he that hardens his heart,
shall fall into mischief. And this keeps the holy soul humble.

I have known a good old man, says Bernard, who when he had heard of any that
had committed some notorious offense, Ille hodie and ego cras.
was wont to say with himself, He fell to day, so may I to morrow. Now the
Reason why humble souls do keep up in themselves a holy fear of falling, is;
Because this is the best to keep them from falling, Job fears, and conquers,
on the dunghill: Adam presumes, and falls, in Paradise. Nehemiah fears, and
stands, Nehem. 5. 15. Peter presumes, and falls, Mat. 26. Mr. Sanders (the
Martyr) in Queen Mary's days, fears, and stands: Dr. Pendleton presumes, and
falls, from a Professor, to be a Papist.

When Agamemnon said, What should the Conqueror fear? Casander presently
answered, (Quod nihil timet) He should fear this most of all, that he fears
not at all.

And so I have done with the Reasons of the point. I shall now come to the Uses
of it. And the first is this.

Is it so, that the most holy souls, are the most humble souls? Then this
shows you, That the number of holy souls is very few. Oh how few be there
that are low in their own eyes! The number of souls that are high in the
esteem of God, and low in their own esteem, are very few. Oh the pride of
England! Oh the pride of London! Pride in these A proud heart resists and is
res^sted, this is du^o du^um, flint to flint, fire to fire, yet down he must.
days has got a whores forehead; yet pride cannot climb so high, but Justice
will sit above her.

Bernard says, that Pride is the rich man's Cosen: I may add, And the poor
man's Cosen; and the profane man's Cosen; and the Civil man's Cosen; and the
formal man's Cosen; and the Hypocrites Cosen; yea, all men's Cosen; and it
will first or last cast down, and cast out all the Lucifers and Adams in the
world.

Secondly, As you would approve your selves to be high in the account of God,
as you would approve your selves to be not only good, but eminently good, Keep
humble. Since England was England; since the Gospel shined amongst us, there
was never such reason to press this duty of humility, as in these days of
pride wherein we live; and therefore I shall endeavor these two things.

First, to lay down some Motives that may work you to be humble. Secondly, to
propound some Directions that may further you in this work.
First, for the Motives: Consider,

First, how God singles out humble souls, from all others, ot 1 Motive.
pour out most of the Oil of Grace into their hearts.

No Vessels that God delights to fill, like broken vessels, like contrite
spirits. Jam. 4. 6. He resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. The
Greek word signifies, To set himself An^itassetai.
in battle array; God takes the wind and hill of a proud soul; but he gives
grace to the humble. The silver dewes flow down from the Mountains, to the
lowest valleys. Abraham was but dust and ashes in his own eyes, I but says
Genesis 18. 17.
God, Shall I hide from Abraham, the thing that I will do? No, I will not. An
humble soul shall be both of Gods Court, and his Counsel too -- Humble Jacob,
that was in his Genesis 32. 10.
own eyes, less then the least of all mercies, what a glorious Vision had he
of God; when the Ground was his Bed, and Genesis 28.
the Stone his Pillow, and the Hedges his Curtains, and the Heavens his
Canopie: Then he saw Angels ascend and descend. An humble soul that iies low,
O what sights of God He that is in the low pits and caves os the earth, sees
the stars in the fi^mament, when they who are upon the tops of the mountains
discern them not.
has he! what glory does he behold? when the proud soul sees nothing. God
poures in grace to the humble, as men pour in liquor into an empty vessel; he
does not drop in grace into an humble heart, but he poures it in.

The Altar under the Law, was hollow, to receive the fire, the wood, and the
Sacrifice: So the hearts of men, under the Gospel, must be humble, empty of all
sprituall pride, and self-conceitednesse, that so they may receive the fire of
the Spirit, and Jesus Christ, who offered himself for a Sacrifice for our sins.

Humility is both a Grace, and a vessel to receive Grace. There Is none that
sees so much need of grace, as humble souls; there is none prises grace like
humble souls; there is none improves grace like humble souls: Therefore God
singles out the humble soul, to fill him to the brim with grace, when the
proud is sent empty away.

Secondly, Of all Garments, humility does best become Christians, 2 Motive.
and most adorn their profession.

Faith is the Champion of grace; and Love, the Nurse; but Humility the beauty
of grace. 1 Pet. 5. 5. Be clothed with humility. The Greek word imports, That
Humility is (...).
the Ribbon, or string, that ties together all those precious Pearls, the rest
of the graces. If this string break, they are all scattered.

The Greek word that is rendered, Clothed, comes of another (...).
Greek word that signifies to knit, and tie knots, as delicate and curious
women use to do, of Ribbons, to adorn their heads and bodies; as if humility
were the knot of every virtue, the grace of every grace. Chrysostom calls
Humility, It Is reported of the Crystal that it has such a virtue in it, that
the very touching of it quickens other stones, and puts a luster and beauty
upon them; so does humility put a luster upon every grace.
The Root, Mother, Nurse, Foundation, and Band of all Virtue. Bazill calls it,
The Storehouse, and Treasury of all good; For what is the scandal and reproach
of Religion, at this day? nothing more then the pride of Professors. Is not
this the language of most? They are great Professors, O but very proud; they
are great hearers, they will run from Sermon, to Sermon, and cry up this man,
and cry up that man, O but proud. They are great talkers, O but as proud as the
Devil, etc. Oh that you would take the Counsel of the Apostle! Be clothed with
humility: And that, Col. 3. 12. Put on therefore as the Elect of God, holy and
Beloved, Bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering. No Robes to these.

The Third Motive is this, Humility is a Lodestone that 3 Motive.
draws both the heart of God and man to it.

In Isa. 57. Thus says the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth Eternity, whose
name is holy; I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a
contrite and humble spirit. The Lord singles out the humble soul, of all
others, to make him an Habitation for himself. Here is a wonder, God is on
high, and yet the higher a man lifts up himself, the farther he is from God:
And the lower a man humbles himself, the nearer he is to God. of all souls,
God delights most to dwell with the humble; for they do most prize and best
improve his precious presence.

In Prove. 29. 23. A man's pride shall bring him low, but honor shall uphold the
humble in spirit. Prove. 22. 4. By humility, and the fear of the Lord, are
riches and honor, etc. The Hebrew is, The heel of humility: Riches and honor
follow humility at the very heels. One of the Ancients used to say, that
Humility is the first, second, and third Grace of a Christian. Humility is a
very drawing grace; it draws men to think well, and speak well, of Christ, the
Gospel, and the people of God: It makes the very world to say, I, these are V
is magnus esse incipe ab im^. Will thou be great, begin from below, says the
Father.
Christians indeed; they are full of light, and vet full of lowliness; they
are high in worth, and yet humble in heart: Oh these are the Crown, and the
glory of Religion.

An humble soul is like the Violet, that by its fragrant smell, draws the eye
and the hearts of others, to him, Mat. 18. 14. They are the greatest in the
Ki^gdome of Heaven. He that is least in his own account, is always greatest
in Gods, and in good men's account.

The fourth Motive is this, Consider, All the world cannot 4 Motive.
keep him up, that does not keep down his own spirit.

One ask't a Philosopher, what God was a doing; he answered Totam ipsius
occupationem esse in elevatione, humilium and superlorum dejectione.
That his whole work was to lift up the humble, and to cast down the proud.
That man cannot possibly be kept up, whose spirit is not kept down: as you may
clearly see in Pharaoh, Haman, Herod, and Nebuchadnezzar; all the world could
not keep them up, because their spirit was not kept down.

Prove. 29. 27. A man's pride shall bring him low; for it sets God against him,
and Angels against him, and men against him; yea, even those that are as proud
as himself. Dyonisius a proud King of Sicily, fell from a King to a
Schoolmaster. History is full of such instances.
It Is very observable, that whereas one Drunkard loves another, one Swearer
loves another, and one Thief loves another, and one Unclean person loves
another, etc. yet one proud person cannot endure another; but seeks to undermine
him, that he alone may bear the Bell, and carry the commendations, the praise,
the promotion. It is storyed of the Romans, that were the proudest people on
the Earth, that they reckoned it as a parcel of their praise, that they
brought down the proud. All the world, Sirs, will not keep up those persons,
that do not keep down their spirits.

Proud Valerian, the Roman Emperor, fell, from being an Emperor, to be a
footstool to Sapor, King of Persia, as often as he took Horse.

Henry the fourth, Emperor, in sixty-two Battles had generally the better, and
yet was deposed, and driven to that misery, that he desired only a Clarkship
in a house at Spira, that himself had built: And oh that Professors would
think of this in these days in which we live. All the world shall not keep up
those, which do not keep down their own spirits. The very design of God is
to stain the pride of all glory, and to bring into contempt the honorable of
the earth. Therefore now if men in our days shall grow proud and Isa. 23. 9.
high, under mercies and Divine appearances, Just^ce will be above them, and
turn their glory into shame, and lay their honor in the dust. If your blood
rises with your outward good, you will certainly fall, and great will be your
fall.

The fifth Consideration to provoke us to be humble, is 5 Motive.
this, Let us have always our eye fixed upon the example of Jesus Christ, and
his humble and lowly carriage.

Christ by his own example labors to provoke his Disciples to keep humble,
and to walk lowly, in John 13. 4, 5, 12, 13, 14, 15 verses compared: He rifes
and washes his Disciples feet, etc. and mark what he aims at in that carriage
of his, verse. 12, 13, 14. Know ye what I have done unto you (says he) Ye call
me Master, and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am; if I then your Lord and
Master, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another feet; for I
have given you an example, that you should do as I have done to you. I have
given you an example, says Christ, and I would have you to imitate my example.
Example is the most powerful Rhetoric; the highest and noblest example should
be very quickening, and provoking. Oh here you have the greatest, the noblest
example of humility, that was ever read or heard of: Upon consideration of this
great and eminent example of Christ's humility, Guericus, a good man, cried out,
Thou have overcome me, O Lord, thou have overcome my pride, this example of
thine has mastered me. Oh that we could say with this good man, Thou have
overcome, O Lord, thou have overcome our proud hearts, by this example thou
have over-mastered our lofty spirits.

This example of Christ's humility, you have further set forth, Phil. 2. 6, 7,
8. Who being in the form of God (that is, in the Nature and Essence of God,
being very God, clothed with Divine glory and Majesty, as God) thought it not
robbery (it being his right by Nature) to be equal with God. The Greek words
that are rendered, He thought it no robbery, do import, He made it not a matter
of Triumph, or ostentation, to be equal with God, it being his right by
nature; and therefore the challenging of it, could be no Usurpation of another
right; of taking to himself that which was not his own. He thought it no
robbery to be equal with God. The Greek is Equals, that is, every way equal:
not a Secondary and inferior God, as the Arrians would have him. But made
himself of no reputation: The Greek is, Emptied himself, Verse. 7.
that is, he suspended and laid aside his glory and Majesty, or dis-robed
himself of his glory and dignity, and became a sinner, both by Imputation, and
by Reputation, for our sakes.

And verse. 8. He humbled himself. This Son of Righteousness went ten degrees
back in the Dial of his Father, that he might come to us with healing under
his wings. And became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. In
these words there is a kind of gradation; for it is more to become obedient,
then to humble himself; and more to yield unto death, then to become obedient;
and yet more to be crucified, then simply to dye; for it was to submit himself
to a most painful, ignominious, and cursed death. He became obedient, that is,
says Beza, To his dying day, his whole life being nothing but a continual
death.

I have read of an Earl called Eleazarus, that being given to immoderate anger,
was cured of that disordered affection, by studying of Christ, and his
patience; he still dwelt upon the meditation of Christ, and his patience, till
he found his heart transformed into the similitude of Jesus Christ. And oh that
you would never leave pondering upon that glorious example of Christ's Humility,
till your hearts be made humble, like the heart of Christ! Oh that that sweet
word of Christ, Mat. 11. 29. might stick upon all your hearts! Take my yoke
upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly, and you shall find rest to
your souls.

Bonaventure Engraved this sweet saying of our Lord, Learn of me, for I am
meek and lowly in heart, in his Study: It was a good Law that the Ephesians
made, that men should propound to themselves ^he b^st parterns, and ever bear
in mind some eminent man.
And oh that this saying was Engraven upon all your foreheads. upon all your
hearts! Oh that it was Engraven upon the dishes you eat in, the cups you drink
in, the seats you sit on, the Beds you lie on, etc.

Jerome having read the Religious life and death of Hilaron, folding up the
Book, said, Well, Hilaron shall be the Champion whom I will imitate. Oh when
you look upon this glorious example of Christ, say, The Lord Jesus his example
shall be that that my soul shall imitate.

Sixthly, Consider, Humility will free a man from perturbations and distempers.
6 Motive.


When there are never such great storms without, humility will cause a calm
within. There are a great many storms abroad, and there is nothing will put the
soul into a quiet condition, but Humility. An humble soul says, who am I,
that I may not be despised? Who am I, that I may not be reproached, abused,
slighted, neglected? That which will break a proud man's heart, will not so much
as break an humble man's sleep. In the midst of a storm, an humble soul is
still in a calm: When proud hearts are at their wits ends, stamping, swearing,
and swaggering at God, and man, and providence, an humble soul is quiet, and
still, like a ship in a Harbor. 2 Samuel 16. 6. to 13. Shimei comes railing and
cursing of David, and calls him a bloody man, and a man of Belial, that is, a
Runnagado, one who being desperately wicked, had shaken off the yoke of
Government, and would be under no Law: So the Hebrew word (Jagnal) signifies,
men without yoke, or lawless: Therefore the Septuagint commonly Translate it
(Paranomos) altogether irregular. It signifies most flagitious men, and
notorious and desperately wicked, stigmatized Villains, even incarnate Devis;
and yet David holds his peace, though provoked by his mighty men to revenge
himself. Oh! how would this cursing and railing have madded and broken many a
proud man's heart, and yet it stirs not David.

Fulgentius after he was extremely persecuted, he had ^n Plura pro(...) ^ole.
advantage to seek revenge, but he would not, for says (...) We must suffer
more for Christ then so: What though I am thus and thus wronged? What though I
have an opportunity for revenge? yet I must suffer more then so for Christ,
says the humble soul. An humble soul, when wrongs are offered him, is like a
man with a sword in one hand, and salve in another; he could kill, but will
cure.

One wondering at the patience and humble carriage of Socrates, toward one that
reviled him; Socrates said, If we should meet one whose body were more unsound
then ours, should we be angry with him, and not rather pity him? Why then
should we not do the like to him, whose soul is more diseased then ours? An
humble soul, when he meets with this and that wrong from men, he knows that
their souls are diseased, and that rather moves him to pity, then to revenge
wrongs offered. A proud heart swells and grows big, when in the least
wronged, and is ready to call for fire from Heaven, and to take any opportunity
for revenge of wrongs offered. No man so abused as I, no man thus styled as I,
says the proud soul: O but an humble soul in patience possesses himself, in
all trialls and storms.

Gallesius observes, upon Exodus 22. 28. the patience and Willet on Ex. 28. Qu.
51.
humble carriage of those three Emperors, Theodosius, Honorius, and Arcadius,
toward those that spoke evil of them; they would have them subject to no
punishment; for they said, If it come from lightness of spirit, it is to be
contemned; if from madness, it is worthy of pity; if from injury, it is to be
forgiven; for injuries and wrongs are to be pardoned. And this is the true
temper of an humble foul, and by this he enjoyes peace and quiet, in the midst
of all earthquakes and heart-quakes.

The seventh Consideration, is this, Consider, Humility 7 Motive.
exalts.

He that is most humble, is, and shall be most exalted, and most honored. No
way to be high, like this of being low: Moses was the meekest man on Earth, and
God made him the honourablest, calling of him up unto himself into the Mount,
making known his glory to him, and making of him the Leader of his people
Israel. Gideon was very little in his own eyes, he was the least of his
Fathers house in his own apprehension, and God exalts him, making him the
Deliverer of his Israel.

It was a good saying of one, Will thou be great? begin from below. As the
Roots of the Tree descend, so the Branches ascend. The lower any man is in this
sense, the higher shall that man be raised. Mat. 23. 12. And whosoever shall
exalt himself, shall be abased; and he that shall humble himself, shall be
exalted. God that is wisdom it self, has said it, and he will make it good,
though thou see no ways how it should be made good. The lowest valleys have
the blessing of fruitfulness, while the high Mountains are barren. Prove. 18.
12. Before destruction the heart of man is lofty, and before honor is humility.

David came not to the Kingdom, till he could truly say, Lord my heart is not
haughty, nor mine eyes lifted up, Psalm. 131. 1, 2. Abigall was not made David's
wife, till she thought it honor enough to wash the feet of the meanest of
David's servants, 1 Samuel 25. Moses must be forty years a stranger in Midian,
before he become King in Jeshurun: He must be struck sick to death in the Inn,
before he goes to Pharaoh, on that Noble Embassage.

It was a sweet Observation of Luther, That for the most part when God set him
upon any special service for the good of the Church, he was brought low by
some fit of sickness, or other. Surely as the lower the ebb, the higher the
tide: So the lower any descend in Humility, the higher they shall ascend in
honor and glory. The lower this foundation of Humility is laid, the higher
shall the roof of honor be over-laid. If you would turn spiritual
purchasers of honor, or of whatsoever else is good, no way like this of
Humility. We live in times wherein men labor to purchase honor; some by their
money; others by their friends; others by making themselves slaves to the l^sts
of men; others by being prodigal of their blood, and many by giving themselves
up to all manner of baseness and wickedness, whereby their carnal ends may
be attained, and themselves exalted, but these men, and their honor will
quickly be laid in the dust. Oh! but the readiest, the surest, the safest, the
sweetest way to attain to true honor, Qui parvus est in reputatione propria,
magnus est in reputatione divina. Gregory. 8 Motive.
is to be humble, to lie low: Humility makes a man precious in the eye of God.
He that is little in his own account, is great in Gods esteem.

The eighth and last Consideration that I shall propound is this, Consider
humility keeps the soul free from many darts of Satan's casting, and snares of
his spreading.

As you may see in the three Children; in Daniel; and in those Worthies, in the
11 of the Hebrews, of whom this world was not worthy. As the lowest shrubs are
freed from many violent gusts and blasts of wind, which shake and rend the
tallest Cedars: So the humble soul is free from a world of temptations, that
proud and lofty souls are shaken and torn in pieces with. The Devil has
least power to fasten a temptation upon an humble soul. He that has a
gracious measure of Humility, is neither affected with Satan's proffers, nor
terrified with Satan's threatniugs. The golden Chain does not allure him, nor
the iron Chain does not daunt him.

I have read of one, who seeing in a Vision many snares of Satan spread upon
the earth; he sat down, and mourned, Quis pertran siet ista. The answer was,
Humilitas pertransiet.
and said with himself, Who shall pass through these? whereunto he heard a
voice answering, Humility shall pass through them. A proud heart is as easily
conquered, as tempted; vanquished, as assaulted: But the Humble soul, when
tempted, says with that worthy Convert, I am not the man that I was. Ego non
sum ego.
There was a time when my heart was proud, and lifted up, and then thou could
no sooner knock, but I opened; no sooner call, but I answered; no sooner tempt,
but I did assent: Oh! but now the Lord taught me to be humble; I can resist,
though I cannot dispute; I can fight, but not yield.

Mistress Catherine Bretterge (an humble precious soul) being once in a great
Conflict with Satan, said thus to him; Satan, Reason not with me, I am but a
weak woman; if thou have any thing to say, say it to my Christ; he is my
Advocate, my strength, and my Redeemer, and he shall plead for me. An humble
soul is good at turning Satan over to the Lord Jesus, and this increases
Satan's Hell. It is reported of Satan, that he should say thus of a Learned man,
Thou do always overcome me; when I would throw thee down, thou liftest up
Tu me semper vincis.
thy self in assurance of Faith; and when I would exalt and promote thee, thou
keep thy self in humility; and so thou art too hard for me. The only way
to avoid Cannon-shot (as they say) is to fall down flat: No such way to be
freed from temptations, as to keep low.

And so I have done with the first Head; namely, The Motives that should move
and provoke us, to keep humble, to be base, to be nothing in our own eyes.

I shall now come to some Helps, and Directions, that may be useful to keep us
humble and low in our own eyes: And the first is this,

Dwell much upon the greatness of Gods mercy and goodness 1 Direction.
to you.

Nothing humbles and breaks the heart of a sinner like mercy, and love. Souls
that converse much with sin and wrath, may be much terrified; but souls that
converse much It Is said of Adam, that he turned his ^^ce to the Garden of Eden,
and wept sore.
with grace and mercy, will be much humbled. Luke 7. the Lord Jesus shows
mercy to that notorious sinner, and then she falls down at his feet, and loves
much, and weeps much, etc. In the 1 Chronicles. 17. it was in the heart of David to
build God a house: God would not have him do it, yet the Messenger must tell
David, that God would build him a house, and establish his Son upon the Throne
for ever. Look Verse. 10, 11.
into the 15, 16, 17 verses, and there you shall find that David lets fall such
an humble speech, which he never did before that God had sent him that message
of advancement. And 2. Sam. 9. 7, 8.
David the King came, and sat before the Lord, and said, Who am I O Lord God,
and what is mine house? that thou have As Honey flows natural^y from the Be,
so does mercy flow naturally from God.
brought me hitherto: And yet this was a small thing in thine eyes, O God; for
thou have also spoken of thy servants house, for a great while to come, etc.
And this sweetly and kindly melts him, and humbles him, before the Lord. Oh if
ever you would have your souls kept low, dwell upon the free grace and love of
God to you in Christ, Dwell upon the firstnesse of his love, dwell upon the
freeness of his love, the greatness of his love, the fulness of his love,
the unchangeablenesse of his love, the everlastingnesse of his love, and the
activity of his love; if this do not humble thee, there is nothing on earth
will do it. Dwell upon what God has undertaken for you. Dwell upon the choice
and worthy gifts that he has bestowed on you: And dwell upon that glory and
happiness that he has prepared for you; and then be proud if you can.

Secondly, Keep faith in continual exercise, upon Christ as 2 Direction.
crucified, and upon Christ as glorified.

There are two special sights of Christ, that tend much to humble and abase a
soul.

The one is, A sight of Christ in his misery, in the 12 of As one scale goes
up, the other goes down: So as faith goes up, the heart goes down.
Zech. ver. 10.

And the other is, A sight of Christ in his glory, Rev. 1. 7. Isa. 6. 1, 3, 5.
compared. It Is dangerous to be more notion, then motion; to have faith in the
head, and none in the heart; to have an idle, and not an active faith. It Is not
enough for you to have faith, but you must look to the acting of your faith,
upon Christ as crucified, and upon Christ as glorified. Souls much in this,
will be very little and low in their own eyes. The great reason why the soul
is no more humble, is; because faith is no more active.

Thirdly, Study your own natures more, and what ever evil 3 Direction.
you behold in other men's practices, labor to see the same in your own nature.

There is the seed of all sins, of the vilest and worst of sins, in the best
men. When thou see another drunk, thou may Imibria sued Scenola, for that
he received not his weapon deep enough into his body. Aug.
see the seed of that sin in thy own nature. When thou see another unclean,
the seeds of uncleanness thou may see in thy own nature. And in that thou
do not act uncleanness as others, it arises not from the goodness of thy
nature, but from the riches of Gods grace. Remember this, there is not a worse
nature in Hell, then that that is in thee; and it would discover it self
accordingly, if the Lord did not restrain it, it would carry thee to those
horrid acts that are against the very light of nature. I have read of an
Italian Monster, who taking his Enemy upon an advantage, set his dagger to his
heart, and made him to abju^e and blaspheme the Lord, that so he might save his
life: which being done, he thrust him through, and with a bloody triumph,
insulting over him, said, Oh this is right noble and heroical revenge, which
does not only deprive the body of temporal life, but brings also the
immortal soul to endless flames everlastingly. See what natures you carry
with you. It was a good saying of one of the fathers Other Vi^es are in sins
(says he) but pride and high confidence is most apt to creep in upon duties
well done.


There was one that was a long time tempted to three horrid sins; to be drunk;
to lie with his mother; and to murder his father. Being a long time followed
with these horrid temptations, at last he thought to get rid of them, by
yielding to that he judged the least, and that was to be drunk: But when he was
drunk, he did both lie with his mother, and murder his father. Why, such a
Hellish nature is in every soul that breaths; and did God leave men to act
according to their natures, men would be all incarnate Devils, and this world a
perfect Hell. Such is the corruption of our nature, that propound any Divine
good to it, it is entertained as fire by water: But propound any evil, and
it is like fire to straw; it is like the foolish Satyr, that made have to kiss
the fire; it is like that unctious matter, which the Naturalists say, that it
sucks and snatches the fire to it, with which it is consumed. There was a holy
man that rarely heard of other men's crimson sins, but he usually bedewed the
place with his tears, considering that the seeds of those very sins was in his
own nature. In thy nature thou have that that would lead thee with the
Pharisees, to oppose Christ; and with Judas, to betray Christ; and with Pilate,
to condemn Christ; and with the Soldiers, to crucify Christ, etc. Oh what a
monster, what a Devil would thou prove, should God but leave thee to act
suitable to that finfull and woeful nature of thine?

Fourthly, Dwell much upon the imperfection that follows, and cleaves to thy
best actions.

Oh the wanderings! Oh the deadness! the dullness! the fruitlesnesse of thy
spirit in Religious duties! Man is a creature apt to hug himself in
Religious services, and to pride himself in holy duties; and to stroke
himself after duties, and to warm himself by the sparks of his own fire
(his own performances) though he does lie down in sorrow for it, Isa. 50.
ult. When ever thou come off from holy services, sit down, and look over the
spots, blots, and blemishes that cleave to your choycest services. The fairest
day has it clouds; the richest Jewels, their flawes; the finest faces, their
spots; the fairest Copies, their blots; and so have our finest and fairest
duties.

Plutarch tells of a private Soldier of Julius Caesar's, who fought so
val^antly in Britain, that by his means he saved the Captains, which
otherwise were in great danger to be cast away (being driven into a Bogge) then
marching with great Plutarch in the Life of Caesar.
pain through the mire and dirt; in the end he got to the other side, but left
his shield behind him. Caesar wondering at his noble courage, ran to him with
joy, to embrace him: But the poor Soldier, hanging down his head, the water
standing in his eyes, fell down at Caesar's feet, and besought him to pardon
him, for that he had left his Shield behind him. You know how to apply it. He
had done gallantly, yet he falls down at Caesar's feet, after his brave
service, with tears in his eyes, upon the sense of his leaving his shield
behind him. When we have done our best, we have cause to fall down at Jesus
feet, and with tears in our eyes, sue out our pardon.

Fifthly, In the day of thy prosperity, forget not thy former 5 Direction.
poverty.

In the day of thy present greatness, forget not thy former meannesse. Humble
Jacob, in the day of his prosperity, remembers his former poverty; With my
staff I passed over Genesis 32. 10.
Jordan, and now I am become two bands. And so David, in his prosperity
remembered that his sheep-hook was changed Psalm. 78. 71. 1 Chronicles. 17.
into a Scepter, and his seat of Turse, into a Royal Throne. And when Joseph
was a Royal favorite, he remembered that he had been an Imprisoned slave. And
when Gideon was raised to be a Savior to Israel, he remembered how God took him
from the Threshing-floore (Judges 6. 11.) and how God changed his Threshing
instrument of wood, into one of iron, to Thresh the Mountains, as God himself
phraseth it, Isa. 41. 15.

Primistaus, the first King of Bohemia, kept his Country shoes always by
him, to remember from whence he was raised.

Agathocles, by the furniture of his Table, confessed that from a Potter, he was
raised to be King of Sicily.

We live in times wherein many a man has been raised from the dunghill, to sit
with Princes. And O that such were wise to remember their former low and
contemptible beings! and to walk humbly before the Lord: Otherwise who can tell
but that greater contempt shall be poured forth upon them, then that which they
have poured upon Princes.

Sixthly, Look upon all that you have received, and all that 6 Direicton.
you shall hereafter receive, as the fruit of free Grace.

Look upon thy Adoption, and write this Motto, This is the fruit of free Grace.
Look upon thy Justification, and write this Motto, This is the fruit of free
Grace. Look upon all thy Graces, and write, These are the fruits of free Grace.
Look upon thy Experiences, and write, These are the fruits of free Grace. Look
upon thy strength to withstand Temptations, and write, This is the fruit of
free Grace. Look upon Divine power to conquer Corruptions, and write, This is
the fruit of free Grace. Look upon the Bread thou eatest, the Beer thou
drinkest, the Clothes thou wearest, etc. and write, These are all the fruits of
free Grace. 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who makes thee to differ from another? and what have
thou that thou have not received? And if thou have received it, why do thou
glory as though thou had not received it? Who makes thee to differ?
Episcopius, a great Insolent Arminian, answered, Ego me ipsum, disce^ne.
I make my self to differ, to wit, by the improvement of Nature.

This Age is full of such proud Monsters: But an humble soul sees free grace
to be the Spring and Fountain of all his mercies and comforts; he writes free
Grace upon all his temporalls, and upon all his spiritualls, etc.

The Seventh Direction, is, Meditate much upon these two 7 Direction.
things.

First, The great mischief that sin has done in the World.

It cast Angels out of Heaven; and Adam out of Paradise; it has layen the
first cornerstone in Hell, and ushered in all the evils and miseries that be
in the world. It has threw down Abraham, the best Believer in the world; and
Noah, the most Righteous man in the world; and Job, the Uprightest man in the
world; and Moses, the Meekest man in the world; and Paul, the greatest Apostle
in the world. Oh the Diseases, the crosses, the losses, the miseries, the
deaths, the hells, that sin has brought upon the world!

Bazill wept when he saw the Rose, because it brought to to his mind the first
sin from whence it had the prickles, which it had not while man continued in
Innocence, as he thought. Oh when he saw the prickles, his soul wept: So when
we see, hear, or read, of the blood, misery, wars, and ruins that sin has
brought upon us, ler us weep, and lie humble before the Lord.

Secondly, Mediate much on this, That many wicked men Mat. 23. 15.
take more pains to damn their souls, and go to Hell, then thou do to
save thy soul, and to get to Heaven.

Oh what pains do wicked men take, to damn their souls, and go to Hell.
Lanctantius says of Lucian, that he spared Such a mad Devil was Catalin.
neither God, nor man. He took pains to make himself twice told a Child of
wrath.

It is said of Marcellus, the Roman General, That he could not be quiet (Nec
victor, nec victus) neither Conquered, nor Conqueror. Such restless wretches
are wicked men. The Drunkard rises up in the morning, and continues till Isa.
5. 11.
midnight, till wine inflame him. The unclean person wastes his time, and
strength, and estate, and all to ruin his own soul.

Theotimus being told by his Physician, that if he did not leave his lewd
courses, he would loose his sight; answered, (Vale lumen amicum) Then farewell
sweet light. What a deal of pains does the Worldling take? He rises up early,
and goes to Bed late, and leaves no stone unturned, and all to make himself
but the more miserable in the close.

Pambus, in the Ecclesiastical History, wept when he saw a Harlot dressed with
much care and cost: partly to see one Socrates Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c. 28.
take so much pains to go to Hell; and partly because he had not been so
careful to please God, as she had been to please a wanton lover. Oh Sirs!
what reason have you to spend your days in weeping? when you look abroad and
see what pains most men take to damn their souls, and go to Hell; and then
consider what little pains you take to escape Hell, to save your souls, and
go to Heaven.

Eighthly, Get more internal and experimental knowledge 8 Direction.
and acquaintance with God.

If ever you would keep humble, no knowledge humbles and abases, like that
which is inward and experimental. We live in days wherein there is abundance
of notionall light; many Professors know much of God notionally, but know
nothing of God experimentally: They know God in the History, but know nothing
of God in the Mystery. They know It Is a sad thing to be often eating of the
Tree of Knowledge, but never to taste of the Tree of Life.
much of God in the letter, but little or nothing of God in the spirit; and
therefore it is that they are so proud and high in their own conceits, when as
he that experimentally knows the Lord, is a Worm, and no man in his own
eyes. As the Sun is necessary to the world, the eye to the body, the Pilate to
the Ship, the General to the Army: So is experimental knowledge to the
humbling of the soul. Who more experimental in their knowledge, then David,
Job, Isaiah, and Paul? And who more humble then these Worthies?

Seneca observed of the Philosophers, That when they grew more learned, they
were less moral: So a growth in notions will bring a great decay in humility
and zeal, as it is too evident in these days. Well, remember this, a drop of
experimental knowledge will more humble a man, then a sea of notionall
knowledge.

Ninthly, Look up to a crucified Christ for special power 9 Direction.
and strength, against the pride of your hearts. It Is sad in these knowing
times to think how few there are that know the right way of bringing under the
power of any sin. Most men scarce look so high as a crucified Christ, for power
against their powerful sins. One soul sits down and complains, Such a Psalm.
10. 4. It was the the blood of the Sacrifice, and the Oil, that cleansed the
Leper in the Law, and that by them was meant the blood of Christ, and the grace
of his Spirit, is agreed by all.
lust haunts me, I Will pray it down. Another says, such a sin follows me, and
I Will hear it down, or watch it down, or resolve it down; and so a crucified
Christ is not in all their thoughts. Not but that you are to hear, pray, watch,
and resolve against your sins; but above all, you should look to the acting of
Faith upon a crucified Christ. As he said of the sword of Goliath, None like to
that: So I say, none like to this, for the bringing under the pride of men's
hearts. The weaker the House of Saul grew, the stronger the House of David
grew. The weakening of your pride, will be the increase and strengthening of
your Humility; and therefore what the King of Syria said unto his fifty
Captains, Fight neither with small, nor great, but with the King of Israel: So
say I, if you woulk keep humble, if you would lie low, draw forth your
Artillery, place your greatest strength against the pride of your souls. (The
death of Pride, will be the resurrection of Humility.) And that this may stick
upon you, I shall lay down several Propositions concerning Pride; and I am so
much the more willing to fall upon this work, and to make it the subject of our
discourse at this time, because this horrid sin does appear so boldly, and
impudently; and that not only among profane persons, but Professors also.
There are ten Propositions that I shall lay down concerning Pride.

And the first is this.

Of all sins, Pride is most dangerous to the souls of Men. Pride is a sin
that will put the soul upon the worst of sins. Pride is a gilded misery, a
secret poison, a hidden plague. It Is the Ingeneere of deceit, the Mother of
hypocrisy, the Parent of envy, the Moth of holiness, the blinder of hearts,
the turner of Medicines into Malladies, and A world of instances out of
Histories might be given, if it were needful, further to evidence this truth.
Remedies into diseases. It Is the Original and root of most of those notorious
Vices that be to be found among the Children of men. It was pride that put
Herod upon seeking the blood of Christ. 'Twas Pride that put the Pharisees upon
the persecuting of Christ. 'Twas Pride that made Athaliah destroy all the seed
Royal of the house of Judah, that he might reign, 2 Chronicles. 21. 10. 'Twas
Pride that put Joab upon murdering perfidiously, under color of friendship,
Abner, 2 Samuel 3. 27. and Amasa, 2 Samuel 10. 9, 10. Zimri out of Ambition to
Reign, murdered Elah his Lord, 1 Kings 16. 8, 9, 10. Omri out of Pride and
Ambition to Reign, rose up against Zimri, and enforced him to burn himself
in the Kings Palace, 1 Kings 16. 18. It Is Pride that has ushered in all the
contentions that be in Towns, Cities, Countries, Families, and Pulpits,
throughout the world. It was Pride, and Ambition to Reign, that put Absalom
upon pursuing his Fathers life, from whom he had received life.

It is very remarkable, that the Pride and Ambition of Nebuchadnezzar, did
usher in the destruction of the Assyrian Monarchy. And the ambition and pride
of Cyrus, that did usher in the overthrow of the Babylonian Monarchy. And the
ambition and pride of Allexander, was the cause of the annihillation of the
Persian Monarchy. And it was the pride and ambition of the Roman Commanders,
was the cause of the utter subversion of the Grecian Monarchy. There is no
tongue that can express, nor heart that can conceive the horrid sins and
miseries that pride has ushered in among the Children of men. All sin will
down with a proud heart, that is resolved to rise. Great sins are no sins with
such a soul; he makes nothing of those very sins that would make the very
Heathen to blush.

The second Proposition that I shall lay down concerning Pride, is this;

Where Pride has possessed it self thoroughly of the soul, it turns the heart
into steel, yea, into a rock. As you may see in Pharaoh, pride turned his
heart into Proud souls are of his mind that said (Non persuadebts, etiam si
persuaseris) Though you do convince me, yet will I not be convinced.
steel, yea, into a very rock. God strikes again and again, he sends plague
upon plague; and yet the more he is plagued, the more he is hardened. His pride
turned his soul into a Rock; he is no more sensible of the frowns of God, the
threatenings of God, the plagues, the strokes of God, then a Rock: Pride had
heardened his heart, he stirs not, he yields not.

It was the pride of Saul that turned his heart into steel. I have sinned
(says he) yet honor me before the people. God gave him many a blow, many a
knock, and many a check, and yet after all, Honor me before the people. Oh how
desperately 1 Samuel 15. 30.
was his heart hardened in Pride! In Dan. 5. 10. Nebuchadnezzers mind (says
the Text) was hardened in pride: He saw the vengeance of the Almighty upon his
Predecessors, and God took him up and lasht him till the blood came, and yet he
made nothing of it, because his heart was hardened in Pride. Pride sets a man
in opposition against God. Other sins are aversions from God, but this sin is a
coming against God. In other sins a man flies from God, but in this sin a man
flies upon God. James 4. 6. God resists the proud. A man does not resist
another, till he is set upon; the Traveller does not resist, until such time
as the Thief sets upon him. Says the Text, God resists the proud: It
intimates thus much to us, That the proud heart sets upon God himself, and
therefore God resists him. The Greek word is, Antitasetai, he places himself
in Battle array against the proud: God brings forth his Battalia against the
proud, and they bring forth their Battalia against God. A proud heart resists,
and is resisted, this is (duro durum) flint to flint, fire to fire, yet in the
day of Gods wrath, the proud shall be burnt up as stubble, both branch and
root, Mal. 4. 1.

The third Proposition concerning Pride, is this,

Pride is a sin that shales forth, and shows it self, not one way, but many
ways. For instance: First, Sometimes it shows it self in the looks. Prove.
6. 17. he tells you of seven things that the Lord hates, and one Profuto oculis
animus inhabitat. Plin.
is, A proud look. The Hebrew word there, is, The haughty eye. The haughty eye
God hates. Men's hearts usually show themselves in their eyes. Psalm. 131. 1.
Mine heart is not haughty, nor mine eye lofty. There be such who show pride in
their very looks, but the Lord looks aloof at them, Psalm 138. 6.

Secondly, Sometimes Pride shows it self in words. Dan. 4. 30. Is not this
great Babylon that I have built, for the house of the Kingdom, by the might of
my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? And in Chap. 3. 15. Who is that God
that shall deliver you out of my hands? It was a very proud saying of one
(Coelum gratis non accipiam) I will not have Heaven, but at a rate. And of
another, We have not so lived, and deserved of God, that the Enemy should
vanquish us. These were the proud ones, that spoke loftily, and that set their
mouths against the Heavens, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 73. 6, 8, 9. comp.
And such a one was Henry the Second, hearing that his City Mentz was taken, he
used this proud blasphemous speech, I shall never love God any more, that
suffered a City so dear to me, to be taken away from me. Such a proud wretch,
both in words and actions, was Senacherib, as you may see in Isa. 27. from the
8 verse, to the 18.

Thirdly, Sometimes Pride shows it self in the habit of the body. So Herod's
pride appeared, Acts 12. 21. Herod was arrayed in Royal Apparel; In cloth
of silver (says Josephus) which being beaten upon by the Sunbeams, dazzled
the peoples eyes, and drew from them that blasphemous Acclamation, It is the
voice of God, and not of man. (The people being most commonly like the Bohemian
Curres, that used to fawn upon a good Suit.) So the Rich man, Luke 16. 19. was
clothed in Purple ((...)) and in Silk. He was commonly so clothed, it was
his every-dayes wear, as the (...).
Greek word implies.

But here a Question may be asked, May not persons habit themselves according
to their dignities, ranks, and places, that God has put them in, in the world.

I answer, They may and ought so to do, if God has lifted Genesis 41. 42. Esth.
6. 8. Psalm. 45. 13, 14. 2 Samuel 13. 18. Lam. 4. 5. Mat. 11. 8. Genesis 27. 15. Isa.
52. 1. Hos. 2. 13. Exodus 28. 40. I cite these Scriptures so much the rather,
because some through weakness and peevishness stumble, and are not satisfied
herein. There is nothing in the Law of God or nature against it.

But you may say, May not persous sin in their Apparel?

I answer, Yes, and that in four Cases.

1 When it is not Modest, but carries with it provocation to lust and
wantonness. Prove. 7. 10. There met the young man A woman in the Attire of an
Harlot. The Hebrew word signifies a Habit or Ornament finely set and fitted to
the body. And says the Text, She was subtle of heart, or trust up about the
Breasts, with her upper parts naked, so Levi-Ben-Gersom reads the words, She
met him with her naked Breasts: At this day too commonly used, by such as would
not be held Harlots. Oh what a horrid shame and reproach is it to Re^igion, the
ways of God, and the people of God, that Professors should go so. One says,
That superfluous Apparel is worse then whoredoome, because whoredom only
corrupts chastity, but this corrupts Nature. Another says, If women adorn
themselves so as to provoke men to lust after them, though no ill follow upon
it, yet those women shall suffer eternal damnation, because they offered
poison to others, though none would drink of it.

2 Persons sin in their Apparel, when as they exceed their degree and rank, in
costly Apparel, which is that which is condemned by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. 9.
1 Pet. 3. 3. The Apostle does not simply condemn the wearing of gold, but he
condemns it in those that go above their degree, and rank. The words are
rather an Admonition, then a Prohibition.

3 It Is sinful, when it is so expensive as that it hinders works of Mercy and
Charity. Oh how many Proud souls be there in these days that lay so much upon
their backs, that they can spare nothing to fill the Poores bellies. Silk does
quench the fire of the Kitchen, says the French Proverb: The meaning is, that
it does hinder works of Charity and Mercy. Surely those that put on such costly
Ornaments upon their backs, as close up the hand of Charity, will at last share
with Dives in his misery.

4 When persons habit themselves in strange and foreign fashions, which is
the sin, shame, and reproach of many among us in these days. Now that is
strange Apparel which is not peculiar to the Nations where men live. The Lord
threatens to punish such, Zeph. 1. 8. that are clothed with strange Apparel.
There are too many women and men in our days, that are like the Egyptian
Temples, very Gypsies, painted without, and spotted within; Varnish without,
and Vermin within.

Mercury being to make a Garment for the Moon (as one says) could never fit
her, but either the Garment would be too big, or too little, by reason she
was always increasing or decreasing. May not this be applied: to the vain
curiosity of too too many Professors in these days, whose curiosity about
their clothes can never be satisfied.

I shall conclude this Head with this Council, Cloth your selves with the
Silk of Piety, with the Satin of Sanctity; and with the Purple of Modesty,
and God himself will be a Suitor to you. Let not the Ornaments upon your
backs, speak out the vanity of your hearts.

Fourthly, Sometimes Pride shows it self by the gesture and carriage of the
body. In Isa. 3. 16. the Daughters of Sion were haughty, and walked with
stretched out necks, and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, making a
tinkling with their feet. Oh Earth! Earth! do thou not groan to bear such
Monsters as these?

Fifthly, And sometimes Pride shows it self in contemptuous challenges of
God; as Pharaoh, Who is the God of the Hebrews, that I should obey him?

Sixthly, Sometimes Pride shows it self by bragging promises. I will arise, I
will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide Exodus 14.
the spoil, and my lusts shall be satisfied.

The fourth Proposition that I shall lay down, is this.

Pride is a sin that of all sins makes a man or woman, most like to Satan.
Pride is (Morbus Satanicus) Satan's Disease: Pride is so base a disease, that
God had rather see his dearest Children to be buffeted by Satan, then that in
Pride they should be like to Satan. 2 Cor. 12. 7. When Paul under the abundance
of Revelations, was in danger of being pufft up, the Lord rather then he would
have him proud, like to Satan, suffers him to be buffeted by Satan. Humility
makes a Man like to Angels, and Pride makes an Angel a Devil. Pride is worse
then the Devil, for the Devil cannot hurt thee, till Pride has possessed thee.
If you would see the Devil Limned to the life, look upon a proud soul; for as
face answers to face, so does a proud soul answer to Satan. Proud souls are
Satan's Apes, and none imitate him to the life like these: And oh that they were
sensible of it, before it be too late, before the door of darkness be shut
upon them.

A fifth Proposition is this,

Pride cannot climb so high, but Justice will sit above her. One asked a
Philosopher, what God was a doing? he answered, That his whole work was to
exalt the humble, and pull down the proud. It was Pride that turned Angels
into Devils, they would be above others in Heaven, and therefore God cast them
down to Hell. Pride (says Hugo) was borne in Heaven, but forgetting by what
way she fell from thence, she could never find the way thither again. The
first man would know as God, and the Babel builders would dwell as God, but
Justice set above them all. This truth you see verified in the Justice of God
upon Pharaoh, Haman, Herod, Beltshazzar, and Nebuchadnezzer; all these would be
very high, but Justice takes the right hand of them all, and brings them down
to the dust. Yea Pride cannot climb so high in the hearts of the Saints, but
Divine Justice will be above it. Vzziah his heart was lifted up, 2 Chronicles. 26.
27. but Justice smites him with a Leprosy, and so he died, out of grief and
sorrow, says Josephus. David glories in his own greatness, 2 Chronicles. 29. 32.
and for this seventy-thousand fall by the hand of Justice. Hezekiah's heart was
lifted up, but wrath was upon him, and upon all Judah and Jerusalem for it, 2 Chronicles. 29. 32, 33. Pride sets it self against the Honor, Being, and
Sovereignty of God, therefore Justice will in spite of all, sit above her.
Other sins strike at the word of God, the people of God, and the Creatures of
God, but Pride strikes directly at the very Being of God, and therefore Justice
will be above her.

Nebuchadnezzer was Proud, and God smites his reason, and turns him into a
Beast. Oh how many young Professors Staupecius was proud of his memory, and
Justice smote it.
are there in our days, who have been proud of their notions, and proud of
their parts and gifts, and Justice has so smitten them, that they have lost
that life, that sweetness, that spiritualnesse, that quickness, that once
they had; and are dried and shrivel'd up by a hand of Justice. They are like
the Apples of Sodom, glorious without, but rotten and worthless within. Some
there are that have been very shining, yet by reason of Pride have fallen from
a seeming excellency, to be naught, and from naught, to be very naught, and
from very naught, to be stark naught. Isa. 23. 9. The Lord of Hosts has
purposed it, to stain the pride of all glory, and to bring into contempt (or
to make light) all the honorable of the earth. The Hebrew word that is here
rendered Purposed, signifies to consult, or take council: It is consulted, and
agreed (...) Deliberately to consult and agree upon a thing.
upon in Council, that he will stain the pride of all glory, and bring into
contempt the Honorable of the Earth: And the council of the Lord shall stand,
Psalm. 33. 11. In Isa. 2. 11, 12. The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and
the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be
exalted in that day. For the day of the Lord of Hosts shall be upon every one
that is proud, and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be
brought low.

Divine Justice will take the right hand of all proud ones on the Earth. God
bears (as I may say) a special spleen against Pride. His heart hates it, Prove.
6. 16, 17. His mouth curses it, Psalm. 119. 21. And his hand plagueth it, as you
have seen in the former instances, and as you may see further in these
following Instances.

The King of Egypt, that Jeremiah Prophesied against, in his 44th Chapter, was
so pufft up with Pride, that he boasted his Kingdom was so surely settled,
that it could not be taken from him either by God, or man; not long after he
was taken in Battle by Amasis, one of his own Subjects, and hanged up.

Dyonisius the Tyrant, said in the Pride of his heart, That his Kingdom was
bound to him with Chains of Adamant; but time soon confuted him, for he was
driven out, and forced to teach a School at Corinth, for a poor living.

Cares, a Soldier, being proud of his valor, because he had given Cyrus a
great wound, shortly after he ran mad. In all Ages there are notable instances
to prove that pride has not got so high, but Justice has set above her.

The sixth Proposition, is this.

Of all sins spiritual Pride is most dangerous, and must be most resisted.
Spiritual Pride is the lifting up of the mind against God, it is a tumor and
swelling in the mind, and lies in contemning and slighting of God, his Word,
Promises, and Ordinances, and in the lifting up of a man's self, by reason of
birth, breeding, wealth, honor, place, relation, gifts, or graces, and in
despising of others. Of this spiritual Pride Habakkuk speaks, Chap. 2. 4. His
heart that is lifted up in him, is not upright. Prove. 16. 5. Every one that is
proud in heart, is an Abomination to the Lord, or that lifts up his heart
against God or his Decrees: as Lewis the Eleventh did, in that proud speech of
his, If I shall be saved, I shall be saved; and if I Si salvab^r. Si vero
damnabor, damnabor.
shall be damned, I shall be damned; and there is all the care that I shall
take. Like to this, was that proud and wretched speech of one Ruffus, who
painted God on the one side of his Shield, and the Devil on the other, with
this mad Motto, If thou will not have me, here is one will. Spiritual Pride is
a white Devil, as one calls it, a gilded Poison, by which God is robbed of his
honor, a man's own soul of his comfort and peace, and others of that benefit
and fruit which otherwise they might receive from us. Satan is subtle, he will
make a man proud of his very graces: He will make him Proud, that he is not
Proud. Pride grows with the decrease of other sins, aed thrives by their
decay: Other sins are nourished by poisonous roots, as Adultery is nourished by
Idleness; and Gluttony and Murder, by malice and envy: But this white Devil,
Spiritual Pride, springs from good duties, and good actions, toward God and
man. Spiritual Pride is a very great Enemy to the good, and salvation of men.
Pride is like a very great swelling, which unfits men for any service.

Again, Spiritual Pride is a very great Enemy to the good and salvation of
men. The Greek word signifies Swells, for Pride is like a great swelling in
the body, which unfits it for any good service. John 5. 40. You will not come
to me, that you may have life. And, verse. 44. How can ye believe in me, which
seek honor one of another? Christ blesses his father, Mat. 11. that he had
hid those things from the wise and prudent, and had revealed them unto Babes
and Sucklings. It Is the Pride of men's hearts, that makes them throw off
Ordinances, as poor and low things; when alas in their practices they live
below the power, beauty, glory, and holiness, of the least and lowest
Ordinance. There Is more holiness, purity, and glory, manifested in the lowest
Administrations of Christ, then is held forth by them; in their highest
practices.

The seventh Proposition is this,

Pride un-mans a man, it makes him do acts that are below a man. As you may
see in Pharaoh, Haman, Herod, Nebuchadnezzar, etc. It makes men Bedlams, to say
they know not what, and to do they care not what. It was Pride that made
Hildebrand to cause Henry the Fourth to stand 3 days at his Gate, with his
Wife, and his Child, barefooted. It was Pride that made Adoni-bezek cause
threescore and ten Kings (with Judges 1. 5. 6, 7.
their Thumbs and great Toes cut off) to gather their meat under his Table. Oh
what wretched un-manly acts, has the Pride of many persons put them upon!

The eighth Proposition is this,

The Poorest are oftentimes the Proudest. Pretty is the Parable of Jotham, The
best Trees refused to be King, but the Bramble affected it; and did (sperare
and aspirare) hope and aspire it, Judges 9. 15. So in 2 Kings 14. 9. The
Thistle that was in Lebanon, sent to the Cedar that was in Lebanon, saying,
Give thy Daughter to my Son to Wife. Hagar the Kitchin-maid will be proud, and
insult Genesis 21. Mat. 20. 20, 21. Job 30. 1.
over her Mistress Sarah. The poor Sons of Zebedee would sit at Christ's right
hand, and left. And those that Job disdaines to sit with the Dogs of his
flock, yet contemn him in the day of his sorrow. The foot strives to be
equal with the head, the Servant, as the Master; the Cobbler, as the
Councellor; and the Peasant, as the Prince, etc.

The ninth Proposition is this,

Pride is a sure forerunner of a fall. Pride goes before destruction, and a
haughty mind, before a fall. Herod fell from a Throne of Gold, to a Bed of
dust. Prove. 16. 18. Chap. 18. 12.
Nebuchadnezzar fell from the state of a mighty King, to be a Beast. Adam fell
from Innocence, to Mortality. The Angels fell from Heaven, to Hell; from
felicity, to misery.

The tenth and last Proposition, is this,

God will by an invisible power, carry the day against proud souls. You that
it escape, and ruffle it out, and carry it with a high hand, remember this, God
will by an invisible power, carry the day against you, when you think not of
it, he will Pope Innocent the fourth, as he was walking securely in his Palace
heard that sorrowful and dreadful Summons (Veni miser in judicium) come thou
wretch; receive thy judgment, and soon after he was found dead. Eccl. 8. 11.
eat you out like a Moth. Isa. 47. 10, 11. For thou have trusted in thy
wickedness, thou have said, None sees me. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge it
has perverted thee: And thou have said in thine heart, I am, and none else
besides me. Therefore shall evil come upon thee, thou shall not know from
whence it rises, and mischief shall fall upon thee, thou shall not be able to
put it off. And desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou shall not
know. Impunity oftentimes causes impudency, but (Quod defertyr non aufertur)
Forbearance is no Acquittance: The longer the hand is lifted up, the heas vier
will be the blow at last. Of all Metals, Lead is the coldest, but being
melted, it becomes the hottest. Humble souleknow how to apply this, and Proud
souls shall sooner or later experience this.

I shall now proceed to a second Observation; namely,

That all Saints are not of an equal cize and growth Some are higher, and some
are lower; some are stronger, and some are weaker, in spiritual Graces, and
Heavenly Excellencies. Unto me who am less then the least, etc.

Among true Believers, some may be found to be but weak Believers. This Point
flows as natural from the words, as the stream does from the fountain; and
no Point more clear in all the Scripture, then this.

In Romans 14. 1. you read of some that are weak in the faith, Them that are
weak in the faith receive, says the Apostle. None are to be rejected in whom
(Aliquid Christi) any thing of Christ is to be found. And so, Mat. 14. 31.
there is mention made of little faith. 1 Cor. 9. 22. To the weak became I as
weak, that I might gain the weak. You read of Babes in Grace, 1 Pet. 2. 2,
3. As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that you may grow
thereby, if so be that ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. 1 John 2. 12,
13, 14. there is mention made of little children, of young men; and of Fathers.
All are not Fathers in grace, nor all are not young men in grace; there are
some Children in grace. It is with Christians as it is with Planets. The Moon
goes her course in a month; the Sun in a year, the rest not in many years yet
at length they finish.
A Christian in this life has his degrees of growth; he is first a Child in
Grace, and then a young Man in Grace, and then a Father in Grace.

For the further opening of this Point, I shall endeavor these four things.

1 I shall endeavor to decipher to you, souls weak in Grace. 2 I shall
endeavor to lay down those things that may Encourage, Support, and Comfort
souls that are weak in Grace. 3 I shall speak to the Duties that lie upon
those that are weak in Grace. 4 The Duties that lie upon those that are strong
in grace, toward those that are weak in grace.
Of these four we shall speak, as the Lord shall assist.

I shall begin with the first, To decipher souls weak in Grace.

The first thing by which I shall decipher souls weak in Grace, is this.

Weak Christians are usually carried much out after the poor low things of
this world. They are much in carking and caring for them, and in pursuing and
hunting greedily after them. That Is a clear Text for this, Mat. 6. 24. to the
end. Christ labors by several weighty Arguments to fence and fortify his
Disciples against those dissident, doubtful, carking cares, that divide,
distract, distemper, torture, and tear the heart in a thousand pieces. And yet
neither these Arguments, nor yet the presence of him who was the great
Landlord of Heaven and Earth (and whose love and bowels were still yearning
toward them, and whose special eye of providence was still over them) could
rid their heads and hearts of these worldly cares (that do but vex and perplex
the souls of men.) And it is very observable, that after this smart Lecture
that Christ had read them, they did strive three several times, who should be
greatest and highest in worldly Enjoyments. Their hearts should have been only
in Heaven, and yet they strive for Earth, as if there were no Heaven, or as if
Earth were better then Heaven. All which does clearly evidence, that their
Graces were very weak, and their corruptions very strong. Men that have little
of the upper springs within, are carried out much after the springs below.
Baruch was good, but weak in Grace, he had but some sips and tastes of the glory
of that other world, and Jerem. 45. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
that made him (when God was a pulling down all worldly glory) to seek for
Earth, as if there were no Heaven. Certainly there is but little of Christ and
Grace within, where the heart is so strongly carried ont after these things
without. Where there is such strong love, and workings of heart after these
poor things, it speaks out souls enjoyment of God, to be but poor and low.

In the Old Testament, the Jews being Babes and Infants in grace and
holiness, had a world of Temporal Promises, and very few Spiritual Promises:
But now in the days of the Gospel, the Lord is pleased to double and trebble
his spirit upon his people, and now you meet with very few temporal Promises
in the Gospel, but the Gospel is filled with spiritual Promises; the Gospel
drops nothing but marrow and fatness, love and sweetness; and therefore God
looks in these days that men should grow up to a greater height of holiness,
heavenlinesse, and spiritualnesse, then what they attained to in those dark
days, wherein the Sun shined but dimly. Men rich and strong in Grace, look
upon the world with a holy scorn, and disdain, as Themistocles, when he saw
in the dark a thing like a Pearl, he scorned to stoop for it himself, saying
to another, Stoop thee, for thou art not Themistocles. Abraham, a man strong in
Grace, looked with a holy scorn, and with an eye of disdain upon these poor
things. When Melchisedech from God had made him Heir of all things, he refused
the Riches that the King of Sodom offered Genesis 14. 21. Chap. 15. 1.
him, because God was his Shield, and his exceeding great Reward. The greatest
bargain that a soul rich in Grace will make with God for himself, is this,
Give me but bread to eat, and clothes to wear, and thou shall be my God; so it
was with that brave soul, Genesis 28. 21. he desires but Food and Raiment. Mark,
he asks food, not junkets; Raiment, not Ornaments. A little will serve a man
that is strong in grace; much will not serve a man that is weak in grace;
nothing will serve a man that is void of grace. Souls weak in grace, have
their hearts much working after these poor low things, as you may see, Mat.
18. 1. Who shall be greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven? The Question is stated
by the Disciples, that one would have thought should have had their hearts and
thoughts in Heaven; but they dreamed of an earthly Kingdom, where honors and
Offices should be distributed, as in the days of David, and Solomon. And it is
observeable in Mark 9. 33, 34. they are at it again, And he came to Capernaum,
and being in the house, he asked them, What was it that ye disputed among your
selves by the way? But they So in Luke 9. 46.
held their peace, (they were ashamed to tell him) for by the way they had
disputed among themselves, who should be greatest. Says one, I Will have this,
and says another, I Will have that, etc. Or as it is in the Greek, they disputed
who was greatest; says one, I am greater then thou; no, says another, I am
greatest. It is an (...) It Is me^^^n. Who was greatest.
Argument of a Childish disposition, to be taken more with Rattles and Baubles,
then with Jewels and Pearls. That Christian has little of the power of grace
within him, whose heart is so strongly carried out to these vanities below. Men
that are grown up to years of understandiug, prefer one piece of gold above a
thousand new Counters, A soul that is strong in grace, that is high in its
spiritual enjoyments, prefers one good word from God, one good look from
Christ, above all the glory of this world. Lord (says he) lift thou up the The
Philosophers preser^ed the Kings countenance before his Coin.
light of thy countenance upon me. Warm my heart with the beams of thy love,
and then a little of these things will suffice. You see Moses, and all those
Worthies in the 11 of the Hebrews, (who were men strong in grace) how bravely
they trample upon all things below God, they lav'd their Families, and their
Countries (where they lived like Princes) to wander in a Wilderness, upon the
bare Command of God. So Luther (a man strong in grace) when he had a Gown, and
Money given him, by the Elector, he turned himself about, and said, I protest
God shall not put me off with these poor low things. Souls that know (by
experience) what the bosom of Christ is, what spiritual Communion is, what
the glory of Heaven is, will not be put off, by God nor man, with things that
are mixed, mutable, and momentary. And to shame many professors in these days,
I might bring in a Cloud of Witnesses, even from among the very Heathen, who
never heard of a Crucified Christ, and yet were more Crucified to things below
Christ, then many of them that pretend much to Christ: But I shall forbear,
only desiring, that those that think and speak so scornfully and
contemptuously of Heathens, may not at last be found worse then Heathens; yea,
be judged and condemned by Heathens, in the great and terrible day of the Lord.

Secondly, In order to a further deciphering of weak Christians, I shall lay
down this.

That weak Saints do usually over-feare troubles before they come: Yea, those
future evils, that forty to one may never fall out. The very empty thoughts,
and conceit of trouble, is very terrible and perplexing to a weak Saint. When
it was told The Chamelion (says Pliny) is the most searfull of all Creatures,
and does therefore turn into all colou^s to save it self, and so it is often
with weak Christians.
the house of David, saying, Syria is confederate with Ephraim, his heart was
moved, and the heart of his people, as the Trees of the wood are moved with the
wind, Isa. 7. 2. Their heart quaked and quivered (as we say) like an Aspen
leaf. It is an Elegant expression, showing (in their extremity) the baseness
of their fears, arguing no courage or spirit at all in them. The very news
and conceit of trouble or calamities, oh how does it perplex and vex, and
grieve, and overwhelme weak Christians! The very hearing of trouble at a
distance, makes them to stagger, and reele, and ready to say, Will God now
save? Will he now deliver? It puts them into those shaking fits, that they know
not what to do with themselves, nor how to perform the service they owe to
God, or man. Now tell me, can you call that a stout spirit, a strong spirit,
Pray for me (said Latimer in his Letter to Ridley) for I am sometimes so
fearful, tha^ I would creep into a Mousehole. Acts and Mon. 1565
that is daunted with the very report, and thoughts of Calamity? Or that does
torment men with immoderate fear of a thousand things that happily shall never
fall out; as fears of foreign Invasions, or fears of homebred Confusions;
fears of change of Religion, or being surprised with such or such Diseases; or
being ruined in their outward estate, by such and such devises, or
disadvantages; or by falling under the frowns of such a great man; or under
the anger and revenge of such and such a man; and a thousand such like things.
Now this speaks out much weakness in grace: Souls strong in grace are carried
up above these fears; yea, with the Leviathan (in Job) they can laugh at the
shaking of the spear; Job 41. 29. Psalm. 23. 4.
they can say with David, Though we walk through the valley of the shadow of
death, we will fear no evil; for thou art with us, thy rod and thy staff do
comfort us. But weak souls are Bucephalus was not afraid of his burden, the
shadow only frighted him. So weak Christians are afraid of the shadow of the
cross.
afraid of their own shadow; the very shadow of trouble, will exceedingly
trouble such souls, and oftentimes make their lives a very hell.

Thirdly,

Fainting in the day of Adversity, speaks out the soul to be but weak in
Grace. Weak Christians are overcome with little crosses; the least cross does
not only startle them, but it sinks them, and makes them ready to sit down,
and to cry out with the Church, Behold you that pass by, see whether there be
any sorrow like my sorrow. Before trouble comes, weak Christians Lam. 1. 12.
are apt to think that they can bear much, and endure much; but alas when the
day of Trial comes upon them, when they are put to it, they prove but men of
poor and impotent spirits; and then they roar, and complain, and lie down in
the dust, suffering crosses and losses to bind them hand and foot, and to
spoil them of all their Comforts: And now though they have many comforts for
one cross; yet one cross does so damp and daunt their hearts, that joy and
comfort flies away from them, and they sit down overwhelmed. Certainly this
speaks out little of Christ within. All Rachels comforts, were no comforts,
because her Children were not. This speaks out much weakness within.

Prove. 24. 10. If thou faintest in the day of adversity, thy strength is small.
If thou shrinkest, if thou abatest and slackest in the day of adversity, thy
strength is small. Man has no trial of his strength, till he be in trouble;
faintness then discovers weakness. Afflictions try what sapp we have, as hard
weather tryes what health we have. A weak Christian sinks under a little
burden; every frown, every sour word, every puff of wind blows him down,
and makes him sink under his burden: But now a soul strong in grace, bears up
bravely against all winds and weather. That Is a brave Text (and worthy to be
written in letters of gold) that you have in Genesis 49. 23, 24. Joseph's Bow
abode in strength, though the Archers sorely grieved him, shot at him, and
hated him. And the arms of his hands were made strong, by the mighty God of
Jacob. The Archers that sorely grieved him, were his Barbarous Brethren that
sold him; his Adulterous Mistress, that Harlot-like hunted for his precious
life; his injurious Master, that without any desert of his, imprisoned him; the
tumultuating Egyptians, that were pined with hunger, perhaps spoke of stoning
him; and the envious Courtiers, and Inchanters, spoke evilly of him before
Pharaoh, to bring him out of favor. All these shot sorely at him. The word
that is rendered Archers, in the Hebrew is Arrow-masters, which term implies
(...)
cunning and skilfulnesse in shooting. They were cunning and skillful to hit
the mark, and they shot at him, as at a mark. But yet his Bow abode in
strength. When God in the midst of weakness makes a soul strong, that soul
will not only face enemies and difficulties, but triumph over them. Those that
are strong in grace, seldom want courage or counsel, when they are at the
worst: They always find their hope to be an Anchor at Sea, and their faith a
Shield upon Land: and therefore they triumph in all storms and dangers: They
stand firm when they are under the greatest pressures, 2 Cor. 11. 23. I,
labors more abundant, In stripes above measure, If we perish, Christ perishes
with us. said Luther.
in prisons more frequent, in deaths often, etc. And yet he triumphs in 2 Cor.
1. 12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in
singleness and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the Grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to
you-wards. Strong Paul rejoiced in his sufferings for Christ; and therefore
often sings out, I Paul a Prisoner of Jesus Christ; not, I Paul wrapped up in the
third Heaven. He preferred his Crown of Thorns before a Crown of gold; his
Prison rags, above all Royal Robes.

Fourthly, A weak Christian thinks that little to be much that he suffers for
Christ.

In Mat. 19. 27. Then answered Peter, and said unto him, Behold, we have
forsaken all, and followed thee, what shall we have? Their worldly case in
following Christ, was little worse then when they only Traded in Fishing; and
yet, we have forsaken all, and followed thee, what shall we have? This their
All was not worth a speaking of, and yet for this they look for some great
worldly reward, and recompense. We have forsaken all. A great All sure, a few
broken Boats, and a few tattered Weak Christians are like Children, they look
for a great reward for a little work.
and torn Nets, and a little old Household Stuff, and Christ maintained them
too upon his own cost, and charge; and yet say they, We have forsaken all, and
followed thee. Neither is it without an Emphasis, that they begin with a
Behold, Behold we have forsaken all; as if Christ were greatly beholding to
them. Let their wills but be crossed a little, by servants, children, friends,
etc. Or let them but suffer a little in their Names or Estates, etc. and
presently you shall have them a sighing it out, No sorrow like our sorrow, no
loss to our loss, no cross to our cross, etc. Whereas souls strong in
grace, suffer much, and yet count that much, but little. A soul strong in
grace, can suffer much, and yet make nothing of it. I am heartily angry (says
Luther, who suffered very much) with those that speak of my sufferings, which
if compared with that which Christ suffered for me, are not once to be
mentioned in the same day, etc.

Fifthly,

Those that are weak in Grace dwell more upon what may discourage them, in the
ways of Grace and Holiness, then they do upon what may encourage them. They
dwell more upon their sins, then upon a Savior; more upon their misery, then
upon free grace and mercy; more upon that which may feed their fears, then
upon that that may strengthen their faith; more upon the Cross, then upon the
Crown; more upon those that are against them, then those that are for them.
Isa. 51. 12, 13. I, even I am he that comfort you. Who art thou, that thou
should be afraid of a man that shall dye, and of the Son of man, which shall
be made as grass, and forgettest the Lord thy maker, that has stretched forth
the Heavens, and laid the foundations of the Earth, and have feared continually
every day, because of the fury of the Oppressor, as if he were ready to
destroy, and where is the fury of the Oppressor? This same is intimated, Romans
4. 19, 20. Abraham being not weak in faith, he considered not his own body,
being dead, nor yet the deadness of Sarahs womb. Mark, being not weak in
faith. Souls weak in faith are very apt to dwell upon discouragements, but
strong Christians look above all discouragements.

He considered not. The Greek is, He cared not for his own (...)
body, he did not mind that; but in the 20 verse, He considered him that had
promised. Souls strong in grace dwell more upon their encouragements to
holiness, and believing, then upon their discouragements. He considered him
that had promised. He had an eye fixed upon the faithfulness of God, and the
Sufficiency and Almightinesse of God, and this bore up his heart above all
discouragements. So in 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18. Our light affliction, which is but
for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of
glory; while we look not (mark, they are not doting upon their discouragements)
upon things that are seen, but upon things that are not seen. The things which
are seen, are temporal, but the things which are not seen, are eternal. An
eye fixed upon encouragements, makes heavy afflictions light; long afflictions
short; and bitter afflictions sweet. Those blessed Martyrs found it so, that
were cast out all night, in a cold frosty night, and were to be burnt the next
day; who thus comforted themselves, The winter is sharp, but Paradise is
sweet; here we shiver for cold, but the bosom of Abraham will make amends for
all. Weak Christians have eyes to behold their discouragements, but none to see
their encouragements; they look more upon their corruption, then upon their
sanctification: Upon their disobedience, then their obedience; upon their
distrust, then upon their faith; upon the old man, then upon the new; and this
keeps them low and weak in spirituals, it causes a leanness in their souls.

Sixthly,

The zeal of weak Christians, usually out-strips their wisdom and
knowledge. Weak Christians are very Zealous, but not according to knowledge,
Romans 10. 2. For I bear them record, that they They were very zealous, but not
true Zelors.
have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. They are very peevish,
and pettish, and censorious; but they want wisdom and knowledge to manage
their zeal, to Gods glory, and their brethrens good. Such zeal had those two
Rabbis that set upon Charles the Fifth, to persuade him to David Rab^nita, and
Shilomoh Mol^h^. Alsted. Chr. ^26.
turn Jew, as judging their Religion to be the only Religion in the world,
and for which they were put to a cruel death, in the year 1530. A great zeal
they had to the winning over of him to Judaisme, but this zeal was their
ruin. Zeal without knowledge, is as wildfire in a fools hand; it is like the
Devil in the Demoniack, that sometimes cast him into the fire, and sometimes
into the water. So the Disciples of Christ Josephus in ^he 1^ and 12 Chapters
of his Book, tells you of some that imposed this name of Zelote upon
themselves, as if they were zealous for the honor and service of God, and
under this pretense committed all ^iots and imaginable wick e^nesse. 'Twere
well if we had no such Monsters among us in these days.
were weak in their light, and furious in their zeal, Luke 9. 54. Let fire
come down from Heaven, and consume them, say they: But mark what Christ says,
verse. 55. Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. That is, you know not
what spirit acts you; you think that you are acted by such a spirit as Elias of
old was acted by, but you err, says Christ, You have a zeal, but not
according to knowledge; therefore it is a human affection, and not a Divine
motion. Zeal is like fire, in the Chimney, it is one of the best servants, but
out of the Chimney, it is one of the worst Masters. Zeal kept by knowledge and
wisdom, in its proper place, is a choice servant to Christ, and Saints: But
zeal not bounded by wisdom and knowledge, is the highway to undo all, and
to make a hell for many at once.

Weak Christians are usually most zealous about Circumstances, and things that
have least of God and Christ, and the power of holiness in them; and most cold
about substances, as woeful experience does evidence in these days. Zeal
ordered by wisdom, feeds upon the faults of offenders, not on their persons:
It spends it self, and it is greatest heat, principally upon those things that
concern a man's self. It Is most exercised about substantials, Titus 2. 14. But
that which is rash, is most exercised about circumstantials, Gal. 1. 14. Paul
was in the days of his ignorance, very zealous for the Traditions of his
fathers, etc.

Seventhly,

Among all Saints, the weakest Saints act most like carnal sinners. No Saint
so like a sinner, as a weak Saint. 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And I Brethren,
could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto
Babes in Christ. I have fed you with milk, and not with meat, for hitherto ye
were not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able; for are ye not yet
carnal? for whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are
ye not carnal, and walk as men? for while one says, I am of Paul, and
another, I am of Apollo, are ye not carnal? They were advanced but very little
above the imperfections, and passions, and sins of mere men, of such which had
nothing of the Spirit in them, etc. Do wicked men quarrel with their
Teachers, as shallow trivial Teachers, when themselves are in fault, as being
not capable of more Mysterious matter? So did these Babes here. Do wicked In
many things weak Christians are carnal men's Apes.
men impute their not profiting to the Minister, as he that having a thorn in
his foot, complains of the roughness of the way, as the cause of his limping,
when as it was the thorn, and not the roughness of the way, that hurt him. Or
as she that being struck with a sudden blindness, bid open the window, when
as it was not the want of light, but want of sight, that troubled her. So did
these Babes in the Text, lay the fault of their non-proficiency, upon their
Teachers, when the fault was wholly in themselves.

Now he calls them Carnal, partly because the flesh was strong in them; and
partly, because they followed and relished the things of the flesh; and partly,
because they did in their actions resemble carnal men. Do carnal and wicked
men cry up one good man, and cry down another? Do they lift up one, and abase
another? So did they: Are wicked men full of envy, strife, and divisions? So
were they. And these overflowings of the Gall and Spleen, come from a fulness
of bad humors, from that abundance of carnality that was in them. But now
souls strong in grace, are higher then carnal men, as Saul was higher then
the people, by head and shoulders. Souls strong in grace have their feet where
carnal men's heads are. Prove. 15. 24. The way of life is above to the wise,
that he may depart from hell beneath. Souls that are strong in grace, do act
rather like Angels, then like carnal men; they do as much resemble the father
of Spirits, as carnal men do the father of Lies.

Eighthly,

Souls weak in Grace, are easily drawn aside out of the ways of holiness.
You know a man that has but a little bodily strength, is easily thrust out of
the way, so it is with souls weak in grace, 1 John 3. 7. Little Children, let
no man deceive you; he that does righteousness, is righteous, even as he is
righteous. Says the Apostle, Little Children, let no man deceive you. Many in
these days (under pretenses of high and glorious enjoyments of God) neglect
and despise righteousness, and holiness, crying up Visions and
manifestations, when their Visions are only the Visions of their own hearts,
and their Manifestations are plain delusions. Ah but says the Apostle, Little
Children, let none of these deceive you. I tell you he (and only he) that does
righteousness, is righteous, as God is righteous. Children you know may be
easily cousened, and made to take Counters for gold, because they are broader,
and brighter. Children in grace are soon deceived, hence is it that they are so
cousened. Little Children, keep your 1 John 5. 21. The Idols that are here
mentioned, are surely those that the Gnostics used to worship, viz. The Images
and pictures of Simon Magus, and Helena, as might be made evident out of
E^sebius.
selves from Idols. So in Heb. 12. 12, 13. Wherefore lift up the hands which
hang down, and the feeble knees. Some think that the Apostle Alludes to those
Combats of the Heathens, wherein it was a token of yielding, when a man hung
down his hands. You are weak, says the Apostle, and by reason of Trials, you
are apt to hang down your hands, and to give up all as lost, therefore (says
he) lift up your hands to fight, and your feet to run, take heart and courage,
faint not, give not over, turn not aside because of the sharpness of
afflictions. But souls strong in grace, will hold on in the ways of grace and
holiness, in the face of all dangers and deaths, Psalm. 44. etc.

Ninthly,

Weak Christians are apt to make sense and feeling the Judge of their
spiritual estates and conditions. And therefore upon every turn they are apt
to judge themselves miserable, and to conclude that they have no grace, because
they cannot feel it, nor discern it, nor believe it, and so making sense,
feeling, and reason, the judge of their estates. They wrong, and perplex, and
vex their precious souls, and make their lives a very Hell: As if it were not
one thing to be the Lords, and another thing for a man to know that he is the
Lords. As if it were not one thing for a man to have grace, and another thing
to know that he has grace.

The Canaanite woman had strong faith, but no Assurance, Mat. 15.
that we read of. Gal. 4. 6. And because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the
spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba father. Mark, they are first
the Sons of God, and then the Spirit cries, Abba father. 1 John 5. 13. These
things have I written unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God,
that ye may know that ye have Eternal life. Mark, they did believe, and they
had Eternal life, in respect of Christ their head, who as a public person was
gone to Heaven, to represent all his Saints. And they had Eternal life in
respect of the Promises. And they had Eternal life in respect of the
beginnings of it; and yet they did not know it, they did not believe it.
Therefore these things write I unto you that believe on the name of the Son of
God (says he) that ye may know that ye have Eternal life, and that this life
is in his Son. Ponder on Mich. 7. 7, 8, 9. Much of this you may read in my
Treatise called HEAVEN ON EARTH, or, A well-grouded Assurance of men's
everlasting happiness and blessedness in this World, and to that I refer
you. The word shall judge us at last, and therefore strong Saints John 12. 48.
make only the word of God, the judge of their Spiritual conditions now, as
Constantine made it the Judge and decider of all opinions.

Tenthly,

Their thoughts and hearts are more taken with the lovetokens, and the good
things they have by Christ, then with the person of Christ. Oh their graces,
their comforts, their inlargements, their meltings, and their warmings, etc.
are the things that most take them: Their thoughts and hearts are so exercised
and carried out about these, that the person of Christ is much neglected by
them. The Child is so taken with Babies and Rattles, etc. that the Mother is
not minded. And such is the carriage of weak Christians toward Christ. But now
souls strong in grace, are more taken with the person of Christ, then they are
with the Love Tokens of Christ. They bless Christ indeed Christ is the most
sparkling D^amond in the Ring of glory, etc.
for every dram of grace, and for every good word from heaven, and for every
good look from heaven: I, but yet the person of Christ that is more to them,
then all these. This is remarkable in the Church, Cant. 5. 9, 10. What is thy
Beloved more then another Beloved, O thou fairest among women? etc. My Beloved
is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand, etc. She does not say, My
Beloved is one that I That wise is but weak in her love, that is more taken
with her husbands presents, then with his person.
have got so many thousands by, and heaven by, and pardon of sin by, and peace
of Conscience by. Oh no; but he is white and ruddy. Her soul was taken most
with the person of Christ. Not but that every one is to mind the graces of
Christ, and to be thankful for them: I, but it is an Argument of weakness of
grace, when the heart is more exercised about the bracelets, and the kisses,
and the Love Tokens of Christ, then it is about the person of Christ. But now
says one strong in grace, My Christ's person to a strong Christian, is the
greatest Cordial in all the world.
bracelets are precious, but Christ is more precious; the streams of grace are
sweet, but the fountain of grace is most sweet; the beams of the Sun are
glorious, but the Sun it self is most glorious. A naked Christ, a despised
Christ, a persecuted Christ, is more valued by a strong Christian, then Heaven
and Earth is by a weak Christian.

Eleventhly,

Souls weak in Grace are easily stopped and taken off from acting graciously
and holily, when discouragements face them. This you may see in that
remarkable instance concerning Peter, in the 26 of Matthew, from the 69 to the
end. A silly wench outfaces him, she daunts and dis-spirits this selfconfident
Champion, she easily stops and turns him by saying Thou wast with Jesus of
Galilee, v. 70. But he denied it before them all, saying, I know not what thou
say. He makes as if he did neither understand her words, or her meaning, and
this false dissembling was a true denying of Christ. Now Mark says, Chap. 14.
68. That upon the very first denial of Christ, the Cock crew, and yet this
fair warning could not secure him, but when another Maid saw him, and said,
This fellow was with Jesus of Nazareth, verse. 72. He denied it with Cavebis
autem, si pavebis.
an Oath, saying, I do not know the man. This was fearful and dreadful, and
the worse because his Master whom he forsware, was now upon his Trial, and
might say with wounded Caesar, What, and thou my Son Brutus: Is this thy
kindness to thy (...).
friend, to him that has loved thee, and saved thee, and owned thee? etc.
Then, verse. 73. Surely thou art one of them, for thy speech bewrays thee.
And, verse. 74. He began to curse and to swear, I know not the man. (...). Vide
Calvin on the Text. In Romans 6. 19. There are 3 To's in the expression, of the
service of sin, To uncleanness, To iniquity, and Unto iniquity. But in the
service of God there are only two To's, To righteousness, and Unto holiness.
To note, that we were more prone to sin, before Conversion, then wearetograce
and holiness after conversion.


The Greek word that is rendered Curse, imports a cursing and a damning of
himself, an imprecation of Gods wrath, and a separation from the presence and
glory of God, if he knew the man. Some Writers say, That he cursed Christ, I
know not the man, says he. Though it were ten thousand times better to bear,
then to swear; and to dye, then to lie; yet when discouragement faces him, he
is so amazed and daunted, that he tells the most incredible lie that almost
could be uttered by the mouth of man. For there was scarce any Jew (says
Grotius) that knew not Christ by sight, being famous for those abundance of
Miracles that he wrought before their eyes. Neither could Peter allege any
cause why he came thither, if he had not known Christ. But, verse. 75. He went
out, and wept bitterly. One sweet look of love breaks his heart in pieces; he
melts under the beamings forth of Divine favor upon him. Once he leapt into a
Sea of waters to come to Christ, and now he leaps into a sea of tears for that
he had so shamefully denied Christ.

Clement notes, That Peter so repented, that all his lifetime after, every
night when he heard the Cock crow, he would fall upon his knees, and weep
bitterly, begging pardon for this dreadful sin. Others say, That after his
lying, cursing, and denying Christ, he was ever and anon weeping, and that his
face was furrowed with continual tears. He had no sooner taken in poison, but
he vomits it up again, before it got to the vitals. He had no sooner handled a
Serpent, but he turns it into a rod to scourge his soul with remorse. This
truth is further confirmed by the speech and carriage of the Disciples, Luke
24. 21 -- ult. We trusted (say they) that it had been he which should have
redeemed Israel, but now we cannot tell what to say to it. Here their hope
hangs the wing extremely. Invalidum omne natura querulum. Seneca. Weak spirits
are ever quar^elling and contending.
Weak souls find it as hard to wait for God, as it is to bear evil. This
weakness Christ checks, verse. 25. O fools and slow of heart to believe all
that the Prophets have spoken, etc. And John 16. 5. The first news Christ
tells them, is of their sufferings, and of his leaving of them; and upon the
thoughts hereof their hearts were so filled with sorrow, that they could not so
much as say, Master, whither go thou? verse. 6. But now souls strong in
grace, will hold on in holy and gracious actings, in the very face of the
greatest discouragements, as those in Psalm. 44. Though thou have sore broken us
in the place of Dragons, and covered us with the shadow of death, yet our heart
is not turned back, neither have our steps declined Such a spirit shined in
Chrysostom, when he bid them tell the enraged Empress Eudoxia, Nil nisi
peccatum timeo. I fear nothing but sin.
from thy ways. And so the three Children, they hold up in the face of all
discouragements. And so those brave Worthies, of whom this world was not
worthy, Heb. 11. their hearts were carried out exceedingly, notwithstanding all
discouragements, to hold on in ways of holiness, and in their actings of
faith upon God, in the face of all dangers and deaths that did attend them.

When Henry the Eighth had spoken and written bitterly against Luther; says
Luther, Tell the Henry's, the Bishops, the Turk, and the Devil himself, Do
what they can, we are Children of the Kingdom, worshipping of the true God,
whom they, and such as they, spit upon, and crucified. And of the same spirit
and mettle, were many Martyrs. Bazill affirms of the Primitive Saints, That
they had so much conrage and confidence in their sufferings, that many of the
Heathens seeing their heroic zeal and constancy, turned Christians.

Twelfthly,

Weak Saints mind their wages and vailes, more then their work. Their wages,
their vailes, is joy, peace, comfort, and assurance, etc. and their work is
waiting on God, believing in Children mind mo^e play-^ayes, then they do
working day^, o^ Scho^dayes. 1 Samuel 15. 14.
God, walking with God, acting for God, etc. Now weak Saints minds are more
carried out, and taken up about their wages, about their vailes, then they are
about their work, as experience does abundantly evidence. Ah Christians! if you
don't mind your wages more then your work, what means the bleating of the
sheep, and the lowing of the Oxen? What means those earnest and vehement
cryings out, and wrestings for joy, peace, comfort, and assurance? when the
great work of believing, of waiting, and of walking with God, is so much
neglected, and dis-regarded. But now strong Saints are more mindful of their
work, then they are of their wages. Lord, says a strong Saint, do but uphold
me in a way of believing, in a way of working, in a way of holy walking, etc.
and it shall be enough, though I should never have Assurance, comfort, peace,
or joy, till my dying day. If thou will carry me forth so as thou may have
honor, though I have no comfort; so thou may have glory, though I have no
peace, I Romans 4. 18, 19, 20.
will bless thee. I know, says such a soul, though a life of comfort be most
pleasing to me, yet a life of believing (abstracted from comfort) is most
honorable to thee, and therefore I will be silent before thee. Lord do but
help me in my work, and take thine own time to give me my wages; to give me
comfort, joy, peace, assurance. They are none of the best Servants, that mind
their wages more then their work: Nor they are none of the best Christians,
that mind their comforts, and their incomes, more then that homage and duty
that they owe to God.

Before I come to the second thing premised, give me leave to give you this
hint, viz. That there is no such way to joy, peace, and Assurance, as this, to
mind your work more then your wages. Ah! had many mourning, complaing
Christians done thus, their mourning before this, had been turned into
rejoicing, and their complainings into singings. Christians, the high way to
comfort, is to mind comfort less, and duty more; it is to mind more what thou
should do, then what thou would have, as you may see in Ephesians. 1. 13. In
whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your
salvation. In whom also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy
spirit rf Promise.

The Original runs thus, In whom believing, you were sealed. (...).
While faith is busied and exercised about Christ, and those varieties of
glories and excellencies that are in him, the Lord comes, and by his spirit
seals the life and love, and glory of them.

Thus by Divine assistance I have dispatched the first thing, viz. The
deciphering of weak Christians.

The second thing that I propounded for the further opening and clearing of
this Point, was, To hold forth to you those things that tend to support,
comfort, and uphold weak Christians. And truly I must needs say, that if ever
there were a time wherein weak Christians had need of support, I verily believe
this is the time wherein we live; for by the horrid profaneness of men on the
one hand; and the abominable, loose, and rotten Principles of others on the
other hand, the hearts of many, weak Christans especially, are sadded, that God
would not have sadded, and their spirits wounded and grieved, that God would
have comforted, and healed; and therefore I shall dwell the longer upon this
second thing.

And the first thing that I shall lay down by way of Support, is this. 1
Support. He that lo^kt upon the brazen Serpent, though with a weak sight, was
healed a thoroughly as he that looked upon it with a stronger sight. A weak faith
is a joint possessor, though no faith can be ^ joint pur^haser of Christ.


That the weakest Christians have as much interest and propriety in Christ, and
all the fundamental good that comes by Christ, as the strongest Saints in the
world have. Weak Saints are as much united to Christ, as much justified by
Christ, as much reconciled by Christ, and as much pardoned by Christ, as the
strongest Saints. It Is true, weak Christians cannot make so much improvement
and advantage of their interest in Christ, as strong Saints can; they have not
that power, that wisdom, that spiritual skill to make that advantage of
their interest and propriety in Christ, as strong Saints have: Yet have they as
much interest and propriety in the Lord Jesus, and all the fundamental good
that comes by him, as the strongest Saint that breaths. The sucking Child has
as much interest and propriety in the father, and in what is the fathers, as
the Child that is grown up to age: Though the young Child has not that skill,
nor that power, nor wisdom, to improve that interest to his advantage, as he
that is grown up in years has. It Is just so here, A soul weak in grace, has
as much interest in the Lord, as the strongest Saint has; though he has not
that skill to improve that interest. And is not this a singular comfort and
support? Verily were there no more to bear up a poor weak Saint from fainting
under all his sins, and sorrows, and sufferings, yet this alone might do it,
etc.

The Second Support and Comfort to weak Saints, is this.

That God does with an eye of love reflect upon the least good 2 Support.
that is in them, or done by them. And is not this a glorious Comfort and
Support, that the Lord looks with an eye of love upon the least good that is in
you, or done by you? You cannot have a good thought, but The least Star gives
light; the least drop moystens.
God looks upon that thought with an eye of love. Psalm. 32. 5. I said I would
confess my sin, and thou forgavest mine iniquity. I said it in my thoughts,
that I would confess my sin, and thou presently meeting me with pardoning
mercy, forgavest mine iniquity. So in Mal. 3. 16. And there was a Book of
Remembrance written, for them that fear the Lord, and that thought upon his
name. They had but some thoughts of God, and God reflects upon those thoughts
with an eye of love. Isa. 38.. 5. I have heard thy prayers, I have seen thy
tears. Tears we look upon but as poor things, and yet God looks upon them as
Pearls, and therefore he puts them into So in Ps. 6. 8. One observes that
there are 2 strong things in Tears. 1 Deorsum fluunt, and coelum terunt. They
drop downward, and fall to the earth, yet they teach upwards, and pierce the
Pere^. 2 Muliae sunt and loquuntur. They hold their peace, yet cry very loud.
his Bottle, as the Psalmist speaks. There is not a bit of bread, nor a drop of
drink thou give, but God casts an eye of love upon it, Mat. 25. 35, 36.

There is not a desire that arises in thy soul, but the Lord takes notice of
it. Prove. 10. 17. Thou have heard the desire of the humble. Weak Saints are
full of desires, their whole life is a life of desires, they are still a
breathing out holy desires: Lord Pardon such a sin, and give me power against
such a sin, and strength Lord to withstand such a Temptation, and grace Lord to
uphold me under such an Affliction, etc. and the Lord hears and answers such
gracious breathings and longings.

It was holy Jewell's desire, That he might dye Preaching, and God looked with
an eye of love upon his desire, and he had it.

It was Latimer's desire, That he might shed his heart blood for Christ, and
God looked with an eye of love upon the breathings of his heart, and he had it.

The Israelites did but groan, and God looked upon their groans with an eye of
love, he comes down, he makes his Arm bare, he tramples upon their proud
Enemies, and by Miracles he saves them. O weak Christian! Is not this a
singular comfort, that the Lord reflects with an eye of love upon your
thoughts, upon your desires, upon your tears, and upon your groanings? etc.
What though others slight you? what though others take no notice of you? yet
the Lord casts an eye of love upon you.

Some think its very strange that God should set down in Scripture, the story
of Jacob, a poor Countryman, Genesis 31. that he had a few Ewes and Lambs,
streaked and spotted, and yet take no notice of the great Emperors and Kings
of the Earth, nor of their great actions, and Warlike designs in the world.
But this is to show that tender love and respect that God bears to his
Children, above what he does to the great ones of this World. God is more taken
with Lazarus patcht Coat, then with Dives silken Robe, etc.

A third thing that I shall propound for the Support and Comfort of weak
Saints, is this.

Consider, the Lord looks more upon your Graces, then he 3 Support:
does upon your weaknesses. Or thus:

The Lord will not cast away weak Saints, by reason of the weaknesses that
cleaves to their persons, or services. In 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19, 20. there came a
multitude of people to eat the Passover, but they were not prepared according
to the preparation of the Sanctuary; therefore Hezekiah puts up a Prayer for
them, and the Text says, That the Lord hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the
people. looked upon their uprightness, and so past over all their other
weaknesses. He did not cast off Peter for his horrid sins, but rather looks
upon him with an eye of love and pity. Mark 16. 7. But go your way, tell his
Disciples and Peter, that he goes before you into Galilee, there shall ye see
him, as he said unto you. Oh admirable love! Oh matchless mercy! where sin
abounds, grace does super-abound. This is the glory of Christ, that he carries
it sweetly toward his people, when they carry themselves unworthily toward
him. Christ looks more upon Peter's sorrow, then upon his sin; upon his tears,
then upon his Oaths, etc. The Lord will not cast away weak Saints for their
great unbelief, because there is a little faith in them. He will not throw
them away for that hypocrifie that is in them, because of that (little)
sincerity that is in them. He will not cast away weak Saints for that Pride
that is in them, because of those Rays of humility that shine in them. He will
not despise his people for their passions, because of those grains of
meekness that are in them. We will not throw away a little gold because of a
great deal of dross that cleaves to it; nor a little wheat, because mixed with
much chafe; and will God? will God?

We will not cast away our Garments, because of some spots, nor our Books,
because of some blots; nor our Jewels, because of some flawes; and do we think
that the Lord will cast away his dearest ones, because of their spots, and
blots, and flawes? Surely no, God looks more upon the bright side of the Cloud,
then the dark, James 5. 11. Remember the patience of Job, It Is not, Remember
the murmuring of Job, the cursing of Job, the complainings of Job, the
impatience of Job; but, Remember the patience of Job. God looks upon the
Pearl, and not upon the spot that is in it. So in Heb. 11. 30, 31. there is
mention made of Rahabs faith, love, and peaceable behavior toward the Spies,
but no mention made of her lie: the Lord overlooks her weakness, and keeps his
eye upon her virtues. Where God sees but a little grace, he does as it were
hide his eyes from those circumstances that might seem to deface the glory of
it. So in 1 Pet. 3. 6. Even as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord. Mark,
there was but one good word in Sarahs speech, to Abraham, she called her
Husband Lord, the speech otherwise was a speech of unbelief, yet the holy
Ghost speaking of her in reference to that speech, conceales all the evil in
it, and mentions only the reverent title she gave to her Husband, commending
her for it.

He that drew Alexander, whilst he had a scar upon his face, drew him with his
finger upon the scar: So when the Lord comes to look upon a poor soul, he
lays his finger upon the scar, upon the infirmity, that he may see nothing but
grace, which is the beauty and the glory of the soul. Ah but weak Christians
are more apt to look upon their infirmities, then on their graces; and because
their little gold is mixed with a great deal of dross, they are ready to throw
away all as dross. Well, remember this, the Lord Jesus has as great, and as
large an interest in the weakest Saints, as he has in the strongest. He has
the interest of a Friend, and the interest of a Father, and the interest of a
Head, and the interest of a Husband; and therefore though Saints be weak, yea,
though they be very weak, yet having as great, and as large an interest in
them, as in the strongest Saints, he cannot but overlook their weakness, and
keep a fixed eye upon their graces.

A fourth Support is this, 4. Support.


That the Lord will graciously preserve and strengthen those weak graces that
are in you. Though your graces be as a spark of fire in the midst of an Ocean
of corruption, yet the Lord will preserve and blow up The tallest Oak was once
^n A corn, and the deepest Doctor was once in his Horn-book.
that spark of fire, into a flame. It was the Priests Office in the time of the
Law, to keep the fire in the Sanctuary from going out; and it is the Office of
our Lord Jesus, as he is our High Priest, our Head, our Husband, our Mediator,
for to blow up that heavenly fire that he has kindled in any of our souls.
His honor, his faithsulnesse, and his goodness is engaged in it, and
therefore he cannot but do it; else he would loose much love and many prayers
and praises, did he not cherish, preserve, and strengthen his own work in his
own people. The faith of the Disciples was generally weak; as I have formerly
showed you, and yet how sweetly does the Lord Jesus John 16. Acts 2.
carry it toward them? He was still a breathing out light, life, and love upon
them, he was still a turning their water into wine, their bitter into sweet,
and their discouragements into encouragements, and all to raise and keep up
their spirits. His heart was much in this thing, therefore says he, It Is
necessary that I leave you, that I may send the Comforter, to be a comfort and
a guide unto you. I will pour out my spirit upon you, Isa. 60. 22.
that a little one may become a thousand, and a small one a strong Nation, and
that the feeble may be as David, and the house of David as God, as the Angel of
the Lord. That Is a sweet Zech. 12. 8.
Text, Isa. 65. 8. Thus says the Lord, as the new wine is found in the
Clusters, and one says, destroy it not, for a blessing is in it, so will I do
for my servants sake, etc. Oh! says Christ (to the father) here are a company
of weak Saints, that have some buddings of grace; Oh do not destroy it,
father! there is a blessing in it, though it be but weak. The Genuine sense of
the similitude I think is this, when a Vine being blasted, or otherwise
decayed, is grown so bad, and so barren, that scarce any good Clusters of
Grapes can be discerned on it, whereby it may be deemed to have any life, or of
ever becoming fruitful again, and the Husbandman is about to grub it up, or
cut it down to the ground: One standing by, sees here a cluster, and there a
little cluster, and cries out, O don't grub up the Vine, don't cut down the
Vine, it has a little life, and by good Husbandry it may be made fruitful. We
may look upon the Lord Jesus Christ as thus pleading with his fathers Justice,
Father I know thou see that these souls are dry, and barren, and that there
is little or no good in them; and therefore thou might justly cut them
down: But oh my father! I see here a bunch, and there a bunch; here a little
(...) Bring forth. It is the custom of all Writers, and very frequent in the
sacred Dialect, to use phrases whereby they understand much more then they do
express; an example whereof you have in this verse; where Christ's not breaking
the bruised reed, signifies his great mercy and kindness in repairing, and
restoring, and curing the bruised weakling. And so his not quenching the
smoking flax, is his enlivening, quickening, and enflaming that fire or spark
of grace or goodness which was almost quenched, etc. Others understand the
words of Christ, seting up the profession of the Gospel in the world, among the
Heathens, if the Jews will not receive it.
grace, and there a little grace; surely there is a blessing in it, O spare it,
let it not be stubb'd up, let it not be destroyed. So Mat. 12. 20. A bruised
Reed shall he not break, nor smoking flax shall he not quench, till he send
forth judgment unto victory.

A bruised Reed shall he not break. The Jewish Commentators carry it thus, He
shall not Tyrannize over, but nourish and cherrish the poor, weak, feeble
ones, that are wont to be oppressed by great ones. But men more spiritual
carry it thus, Christ will not carry it roughly and rigorously, toward poor,
weak, tender souls, whose Graces are as a bruised reed, and as smoking flax.
A Reed is a contemptible thing, a tender thing, it will break sometimes before
a man is aware; a bruised Reed is more tender, it will be broken with a touch;
yet Christ will not breat such a bruised Reed, i. e. a soul weak in grace.

Nor quench the smoking flax. The wick of a Candle is little worth, and yet
less when it smoakes, as yielding neither light nor heat, but rather smoakes
and offends with an ill smell, which men cannot bear, but will tread it out. But
the Lord Jesus Christ will not do so. Souls whose knowledge, love, faith, and
zeal, does but smoke out, the Lord Jesus will not trample under-foot: nay, he
will cherish, nourish, and strengthen such to life Eternal. Look what Tallow
is to the wick, or Oil is to the Lamp, that will the Lord Jesus be to the
Graces of weak Christians.

Till he shall bring forth judgment unto Victory. That is, until the
sanctified frame of grace begun in their hearts, be brought to that perfection,
that it prevails over all opposite corruption. Thus you see how sweetly the
Lord Jesus carries it to souls weak in grace. Therefore let not those that
bring forth a hundred fold, despise those that bring forth but thirty; nor
those that have five Talents, despise those that have but two.

The fifth Support is this,

That weak Saints may be very useful to the strong, and sometimes may do
more then strong Saints can. As you may see in 1 Cor. 12. 14. to 28. The
Apostle in this Scripture discovers the singular use of the weakest Saint in
the body of Christ, by the usefulness of the weakest and meanest Member in the
natural body, to the strongest. Ver. 21. The eye cannot say to the hand, I
have no need of thee; nor again, the head to the foot, I have no need of thee.
By the head, and by the eye, he means such Saints as were eminent in gifts and
graces, that were adorned more richly, and that shined more gloriously in grace
and gracious abilities, then others. Oh these should not despise those that
were not so eminent and excellent as themselves; for God has so tempered the
inequality of the members in the natural body, that the more excellent and
beautiful members, can in no wise lack the more abject and weak members;
therefore slight not the weakest Saints, for certainly at first or last the
weakest will be serviceable to the It was a sayink of General Vere to the King
of Denmark, That Kings cared not for Soldiers, until such time that their
Crowns hung on the one side of their heads.
strongest. A Dwarf may be useful to a Giant, a Child to a man. Sometimes a
little finger shall do that that a limb in the body cannot do. It Is so often
in Christ's spiritual body: I will give you a very famous instance for this.

At the Council of Nice there was 318 Bishops, and by the subtilty of a
Philosopher, disputing against the Marriage of Ministers, they generally voted
against it, that those that were single, should not marry: At length up stars
Paphnutius, a plain Christian, and in the name of Christ, with the naked word
of God, he pleaded against them all in that case, and God so wrought by his
Arguments, that he convinced the 318 Bishops, and carried the cause against
them; yea, and so Socrates Eccles. Histo.
convinced the Philosopher of his error, that before all he freely confessed it.
As long (says he) as men's words were only pressed, I could repel words, with
words; but what is weak man, A little Sta^ has light, and influence, tho nor
the glory which is proper to the Sun.
to withstand the word of God? I yield I am conquered.

Weak Christians may be of singular use to the strongest; those that know most
may learn more, even from the weakest Saints.

Junius was converted, by discoursing with a Plowman. And, Acts 18. 24. to 27.
Apollo, though he was an Eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures (as the
Text speaks) yet was he furthered and bettered in the knowledge of Christ's
Kingdom, by Aquilla, and Priscilla; a poor Tent-maker, and his wife, were
isntrumental to acquaint him with those things that he knew but weakly. He had
not ascended above John's Baptism, but they had, and so communicated their
light and knowledge to him.

The sixth Support, is this.

Where there is but a little Grace, there God expects less, 6 Support.
and will accept of less, though it be accompanied with many failings. Thou
say, Oh! I have but a little grace, a little faith, a little love, a little
zeal. Oh know, where there is but a little grace, there God expects less
obedience, and will accept of less service. 2 Cor. 8. 12. For if there be
first a willing mind, It is very observable, that the Eagle, and the Lion,
those brave Creatures, were not offered in Sacrifice unto God, but the poor
Lamb, and Dove. To note, that your brave, high, and lofty spirits God regards
not; but your poor, meek, contemptible spirits God accepts.
it is accepted according to that which a man has, and not according to that
which he has not. The two Mites cast into the Treasury (Luke 21. 3.) by the
poor widow, her heart being in the action, were more acceptable, then two
Talents cast in by others. Noah's Sacrifice could not be great, and yet it was
greatly accepted by God. In the time of the Law God accepted a handful of
Meal for a Sacrifice, and a gripe of Goats hair for an Oblation; and
certainly God has lost none of his affections to poor souls, in the time of
the Gospel. Cant. 2. 14. Let me hear thy voice, for thy voice is sweet, and
thy countenance is lovely. The Hebrew word Eth kolech.
signifies any sound, such as Birds or bruits make; their chattering is like
lovely Songs in the ear of God; their mite is a sweet Oblation. Parents that
have but some drops of that love and tender affection that is in God to his
people, yet accept of a very little service from their weak Children, and will
not God? In time of strength God looks for much, but in the time of weakness
God will bear much, and overlook much, and accept of a little, yea, of a very
very little.

One writing of the Tree of Knowledge, says, That it bears many leaves, but
little fruit. Though weak Saints have a great many leaves, and but little
fruit, little grace, yet that little the Lord will kindly accept of.

Artaxerxes the Persian Monarch, was famous for accepting of a little water
from the hand of a loving Subject. God makes himself famous, and his Grace
glorious, by his kind acceptance of the weakest endeavors of his people, etc.

The seventh Support, is this.

The least measure of Grace is as true an earnest, and as good 7 Support.
Though men often loose their earnest; yet God will never loose his. His earnest
is very obliging. Phil. 1. 6.
and sure a pledge of greater measures of Grace, that the soul shall have
here, and of Glory, that the soul shall have hereafter, as the greatest
measure of Grace is. He that has begun a good work, he will perfect it to the
day of Christ. Christ is called not only the Author, but also the Finisher of
our faith, Heb. 12. 2. In Mal. 4. 2, 3. Unto you that fear my name, shall the
Son of Righteousness arise with healing in his wings, and he shall go forth
and grow up as The Hebrew word (...) or way, signifies a distinct course from
others, as the way from one Town differs from the way to another. Here in Job
it is taken for a course in piety.
Calves of the stall. And so in Job 17. 9. The righteous shall hold on his way,
and he that has clean hands shall be stronger, and stronger. Zech. 12. 8. In
that day shall the Lord defend the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that is
feeble among them at that day shall be as David, and the house of David shall
be as God, as the Angel of the Lord before them. So in Hos. 14. 5, 6, 7. I will
be as the dew to Israel, he shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth his fruits
as Lebanon: His branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the Olive
Tree, and his smell as Lebanon. They that dwell under his shadow, shall return,
they shall revive as the Corn, and grow as the Vine, the sent thereof shall be
as the wine of Lebanon.

The Tree in Alcinous Garden, had always blossoms, buds, and ripe fruits, one
under another. Such a Tree will God make every weak Christian to be. The
righteous (though never so weak) shall flourish like the Palm Tree, Psalm. 92.
12, 13, 14, Now the Palm Tree never loses his leaf, or fruit, says Pliny.

An old man being asked, If he grew in goodness, answered, Yea doubtless I
believe I do, because the Lord has said, They shall still bring forth fruit in
old age, they shall be fat, and (...) From Hagnan. Green.
flourishing, or green, as the Hebrew has it.

In the Island of St. Thomas (on the back side of Africa) in the midst of it is
a hill, and over that a continual Cloud, wherewith the whole Island is
watered. Such a cloud is Christ, to weak Saints. Though our hearts naturally
are like the Isle of Pathmos, which is so barren of any good, as that nothing
will grow, but on Earth that is brought from other places: yet Christ will make
them like a watered Garden, and like a Isa. 58. 11.
Spring of water, whose waters fail not.

The eighth Support, is this. 8 Support. A dying sai^ once cried out, He is
come, he is come (meaning the Lord) with a great reward, for a little work.


That the least good that is done by the weakest Saint, shall not be despised
by Christ, but highly esteemed and rewarded. As you may see in Mat. 19. 27.
Behold we have forsaken all, and followed thee, and what shall we have? A great
All, a great catch indeed, as I have formerly showed you; they left a few old
boats, and torn Nets, and poor housholdstuffe; yet Christ carries it very
sweetly and lovingly to them, and tells them in verse. 28. that they should sit
upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. Christ tells them
they shall sit as Ambassadors, or chief Counselors, and Presidents, which have
the chief seats in the Kingly Assembly; yea they shall sit as Kings; they are
here but obscure Kings, but Kings Elected, but in that day they shall be Kings
Crowned, Kings glorified, Kings acknowledged; then they shall as far outshine
the glory of the Sun, as the Sun psalm. 89. 27. Agrippa having suffered
imprisonment for wishing Cajus Emperor, the first thing Cajus did when he came
to the Empire, was to prefer Agrippa to a Kingdom. He gave him also a Chain of
gold, as heavy as the Chain of I^on that was upon him in prison: And will not
Christ richly ^eward for all our well wishes toward him? and for all our
gracious actings for him? surely he will; he has a Kings heart, as well as a
Kings Purse. ^eb. 6. 10.
now outshines a twinkling Star. In that day they shall be higher then the Kings
of the Earth. So in Mat. 10. ult. And whosoever shall give to drink unto one
of these little ones, a cup of cold water only, in the name of a Disciple,
verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise loose his reward, for a cup of cold
water. Water the common Element, and cold water, which cost them not the
charges of fire to warm it, for that there is a torrent, and a very sea of all
pleasures, provided for thee to all Eternity. God esteems men's deeds by their
minds, and not their minds by their deeds. The least and cheapest courtesy
that can be showed, shall be rewarded. There is an Emphasis in that deep
asseveration, Verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise loose his reward.
Mercy is as sure a grain as vanity. God is not like to break, neither will he
forget the least good done by the least Saint. The Buttler may forget Joseph,
and Joseph may forget his fathers house, but the Lord will not forget the least
good done by the weakest Saint.

The Duke of Burgundy, being a wise and loving man, did bountifully reward a
poor Gardener, for offering of him a Rape root, being the best present the poor
man had; and will not our God, whose very nature is goodness, kindness, and
sweetness, etc. do much more? surely he will reward the least good done by
the weakest Saint. Therefore be not discouraged, weak Christians, though you
should meet with hard measure from the world, though they should reward your
weak services, with reproaches, etc. for the Lord will reward you, he will not
despise the day of small things. What though (O precious soul) thy language be
clipped and broken, what though thou can but chatter like a Crane? what though
thou can not talk so fluently and eloquently for Christ, as others? what
though thy hand be weak, that thou can not do so much for Christ, as
others? nor do so well for Christ, as others; yet the Lord seeing thy heart
sincere, will reward thee. Thou shall have an everlasting rest for a little
labor, and a great reward for a little work.

The ninth Support is this, 9 Support. When Latimer was at the stake, ready to
be burned, he breathed out those sweet word^, Fidelis est Deus, etc. God is
faithful, etc. Acts and Mon. ^ol. 1579.


That as your Graces are weaker then others, so your Temptations shall be
fewer, and your Afflictions lighter then others. God in much wisdom and love
will suit your burdens to yoar backs; he will suit all your temptations and
afflictions, to your strength; your burdens shall not be great, if your
strength be bur little; as you may see, 1 Cor. 10. 13. There has no Temptation
taken you, but such as is common to man; but God is faithful, who will not
suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, but will will the Temptation
also, make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. The Lord, Oh weak
Christian! will suit thy burden to thy back, and his strokes to thy strength.
This is most evident in Scripture, That the strongest in Grace have always
been most tempted, afflicted, and distressed.

If Abraham excel others in Faith, God will try the Genesis 22.
strength of Abraham's faith, to the uttermost, and put him to that that he
never put man to before. If Moses excel all Number. 12. 3. Exodus 16. 7, 8. Numb.
^4. 27. 36. Chap. 16. 11. Ex. 15. 24. ^ames 5. 11. Read the 1, (...), and 7
Chapters of Job. (...) Cor. 12. 1. to 11.
others in meekness, the Lord will try the strength of that grace, and Moses
shall have to do with as proud, and as murmuring a Generation, as ever man had
to do with. If Job carry the day from all others, in point of Patience, he
shall be exercised with such strange and unheard of afflictions, as shall try
not only the truth, but also the strength of his patience to the uttermost. If
Paul have more glorious Revelations then the rest of the Apostles, Paul shall
be more buffetted, and exercised with Temptations, then the rest of the
Apostles.

And thus you see it clear by all these Instances, That the best and choycest
Saints, have always met with the worst and greatest Temptations, and
afflictions. So when the Disciples were in the lowest form, when they were
weak in grace, the Lord Jesus exercises them but with light afflictions, but
when they had a greater measure of the Spirit poured upon them, then their
troubles were increased and multiplied, and their former troubles, in
comparison of the later, were but Acts 2. 1. to 21.
as scratches of pins, to stabs at the heart. When the Spirit of the Lord was
poured out upon them, then they were afflicted, opposed, and persecuted with a
witness. When they had a greater measure of the Spirit, to enable them to bear
the hatred, frowns, strokes, and blows of the enraged world; then all of them
had the honor to suffer a violent death for Christ, as Histories do evidence.

That Is a very remarkable Scripture, Luke 24. 49. And behold I send the promise
of my Father upon you, but tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem, until ye be
endued with power from on high. The Lord Jesus would not have them go from
Jerusalem, till they were endued with power from on high. By the promise of the
father, is meant the gifts and graces of the Spirit, that is promised in Isa.
44. 3. Joel 2. 28. John 14. 16. and 15. 26. Tarry ye here (says Christ) at
Jerusalem, till ye be completely armed and fitted for all incounters, till ye
be endued with power: Or as the Greek carries it, Till ye be clothed. They
were as naked persons, they had but a little (...).
of the Spirit, so that they were not complete; they were not clothed with the
Spirit, till after the Ascension of Christ. Now says Christ, Tarry until such
time as ye are clothed with the Spirit. The Lord Jesus knew well enough, that
they should meet with bitter opposition, terrible Afflictions, and dreadful
persecutions, for his and the Gospel sake; therefore tarry (says he) until ye
be clothed with the holy Ghost: That so nothing may daunt ye, nor sink ye.

The tenth Support, is this.

That your persons stand not before God in your (...) righteousness, 10
Support.
but in the perfect, spotless, and matchless righteousness of the Lord
Jesus. Weak hearts are apt to sit down troubled and discouraged, when they
look upon that body of sin that is in them, and those imperfections that attend
their chiefest services, they are ready to say, we shall one day perish by the
strength of our lusts; or by the defects of our services. Oh but weak souls
should remember this (to strengthen them against all discouragements) that
their persons stand before God, clothed The costly Cloak of (...), which
D^oninisius sold to the Carthaginians, for an hundred Talents, was a mean and
beggarly ragge to that embroydered mantle that Christ does put upon the weakest
Saints.
with the righteousness of their Savior, and so God ownes them, and looks
upon them as persons wrapped up in his Royal Robe, Hence it is that he is called,
Jer. 23. 6. Jehovah Tsidkenu, The Lord our Righteousness. And so in 1 Cor. 1.
30. he is of God made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption.

Though weak Saints have nothing of their own, yet in Christ they have all,
for in him is all fulness, Col. 1. 19. both repletive, and diffusive; both of
abundance, and of redundance; both of plenty, and of bounty. He is made to weak
Saints Wisdom, by his Prophetical Office; and he is made to weak Saints,
Righteousness, and Sanctification, by his Priestly Office; and he is made to
weak Saints Redemption, by his Kingly Office. So in Col. 2. 10. And ye are
complete in him, which is the head of all Principallity and Power.

Varro reports of 288 several Opinions that was among the Philosophers, about
the complete happiness of man, but they were out in them all; One judging his
happiness lay in this, and another in that; they caught at the shadow of
happiness, but could not come at the Tree of Life, the Lord Jesus Christ, who
is weak Saints complete happiness. Rev. 14. 5. And in their mouths was found
no guile, for they were without fault before the Throne of God. Though men may
accuse you, judge, and condemn you, yet know for your support, that you are
acquitted before the Throne of God: However you may stand in the eyes of men,
as full of nothing but faults; as persons made up of nothing but sin; yet are
you clear in the eyes of God. So in Cant. 4. 7. Thou art all fair, my Love,
and there is no spot in thee. There Is none, such as are the spots of wicked
men; nor no spot in mine account. God looks upon weak Saints in the Son of his
love, and sees them all lovely; they are as the Tree of Paradise, Genesis 3. fair
to his eye, and pleasant to his taste. Or as Absalom, in whom there was no
blemish from head to foot. Ah poor souls! you are apt to look upon your spots,
and blots, and to cry out with the Leaper (not only) unclean, unclean, but
undone, undone. Well, for ever remember this, That your persons stand before
God in the righteousness of Christ; upon which account you always appear
before the Throne of God, without fault; you are all fair, and there is no
spot in you.

The eleventh Support, is this.

Your sins shall never provoke Christ, nor prevail with Christ 11 Support.
so far, as to give you a Bill of Divorce. O there is much in it (if the Lord
would set it home upon your hearts) your sins shall never prevail so far with
Christ, nor never so far provoke him, as to work him to give you a Read the 3d
Chapter of Jeremiah. Out of the most poysonfull druggs, God distills his glory,
and our salvation. Gallen speaks of a Maid, called Nupella, that was nourished
by poison. God can and will turn the very sins of his people, which are the worst
poison in all the world, into his childrens advantage.
Bill of Divorce. Your sins may provoke Christ to frown upon you; they may
provoke Christ to chide with you; they may provoke him gently to correct you;
but they shall never provoke Christ to give you a Bill of Divorce. Psalm. 89.
30, 31, 32, 33, 34. If his Children forsake my Law, and walk not in my
Judgments: If they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments: Then
will I visit their transgressions with the rod, and their iniquity with
stripes. Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him,
nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. That Is a great Support to a weak Saint,
That his sin shall never separate him from God, nor Christ. Thou art many times
afraid that this deadness, this dullness, this earthlinesse, and these
wandering thoughts, etc. that do attend thee, will provoke the Lord Jesus to
sue out a Bill of Divorce against thee: But remember this, Thy sins shall never
so far prevail with Christ, as to work him to give thee a Bill of Divorce.
Mark,

There Is nothing can provoke Christ to give thee a Bill of Divorce, but sin.
Now sin is slain. Ergo. I shall open this to you in three things.

First, Sin is slain Judicially; for it is condemned both by Christ, and his
people, and so it is dead according to Law; A threefold death of sin.
which is and may be a singular Comfort, and Support to weak Saints, that their
greatest and worst Enemy (Sin) is condemned to dye, and shall not for ever vex
and torment their precious souls. It Is dead Judicially, it is under the
sentence of condemnation. 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56. O death where is thy sting? O
grave where is thy Victory? The sting of death is sin, etc. Vide Grotium, and
Vo^stius, on the words, etc.
The Apostle here triumphs over it, as a Thief condemned to death. Sin is
sentenced now, though not fully put to death, it is dead judicially. As when the
sentence of death is past upon a Malefactor, you say he is a dead man, why? he
is judicially dead: so is sin, sin is judicially dead. When a man that has
robbed and wounded another, is taken, and sentenced judicially, we say he is a
dead man; and it is often a great refreshing and satisfaction to a man, that he
is so. Sin, O weak soul! is sentenced, and judicially slain; and therefore
that can never work the Lord Jesus to give thee a Bill of Divorce. The thoughts
of which should much refresh thee, and support thee.

Secondly, Sin is dead or slain civilly, as well as judicially. It Is civilly
dead, because the power of it is much abated; and Romans 6. 14.
its Dominion and Tyranny over-powred; as when a King or a Tyrant is whipped and
stripped of all power to domineere, reign, It Is with sin in the Saints, as 'twas
with those Beasts, Dan. 7. 12. who had their Dominions taken away, though their
lives were prolonged for a season, and a time.
and play the Tyrant, is civilly dead, even whiles he lives: So is sin in this
sense dead, even while it lives. That Text is suitable to our purpose, Hos. 13.
1. When Ephraim spoke trembling, he exalted himself in Israel; but when he
offended in Baal, he dyed.

What Is the meaning of these words? The meaning is this, When the King of
Ephraim spoke, the people even trembled at his voice, such power once he had:
But when he offended in Baal, by serving Baal, by giving himself up to
Idolatry, he dyed in respect of obedience, not yielded to him as formerly. Time
was that he was terrible, but when he fell to Idolatry, his strength and glory
came down; so that now he became even like a dead Carcass.

Adam dyed civilly, the same day that he sinned: The Creatures that before
lovingly obeyed him, as soon as he renounced obedience to his God, they
renounced all obedience to him, or his Sovereignty; so that he civilly dyed the
very same day that he sinned.

That Is a sweet word that you have, Romans 6. 11. Likewise reckon ye also your
selves to be dead indeed unto sin. Therefore Christ will never Divorce you for
sin. O what a support may this be to a weak Saint! That sin that he fears above
all other Where sin sits in the soul as a King sins upon his throne and
commands the heart, as a King commands his subjects, there is reign of sin,
but grace frees the soul from this.
things in the world, is slain judicially and civilly; the Lord has whipped and
stripped it of all its ruling, reigning, domineering, tyrannizing power. O
therefore Christians, look upon sin as dead (that is) as not to be obeyed, as
not to be acknowledged, no more then a Tyrant, that is stripped of all his
tyrannizing power. People that are wise, and understand their liberty, look not
upon such a one as fit to be obeyed and served, but as one fit to be renounced,
and destroyed. Do you so look upon your sins, and deal accordingly with them?

Thirdly, Sin is slain Naturally, as well as Civilly; Christ has given it its
deaths wound, by his death, and resurrection. He has given sin such a wound,
that it cannot be long lived, though it may linger a while in a Saint, (as a
Tree that is cut at the root with a sore gash, or two, must dye within a year,
perhaps a month, nay, it may be within a week, though for a time it may
flourish, it may have leaves and fruit, yet it secretly dies, and will very
shortly wither and perish.) The Lord Jesus has given sin such a mortal wound,
by his death and Spirit, and by the communication of his favor and grace to
the soul, that sin shall never recover its strength more, but dye a lingering
death, in the souls of the Saints. Christ did not dye all at once upon the
Cross, but by little and little. To show us, that his death should extend to
the slaying of sin gradically, in the souls of the Saints. When our Enemy has
a mortal wound, we say, he is a dead man, his wound is mortal: So when Jesus
Christ has given sin such a deadly wound such a mortal blow, that it shall
never recover its strength and power more; we may truly say, It Is dead, it is
slain: Therefore cheer up, Oh weak souls, for certainly sin that is thus
slain, can never provoke Jesus Christ to give you a Bill of Divorce. Ah that
all weak Christians would (like the Be) abide upon these sweet flowers, and
gather Honey out of them, etc.

To proceed. The twelfth Support is this.
Christ and you are Sharers. 12 Support. The notion of (...) is best expressed
by Chrysostom, in these words, When mankind fled far from Christ, Christ
pursued, and caught hold of it, and this he did by fastening on our Nature, in
his Incarnation, etc. The Ancients use to say (commonly) That Alexander and
Eph^stion had ba^ one soul in two distinct bodies, because their joy and
sorrow, glory and disgrace, was mutual to them both. It Is so between Christ
and his Saints. Their names that are written in red letters of blood in the
Churches Calendar, are written in golden letters in Christ's Register, in the
Book of Life, said Prudentius. In my lifetime (said a gracious soul) I have
been assaulted with temptations from Satan, and he has cast my sins into my
teeth, to drive me to despair, yet the Lord gave the strength to overcome all
his temptations


Know this weak Saints, for your support and comfort, That Christ shares with
you, and you share with Christ.

I shall open this sweet Truth to you a little.

1 Christ shares with you, in your Natures.

In Heb. 2. 16. For verily he took not on him the Nature of Angels, but he
took on him the seed of Abraham. And by this he has advanced fallen man,
above the very Angels. This is the great Mystery spoken of, 1 Timothy 3. 16. And
without controversy, great is the Mystery of Godliness, God manifested in
the flesh, etc.

2 The Lord Jesus shares with you in your Afflictions.

In Isa. 63. 9. In all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his
presence saved them. In his love, and in his pity he redeemed them, and he
bare them and carried them all the days of old. It is between Christ and his
Church, as between two Lute-strings, no sooner one is struck, but the other
trembles.

3 He shares with you in all your sufferings, and persecutions, as well as in
all your afflictions.

Acts 9. 4, 5. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? There is such a near Union
between the Lord Jesus Christ, and the weakest Saints, that a man cannot strike
a Saint, but he must strike through the very heart of Christ: Their sufferings
are held his, Col. 1. 24. and their afflictions are his afflictions; and their
reproaches are his reproaches, Heb. 13. 13. and their provocations are his
provocations. Nehem. 4. 4, 5. God is provokt more then Nehemiah. So Isa. 8. 18.
compared with Heb. 2. 13. Behold I, and the Children whom the Lord has given
me, are for signs and wonders in Israel. This the Apostle applies to Christ,
Heb. 2. 13.

4 The Lord Jesus Christ shares with you in all your Temptations, Heb. 2. 17,
18. Chap. 4. 15, 16.

Christ was tempted, and he was afflicted, as well as you, that he might he
able to succor you that are tempted. As a poor man that has been troubled
with pain and grief, he will share with others that are troubled with pain
or grief. Ah friends! the Lord Jesus Christ has lost none of his affections,
by going to Heaven; he is still full of compassion, though free from personal
passion. When he was on earth, Oh! how did he simpathize with his poor
servants, in all their temptations. Satan (says Christ to Peter) has desired
to winnow thee, but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. Luther in
his Preaching, met with every man's temptation, and being once asked How he could
do so? answered, Mine own manifold temptations and experiences are the cause
thereof. Oh the manifold temptations that the Lord Jesus has undergone, makes
him semable (as I may say) and willing to share with us in our temptations.

Secondly, As Christ shares with weak Saints: So weak Saints share with Christ.
And this I shall show you briefly in a few particulars.

1 Weak Saints share with Christ in his Divine Nature. 2 Pet. 1. 4. Whereby
are given to us exceeding great and precious Promises, that by these we might
be partakers of the Divine To be made partakers of the Divine Nature, notes two
things. 1 Fellowship with God in his holiness. 2 A fellowship with God in his
blessedness.
Nature. Not of the substance of the Godhead, as the Familists say, for that
is incommunicable. But by the Divine Nature, we are to understand those Divine
Qualities, called elsewhere, The Image of God, the Life of God; that whereby we
are made like to God in wisdom, and holiness, wherein the Image of God,
after which man was at first Created, consists, Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3. 10.
Saints that do partake of this Divine Nature, that is, of those Divine
Qualities before spoken of, they resemble God, not only as a picture does a
man, in outward lineaments, but as a Child does his Father, in countenance and
condition. And well may grace be called, The Divine Nature; for as God brings
light out of darkness, comfort out of sorrow, riches out of poverty, and glory
out of shame: so does grace bring day out of night, and sweet out of bitter,
and plenty out of poverty, and glory out of shame. It turns Counters into
gold, Pebbles into Pearls, sickness into health, weakness into strength, and
wants into abundance, Enjoying nothing, and yet possessing all things, 2 Cor.
6. 10. etc.

2 Weak Saints share with Christ in his Spirit and Grace. In Psalm. 45. 7.
Christ is anointed with the Oil of gladness above his fellows. They have the
Anointings of the Spirit, as well as he, though not so richly as he. They have
their measure, though not that measure and proportion of the Spirit, as Omne
bonum in summo bono. All good is in the chiefest good.
the Lord Jesus has. So in 1 John 16. Of his fullness have all we received
Grace for Grace. There is in Christ not only a fulness of Abundance, but
also a fulness of Redundance: There is an overflowing fulness in Christ, as
a fountain overflowes, and yet still remains full. Grace for Grace, or Grace
upon Grace; Abundance of grace, and the increases of graces one by another.

Grace for Grace: That is, as a Child in generation, receives member for
member: Or as the Paper from the Press, receives letter for letter: Or as the
Wax from the Seal, receives Print for Print: Or as the glass from the Image,
receives face for face: So does the weakest Saint receive from Jesus Christ.

Grace for Grace: That is, for every grace that is in Christ, there is the same
grace in us, in some measure. There is not the weakest Saint that breaths, but
has in him some wisdom that answers to the wisdom of Christ; and some
love, that answers to the love of Christ; and some humility, meekness, and
faith, that answers to the humility, meekness, and faith, of the Lord Jesus,
in truth and reallity, though not in degree, or quantity, etc.

3 Weak Saints share with Christ in the manifestations and discoveries of his
father.

The Lord Jesus that lies in the bosom of the father, has Plutarch's
reasoning is good (Taton philon panta k^ina Friends have all things in common.
But God is our friend. Ergo This was a ^are speech from a He^^hen.
the clearest and the fullest manifestations of the father, that can be; and he
comes and opens the love and heart of the father; he un-bosomes and un-bowels
God to the weakest Saints, as in John 15. 15. Henceforth I call you not
servants, for the servant knows not what his Lord does; but I have called you
friends, for all things that I have heard of my father, I have made known unto
you. So in John 17. 6, 7, 8.

4 Weak Saints share with Christ in his Honorable Titles.

In the title of Sons, 1 John 3. 12. Behold what manner of love the father has
bestowed upon us, that we should be called The wife shares with her husband in
all his Titles of honor. So does a Christian with his Christ. See 1 Samuel 13.
17. to the 29. Col. 2. 14, 15. Ephesians 2. 13, 14, 15, 16. Heb. 2. 14 15. Romans 8.
37. (...) We do over overcome.
the Sons of God! And in that of Heirs, Romans 8. 17. Yea, they are Priests, and
Prophets, and Kings, as well as he; as you may see, by comparing Revelations 1.
5, 6. with 1 Pet. 2. 9. etc.

5 Weak Saints share with Christ in his Conquests.

In 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57. Romans 8. 37. Christ has triumphed over sword,
famine, death, and Devils, etc. and so have they through him also; over all
these we are more then Conquerours, we are over and above Conquerours. Oh what
a blessed thing is this! that weak Saints should share with Christ in his
Conquests. The poor weak Soldier shares with his General, in all his noble
and honorable Conquests: So does a poor weak Christian share with his Christ
in all his noble and honorable Conquests.

6 Lastly, They share with Christ in his honor and glory.

And what would they have more? John 12. 26. If any man serve me, let him
follow me, and where I am, there shall also my servant be. If any man serve me,
him will my father honor. 1 Pet. 5. 1. Ephesians. 2. 6. And has raised us up
together, and made us sit together, in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.
Believers are already risen in Christ their head, and they do at this instant
sit in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. Christ as a public person does
represent all believing souls, and they are set down in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus. In Romans 8. 17. If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with
him. And in John 14. 1, 2, 3. I go to prepare a place for you, Christ is the
Believers harbinger, to prepare for them the best Mansions, etc.
and if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you
unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also. So in Rev. 3. 21. To him
that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I overcame,
and am set down with my Father, in his Throne. Now what would you have more,
weak souls? Christ shares with you, and you share with Christ. You are apt to
be discouraged, because you do not share with Christ in such measures of
grace, comfort, and holiness, as such and such strong Saints do. Oh but
remember in how many weighty things Christ and you are sharers, and be dejected
if you can. Ah Christians! what though you do not share in the honors,
profits, pleasures, and advantages of the world? yet this should be your joy
and Crown, that Christ and your souls are sharers in those things that are
most eminent, and excellent, most precious and glorious; and the serious
remembrance hereof, should bear up your heads, hopes, and hearts, above all the
troubles, temptations, and afflictions, that come upon you in this world, etc.

The third thing propounded, was, To show you the duty of weak Saints. Who
these weak Saints are, you have heard: Weak Saints Duties.
And what their Supports and Comforts are, you have heard. And now I shall show
you their duty, in the following particulars.

And the first duty that I shall press upon weak Saints, is this.

To be thankful for that little Grace they have. 1 Duty.


Will thou be thankful, Oh Christian! for the least courtesy showed thee by
men? And will thou not be thankful for that little measure of grace that is
bestowed upon thee by God? Do thou remember, Oh weak Christian! that the The
Laws of Persia, Macedonia, and Athens, condemned the ungrateful to death, and
certainly unthankfulness may well be styled The Epitome of all Vices.
least measure of grace is more worth then a thousand worlds? that it is more
worth then heaven it self? Do thou remember, O weak Christian! that the
greatest number of men have not the least measure or dram of saving grace? Does
free grace knock at thy door, when it passes by the doors of thousands? And
does it cast a Pearl of price into thy bosom, when others are left to wallow
in their blood for ever? And will thou not be thankful? Oh do but consider,
weak souls! how notoriously wicked you would have been, if the Lord had not
bestowed a little grace upon you. Thou look, oh soul! one way, and there
thou hear some a cursing, banning, and a blaspheming God to his very face:
Had not the Lord given thee a little grace, ten thousand to one, but thou had
been one in wickedness among these Monsters of mankind. And thou look
another way, and there thou see persons dicing, carding, drabbing, and
drunkening, etc. why had not the Lord vouchsafed to thee some tastes and sips of
grace, thou might have been as vild as the vildest among them. Ah weak
Saints! you do not think what an awakened conscience would give for a little
of that little grace that the Lord has given you: Were all the world a lump of
gold, and in their hand to give, they would give it for the least spark of
grace, for the least drop of mercy.

I have read of a man, who being in a burning Fever, professed One of the Kings
of England, in his straites cried out, A Kingdom for a Horse, a Kingdom for a
Horse. So do awakened consciences cry out, A Kingdom for a Christ, a Kingdom
for a Christ, or a little grace.
That if he had all the world at his dispose, he would give it all for one
draught of Beer: So would an awakened conscience, for one dram of grace. O
says such a soul, when I look up, and see God frowning; when I look inward,
and feel conscience gnawing, and accusing; when I look downward, and see hell
open to receive me; and when I look on my right and left hand, and see Devils
standing ready to accuse me; O had I a thousand worlds, I would give them all
for a little, lirtle drop of that grace that such and such souls have, whom I
have formerly slighted and despised. Oh! what would not a damned soul that
has been but an hour in hell, give for a drop of that grace that thou have in
thy heart? Think seriously of this, and be thankful.

Well, remember one thing more, and that is this, viz. That there is no such
way to get much grace, as to be thankful for a little grace. He who opens his
mouth wide in praises, shall have his heart filled with graces. Ingratitude
stops the ear of God, and shuts the hand of God, and turns away the heart of
the God of grace; and therefore you had need be thankful for a little grace.
Unthankfullnesse is the greatest injustive that may be; it is a withholding
from the great Landlord of heaven Lycurgus (says Musculus) amongst all his
Laws made none against the Ungrateful; because that was thought a thing so
prodigious, ^s not to be committed by man. Isa. 1. 3, 4.
and earth, his due, his debt.

Phillip branched his Soldier that begged the land of one that had relieved
him, and kindly entertained him, with (ingratis hospes) The Ungrateful Guest.
Oh weak Saints! give not God an occasion by your ingratitude to brand you, and
to write upon your foreheads, Ungrateful Children. Had it not been for
unthankfullnesse, Adam had been in Paradise, the lapsed Angels in heaven; and
the Jews in their own Land of Promise. The Jews have a saying, That the
World stands upon three things; The Law; Holy Worship; and Retribution: And if
these things fall, the world will fall. You know how to apply it.

But that I may in good earnest stir up your souls to thankfulness, will you
take home with you these things, that happily have never or seldom been
thought of by you.

First, Consider, That there is more need of Praises, then Gods favors and
mercies, seldom or never come single, there is a series, a concatenatio^ of
them, and every former draws on a ^uture.
there is of Prayers. Two things do with open mouth proclaim this truth.

And the first is this. Our mercies do outweigh our wants. This is true in
temporals, but infinitely more in spiritualls, and eternalls. Thou want this
and that outward mercy; and what is thy want, oh soul! of this and that single
mercy, to the multitudes of mercies that thou do enjoy? And as for
spiritualls, there is nothing more clear then this, that thy spiritual mercies
do infinitely outweigh thy spiritual wants. Thou want this and that
spiritual mercy, but what are those wants to that God, that Christ, and all
those spiritual blessings in heavenly places, with which thou art blessed in
Christ Jesus? Ephesians. 1. 4.


Secondly, Consider this, That all your wants and miseries are deserved and
procured by your own sins. Jer. 4. 18. Thy way and thy doings have procured
these things unto thee, this is thy wickedness, because it is bitter, because
it reaches God and Christ are the sole fountain from whence all these
streams of living waters flow.
unto thy heart. And Chap. 50. 25. Your iniquities have turned away these
things, and your sins have withheld good things from you. But now all your
mercies are unmerited, and undeserved, they all flow in upon you from the free
love and favor of God; and therefore there is more need of praises, then of
prayers. And oh! that the high praises of God were more in your mouths, upon
this very account! And oh that with David, you would summon all the faculties
of your souls to praise the Lord, who has freely filled you, and followed
Psalm. 149. 2. Psalm. 103. 1. to 5.
you with the riches of mercy, all your days!

But secondly, Consider this, Thankefullnesse is a surer, and a better evidence
of our sincerity, and spiritual intenuity, then praying, or hearing, or such
like services are. Thanksgiving is a selfe-denying grace; it is an uncrowning
our selves, and the Creatures, to set the Crown upon the head of our Creator;
it is the making our selves a footstool, that God may be lifted up upon his
Throne, and ride It Is much to be feared, that that man is Christlesse and
graceless, that is earnest in craving mercies, but slow and dull in returning
praises. It Is a sign that the Dumb Devil has possessed such a man.
in a holy triumph over all. It is a grace that gives God the supremacy in all
our hearts, thoughts, desires, words, and marks. Self-love, flesh and blood,
and many low and carnal considerations, may carry men to pray, and hear, and
talk, etc. The whip may work a shame to beg, but thankfulness is the
free will Offering of a Child. There Is nothing that so clearly and so fully
speaks out your sincerity and spiritual intenuity, as thankfulness does.
Therefore weak Saints, if you would have a substantial evidence of your
sincerity, and spiritual intenuity, be thankful for a little grace. The
little Birds do not sip one drop of water, but they look up, as if they meant
to give thanks: To show us what we should do for every drop of grace, etc.

The third and last Consideration to set this home, is this.

A thankful soul holds consort with the music of Heaven. By thankfulness
thou hold a correspondency with the Rev. 4. 6, 7, 8, 9. and 5. 12, 13, 14.
Angels, who are still a singing Hallelujahs to him that sits upon the Throne,
and is blessed for ever. In heaven there is no prayers, but all praises. I am
apt to think, that there cannot be a clearer, nor a greater argument of a man's
right to heaven, and ripeness for heaven, then this, being much in the work of
heaven here on earth. There is no grace but Love, nor no Epictetus wished he
were a Nightingale, to be ever singing: And what then should a Saint wish? etc.
duty but Thankfulness, that goes with us to heaven.

I, but weak Saints may say, Sir, We judge that there is weight in what you
say, to provoke us to thankefullnesse: But did we know that we had true Grace,
though it were never so little, though it were but as the grain of
Mustard Seed, we would be thankful. But this is our condition, we live
between fears, and hopes; one day hoping we shall to heaven, and be happy for
ever: Another day we are fearing that we shall to hell, and miscarry for ever:
And thus we are up and down, backward and forward; sometimes we believe we
have grace, and at other times we doubt we have none. Sometimes we have a
little light, and suddenly our Sun is clouded; one day we are ready to say with
David, The Lord is our portion; and the next day we are ready to complain with
Jonah, that we are cast out from the presence of the Lord.

Methinks I hear a weak Saint saying thus to me. Sir, I would feign have an
end put to this controversy that has been long in my soul, viz. Whether I
have grace, or no; and if you please I will tell you what I find, and so humbly
desire your judgment and opinion upon the whole.

Well, speak on, poor soul, and let me hear what thou have found in thine
own soul.

Why Sir, then thus.

I find first, a holy restlesnesse in my soul, till with Sime^n, I have
gotten Christ in my arms; yea, till I Luke 2. 25. to 33. The Child is
restless till it be in the Mothers Arms Cant. 5. 10.
have gotten Christ into my heart. I go from Duty to Duty, and from Ordinance
to Ordinance, and yet I cannot rest, because I cannot find him whom my soul
loves. I am like Noah's Dove, that could not rest until he had gotten into the
Ark. Oh I cannot be quiet till I know that I am housed in Christ. My soul is
like a ship in a storm, that is tossed hither and thither; Oh! where shall I
find him? Oh! how shall I obtain him who is the chiefest of ten thousand? What
Absalom said in another case, I can say in this, says the poor soul; in his
banishment he could say, What Is all this to me, so long as I cannot see the
Kings face? And truly the language of my soul is this, What Is honor to me?
And riches to me? And the favor of Creatures to me? so long as I go mourning
without my Christ; so long as I see not my interest in my Christ.

Well, have you any thing else to say, O weak Christian? Yes Sir, I have one
thing more to say. What Is that? Why, it is this.
I can truly say, That the poorest, the most distressed, and Tota vita beni
Christiani sanctum desiderium est:
in his desires, then I am. The poor man desires bread to feed him; and the
wounded desires a Plaster to heal him; and the sick man desires Cordialls to
strengthen him, etc. But these are not fuller of desires after those things
that are suitable to them, then I am of holy and heavenly desires. Oh that I had
more of God! Oh that I were filled with Christ! Oh that I had his
righteousness to cover me! His grace to pardon me! His power to support me!
His wisdom to council me! his loving-kindnesse to refresh me! And his
happiness to Crown me, etc.

Well, is this all, O weak Saint? No Sir, I have one thing more to tell you.
What Is that? Why, that is this.
Though I dare not say that Christ is mine, yet I can truly Some Contemplatio^s
have Generationem longam, fruitionem brevem, but these are not the con^em
plations of the Saints.
I am always best, when I am most a meditating and contemplating of Christ,
his love, his grace, etc. Psalm. 139. 17. How precious are thy thoughts unto me,
O God? How great is the sum of them?

Well, is this all, O weak Saint? No Sir, I have one thing more to say. What Is
that? Why, it is this.
I can truly say, That the want of Christ's love is a greater that answers to
all things, as Solomon speaks; and yet all these wants do not so grieve me,
and so afflict and Eccl. 10. 19.
trouble me, as the want of Christ, as the want of grace, as the want of the
discoveries of that favor, that is better then Psa. 63. 3, 4.
life.

Well, is this all, O weak Saint? No Sir, there is one thing more. What Is that?
Why, that is this.
That I would not willingly, nor resolvedly sin against Christ, V.
for a world. It Is true, I dare not say I have an interest in I will rather
leap into a bonsire, then wilfully to commit wickedness, wilfully to against
God.
Christ, yet I dare say, that I would not willingly and resolvedly sin against
Christ, for a world. I can say, through grace, were I this moment to dye, that
my greatest fear is of sinning against Christ, and my greatest care is of
pleasing Christ. I know there was a time, when my greatest care was to please
And I, said A selme, had rather g^e to h^ll ^ure from sin then to heaven
polluted wi^h that filth. The Primitive Christians chose rathet to be ^hrowne
to Ly^ns without then left to lusts within. Ad Leonem magis quam Leonem, says
Tertullian. VI. It is rep^red of Bucer, and Calvin, That they loved a^l them in
whom they could esp^e (Aliqu^a Christi) any thing of Christ. It Is justi so with
these poor hearts that question their present condition. Jer. ^. 1. 2, 3. VII.
Psa. 119. 136
my self, and the Creature; and my greatest fear was of displeasing the
Creature. I can remember with sorrow and sadness of heart, how often I have
displeased Christ, to please my self; and displeased Christ, to please the
Creature; but now it is quite otherwise with me; my greatest care is to please
Christ, and my greatest fear is of offending Christ.

Well, is this all, O weak Saint? No Sir, I have one thing more. What Is that?
Why, that is this.
Though I dare not say that Christ is mine, and that I have an interest in him;
yet I can truly say, I dearly love the people of Christ, for the Image of
Christ that I see stamped upon them. It Is true, I dare not say, Christ is mine,
and heaven is mine; I cannot say with such and such, The Lord is my Portion;
yet I can say that I dearly love those that have the Lord for their portion. I
can truly say, that the poorest, and the most neglected, and the most despised
Saint in the world, is more precious in my eye, and more dear to my soul,
then the greatest and the richest sinner in the world, Psalm 16. 3.

Well, is this all, O weak Saint, that thou have to say? No Sir, I have one
thing more. What Is that? Why, that is this.
Though I dare not say that I have an interest in Christ, or that I love
Christ, yet I dare say, That my soul weeps, and mournes in secret for the
dishonor that is done to Christ, both by my self, and by others also. I can
look the Lord in the face, were I now to dye, and say, Lord, thou that know
all thoughts and hearts, thou do know that mine eyes run down with Rivers
of tears, because men keep not thy Law.

Well, is this all? No Sir, I crave your patience to hear me in one thing
more. What Is that, O weak Christian? Why, that is this.
That I prize persons and things according to the spiritualnesse Psalm. 119.
104. Thy word is very pure, therefore does thy Much in the word is wrapped up in
a little, it is more to be admired, then to have Homers I liads comprised in a
nut-shel. The word is like the stone Garamantides, that has d^ops within it
self, enriching of the gracious soul.
servant love it. Other men love it, because of the profit they get by it; or
because of a name, or this, or that, but I love it for the purity, for the
holiness, and the cleanness of it. No preaching (says the weak Saint) nor no
praying, nor no talking, nor no society that likes me, and is sweet to me, but
that that is most spiritual, most holy. It is not an Exercise tricked and
trimmed up, with wit, learning, and eloquence; it is not the hanging of truths
ears with counterfeit Pearls, that takes me; but the more plainness,
spirituallnesse, and holiness I see in an Exercise, the more is my heart
raised to prize it, and love it. And therefore, says the weak Saint, because
Christ is perfectly and infinitely holy above all others, I prize Christ above
all. Ordinances are sweet, O but Christ is more sweet to my soul; Saints are
precious, but Christ is far more precious; Heaven is glorious, but Christ is
infinitely more glorious. The first thing that I would ask, if I might have it,
says the weak Saint, is Christ. And the next thing that I would ask, if I
might have it, is more of Christ. And the last None but Christ, none but
Christ, ^^id the Martyr.
thing that I would ask, if I might have it, is that I might be sa^iated and
filled with the fulness of Christ. Let the Ambition, man take the honors of
the world, so I may but have Christ. Let the Voluptuous man swim in all the
pleasures of the world, so I may have Christ. And let the covetous man tumble
up and down in all the gold and silver of the world, so I may have Christ, and
it shall be enough to my soul.

Well, is this all, O weak Saint? No Sir, I have one thing more to say. What Is
that? Why, it is this.
I find the same Conflict in my soul, that Paul found in IX. The best Saints
in this world are l^ke the Tribe of Manasses, half on this side Jordan, in the
Land of the Amorites, and half on that side, in the holyland. And tho to be
kept from sin, brings most comf^rt to a poor soul, yet for a poor sou^e to
oppose sin and God to pardon sin, that brings most glory to God. 2 Cor. 12.
7, 8, 9. X. Sozonem r^lates of one, who was as circumspect to be seen, as to
be. A gracious soul is as careful that he does not endanger another, by a bad
life. as he is careful to save his own life.
his soul, after he was converted near upon 14 years, after he was taken up
into as clear and choice enjoyments of God, as any soul that ever I read of.
The Conflict that is mentioned, Romans 7. I find in my soul, the whole frame of
my soul, understanding, will, and affections, are set against sin. I find that
I hate the evil that I do; and I find That the good that I would do, I do
not, and the evil that I would not do, that do I. I find a Law in my
Members, rebelling against the Law of my mind, and leading of me Captive to the
Law of sin. And this makes me often to cry out with Paul, O wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? Therefore I sometime hope,
that those sins that are now my burden, shall never hereafter be my bane.

Well, and is this all, O weak Saint? No Sir, I have one thing more to say.
What Is that? Why, it is this.
I can truly say, when the Lord gives me any strength against sin, and any
power to serve him, and to walk close with him, in his ways, it is a greater
joy and comfort to my soul, then all the blessings of this life. Though I have
not yet seen that he has set me as a seal upon his heart, as a seal upon his
arm: Though I have not yet the clear assurance of his love: Though his Spirit
has not yet set up such a light in my soul, whereby I might run and read my
right and title to himself and heaven; yet when he does give me but a little
light through a crevis, when he does but begin to cause his love to dawne upon
me; when he gives me but a little strength against sin, and a little power to
walk close with himself, etc. O this does administer more abiding joy, and
more sweet peace, and more sollid comfort to my soul, then all the riches,
honors, friends, and favors of this world.

Well, is this all, O weak Saint? No Sir, I have one thing more to say. What Is
that? Why, that is this.
Though my interest in Christ be not clear to me, yet I can XI. Psalm. 101. 3.
Psalm. 139. 21, 22. Psalm. 120. 6.
truly say, I would not change my condition with the men of this world, for a
thousand worlds. It Is true, I cannot say that I have the seal and witness of
the Spirit, that many talk and boast of, (though I fear but a few enjoy) yet I
can really say, That I would not change my estate with men merely civil, nor
with the profane men of this world, for ten thousand worlds, etc.

Well, is this all, O soul? No Sir, I have but one thing more, and then I have
done. Well, what is that? Why, that is this.
I find my soul carried forth to a secret resting, relying, leaning, staying,
and hanging upon Christ, for life and happiness. Though I know not how it
shall go with me, yet I Job 13. 15. 2 Kings 7. 3, 4, 5. Esth. 4. 16.
have thrown my self into his arms, I lean upon him, there I Will hang, and
there I Will rest and stay: If I must perish, I Will perish there.

And thus, Sir, I have opened my state and condition to you. And now I do
earnestly desire your judgment upon the whole.

Well then, this I shall say, as I must answer it in the day of my appearing
before God, That had I as many souls as I have hairs on my head, or as there
be Stars in heaven, I could freely adventure the loss of them all, if these
things do not undeniably speak out, not only the truth, but also the
strength of Grace, etc. Nay, let me tell you, That he that finds but any of
these things really in his soul (though the Lord has not given him a clear
and full manifestation of his love and favor, etc.) yet while breath is in his
body, he has eminent cause to bless God, and to walk thankefully and humbly
before him.

The second use of the Point, is this.

Live up to that little Grace you have.

Thou say, O weak Christian, thou have but a little light, etc. Well, grant
it, but know, that it is thy duty to live up to those measures of To speak well
(says Isiodorus Pelu^iota) is to sound like a ^ymbal; but to do well, is to
act like an Angel, etc
grace thou have. And this is the second head that I shall press upon you;
live up, and live out that grace you have. And if ever there were a season to
press this Point home upon souls, this is the season in which we live: And
considering, that it is not a flood of words, but weight of Argument, that
carries it with ingenuous spirits, I shall therefore propound these following
things to their serious consideration.

First, Consider this, Living up to your Graces, carries If Seneca said of his
wise man, Majore pa^te illic est, unde descendit, He is more in heaven, then in
earth. May not I say this is much more true of the godly, etc.
with it the greatest evidence of the truth of Grace.

That man that lives not up to his grace, (let him be strong or weak) wants one
of the best and strongest demonstrations that can be, to evidence the truth of
his grace. If you would have a clear evidence that that little love, that
little faith, that little zeal you have, is true; then live up to that love,
live up to that faith, live up to that zeal that you have, and this will
evidence it beyond all contradiction, etc.

Secondly, Consider this, God, and your own souls will be very great loosers,
if you live not up to those measures of Grace you have.

God will loose many prayers, and many praises, he will loose much honor and
glory, and service, which otherwise Of all losses. spiritual losses are the
saddest* and greatest, and fercht up with the greatest difficulty.
he might have; and you will loose much peace, much comfort, much rest,
quietness, and content, that otherwise your souls might enjoy, etc.

Thirdly, Consider this, Your not living up to that little light and grace you
have, will open the mouths of graceless souls against your gracious God, and
against his gracious ones, and against his gracious ways.

You think because of the weakness of your grace, you must be borne with in
this, and that, and what not? But remember, it is your duty to live up to the
light and grace you have; and nothing below this will effectually stop the
mouths 1 Pet. 2. 15. Ye may put to silence the Greek word (...), signifies to
muzzle, to halter up, or button up their mouths, as we say. O there is nothing
that will so muzzle and b^tton up the mouths of vain men, as Christians
siving up to that light and grace they have.
of graceless wretches from barking against the ways of God, the truths of
God, and the people of God. Vain men will be often a reasoning thus, Though
such and such men and women, have not such great knowledge, such clear light,
such strong love, and such burning zeal, as David, Paul, and other Worthies,
yet they have so much light, and knowledge, as tells them, that they should not
carry themselves thus and thus as they do. Their light and knowledge tells
them, that they should be just and righteous in their dealings, and in all
their ways and designs, etc. Though they have not such great measures of
spiritual enjoyments, as such and such; yet that little grace they have,
should lead them b y the hand to do things worthy of that Christ, and that
Gospel they profess, etc.

Let me a little expostulate the point with you (weak Saints) you know that you
should not be stirred and heated by every straw that is in your way, why don't
you in this then live up to your light? You know that you should not be
overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. And why don't you in this live
up to your light? You know that you should Do good Romans 12. 21. Mat. 5. 44.
u^t.
to those that do hurt to you; why do not you in this live up to your light?
You know that you should do your duties to others, though they neglect their
duties to you: It Is not the neglect of a husbands duty, that frees the wife
from the discharge of hers: Nor the neglect of a wives duty, that frees the
husband from the discharge of his. You know this, don't you? yes, why don't you
then live up to your light? Why do you by your contrary actings open the
mouths of others against God, and his ways? You know that you should be
exemplary in your relations, in your Generation, and in your conversations. You
know that you should be examples of holiness, meekness, sweetness, patience,
and contentedness, and why then don't you live up to your knowledge in these
things? You know that you should do to others, as you would have others to do
to you: And why in this don't you live up to your knowledge? Ah that you that
are weak did not cause the mouths of wicked men to be opened against God, his
truths, and ways. Therefore by your living below that light and knowledge that
God has given you, I beseech you as you tender the honor of God, and as you
would stop the mouths of vain men, live up to those measures of grace that the
Lord has given you. No way to comfort-like this, no way to the Crown like
this; he will not be long a Babe in grace, who lives out that little grace he
has.

Fourthly, Living up to your light is the readiest and the only way to fetch
up and to recover all that has been lost by your living below your light.

By your living below your light, God, your own souls, and the Gospel, have
lost much, yea, and others also have lost much light, comfort, strength, and
quickness, etc. that they might have had, had you but lived up to that little
grace you Bernard paraphrasing on that of Solomon, A L^lly amongst thorns,
says, the manners (or lines) of men, as Lillies, have their colors and
odou^^; that which comes from a pure heart, and a good Conscience, has he
color of a Lilly. if a good name fallow; it is more truly a Lil'y, when
neither cander nor odor of the Lilly is wanting. Non enim passibus ad deum sed
affectibus currimus.
had. Now there is no way on earth to recover, and to fetch up these losses,
but by living up to that grace you have. Ah Christians! it is not your running
from Sermon to Sermon, (not that I speak against frequent hearing of the word)
nor your crying up this man, and that man; or this notion, or that; or this
way, or that, that will recover and fetch up the honor that God has lost by
your living below your graces; it is only your living up to your graces, that
will make up all the breaches that have been made upon his honor, and the
Gospel, and upon the comfort and peace of your own souls, and others. Well,
remember this, all the honor that God has from you in this life, is from your
living up to that light, knowledge, love, fear, and faith, that he has given
you: There Is nothing that will make up all losses, but this; therefore I beg
of you upon the knees of my soul, that you would take this one thing home with
you, and go into your Closets, and lay your hands upon your hearts, and say,
Well, the Lord has lost much, and my own soul has lost much, and others
have lost much by my living below that little Grace I have; and therefore I
will now make it my business (by assisting Grace) to live up to those measures
of Grace that I have received, more then yet I have done all my days. I will
by the strength of Christ make it more my duty, and my work to live out what
God has given in, then ever yet I have done, that so the Lord and the Gospel
may be no further loosers, but gainers by me.

The fifth and last Motive, is this, The readiest and the surest Job 17. 9.
Cant. 6. 10. Prove. 4. 18. H^story reports of a Country in Asrica, where the
peoples industry has an abundant reward; for every bushel^ of seed they sow,
they receive 150 mcrease after. Blaza^ium Plin l. 18. c. 10. The app^ication is
easy. Prove. 10. 4. Dyonisius gave him his money aga^ne, from whom he had taken
much, after that he hea^d he empl^yed a little well: And will God beworse then
a He^then?
way to get more Grace, is to live up to that little Grace you have.

He that lives up to a little light, shall have more light; he that lives up to
a little knowledge, shall have more knowledge; he that lives up to a little
faith, shall have more faith; and he that lives up to a little love, shall have
more love, etc. There is no such way to attain to greater measures of grace,
as for a man to live up to that little grace he has. Verily the maine reason
why many are such Babes and shrubs in grace, is, because they don't live up to
their seize. He that will not improve two Talents, shall never have the
honor to be trusted with five: But he that improves a little, shall be trusted
with much. The diligent hand makes rich. He that is active and agile, that
works as well as wishes, that adds endeavors to his desires, will quickly be a
Cedar in grace. Ah Christians! you have a God that is great, a God that is good;
a God that is gracious, and a God that is rich, that loves not to see his
Children to be always weaklings and striplings in grace. The very Babe, by
drawing the Breasts, gets strength and nourishment. O you Babes in grace, put
out that little strength you have, be you still a drawing at the breasts of
Christ, at the breasts of the Promises, and strength will come, nourishment
will follow, etc.

The third Duty that I would press upon weak Saints; is this.

Be sure that you always reflect upon your Graces, and whatsocver good is in
you, with Cautions. This is a weighty Point, and does bespeak your most serious
attention.

There are six Rules or Cautions that weak Saints should

And the first is this, Look upon all your Graces, as gifts Of thine own
(aith David) have we given thee. 1 Chr. 29. 14.
of Grace; as favors given you from above, as gifts dropped out of heaven into
your hearts, as flowers that are given you out of the Garden of Paradise.

A man should never look upon his grace, but he should look upon it as a flower
of Paradise, as a gift that God has cast into his bosom, from heaven. 1. Cor.
4. 7. Who makes thee to differ from another? And what have thou that thou have
not received? etc. Thou talkest of light, of love, of fear, of faith, etc. but
what are all these, but Pearls of glory that are freely given thee by the hand
of grace? Every good As all light flows from the Sun, and all water from the
sea, so all good flows from Heaven.
and perfect gift comes down from above. The greatest excellencies in us do
as much depend upon God, as the light does upon the Sun. When thou look upon
thy wisdom, thou must say, Here Is wisdom, I, but it is from above. Here is
some weak love working toward Christ, but it is from above Here Is joy, and
comfort, and peace, but these are all the flowers of Paradise, they never grew
in natures Garden. When a soul looks thus upon all those costly Diamonds with
which his heart is decked, he keeps low, though his graces are high. Where this
rule is neglected, the soul will be endangered, of being swelled and pufft.

Mr. Fox was used to say, That as he got much good by his sins, so he got much
hurt by his graces. When you look upon the stream, remember the fountain; when
you look upon the flower, remember the root; when you look upon the stars,
remember the Sun; and when you look upon your graces, remember the fountain of
grace, else Satan will be too hard for you. Satan is so artificial, so subtle
and critical, that he can make your very graces, to serve him against your
graces; conquering joy by joy, sorrow by sorrow, humility by humility, fear by
fear, and love by love, if you do not look upon all your graces, as streams
flowing from the fountain above, and as fruits growing upon the Tree of life,
that is in the midst of the Paradise of God. Therefore when one eye is fixed
upon your graces, let the other be always fixed upon the God of grace.

Secondly, At the time when your eye is upon inherent grace Aut totum mecum
tene, aut totam omit. Greg. Naz. Let us say of Christ, as the heathen once
said of his petty Gods. (Contemno minutus istos Deos, modi ^ovem propiti am
habeam) So long as he had his Jupiter to friend, he regarded the^ not. So so
^ong as we have our Jesus to friend, we should not reg^rd others no not our
very graces, in comparison of Christ
and righteousness, let your heart be fixed upon Christ, and his imputed
righteousness.

Paul's eye was upon his grace, Romans 7. 22. 25. I delight in the Law of God,
after the inward man. And with my mind I serve the Law of God. And yet at that
very same time, his heart was set upon Christ, and taken up with Christ, verse.
25. I thank God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. So in Col. 2. 2, 3. you have
one eye fixed upon grace, and at the same time the heart fixed upon Christ. That
their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all
riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgement of the
mystery of God, and of the father, and of Christ; in whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge. His eye is upon grace, his heart is upon
Christ. So in Phil. 3. 8. the Apostle has his eye upon the excellent knowledge
of Christ, but verse. 9. his heart is set upon the righteoushesse of Christ.
That I might be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of
the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by faith. Here you have his eye upon grace, and his heart upon
Christ, in the very presence of his grace. This is your glory, Christians, in
the presence and sight of all your graces, to see the free grace of Christ and
his infinite, spotless, matchless, and glorious righteousness, to be your
surest, sweetest, highest, and choycest comfort, and refuge.

Peter was not well skilled in this lesson, and that was the very reason that
he fell fowlest, when his confidence was highest. Grace is a ring of gold, and
Christ is the Pearl in that ring; and he that looks more upon the ring, then
the Pearl that is in it, in the hour of temptation will certainly fall. When
the wives eye is upon her Rings or Jewels, then her heart must be set upon her
husband. When grace is in my eye, Christ must at that time be in my arms; yea,
he must lie between my breasts. Cant. 1. 13. My Beloved is as a bundle of
myrrh, he shall lie all night between my breasts. Christ (and not grace) must
lie nearest to a Christians heart.

A third thing is this, When you look upon your grace, you must look upon it
as a beautiful Creature, that is begotten in Gal. 2. 20. Phil. 5. 6 Deus nihil
coronat n^si dona sua. Aug. When God crowns us he does but crown his own
gifts in us.
the soul by Christ, and that is strengthend, maintained, cherished, and
upheld in your souls by nothing below the spiritual, internal, and glorious
apperations of Christ.

Though Grace be a beautiful Creature, yet Grace is but a Creature, and so
your souls must look upon it. Grace is a heavenly offspring, it is the
firstborn of God (as I may say) and does most represent him to the life.
Grace is a bud of glory, it is of the blood Royal, it is nobly descended, Jam.
1. 17. So in Heb. 12. 2. Looking unto Jesus the Author and (...) The Leader and
Crowner
Finisher of our faith. Christ is the Alpha and Omega, the Beginner, and Ender.
In all other things and Arts, the same man cannot begin; and finish, but Christ
does both, Phil. 1. 5. Our graces thrive, and are upheld in life, and power, in
beaury and glory, by the internal apperation of Christ in our souls. So in
Col. 1. 27. Christ in you, the hope of glory. So verse. 29. Whereunto I also
labor, striving according to his working, which works in me mightily. So
Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things, through Christ that strengthens me. I
(...), is wrong ^^ in me in power. The word ((...). All things) tho it be an
universal, is not to be taken in the u most ex^ent, but according to the use
of the like phrases in all languages, wherein the universal sign affix^,
either to persons, o^ times, or places, or things, signifies a greater number,
but not all without exception, as you may see by comparing these Scriptures
together, Psalm. 14. 4, 8, 9. John 14. 26. 1 Cor. 10. 23 So those words are to
be understood in Phil. 4. 13.
can be high, and low, poor and rich, honorable and base, something or
nothing, etc. through Christ that strengthens me. So in Cant. 4. ult. Blow upon
my Garden, that the spices thereof may send forth a fragrant smell. We may
puff and blow our hearts out, and yet no savoury smell will flow forth, if
Christ does not blow. So in Psalm. 138. 3. In the day when I cried, thou
answeredst me, and strengthenest me with strength in my soul. Your graces,
Christians, are heavenly Plants of Gods own setting, and watering; and
certainly this heavenly Husbandman will never suffer such Plants of renown to
wither, for want of heavenly sapp; he will look to the strengthening,
supporting, and nourishing of the work of his own hand; he will cause the
desires of his people to bud, and their graces to blossom, and their souls to
be like a watered Garden, green and flourishing, Isa. 58. 11. compared with
Isa. 35. 6, 7.

Fourthly, When you look upon your Graces, you must look upon them as an
earnest of more glorious and unspeakeable measures of Grace and glory, that
your souls shall be filled with at last.

In Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. After that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy
spirit of Promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the
redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory. That
little light and knowledge thou have, is an earnest to thy soul, that thou
shall at last know even as thou art known. 1 Cor. 13. 12. For now we see
through a glass darkely, but then face to face. Now I know in part, but then
shall I know, even as I am known. Christians know but little of that they
should know, they know but little of that they might know, they know but little
of that others know, they know but little of that they desire to know, they
know but little of that they shall know, when they shall come to know, even as
they are known. And yet these weak and imperfect glimpses that they have of
God and Heaven here, are infallible pledges of that perfect knowledge, and full
prospect, that they shall have of God and heaven hereafter. So that that little
spark of joy thou have, is an earnest of those everlasting joys that shall
rest upon thy head, when (...) in a Riddle. Aenigma is properly Obscura
allegoria, an obscure Allegory, it is an Allegory with a mask on; it is a cloudy,
knotty, intricate speech, sealed and locked up from vulgar apprehensions. That Is
a Riddle.
all sorrow and mourning shall fly away, Isa. 35. 10. etc. And those sips of
comfort thou have now, are an earnest of thy swimming in those everlasting
pleasures that be at gods right hand, Psalm. 16. ult. The least measures of
grace, are an earnest of greater measures: God will not loose his earnest,
though men often loose theirs. God will not despise the day of small things; he
will make those that bring forth but thirty fold, to bring forth sixty fold;
and those that bring forth sixty fold, to bring forth a hundred fold, etc. He,
his Son, and Spirit, are all eminently and fully engaged to carry on the work
of grace in his Childrens souls. Therefore do not sit down and say, my light
is but dim, and my love but weak, and my joy but a spark, that will quickly go
out, etc. But always remember, That those weak measures of grace thou have,
are a sure evidence of greater measures that God will confer upon thee in his
own time, and in his own ways, Isa. 64. 4, 5.

Fifthly, When you look upon your Graces, be sure that you look more at the
truth of your Graces, then at the measure of your Graces.

You must rather bring your Graces to the Touchstone, to try their truth; then
to the balance to weigh their measure. Many weak Christians are weighing their
graces, when they should be a trying the truth of their graces, as if the
quantity and measure of grace were more considerable, then the Essence and
nature of grace; and this is that that keeps many weak Saints in a dark,
doubting, questioning, and despairing condition; yea, this makes their lives a
very hell. Weak Saints, if you will not observe this rule, this Caution, when
you look upon your graces, you will go sighing and mourning to your Graves. Ah
poor hearts! you should not be more cruel to your own souls, then God is.
When God comes to make a judgment of your spiritual estates, he does not
bring a pair of scales to we^gh your graces, but a Touchstone to try the truth
of your graces; and so should you deal by your own souls: If you deal
otherwise, you are more cruel to your souls, then God would have you. And if
you are resolved, That in this you will not imitate the Lord, then I dare
prophecy, that joy and peace shall be none of your Lam. 1. 16.
Guests, and he that should comfort you, will stand a far off. It Is good to
own and acknowledge a little grace, though it be mingled with very much
corruption; as that poor soul did, Mark 9. 24. And straightway the father of
the Child Grace is homogeneall: ^very winkling of light; is light; every drop
of water, is water; every spark of fire, is fire; every drop of honey, is
honey: So every drop of grace, is grace; and if the l^ast dr^p or spark of
grace, be not wo^th ac knowledging, it is worth nothing.
cried out, and said with tears, Lord I believe, help thou mine unbelief. He
had but a little little faith, and this was mixed with abundance of unbelief,
and yet notwithstanding he acknowledges that little faith he had. Lord I
believe, help my unbelief. His faith was so weak, that he accounts it little
better then unbelief: Yet says he, Lord I believe, help my unbelief. The
least measure of faith will make thee blessed here, and happy hereafter.

A Doctor cried out upon his dying Bed (Credo languida fide sed tamen fide)
Much faith will yield unto us here our Heaven, and any faith (if true) will
yield us heaven hereafter. So the Church in Cant. 1. 5. I am black, but comely.
She had nothing to say for her beautifullnesse, yet she acknowledges her
comeliness, I am black, but comely. Though she could not say she was clear,
yet she could say she was comely. As she was free to confess her blackness,
so she was ingenuous to acknowledge her comeliness. I am black, but comely. Ah
Christians! will you deal worse with your own souls, then you deal with
your Children? When you go to make a Judgment of your Child's affections, you
look more to the truth of their affections, then you do to the strength of
their affections; and will you be less ingenious and favorable to your own
souls? If he deserves to be branded, that feasts his Child, and starves his
wife, what do you deserve, that can acknowledge the least natural good that
is in a Child, and yet will acknowledge none of that spiritual and heavenly
good that is in your souls?

Sixthly, and lastly, When you look upon your Graces, look that you do not
renounce and reject your Graces (seen in the light of the spirit) as a weak
and worthless evidence of your interest in Christ, and that happiness that
comes by Christ.

I know in these days many cry up Revelations and Visions Grace (says one) is
the foundation of all our felicity, and comprebends all blessings: As M^nna is
said to have done all go^d tastes. John's Epistles are a rich Treasury for
Christian Assurance.
(yea, the Visions of their own hearts) and make slight of the graces of
Christ, in the hearts of his people: Yea, they look upon grace as a poor weak
thing. Ah Christians! take heed of this, else you will render null (in a very
great measure) many precious Scriptures, (especially the Epistle of John) which
were penned for the Comfort and Support of weak Saints.

But that this may stick, and work, be pleased to carry home with you these
three things.

First, Other precious Saints that are now triumphing in heaven, have pleaded
their interest in Gods love, and hopes of a better life from Graces inherent.

I Will only point at those Scriptures that speak out this truth. 1 John 3. 14.
Chap. 2. 3, 4. Job 23. 10, 11, 12. And the whole 31 Chapter of Job. Psalm. 119.
6. Isa. 38. 2, 3. 2 Cor. 1. 12. All these Scriptures (with many others that
Christians may doubtless look to their graces as Evidences of their part in
Christ and salva^ion (and the clearer and stronger they are, the greater will
be their comfort) but not as Causes.
might be produced) do with open mouth proclaim this Truth. And surely to
deny the fruit growing upon the Tree, to be an Evidence that the Tree is alive,
is to me as unreasonable, as it is absurd. Certainly, it is one thing to judge
by our graces, and another thing to trust in our graces, to make a Savior of
our graces. There is a great deal of difference betwixt declaring and
deserving: And if this be not granted, it will follow, that the Apostle has
sent us aside to a Covenant of works, when he exhorts us to use all diligence
to make our Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 5-10.

Secondly, Carry home this with you, If Justification and Sanctification be
both of them benefits of the Covenant of Grace, then to evidence the one by the
other, is no ways unlawful, nor no turning aside to a Covenant of works.

But our Justification and Sanctification are both of them benefits and
blessings of the Covenant of Grace. Ergo. In Jer. 33. 8. I will pardon all
their iniquity, whereby they have sinned against me (there is your
Justification.) And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby they
have sinned against me. (There Is your Sanctification) And therefore to evidence
the one by the other, can be no ways unlawful, nor no turning aside to a
Covenant of works.

Thirdly, Carry home this with you, Whatever gift of God in man brings him
within the compass of Gods Promise of Eternal Mercy, that Gift must be an
infallible evidence of salvation, and happiness.

But such are those gifts mentioned in those Scriptures that prove the first
head.

Therefore they are infallible evidences of our salvation, and eternal
happiness.

I confess a man may have many great gifts, and yet none Covet rather graces,
then gifts; as to pray more fervently, tho less notionally, or eloquently.
Stammering Moses must pray rather then wellspoken Aaron. The Corinthians came
behind in no gift, 1 Cor. 1. 7. yet were Babes, and Carnal. Chap. 3. 2, 3.
of them bring him within the compass of Gods Promise of Eternal mercy. But I
say, whatever gift of God in man brings him within the compass of Gods Promise
of eternal mercy, that gift must be an infallible evidence of his happiness,
and blessedness.

For the further clearing of this, I will instance in a gift of Waiting; where
this gift is, it brings a man within the compass of Gods Promise of eternal
mercy. And had a man (as in a deserted state it often falls out) nothing under
heaven to show for his happiness, but only a waiting frame, this ought to
bear him up from fainting and sinking. When the soul says, My sun is set, my
day is turned into night, my light into darkness, and my rejoicing into
mourning, etc. Oh! I have lost the comforting presence of God, I have lost the
quickening presence of God, I have lost the supporting presence of God, I have
lost the encouraging presence of God, etc. and when I shall recover these sad
losses, I know not. All that I can say, is this, That God keeps me in a waiting
frame, weeping and knocking at the door of mercy. Now I say, This waiting
temper brings the soul within the compass of the Promise of Eternal mercy:
And certainly such a soul shall not miscarry. Take three Promises for this.

In Isa. 40. ult. They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength,
they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run, and not be weary, and
they shall walk, and not faint. (The mercy is the waiting-mans, but the
waiting-man must give God leave to time his mercy for him.) So in Isa. 30. 18.
And therefore will the Lord wait, that he may be gracious unto you: And
therefore will he be exalted, that he may have Vide Lyra, and Junius, on the
words.
mercy upon you; for the Lord is a God of Judgment, blessed are all they that
wait for him. So in Isa. 64. 4. For since the beginning of the world men have
not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither has the eye seen, O God,
besides thee, what he has prepared for him that waits for him. So in Isa.
49. 23. They shall not be ashamed that wait for me. Men are often That is,
they shall be advanced by me to great hap pinesle, and glory, to great dignity,
and ^elicity; for in the Hebrew Dialect, Adverbs of denying, signify the
contrary to the import of that Verb whereunto they are joined. as might be
showed by many Scriptures.
ashamed, that wait upon the mountains and hills. Men high and great often
frustrate the expectation of waiting souls, and then they blush, and are
ashamed and confounded that they have waited, and been deceived; but they shall
not be ashamed that wait for me, says God. I will not deceive their
expectation, and after all their waiting turn them off, and say, I have no
mercy for you. Now I say, where this waiting temper is, which is all that many
a poor soul has to show for everlasting happiness and blessedness, that
soul shall never miscarry. That God that does maintain and uphold the soul
in this heavenly waiting frame, in the appointed season will speak life and
love, mercy, and glory, to the waiting soul.

And so I have done with the third Use, which was to stir you up to look upon
your graces, with Cautions.

The fourth Duty is

To persuade weak Saints not to turn aside from the ways of God, nor from
the service of God, because of any hardships, There is a very great aptness in
weak Saints, to take offense almost at every thing, and to be discouraged by
the least opposition, affliction, and temptation, and so to turn aside from
the good old way. Now that no difficulties, nor hardships may turn you out of
the way that is called holy, consider seriously of these few things.

First, Consider this, The Lord will sweeten more and more his services to you.

He will make his work to be more and more easy to your souls; he will suit
thy burden to thy back, and thy work to thy hand, O weak soul. Thou shall find
that his grace will be sufficient to hold thee up, and carry thee on,
notwithstanding 2 Cor. 12. 9. 2 Cor. 5. 14.
any difficulties or discouragements that be in the way. He will shed abroad
that love that shall constrain thy soul, The Philosopher told his friends
when they came into his little low Cottage (Enteuthen ouk apeisi the oi) the
Gods are here with me. Surely God, and Christ, and the Spirit are and will be
with weak Saints to aid and astist them in every gracious work.
both to keep close to his service, and to delight in his service. He will make
all his services to be easy to thee; he will vouchsafe to thee that assisting
grace that shall keep up thy head and heart from fainting and sinking under
discouragements; as you may see in Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27, 28. And I will put my
spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my
Judgments, and do them. So in Psalm. 63. 8. My soul follows hard after thee
(I, but how comes this to pass?) Thy right hand upholds me. I feel thy hand
under me, drawing of my soul off after thee. Oh! were not thy gracious hand
under me, I should never follow hard after thee. The Lord will put under his
everlasting arms, O weak Christian, and therefore though thy feet be apt to
slide, yet his everlasting arms shall bear thee up; therefore be not
discouraged, do not turn aside from those paths that drop marrow and
fatness, though there be a Lion in the way.

Secondly, Consider this, O weak Saint, That there is less danger and hardship
in the ways of Christ, then there is in the ways of sin, Satan, or the world.
Prove. 11. 18, 19. and 21. 21.


That soul does but leap out of the Drying Pan into the fire, that thinks to
mend himself by turning out of the way that is called holy. Oh! the horrid
drudgery that is in the ways of sin, Satan, or the world. Thy worst day in
Christ's service, is better then thy best days (if I may so speak) in sin or
Satan's service. Satan will pay the sinner home at last with the loss of God,
Christ, Heaven, and his soul for ever: But in the way of righteousness is
life, joy, peace, honor, and in the pathway thereof there is no death, Prove.
12. 28. His ways are ways of pleasantness, and all his paths are peace,
Prove. 3. 17.

Thirdly, Remember, O weak Saint, That all those hardships that thou meetest
with, do only reach the outward man.

They only reach the ignoble, the baser part of man; they meddle not, they
touch not the noble part. With my mind I serve the Law of God, though with my
flesh the Law of sin, Romans 7. 22. And, verse. 25. I delight in the Law of God,
after the inward man. And indeed, many of the Heathen have encouraged
themselves for this very consideration, against the troubles and dangers of
this life. All the Arrows that are Anaxagoras, Pla to, and others.
shot at a Christian, stick in his Buckler, they never reach his conscience,
his soul. The raging waves beat sorely against Noah's Ark, but they touched not
him. The soul is of too noble a nature to be touched by troubles. Jacob's hard
service under Laban, and his being nipt by the frost in winter, and Genesis 31. 40.
scorcht by the Sun in summer, did only reach his outward man; his soul had
high communion, and sweet fellowship with God, under all his hardships. Ah
Christian! bear up bravely, for whatever hardships thou meetest with in the
ways of God, shall only reach thy outward man; and under all these hardships
thou may have as high and sweet Hos. 2. 14.
communion with God, as if thou had never known what hardships meant.

Fourthly, Tell me, O weak Saints, have not you formerly enjoyed such sweet
refreshings while you have been in the very service of God, as has out-wayed
all the troubles and hardships that your souls have met with? I know you have,
and you know that you have often found that Scripture made good upon your
hearts, Psalm. 19. 11. Moreover by them is thy servant warned, and in keeping of
them there is great reward. (Mark) he does not say, For keeping of them there
is great reward, though that is a truth: But in keeping Austin says, If a man
should ^erve the Lord ^ thousand ^ears, in would ^^t d^serve an boure of the
reward in Heaven, much less an Eternity, etc.
of them there is great reward. While the soul is at work, God throws in the
reward. Don't you remember, O weak Christians, when you have been in the
service and way of God, how he has cast in joy at one time, and peace at
another, etc? Oh! the smiles, the kisses, the sweet discoveries that your
souls have met with, whilst you have been in his ways. Ah poor souls! don't
you know, that one hours being in the bosom of Christ, will make you forget
all your hardships? heaven at last will make amends for all; and the more
hardships you find in the ways of God, the more sweet will heaven be to you,
when you come there. O how sweet is a Harbor after a long storm; and a
Sunshine day after a dark and tempestuous night, and a warm Spring, after a
sharp winter. The miseries and difficulties that a man meets with in this
world, will exceedingly sweeten the glory of that other world.

Lastly, Consider, What hardships and difficulties the men of this world run
through, to get the world, and undo their own souls.

They rise early, go to bed late, they go from one end of the world, to
another, and venture through all manner of dangers, Psalm. 127. 2. Mat. 16. 16^
deaths, and miseries, to gain those things that are vain, uncertain,
vexing, and dangerous to their souls: And wilt not thou, as a good Soldier of
Christ, endure a little hardship 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4.
for the honor of thy Captain, and thine own internal and eternal good?
Thou art listed under Christ's Colors, and therefore thou must arm thy self
against all difficulties, and discouragements. The number of difficulties makes
the Christians Conquest the more illustrious. A gracious man should be made up
all of fire, overcoming and consuming all oppositions, As Chrysostom said of
Peter.
as fire does the stubble. All difficulties should be but whet-stones to his
fortitude.

The fifth Duty is this, You that are weak Saints should observe how Christ
keeps your wills and affections. That man is kept indeed, whose will and
affection is kept close to Christ: And that man is lost with a witness, whose
will and affections are won from Christ. Weak Saints are more apt to observe
their own actions, then their wills and affections, and this proves a snare
unto them; therefore observe your affections, how they are kept, for if they
are kept close to Christ, if they are kept faithful to Christ, (though thy
foot may slide from Christ) all is well. The Apostle, Romans 7. observed that his
will and affections were kept close to Christ, even then when he was
Tyrannically Captivated, and carried by the prevalency of sin, from Christ.
With my mind I serve the Law of God (says he) and what I do I allow not,
therefore it is no more I that does it, but sin that dwells in me. My will
stands close to Christ, and my affections are faithful to Christ, though by
the prevalency of corruption I am now and then carried Captive from Christ.
It Is one thing to be taken up by an Enemy, and another thing for a man to lay
down his Weapons at his Enemies feet. I am, says the Apostle, a forced man, I
do what I hate, I do what I never intended. The heart may be sound, when more
external and inferior parts are not. The heart of a man may be sound
Godward, and Christ-ward, and holinesse-ward, when yet there may be many
defects, and weaknesses in his Conversation. Now a weak Christian should be
very studious to observe how his heart stands God-wards; for the man is as his
heart is, if that be right with Christ, then all is well; therefore says
Solomon, Prove. 4. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the
issues of life. The Hebrew runs more The heart is (Camera omnipotentis Regis)
The Presence Chamber of the King of Heaven.
fully thus, Before all, or Above all keepings, keep thy heart; for out of it
is the goings forth of lives. The heart is the Spring and Fountain of all
natural and spiritual actions; it is the Primum mobile, the great wheel that
sets all other wheels a going: It Is the great Monarch in the Isle of Man,
therefore keep it with all custody and Caution, or else bid farewell to all
true joy, peace, and comfort. When the heart stands right toward Christ,
Christ will pardon much, and pass by much.

If the ravished Virgin in the time of the Law cried out, she was guiltless:
So when a poor soul, ravished by the power of corruption, and strength of
Satan's temptations, cries out, Lord I would not for all the world, sin against
thee; I would not distrust thee; I would not be impatient under thy afflicting
hand; I would not be proud, under thy merciful hand; but Lord, these Sons of
Zerviah, these corruptions, 2 Samuel 3. 39.
are too hard for me; they commit a Rape upon me, they ravish me of my Jesus,
and of my joy, and of my peace; Lord help me, Lord deliver me. Now these
weaknesses shall not be charged upon the soul. The ravished Virgin under the
Law, if she cried out, was guiltless: And certainly, God is not, nor will not
be less merciful and gracious to his people under the Gospel, who are still a
crying out against their sins, and Satan's assaults. Surely those sins shall
never be a Christians bane, that are now his greatest burden. It Is not falling
into the water, but lying in the water, that drownes. It Is not falling into
sin, but lying in sin, that damnes. If sin and thy heart be two, Christ and thy
heart are one. If thy heart be Christ-ward, thou art so happy that nothing can
make thee miserable.

Sixthly,

Take heed of making sense and feeling a Judge of your Though there is nothing
more dangerous, yet there is nothing more ordinary, then for weak Saints to
make their sense and feeling the Judge of their condition. Ah poor souls!
this is dishonorable to God, and very disadvantagious to Sense and reason in
spiritual things, says Luther, is (N^xia bestia) an harmfull beast, that will
destroy and pull down what faith builds up.
your selves. Sense is sometimes opposite to reason, but always to faith;
therefore do as those Worthies did, 2 Cor. 5. 8, 9. We walk by faith, and not
by sight. For a man to argue thus, Surely God is not my God, for I am not
enlightened, I am not quickened, I am not melted, I am not raised, I am not
enlarged as formerly: Oh! I have not those sweet answers and returns of
Prayer, that once I had. Oh! I cannot find the Lords quickening presence, nor his
inlivening presence, nor his humbling presence, nor his encouraging presence,
as once I have; therefore surely my condition is not good. Oh! I am more
backward to good, then formerly; and more prone to evil, then formerly;
therefore I am afraid that God is not my God, and that the work of grace is not
through upon me. Oh! God does not look upon me as in the days of old; nor
speak to me, as in the days of old; nor carry it toward me, as in the days
of old; and therefore I am afraid that all is naught.

Verily, if you will make sense and feeling the Judge of your estate and
condition, you will never have peace nor comfort all your days. Thy estate, O
Christian, may be very good, when sense and feeling says it is very bad. That
Child cannot but be perplexed, that thinks his father does not love him,
because he does not always feel him smoothing and stroking of him.
Christians, you must remember, that it is one thing for God to love you; and
another thing for God to tell you that he loves you. Your happiness lies in
Psalm. 80. 4. Lam. 3. 44. Psalm. 119. 25, 37, 40, 88, 107, 149, 154 156, 159.
Psalm. 42. 5. Can. 3. 1, 2, 3. Isa. 54. 7, 8.
the first, your comfort in the second. God has stopped his ear against the
prayers of many a precious soul, whom he has dearly loved. The best of men
have at times lost that quickening, ravishing, and comforting presence of God,
that once they have enjoyed. And verily, he that makes sense and carnal reason
a judge of his condition, shall be happy, and miserable, blessed and cursed, saved
and lost, many times in a day, yea, in an hour. The Counsel that I would give
to such a soul that is apt to set up reason in the room of faith, is this,
Whatsoever thy estate and condition be, never make sense and feeling the Judge
of it, but only the word of God. Did ever God appoint carnal reason, sense,
and feeling, to be a Judge of thy estate? Surely no: And why then will thou
subject thy soul to their judgment? God will judge thee at last by his word,
John 12. 48. The word that I have spoken, the same shall judge you in the last
day. Carnal reason is an Enemy to faith, it is still a crossing and
contradicting of faith; it fills the mind full of cavills and prejudices, full
of Pleas and Arguments to keep Christ and the soul asunder; and the soul and
the Promises asunder; and the soul and peace and comfort asunder. 'Twill never
be well with thee, so long as thou art swayed by carnal reason, and relyest
more upon thy five Senses, then the four Evangelists. Remember, Job was as
famous for his Confidence, as for his Patience. Though he slay me, yet will I
trust in him, Job 13. 15. As the body lives by breathing, so the soul lives by
believing, etc.

The Duties of Strong Saints to the Weak.
WE come now to the last thing propounded, and that is, The Duties of strong
Saints to those that are weak. I intend at this time to finish this Point, and
therefore shall not speak every thing that might be spoken; being not of their
minds, that think a man never speaks enough, that speaks not all that may be
spoken to an Argument. I shall (as near as I can) instance in those Duties that
are most weighty, and worthy; and surely those souls that are serious and
conscientious in the discharge of these, cannot nor will not be negligent in
the discharge of the rest. Now there are eleven Duties that strong Saints are
to perform to those that are weak.

And the first is this,

Those that are strong, ought to bear with the infirmities Romans 15. 1. We then
that are strong (says the Apostle) ought to bear with the infirmities of the
weak, and not to please our selves. The word that is rendered to bear (Bastazein)
signifies to bear, as Pillars do bear the weight and burden of the house: To
bear, as Porters do bear their burdens; or as the bones do bear the flesh; or
rather as Parents bear their Babes in their arms.

Bear the infirmities: Mark, he does not say the Inormities, but the
infirmities,; he does not say the wickedness, but the weakness. The strong
ought to bear with the infirmities of the weak. The Lord bears with the
weakness of his Children. Peter is weak, and sinful through weakness, he
will not let the Lord Jesus wash his feet, John 13. but the Lord Jesus knowing
that this was from weakness, and not from wickedness, he passes it over, and
notwithstanding his unkind refusal, he washes his feet. Thomas is very weak, I
John 20. 25.
will not believe (says he) except I shall see in his hands the print of the
nails, and thrust my hand into his side. Now this Christ bears with much
tenderness, and sweetness; as you may see in verse. 27. Then said he to
Thomas, reach hither thy fingers, and behold my hands, and reach hither thy
hand, and thrust it into my side, and be not faithless, but believing. The
Lord Jesus does as it were open his wounds afresh; he overlooks his weakness.
Well, says he, seeing it is so, that thou will not believe, I will rather
bleed afresh, then thou shall dye in thy unbelief. So the three Disciples that
Christ had singled out to watch with him one hour, Mat. 26. they showed a
great deal of weakness to be sleeping, when their Lord was a sorrowing; to be
snorting, when their Savior was sighing, etc. Yet Christ bears this, and
carries it sweetly toward them, and excuses their weakness, verse. 41. The
spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. Oh how sweetly does the Lord carry
it! Every new man is two men, he has a contrary principle in him; the flesh,
and the spirit: The spirit, the Noble part is willing; but the flesh, the
ignoble part, is weak, and way-ward.

Now shall the Lord thus bear with his weak ones, and shall not strong Saints
bear also? Remember strong Christians, there was a day when you were as weak as
others; as apt to fall, as others; as easily conquered, as others; and if then
the Lord carried it sweetly toward you, let the same spirit be in you, toward
those that are weak; it will be no grief of heart to you, if in this you act
like your Lord and Savior.

If you do not bear with the infirmities of the weak, who shall? who will?
this wicked world cannot, nor will not: Isa. 29. 21. Jer. 20. 10.
The world will make them transgressors for a word, and watch for their
halting: And therefore you had need to bear with them so much the more; the
worlds cruelty should stir up your compassions.

Secondly,

As it is your duty to bear with them, so it is your duty to Romans 14. 1. Him
that is weak in the faith receive you, but not to doubtful disputations.

Him that is weak in the faith receive: That is, him that is not thoroughly
persuaded of all things pertaining to Christian liberty, about things
indifferent. Them that are weak in the faith receive. He does not say, Them
that have no faith receive: For there is no rule for the Saints or Churches to
receive them into Communion that have no faith, that have no fellowship with
the father and the Son. But him that is weak in the faith, says he, receive.

The word that is here rendered Receive, signifies to receive Prostambanesthe.
into our bosom with charitable affection. The Greek word signifies three
things.

1 It signifies to receive weak Saints as our own bowels; to receive them with
the greatest tenderness, affections, pity, and compassion that possibly can
be. So the same Greek word is used in the Epistle of Philemon, verse. 12. where
Paul entreats Philemon, to receive Onesimus as his own bowels. The word there
is the same word with this in the Text: So must the strong receive the weak,
even as their own bowels; receive them with the greatest affection, with the
greatest compassion that possibly can be.

2 The word signifies patiently to bear with the weak when they are received:
And not to take them into your bosoms, into your communion one day, and cast
them out the next, but patiently to bear with them, as well as affectionately
to receive them.

It was a Heathen Prince that Crowned his Steer-man in etc.

3 The word signifies by fatherly instruction to seek to restore him. It Is not
the will of Christ that weak Saints should be rejected, or that the door of
entrance should be shut against them, till they are stronger, or till they have
attained to such heights, and such perfections of grace, and Divine enjoyments
of God, as others have attained. Remember this, as the weakest faith (if true)
gives the soul a right to all that internal and eternal worth that is in
Christ: So the weakest faith, if true, gives a man a real right unto all the
external privileges and favors that come by Christ. In Romans 15. 7. Wherefore
receive ye one another, as Christ also received us to the glory of God. This is
the standing rule for all the Saints and Churches in the world to go by: It Is
not their wills, but these two Scriptures last cited, that are the standing
rules by which all the Churches on earth are to go by, in the admission of
Members.

Them that are weak in the faith are to be received by you, because the Lord
Jesus has received them. Christ does not receive the strong to the glory of
God, and cast off the weak: No, the Lord Jesus gathers the weak into his
bosom, and tenderly dandles them upon his knee. He receives the weak to glory,
as well as the strong; therefore says the Apostle, As the Lord has received
them, so do you.

Bucer ejected none, in whom he saw (Aliquid Christi) Any thing of Christ: But
gave them the right hand of fellowship. Such persons and Churches can never
answer it to Christ, that keep the door of admission shut against souls truly
gracious, though they are but weak in grace, though they have not attained to
such a measure of light, or degrees of love, or to such pe^^ections in
holiness, as such and such have done: No, the standing Rule is, Him whom the
Lord has received, receive.

If weak Saints shall desire communion, and be willing to walk in the ways
that Jesus Christ has appointed his Saints to walk in, the Churches ought to
give them the right hand of fellowship. And that is the second Duty that lies
upon the strong, viz. That they are to receive the weak into communion and
fellowship with them, and that with the greatest affection, love, and
compassion that possibly can be.

A third Duty that lies upon strong Saints to the weak, is this.

They must look more upon their Graces, then upon their It Is a sad thing when
they shall borrow Spectacles to behold their weak brethrens weaknesses, and
refuse Lookingglasses wherein they may see their weak brethrens graces. Saints
that are strong, ought to look more upon the virtues of weak Saints, then upon
their miscarriages. When Christ saw but a little moral good in the young man,
the Text says, that he looked upon him, and loved him: And shall not Mark 10.
12.
we look upon a weak Saint, and love him, when we see the love of God, and the
Image of God upon him? Shall moral If moral virtue could be seen with mortal
eyes, it would so ne draw all hea^^s to it self, says Plato. What then should
grace do? the least dram of which is of more worth then all the moral virtues
in the world.
virtue take the eye, and draw the love of Christ? And shall not supernatural
grace in a weak Christian take our eyes, and draw our hearts? Shall we eye a
little gold in much earth? And shall we not eye a little grace where there is
much corruption.

It is an insufferable weakness (I had almost said) for persons to suffer
their affections to run out only to such that are of their judgments, and to
love, prize, and value persons according as they suit their opinions, and not
according to what of the Image of God shines in them. But if this be not far
from a Gospel spirit, and from that God-like spirit that should be in the
Saints, I know nothing. It speaks out much of Christ within, to own where
Christ ownes, and love where Christ loves, and embrace where Christ embraces,
and to be one with every one that is practically one with the Lord Jesus.
Christ cannot but take it very unkindly at our hands, if we should disowne any
upon whom he has set his Royal stamp: And I bless his grace that has drawn
out my desires and endeavors to love, own, and honor the people of Christ,
according to what of the appearances of Christ I see in them. And, if I am not
much mistaken, this is the highway to that joy, peace, and comfort, the want
of which makes many a man's life a hell. God looks more on the bright side of
the Cloud, then he does on the dark, and so should we.

It was the honor of Vespatian, That he was more ready to conceal the Vices
of his friends, then their virtues. Surely there is much of God in that soul,
that is upon a Gospel account more careful and skillfull to conceal the vices
of weak Saints, then their virtues. Many in these days do justly incur the
censure which that sour Philosopher past Diogenes apud laertium. l. 6.
upon Gramarians, That they were beteer acquainted with the evil of Ulysses,
then with their own.

Fourthly,

It is the duty of strong Saints, in things indifferent to 1 Cor. 8. 13.
Wherefore if meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the
world stands, least I make my Brother to offend. Strong Saints must stand
unchangeably resolved neither to give offense carelessly, nor to take offense
causlesly. Says the Apostle, I will not stand to dispute my Christian liberty,
but will rather lay it down at my weak brothers feet, then I will by the use
of it offend one for whom Christ has dyed. 1 Cor. 9. 22. To the weak became I
as weak, that I might gain the weak. I am made all things to all men, that I
might by all means save some. That is, I condescended and went to the uttermost
that possibly I could (without sin) to win and gain upon the weak; I
displeased my self in things that were of an indifferent nature, to please
them. Thou ought not, O strong Christian! by the use of thy Christian
liberty, to put a stumbling block before thy weak Brother. Romans 15. 2. We then
that are strong, ought to bear with the infirmities of the weak, and not to
please our selves. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to
edification. He does not say, Let every one of us please the lust of his
neighbor, but let every one of us please his neighbor for his good to
edification: Let us in things of an indifferent nature, so yield as to please
our neighbor. There were some that thought they might observe days, others
thought they might not. Some thought they might eat meat, others thought they
might only eat Herbs. Why, says the Apostle, in these things that are of an
indifferent nature, I will rather displease and deny my self, to profit my
neighbor, then I will by the use of my liberty, occasion my neighbor to
offend. I, this is true Christian love indeed, for a man to cross himself to
please his neighbor, so it may be for his souls edification: But this
heavenly love is driven almost out of the world, which causes men to dislike
those things in others, which they flatter in themselves.

A fifth Duty incumbent upon strong Saints, is

To support the weak. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. Support the weak, be patient toward
all men. Look what the Crutch is to the lame, and the beam of the house is to
the ruinated house, that ought strong Saints to be to the weak. Strong Saints
are to be Crutches to the weak; they are to be (as it were) beams to bear up
the weak. Strong Saints are to set too their shoulder, to shore Look what the
Nurse is to the child; the O^k to the Ivy, the house to the Vine, that should
strong Saints be to the weak, etc. 2 Cor. 2. 7.
up the weak by their councels, prayers, tears, and examples. Strong Saints
must not deal by the weak, as the Herd of Dear do by the wounded Dear, they
forsake it, and push it away: O no, when a poor weak Saint is wounded by a
temptation, or by the power of some corruption, then they that are strong ought
to succor and support such a one, least he be swallowed up of sorrow. When you
that are strong see a weak Saint staggering and reeling under a temptation, or
affliction; Oh know, it is then your duty to put both your hands underneath, to
support him that he faint not, that he miscarries not in such an hour. Isa.
35. 3. Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees. Strengthen
the weak hands. That is, hands that hang down. And confirm the feeble knees,
that is, such knees that by reason of feebleness are ready to fall, strengthen
such; that is, encourage them, by casting in a Promise, by casting in thy
Experiences, or by casting in thy Experiences of other Saints, that so they may
be supported. It may be his case was once thine; if so, then tell him what
Promises did support thee, what discoveries of God did uphold thee: Tell him,
what tastes, what sights, and what incomes thou had, and how bravely thou
did bear up by the strength of his everlasting arms, that were under thee,
etc

A sixth Duty that is incumbent upon strong Saints, is

To take heed of making weak Saints halt and go lame That Is the meaning of
that Scripture (as I conceive) Luke 17. 2. And of that, Mat. 18. 10 Take heed
that ye offend not one of these little ones, for their Angels do always
behold the face of my father. You are apt to slight them because they are weak
in grace and holiness, and so you are apt to cause them to halt, but take heed
of this; they have glorious glistering Courtiers that do attend them;
therefore take heed that you don't offend them, for their Angels as so many
Champions, stand ready to right them, and fight for them. A man were better
offend and anger all the Devils in hell, and all the Witches in the world, then
to anger and offend the least of Christ's little ones. If Caine do but lower
upon Abell, Genesis 4.
God will arraigne him for it, Why is thy countenance cast down? If Miriam do
but mutter against Moses, God Number. 12 14.
will spit in her face for it. That is a very dreadful word, Mat. 18. 6. Take
heed how you offend one of these little ones, (you make nothing of it, but
says Christ, take heed) for it were better that a Millstone (A huge
Millstone, as the Greek word signifies, such a one as an Ass can but turn
about: This kind of punishment the greatest Malefactors among the Jews were
put to in those days, says Jerome) and he cast into the middle of the sea; so
it is word for word in the Greek, the middle being deepest, and furthest off
from the shore; rendering his estate most miserable and irrecoverable.

Seventhly,

It is the Duty of strong Saints to suit all things to the capacity To suit all
their prayers and all their discourses to the capacity of the weak. Paul was
good at this, To the weak I became as weak: Paul he was a man as strong in
natural and acquired parts, as any living, and he knew how to word it, and to
carry it in as lofty strains as any that breathed, yet who more plain in his
Preaching, then Paul? It has many a time made my heart sad, to think how those
men will answer it in the day of Christ, that affect lofty strains, high
notions, and cloudy expressions, that make the p^aine things of the Gospel
dark, and obscure.

Many Preachers in our days are like Heraclitus, who was called The Dark
Doctor, they affect sublime notions, obscure expressions, uncouth phrases,
making plain truths difficult, and easy truths hard. They darken council with
words without knowledge, Job 38. 2. Studdied expressions, and high notions in a
Sermon, are like Asahels Carcass in the way, that did only stop men, and make
them gaze, but did no ways profit them, or better them. It Is better to present
truth in her native plainness, then to hang her ears with counterfeit Pearls.

That Is a remarkable Scripture, 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2. And I brethren, could not
speak unto you, as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto Babes in
Christ. I have fed you with milk, and not with meat, for hitherto ye were not
able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able. The Apostle did not soar aloft
in the Clouds, and express the Mysteries of the Gospel in such a dark obscure
way, as that poor Creatures could not be able to pick out the mind of God in
it: No, but he suited all his discourses to their capacities, and so must you.

Eighthly, It is your duty to labor to strengthen weak Saints against sin, and
to draw them to holiness Argumentatively. When a strong Saint comes to deal
with one that is weak, and would strengthen him against sin, he must do it
Argumentatively; and when he would draw to holiness, he must do it
Argumentatively 1 John 2. 1, 2. compared with Chapter 7. 9. My little Children,
these things write I unto you, that you sin not. What things were those he
wrote? Mark, Chap. 1. 7. If we walk in the light as he is in the light, we
have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son,
cleanses us from all sins. Here he fenceth them against sin by one of the
strongest and choycest Arguments that the whole Book of God affords, by an
Argument that is drawn from the souls Communion with God. And then in verse. 9.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and
to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If any man sin we have an Advocate
with the father. Here the Apostle labors to strengthen weak Saints
Argumentatively, even by the strongest Arguments that the whole Book of God
affords. So verse. 12, 13. I write unto you little Children, because your sins
are forgiven you, for his names sake, etc. So in verse. 18. Little Children, it
is the last times, and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now
are there many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time. So in
ver. 28. And now little Children abide in him, that when he shall appear, we
may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming; If ye know
that he is righteous, ye know that every one that does righteousness is borne
of him. You see in all these Scriptures, how the Apostle labors to strengthen
weak Saints in a way of holiness, and to fence them against ways of
wickedness Argumentatively, and so must you; this being the ready way to
convince them, and to make a Conquest upon them, etc.

The Ninth Duty that lies upon strong Saints, is

To cast a Mantle over the infirmities of the weak. Now there is a threefold
Mantle that should be cast over the infirmities of the weak. There is a Mantle
of Wisdom. Parisensis said sometimes concerning trifles, It is (said he) as
if a man should see a Fly or a Flea on a man's forehead, and for that should
presently take a Beetle to knock him on the head, to kill the Fly.
A Mantle of Faithfulness. And a Mantle of Compassion, which is to be cast
over all the infirmities of weak Saints.

First, Strong Saints are to cast a Mantle of Wisdom over the infirmities of
weak Saints. They are not to present their sins in that ugliness, and with
such aggravations, as may terrify, as may sink, as may make a weak Saint to
despair, or may drive him from the Mercy-seat, or as may keep him and Christ
asunder, or as may unfit him for the discharge of Religious duties. It is more
a weakness then a virtue in strong Christians, when a weak Saint is fallen, to
aggravate his fall to the uttermost, and to present his sins in such a
dreadful dress, as shall amaze him, etc. It often proves very prejudicial
and dangerous to weak Saints, when their infirmities are aggravated beyond
Scripture-grounds, and beyond what they are able to bear. He that shall lay
the same strength to the rubbing of an earthen dish, as he does to the rubbing
of a Pewter platter, instead of cleaning it, shall surely break it all to
pieces. The application is easy, etc.

Secondly, There is a Mantle uf Faithfulness that is to be cast over the
infirmities of weak Saints. A man should never discover the infirmities of a
weak Saint, especially to such that have neither skill, nor will to heal and
bury them: The world will but blaspheme, and blaze them abroad, to the
dishonor of God, to the reproach of Religion, and to the grief and scandal of
the weak, etc. They will with Ham, rather call upon others to scoff at them,
then bring a Mantle to cover them, etc. Ham was cursed for that he did discover
his fathers nakedness to his brethren, when it was in his power to have
covered it; he saw it, and might have drawn a Curtain over it, but would not;
and for this, by a Spirit of Prophecy he was cursed by his father, Genesis 9. 22.
This Age is full of such Monsters, that rejoice to blaze abroad the infirmities
of the Saints, and these certainly Justice has or will curse.

Thirdly, There is a Mantle of Compassion that must be I have known a good old
man, said Bernard, who when he had hevd of any that had committed some
no^orious offense, was wont to say with h^mselfe, Ille hodie and ego cras, He
fell to day, so may I to morrow, etc.
cast over the weaknesses and infirmities of weak Saints. When a weak Saint
comes to see his sin, and the Lord gives him to lie down in the dust, and to
take shame and confusion to himself, that he has dishonored God, and caused
Christ to bleed afresh, and grieved the Spirit, etc. Oh now thou must draw a
covering, and cast a Mantle of love and compassion over his soul, that he may
not be swallowed up with sorrow; now thou must confirm thy love to him, and
carry it with as great tenderness and sweetness after his fall, as if he had
never fallen; this the Apostle presses, 2 Cor. 2. 7. Love, says the wise man,
covers all sin. Loves Mantle is very large: Love claps a Plaster upon
every soar; Love has two hands, and makes use of both, to hide the scarres of
weak Saints. Christ, O strong Saints, casts the Mantle of his righteousness
over your weaknesses, and will not you cast the Mantle of love over your
brothers infirmities?

Tenthly,

It Is the Duty of strong Saints to sympathize with the weak: To rejoice with
them when they rejoice, and to mourn with them when they mourn. 2 Cor. 11.
29. Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is (...). Scandal^ze^ai. Scandalized.
offended, and I (...) As ^ot on fire. Thuan. Hist.
burn not?

Thuanus reports of Ludonicus Marsacus, a Knight of France, when he was led
with other Martyrs that were bound with Coards, going to Execution, and he for
his dignity was not bound, he cried, Give me my Chains too, let me be a Knight
of the same Order.

It should be between a strong Saint, and a weak, as it is between two
Lute-strings, that are tuned one to another, no sooner one is struck, but the
other trembles; no sooner should a weak Saint be struck, but the strong should
tremble. Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them, Heb. 13. 3.

The Romans punished one that was seen looking out at his window with a Crown
of Roses on his head, in a time of public calamity, and will not God punish
those that don't simpathize with Joseph in his afflictions? surely he will.
Amos 6. 1 -- ult.

Lastly,

It Is the Duty of the strong to give to the weak the honor 1 Pet. 3. 7. They
have the same Name, the same Baptism, the same Profession, the same Faith, the
same Hope, the same Christ, the same Promises, the same Dignity, and the same
Glory with you; therefore speak honorably of them, and carry it honorably
toward them. Let not them be under your feet, that Christ has laid near his
heart, etc. And so much for this second Doctrine.

We come now to the next words.

EPHESIANS. 3. 8. Unto me who am less then the least of all Saints, is this Grace
given, etc.
WE shall speak now to the word Grace. The (...)
Greek word (Caris) that is here rendered Grace, has a twofold signification.
Sometimes it is taken for the gracious favor and good will of God, whereby he is
pleased of his own free love to accept and own poor sinners in the Son of his
love, for his own. This is called the first Grace, because it is the fountain
of all other graces, and the Spring from whence they flow. And it is therefore
called Grace, because it makes a man gracious with God.

Secondly, This word Caris, that is here rendered Grace, is taken for the gifts
of Grace, and they are of two sorts. Special; or Common: Common grace is that
which Hypocrites may have, and in which they may excel and go beyond the
choycest Saints: As in a gift of knowledge, a gift of utterance, a gift of
prayer, a gift of tongues, etc. A Mat. 7. 21, 22, 23, 25. Chapter 1. 13.
man may have these, and many other excellent gifts, and yet miscarry; yea,
fall as low as hell; witness Judas, Demas, the Scribes and Pharisees, etc.

Secondly, There is special Grace, as Faith, Love, Humility, Meekness, which
the Apostle reckons up, Gal. 5. 22, 23. Now here by Grace you may either
understand the gracious favor of God, (Unto me who am less then the least of
all Saints is this choice favor given, that I should preach among the
Gentiles, the unsearchable riches of Christ) or else you may take it for the
gifts of grace, both saving and common, which the Apostle had given him, in
order to the discharge of his Ministerial Office, which by the special favor
of God he was advanced to.

The word Grace being thus opened, we may from thence Observe. First,

That the Lord gives his best Gifts, to his best Beloved ones.
Unto me (says the Apostle) who am less then the least of all Saints, is this
Grace given.

For the opening and clearing of this point, I shall premise these four things.

1 To show you what those best gifts are, that God bestows upon his best
beloved ones.

2 I shall show you the manner of his giving the best gifts to his beloved
ones: Or the difference there is between Christ's giving, and the worlds giving.

3 And then the excellency of those gifts that Christ gives, above all other
gifts that the world gives.

4 And lastly, The Reason why Christ gives his best gifts to his best beloved
ones.

For the first, What are those best gifts that Christ bestows upon his best
beloved ones?

I shall not instance in those Common gifts that they have in common with
others: But rather show unto you those special gifts that he bestows upon
them; and of those I shall single out them that are most choice, and that carry
most in them, of the glory, favor, and good will of him that dwelt in the Bush.

And the first is this,

He gives Light to his beloved ones; and Light is a pleasant Eccles. 11. 7.
thing to behold, as the wise man speaks. He gives spiritual light, which is a
mercy of mercies. Ephesians. 5. 14. Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the
dead, and Christ shall (...) Some upon thee. Life ^^h^u^ligh^s but a lifelesse
life.
give thee light. So John 1. 7, 8, 9. He was not that light, but was sent to
bear witness of that light that was the true light that lightneth every man
that comes into the world. Vide Cameron, and Augustine, on the words. When
Telemachus saw a great light that guided him and his father* in a dark Ro^me,
Surely (sed he) there is some God in it. Mal. 4. 2.
He gives that light whereby his people are enabled to see sin to be the
greatest evil, and himself to be the chiefest good. He gives that light that
melts the soul, that humbles the soul, that warmes the soul, that quickens
the soul, that quiets the soul, and that glads the soul Man is not borne
with heavenly light in his heart, as he is borne with a tongue in his mouth.
Till Christ comes and sets up a light in the soul, the soul lives in
darkness, and lies in darkness, yea, is darkness in the very abstract.
Ephesians. 5. 8. Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord.
Saints are always in the Sunshine, therefore they should be like a Crystal
glass, with a light in the midst, which appears in every part.

A Christian should be like the Lamp in the story, that never 2 Cor. 3. 5. If
there be such a power in fallen man to repent, and believe, etc. to what
purpose was the coming of Christ into the world? 1 John 2. 9 1 John 3. 8. And
why do natural men when their consciences are awakened, so cry out, That they
ar^ as able to stop the Sun in his course* to raise the dead, and to make a
world, as they are able of themselves to repent, etc.
went out. Were it not for the Sun, it would be perpetual night in the world,
notwithstanding all Starlight, and Torch-light, and Moonlight. It Is not the
Torch-light of Natural parts, and Creature Comforts, nor the Starlight of
Civil honesty, and Common gifts: Nor yet the Moonlight of temporary faith,
and formal profession,, that can make day in the soul, till the Son of
righteousness rise, and shine upon it. And that is the first thing he gives,
Light.

Now the second thing he gives, is,

Repentance. Repentance is not a Flower that grows in Natures Garden. Acts 5.
31. Him has God the father exalted, to be a Prince and a Savior to give
Repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. So in 2 Timothy 2. 25. The servant
of the Lord must in meekness instruct those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them Repentance to the acknowledging of the truth. By
these Scriptures it is clear that Repentance is no flower that grows in Natures
Garden, though Arminians teach and Print, That if men will but put out their
power and their strength, they may repent, etc. But several that have been of
this Opinion, have experienced the falsenesse of it, when it has been too
late. The Ethiopian cannot change his skin, nor the Leopard his spots, Jer. 13.
23. And certainly, if there were such a power in man to repent, as some would
make the world believe, man would never miscarry everlastingly, for his not
repenting. Oh! is it good dwelling with everlasting burnings? with a devouring
fire? Is it good being for ever shut out from the presence of the Aut
paenitendum out pereundum.
Lord, and the glory of his power? Certainly if there were such a power in
vain man to repent, no man would go to hell for not repenting. And many that
have boasted much of their abilities to repent, when they have been upon a
dying bed, would have given a thousand worlds (were there so many in their
power) that they could but repent.

Luther confesses, That before his Conversion he met not Homo ipsius
paenitentiae paenitere deb^t. Salv. Paenitens de peccato dolet, and de dolor
gaude^. Luther.
with a more displeasing word in all the study of Divinity, then this word
Repent: But after the Lord had converted him, and manifested himself to him,
he delighted in this work. Then he could sorrow for his sins, and rejoice in
his sorrow.

Repentance strips the soul stark naked of all the Garments of the old Adam,
and leaves not so much as the shirt behind. In this rotten building there is
not one stone left upon another: As the Flood drowned Noah's own friends and
servants, as well as strangers, so true Repentance drownes all darling lusts.
True Repentance is the cutting off the right hand, and the pulling out of the
right eye, and is this such an easy thing? surely no. True Repentance is a
gift that is from above, and if the Lord does not give it, man will eternally
perish for the want of it. You may read much more of this, in my Treatise
called HEAVEN ON EARTH.

Thirdly, Christ gives his Spirit, Romans 5. 5. The love of Spiritus sanctus
estres delicata.
God is shed abroad in our hearts, by the holy Ghost which is given unto us. So
in 1 John 3. ult. And hereby we know that he abides in us, (how?) by the
spirit which he has given John 14. 26.
us. So in Chap. 4. 13. The spirit that the Lord Christ gives, is an
inlightning spirit, it is the Candle of the Lord set up in the hearts of the
Saints, to guide them in the way everlasting. It Is a sanctifying spirit, a
spirit of burning, Isa. 4. 4. He is a fire to inlighten the soul, and a fire
to inliven the soul, and Nil nisi sanctum a sancto spiritu prediere potest.
a fire to warm the soul, etc. Whatsoever is of the spirit is spirit. It is
nimble, and lively, and active, and full of life, and motion, as the Spirit is.
A man without the spirit of the Lord is a dull, dromish Creature, as the
Latins call a dull, dromish man, A fire-lesse man; so we may call a man that
has not the spirit, a spiritlesse man. The spirit that Christ gives, is A
sealing spirit, Ephesians. 1. 13. and a Leading spirit, Romans 8. He leads from sin,
he leads from wrath, he leads from the curse; he leads to God, he leads to
Christ, he leads to the Promises, he leads to glory, etc. There is no
gain-sayingt Demo^^hene^ words, said one: So ^her^ is no ga^^la^ing of the
pleadings of the Spirit.


Again, this spirit is A comforting spirit, John 14. 16. and A pleading
spirit, Romans 8. 26. Every Christian has three Advocates pleading for him. The
first is that Divine Love that is in the bosom of the father. The second is
the Lord Jesus, that is at the right hand of the father. And the third is the
holy Spirit, that is one with the father.

Fourthly, He gives his Blood, the blood of Christ, is a gift of Christ to his
beloved ones, Mat. 20. 28. The Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, and to give his life a ransom for many. So in John 10. 11. I am the
good Sheppard, the good Sheppard gives his life for his sheep. His blood was
the purest blood, his humane nature being most pure; his blood was the noblest
blood, and therefore called Acts 20. 28.
in Scripture, The Blood of God, by reason of the conjunction of the Divine
Nature with the humane. It was his lifeblood, his heart-blood, that he gave; it
was not the blood of his finger, but the blood of his heart; it was precious
blood. Romans 3. 25. Romans 5. 9. Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 20. Heb. 9. 7-26. Chap. 10.
19. 1 John 1. 7. Rev. 1. 5. etc.


Three things are called precious in the Scripture.

1 Faith is called Precious Faith, 2 Pet. 1. 1.

2 The Promises are called Precious Promises, ver. 4.

3 The Blood of Christ is called Precious Blood, 1 Pet. 1. 19.

All your precious mercies swim to you in precious blood, as you may see by
comparing the Scriptures in the Margent together.

It was an excellent saying of Luther, speaking of this blood Vna guttula plus
valet quam coelum and terra-Luth.
of Christ, One little drop of this blood (says he) is more worth then heaven
and earth. Your pardon swims to you in blood, your peace swims to you in blood,
your reconciliation is made by blood, your acceptance is wrought by blood,
etc. Sanguis Christi clavis coeli, Christ's Blood is Heavens Key. Christ's blood
is a Preservative against the greatest evils; Christ's blood (as Pliny says of
Polium) is a Preservative against Serpents, etc.

Fifthly, Christ gives Pardon of sin, and do you know what a mercy that is?
Ask the troubled soul, ask the soul that knows what it means to lie under
the wrath of the Almighty, and he will tell you that pardon of sin is a gift
more worth then a thousand worlds. Now that pardon of sin is a gift of God, you
may see in Acts 5. 31. Him has God exalted (...). To his right hand: That is,
to honor and dignity, etc.
with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior to give Repentance to
Israel, and forgiveness of sins: So in Acts 26. 18. Ah souls! of all mercies
pardoning mercy is the most necessary mercy. I may to Heaven without honors,
and without riches, and without the smiles of creatures: But I can never to
Heaven without pardoning mercy. As Ahab, Haman, Dives, etc.
A man may be great and graceless, he may be rich and miserable, he may be
honorable and damnable, etc. But he cannot be a pardoned soul, but he must be
a very blessed soul. (...) Blessednesses in he plural. Pardon of sin ^^cludes
a plurality of mercies, a chain of Pearls, a chain of blessings. Genesis 30. 11.
Psalm. 32. 1, 2. It intitles souls to all blessedness, it puts the Royal
Crown upon their heads. Of all mercies, pardoning mercy is the most sweetning
mercy, it is a choice Jewel, and swims to the soul in blood, Heb. 9. 22. It Is a
mercy that makes all other mercies to look like mercies, and taste like mercies,
and work like mercies; and the want of it takes off the glory and beauty of all
a man's mercies, and makes his life a very hell. Pardon of sin is a voluminous
mercy, a mercy that has many precious mercies in the womb of it: You may well
call it Gad, for it ushers in Troops of mercy. When you can number the sands of
the sea, and tell the Stars of heaven, then, and not till then shall you be
able to recount the mercies that attend pardoning mercy. He that has this
mercy, cannot be miserable; he that wants it, cannot be happy; get this, and
get all; miss this, and miss all; this is a gift conferred only upon Christ's
favorites. Son be Mat. 9. 2.
of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee. No mercy will make a man
everlastingly merry, below pardoning mercy. He has no reason to be sad, that
has his pardon in his bosom; nor he has no reason to be glad, who is upon
the last step of the Ladder, ready to be turned off without his Pardon. And
this is the fifth gift that Christ gives to his, viz. Pardon of sin.

Sixthly, Christ gives Precious Promises. 2. Pet. 1. 4. The Promises are
precious beds of spices, they are V^res caelesie^, bottles filled with those
heavenly dews that will never fail, like that of Hagars; but will che^ish and
nourish the soul to life eternal, etc.
Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and Precious Promises, etc. The
Promises are a precious Book, every leaf drops myrrh, and mercy. The Promises
are golden Vessels that are laden with the choycest Jewels that heaven can
afford, or the soul desire. All our spiritual, temporal, and eternal good,
is to be found in the belly of the Promises. Promises are big-bellied mercies,
there is nothing you can truly call a mercy, but you will find it in the belly
of a Promise; under all changes they are the comfort, support, and relief of
the soul, Psalm. 119. 49, 50. Remember thy word unto thy servant, upon which
thou have caused me to hope. This is my comfort in my affliction, for thy word
has quickened me. If the soul groan under the power of sin, then that Promise
relieves it, Romans 6. 14. For sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are
not under the Law, but under grace. If the soul groan under the guilt of sin,
then that Promise relieves it, Jer. 33. 8. I will pardon all their iniquities
whereby they have sinned against me, etc. And that Promise, Isa. Anochi anochi
ha m^hhe.
43. 25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for my own sake,
and will not remember thy sins. I, even I am he, blotting out thy
transgression. I, even I, whom thou have offended; I, even I, whom thou have
provoked; I, even I, whose glorious name thou have profaned; I, even I, whose
righteous Law thou have violated; I, even I, whose holy Covenant thou have
transgressed; I, even I, whose mercies thou have despised; I, even I, whose
Chastisements thou have slighted, will blot out thy transgressions for my own
sake. I, even I, is a passionate and emphaticall expression; Gods goodness
runs over to sinful Creatures; and Where sin abounds, there grace does
super-abound.

If the Creditor himself blot out the debt, and cross the Mat. 6. 12, 14, 15.
and 18. 24, ^7, 33. Luke 7. 41 to 4^.
Book, surely it shall never be remembered more. Our sins are debts, which God
who has the power of life and death, of heaven and hell, of condemning and
absolving, has engaged himself to blot out as a thick cloud. Isa. 44. 22. I
have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins.
An under Officer may blot out an Indictment, and yet the offender may be never
the better for it; but if the King, who is the supreme Judge, shall blot it
out, then the offender is safe. The Application is easy. If the soul be
diserted, then that Promise relives it, Mich. 7. 18, 19. He will turn again,
he will have compassion upon us, etc. If the soul be sliding, and ready to
fall, then that Promise supports and upholds it, Psalm. 37. 24. Though he fall,
he shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand:
^i Jeh^vah somech j^do.
Or as the Hebrew has it, The Lord upholding him with his hand. The Hebrew
Participle (Somech) notes a continued act of God (God has still his
everlasting arms under his Deuteronomy. 33. 26. 22.
people, so that they shall never totally nor finally fall.) And the root
(Samuch) from whence this word is derived. (...)
signifies to sustain, or uphold, as the tender Mother does the little Babe.
The safety and security of the Child lies not so much in the Child's hanging
about the Mothers neck, as in the Mothers holding it fast in her arms: So our
safety and security lies not so much in our weak holding upon Christ, but in
Christ's holding of us fast in his everlasting arms. This is our glory, and our
safety, that Christ's left hand is always under us, and his right hand does
always embrace us, Cant. 2. 6. If the soul be forsaken by friends, then that
Promise relieves it, Heb. 13. 5, 6. I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.

There are five Negatives in the Greek, to assure Gods people that he will
never forsake them. Five times this precious Promise is renewed in the
Scripture, that we might have the stronger Consolation, and that we may press
and oppress it, till we have gotten all the sweetness out of it; and verily
many precious souls have sucked much sweetness out of the breasts of this
Promise, when their nearest relations, and their dearest friends have forsaken
them, and forgotten them. God loves that his people should put his Bonds, his
Promises in suite; and he that does, shall find God near him, though friends
should leave him, and the world be in arms against him, etc. If the soul be
tempted, then that word of Promise relieves it, 1 Cor. 10. 13. But God is
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, etc.
The Promises are a Christians Magna Charta, they are his chief Evidences for
heaven. Men highly prize their Charters and Privileges, and carefully keep the
Conveyances and Assurances of their Lands: Oh! how should Saints then treasure
up and keep these Precious Promises which the Lord has given them, and which
are to them instead of all Assurances, for their protection, maintenance,
deliverance, comfort, and everlasting happiness? And thus much for the sixth
gift the Lord gives, viz. The Promises.

Seventhly, The Lord gives Grace. Of his fulness we all John 1. 16.
have received Grace for Grace. The Lord gives that grace, the least dram of
which is more worth then Heaven and Earth.

It was an excellent saying of one of the Ancients, I had Hierom.
rather have St. Paul's Coat with his heavenly Graces, then the Purple of Kings,
with their Kingdoms. Grace is that A good symbol was at^^buted to Emilian,
the Roman Emperor (Non gens sed men's, non genus sed genius.) Not race, or
place, but grace truly sets forth a man.
which truly ennobles the soul, it raises the soul up to converse with the
highest and with the noblest objects; and every man is as the objects are, with
which he converses; if the objects are noble, the man is so; if the objects are
base with which a man converses, the man is base. A man may better know what he
is by eying the objects with which his soul does mostly converse, then by
observing his most glorious and pompious services. The righteous is more
excellent then his neighbor. Abraham was a Prince of God among the Hittites.
The Jews say, That those seventy persons that went down with Jacob into
Egypt, were more Pro. 12. 26. Genesis 23. 6.
worth then the seventy Nations of the world. Indeed, it is only grace that
makes a man truly noble.

When one heard the King of Persia styled, The Great King; says he, I
acknowledge none more excellent then my self, unless more righteous; nor none
greater, unless better. Grace, as it is bred by the noblest means, so it is
preserved and maintained in the soul, by the choycest means, viz. Union, and
Communion with God, etc. Grace is glory in the bud, and glory is grace at the
full. Grace makes a man all glorious Psalm. 45. 13.
within and without. Grace is a ring of gold, and Christ is the sparkling
Diamond in that ring.

Eighthly, He gives Peace. John 14. 27. My peace I leave with you, my peace I
give unto you; not as the world Romans 5. 1. Hos. 2. 21, 22, 23. Job 5. 19 to 25.
gives, give I unto you. Christ gives peace with God, and peace with
Conscience, and peace with the Creatures. (Dulce nomen pacis) The very name of
Peace is sweet.

The Hebrews when they wished all happiness to any, used but this one word,
Peace be with you. And the Ancients Martimus the Emperors Motto was (Pax bello
potior) Give me peace and let others quarrel.
were wont to paint Peace in the form of a Woman, with a Horn of Plenty in
her hand, all blessings. Ask a soul that has been under terrors of
conscience, and he will tell you, that of all gifts, inward Peace is the most
Princely gift, etc.

Ninthly, He gives Glory. John 10. 28. My sheep hear my voice, and they follow
me, and I give unto them eternal life. Romans 7. The wages of sin is death, but
the gift of God is eternal life.

Now the glory that Christ gives, is Real glory. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. Henceforth is
laid up for me a Crown of Glory. The Greek word (Apokeitai) signifies two
things. 1 A designation (...).
of a Crown. And 2 A reservation and safe keeping of it for him until the
Coronation day.

Again, the glory he gives the soul, is Soule-filling glory; glory that fills
the understanding with the cleerest and the Psalm. 16. ult Psalm. 17. ult. 2 Co^.
12. 1 to 6. Pericula non respicit Martyr, coronas respicit, says Basil.
brightest light; glory that fills the will with the greatest freedom; glory
that fills the affections with the choycest joy and delight.

Again, the glory he gives is Incomparable glory. Romans 8. 18. I reckon that
the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the
glory that shall be revealed in us. The Greek word (Logizomai) that is here
rendered I reckon, is not a word of doubting, but a word of concluding: (...).
ready to be (...) on us.
I conclude by Arguments, that our present sufferings are not worthy to be
compared to that illustrious and glorious glory that is ready to be revealed on
us, as it is in the Greek* I have cast up the account, says the Apostle, as
wise Merchants use to cast up theirs, and I find in the ballancing of the
account, that there is nothing to be compared with this glory that shall be
revealed.

Again, the glory he gives is Immovable glory; all worldly glory is tottering
and shaking. Princes Crowns hang now but upon one side of their heads. The
Lord of Hosts has Isa. 23. 9.
purposed it, to stain (or pollute) the pride of all glory, and to bring into
contempt all the honorable of the earth. The Lord (...) Jegn^sah.
has purposed it, or as it is in the Hebrew, The Lord has consulted it; And
the council of the Lord shall stand. It is agreed upon in heaven, that the
pride of all glory shall be stained, and polluted, or thrown down as some
polluted filthy thing, that is trampled upon, and trodden under foot. Oh! but
this glory that Christ gives, is unmovable glory, Heb. 12. 28
it is permanent glory, it is glory that cannot be changed, stained, nor polluted.

Again, the glory he gives, is suited glory; it is glory that Jo: 14. 1, 2, 3.
is suited to the backs, hearts, hopes, desires, and capacities of his servants.

Again, the glory he gives, is never fading glory; it is glory that fades not
away. When a man has been in heaven 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. (...) is the proper name
of a Flower, which is still ^^esh and green. Isa 40. 6, 7, 8.
as many millions of years as there be Stars in heaven, his glory shall be as
fresh, and as green, as it was at his first entrance into heaven. All worldly
glory is like the Flowers of the field, but the glory that Christ gives is
lasting and durable like himself, etc.

Tenthly, and lastly, He gives Himself, and verily this is a gift of gifts
indeed, John 6. 51. 63. So in Ephesians. 5. 20. A Saint may say, me thinks I hear
Christ saying to me, as Austin prays, Lord (says he) what ever thou have
given, take all away, only give me thy self.
Eschines said to Socrates, Others (said he) give thee silver and gold, and
precious Jewels, but I give thee my self. So the soul may say, One friend
gives me bread, and another gives me clothes, and another gives me house-roome,
etc. Oh! but thou give me thy self. Christ put into the balance, will
outweigh all other gifts, that he bestows upon the sons of men: Christ is the
richest gift; Oh! there are Unsearchable Riches in Christ, as hereafter I shall
show you. He is the choycest and the rarest gift; he is a gift given but to a
few; rich and rare Jewels are not commonly, but more rarely given, so is
Christ. Though Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a Romans 9. 27.
remnant only shall be saved. A garden enclosed, a spring Ca^t. 4. 12. Luke
12. 32.
shut up, a fountain sealed, is my well-beloved. Fear not little little
fl^cke, it is your fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom. Christ is a drawing
gift, a gift that draws all other gifts along with him. If he have given us
his Son, how shall Romans 8. 32.
he not with him freely give us all things? Christ is a drawing gift. When God
the father has cast this incomparable Jewel into a man's bosom, he cannot deny
him any thing: Such a soul may well say, Has he given me a Christ? and will
he not give me a crum? Has he given me his Son, which is the greatest mercy?
and will he stand with me for lesser mercies? surely no. In a word, Christ is
of all gifts the sweetest gift: As the Tree, Exodus 15. 25. sweetened the bitter
waters, so this gift, the Lord Jesus (of whom that Tree was a Type) sweetens
all other gifts that are bestowed upon the sons of men; he turns every bitter
into sweet, and makes every sweet more sweet.

And so I come to the second thing propounded, and that was

The Difference between Christ's giving, The Difference between Christ's, and the
world^ giving.
and the Worlds giving.
And this I shall show you in the following Particulars.

FIrst, The world gives, but they give grudgingly: But 2 Cor. 9. 7.
when Christ gives, he gives freely. Isa. 55. 1. Ho every ^ Pe^. 4. 9. No
Offerings to free will Offerings.
one that thirsts let him come, and buy wine and milk without money, and
without price. So in Rev. 21. 6. I will give to every one that is athirst, of
the water of life freely. To do good, and not to do it freely, handsomely, is
nothing. A benefit given with grudging, is a stony loaf, only taken for
necessity.

Secondly, The world they give, but they give poorly, Saul had bu^ five pence
to give the Seer; the Seer after much good cheer gives him no less then the
Kingdom, 1 Samuel 9 8. 10. So God deals with his.
nigardly; but Christ gives plenteously, richly, 1 Timothy 6. 17. Charge them that
are rich in this world, that they be not highminded, nor trust in uncertain
riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all things to enjoy.

When Caesar gave one a great Reward, This, says he, is too great a gift for
me to receive; but says Caesar, It Is not too great a gift for me to give. So
though the least gift that Christ gives (in some sense) is too much for us to
receive, yet the greatest gifts are not too great for Christ to give.

It Is said of Araunahs, that Noble Jebusite, renowned for his bounty, That he
had but a subjects purse, but a Kings heart: But the Lord Jesus has not only
a Kings heart, but he has also a Kings purse, and gives accordingly.

Thirdly, The world give, but they give tauntingly, they give upbraidingly;
they hit men in the teeth with the gifts they give: I, but the Lord Jesus
Christ gives, and he gives willingly, he upbraids none with the gifts he gives,
Jam. 1. 5. If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, that gives
liberally, and upbraideth no man. Where Christ gives, there he will not upbraid,
neither with present failings, nor former infirmities. Christ is not will not to
reproach those to whom he gives the best gifts: He will not cast it in their
dish, that he has been thus and thus kind unto them; but will Jer. 32. 40, 41
Prove. 1. 20. to 25. Chapter 8. 1. to 13. and Chapter 9. 1. to ^. Augustus in his
solemn Feasts, gave gold to some, and trifles to others. The Lord gives the
gold, the best things to his own, but the trifles of this world, to the men of
the world.
always rejoice over them to do them good. But the world gives, and then
reproaches the receiver for receiving, and this turns all into gall and
wormwood, etc.

Fourthly, The world gives, but they give more rarely; but Christ gives, and he
gives frequently; he is every day, every hour, yea, every moment a giving of
Royal favors to his people. Here is Peace for you that are in trouble, says
Christ; and here is Pardon for you that groan under guilt, says Christ; and
here is Comfort for you that are Mourners in Zion, says Christ, etc. His hand
is ever in his purse, he is still a scattering Pearls of glory, I, the very
Jewels of his Crown, among the beloved of his soul.

Fifthly, The world gives, but they give the worst, and keep the best: I, but
Christ gives the best, he gives the best of the best; he gives the best joy,
the best comfort, the best 2 Cor. 9. 15. 1 Pet. 1. 8. Phil. 4. 7. Psalm. 88. 10,
11.
peace, the best love, the best assistance, etc. he gives Adoption, Remission,
Justification, Sanctification, Acceptance, Reconciliation, and Glorification,
etc. He gives the best: As that King in Plutarch said of a Groat, It is no
Kingly Gift: And of a Talent, It Is no base Bribe. The world gives Groats, I,
but Christ gives Talents.

Sixthly, The world gives a little, that they may give no more: I, but Christ
gives that he may give. He gives a little Grace, that he may give Grace upon
Grace. He gives a little John 1. 16.
comfort, that he may give fulness of comfort: He gives some sips, that he
may give full draughts; he gives pence, that he may give pounds; and he gives
pounds, that he may give hundreds.

The third particular that I am to show you, is

The Excellency of those Gifts that The Excellency of Christ's gifts, above all
other gifts.
Christ gives, above all other Gifts that the World gives.
In this I shall mind brevity: And

FIrst, The Gifts that Christ gives to his, are Spiritual, and Heavenly Gifts:
As is most clear by what has been already said; and the spirituality of them,
does demonstrate the excellency of them. And doubtless the more spiritual any
gift, any promise, any truth, any prayer, or any service is, the more excellent
is that Gift, etc. All Christ's Gifts are like himself, spiritual and heavenly.

Secondly, They are Pure Gifts; Christ gives wine without Rev. 22. 1. Jam. 3.
17.
water; light without darkness; gold without dross; and sweet without bitter.
There Is much dross and poison in the Gifts that the world gives, but there is
none in the Gifts that Christ gives. The streams are as the fountain is; the
fountain is pure, and so are the streams; the branches are as the root is,
the root is pure, and so are the branches. John 15.


Thirdly, The Gifts that Christ gives, are Soule-satisfying Gifts: They are
such as are suitable to the soul, and therefore they satisfy the soul. Things
satisfy as they suite; there is a Good, and there is a suitable Good, now it is
only the suitable Good that satisfies the soul of man. A Pardon is most
suitable to a condemned man, and therefore it best satisfies him. Health is most
suitable to the sick, and therefore it satisfies when it is attained, etc. As
bread satisfies the hungry soul, and drink the thirsty soul, and clothing
the naked soul: So does the Precious Gifts that Christ bestows upon the
soul, satisfy the soul: The light, the love, the Jer. 31. 25. Psalm. 90. 14.
Psalm. 36. 8. Psalm. 63. 5. Ps. 65. 4, etc.
joy, the peace, the fellowship, etc. that Christ gives, does abundantly
satisfy the soul. Oh! but Gifts that this world gives, can never satisfy the
soul. Eccl. 5. 10. He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver;
nor he that loves The Creature is all shadow and vanity, it is filia noctis,
like Jonah's Gou^d, it is now flourishing, and now dying, etc. 1 John 3. 9. Romans
2. 7. 2 Pet. 1. 11.
abundance, with increase. A man may as soon fill a Chest with Grace, or a
quart-pot with virtue, as a heart with wealth. If Alexander Conquer one World,
he will wish for another to Conquer.

Fourthly, The Gifts that Christ gives, are Most permanent and lasting Gifts.
The Grace he gives, is called An immortal seed; and the Glory he gives, is
called Everlasting Glory. The Gifts of the world, are fading; a false Oath, a
spark of fire, a storm at sea, a treacherous friend, brings all to nothing in
a moment. Sad experience does every day confirm this.

Fifthly, and lastly, The Gifts that Christ gives, are the most Useful Gifts.
They are useful to the strengthening of the soul against Temptations, and to
the supporting of the The golden Crown cannot cure the headache, nor the chain of
pearl cannot cure the toothache.
soul under Afflictions, and to the sweetning of all changes; health and
sickness, strength and weakness, plenty and poverty, honor or disgrace, life
or death. Oh but worldly Gifts cannot bear up the spirits of men from fainting
and sinking, when Trials come, when troubles come.

Our Modern Stories relate of Queen Mary, that she should say, If they did
open her when she was dead, they should find Callis lying at her heart. The
loss of which it seems, hastened her end.

The Prior in Melancthon, rolled his hands up and down in a Basin full of
Angels, thinking to have Charmed his Gowt, but it would not do. The precious
Gifts that Christ gives his, will bear up their heads above all waters, etc. Of
all gifts, they are the most useful for the producing of the most noblest
effects; there are no gifts produce such effects, as the precious Gifts that
Christ gives; they raise men up to much life and activity, they make souls
strong to do for God, to bear for God, to suffer for God, to be any thing, to
be nothing, that God may be all in all. They raise the strongest joy, the most
lasting comfort, and the purest peace. There Is no Gifts draw out that
Thankfulness, and raises up to that Fruitfullnesse, as the Gifts that Jesus
Christ gives. And so much for that third Head, viz. The Excellency of those
Gifts that Christ gives, above all other Gifts whatsoever.

I come now to the fourth Head, and that is

The Reasons why God gives his b^st Gifts to his Dearest ones.
I shall only give you these six.

FIrst, Because he loves them with the dearest, with the choycest, and with the
strongest love; therefore he gives them the best Gifts.

Christ does not love Believers with a low, flat, dull, common love, with such
a love as most men love one another with, but with a love that is like
himself. Now men will give as they love, 1 Samuel 1. 4, 5. And Elkanah gave to
Penninah his wife, and to all her sons and daughters, Portions, but unto
Hannah he gave a worthy Portion, for he loved her. Ji^^en manah ahhath appaiim.
In the Hebrew it is, He gave her a Gift of the face: That is, a great, an
honorable Gift. Men look upon great and honorable Gifts, with a sweet and
cheerful countenance: So the Gifts that Jesus Christ gives to Believers, are
Gifts of the face; that is, they are the greatest Gifts, the honourablest
Gifts, the choycest Gifts, Gifts fit for none but a King to Mundus cadaver est,
and petentis cum sunt Canis. The world is a Carcass, and those that hunt after
it are Dogs, is an Arabic Proverb.
give.

Augustus in his solemn Feasts, gave trifles to some, but gold to others. The
Lord Jesus scatters the trifles of this world up and down, as Luther well
speaks, The whole Turkish Empire is but a crust that God throws to a Dog.
God scatters giftlesse Gifts, viz. the honors, riches, and favors of this
world, up and down among the worst of men; but as for his gold, his spirit,
his grace, his Son, his favor, these are Jewels that he only casts into the
bosom of Saints, and that because he dearly loves them.

Secondly, Christ gives the best Gifts to his people, Beeause Wicked men are
only principled to abuse mercy, which occasions God so often to rain hell out
of heaven upon them, as he did once up on Sodom and Gomorrah, for abusing of
mercy. Genesis 25. 5.
they are best principled and fitted to make a Divine improvement of them.

There Is no men on earth that are principled and fitted for the improvement of
the special Gifts that Christ gives, but his own people: None have such
principles of wisdom, love, holiness, and faithfulness, to make an
improvement of the joy, the peace, the comfort, that the Lord gives, as his
people. Ergo. Abraham gave unto the Sons of the Concubines Gifts, and sent them
away, but unto Isaac he gave all that he had. As Isaac was better beloved then
the Concubines Sons, so Isaac was better principled to improve love, then they
were. The application is easy.

Thirdly, He does it upon this account, That he may the more indeere the hearts
of his people to him.

The greatest design of Christ in this world, is mightily to indeere the
hearts of his people; and indeed it was that which was in his eye, and upon his
heart from all eternity. It was this design that caused him to lay down his
Crown, and to take up our Cross; to put off his Robes, and to put on our
Rags; to be condemned, that we might be justified; to undergo the wrath of the
Almighty, that we might for ever be in the arms of his mercy. He gives his
Spirit, his Grace, yea, and his very self and all, to indeere the hearts of
his people to himself. When Isaac would indeere the heart of Rebeckah, then
the Bracelets, the Jewels, and the Earrings are cast into her bosom: So the
Lord Jesus casts his Genesis 24. 53.
heavenly Bracelets, Jewels, and Earrings, into the bosoms, into the laps of
his people, out of a design to indeere himself unto them. Prove. 17. 8. A Gift
is a precious stone in the eyes of him that has it, whither soever it turns,
it prospers. In the Hebrew it is thus, A Gift is as a stone of grace: (...)
That is, it makes a man very acceptable and gracious, in the eyes of others. A
Gift is like that precious stone Pantarbe, that has a mavelous consiliating
property in it: Or like the wonder-working Lodestone, that as some Writers
observe, has among other Properties this, That it makes those that have it,
well-spoken men, and well accepted of Princes. Certainly the Gifts that Jesus
Christ gives to his, do render him very acceptable and precious in their eyes.
Christ to them is the Crown of Crowns; the Heaven of Heaven; the Glory of
Glories; he is the most sparkling Diamond in the Ring of Glory, Prove. 18. 16. A
man's Gift makes room for him, and brings him before great men. The Gifts
that Jesus Christ gives, widen the heart, and enlarge the soul of a Believer,
to take in more of himself. Naturally we are narrow-mouthed Heavenward, and
wide-mouthed earth-ward: But the Lord Jesus by casting in his Jewels, his
Pearls, his precious Gifts into the soul, does widen the soul, and enlarge
the soul, and make it more capacious to entertain Psalm. 24. 7, 8, 9, 10.
himself. Christ by his Gifts causes all doors to stand open, that the King
of glory may enter in.

Now the fourth Reason of the Point, is, Because Christ expects more from his
people, then he does from all the world besides; therefore he gives them the
best Gifts.

Where the Lord expects and looks for most, there he gives 'Twas a good saying
of Just: Ma^tyr, Non in verbis sed infactis res nostrae religionis consislunt.
God loves (says Luther) curristas, not quaristas, the ^unner, not the question
or* etc.
most. Though Believers are but A little little flock; though they are but A
remnant; though they are A fountain sealed, A spring shut up, A Garden
enclosed; yet Christ looks for more from them, then from all the world besides:
He looks for more love from them, then from all the world besides; and he
expects more service from them, then from all the world besides; and he looks
for more honor from them, then from all the world besides, Mal. 1. 6. A Son
honors his father, and a servant his Master; if I am your father, where is
my honor? And if I am your master, where is my fear? He looks for more fear
from them, then from all the world besides; and for more honor from them, then
from all the world besides; and for more prayers and praises Some say, that the
Panther will leap three times after his prey, but if he miss it the 3d time, he
will leap no more. 'Twere well for Saints, if Satan would do so, etc. 1 Chr.
21. 1. Job 2. 9. Mat. 26. 2 Cor. 12. 7. Mat. 4. 1* 12.
from them, then from all the world besides.

Fifthly, The Lord Jesus gives the best gifts to his own people, That he may
fence and strengthen them against the worst Temptations.

There are no men on earth that lie open to temptations, as Saints; the best
men have been always the most tempted. The more excellent any man is in grace
and holiness, the more shall that man be followed with temptations; as you may
see in David, who was tempted by Satan to number the people; and Joh, to curse
God, and dye; and Peter, to deny Christ; and so Paul was buffeted; yea, and
Christ himself most grievously assaulted. The Lord knows well enough, that
Satan has a cruel eye, an envious eye, a malicious eye upon his beloved ones,
and therefore he is pleased by his precious Gifts, to strengthen them against
his assaults. What Paul once said concerning bonds, and afflictions, that Acts
20. 23.
they attended him in every place; that may Believers say concerning
temptations, that they attend them in every place, in every calling, in every
condition, in every company in every service, etc. As now, that the hearts of
his people, and temptations Vigilat diabolus and tu dormis. The Devil watches,
and do thou sleep?
may not meet, the Lord is pleased to give them the best and choycest Gifts.

Austin thankt God for this, That his heart and the temptations did not meet.
The Lord has on purpose given these glorious Gifts into the hearts of his
Saints, that their souls and temptations may be kept asunder; that though they
be tempted, yet they may not be conquered; though they be assaulted, yet they
may not be vanquished. Basil, Luther, Ego non sum ego, said that noble Convert,
when he met with a temptation.
Vincentius, and that famous Marquess Galiasius, etc. met with very strange and
strong temptations, but the precious Gifts that the Lord had cast into their
bosoms, made them triumph over all. Oh that grace, that peace, that life, that
love, that communion with which the Lord had crowned them, made them too great,
too noble, and too glorious, to yield to any temptations with which they were
beset. 'Twas their pleasure, to overcome offered pleasure; their honor, to
overcome offered honor; their greatness, to overcome offered greatness.
Pecuniam daquae permaneat ac con^i^^o duret, glor^a^ que semper floreat. Basil.


When one of them was tempted with money and preferment, he scorned the offers,
saying, Give me money that may last for ever, and glory that may eternally
flourish.

Jerome tells a story Of a Christian Soldier, whom when the Praetor could not by
any torments remove from Christianity, he commanded to be laid on a bed in a
pleasant Garden, among H^eronimus in vita Pauli.
the flourishing and fragrant flowers; which done, all others withdrawing, a
most beautiful Harlot came to him, and used all Art to destroy his soul; but
the Christian Soldier being filled with the royal Gifts of the spirit, bit
off his tongue with his teeth, and spat it in her face as she was tempting him,
and so got victory over all her temptations.

The precious favors God confers upon his, make them temptation-proof, they
make believers trample upon the most amiable baits, How can I do this great
wickedness, and Genesis 39.
sin against God? says Joseph: Joseph's sense of Potiphars favors heaped upon
him, strengthened him against the impudent solicitations of his wanton
Mistress; and shall not the singular favors that God confers upon his dearest
ones, strengthen them against Satan's assaults? Surely gracious hearts are
wrought more upon, and bettered and strengthened more by spiritualls, then by
temporalls; by eternalls, then by externalls, and if Satan don't find it so, I
am much mistaken. Well, remember this, Satan's overcoming the Saints gives him
the greatest advantage to boast and triumph over Christ.

Ambrose brings in the Devil boasting against Christ, and The Devil
ma^chethwell armed, and in good array, says Luther.
challenging Judas as his own, He is not thine, Lord Jesus (says he) he is
mine, his thoughts beat for me; he eats with thee, but is fed by me; he takes
bread from thee, but money from me; he drinks with thee, but sells thy blood to
me. So when Satan prevails over the Saints, Look, Oh Christ! (says he) Are
these the price of thy blood? are these the objects of thy love? are these the
delight of thy soul? what, are these thy Jewels? are these the apple of thy
eye? are these thy pleasant portion? Why, Lo how I lead them? Lo how I triumph
over them! they seem rather to be mine, then thine. Ah Christians! resist as
for life, that Satan may never have occasion thus to insult and triumph over
Christ, etc.

Sixthly, and lastly, Christ gives the best gifts to his dearest ones, That
they may be an honor and a praise unto him in the glorious day of his owning
of them, and marriage to them before all the world.

Believers in this life are but betrothed to Christ, I will betroth thee unto
me for ever; yea, I will betroth thee unto Hos. 2. 19, ^0.
me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving-kindnesse. Their
Marriage-day is put off till the glorious day of Christ's appearing; the great
day of his glory, will be the day of solemnity, Rev. 21. 2. 9, 10 compared, It
would not be for The good things of eternal life, are so many, that they
exceed number; so great, that they exceed measure; so precious, that they are
above all estimation. Aug. de Triplici habitu. c. 4.
the honor and glory of Christ, that his Spouse in that day should be clothed
with rags; therefore he has given them the Bracelets, the Earrings, and the
Jewels before hand, that they may be a praise and an honor to him, in the
Marriageday. Oh! when the Saints shall appear with all those glorious Jewels
about them, that Christ has bequeathed to them, how will their splendant glory
darken all other glory, and make the very Sun to hide its face? This is our
betrothing day, that will be our Marriage-day.

Bishop Ridley, the night before he suffered, invited his Hostess, and the
rest, at Table to his Marriage, For, said he, to morrow I must be married. So
several other Martyrs went as merrily to dye, as to dine; knowing that their
dying day did but make way for their Marriage-day. The Lord does by his rich
and royal favors, trick and trim up his Bride before hand, that she may be an
honor and a praise to him in the day of Coronation, in the day of Marriage, in
the day of solemnity, when he will own her before Devils, Angels, and all
Reprobates; when he will say, Lo here am I, and the Bride, Oh father! that
thou have given me.

And thus you have a brief account of the Reasons of the Point, Why the Lord
gives the best Gifts to his own people.

We shall make some short, but sweet Uses of this Point. And first, Does the
Lord give the best and greatest Gifts to his people? Oh! what is in thy soul,
or in my soul that should cause Ezekiel. 16.
the Lord to give such Gifts to us, as he has given? We were all equal in
sin, and misery; nay doubtless, we have actually out-sinned thousands to whom
these precious Gifts are denied. Let us therefore sit down and wonder at this
O Lord Jesus, says Bernard, (breaking sorth into an admiration of Christ's
love) I love thee (plusquam mea, plusquam ineos, plusquam me) more then all my
goods, more then all my friends, ye^, more then my very self, etc.
condiscending love of God. Oh! we were once poor wretches, siting upon the
dunghill, yea, wallowing in our blood; and yet behold the King of Kings, the
Lord of Lords has so far condiscended in his love, as to bestow himself, his
spirit, his grace, and all the Jewels of his Royal Crown upon us. Oh! what
heart can conceive, what tongue can express this matchless love? I will be
thine for ever, says Christ, and my spirit shall be thine for ever, and my
grace thine for ever, and my glory thine for ever, and my righteousness thine
for ever; all I am, and all I have, shall be thine for ever. Oh Sirs! what
condiscending love is this? Oh! what a Christ is this?

But then secondly, Be greatly thankful, O be greatly thankful for the
great Gifts that Christ has bestowed upon you. It Is not a little
thankfulness that will answer and suite to the great Gifts that the Lord
Jesus has bestowed upon you. Psalm. 103.
O say with the Psalmist, What shall I render to the Lord for all his favors,
and great benefits: I will take the cup of salvation, and will call upon the
name of the Lord. Yea say again Psalm. 71. 14. Injuries shall be writ in the
dust, but our mercies on M^rble, that our hearts may be the better provokt to
praise and thankfulness.
with the same Psalmist, I will yet praise thee more and more: Or as it is in
the Hebrew, I will add to thy praise. Oh when thou look upon the Jewels, the
Pearls that Christ has given thee, say, Lord I will praise thee more and
more* I will rise higher and higher in thy praises, I will be still a adding to
thy praise. The very Law of Nature bespeaks great thankfulness, where great
favors are given; and the Law of Custom bespeaks it, and does not the Law of
grace bespeak it much more?

When Tamerlin had taken Bajazet, among other Questions, he asked him If ever he
had given God thanks for making him so great an Emperor? He confessed
immediately, That he never thought of that: To whom Tamerlin replied, Turk.
Hist. 220, etc.
It Is no wonder so ungrateful a man should be made a spectacle of misery. Oh!
what do they then deserve, that are unthankful for spiritual favors? Tell
me, O Christians! are not the Gifts that Christ has conferred upon you,
peculiar Gifts? And will you not be thankful for them? Were they There are but
few upon whom God bestows his love. 'Twas always a principle in morality,
that sweet and intimate friendship cannot be extended to many, friends usually
go by paires.
but common Gifts, you ought to be thankful for them, how much more then for
peculiar Gifts, for right-handed favors? Tell me, are not the Gifts that
Christ has given thee, rare Gifts? What had thou been if Christ had not made
a difference between thee, and others, by those glorious Gifts that he has
conferred upon thee? Thou look upon some, and see they are very ignorant;
Oh! what had thou been, if God had not bestowed the Grace of knowledge upon
thee? Thou look upon other persons that are unclean, profane, and filthy,
why, such a wretch would thou have been, if the Lord had not made a
difference between thee and them, by bestowing himself, his grace, and spirit
upon thee.

It was long since determined in the Schools, That penitents had more reason to
be thankful, then innocents. Sin giving an advantage to mercy to be doubly
free in giving, and in pardoning: And so the greater obligation is left upon us
to thankfulness.

Luther has a very famous story, in his writing upon the fourth Commandment,
in the time of the Council of Constance; he tells you Of two Cardinals, that
as they were riding to the Council, they saw a Shepherd in the field weeping,
one of them being affected with his weeping, rode to him to comfort him; and
coming near to him, he desired to know the reason of his weeping; the Shepherd
was unwilling to tell him at first, but at last he told him, saying, I looking
upon this Toad considered that I never praised God as I ought, for making me
such an excellent Creature as a man comely and reasonable. I have not blessed
him that he made me not such a deformed Toad as this. The Cardinal hearing
this, and considering that God had done far greater things for him, then for
this poor Shepherd, he fell down dead from his Mule; his servants lifting
him up, and bringing him to the City, he came to life again, and then cried
out, Oh Saint Austine! how truly did thou say, The unlearned rise and take
heaven by force, and we with all our learning wallow in flesh and blood. The
application is easy.

Thirdly, The next Use is this,

If the Lord has given the best Gifts to his people, then Oh that his people
would not give God the worst, but the best of every thing! It Is the most wicked
a^a^ice, to defraud God of the oblation of our selves, says Chrysostom.
Oh! give the Lord the best of your strength, the best of your time, the best
of your mercies, and the best of your services, who has given to your souls
the best of Gifts. Number. 18. 29. Out of all your Gifts ye shall offer every
heave Offering of the Lord, of all the best thereof, even the hallowed part
thereof out of it. So I say, of all thy Offerings offer God the best, who has
given to thee the best and greatest Gifts. So in Exodus 35. 22. For the service
of the Tabernacle they brought bracelets, and earrings, and rings, and tables,
all Jewels of If a man should serve the Lord a thousand years (says Austin) ^
would net deserve an ^oure of the reward in Heaven, no not a moment, much less
an Eternity: And therefore (says he) we had need do as much as we can, and
do all that we do as well as we can, etc.
gold: and every man that Offered, Offered an Offering of Gold unto the Lord.
They gave the best of the best, and so must we. O do not offer to God, the
worst of your time, the worst of your strength, the worst of your mercies, the
worst of your services. That same is a very dreadful Text, Mal. 1. 8. 13, 14.
compared. And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? And if ye
offer the lame and the sick, is it not evil? Offer it now unto thy Governor,
will he be pleased with it, and accept thy person? says the Lord of hosts.
Says God, will men be put off thus? No, I know they will not, and why then should
you deal worse with me, then with men? Thy Governors will have the best, I,
the best of the best, and will you deal worse with me, says God, then with
your Governors? Will you thus requite me for all my savours, O foolish people,
and unwise, is this your kindness to your friend? Verse. 13, 14. Ye said also,
behold what a weariness is it? and ye have snuffed at it, says the Lord of
hosts; and ye have brought that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick,
thus ye brought an Offering, should I accept this of your hands, says the
Lord. (Oh! that God had not cause to complain thus of many of your souls, to
whom he has shown much love.) But mark what follows, verse. 14. But cursed be
the deceiver, which has in his flock a male, and voweth and sacrifices unto
the Lord a corrupt thing; for I am a great King, says the Lord of Hosts, and
my name is dreadful among the Heathen. If you have better in your hands, and
yet shall go to put off God with the worst, the curse will follow. Think of it
and tremble, all you that deal fraudulently and false-heartedly with God. Ah
Christians! you must say, world stand behind, sin and Satan get you behind us,
for the best Gifts, the choycest favors that ever were given, we have received
from the father of light; and therefore by his Gifts he has obliged our souls
to give him the best of our time, strength, and services; and therefore we will
not be at your call or beck any longer. Oh say! the Lord has given us the best
Gifts, and cursed be the deceiver, which has in his flock a male, and voweth
and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing?

Fourthly,

This should bespeake the people of God to trust and lean 2 Timothy 4. 8.
upon God for lesser Gifts. Has God given thee a Crown, and will thou not
trust Heb. 11. 10. Chap. 12. 28.
him for a crum? Has he given thee a house that has foundations, whose
builder and maker is God? Has he given thee a Kingdom that shakes not, and
will thou not trust him for a Cottage, for a little house-roome in this world?
Has he Romans 8. 32.
given thee Himself, his Son, his Spirit, his Grace, and will thou not trust
him to give thee bread, and friends, and Mat. 6. 32.
clothes, and other necessary mercies that he knows thou need? Has he
given thee the greater, and will he stand with thee for the lesser? Surely no.
Will thou trust that man for much, that has given thee but a little? And will thou not trust that God for a little, that has given thee much? Will thou not
trust him for pence, that has given thee pounds. Oh Sirs! has the Lord given
you himself, the best of favors, and will not you trust him for the least
favors? Has he given you Pearls, and will not you trust him for pins? etc.
Does not the Apostle argue sweetly? Romans 8. 32. He that spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also, freely
give us Prove. 8. 23. to ^2 Vide M^t. 3. u^^.
all things? What? says the Apostle, has he given us his Son, his only Son,
his bosom Son, his beloved Son; the Son of his joy, the Son of his delight? Oh
how can he then Ta^^um poss^mus, qu^^tum credimus. Cyp.
but cast in all other things, as paper and pack-threed, into the bargain? Oh
that Christians would learn to reason themselves out of their fears, and out
of their distrusts, as the Apostle does! Oh! that Christians would no longer
rend and wrack their precious souls, with fears and cares? but rest satisfied
in this, That he that has been so kind to them in spiritualls, will not be
wanting to them in temporalls.

Fifthly,

If the Lord has given the best Gifts to his people, this should then bespeake
his people, not to envy the men of the world, for those lesser favors that God
has conferred upon them. David three several times g^ves himself this
counsel, Not to envy at others. Psalm. 37. 1, 7, 8. comp: So Psalm. 73. 21.
It was horrid wickedness in Ahab, to envy poor Naboth, because of his
Vineyard: And is it a virtue in you that are Christians, to envy others,
because their outward mercies are greater or sweeter then yours? Should the
Prince, upon whose head the Royal Crown is set, and about whose neck the
golden Chain is put, envy those whose hands are full of Sugarplums, and whose
laps are full of Rosemary? etc. Has not God, Oh Christians! put a Royal
Crown of glory upon your heads, and a golden Chain of grace about your necks;
and his Sons glorious Robe upon your backs, and why then should your hearts
rise against others mercies? Oh! reason your selves out of this sinful temper.
I would have every Christian thus to argue, Has not the Lord given me
himself? is not one dram of that grace that God has given me, more worth then
ten thousand worlds? and why then should I envy at others mercies?

There was a Soldier, which for breaking his rank, in reaching after a bunch
of Grapes, was condemned to dye (by Martial Law) and as he went to execution,
he went eating of his Grapes: Upon which, some of his fellow Soldiers were
somewhat troubled, saying, He ought then to mind somewhat else: To whom he
said, I beseech you Sirs do not envy me my Grapes, they will cost me deer; you
would be loath to have them at the rate that I must pay for them. So say I, Oh
Saints! do not envy the men of this world, because of their honors, riches,
etc. for you would be loath to have them at the rate that they must pay for
them. Oh! there is a day of reckoning a coming, a day wherein all the Nobles
and brave Gallants in the world, must be brought to the Bar, and give an
account how they have improved and employed all the favors that God has
conferred upon them; therefore envy them not. Is it madness and folly in a
great favorite at Court, to envy those that feast themselves with the scrapps
that come from the Princes Table? O then what madness and folly is it, that
the favorites of heaven should envy the men of the world, who at best do but
feed upon the scraps that come from Gods Tables? Spiritualls are the choice
meat; temporalls are but the scraps: Temporalls are the bones, spiritualls are
the marrow. Is it below a man to envy the dogs, because of the bones? And is it
not much more below a Christian, to envy others for temporalls, when himself
injoyes spiritualls?

Sixthly,

Be not troubled for the want of lesser Gifts. John 14. 1, 2, 3.
It is to me a sad thing to see gracious souls (that have some comfortable
satisfaction in their own hearts, that the Lord has given Christ and grace to
them, etc.) go up and down whining and weeping, because they have not health,
or wealth, or Child, or Trade, etc. when the Lord has bestowed upon them such
choice, spiritual blessings, the least of which will outweigh all temporal
blessings. Well Christians, remember this, you act below your spiritual birth,
your holy calling, when you suffer your hearts to be troubled and perplexed for
the want of temporal things. Can you read special love in these? Does your
happiness lie in the enjoyment of them? Are not the Angels happy without them?
Was not Lazarus more happy then Dives? Yes, O then let not the want of those
things trouble thee, the enjoyment of which can never make thee happy. Should
the Child be troubled for want of a Rattle, or a Babie, that is proclaimed
Heir of a Crown? And why then should a Christian, that is Heir apparent to a
Heavenly Crown, be troubled upon the want of worldly toys? etc.

Jerous tells us of one Didymus, a godly Preacher, who was Socrates Scho. l. 4.
c. 20.
blind; Alexander a godly man coming to him, asked him, Whether he was not sore
troubled and afflicted for want of his sight? O yes, said didymus, It Is a great
affliction and trouble to me: Then Alexander chid him, saying, Has God given
you the excellency of an Angel, of an Apostle, and are you troubled for that
which Rats and Mice, and bruit-beasts have? It Is great folly, it is double
iniquity, for a Christian to be troubled for the want of those things, that God
ordinarily bestows upon the worst of men. Oh the mercies that a Christian has
in hand! Oh the mercies that a Christian has in the Promises! Oh the mercies
that a Christian has in hope! are so many, so precious, and so glorious, that
they should bear up his head and heart from fainting, and sinking, under all
outward wants.

There goes a Story among Scholars, Of Aesops deceiving Mercury, He having
promised him one part of his Nuts, keeps all the meat to himself, and gives
the other the shells. Cyprian in his Sermon, De lapsis, reports of diverse,
who forsaking the Lord, were given over to evi^l spirits, and died fearfully. A
backsl^der may say* Opera and impensa pe^it. All my pains and charge is lost.
Ah Christians! God has given you the meat, but the world the shells; why then
should you be troubled for want of the shells, when God has given you the
kernel? etc.

Seventhly,

If the Lord has given his people the best of Gifts, Oh then let not them
leave off that God that has bestowed such choice and noble favors on them.
Jerem. 2. 11, 12, 13. Has a Nation changed their Gods, which are yet no Gods?
but my people have changed their glory for that which does not profit. Be
astonished O ye Heavens at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate,
says the Lord. (Why?) For my people have committed two evils, they have
forsaken me the fountain of living waters, etc. This was that that aggravated
the Israelites sin, Psalm. 105. and 106. That They forsook that God that had
conferred upon them many rich and royal favors. But O then what madness and
folly is it in you, that you should forsake that God that has done such mighty
things for your souls? I may say to keep you close to God, as Saul said to his
servants, to keep them close to him, 1 Samuel 22. 7. Then Saul said unto his
servants that stood about him, hear now ye Benjamites, will the Son of Jesse
give every one of you fields, and Vineyards, and make you all Captains of
thousands, and Captains of hundreds? Ah Christians! can the world give you
spiritual life? Can the world give you peace of conscience, pardon of sin, the
favor of God, the hopes of glory? No, O then never leave nor forsake that God
that has given you all these royal favors, which none can give nor take, but
himself. He that forsakes Diis proximu^ ille est, quem ratio non ira movet.
Sen. He is next to God, whom reason, and not anger moves. Did an impatient
soul bu^ see himself i^ a glass, he would loath himself, for, says Homer,
his eyes sparkle like sire, his heart swells his pulls beats, etc. In a word. a^
impatiem soul is a bed lam, a monster, a devil, etc.
God, forsakes his own mercies, he forsakes his life, his joy, his Crown, his
all in all. No evil to this, of forsaking the greatest good. It makes a man's
life a very hell, Such shall be written in the dust. Jer. 17. 13.

Eighthly, and lastly.

Be not impatient nor froward, when God shall take away some lesser mercies
from you. Has God given you the best, and the greatest gifts that your souls
can beg, or himself can give? And will you be froward or impatient when he
shall come to take away lesser mercies? What? will thou be an impatient soul,
when God comes and writes death upon such a near mercy, and passes the
sentence of death upon such and such desirable mercies? Verily this is the way
to provoke God to strip thee naked of thy choycest ornaments, and to put thee
in Chains, or else to turn thee a grasing among the beasts of the field, as
he did Nebuchadnezzar. God gives the best, and takes away the worst; he gives
the greatest, and takes away the least; the sense of which made Job bless God,
when stripped of all. If a man should give you a Pearl, and take away a pin; if
he should give you a bag of gold, and take away a bag of Counters, would it
not be madness in you to be impatient, and froward? Does God take away a pin,
and has he not given you a Pearl for it? He has given thee a pound, O
Christian, for every penny that he has taken from thee; therefore be not
froward, nor impatient. Remember Christians, how many in the world there be,
that sit sithing and mourning under the want of those very favors that you do
enjoy. Why does the living man complain? What, out of the grave, and
complain? What, out of hell, and complain? This is man's sin, and Gods wonder.

But now some poor sinners may say, Here Is good News for Saints, but what is
all this ^o us all this while. Read also Pro. 1. 20. to 29. Chapter 8. 1. to 8. and
Chap. 9. 1. to 7. Isa. 43. 22, 23, 24, 25. Jer. 51. 5.


Why, I Will tell you, I have something to say for the comfort and encouragement
of poor sinners. Ah sinners! Christ is willing to bestow the best Gifts upon
the worst sinners; take one Text for all, it is a sweet one, and full to the
point in hand, Psalm. 68. 18. Thou have ascended on high, thou have led
Captivity Captive, thou have received Gifts for men; yea, for the rebellious
also, that the Lord God might dwell among them.

Christ has received Gifts as a Steward from the hand of None so faith ^ull as
Christ, Heb. 3. 5, 6.
the father, to dispense them among men, yea among the rebellious, the worst of
men. If there be here at this time any rebellious sinner, or rebellious
Sabboth-breaker, or rebellious Rev 3. 20. 2 Cor. 6. 16. I will dwell in them.
The words are very significant in the Or^ginall (...). I will indwell in their.
There are two in's in the Original, as if God could never have enough
communion with them.
drunkard, or rebellious curser, etc. let such rebellious sinners know, that
Christ has received Gifts, even for the rebellious.

That the Lord God might dwell amongst them. That is, that the Lord God might
have sweet fellowship and communion with them. Behold I stand at the door, and
knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him,
and will sup with him, and he with me.

Behold I stand at the door and knock. I, that have Heaven to give, and Peace
to give, and Pardon to give, and Grace to give, and my Self to give. I that
have tried gold, to enrich you; and white raiment to cloth you; and eye salve,
to anoint you. I stand at the door and knock, if any man will open the door,
let him be never so guilty, never so filthy, never so unworthy, etc. I will
come in, and sup with him, and he with me.

Lord, at whose door do thou stand knocking? Is it at the rich man's door?
Or at the righteous man's door? Or at the humbled man's door? Or at the weary
and heavy laden man's door? Or at the mourners door? Or at the qualified or
prepared man's door? No, says Christ, it is at none of these doors. At whose
then, O blessed Lord? At the Lukewarm Laodiceans door. At their door that
are neither hot, nor cold, that are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked. These, says Christ, are the worst of the worst; and yet if
any of these wretches, these Monsters of mankind, will open the door, I will
come in, and will sup with them, and they with me, etc.

I have read a remarkable story of a great Rebel, that had Bodin relates this
story.
raised a mighty party against a Roman Emperor: The Emperor upon this being
much provoked and stirred in spirit, made a Proclamation, That whosoever
brought in the Rebel dead or alive, should have a great sum of money. The
Rebel hearing of this, comes and presents himself unto the Emperor, and
demanded of him the sum of money. Whereupon the Emperor reasons thus, If I
should now cut him off, the world would say, I did it to save my money; and so
he pardoned him, and gave him the great sum of money, notwithstanding all his
former Rebellion.

Oh! shall a Heathen Emperor do thus to a Rebel that was in Arms against
him? And will not God do as much for poor rebellious sinners? Surely he will.
What though thou have been in Arms against God? and Mustered Romans 5. 10. Col.
1. 21. Romans 6. 13, 16, 19, 20.
up all the strength and force thou could, even all the members of thy body,
and faculties of thy soul, against God, and Christ, and Holiness? Yet know,
that the King of Israel is a merciful King, he is a God of Pardons, he
delights to make his Grace glorious, and therefore is very willing to show
mercy to the greatest Rebels, to the worst of sinners: witness Manasses, Mary
Magdalen, the Thief, Paul, and others. The greatness of man's sins, do but set
off the riches of free grace. Sins are debts, and God can as easily blot out a
debt of many thousands, as he can a lesser debt* therefore let not the greatest
Rebel despair, but believe, and he shall find, that where sin has abounded,
there Grace shall super-abound, etc.

And thus much for this Observation, we shall now proceed to the next words.
Viz.

EPHESIANS. 3. 8. That I should Preach among the Gentiles, the Unsearchable Riches
of Christ.
A Little to open the words.

That I should Preach. That is, declare good news, or the glad tidings of
salvation, that is brought by Jesus Christ, to sinners. The Greek word (...) in
the New Testament, answers to the Hebrew word Bessorah, in the Old Testament,
(...). Evaggelisasthi, from Evagg^lize.
both signifying Good news, glad tidings, or a Joyful Message.

That I should Preach among the Gentiles. The word that is here rendered
Gentiles, is sometimes used generally for all men, or all Nations: So it is used
in Mat. (...).
25. 32. Mat. 28. 19. Sometimes this Greek word is used more especially for the
people of the Jews, so in John 11. 48, 50, 51, 52. Acts 10. 22. And sometimes
it is used for the Gentiles, distinguished from the Jews, so in Matthew 6. 32.

By the Gentiles here you are to understand those poor Phil. 2. 12, 13
Heathens that were without God in the world, that never had heard of Christ,
nor those Unsearchable Riches that be in him, as you may clearly see by
comparing this Text with that, Gal. 1. 15, 16. But when it pleased God, who
separated me, from my mothers womb, and called me by his grace, to reveal his
Son in me, that I might preach among the Heathen. (Says he) Immediately I
consulted not with flesh and blood.

The first Observation that I shall speak to, from these words thus opened, is
this.

That the Gifts and Graces that God bestows upon his people, should be
improved, employed, and Observ^
exercised by his people.
The Greek word Caris, that is here rendered Grace, we showed you had a
threefold signification in the Scripture. Sometimes it denotes the favor of
God; sometimes the common gifts of the Spirit; and sometimes the saving Graces
of the Spirit. Now, says Paul, that singular favor that God has conferred
upon me, and all those common gifts, and special graces with which he has
enriched me, they are all to be employed and exercised. Unto me is this Grace
given, that I should preach among the Gentiles, the Unsearchable Riches of
Christ.

So that there is nothing more clear then this, viz. That the gifts and graces
that God bestows upon his people, should be employed, improved, and exercised
by his people.

To me is this grace given. Not that I should be idle, but active; not that I
should be negligent, but diligent; not that I should hide my Talents, but
improve them.

I shall touch upon a few Scriptures that speak out this truth, and then open
it to you. 2 Timothy 1. 6. Wherefore I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up
the gift of God that is in thee. As the fire is increased and preserved by
blowing, so are our graces. Some think that it is a metaphor taken from Calvin,
and others.
a spark kept in ashes, which by gentle blowing is stirred up, till it take a
flame. Others say, it is an allusion to the fire in the Temple, which was
always to be kept burning. We get nothing by dead and useless habits: Talents
hid in a napkin, gather rust; the noblest faculties are imbased, when not
improved, when not exercised. Phil. 2. 12. Work out your own salvation with
fear and trembling. The Greek is, Work till you get the work through. The
reason why many men's (...). Katergazesth^.
hearts tremble, and are so full of fears and doubts, is because their
salvation is not wrought out, they do not make through work in their souls:
They put not that question home, whether they have grace, or no; an interest in
Christ, or no. They do not rise with all their strength against sin, nor with
all their power to serve the Lord, and therefore fears and doubts do compass
them round about. So in 1 Cor. 15. ult. Be steadfast, and unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Grace is bettered and made more perfect by
acting. Neglect of our graces, is the ground of their decrease and decay. Wells
are the sweeter for drawing.
Lord, forasmuch as you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

Be steadfast. It Is a Metaphor taken from a foundation, on which a thing stands
firmly; or a seat, or chair, wherein one sits fast.

Immovable, signifies one that will not easily move his place, or opinion.

Abounding, or Excelling in the work of the Lord.

Knowing that your labor is not in vain. The Greek is, Labors unto
weariness. The Apostle would have them labor unto weariness; For (says he)
It Is not in vain: It will turn to a good account, it will yield you much of
heavenhere, and make you high in heaven hereafter.

There are only two things that I shall endeavor to do, for the opening of
the Point.

1 To show you why persons must improve, employ, and exercise the graces and
gifts that God has bestowed upon them. And then

2 The End to which they are to exercise those graces and gifts.

For the first: There are these twelve Reasons why gracious souls should
exercise and improve their gifts and graces. Friends, this Point is a Point of
as singular use, and of as great concernment to you, as any that I know the
Scripture speaks of; and therefore I desire you to lend your most serious and
solemn attentions.

First, They must exercise and improve their graces,

Because the exercise and improvement of their graces, is the ready way to be
rich in grace. Our graces are like Gideo^s Army, but a handful in comparison^;
but our sins are like the M^dianites, in* numerable as Grathoppers.
As sin is increased in the soul by the frequent actings of it, so grace is
nourished and strengthened in the soul, by its frequent actings. The exercise
of grace is always attended with the increase of grace. Prove. 10. 4. The
diligent hand makes rich; or, the nimble hand, the hand that is active and
agile, that will see nothing lost for looking after; that hand makes rich.
Ruth 2. How did Boaz follow the business himself? his eyes were in every
corner, on the servants, and on the Reapers, yea, on the Gleaners too.

It is recorded of Severus, That his care was not to look what men said of
him, or how they censured him, but to look One day God will require of men,
Non quid legerint, sed quid egerint, nec quid dixerint, sed quomedo vixerint.
what was to be done by him. He will rise in judgment against those Professors
that look more what this man, and the other man says of them, then what is to
be done by them. The heart of a Christian is to be taken up with what is to be
done by him, and not with what this man thinks, or the other judges of him.

Pacunius has an elegant saying, I hate (says he) the men that are idle in
deed, and Philosophical in word. God loves (says Luther) Curristas, not
Quaristas, The runner, not the questioner. Grace grows by exercise, and
decays by disuse. Though both arms grow, yet that which a man most uses, is
the stronger, and the bigger; so it is both in gifts and graces. In Birds,
their wings which have been used most, are sweetest; the Application is easy.
Such men as are contented with so much grace as will bring them to glory, The
reason (say some) why Christ corsed the fig^^ee, tho the time of bea^ing fruit
was not come, was because it made a glorious show with leaves, and promised
much, ^ut brought fo^^ nothing.
with so much grace as will keep hell and their souls asunder, will never be
rich in grace, nor high in comfort, or assurance, such souls usually go to
heaven in a storm. O how weather-beaten are they before they can reach the
Heavenlyharbour?

Secondly, They must exercise their gifts and graces,

Because it is the maine end of Gods giving gifts and graces to them. Grace is
given to trade with, it is given to lay out, not to lay up. Grace is a Candle
that must not be put under a bushel, but set upon a Candle-stick. Grace is a
golden treasure that must be improved, not hoarded up, as men do their gold.
Grace is a Talent, and it is given for this very end, that it should be employed
and improved for the honor and advantage of him that gave it. The slothful
servant, in Gods account, is an evil servant, and accordingly God has denoted
him, and doomed him for his ill husbandry, to destruction, Mat. 25. 24 -- 31.

What a shame is it (says one) that faith should not be able Hierom.
to do that which infidelity has done? What, not better fruit in the
Vineyard, in the Garden of God, then in the wilderness? What, not better fruit
grow upon the Tree of Life, then upon the root of nature? etc.

And then thirdly,

Because grace exercised and improved, will do that for us, that all other
means in the world can never do for us. I shall evidence this truth in some
remarkable instances.

Suppose the guilt of sin be upon a man's soul, even as a heavy mountain,
there is nothing but the exercise of grace now that can remove this guilt. The
man prays, and yet guilt sticks upon him, he hears, and yet guilt as a
mountain lies heavy upon him; he mournes, he sighs, he groans, and yet guilt
sticks upon him; he runs from Ordinance, to Ordinance, No Israelite that was
bit or stung with the fiery Serpent, could be hea^ed, but by looking up to the
brazen Serpent.
and from ordinary services, to extraordinary, and yet guilt follows him; he
runs from man to man, Sir was ever any man's case like mine? I have prayed thus
long, I have heard thus long, I have mourned thus long, etc. and yet guilt lies
as a mountain upon my soul. There Is nothing now below the exercise of grace,
that will remove this, it is only faith in the Promises of remission, that will
remove the guilt of sin, that lies so heavy upon the soul. It Is only faith's
application of the righteousness of Christ, that can take Those spots a
christian finds in his own heart, can only by a hand of faith ^e washed out in
the blood of the Lamb.
off this burden that sinks the soul, even as low as hell. Faith must make a
Plaster of the blood of Christ, and apply it to the soul, or the soul will
dye under its guilt. There Is nothing below this can do it; faith's application
of the blood of Christ, takes off the guilt, and turns the storm to a calm.
Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Again, Suppose that the power and prevalency of sin hinders the souls sweet
communion with God, so that the Much less th^n can the Papists purga tories,
watchings* whipings, etc. or St. Francis his kissing or licking of Leper's
sores, which will cleanse the ^retting Leprosy of sin, etc. A touch of ^aith
cures the woman, as well as a f^ll hold. It Is the exercise of the graces of
the spirit, by which we mortify the deeds of the flesh, Romans 8. 13. It is not
our strong resolutions or purposes, that will be able to over-master these
e^emies. A ^oul-sore will run till it be indeed healed, though we say it shall
not.
soul cannot sport it self, and joy and delight it self in God, as in the
days of old; it cannot see God smiling, stroaking, and speaking kindly, as in
former days. Now there is nothing in all the world that can ease the soul of
this burden of sin, below the exercise of grace. Oh says such a poor soul, I
pray, Sir, and yet I sin; I resolve against sin, and yet I sin; I combat
against sin, and yet I am carried Captive by sin; I have left no outward means
unattempted, and yet after all, my sins are too hard for me; after all my
sweating, striving and weeping, I am carried down the stream: There Is nothing
now but the actings of faith upon a crucified Christ, that will take off this
burden from the soul of man: Now you must make use of your graces, to draw
virtue from Christ; now faith must touch the hem of Christ's garment, or thou will never be healed. It Is just with a soul in this case, as it was with the
ponre widow, Luke 8. 43. to 49. that had a bloody issue, she leaves no means
unattempted, whereby she might be cured; she runs from one Physician to
another, till she had spent all that she was worth, till she had brought a
noble to nine-pence; and now says she, If I could but touch the hem of his
Garment, I should be whole. Hereupon she crowds through the crowd to come to
Christ, and being got behind him, she touches the hem of his garment, and
immediately she was made whole. The cure being thus wrought, Christ uncrownes
himself, to crown her faith. And he said unto her, daughter be of good
comfort, thy faith has made thee whole, go in peace. He does not say, woman
thy trembling has made thee whole; or woman thy sweating and struggling in a
crowd to come to me, has made thee whole; or woman thy falling down and
abasing thy self, (though she did all this) but, woman thy faith has made
thee whole. Ah Christians, it is not your trembling, or your falling down, or
your sweating in this and that service, that will stop the bloody issue of your
sins, but believing in Christ. It Is sad to consider how few Professors in these
days, have attained the right way of mortifying of sin; they usually go out
against their sins, in the strength of their own purposes, prayers, and
resolutions, etc. and scarce look so high as a crucified Christ, they mind not
the exercise of their faith upon Christ, and therefore it is a righteous thing
with Christ, that after all, they should be carried captive by their sins.
Nothing eats out sin, like the actings of grace; nothing weakers and wastes the
strength of sin, like the exercise of grace. Oh did men believe more in Christ,
sin would dye more; did they believe the threatenings more, sin would dye more;
did they believe the Promises more, sin would dye more; did they believe
reigning with Christ more, sin would dye more. He that has 1 John 3. 3.
this hope, purifies himself, even as Christ is pure.

Again, Suppose that the soul be followed with black, dismal, fiery
temptations, there is nothing now in all the world that can Divinely strengthen
and fence the soul against these Luther said, I am without set upon by all the
world, and within by the Devi^l and all his Angels, and yet by the exercise of
grace* he became victorious over them all, etc.
temptations, but the exercise of grace, the improvement of grace. It Is true,
you are to hear, read, pray, meditate, etc. but all these without the exercise
of grace in them, will never make you victorious over Satan's temptations.
Nothing puts Satan to it, like the exercise of grace.

It Is said of Satan, that he should say to a holy man, who was much in the
exercise of grace, (Tu me semper vincis) Thou do always overcome me. Ephesians.
6. 16. Above all take the shield of faith, whereby ye may be able to quench the
fiery darts of the Devil. Whatsoever piece of Armor you neglect, be sure that
you neglect not the Shield of faith. The Greek word that is here rendered a
Shield, comes from another (...).
word that signifies a door, or a gate; to note, that as a door or a gate
does secure our bodies, so will the shield of faith secure our souls against
the fiery darts of the Devil. Above all take the shield of faith, whereby ye
may be able to quench all the fiery darts of the Devil. The Apostle alludes to
the custom of the Scythians, who used to dip the heads of their Arrows, or
Darts, in the gall of Aspes and Vipers, the venomous heat of which, like a fire
in their flesh, killed the wounded with torments, the likest hell of any other:
But the Soldiers then had generally Shields of raw neats leather, as Polebius
and Vigetius, etc.
several Writers testify, and when the fiery darts lighted upon them, they
were presently quenched. So these fiery darts of Satan, when they light upon the
shield of faith, they are presently quenched, and there is no other way to do
it; till the Lord draw out a man's faith to act upon the Promises, and upon
Christ, these fiery darts will not be quenched.

Again, Suppose that the world, the smiling world, or the frowning world, the
tempting world, or the persecuting world, Faith is a better Engineer then
Daedalus, and yet he mide wings, with which he made an escape over the high
walls within which he was imprisoned. This world is the souls prison, yet
faith is such an Engineer, that it can make wings for the soul to fly out, etc.
should lie as a heavy stone or burden upon your hearts, as it does upon the
hearts of thousands in these days (witness their attempting any thing to get
the favors, honors, and riches of this world: Ah how many have turned their
backs upon God, and Christ, and truth, etc. to gain the world) how will you
get off this burden? No way in the world, like to the exercise and actings of
grace. Many men hear much, and yet remain worldly; and pray like Angels, and
yet live as if there were no heaven nor hell. They will talk much of heaven,
and yet those that are spiritual and wise, do smell their breath to stink
strong of earth; and all the art, and parts, and gifts in the world, can never
cure them of this soule-killing disease, but the exercise of grace, till faith
break forth in its glorious actings. A man may hear and pray many years, and
yet be as carnal, base, and worldly as ever. There is no way under Heaven to
remove this stone, this burden, but the exercise of faith and love, etc. Cant.
8. 6, 7. 1 John* 4. 5. For whatsoever is borne of God, overcomes the world;
and this is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith, who is he
that overcomes the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?

Not that the habit of faith overcomes the world, but faith in the exercise of
it, conquers the world, and that it does these three ways.

First, Faith in the exercise of it presents the world to the soul, under all
those notions that the Scripture holds forth the Divi^^ae corporales
paupertati^ plenae sunt. Earthly Riches are full of poverty, says Austin.
world unto us by.

The Scripture holds forth the world as an impotent thing, as a mixed thing, as
a mutable thing, as a momentary thing. Now faith comes and sets this home with
power upon the soul, and this takes the soul off from the world.

Secondly, Faith does it by causing the soul to converse with more glorious,
soule-satisfying, soule-delighting, and soule-contenting objects.

2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18. Though our outward man perish, yet our inward man is
renewed day by day, (how comes this to pass?) while we (...). Whiles we lo^k
upon eternal things, as a man looks upon the mark that he aims to hit.
look not at the things which are seen, but at the things that are not seen;
for the things that are seen, are temporal, but the things that are not seen,
are eternal. Now when faith is busied and exercised about soule-ennobling,
soule-greatning, soule-raising, and soule-cheering objects, a Christian
tramples the world under his feet; and now heavy afflictions are light, and
long afflictions short, and bitter afflictions sweet unto him, etc. Now stand
by world, welcome Christ, etc.

So in Heb. 11. It was the exercise of faith and hope upon noble and glorious
objects, that carried them above the world, above the smiling world, and above
the frowning world; above the tempting world, and above the persecuting world;
as you may see by comparing several verses of that Chapter together. Verse. 9,
10. By faith he sojourned Every man is as the objects are, about which his
soul is most conversant, etc.
in the land of Promise, as in a strange Country, dwelling in Tabernacles with
Isaac and Jacob, the Heirs with him of the same Promise; for he looked for a
City which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God. Verse. 24, 25, 26.
And by faith Moses when he was come to years, refused to be called the Son of
Pharoahs Daughter, choosing rather to suffer afflictions with the people of
God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Esteeming the reproach of
Christ greater riches then the treasures in Egypt, for he had respect to the
recompense of reward. Verse. 27. By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the
wrath of the King; for he endured, as seeing him who is invisible. And in verse.
35. They refused deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection.

So in Heb. 10. 34. They took joyfully the spoiling of their Goods, (Upon what
account?) Knowing in themselves, that they had in Heaven a better and more
enduring substance.

Thirdly, and lastly, Faith does it by assuring the soul of Enjoying of better
things; For my part I must confess, so far as Heb. 11. 1.
I understand any thing of the things of God, I cannot see how a soul under
the power of a well grounded Assurance can be a servant to his slave, I mean
the world; I confess, men may talk much of heaven, and of Christ, and
Religion, etc. but give In my treatise called Heaven on earth, you may find
many consideratio^s to evince this, and to that I refer you, etc.
me a man that does really and clearly live under the power of divine
Assurance, and I cannot see how such a one can be carried out in an inordinate
love to these poor transitory things. I know not one instance in all the
Scripture that can be produced to prove that ever any precious Saint that has
lived in the assurance of divine love, and that has walked up and down this
world with his pardon in his bosom, have ever been charged with an inordinate
love of the world: that is a sad word, 1 John 2. 15.

Now a fourth reason of this point why persons are to exercise their Graces,
is, Because its the best way to preserve their souls from Apostasy and back
sliding from God, 2 Pet. 1. 5-11. Add to your faith virtue, and to virtue
knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, and to
patience Godliness, etc. For if ye do these things ye shall never fall. (...).
Add to your faith virtue. The Greek word that is here rendered Add, has a
great emphasis in it; it is taken from dansing round, link them, says the
Apostle, hand in hand, as in dansing, virgins took hands, so we must join hand
to hand in these measures of Graces, lead up the dance of Graces, as in
Pul^brior in praelio occisus miles, quam fuga salvus.
the Galliard every one takes his turn. So in Chap. 3. 17, 18. Ye therefore
beloved, seeing ye know these things, beware lest ye also being led aside with
the error of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness. There are many
turn aside, and shake hands with God and Christ, and truth, and the words of
Righteousness: and therefore you had need to take heed that you fall not as
others have fallen before you. But how shall we be kept from apostatizing? why,
Grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. It Is
a growth in grace, it is the exercise of grace that will make a man stand when
others fall, yea when Cedars fall, etc.

Fifthly, All other exercises without the exercise of Grace, will profit
nothing.

Or if you will, take it thus;

All other exercises will be less to us without the exercise of Grace,
therefore we had need to Improve our Graces. When the house is on fire, if a
man should only pray, or cry, etc. he may be burnt for all that; therefore he
must be active and stirring, he must run from place to place, and call out for
help, and must work even in the fire, and bestirre himself as for life, in
the use of all means, whereby the fire may be quenched; so if Grace be not
acted, its not all a man's praying and crying, etc. that will profit him, or
better him, grace must be exercised, or all will be lost, prayers lost, tears
lost, time lost, strength lost, soul lost, etc. 1 Timothy 4. 7, 8. But refuse
profane and old wives (...) make a fair excuse.
fables: shift them off, as the word is, set them by, say thou art not at
leisure to attend them, make a fair excuse, as the word notes, tell them thou
have business of an eternal concernment to look after, and exercise thy self
rather unto Godliness, or (...) is not to be taken in a sense wherein little
signifies nothing at all, but as when it is set in comparison and opposition to
some greater matter, as here in opposition to (...) for all things. Let the
Patient take such or such a potion that in its self is good, yet if it want
such or such a particular ingredient, it works not, it does no good, it is so
here.
lay aside thy upper Garments, as runners and wrastlers do, (to which the
Apostle alludes) and bestirre thy self lustily; for says he in the 8 ver.
Bodily exercise profits little, but Godliness is profitable unto all things,
and has the promise of this life and of that which is to come. The Babylonians
are said to make 360 several Commodities of the Palm Tree, but what are those
hundred Commodities to those thousands that attend holiness, that attend the
exercise of grace? nothing makes a man rich in spiritualls, like the frequent
and constant actings of grace. In the fourth of the Heb. 2. The word did not
profit them that heard it, because it was not mixed with faith. He does not
speak there of unbeleevers, but of those that had Grace in the habit, but not
in the exercise, and therefore the word did not turn to their Accounts, they
heard and were never the better, and what was the Ground of it? why, it was
because they did not exercise Faith upon the word: the words that fell from the
Preachers lips into their ears, were a sweet potion, but they did not work
kindly, because there wanted the Ingredients of faith: faith is one of those
Glorious Ingredients, that must make every Sermon, every truth, work for the
souls advantage; nothing will work for a believers good, for his gain, if his
graces lie asleep.

Sixthly, Because it is the end of all the Dignity and Glory that God has
conferred upon his people, therefore they must exercise and Improve their Grace
In the 1 Pet. 2. 9. But ye are a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an
holy Nation, a peculiar people, that ye may show forth the praises of him who
has called you out of Darkness into his marvelous light.

Ye are a chosen Generation; that is, a picked people, the dearly beloved of
his soul; such as he first chose for his love, and then loves for his choice.

A Royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar people. The Greek is, A people
of purchase; such as comprehends as it (...).
were all Gods gettings, his whole stock, that he makes any reckoning off.

That ye may show forth, or as it is in the Greek, that ye may hopos tas aretas
exaggeilete.
preach forth, that ye may publicly declare the virtues of him that has
called you out of darkness into his marvelous light; that ye may so hold forth
the virtues of him that has conferred all this Dignity and Glory upon you, as
to excite others to Glorify your father which is in heaven. You know the
picture of a dear Friend is not to be thrust in a Corner, but in God himself
is wronged by the injury that is done to his Image. The contempt is done to the
King himself, that is done to his Image or Coin. As Suet^nius wri^es.
some Conspicuous place of the house; why, our Graces are the very Image of
Christ, they are his picture, and therefore to be held forth to open view.
These Candles must not be put under a bushel, but set up in a Candlestick.
Jewels are to ware not to hide, so are our Graces.

It was a Capital Crime in Tiberius days to carry the Image of Augustus upon
a ring or coin into any fordid place, and shall not Christians be more mindful
and careful, that their Graces which are Christ's Image, be no ways obscured,
but that they be kept always sparling and shining? Christ's glory and thy
comfort, oh Christian, lies much in the sparkling of thy graces. Pearls are
not to be thrust in mudd walls, or hung in swines snoutes, but to be hung on
the breasts.

Seventhly, Gracious souls must exercise their Grace, because the more Grace
is exercised and impro^ed, with the more Psalm. 40. 7, 8 Psalm. 119. 97, ^8, 99,
100, 103, 104, 111, 112.
ease and delight will all religious services be performed. When grace is
improved and exercised, gracious services are easily performed. As the more
natural strength is exercised and improved, with the more ease and pleasure
are all bodily services performed; so the more grace is acted and improved,
with the more ease and delight all Christian services are performed. Such
souls find wages in their very work, they find not Romans 6. 22.
only for keeping, but also in keeping of his commands there is Psalm. 19. 11.
great reward; all the ways of the Lord are ways of pleasantness Prove. 3.
17. P^al. 65. 11.
to them, and they find that all his paths drop marrow and fatness. Ah
Christians! as ever you would have the services of God to be easy and
delightful to your souls, look to the exercise and Improvement of your
Graces; and then your work will be a joy.

Eighthly, You must exercise and improve your gifts and graces, because the
more grace is improved, the more God will be Abraham's says made him rejoice
and obey. Heb. 11. Faith is as the spring in the watch that moves the wheels,
not a grace stirs, till faith sets it on work. Romans 4. 3. etc.
honored. In Romans 4. 19, 20, 21. And being not weak in faith, he considered
not his own body, now dead, when he was about an hundred years old; neither
the deadness of Sarahs womb, he staggered not at the promise of God through
unbeleefe, but was strong in faith, giving glory to God: and being fully
persuaded that what he had promised, he was able to perform.

He gave glory to God. But how did he give glory to God? was it a dead habit of
faith that set the Crown of honor upon the head of God? no, it was the lively
actings of his faith upon the promise and the promiser, that gave glory to God.
All the honor and glory that God has from believers in this life, is from the
actings of their grace. 'Twas Abraham's acting of faith that was his high
honoring of God. Christians, I would entreat this favor of you, that you
would be often in the meditation of this truth, viz. That all the honor that
God has from believers in this life, is from the actings and the exercise of
their Graces. When thou go to prayer, then think thus with thy self, is it
so, that all the honor that God It is reported in the life of Luther, that
when he pra^ed, it was Tan^a reverentia ut si Deo and tanta fiducta ut si
amico, etc. Jonah 2. u^t.
shall have from my soul in prayer, will be from the actings of grace in
prayer? oh then what cause have I to stir up my self to lay hold on God, and
to blow up all those sparks of grace that be in me; As a body without a soul,
much wood without fire, a bullet in a Gun without powder, so are words in
prayer without the Spirit, without the exercise of the graces of the Spirit.
Jonah acted his faith when he was in the belly of hell, and Daniel acted faith
when he was in the Lions den, Dan. 6. 23.
and the Theife acted faith when he was on the Cross, and Jeremiah acted faith
when he was in the Dungeon, and Job So did the Publican, he prayed much though
he spoke little: or a^io brevis penetrat coelum. The hottest springs send forth
their waters by ebullitions. (...) Augustine cries out against them that did not
profit by afflictions perdidistis utilitatem calamitatis. August. de Civit. l.
2. c. 33.
acted faith when he was on the dunghill, and David acted faith when he was in
his greatest distress, and so did Moses in Exodus 14. And you know the issue of
all was, much glory to God, and much good to them; his heart will never be long
a stranger to joy and peace, who is much in the exercise and actings of grace.

Ninthly, Because the more Grace is improved, the more afflictions and
tribulations will be lessened and sweetend to us. 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17. Though our
outward man decreases, yet our inward man is renewed day by day; or, day and
day.

When Peter Martyr was dying, he said, My body is weak, but my mind is well,
well for the present, and will be better for ever hereafter. This is the Godly
man's Motto, for Afflictions there is Glory, for light afflictions a weight of
glory, for momentary afflictions eternal Glory: so in the 10 and 11 Chapters
of the Hebrews. Oh friends, if your graces were more exercised and improved,
afflictions would be more sweet; this would turn the Cross into a Crown,
this would turn bitter into sweet, and long winter nights into summer days:
It would make every condition to be a Paradise to you, etc.

Tenthly, If Grace be not exercised and improved, the soul Saints should be
like a Seraphim beset all over with eyes and lights, as Bassarion said. The
fearful Have (they say) sleeps with her eyes open; oh how watchful then
should a Christian be?
may be easily surprised, conquered, and vanquished by a tempting Devil, and
an intising world: when the sword is in the scabbard, the traveller is easily
surprised, and when the Guard is asleep, the City is quickly conquered. The
strongest creature the Lion, and the wisest creature the Serpent, if they be
dormant, are as easily surprised as the weakest worms; so the strongest and
wisest Saints, if their graces be asleep, if they be only in the habit, and
not in exercise, they may be as easily surprised and vanquished as the weakest
Christians in all the world, as you may see in David, Solomon, Sampson, Peter.
Every enemy insults over him that has lost the use of his weapons, etc.

Eleventhly, We must improve our Graces, because decays in Grace are very
great losses to us. By decaying in grace, we come to loose our strength, our
best strength, our spiritual Spiritual losses are hardly recovered, a man may
easi^y run dow^e the hill, but he cannot so easily get up. Philosophers say,
that the way from the habit to the privation, is easier then the way from the
privation to the habit. As a man may soon put an inst^ument out of tu^e, but
not so soon put in again. 1 Cor. 2. 14. Jer. 13. 23. James 1. 17. Ephesians. 2. 1,
2, 3.
strength, our strength to do for God, our strength to wait on God, and walk
with God, our strength to bare for God, our strength to suffer for God; by
decaying in Grace we come to loose that Joy that is unspeakeable and full of
Glory, and that comfort and peace that passes understanding, and to loose the
sense of that favor that is better then life. Now our faith will be turned into
fear, our dansing into mourning, our rejoicing into sighing, and when, O
Christian, thou beginnest to fall, and to decay, who knows how far thou
may fall? how much thy graces may be impaired? and how long it may be before
thy Sun rise when once it is set? therefore you had need to exercise and
improve your Graces.

Twelfthly, and lastly, You are to improve your Graces, because souls truly
gracious, have a power to do good. I do not say that a man in his natural
estate (though Arminians do) has power in himself to do supernatural acts,
as to believe in God, to love God, and the like, etc. for I think a Toad may
as well spitt cordialls, as a natural man do supernatural actions: nor I do
not say that all the Grace we have is not from God, nor that man in his
natural estate is not dead Godward, and Christ-ward, and holynesse-ward, and
heavenward: But this I say, that souls truly gracious have a power to do
good. It Is sad to think how many professors do excuse their negligence, by
pretending an Inability to do good, or by When Charles Largius had excited
Lipsius to the study of tru^ wisdom, my mind is to it, said Li^sius, and then
he fa^s to ^ishing; what said Langius, ^rt thou pur^osing when ^hou should
be doing. Just. Lip de Constan. l. 2. 5.
sitting down discouraged, as having in their hands no power at all; what can
we do, say they, If the Lord do not breath upon us, as at first conversion?
we can do nothing. I think in my very Conscience, that this is one reason of
much of that slightness, neglect, and omission of duties, that is among
professors in these days. So that God may complain as he does in the 64 of
Isa. 7. There is no man that stirs up himself to take hold of me, they are
as men asleep, that sit still and do nothing. But certainly they that are
truly united to Christ, are not acted as dead stocks, as if every time and
moment of their acting God-wards, and holynesse-ward, they received new life
from the Spirit of Christ, as at first conversion they did, and I am confident
for want of the knowledge and due consideration of this truth, many professors
take such liberty to themselves, as to live in the neglect of many precious
duties of Godliness, for which first or last they will pay dear. But
remembering that it is not a flood of words, but weighty arguments that convinces
and persuades the souls and consciences of men. I shall give you four reasons
to demonstrate, That Believers have a power to do good; and the first is this.

First, Because they have life, and all life is a power to act Omnis vita est
propter delectationem.
by; natural life is a power to act by, spiritual life is a power to act by,
eternal life is a power to act by. The Philosopher says, That a fly is more
excellent then the heavens, because the fly has life, which the heavens have
not, etc.

Secondly, Else there is no just Ground for Christ to charge Omission of diet
breeds diseases, so does omission of duty, and makes work either for
repentance, hell, or the physician of souls.
the guilt of sins upon them; as neglect of Prayer, Repentance, Mortification,
nor the guilt of Carelessness, and Sloathfullnesse, etc. which he does, if they
can act no further, nor no longer then the Holy Ghost acts them, as at their
first conversion, notwithstanding their union with Christ, and that spiritual
principle of life that at first they received from Christ; Certainly if it be
so, it will not stand with the unspotted Justice of God to charge the guilt of
sins of omission upon Believing souls, if they have no power to act, but are
as stocks and stones, etc. as some dream.

A third Ground is this; If there be not some power in Believers to do good,
then we should not have as much benefit by the Ipse unus erit tibi omnia, quia
in ips^ uno bono, bona sunt omnia. August.
second Adam as we had by the first Adam. The first Adam if he had stood would
have Communicated a power to all his sons and daughters to have done good, and
being corrupted he does communicate power to sin, as all his children find by
sad and woeful experience; and shall not Christ much more communicate a power
to us to do good in our measure? surely he does, though few mind it, and
fewer improve it as they should. If there be not such a power in believers, how
have they gained more by the second Adam, then they lost by the first? and
wherein lies the excellency of the second above the first? etc.

Fourthly, and lastly, All those exhortations are void and of none effect, if
there be not some power in souls truly gracious to do good, as all those
exhortations to watchfullnesse, To stir up the Grace of God that is in us,
and to work out our own salvation with fear and trembling; and that also,
Give all diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. To what purpose are
all these precious exhortations, if the regenerate man have no power at all to
act any thing that is good? Nay then, believers under the Covenant of Grace,
should be in no better a Condition then unregenerate men that are under a
Covenant of works, who see their duties discovered, but have no power to
perform: which is contrary, as to other Scriptures, so to that, Psalm. 40. 7,
8, 9. Then said I, lo, I come: in the volume of thy book it is written of me:
I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea thy law is within my heart, or, thy
law is in the midst of my Bowels, as the Hebrew reads it. And to that of Ezekiel.
36. 25, 26, 27. etc. A soul truly gracious can sincerely say, Thy law O Lord,
is in the midst of my bowels, and I delight to do thy will O Lord, I confess
I cannot do it as I should, nor I shall never do it as I would, till I come
to heaven; but this I can say in much uprightness, that, Thy law is in my
heart, and I delight to do thy will, O father. And so Paul, With my mind I
serve the Law of God, though with my Romans 7. ult.
flesh the Law of sin.

And we have many promises concerning divine Assistance, and if we did but
stir up the Grace of God that is in us, Isa. 41. 10. Heb. 13. 5, 6, etc.
we should find the Assistance of God, and the Glorious breakings forth of his
power and love, according to his promise, and the work that he requires of us,
Isa. 26. 12. Chap. 64. 5. etc. Though no believer does what he should do, yet
doubtless every believer might do more then he does do, in order to Gods
glory and his own and others internal and eternal good. Affection without
endeavor is like Rachel, beautiful, but barren. They are blessed that do
what Bea^i sunt qui praecepta faciunt, etiam si non perficiunt. Aug.
they can, though they cannot but under-doe.

When Demosthenes was asked, What was the first part of an Orator, what the
second, what the third, answered, action; the same may I say, if any should
ask me, what is the first, the second, the third part of a Christian, I must
answer, action. Luther says, He had rather obey, then work Miracles:
obedience is better then sacrifice.

But Sir, you will say, What is the meaning of that Text, (that is so often in
the mouths of Professors) Without me you can do nothing? John 15. 5.

I answer, All that that Text holds forth, is this, That if a man has not
union with Christ, if he be not implanted into Christ, he can do nothing.
Without me (that is, separate from me, or apart from me (as the words may be
read) (...) is Secrsim a me. Vide Beza, C^meron, and Pis^at.
you can do nothing. If you are not implanted into me, if by the spirit and
faith, you art not united unto me, you can do nothing. The arm may do much,
it may offend an enemy, and it may defend a man's life, by virtue of its union
with the head; but if you separate the arm from the head, from the body, what
can it do? Certainly the soul, by virtue of its union with Christ, may do
much, though such as are separated from Christ, can do nothing, at least, as
they should. Union with Christ is that wherein the strength, comfort, and
happiness of the soul does consist.
Ah Christians! if you would but put out your selves to the utmost, you would
find the Lord both ready and willing to assist you, to meet with you, and to
do for you, above what you are able to ask, or think.

Caesar by continual employment, overcome two constant Diseases, the Headache,
and the Falling Sickness. Oh! the spiritual Diseases that the active
Christian overcomes? Among the Egyptians, Idleness was a capital crime.
Among the Lucani, he that lent money to an idle person, was to loose it. Among
the Corinthians, the sloathfull were delivered to the Carnifex, says Diphilus.
Oh! the deadly sins, the deadly temptations, the deadly judgments, that idle
and sloathfull Christians are given up to; therefore be active, be diligent, be
abundant in the work of the Lord. Idleness is the very Source of sin:
Standing pooles gather mud, and nourish and breed venomous Creatures; and so
do the hearts of idle and sloathfull Christians, etc.

Now the second thing that we are to do for the further opening of this Point,
is to show you

The special Ends that the Gifts and Graces that God has bestowed upon
Believers, should be exercised, and improved to. And they are these that follow.
FIrst, They are to be improved and exercised to the honor 1 Cor. 10. 31.
of God, to the lifting up of God, and to the keeping up of his name and glory
in the world.

He that improves not his gifts and graces to this end, crosses the grand end
of Gods bestowing such royal favors on him. Graces and gifts are Talents that
God has given you to trade with, and not to hide in a Napkin. The idle
servant, Mat. 25.
in Christ's account, was an evil servant: The idle soul, in Christ's account,
is an evil soul, and accordingly Christ will deal with him.

Seneca calls sloth, The Nurse of beggary, the Mother of misery; and
sloathfull Christians find it so. Christians, God has given you grace, that
you should give him glory: His honor should be dearer to you, then your
Jewels, then your Crowns, then your lives; I, then your very souls. Thou
live no longer, then thou live to his praise.

It is recorded, that Epaminondes the Commander in chief of the Thebanes, That
he did not glory in any thing but this, that his father, whom he dearly loved
and honored, was living, when he won three famous Battles against the
Lacedaemonians, Plutarch in his Morals.
that were then held for their valor, to be invincible, regarding more the
honor and content his father should receive of it, then his own. Shall a
Heathen thus strive to honor his earthly father? And shall not Christians
strive more to honor their heavenly father, with all the gifts and graces that
he has conferred upon them?

But you will say, How should we honor the Lord?

I answer:

First, By a free and frequent acknowledgement, that all your graces flow from
the Lord Jesus, the fountain of grace. 1 John 16. Of his fulness we all
receive grace for grace. Jam. 1. 17. Every good and perfect gift comes down
from above, etc. Thou must say, O Christian, I have nothing but what I 1 Cor.
4. 7.
have received, I have no light, no life, no love, no joy, no peace, but from
above. The Jewels that hang in my breasts, and the Chains of Pearl that be
about my neck, and the golden Crown that is upon my head, and all sparkling
Diamonds Ezekiel. 16. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Psalm. 45. 8. -- ult.
in that Crown, are all from above. All those Princely Ornaments by which I am
made more beautiful and lovely, then others; and all those beds of spices, and
sweet flowers, by which I am made more desirable, and dilectable, is from
above. Say I am nothing, I have nothing of my own; all I am, and all I have,
is from on high: We have given thee of 1 Chronicles. 29. 14.
thine own, says David. So do thou say, Lord, the love with which I love
thee, is thine own; and the faith by which I hang upon thee, is thine own; and
the fear by which I fear Deus nihil coronat nisi dona sua. Aug.
before thee, is thine own; and the joy which I rejoice before thee with, is
thine own; and the patience with which I wait upon thee, is thine own, etc,
And therefore say as David did, upon the receipt of mercy, Blessed be thou Lord
God of Israel, our father for ever and ever. Thine, O Lord, is the greatness,
and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the Majesty, for all that is
in the heaven, and in the earth, is thine: Thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and
thou art exalted as head above all. Both riches and honor come of thee, and
thou reignest over all, and in thine hand is power and might; and in thine hand
it is to make great, and to give strength unto all. Now therefore our God, we
thank thee, and praise thy glorious name.

Secondly, You must honor him By acknowledging the dependancy of your graces,
upon the fountain of grace. And that your strength to stand, lies not so much
in your graces, as in their dependancy upon the fountain of grace, as in their
conjunction with the God of grace. A man by his arm may do much, but it is
mainly by reason of its union, and conjunction with the head: It Is so between a
Christians graces, and Christ. The stream does not more depend upon the
fountain, nor the branch upon the root, nor the Moon upon the Sun, nor the
Child upon the Mother, nor the effect upon the cause, then our graces do
depend upon the fountain of grace, Ps. 138. 3. Phil. 4. 12, 13.

Now that our very graces do thus depend upon the fountain Though our graces
be ou^ best Jewe's, yet they are imperfect, and as the Moon shines by a
borrowed light, so do our graces; i^ it were not for the Sun of righteousness,
all our graces would give ^o light, etc.
of grace, and that our strength to stand, lies not so much in our graces, as
in Christ, is clear by this, That the graces of the Saints may and do most
fail them, when they have most need of them. Mark 4. 40. And he said, why are
ye so fearful? How is it that you have no faith? When the wind was high,
their faith was low; when the storm was great, their faith was little. So Luke
8. 25. And he said unto them, where is your faith? Are you now to seek it, when
you should use it? Peter denied Christ, when he had need by faith to have
confessed Christ. Moses faith failed him, when it should have been most
serviceable to him, Nu. 20. 12. And David's courage failed him, when it should
have been a buckler to him, 1 Samuel 21. 13, 14. And the Disciples love failed
them, when it should have been most useful to them, John 14. 28. And Job's
wisdom and patience failed him, when they should have been greatest
supporters to him. By all which it is most clear, that not only our selves, but
also our very graces must be supported by the God of grace, the fountain of
grace, or else they will be to seek when we most need them. Though grace is a
glorious Creature, it is but a creature, and therefore must be upheld by its
Creator. Though grace be a beautiful Child, yet it is but a child, that must be
upheld by the fathers arms. This Christians, you must remember, and give glory
to God.

Thirdly, You must honor him by uncrowning your graces, to crown the God of
your graces. By taking the Crown off Certum est nos facere quod facimus, sed
ille facit, ut sa^iamus, says Aug^stine. True it is, that we do what we do,
but it is as true, that Christ makes us to do what we do. Cant. 5. 10 -- ult.
your own heads, and putting it upon his, or by laying it down at his feet,
as they did theirs in Rev. 4. 10. Acts 3. 11. 12, 16. and Chap. 4. 7, 8, 9, 10.
These Scriptures are Wells of living waters, they are Bee-hives full of honey,
see and taste. The Lord has often uncrown'd himself, to Crown his peoples
graces, as you may see in these following Scriptures, Mat. 9. 22. Chap. 15. 28.
Mark 10. 52. Luke 7, 50. And why then should not his people uncrowne their
graces, to crown him? That which others attribute to your graces, do you
attribute to the God of grace. You must say, though our graces are precious,
yet Christ is more precious; though they are sweet, yet Christ is most sweet;
though they are lovely, yet Christ is altogether lovely. Your graces are but
Christ's Picture, Christ's Image, and therefore don't you worship his Image, and
in the mean while neglect his person: make much of his Picture, but make more
of himself; let his Picture have your eye, but let himself have your heart.
Your Prove. 23. 26.
graces are but Christ's hands, by which he works, be you therefore careful
that you don't more mind the workmans hands, then the workman himself: Your
graces are but Christ's servants, therefore don't smile upon the servant, and
look asquint upon the Master. Your graces are but Christ's favorites, therefore
don't so stare upon them, and be taken with them, as to forget the Prince on
whom they wait, etc. All I drive at is this, That not your graces, but Christ
may be all in all unto you, etc.

The second end to which you must improve your gifts and John 1. 39. -- u^t.
Chapter 4. 1-43. l^d. 2. 3. Acts 5. 26, 29. Bo un est comm^n cat^vum.
graces, is, To the good of others. Psalm. 66. 16. Come and hear all ye that
fear God, and I will declare what he has done for my soul. Psalm. 34. 8. O
taste and see that the Lord is good, blessed is the man that trusts in him.
God has given you gifts and grace, to that very end, that you should improve
them for others good. It Is the very nature of grace to be diffusive and
communicative; grace cannot be long concealed. The better any thing is, the more
communicative it will be. Grace is as fire in the bones, as new Wine in the
bottles, you cannot hide it, you must give vent to it. Acts 4. 20. We cannot
but speak the things that we have heard and seen; as Croesus his dumb Son did
for his father. Can the fire cease to turn all combustible matter into fire?
Can the Candle once thoroughly lighted, cease to spend it self for the
enlightening of others? then may the precious Sons of Zion cease to give light
to others by their examples, counsels, and communicating their experiences. No
way to honor God, no way to win souls, nor no way to increase your own gifts
and graces, then to exercise them for the good of others. Grace is not like to
worldly vanities, that diminish by distribution; nor like Candles, which keep
the same light, though a thousand are lighted by them. Grace is like the widows
Oil, which multiplied by pouring out; and like those 2 Kings 4. Mat. 25.
Talents, which doubled by employment.

'Twas a good saying of one, For insensible riches those who pay their money,
do diminish their substance, and they who Chrysostom. Hom. Genesis 15.
receive, are made richer; but these not so; but both he who numbreth, does
much increase his substance, and does add much to the riches of the receiver.

Again, By how much more we pour out of these flowing spiritual things, by
so much those spreading in abundance are Chrysostom. Hom. Genesis 8. p. 37.
greater to us; for in this cause it does not happen as in money; for there
they who tell out to their neighbor, diminish their own substance, and by how
much the more he spends, by so much the less money he possesses; but in
spiritualls it is quite otherwise.

No way to advance the Kingdom of Christ in the world, like this, of improving
your gifts and graces to the advantage and profit of others. No love nor pity
to the precious souls Romans 1. 11, 12. 2 Cor. 9. 6. Suetonius tells of
Augustus, That in reading all sorts of good Authors he skillfully p^ckt out the
prime precepts and patterns of valor and virtue, and sent the some to such of
his servan^s and unde-^fficers for tokens, as he thought they might do m^st
good unto.
of men, like this. No way to abound in grace, to be rich in grace, like this:
Nor no way to be high in heaven, like this. Art thou, O Christian, bound to do
good to others, by communicating earthly things? And art thou not much more
bound to do them good by communicating of spiritual things? Surely thou art.
Why are Christians so often in Scripture compared to Trees, but because of
their fruitfullnesse and usefullnesse to others? And why are they called
Stewards of the manifold gifts of God, but to note to us, that their gifts are
not to be enclosed, but employed for the good of others? And why has Christ
put a box of precious Ointment into every Christians hand, but that it should
be opened for the benefit of others? Certainly he that is good, is bound to do
good, for gifts and graces are given, not only to make us good, and keep us
good, but also to make us, yea, to prevoke us to do good. Lilmod lelammed, We
therefore learn, that we may teach, is a Proverb among the Rabbis. And I do
therefore lay in, and lay up (says the Heathen) that I may draw forth again,
and lay out for the good of many. I think they are no good Christians that
shall scorn to learn this good lesson, though of a Heathen. And O that all
that write themselves Christians, were so good as to imitate the good that
shined in many Heathens! To me it is sad, that Christians that live and act
below the very Heathens, should be offended to hear now and then of those
excellencies that sparkled in the very Heathens. I think that is a very evil
spirit, that cannot endure to hear of those excellencies in others, that he
wants in himself. Certainly he is a brave Christian, and has much of Christ
within, that accounts nothing his own, that he does not communicate to others.
The Be does store her Hive out of all sorts of flowers, for the common
benefit, and why then in this should not every Christian be like a Be?

Synesius speaks of some, who having a treasure of rare abilities in them,
would as soon part with their hearts, as their conceptions. I think they are
rather Monsters then real Christians, that are of such a spirit.

The third and last thing to which you are to improve your gifts and graces,
is, To the benefit and profit of your own souls. The good of the soul is
specially to be minded 1 Because it is the most Noble part of man. 2 Because the
Image of God is most fairly stamped upon it. 3 Because it is first converted. 4
Because it shall be first glorified.
Not to improve them to your own internal and eternal good, is with a high
hand to cross the maine end of Gods conferring them upon you. Ah Christians!
you must improve them to the strengthening of you against temptations, to the
supporting of you under afflictions, to the keeping under of strong
corruptions, to the sweetning of all mutations, and to the preparing and
fitting of you for the days of your dissolution.

I shall content my self with giving you this hint, because I have before
spoken more fully to this head.

And thus we have done with the Doctrinall part.

We shall come now to make some Use and Application of this Point to our selves.

If this be so, That it is the Duty of Christians to improve and exercise the
gifts and graces that the Lord has given them.

Then in the first place, this looks very sowrely and wishly upon all lazy,
idle, negligent Christians, that do not stir up Cupid complained, He could
never ^asten upon the Muses, because he could never find them idle. No
Christians so f^ee from Satan's assaults as active Christians are; nor none so
temp^ed, as idle Christians.
can stir up themselves to lay hold on all opportunities to make themselves
great and rich in the world, and yet suffer their golden gifts and graces even
to grow rustie for want of exercise. It Is sad to see how busy many men are, to
exercise and improve a Talent of riches, who yet bind up their Talents of gifts
and grace in a Napkin: By these God looses much honor and praise, and
themselves loose much comfort and content, and others loose much profit and
benefit, and the Gospel looses much credit and glory.

But the maine Use that I shall make of this Point, shall be To exhort and stir
you all up, to make a blessed improvement of your graces.

And indeed it is a Point of most singular use to us all our The Jewish Rabbis
report, That he same night that Israel de parted out of Egypt, toward Canaan.
all the Idols and Idolatrou. Temples in Egypt, by lightning, and earth quakes,
were broken down. So when grace and holiness is set up in the heart, all the
Idols of Satan, which are me^slust, are thrown down.
days, a truth that is every day of very great concernment to our souls.

Now there are seven Considerations that I shall propound by way of Motive, to
stir up your souls to make a blessed improvement of the grace and gifts you
have received.

And the first is this, Seriously consider, that the exercise and improvement
of grace in your souls, will be more and more the death and ruin of sin in
your souls.

Take it from experience, There is not a choycer way then this, for a man to
bring under the power of his sin, then to keep up the exercise of his grace.
Sin and Grace are like two Buckets at a Well, when one is up, the other is
down: They are like the two Laurels at Rome, when one flourishes, the other
withers. Certainly the readiest, and the surest way to bring under the power of
sin, is, to be much in the exercise of grace, Romans 8. 10. And if Christ be in
you, the body is dead, because of sin, but the spirit is life, because of
righteousness. The life and activity of Christ and grace in the soul, is the
death and destruction of sin in the soul: The more grace acts in the soul,
the more sin withers and dies in the soul; the stronger the house of David
grew, 2 Samuel 3. the weaker the house of Saul grew. As the house of David grew
every day stronger and stronger, so the house of Saul every day grew weaker and
weaker: So the activity of the new Mat. 21. 12, 13, 14.
man, is the death of the old man. When Christ began to bestir himself in the
Temple, the money changers quickly fled out: So when grace is active and
stirring in the soul, corruption quickly flies. A man may find out many ways
to hide his sin, but he will never find out any way to subdue his sin, but by
the exercise of grace. Of all Christians, none so mortified as those in whom
grace is most exercised. Sin is a Viper that must be killed, or 'twill kill you
for ever; and there is no way to kill it, but by the exercise of grace.

Secondly, Consider this by way of motive to provoke you Mat. 5. 16. The
exercise of virtue will draw I ve from a man's very enemies. Tilligny for his
^are virtues was reserved from death, by his greatest enemies, at the M^ssacre
of Paris; as you may see in the French History, in the life of Charles the Ninth.
to exercise and improve your Graces; The exercise and improvement of your
Graces, will provoke others to bless and admire the God of Grace. Let your
light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify
your Father which is in heaven. The light of your Conversation, and the light
of your graces; Oh! how many thousand souls be there now triumphing in heaven,
whose gifts and graces shined gloriously when they were on earth: and ah! how
many thousands are there now on earth, that bless and admire the Lord for the
shine of their graces, who are now in heaven; That bless the Lord for the
Faith of Abraham, and the Zeal of David, and the Meekness of Moses, and the
Patience of Job, and the Courage of Joshua, etc. Ah Christians! as you would
stir up others to exalt the God of grace, look to the exercise and
improvement of your graces. When poor servants shall live in a family, and see
the faith of a Master, and the love of a Master, and the wisdom of a Master,
and the patience of a Master, and the humility of a Master, etc. shining like
so many stars of heaven, oh how does it draw forth their hearts to bless the
Lord, that ever they came into such a family? It Is not a profession of
Religion, but the exercise and improvement of grace, that contributes so much
to the lifting up of the glory of the Lord, and to the greatning of his praise
in the world. Many Saints have had their hearts warmed and heated by siting by
other Saints fire, by eying and dwelling upon other Saints graces. Ah! when
men's graces shine as Moses his face did; when their lives, as one speaks of
Joseph's life, is a very heaven, sparkling with variety of virtues, as with so
many bright Stars; ah! how are others stirred up to glorify God? and to cry
out these are Christians indeed? these are an honor to their God, a Crown to
their Christ, and a credit to their Gospel: Oh! if they were all such, we would
be Christians too. It Is a very great stumbling block to many poor sinners, to
see men that make a very great and large profession Those in whom virtue is
extinguished, are like unto painted, and printed papers, which ignorant men
honor and worship instead of Christ. Rawleigh.
of Christ, never to exercise and show forth the virtues of Christ; they
profess they know him, and yet by the non exercise of his virtues, they deny
him.

'Twas one of Matchavils Principles, That the appearance of virtue was only to
be sought, because the use of it (says he) is a trouble, but the credit of it
a help. I am afraid that this cursed, soule-damning Principle, is the best
flower that grows in many men's Gardens in these days. Though there is no
virtue, but is as a bright stone in a dark night, it shines and shows its
clearness and beauty, it is as pure gold, the brighter for passing through the
fire, yet how do most Hypocritis nihil est crudelius, impatientius and
vindicta cupidius. There is not a more cruel creature more impatient and
vindictive, then an hypocrite, says Luther, who had the experience of it;
therefore trust not to the Matchavils of the times.
covet rather the name of virtue, then to be really virtuous? Such, I believe,
shall have the hottest, and the lowest place in hell. Well Christians, remember
this, it is not a show of grace, but the exercise of grace, that will provoke
others to glorify the fountain of grace. That Is a very remarkable Scripture,
1 Thessalonians. 2. 2, 3, 8. compared. We give thanks to God always for you, making
mention of you in our prayers: Remembering without ceasing, your work of faith,
and labor of love, and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight
of God, and our father. For from you sounded out the word of the Lord, not
only in Macedonia, and Achaia, but also in every place your faith to Godward
is spread abroad. In this eighth verse you have an elegant Metaphor, which
signifies, that their faith was so lively, that with its sound, as it were, it
stirred up other Nations. The Greek word (Exechetai) is to sound as with the
sound of a Trumpet, to make sound afar off. Says the Apostle, your graces made
a noise like a Trumpet, Pliny tells of some in the remote parts of India, that
they have no mouths. We have many such Monsters among us, that have no mouths
to bless God for the good that shines in others.
they stirred up others to be gracious and active, as the Trumpet stirs up men
to war. So in 2 Pet. 1. 3, 4. We are bound to give thanks to God always for
you brethren, as it is meet, because that your faith grows exceedingly, and
the charity of every one of you all toward each other abounds: So that we
our selves glory in you in the Churches of God, for your patience and faith, in
all your persecutions and tribulations that you endure. Hoc enim Angelicum,
this is the Character of the Angelical nature, to rejoice in the graces and
gracious actings of others: He that acts otherwise, holds forth the Image of
the Devil, and declares himself a native of hell.

Thirdly, Consider, That the exercise and improvement of graces, may be a
special means to stir up the exercise of grace in others.

Your improvement of grace may be a special means to stir The complaint is
ancient in Seneca, That commonly men live not ad rationem, but ad similitudinem.
Se^. de vita beati. cap. 1.
up others to improve their graces also. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 7. So that we were
ensamples to all that believe in Macedonia, and Achaia. Or as the Greek is,
(...).
You were Types moulds, Patterns of piety to them that were in Christ long
before you. So in 2 Cor. 9. 2. For I know the forwardness of your mind, for
which I boast of you to them of Macedonia, that Achaia was ready a year ago,
and your zeal has provoked very many. I knew you were forward, and this I
beasted of, I made it my glory to tell how grace shined in your souls. And,
says he, your zeal has provoked many. When they saw how warm, and lively,
and active, how open-handed, and open-hearted you were to the poor Saints,
their hearts were stirred up to acts of charity also. Stories speak of some that
could not sleep when they thought of the Trophies of other Worthies that
Praecepta docent, exempla movent. Precepts may instruct, but examples do
persuade.
went before them. The highest examples are very quickening and provoking

That this may stick upon your souls, I beseech you bed and board, rise and
walk with this one Consideration, viz. That all the good you provoke others
to, by Counsel or example, shall be put down to your Account. It shall
certainly turn to your internal and eternal advantage. In the great day
Christ will make honorable mention of all the good that thou have stirred and
provoked others too, and will reward thee for it before Angels and men. The
faith, the love, the hope, the charity, the patience, etc. that thou have
provoked others too, shall be put down to thy account, as if thou had been
the only actor of them, etc. As all the sins that men provoke or stir up
others to by their Counsel or example, shall be put down to their Accounts:
as you may see in David; David did but send a Letter concerning the death of
Vriah, and yet the 2 Samuel 12. 9
charge comes; Thou have stain Vriah with the sword; as whatsoever is done,
by letter, counsel, or example, to provoke others to sin, shall certainly be
charged upon men's accounts at last; so whatsoever good thou do stir up
others to, that They shall shine as so many Suns in heaven, who are much in
stirring and provoking of others to the exercise of grace and holiness. Dan.
12. 3. Dan. 6. 1, 2.
shall be set upon thy score, and shall turn to thy eternal account in the
day of Christ: Oh! who would not then labor, with all their might, even day
and night to stir up the Grace of the Lord in themselves and others, seeing
it shall turn to such a Glorious Account, in that day wherein Christ shall say
(to his Father) Lo here am I, and the children that thou have given me, etc.

Fourthly, Consider this, The exercise and Improvement of Grace, Contributes
very much both to the stopping the mouths of your enemies, and to the rendering
of you lovely in the very eyes of your enemies: oh! there is nothing in all the
world that contributes so much to the stopping of the mouths of your enemies,
and to the rendering of your souls lovely in the eyes of your enemies, as the
exercise and improvement of your Graces; as you may see in David, David
improved his Grace to a glorious height, and says Saul, Thou art more righteous
then I: 1 Samuel 24. 17.
John improved his Grace to a glorious height, and was much in the exercise of
it; and what follows? why, Herod feared and reverenced him, knowing that he was
a just and a holy man Mark 6. 20. So what a deal of respect and hono^r did
Alexander the Great pu^ upon Jadus the High Priest, Theodosius upon Anbrose,
and Constantine upon Paph^utius, kissing that eye of his that was bored out for
the cause of Christ, etc.
O! how did the wisdom, faith, and holiness, of Joseph, Daniel, and the three
children, silence their most enraged adversaries? yea, what a deal of honor
did the exercise of their graces cause those Heathen Princes to put upon them?
1 Pet. 2. 15. For so is the will of God, that by well-doing ye may put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men. It Is not all the talking and profession
in the world, that can stop the mouths of foolish men; it must be well-doing,
grace improved, grace exercised, and manifested in ways of holiness, that
must work so great a wonder, as to stop the mouths of wicked men.

The Greek word that is here Translated (...).
well-doing, is a Participle of the Present Tense, and notes, the continual
custom of well-doing. And indeed, nothing but a continual course of
well-doing, will be able to stop the mouths of wicked persons. It Is not a fit
of holiness, but a course, that can produce so great a Miracle, as to stop the
mouths of wicked men. That ye might stop the mouths of ungodly men.

The Greek is, That ye may muzzle, or halter up. There Is (...), from (...)
no way in the world, to button, muzzle, or halter up the mouths of wicked men,
but by the exercise of your graces in ways of well-doing. Oh this will cause
you to be well thought of, and well spoken of; this is that that will make even
wicked men to say, these are Christians indeed; these are they that have not
only a name to live, but are alive; that have not only a form of godliness,
but the power. A Christians exercise of faith in times of wants, and of
patience, in times of affliction, and of courage in times of temptation, and of
contentation in times of opposition, etc. does mightily silence and stop the
mouths of the worst of men.

Henry the Second of France, being present at the Martyrdom of a certain
Tailor burnt by him for Religion, was so terrified by beholding the wisdom,
courage, faith, and constancy Epi^. Hist. Gal. 82.
of the said Martyr, that he swore at his going away, That he would never be
any more present at such a sight.

Fifthly, Dwell much upon the sweet nature of grace, if you would have your
souls carried out to the exercise and improvement of grace.

The name of grace, and the nature of grace, is very sweet. The Hebrew word
that is rendered Grace, signifies favor, and mercy; and it answers to the Greek
word Caris, that signifies Grace is a Pan^ply against all troub^e^, and a
Paradise of all pleasures.
favor and mercy; and some derive the Greek word from a word that signifies
Joy, because grace begets the greatest joy and sweetness in the spirits of
men, that possibly can be.

Grace is compared to the sweetest things, to sweet Spices, to Wine and Milk:
Grace is a beam of the Sun of righteousness, Cant. 4. 10, 14, 16. Cha. 6. 2.
Isa. 55. 1, 2.
the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace is a sweet Flower of Paradise, a spark of glory,
etc. it is cherisht and maintained by that sweet word that is sweeter then the
honey, or the honeycombe, and by sweet union and communion with the father and
the Son: It Is exercised about the sweetest objects, viz. Psalm. 119. 103. 1 John
1. 3, 4.
God, Christ, Promises, and future Glory. It sweetens all your services, and
duties; your best performances are but stinking sacrifices, if they are not
attended with the exercise of grace. Grace is that heavenly salt, that makes
all our services savoury and sweet in the nostrills of God. Grace is of the
greatest and sweetest use to the soul; it is an Anchor at sea, and a Shield at
land; it is a staff to uphold the soul, and a sword to defend the soul; it is
bread to strengthen the soul, and wine to cheer the soul; it is Physic to
cure all diseases, and a Plaster to heal all wounds, and a Cordial to
strengthen the soul under all faintings, etc. Grace is thy eye to see for
Christ, thy ear to hear for Christ, thy head to contrive for Christ, thy tongue
to speak for Christ, thy hand to do for Christ, and thy feet to walk with
Christ. Grace makes men of the forwardest, sowrest, crabbedst natures, to be of
a sweet, lovely, amiable, pleasing temper. It turns Lions into Lambs, Wolves
into Sheep, Monsters into Isa. 11. 7, 8, 9.
Men, and Men into Angels, as you may see in Manasses, Paul, Mary Magdalen,
Zacheus, and others: Yet sometimes La^imer told the Clergy, and the Bishops,
That if they would not learn diligence and vigilance of the Prophets and
Apostles, they should learn it of the Devil, who goes up and down his
di^cesse.
Grace in a rugged unhewne nature, is like a gold ring on a leprous hand, or a
Diamond set in iron, or a Jewel in a Swines snout, etc.

Sixthly, By way of Motive, consider this, That wicked men do exercise and
improve to the uttermost, all those principles of wickedness that be in them,
against the ways of God, the honor of God, and the comforts of the Saints.

Now shall wicked men improve all their Principles to the uttermost against
God, his truth, and Saints, etc. And shall not Saints improve their graces to
the honor of God, the advancement of truth, and the joy and benefit one of
another? You may see the activity of wicked men's spirits, in Prove. 4. 16. They
sleep not unless they have done mischief, and their sleep is taken away,
unless they cause some to fall. Oh they cannot rest. The wicked are like the
troubled Sea (as Esaias speaks) when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up Isa.
57. 20. 21. The Hebrew word (...) R^shang signifies properly (...) ^ laborious
sinner, a practitioner in sin; The Verb Rashang signifies to make a stir, to be
exceeding busy, unquiet, or troublesome, etc.
mire and dirt. So in 2 Pet. 2. 14. Having eyes full of adultery that cannot
cease from sin, beguiling unstable souls. An heart they have, exercised with
covetous practices cursed children; they break all Promises and Covenants with
God and man, as Sampson did the new Ropes. So in Prove. 19. 19. A man of great
wrath shall suffer punishment, for if thou deliver him, yet thou must do it
again. The Hebrew word (Tosiph) signifies to add; says he, thou must add
deliverance to deliverance, for he will still be a adding sin to sin: So the
radix (Jasaph) is used, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. and in several other Scriptures. Such
sinners make God a God of clouts, one that will not do as he says. Ahab after
he was threatened with utter rooting out, begat fifty Sons, as it were to cross
God, and to try it out with him. Let God thunder Jer. 9. 3.
in his judgments, yet he will add sin to sin, he will proceed from evil to
evil, till he comes to the very top of evil, viz. to be hardened in sin, and
to scoff at holiness, etc.

The old Italians were wont in time of thunder, to shoot Wi^nesse Ahab, Hama^,
Jehu, Jeroboa^, the so^le in the Gospel, and those in Mat. 23. 14, 15, 16.
off their greatest Ordnance, and to ring their greatest Bells, to drown the
noise of the Heavens: So let God thunder from Heaven, yet wicked men will so
improve their wicked principles, that their consciences may not hear the noise
of the Thunderclaps of Divine displeasure. The covetous man will improve his
earthly Principles; and the ambtious man, his ambitious Principles; and the
voluptuous man, his voluptuous principles; and the unchaste man, his unclean
principles; and the erroneous man, his erroneous Principles; and the
blasphemous man, his blasphemous Principles, etc. Ah Sirs! shall wicked men
thus improve their wicked Principles to the uttermost, against God, Christ, and
Religion, and against the prosperity, peace, joy, and happiness of the Saints?
And shall not Saints improve their graces to the uttermost, for the honor of
the Lord, the advancement of Religion, and the mutual profit and benefit of
each other?

Seventhly, The more high and excellent any man is in grace, the more highly he
shall be exalted in glory.

Oh therefore exercise your Grace, improve your grace; as you would be high in
Heaven, labor to improve your graces much while you are here on earth; for
glory will be given out at last according to the exercise and improvement of
your grace.

The more high and improved a man's graces be, the more that man will do for
God; and the more any man does for God, the more at last shall he receive from
God, 1 Cor. 15. last. Therefore my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast,
unmovable, Darius before he came to the Kingdom, received a Ga^ment for a
gift, of one Sylos^, and when he became King, he rewarded him with the command
of his Country Sanus, etc.
always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know that your
labor is not in vain in the Lord. So Gal. 6. He that sowes sparingly, shall
reap sparingly; but he that sowes liberally, shall reap liberally. The more any
man has improved his Grace, the more that man will be able to bare and suffer
for God; and the more any man bears and suffers for God, the more glory shall
that man have at last from God, Mat. 5. 11, 12. Blessed are ye when men shall
revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you
falsely for my sake, rejoice and be exceeding glad, or Leap and dance for joy:
Why so? For great is your reward in heaven. God is a liberal Play Master, and
no small things Chaire^e kai agal^iasthe Leap and skip for joy, etc.
can fall from so great and so gracious a hand as his. The more excellent any
man is in Grace, the more he is the delight of God, Psalm. 16. 3, 4. My
goodness extends not to thee, but to the Saints that are in the earth, and
to the excellent, in whom is all my delight. Now this is spoken in the person
of Christ, for the Apostle applies these words to Christ: Now says Christ, My
goodness reaches not to thee, oh father, Acts 2 25. The sa he delights in all
his Children, yet sometimes he delights more in one, then in another, etc.
but to the Saints, and to the excellent, in whom is all my delight. And
doubtless, they that are his greatest delight on earth, shall be possessed of
the greatest glory in Heaven. If fathers give the greatest portions to those
Children in whom they delight, why should not Christ? Is it equity in the one,
and iniquity in the other? Surely no: Christ may do with his own as he
pleases.

Again, The more any man improves his Grace, the clearer, sweeter, fuller, and
richer is his enjoyments of God here: There Is no man in all the world that has
such enjoyments of God, as that man has, that most improves his Graces. It Is
not he that knows most, nor him that hears most, nor yet he that talks most,
but he that exercises Grace most, that has most communion with God, that has
the clearest visions of God, that has the sweetest discoveries, and
manifestations of God. Now certainly if they that improve their graces most,
have most of God here, then without controversy, they shall have most of God
hereafter. Doubtless a man may as well plead for equal degrees of Grace in
this world, as for equal degrees of glory in the other world.

Again, If those who are most graceless and wicked, shall be most tormented,
then certainly they that are most gracious, shall be most exalted in the day of
Christ: But the more wicked any man is, the more shall he be tormented in the
Mat. 23. 14. Luke 12. 47, 48.
day of vengeance. Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye shall
receive the greater damnation. The darkest, the lowest, the hottest place in
hell, is provided for you; therefore it roundly follows, That those that are
most gracious, shall at last be most glorious.

And thus much for the Motives that tend to provoke all the precious Children
of Zion, to make a through improvement of the Gifts and Graces that the Lord
has bestowed upon them.

I shall now come to the resolution of a weighty Question, and so conclude this
Point, (which I have been the longer upon, by reason of its very great
usefullnesse in these days, wherein men strive to exercise any thing, yea,
every thing but grace and holiness, etc.)

Now the Question is this.

When may a soul be said to be excellent in Grace, or to have highly improved
Grace?

Now to this Question I shall give these following Answers.

First, A soul that is high and excellent in grace, that has improved his
Graces to a considerable height, will keep humble and unspotted under great
outward enjoyments. It Is said of Daniel, that he had an excellent spirit; and
herein Many are seemingly good, till they come to be great, and then they prove
stark naught, l^ke the Monk in the Fable.
did his excellent spirit appear, in that he was holy and humble in heart,
though high in place and worth, etc. Dan. 6. 3-7. Daniel keeps humble and holy,
when he is lifted high, yea, made the second man in the Kingdom: Malice it
self could not find any thing against him, but in the matter of his God. It Is
much, to be very gracious when a man is very great; and to be high in
holiness, when advanced to high places; usually men's blood rises with their
outward good: Certainly they are worthy ones, and shall walk with Christ Rev.
3. 4.
in white, whose Garments are not defiled with greatness, or riches, etc.

Secondly, They that have highly improved their graces, will comply with those
commands of God that cross nature, that are contrary to nature: And doubtless
that man has improved his graces to a very high rate, whose heart complies
with those Commands of God, that are cross and contrary to nature: As for a
man to love them that loath him, Mat. 5. 44. They use to say, If any man would
have Mr. Fox do him a good turn, let him do him an injury, etc.
to bless them that curse him, to pray for them that persecute him, etc. It Is
nothing to love them that love us, and to speak well of them that speak well of
us; and to do well, and carry it well toward them, that carry it well toward
us: Oh! but for a man to love those that hate him; to be courteous to them that
are currish to him; to be sweet to them that are bitter to him, etc. this
strongly demonstrates a high improvement of grace. Certainly that man is very
very good, who has learned that holy Lesson of overcoming evil with good.
Such a one was Stephen, Acts 7. 55 -- ult. Romans 12. ult.
He was a man full of the holy Ghost: That is, of the Gifts and graces of the
Holy Ghost; he was much in the exercise of Grace, he can pray, and sigh for
them, yea, even weep tears of blood for them, who rejoiced to shed his blood:
So did Christ weep over Jerusalem, so did Titus, so did Marcellus over
Syracuse, so did Scipio over Carthage, but they shed tears for them, whose
blood they were to shed; but Christ shed tears for them, who were to shed his
blood. So Abraham being strong in faith gave glory to God. How? Romans 4.
why, by complying with those commands of God, that were very contrary to flesh
and blood; as the offering up of his Son, his only Son, his beloved Son, his
Son of the Promise, and by leaving his own Country, and his near and dear
relations, upon a word of Command. The Commands of God so change the whole man,
and make him new, that you can hardly know him to be the same man, says one.
Well Sirs, Lactant. defalsa. sapient. lib. 3. cap. ^7.
remember this, it is a dangerous thing to neglect one of his Commands (though
it be never so cross to flesh and blood) who by another is able to command you
into nothing, or into hell. Let Luther hate me, and in his wrath call me a
thousand times Devil, yet I will love him, and acknowledge him to be a most
precious servant of God, says Calvin, etc.

Thirdly, consider this, Such souls will follow the Lord fully, that have made
an improvement of their graces. Oh! this was the glorious commendations of
Caleb; and Joshua, in Numb. 14. 24. that They followed the Lord fully, in the
face of all difficulties and discouragements: They had another spirit in them,
says the Text, they would go up and possess the Land, though the Walls were
as high as Heaven, and Veni, vidi, vici, I came, I saw, I overcame, said that
Emperor.
the Sons of Anak were there; they made no more of it, then to go see and
conquer.

They followed the Lord fully: In the Hebrew it is, They fullfilled after me.
The Hebrew word is a metaphor taken from a Ship under sail, that is carried
with a strong wind, as fearing neither Sands, nor Rocks, nor Shelves, etc. Such
have little, if any thing of Christ within, who follow him by halves, or
haltingly.

I remember Cyprian brings in the Devil triumphing over Christ thus, As for my
followers, I never dyed for them, as Christ did for his, I never promised them
so great reward, as Christ has done to his, and yet I have more followers then
he, and they do more for me, then his do for him. O where is that spirit in
these days, that was upon those Worthies? Psalm. 44. All this is come upon us,
yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant;
our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy way,
though thou have sore broken us in the place of Dragons, and covered us with
the shadow of death.

Fourthly, Such souls that have improved their Graces to a considerable
height, will bless God as well when he frowns, as when he smiles.

As well when he takes, as when he gives; when he strikes, as when he strokes,
as you may see by comparing the Scriptures in the Margent together. When the
Lord had stripped Job of all, and had set him naked upon the dunghill, why then
Job 1. ^1. Levit. 10. 3. 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26. Isa. 63. 14, 15.
says Job, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, and blessed be the name
of the Lord. Where Grace is improved to a considerable height, it will work a
soul to sit down satisfied with the naked enjoyment of God, without other
things. John 14. 8. Show us the father, and it sufficieth us. The sight
Christus est mihi pro omnibus, says a Christian, as he said, Plato est mihi
pro omnibus.
of the father without honors, the sight of the father without riches, the
sight of the father without men's favor, will suffice the soul: As Jacob said,
It is enough that Joseph is alive; so says the soul that is high in Grace,
it is enough that Jesus is alive, etc.

Fifthly, Souls that have improved their Graces to a considerable height, will
be good in bad times, and in bad places.

Such souls will bear up against the stream of evil examples, in the worst of
times, and in the worst of places. Abraham Though the Fishes live in the salt
sea, yet they are fresh: So though souls eminently gracious, live among the
wicked, yet they retain their spiritualnesse, freshness, and li^e.
was righteous in Chaldea: Lot was just in Sodom: Daniel holy in Babylon: Job
upright and fearing God, in the Land of Vz, which was a profane and most
abominable superstitious place: Nehemiah zealous in Damasco. Oh take me a man
that has improved his grace, and the worser the times are, the better that man
will be; he will bear up bravely against the stream of evil examples; he will
be very good, when times, and all round about him are very bad.

Some say that Roses grow the sweeter, when they are planted by Garlic: Verily
Christians that have gloriously improved their Graces, are like those Roses,
they grow sweeter, and sweeter, holier and holier, by wicked men. The best
Diamonds shine most in the dark, and so do the best Christians shine most in
the worst times.

Sixthly, Such turn their principles into practice. They turn their
speculations into power, their notions into spirit, their glorious inside into
a golden outside, Psalm. 45. 13.

Seventhly, Such as have made a considerable improvement of their gifts and
graces, Have hearts as large as their heads: Whereas most men's heads have
outgrowne their hearts, etc.

Eighthly, Such are always most busied about the highest things, viz. God,
Christ, Heaven, etc. Phil. 3. 2 Timothy 4. 8. 2 Cor. 4. ult. Romans 8. 18.

Ninthly, Such are always a doing or receiving good: As Christ went up and
down doing good, Mat. 4. 23. Chap. 9. 35. Mark 6. 6.

Tenthly, and lastly, Such will mourn for wicked men's sins, as well as their
own. O the tears, the sighs, the groans, Psalm 119. Jer. 9. 1, 2. 2 Pet. 2.
7, 8, 9.
that others sins fetch from these men's hearts! Pambus, in the Ecclesiastical
History, wept when he saw a Harlot dressed with much care and cost, partly to
see one take so much pains to go to hell, and partly because he had not been
so careful to please God, as she had been to please a wanton Lover.

I have at this time only given you some short hints, whereby you may know
whether you have made any considerable improvement of that grace the Lord has
given you. I do intend (by Divine permission) in a convenient time to declare
much more of this to the World: I shall follow all what has been said, with my
prayers, that it may help on your internal, and eternal welfare.

EPHESIANS. 3. 8. -- The Unsearchable Riches of Christ.
NOw the next Observation that we shall begin with, is this.

That the Lord Jesus Christ is very Rich. And the second will be this.

That the great business and work of the Ministry, is to hold forth to the
people, the Riches of Christ. We shall begin with the first Point at this time,
namely,

That the Lord Jesus Christ is very rich. For the opening of this Point, we
shall attempt these three things.

1 To demonstrate this to be a truth, That the Lord Jesus is very rich. 2 The
Grounds why he is thus held forth in the word, to be one full of Unsearchable
Riches. 3 To show you the Excellency of the riches of Christ, above all other
Riches in the world.
And then the Use of the Point.

For the first, That the Lord Jesus Christ is very rich.

First, Express Scripture speaks out this truth. He is rich in goodness, Romans
2. 4. Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, that is ready to be
employed for thy internal and To chreston. His native goodness, etc.
eternal good, etc.

Again, He is rich in wisdom and knowledge, Col, 2. 3. In whom (speaking of
Christ) are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Christ was content
that his riches should be hid from the world; therefore do not thou be As man
is an Epitome of the whole world, so is Christ of all wisdom and knowledge,
etc.
angry that thine is no more known to the world: What is thy one mite, to
Christ's many millions? etc.

Again, He is rich in grace, Ephesians. 1. 7. By whom we have redemption through
his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace.

Again, He is rich in glory, Ephesians. 1. 18. That ye may know what is the hope
of his calling, and what is the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the
Saints. So in Chap. 3. 16. That he would grant unto you according to the riches
of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his spirit in the Nec Christus
nec coelum patitur hyperbolem. Neither Christ nor heaven can be hyperbolized.
inner man. So in Phil. 4. 19. But my God shall supply all your need, according
to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus. The riches of glory are unconceiveable
riches: Search is made through all the bowels of the earth, for something to
shadow it by: The riches of this glory is fitter to be believed, then to be
discoursed of, as some of the very Heathens have acknowledged.

But secondly, As express Scripture speaks out this truth, That Christ is very
rich, so there are eight things more that do with open mouth speak out Christ
to be very rich.

First, You may judge of his riches, by the dowry and portion his father has
given him. In Psalm. 2. 7. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; ask
of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. He is the heir of all things,
all things above and below, in heaven and earth, are his. Heb. 1. 2. God has
in these last days spoken to us by his Son, whom he has appointed Heir of
all things. Christ is the richest Heir in heaven and earth: Men cry up this
man to be a good match, and that, and why so? but because they are great
Heirs. Ah! but what are all the great Heirs of the world, to this Heir, the
Lord Jesus? Joseph gave Portions to all his brethren, but to Benjamin a Portion
five times as good as what he gave the residue: So the Lord scatters Portions
among the Sons of men, he gives brass to some, gold to others; temporalls to
some, spiritualls to others, but the greatest portion of all, he has given
into the hands of Christ, whom he has made the Heir of all things. Rev. 11.
15. And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven,
saying, The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and
of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. So in Chap. 19. 11, 12.
And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white Horse, and he that sat upon him was
called, faithful and true, and in righteousness he does judge, and make war.
His eyes were as a flame of fire, and on his head were many Crowns. (Mark
that) what are Princes single Crowns, and the Popes tripple Crown to Christ's
many Crowns? Certainly he must be very rich, that has so many Kingdoms and
Crowns; wait but a while, and you shall see these Scriptures made good, etc.

Secondly, You may judge of his riches, by his Keeping open house for the
relief and supply of all created creatures, both in heaven and in earth.
Crassus was so rich, that he maintained a whole Army with his own Re^enues:
^ut what is this to what Jesus does? etc. Psalm. 145. 16.


You look upon those as very rich, that keep open house for all comers and
goers; why, such a one is the Lord Jesus Christ, he keeps open house for all
comers and goers, for all created creatures both in heaven and earth. Psalm.
104. 24. The earth is full of thy riches, so is the great and wide sea, where
are things creeping innumerable, both small and great. He opens his hand, and
he satisfies every living creature, says the Psalmist. So Isa. 55. 1. Ho every
one that thirsts let him come and buy wine and milk without money, and
without price; wherefore do thou lay out thy money for that which is not
bread, and thy strength for that which does not profit? All Creatures, high and
low, honorable and base, noble and ignoble, blessed and cursed, are fed, at
the cost and charge of the Lord Jesus Christ: They are all fed at his Table,
and maintained by what comes out of his treasury, his purse. All Angels and
Saints above, and all Saints and sinners below, are beholding to Christ for
what they enjoy. Oh the multitudes, the numberless number of those that live
upon the cost and charge of Christ! Can you number the Stars of heaven? Can you
number the sands upon the seashore? Then may you number the multitudes, the
millions of Angels and men that are maintained upon the cost and charge of the
Lord Jesus. In Col. 1. 16, 17. For by him were all things created that are in
heaven and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones,
or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, all things were created by him, and
for him. And he is before all things, and by him all things consist.

Thirdly, You may judge of the riches of Christ by The time that he has fed
and clothed, cherished and maintained so many innumerable millions of Angels
and men,

He has maintained his Court above and below, upon his own cost and charge,
for almost six thousand years. Oh to keep such a multitude, if it were but for
a day, would speak him out to be richer then all the Princes in the World: But
to keep so many millions, and to keep them so long, what does this speak out,
but that Christ is infinitely rich, rich in goodness and mercy. It would
beggar all the Princes on earth, to keep but one day the least part of those
that Christ maintains every day, etc.

But Fourthly, You may judge of the riches of Christ by this, That he does not
only enrich all the Saints, but all of the Saints.

That is, He inriches all the faculties of their souls, he inriches their
understandings with glorious light, their consciences with quickness,
pureness, tenderness, and quietness; and their wills with holy intentions,
and heavenly resolutions, and their affections of love, joy, fear, etc. with
life, heat, and warmth, and with the beauty and glory of the most
soulinriching, soule-delighting, soule-ravishing, and soule-contenting objects,
etc. All Saints experiences seal to this truth, and therefore a touch shall
suffice, etc.

Fifthly, Judge of the riches of Christ, by this, That notwithstanding all the
vast expense and charge that he is at, and has been at for so many millions of
thousands, and that for near six thousand years, yet he is never the poorer,
his purse is never the emptier.

There is still in Christ a fulness of Abundance, and a fulness of
Redundance, notwithstanding all that he has expended. It were blasphemy to
think that Christ should be a penny the poorer by all that he has laid out for
the relief of all those that have their dependence upon him. Col. 1. 19. It
pleased the father that in him should all fulness dwell: Not stay or abide a
night, or a day, and away, but should They say it is true of the Oil at Rhemes,
That though it be continually spent in the inauguration of their Kings of
France, yet it never wastes. I am sure though all Creatures spend continually
on Christ's stock, yet it never wastes.
dwell: The Sun has not the less light, for filling the stars with light. A
Fountain has not the less for filling the lesser vessels. There is in Christ
(Plenit^do fontis) The fulness of a fountain: The overflowing Fountain
powers out water abundantly, and yet remains full; why, the Lord Jesus is such
an overflowing Fountain, he fills all, and yet remains full. Christ has the
greatest worth and wealth in him, as the worth and value of many pieces of
silver is in one piece of gold, so all his petty excellencies scattered abroad
in the Creature, are united to Christ; yea, all the whole volume of
perfections, which is spread through Heaven and Earth, is Epitomized in him,
etc.

Sixthly, The Lord Jesus is Generally rich; and that speaks him out to be rich
indeed, he is generally rich.

You have few persons that are generally rich, that is, a rich man indeed, that
is generally rich, that is, that is rich in money, and rich in Land, and rich
in Commodities, and rich in Jewels, etc. Now the Lord Jesus Christ is one that
is generally rich; he is rich in all spiritualls, he is rich in goodness, rich
in wisdom and knowledge, he is rich in grace, and rich in glory: Yea, he is
generally rich in respect of temporalls, He is the Heir of all things; he is
the Heir of all the Gold in The Philosopher once said (Solus sapiens dives)
Only the wise man is the rich man, etc.
the world, and of all the Silver, and of all the Jewels, and of all the Land,
and of all the Cattle in the world, as you may see by comparing some
Scriptures together, Hos. 2. 5, 8, 9. For their Mother has played the Harlot,
she that conceived them has done shamefully, for she said, I will go after my
Lovers that gave me my bread and my water, and my wool, and my flax, my Oil,
and my drink. But mark what follows, verse. 8, 9. For she did not know that I
gave her corn, and wine, and Oil, and multiplied her silver and gold, which
they prepared for Baal; therefore will I return, and take away my Corn in the
time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof, and will recover my wool and
my flax, given to cover her nakedness. So in Psalm. 24. 1. The earth is the
Lords, and the fulness thereof, the round world, and all that dwell therein:
All others are either Usurpers, or Stewards. It Is the Lord Jesus that is the
great Landlord of Heaven and Earth. So in Psalm. 50. 8, 9, 10. I will not
reprove thee for thy sacrifices, or thy burnt-offrings, I will take no Bullock
out of thy house, nor He-goats out of thy folds, for every Beast of the Forest
is mine, and the Cattle upon a thousand hills. I know all the Fowls of the
mountains, and the wild Beasts of the fields are mine. If I were hungry, I
would not tell thee, for the world is mine, and the fulness thereof. It Is all
mine, says the Lord.

Thus you see that the Lord is generally rich, rich in houses, in Lands, in
Gold, in Silver, in Cattle, etc. in all temporalls as well as in spiritualls;
but where will you find a man that is generally rich, either in spiritualls, or
temporalls. It Is true, you may find one Christian rich in one grace, and
another Christian rich in another, but where will you find a Christian that is
generally rich, that is rich in every grace? that is rich in knowledge, in
faith, in love, in wisdom, in humility, in meekness, in patience, in
selfe-denyall. Abraham was rich in Faith, and Moses was rich in Meekness, and
Job was rich in Patience, and Joshua was rich in Courage, and David Gregory the
Great, was wont to say, That he was poor, whose soul was void of grace, not
whose Coffers were empty ^s money.
was rich in Uprightness, etc. But where will you find a Saint that is rich in
all these graces? Or where will you find a man that is generally rich, in
respect of temporalls, as to be rich in lands, and rich in moneys, and rich in
wares, and rich in Jewels, etc. But now the Lord Jesus Christ is generally
rich, both in respect of spiritualls, and temporalls. In having nothing I have
all things (says one) because I have Christ, having therefore all things in
him, I seek no other reward, for he is the universal reward, etc.

Seventhly, You may judge of the riches of Christ, by the Tribute and Rent
that is due to him.

He is the great Landlord and owner of all that Angels and Quicqu^d esi d^bes
^^cami, Quicquid ^otes, debes redimenti. Bern.
men possess above and below: All created Creatures are but Tennants at will
to this rich Landlord, the Lord Jesus: He puts out and puts in as he pleases;
he lifts up one, and casts down another; he throws down the mighty, and sets
up the needy, according to the pleasure of his own will; Psalm. 113. 7. Psalm.
148. 14. Luke 1. 52.
Whom he will he destroys, and whom he will he keeps alive: whom he will he
binds, and whom he will he sets at liberty; whom he will he exalts, and whom he
will he abases; whom he will he makes happy, and whom he will he makes
miserable, etc. The Psalmist, Psalm. 148. upon this account calls upon all
Celestial and Terrestiall Creatures, to pay their Tribute of Praise to the
Lord: He has given them all their beings, and he maintains them all in the
beings that he has given them.

The Ancient Hebrews (as Josephus relates) set marks and tokens sometimes on
their Arms, sometimes at their Gates, to declare to all the world the Tribute
and Praise that was due to the Lord for all his benefits and favors showed
unto them. Bernard says, We must imitate the Birds, who morning and evening,
at the rising and setting of the Sun, omit not to pay the debt of praise that
is due to their Creator.

Eighthly, and lastly, Judge of the riches of Christ, by the Multiplicity and
variety of temporal and spiritual Gifts Christ says to the believe^, as the
King of Israel said* to the King of Syria, I am thine, and all that I have, 1
Kings 20 4. This is a^vearium div^ni mellis, an hive fu^l of Divine comfort.
and Rewards that he scatters among the children of men.

He gives honors to thousands, and riches to thousands, and Peace to
thousands, and Pardons to thousands, and the joys and comforts of the Holy
Ghost to thousands; there is not a moment that passes over his head, but he is a
scattering of Jewels up and down the world; he throws some into one bosom,
and others into others, but the best into the bosom of his Saints. Oh the
abundance of peace, the abundance of joy and comfort! Oh the fear, the faith,
the love, the kindness, the goodness and sweetness, that the Lord Jesus
Christ scatters up and down among the precious Sons and Daughters of Zion,
besides all temporal favors. There Is not a Saint that receives so much as a
cup of cold water, but Mat. 10. 42. The Duke of Bu^gandy gave 1 poor man a
great rewa^d, for offering him a R^pe Root, being the best present the poor man
had: And surely so w^ll God bountifully reward the least sev^urs showed to his.
Christ rewards it abundantly into the bosom of the giver. By all which you
may well judge, that certainly the Lord Jesus is very rich, for if he were not,
he could never hold out in scatterring of rich rewards among so many millions,
and for so many thousand years as he has done.

And so much for the proof of the Point, viz. That the Lord Jesus is very rich.

We come now in the second place to discover to you

The Grounds and Reasons why the Lord Jesus Christ is held forth in the Word to
be so very Rich.
And they are these that follow.

First,

TO encourage poor sinners to look after, and to be willing to match with
him. Abraham's servant to win ovre the heart of Rebekah to Jsaac, brings so^th
Jewels of silver, and Jewels of gold, and acquaints her what a rich match she
sho^l^ have, by matching with Isaac, and so overcame her, Genesis 24. And so does
God dealwith poor sinners, etc.
Poverty hinders many a match. The Lord did foresee from eternity, That fallen
man would never look after Christ, if there were not something to be gotten by
Christ; the Lord has therefore in his wisdom and goodness to fallen man,
thus presEnted him, as one exceeding rich, that so poor sinners might fall in
love with him, and be willing to give up themselves to him. Prove. 8. 34, 35.
Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at my Gates, waiting at the
posts of my doors (As Princes Guards do at Princes Gates and doors.) Now the
Arguments to draw out the soul thus to wait upon the Lord, lies in the next
words, For whosoever finds me, finds life, and shall obtain favor of the
Lord. The Hebrew runs thus, For finding me he shall find lives, and shall draw
forth the favor of the Lord. Divine favor is as it were a Jewel locked up, I,
but by finding Christ, by getting Christ, the soul gets this Jewel that is
more worth then a world; yea, by gaining him, the soul gains lives; to wit, a
life of grace, and a life of glory; and what would the soul have more?

A second Ground of this, is,

Because he is Ordained by the father to convey all riches of Grace to his
chosen and beloved ones. John 1. 16. Of his fulness we all receive grace for
grace. And this we receive by Divine ordination. John 6. 27. Labor not (says
Christ) for the meat that perishes, but for that which indureth to everlasting
life, which the Son of man Sealed, that is, made his Commission authentical,
as men do their deeds by their seal.
shall give unto you, for him has God the father sealed. God the father has
sealed Christ, he has designed Christ, he has set Christ apart for this very
work, that he might give grace unto us. God has ordained to convey all
fulness of light to the Air by the Sun, and therefore has put a greater
fulness of light into the Sun. God has ordained all fulness of nourishment
to the branches, by the roots, and therefore has put a fulness of juice into
the roots: So the Lord has ordained that all the riches of grace, of peace, of
glory, etc. that Believers shall enjoy here and in Heaven, they shall have from
this Son of righteousness, from this blessed root the Lord Jesus Christ; and
therefore the father has filled this Son with light, this root with heavenly
juice, because he is by Divine ordination to convey all spiritual and glorious
John 15. 21, 22. Sirens are said to sing curiously while ^hey live, but to
r^are horribly when they dye. So will all those that have rerected so rich a
Jesus as has been tendered ^o them, when the Lord Jesus shall plead with them,
etc.
Riches into the hearts of his chosen and beloved ones.

A third Ground is

To take away all excuse from ungodly and wicked men, and that they may be
found speechless in the day of vengeance, when the Lord shall come to reckon
with them. Ah sinners! How will you that have turned your backs upon Christ,
who is thus rich, be able to answer it in the day when God shall reason the
case with you? When God shall say, sinners, Has it not been often told you
that Christ is rich in mercy, and rich in goodness, and rich in grace, rich in
pardons, rich in loves, and rich in glory, rich in spiritualls, rich in
temporalls, and rich in eternalls, and yet you have slighted this Christ, you
have turned your backs upon this Christ, you have preferred your lusts and the
world, and the service of the Devil, above this Christ. Oh! How dumb, how
speechless will sinners be, when the Lord shall thus plead with them? Oh how
will their countenances be changed, their thoughts troubled, their joints
loosed, their consciences enraged, and their souls terrified, when they shall
see what a rich Match they have refused, and thereupon how justly they are for
ever accursed, etc.

Lastly, It is upon this account,

That he may be a complete Redeemer to us, and that nothing may hinder our
souls closing with the Lord Jesus Christ. We stand in need of one that is rich,
rich in grace to pardon us, rich in power to support us, and rich in goodness
to relieve us, and rich in glory to Crown us, there is none but such We may say
of Christ, as Writers say of the Jasper, it is easier to admire then declare it,
and far more easier to say what he is not, then what he is.
a Christ can serve our turns. We stand in need of one that is rich, that is
generally rich, one that is rich in money to pay all our debts. We have run much
upon the score with God, and none can pay this score, but Christ; our sins are
debts that none can pay but Christ: It Is not our tears, but his blood, it is
not our sighs, but his sufferings, that can satisfy for our sins. We are much
in debt to God, for the ground we tread on, the air we breath in, the beds we
lie on, the bread we eat, the clothes we wear, etc. and none can pay this debt
but Christ. Angels and Saints may pity us, but they cannot discharge the least
debt for us, etc. Christ must pay all, or we are Prisoners for ever, etc. We
stand in need of one that is rich in goodness, we are a needy people, and are
still in want; Christ must be still a giving, or we shall be still a
languishing, if he shut his hand we perish and return to dust. Our temporal
wants are many, our spiritual wants are more, and if Christ don't supply them,
who will? who can? Nay our wants are so many, and so great, that Christ
himself could not supply them, were he not very, very rich.

And thus I have given you a brief account of the Reasons of the Point, Why the
Lord Jesus is held forth by the Scripture to be so very rich.

We shall now come to the third thing proposed, and that is.

The Excellency of the Riches of Christ above all other riches in the World.
I shall briefly run over this third branch, and so come to the Application,
which is most in my eye, and upon my heart. The Excellency of the Riches of
Christ, above all other Riches.


FIrst, The riches of Christ are Incomparable riches. In Prove. 3. 13, 14, 15.
Happy is the man that finds wisdom (that is, the Lord Jesus Christ) and the
man that gets understanding; for the merchandise of it is better then the
merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof then fine gold. She is more
precious then Rubies, and all the things thou can desire are not to be
compared unto her: One grain of Grace is far beyond all the gold of Ophir, and
all the silver of the Indies, which is but the guts and garbidge of the earth.
We may say of the riches of this world, compared with the riches of Christ, as
Gideon sometime said of the Vintage of Abiezer, The gleanings of Ephraim are
better then the Vintage of Abiezer. So the gleanings, the smallest gatherings
of the riches of Christ, are far better, more excellent, more satisfying, more
contenting, and more ravishing, then all the riches of this world.

The whole Turkish Empire (says Luther) is but a crust that God throws to a
Dog. The wise Merchant, Mat. 13. Riches are called Thick clay, Hab. 2. 6.
which will sooner break the back then lighten the heart, etc.
44, 45. parts with all to gain this Pearl of price; the truth is, other
riches are but a burden. Genesis 13. 2. Abraham was very rich in Cattle, in
silver, and in gold. The Hebrew word (Cabbedh) is, He was very heavy in
Cattle, in silver, and in gold: To signify, that riches are but heavy
burdens. A little will serve nature, less will serve grace, but nothing will
serve men's lusts.

Pheraulas a poor man, on whom Cyrus bestowed so much, that he knew not what to
do with his riches, being wearied out with care in keeping of them, he desired
rather to live quietly, though poor, as he had done before, then to possess
all those riches with discontent; therefore he gave away all his wealth,
desiring only to enjoy so much as might supply his necessities. Let worldly
Professors think seriously of this story, and blush, etc.

Secondly, the riches of Christ are Inexhaustible riches, as Earthly riches are
true Gardens of Adonis where we can g^^her nothing but trivial flowers
surrounded with many briars, and.
I have hinted before; Christ can never be drawn dry.

The Spanish Ambassador coming to see the Treasury of St. Mark (in Venice)
which is cried up throughout the world, fell a groping whether it had any
bottom, and being asked why, answered, In this among other things, my great
Masters Treasure differs from yours, in that his has no bottom, as I find
yours to have, alluding to the Mines in Mexico, and Petosi, etc. Certainly
Christ's Treasures have no bottom, all Have thou entered into the treasures of
the Snow? (says God to Job) Now Gregory says, That the treasures of the Snow
are worldly riches which men ^ake together as children do Snow, which the next
show rewashes away, and l^aves nothing in the room but dirt, and can dirt
satisfy? Surely no. N^ more can worldly riches
his baggs are bottomless; but Scripture, History, and Experience, do
abundantly testify, that men's baggs, purses, Coffers, and Mints, may be
exhausted, or drawn dry, but Christ's can never; millions of thousands live
upon Christ, and he feels it not, his Purse is always full, though he be
always giving, etc.

Thirdly, The riches of Christ are Soule-satisfying riches. O those riches of
grace and goodness that be in Christ, how do they satisfy the souls of
sinners? A Pardon does not more satisfy a condemned man, nor bread the hungry
man, nor drink the thirsty man, nor clothes the naked man, nor health the sick
man, then the riches of Christ do satisfy the gracious man. John 4. 13, 14.
Whosoever drinks of this water, shall thirst again, but whosoever drinks
of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst, but the water that I
shall give him, shall be in him a well of living water, springing up to
everlasting life. Grace is a perpetual flowing fountain: Grace is compared to
water, water serves to cool men when they are in a burning heat, so Grace
cooles the soul when it has been even scorcht and burnt up under the sense of
Divine wrath and displeasure. Water is cleansing, so is Grace. Water is
fructifying, so is Grace. And water is satisfying, it satisfies the thirsty,
and so does Grace. Show us the father, Anima ratinalis caeteris o^nibus
occupari po^est, impleri non potest. Bern. The reasonable soul may be busied
about other things, but it cannot be filled with them etc.
and it suffices us, John 14. 8. But now earthly riches can never satisfy the
soul, but as they said once of Alexander, That had he a body suitable to his
mind, he would set one foot upon sea, and the other upon land, he would reach
the East with one hand, and the West with the other. And doubtless the same
frame of spirit is to be found in all the Sons of Adam. In Eccles. 5. 10. He
that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he that loves
abundance, with increase: This is also vanity. If a man be hungry, silver
cannot feed him; if naked, it cannot cloth him; if cold, it cannot warm him;
if sick, it cannot recover him, much less then is it able to satisfy him. Oh!
but the riches of Christ are Soule-satisfying riches. A soul rich in
spiritualls, rich in eternalls, says, I have enough, though I have not this
and that temporal good, etc.

Fourthly, The riches of Christ are Harmless riches; they are riches that will
not hurt the soul, that will not harm the soul. Where is there a soul to be
found in all the world, Da Domine ut sic possidiamu^ temporalia ut non perdamus
aeterna. Bern.
that was ever made worse by spiritual riches? O but earthly riches have cast
down many, they have slain many: If poverty with Saul, has killed her
thousands, riches with David, has killed her ten thousands. Eccles. 5. 13.
There is a sore evil, which I have seen under the Sun, namely, riches kept
from the owners thereof, to their hurt. Earthly riches are called Thorns, and
well they may; for, as Thorns, they pierce Some say, where Gold grows, no
Plant will prosper: So no truth, no good, etc. will have any heart-roome, where
the love of money bears the bell, etc.
both head and heart; the head with cares in getting them, and the heart with
grief in parting with them. O the souls that riches have pierced through and
through with many sorrows! O the minds that riches have blinded! O the hearts
that riches have hardened! O the consciences that riches have benumbed! O the
wills that riches have perverted! O the affections that riches have disordered
and destroyed! Earthly riches are very vexing, very defiling, very dividing,
and to multitudes prove very ruining.

It was a wise and Christian speech of Charles the Fifth, to the Duke of Venice,
who when he had showed him the glory of his Princely Palace, and earthly
Paradise: instead of admiring it, or him for it, only returned him this grave
and serious Memento, Haec sunt quae faciunt invitos mori. These are the things
which make us unwilling to dye, etc.

Fifthly, The riches of Christ are Unsearchable riches. This The Philosophers
seeing to the very bottom of earthly riches, contemned them, and preferred a
contemplative life above them. Omniame^mecum porto, said Bias, one of the seven
wise men of Greece, etc.
is plain in the Text, Unto me who am less then the least of all Saints, is
this grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles, the Unsearchable
riches of Christ. There are riches of Justification, riches of Sanctification,
riches of Consolation, and riches of Glorification in Christ: All the riches of
Christ, are Unsearchable riches. A Saint with all the light that he has from
the spirit of Christ, is not able to search to the bottom of these riches.
Nay, suppose that all the perfections of Angels and Saints in a glorified
estate, should meet in one noble breast, yet all those perfections could not
enable that glorious glorified Creature for to search to the bottom of Christ's
unsearchable riches. Doubtless when believers come to Heaven, when they shall
see God face to face, when they shall know as they are known, when they shall
be filled with the fulness of God, even then they will sweetly sing this
Song, O the height, the depth, the length, the breadth of the unsearchable
riches of Christ! As there is no Christ to this Christ, so there are no riches
to his ri^hes, etc. O but such are not the riches of this world, they may be
reckoned, they may be fathomed, etc. Ron Gnathak. It is repored of one
My^cgenes, when great gifts were sent him he sent then back, saying, I only
desire this one thing at your Masters hands, to pray for me, that I may be
saved for eterni^y* etc


Sixthly, The riches of the Lord Jesus Christ are Permanent and abiding riches.
They are lasting, they are durable riches. That Is a choice Scripture, Prove. 8.
18. Riches and honor are with me, yea, durable riches, and righteousness. The
Hebrew word that is rendered durable riches, signifies old riches: All other
riches are but new, they are but of yesterday, as it were: Oh but with me are
old riches, durable riches; all other riches, in respect of their fickleness,
are as a shadow, a bird, a ship, an arrow, a dream, a post, etc. This Valerian,
Valens, and Bajazet, three proud Emperors, found by experience, and so have
many Kings, and Generals, and Nobles, as Scripture and History do abundantly
evidence. Earthly riches are very uncertain, 1 Timothy 6. 17. They are ever upon
the wing, they are like Tennis-balls, which are bandied up and down from one
to another. As the Bird hopps from twig to twig, so do riches from man to man.
This age can furnish us with multitudes of instances of this nature, etc.

Seventhly, and lastly, They are the most Useful riches, to sweeten all other
riches, mercies, and changes, etc. which speaks out the Excellency of these
riches above all other riches. The more useful any thing is, the more
excellent it is: Now the riches of Christ are of all things the most useful to
poor souls. When the soul is under the guilt of sin, nothing relieves it
like the riches of Christ. When the soul is surrounded with temptations,
nothing strengthens it like the riches of Christ. When the soul is mourning
under afflictions, nothing comforts it like the riches of Christ. When state,
friends, and trading fails, nothing makes a Christian sing care away, like the
riches of Christ, etc. The riches of Christ sweeten all other riches that men
enjoy. If a man be rich in parts, Earthly riches cannot in rich the soul, no^
better the soul, oftentimes under silk and satin apparel, there is a
threadbare soul.
or rich in grace, rich in faith, rich in knowledge, rich in wisdom, rich in
joy, rich in peace, etc. Or if a man be rich in temporalls, rich in money, rich
in wares, rich in Jewels, rich in Lands, etc. the glorious and unsearchable
riches of Christ sweetens all his riches, and the want of these riches,
imbitters all the riches that men enjoy. When men's consciences are enlightened,
and awakened, then they cry out, What are all these worldly riches to us,
except we had an interest in the riches of Christ? As Absalom once said, What
are all these to me, except I see the Kings face?

I have read of one, that upon his dying bed called for his baggs, and laid a
bag of gold to his heart, and then cried out, Take it away, it will not do,
it will not do. There are three things that earthly riches can never do.

They can never satisfy Divine Justice.

They can never pacify Divine wrath.

Nor they can never quiet a guilty conscience.

And till these things are done, man is undone. The Crown of gold cannot cure
the Headache, nor the honorable Garter cannot cure the Gout, nor the Chain of
Pearls about the neck, cannot take away the pain of the Teeth. Oh but the
unsearchable riches of Christ give ease under all pains and torments.

Nugas the Scythian King despising the rich Presents and Ornaments that were
sent unto him by Michael Pal^olegas.
the Emperor of Constantinople, asked him that brought them, Whether those
things could drive away calamities, diseases, or deaths? looking upon all those
Presents as no Presents, that could not keep off calamities from him. Verily,
all the riches and glories of this world, cannot keep off the least calamity,
neither can they make up the want of the least mercy: But the riches of Christ
do both keep off calamities, and make up the want of all mercies that the
soul craves, or needs. All which speaks out the Excellency of the riches of
Christ, above all other riches,

We come now unto

The Uses of this Point.
AND the first Use that we shall make, is a Use of Exhortation,

1 I shall lay down some Considerations that may provoke your souls to labor
to be rich in grace.

2 I shall propound some Directions, or Helps, to help you to be rich in grace:
which is as much a mercy, as a Duty, etc.

3 I shall lay down some Propositions concerning the souls being rich in
grace.

4 I shall show you how you may know whether you are the persons that are rich
in grace, or no.

I shall begin with the first, and be a little the more large upon it, because
it is a point of mighty weight, and concernment, and then be the more brief in
the three following particulars.

For the first, By way of Motive, I shall only propound these following
Considerations, to provoke your souls to labor to be rich in grace,
Laborandum, was one of the Emperors Motto, and must be every Christians.

First, Consider, That the more rich the soul is in grace, the higher the
soul will be in joy and comfort.

It Is the greatest measures of grace, that usher in the greatest O the joys!
the joys! the unconceiveable joys! cried out Mistress Katharine Bretterge, who
had attained to a great measure of grace, etc.
measure of joy and comfort into a believing heart. Christians, have you tasted
of the Consolations of God? Have you at times sat down and drank of these
wells of salvation? Are your hearts carried out for more of those waters of
life? Then labor to be rich in grace. A little Star yields but a little light,
and a little grace will yield but a little comfort; but great measures of grace
will yield a man not only a Heaven hereafter, but also a Heaven of joy here.
Divine comfort is a choice Flower, a precious Jewel, and only to be found in
their bosoms that are rich in grace. Spiritual comforts are such
Strong Water, that weak Christians are not able to bear them. Great measures
of grace carry with them the greatest evidence of the truth of grace, and the
clearer evidence there is in the soul of the truth of grace, the higher will
joy and comfort spring. The soul is apt to hang her comforts on every hedge,
to shift and shark in every bye corner for comfort; but as air lights not
without the Sun, and as fuel heats not without fire, so neither can any thing
soundly comfort a Christian, without the God of grace, without his being rich
in grace. Great measures of grace carry with them the greatest evidence of a
man's union and communion with God; and the more a man's union and communion with
God is evidenc't, the more Aeterna erit exultatio, quae bono laetatur aeterno,
etc.
will the soul be filled with that joy that is unspeakable, and full of glory,
and with that comfort and peace that passes understanding. In great measures of
grace a man may read most of the love and favor of God; and the more a man
sees of the love and favor of God to him, the more high the springs of comfort
rise in him. In great measures of grace, as in a Crystal glass, the soul
sees the glorious face of God shining and sparkling, and this fills the soul
with joy. Acts 9. 31. Then had the Churches rest throughout all Judca, and
Galilee, and Samaria, and were edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord,
and in the comfort of the holy Ghost, were multiplied. The more their graces
were increased, the more their comforts were augmented.

If one drop of the joy of the Holy Ghost should fall into hell, it would
swallow up all the torments of hell, says Austin. Oh! who would not then
labor to increase in grace, that he may abound in joy? etc. The Promise lies
most fair before their eyes that are rich in grace, their interest in it is
most clear, and rarely that they go without it, unless it is by taking part
sometimes with Satan against their interest in Christ; or sometimes through the
power of unbelief, which indeed cuts off all the comfort of the soul, or by
looking after other lovers, or by not harkening to the voice of the Comforter,
etc. Christians, you often complain of the want of joy and comfort, oh! do
but abound in grace, and you will not complain of the want of comfort. Without
delight the soul cannot live (says one) take away all delight, and the soul
dies. Let this that has been spoken, provoke every Christian to labor to be
rich in grace, etc.

But secondly, Consider this, You have singular opportunities, and choice
advantages to be rich in grace.

There is a price put into your hands, but where are your hearts? In former
times God gave out grace by drops, but now by Flaggons. Opportunities, if not
improved, will, as Cant. 2. 5.
that sword that Hector gave Ajax, be turned into your own bowels. This will
be a sword in thy bowels, that there has been soule-inriching opportunities,
and thou have neglected them, and turned thy back upon them. The thoughts of
this will one day be the Scorpions that will vex thee, the rod that will lash
thee, the thorns that will prick thee, and the worm that will gnaw thee. The
Storke (says the Prophet) knows Jer. 8. 7.
his appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe
the time of their coming, but my people know not the judgment of the Lord. The
Market for your souls is open, slip not your season, least with the foolish
Virgins, you Mat. 25.
go to buy when it is too late. The Merchant will not slip his opportunity of
buying, nor the Saylor his of sailing, nor the Husbandman his of sowing, and
why should you slip yours of growing rich in grace? Many men loose their
souls, as Saul lost his Kingdom, by not discerning their time to be
spiritually rich.

Tamarlen at first hung out a white flagge, but if they slipped Such ^here have
been, who by giving a glass of water, opportunely have obtained a Kingdom. as
you may see in the story of Th^um^stus, and King Agrippa, etc.
that opportunity, then a red, and so death and destruction followed, etc. The
Lord Jesus hangs out the white flagge of mercy in these days, to entice souls
to come in, and to share with him in his glorious and unsearchable riches, in
the riches of his grace and mercy: but if you stand out, Christ has a red
flagge, and if that be once put out, you are lost for ever. Thrice happy are
those that take the first opportunity of closing with Christ, and of subjecting
themselves to Christ.

Plutarch writes of Hanniball, That when he could have taken Rome, he would
not, but when he would have taken Rome, he could not. When many men may have
mercy, they will not, and when they would have mercy, they shall not. Mercy and Prove.
1. 24, ^l. Rev. 3. 20.
grace is sometimes upon the bare knee: Christ stands knocking at sinners
doors, he is willing to come in and make sinners rich and happy for ever, he
calls upon souls to open to him. Lift up your heads, O ye Gates, and be ye
lift up ye everlasting Prove. 24. 7, 8, etc.
doors, and the King of glory shall come in, who is the King of glory? The
Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in Battle. The King of glory comes not
(vacuis manibus) empty-handed; no, he comes with his hands and heart full of
rich and royal Presents, and blessed and enricht for ever are those that open to
this King of glory, etc.

Thirdly, Consider this, Souls rich in grace shall have their names immortal.

Every man naturally would have (if it were possible) his name immortal, now
there is no way in the world to have your names immortal, like this of growing
rich in grace. A man that is spiritually rich, shall live, and his name shall
live, when he is dead. In Nehem. 7. 2. it is said of Hannaniah, that he was a
faithful man, and feared God above many: Or, He feared God above multitudes,
as the Hebrew has it. His Mer^bbim, from Rab^b.
name lives, though his body for many hundred years has been turned to dust.
So in Acts 7. 55. Stephen was a man full of the Holy Ghost. Though Stephen were
stoned, yet his name lives, his memorial is precious among the Saints to this
very day. So in Heb. 11. 38. They were such of whom this world was not worthy.
And in the third Epistle of John, the six first Verses, compared with verse. 12.
Gaius and Demetrius, Ego si bonam fa^ram servass^, sat dives ero. If I may but
keep a good name, I have wealth enough, said Pla^t.
who were rich in grace, have Crowns of honor set upon their heads, their
names live, and are a sweet savor to this very day, etc. So in Psalm. 112. 6.
The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance, but the name of the
wicked shall rot. The great man's name, and the rich man's name shall rot, says
he, but the name of the righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

The Persians use to write their Kings names in golden Characters, so the Lord
writes the names of souls rich in grace, in golden Characters: Their names are
always Heirs to their lives; believe it, there is no such way in the world, to
have immortal names, like this of growing rich in grace. One man thinks to
make his name immortal, by making himself great, another by heaping up silver
and gold, as the dust of the A good name yields a fragrant smell over Town and
Country, it puts a shining luster upon the countenance, it fitteth to any
public employment, in Ministry or Magistracy; it stops many a foul mouth, and
it makes men live when they are dead.
earth, or the stones of the street, and another by doing some strange
exploites, etc. But for all this the Lord will make good his word, The name of
the wicked shall rot, if God be God; his name must rot; but the righteous shall
be had in everlasting remembrance, they leave their Names behind for a
blessing, Isa. 65. 15. It Is sad to consider what many poor carnal Creatures
have done, and suffered, to make their names immortal. The Romans desires of
praise and a name, made them bountiful of their purses, and prodigal of their
lives.

Erostratus set the Temple of Diana on fire, on that night that Alexander was
borne, only that he might be talked of when he was dead.

Calvin observes, That Servetus in Geneva, in the year 1555. gave all his
Goods to the poor, and his body to be burned, and all for a name, for a little
glory among men. But these poor Creatures have all mist the mark. There Is no
way, Christians, to have your names immortal, like this, of growing rich in
grace. Satan nor the world shall never be able to bury such men's names, who are
rich in grace; their names shall rise in glory here, as well as their bodies
hereafter.

But then fourthly, and mainly, Consider, That spiritual riches will enable
you to live up to your Principles.

That man that has but so much grace as will keep hell and his soul asunder,
will never live up to his Principles. Souls weak in grace are too apt to deny,
and in their practices to contradict their own Principles; and oh that this
age could not furnish us with too many instances of this nature! Oh! what is
that that is the reproach of Religion, and the dishonor of God, and the
Gospel, but this, that Professors live below their Principles, that they live
not up to their Principles? And, let me tell you, Christians, there is nothing
but a rich measure of grace that will enable a soul to live up to his
Principles. A man that is not rich in grace, will never be able to live up to
his own Principles, but will upon every occasion and temptation, be ready to
wound two at once, the honor of God, and his own soul. Yea, men that are not
rich in grace, will be ready to deny their own Principles, as many weak
Christians did in persecuting times.

But you will say to me, What are those gracious and holy Principles, that a
rich measure of grace will enable a man to live up to?

I will instance only in those that have most worth and weight in them, and
they are worthy of all your thoughts.

First, It Is your Principle, that

You must rather suffer, then sin. It Is your Principle rather to undergo the
greatest Calamity, It Is better for me to be a Martyr, then a Monarch, said
Ignatius, when he was to suffer, etc.
then willingly to commit the least iniquity. Now pray tell me, what will
enable a Christian to live up to this Principle, will a little grace, a little
knowledge of God a little faith in God, a little love to God, a little zeal
for God, a little communion with God? will this do it? Surely no. It must be
much grace that must enable the soul to live up to this Principle. When sin
and suffering have stood in competition, many weak Christians have chosen
rather to sin, then to suffer, which has opened many a mouth, and sadded many
a heart, and wounded many a conscience: Yea, such by their not suffering, have
suffered more then ever they could have suffered from the wrath and rage of
man. Oh! but now spiritual riches will enable a man to live up to this
Principle, as you may see in Daniel, who had an excellent spirit in him, Dan. 6.
who was rich in grace, and filled with the Holy Ghost, he lives up to his
Principles, he lives out his Principles, when he was put hard to it, when he
must either neglect the worship of his God, and make a God of his King, or to
the Lions Of the very same spirit were the Primitive Christians, they chose
rather to be thrown to Lions without, then left to lusts within. Ad Leonem
magis quam Leonem, says Tertullian.
Den. Now Daniel chooses rather to be cast into the Lions Den, then not to do
homage to his God: He had rather suffer much, then that God should loose a dram
of his glory. Of the same spirit and mettle were those Worthies, Heb. 11. who
when they were put to it, did rather choose to suffer the very worst of
miseries, then they would in the least dishonor the Lord, wound their own
consciences, and make work for repentance, etc. And so did Jovinian, Eusebius,
Galiatius, Basil, Vincentius, Balilas, etc. By all which you see, That
Christians that are spiritually rich, live up to this Principle, viz. To suffer
rather then sin, when sin and suffering stand in competition, which Babes in
grace cannot do.

Secondly, It Is your Principle,

That Grace and Virtue is to be pursued after, for its own But pray tell me,
what will carry a Christian out to this Principle? Will a little grace carry a
man out to pursue after grace, for the beauty, holiness, excellency, and
spirituality that is in it? Alas, we see by daily experience, that it will
not do it: All other considerations put together, are little enough to draw
men on to pursue after grace for its native beauty and excellency. Many seek
Christ, but it is for loaves John 6. 26.
more then for love; and they pursue after the means of grace, not for the
beauty, excellency, and glory that is stamped upon the means, but one to
maintain his honor, and another to keep up his name, and another to bring in
credit or custom, and another to please his friends, and another to silence
his conscience, etc. But few there be (if any) but those that are rich in
grace, that are true to this Principle, that pursue after grace, for its own
beauty and excellency. It was a notable expression of David, who was a man rich
in grace, Psalm. 119. 140. Thy word is very pure, therefore thy servant loves
it. Oh! for a soul to love grace, and the word of grace, for its own
interest, for the holiness, purity, and glory of it, this speaks out the soul
to be rich in grace. So Paul, Phil. 3.
a man rich in grace, pursues after grace for its own interest, for the beauty
and excellency of it: He forgets what is behind, and presses forward after the
mark for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, that if by any
means he might attain to the resurrection of the dead. That is, to that
perfection that the dead shall reach to in the morning of the resurrection, etc.

The young Philosophers were very forward to get the precepts of their Sect,
and the rules of severity, that they might discourse with Kings and Nobles, not
that they might reform their own manners. Many Professors in this age are
like those There may be Malum opus in bono materia, as in Jehu's zeal, etc.
Philosophers, they are very industrious to get knowledge, that they may be
able to discourse, and that they may be eyed, owned, and honored among others,
for their knowledge and understanding, etc. But now souls that are rich in
grace, they labor after greater measures of grace, out of love to grace, and
because of an excellency that they see in grace. Grace is a very sparkling
Jewel, and he that loves it, and pursues after it for its own native beauty,
has much of it within him, etc.

Thirdly, It Is your Principle,

That men must subject themselves, and square all their Now what will make a
man live up to this Principle? will a little grace? Surely no. But great
measures of grace will. Isa. 8. 20.
Zacharias and Elizabeth were rich in grace, and they lived up to this
Principle, Luke 1. 5. They walked in all the Commandments of the Lord
blameless. The Apostles were rich in grace, and they lived up to this
Principle, 2 Cor, 1. 12. This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, we have had our
conversation in the world. So in 1 Thessalonians. 2. 10. Ye are witnesses, and God
also, how holily, justly, and unblameably, we have behaved our selves among you
that believe. Oh here are souls that live up to their Principles. A Christian
that is rich in grace, is excellent all over.

George, Prince of Anhalt, his family is said to have been (Ecclesia, Academia,
Curia,) A Church, a University, and a Court. A Christian that is rich in grace,
has a heart as large as his head, yea, a heart that is as large as the whole
will of God. Acts 13. 22. I have found David the Son of Jesse, a man after my
own heart, which shall fulfill all my will. In the Greek it is, All my wills;
to note, the universality, and (...).
sincerity of his obedience. Souls rich in grace, practice that themselves,
which they prescribe to others. Lessons of Music, and Copies, must not be read
only, but acted also: Souls rich in grace, are good at this, and they will be
good in all places, and cases: They are as good at the particular Duties of
Religion, as at those that are more general; they are good Fathers, and good
Masters, and good Husbands, as well as good Christians in a more general
sense. But now souls that have but a little grace, they are much in the
general Duties of Religion, but very defective in the particular Duties of
Religion, as sad experience does abundantly evidence. Those that have a blemish
in their eye, think the sky to be ever cloudy; and nothing is more common to
weak spirits, then to be criticizing and contending about others Duties, and to
neglect their own. But such that are rich in grace, make it their glory to
subject themselves to the rule of righteousness: As Baldasser a German
Minister, cried out, Let the word of the Lord come, let it come (says he) and
we will submit to it, if we had many hundred necks to put under. It must be
much grace that must enable a man freely, fully, and sweetly to subject
himself and his actions, to the word of the Lord.

Fourthly, It Is your Principle,

That you must deny your selves, your own profit, ease, pleasure, etc. for a
public good. And this the Scripture requires. It Is your Principle to deny your
selves, your own honor, pleasure, profit, etc. for a public advantage, when
your particular advantages stand in competition It Is a base and unworthy spirit
for a man to make himself the Center of all his actions. The very heathen man
could say, A man's Country, and his friend, and others challenge a great part of
him.
with the public: Now self must be laid by, and the public must carry the
day. Oh but will a little grace enable a man to live up to this Principle?
Woeful experience shows the contrary. I but now, take me a man that is rich in
grace, and he will live up to this golden Principle, as you may see in Nehem.
5. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Nehemiah was a man eminent in grace, and he chooses
rather to live upon his own Purse, then upon the public purse. Moreover, from
the time that I was appointed to be their Governor in the Land of Judah, from
the twentieth year, even unto the thirty-second year of Artaxerxes the King,
that is, twelve years, I and my brethren have not eaten the bread of the
Governor: Behold the former Governors that had been before me, were
chargeable unto the people, and had taken of them bread and wine, besides forty
Sheckles of silver, yea, even their servants did bear rule over the people, but
so did not I because of the fear of God; yea, also I continued in the work of
this wall, neither bought we any land, and all my servants were gathered
thither unto the work. Moreover, there were at my Table an hundred and fifty
of the Jews and Rulers, besides those that came in to us from among the
Heathen: And yet for all this (says he) I required not the bread of the
Governor, because the bondage was heavy upon the people. Oh! here was a brave
spirit indeed; he was far from enriching himself by others ruins, from
emptying others Purses, to fill his own. But he is dead, and it seems this
brave spirit is buried with him; there are few of his name, and fewer of his
spirit (if any) in this world; and therefore well might he pray, Think upon me
my God for good, according to all that I have done for this people: And
accordingly God did think upon him for good, and made him very famous and
glorious in his Generation. And that is a remarkable passage concerning Moses,
Numb. 14. 12. to 21. I will smite them with the Pestilence, and dis-inherite
them, and will make of thee a great Nation, and mightier then they, says God
to Moses. Therefore let me alone to destroy them, and cut them off, for they
are a rebellious Generation: And I will make thee a mighter Nation for honor,
riches, and power, then they. Nay, says Moses, this may not be Lord. Oh the
people must be spared, the people must be pardoned, and the people must have
thy presence with them, and rather then it should be otherwise, let my name,
Lord, be blotted out of the Book of life. Lord, I care not how ill it goes with
my particular, so long as it may go well with the general; let me dye, so
they may live: Can the self-seekers of our age, think seriously of this, and
not blush?

So Mordecai was a man of a brave public spirit, Esther 10. 3. Mordecai the
Jew was next unto King Ahassuerus, and great among the Jews, and accepted of
the multitude of his brethren, seeking the wealth of his people: Or as the
Hebrew has it, Seeking good for his people. That is, he made it his business
to seek their good. Christ also was full of grace, Christ healed others, but
was burt himself; he ^ed and filled others, but was hungry himself, etc.
and had a brave public spirit, he laid out himself, and laid down himself
for a public good, and so did Paul, etc. Few in our days are of his opinion
and mind, who was rather willing to beautify Italy, then his own house. That
Pilot dies nobly (says Seneca) who perishes in the storm with the Helm in
his hand. Such that seek themselves more then the public good, must be served
as Aesop did his fellow servant, he gave him warm water to drink, by which
means he vomited up the stolen Figgs. Friends, it is not a little grace that
will make a man prefer the public good, above his own particular good, but
much grace will; therefore labor to be rich in grace.

Fifthly, It Is your Principle,

That you are to do the Duties that God requires of you, and But pray tell me,
Will a little Grace enable a man to live up to this Principle? To do his duty,
and to leave issues and events to him to whom they belong? Surely no. Eccl. 9.
10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might, for there is
no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou
go. Mark, he does not say, what thy hand finds to do, for that may find a
thousand things; nor what thy heart finds to do, for that may find ten
thousand things; but what thy hand finds to do, that is, look what work God
cuts out to thy hand to do, that do with all thy might, for there is no
working in the grave. We are to do much good in a little time, we are made
here, and set to be a doing something that may do us good a thousand years
hence, yea, that may stand us in stead to eternity; our time is short, our task
is great. The Devil knows that his time is but short, and that is the reason
why he is so active and stirring, why he does outwork the Children of light, in
a quick dispatch of the deeds of darkness. Christians, don't deceive your
selves, it is not shows of grace, nor little measures of grace, that will
enable a man to live up to this Principle, but great measures of grace will, as
you may see in the 3 Children, We are not careful to answer thee O King in
this matter, if it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the
burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hands, O King. But
if not, be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor
worship the golden Image which thou have set up. We know our Duty, and that we
will keep to, what ever the issue and event be. So those Worthies, Ps. 44.
Though thou have sore broken us in the place of Dragons, and covered us with
the shadow of death, yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt
falsely in thy Covenant. Here was much of Christ and grace within. So in Acts
21. when Paul was to go up to Jerusalem to suffer, his friends by many tears
and Arguments labored to dissuade him, for fear of some sad issue and event
that would follow: But Paul rich in grace, answered, What mean ye to weep, and
break my heart, for I am ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at
Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus: I must go up to Jerusalem, and I am
willing to go up, though I dye for it. I, here is a soul that lives up to his
Principle; I, but now souls that are weak in grace (as Many of the English
have in this been like the Israelites, etc.
we have had large experience of it in our times) they are more taken up, and
busied about the events and issues of things, then they are with their own
Duties: When they should be a praying, a believing, a waiting, and acting for
God, they have been a questioning, and fearing what the issue and event of
this, and that, and the other thing would be: And indeed they have been high
and low, as secondary causes have wrought, which has made many of their lives
a very hell. But now those that are rich in grace, they say as once he did, Let
us be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for the
Cities of our God, and the Lord do that which 2 Samuel 10. 10, 11, 12.
seems him good. Let us do our duties, and let the Lord do as pleases him,
etc.

Sixthly, It Is your Principle,

That men are to be prepared, and to stand fast against all Many a valiant
person dares fight in a Battle, or a Duel who yet will be timorous and
fearful, if suddenly surprised in a midnight Alarm. Many precious souls,
when they have time to consider of the evil of sin, the holiness of God, the
eye of God, the honor of God, the glory of the Gospel, the joys of the
Saints, and the stopping of the mouths of sinners, will rather dye, then sin;
they will rather suffer any thing, then do the least thing that may be a
reproach to Christ: Oh! but when a sudden occasion or temptation is presented,
why, then they often fall, as David by chance spied Bathsheba washing her
self, and falls before the temptation, he is conquered and carried captive by
that sudden occasion. But that is a more comfortable and considerable passage
that you have concerning Joseph, in Genesis 49. 23, 24. The Archers sorely grieved
him (says the Text) and shot at him, and hated him, but his Bow abode in
strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the
mighty God of Jacob. Joseph never wanted counsel nor courage, when he was at
the worst. Souls rich in grace (usually) stand firm under the greatest and
suddenest pressures, assaults, and invasions, as you may see in Paul, 2 Cor. 1.
9, 12. and so the three Children; so Daniel; and so those Worthies, Heb. 11.
35. They would not accept of deliverance, that they might obtain a better
resurrection. Many sudden assaults and attempts were made upon them, their
enemies would feign have stormed them, and overcome them, sometimes by golden
offers, sometimes by terrible threats, but they are invincible, nothing stirs
them, nothing takes them. Really friends, it must be much grace that will make
a man to live up to this Principle; and there is nothing that speaks out more
the strength of Grace in a man, then his standing against sudden assaults and
invasions that by the Devil and the world are made upon him. You may talk of
this, but without much grace you will never be able to do it, etc.

Seventhly, and lastly, It Is your Principle,

That your hearts are to be ready for every work that God You are not to
choose your employment, neither are you to refuse any employment that God shall
put upon you: You are always to have an open ear, a ready hand, an obedient
heart, and a willing cheerful soul to fall in with what work or service
soever it is that God shall put upon you, this is your Principle. I, but tell
me, Christians, will a little grace enable a man to live up to this Principle?
I judge not. You are to stand ready to change your employment from better to
worse, if the Lord shall be pleased to order it so. You are to be ready to
change your Crown for a Cross; to change that employment that is honorable,
for that that is mean and low; and that which is more profitable, for that which
is less profitable; as it were from ruling of a Province, to the keeping of a
Heard; from being a Lord, to be a servant; from being a servant to great men,
to be a servant to the meanest servant, yea, to the poorest Beast. Certainly a
little grace will never enable a man bravely and sweetly to live up to this
Principle. Their hearts that are poor in grace, are like a wounded hand or
arm, which being but imperfectly cured, can only move one way, and cannot
turn to all postures, and all natural uses.

Weak Christians are very apt to three things.

To choose their mercies. To choose their crosses. And To choose their
employments.
They are often unwilling that God himself should choose out their way or
their work: But now souls that are rich in grace, they are at Gods beck and
check, they are willing that God shall choose their work and their way, they
are willing to be at his dispose, to be high or low, to serve, or to be served,
to be something, or to be nothing, etc. Now I beseech you, Christians, that you
would seriously and frequently remember this, That there is nothing in all the
world that is such an honor to God, and a glory to the Gospel, as for
Christians to live up to their Principles; nor nothing such a reproach to God,
and his ways, as this, for men to live below their Principles, and to act
contrary to their Principles. And you will never be able to live up to your
Principles, nor to live out your Principles, except you grow rich in grace;
therefore labor I say, labor as for life, to abound in Grace, etc.

Now the fourth Motive is this, Consider, That souls rich in Grace, are a
mighty blessing to the Land and place where they live.

There are no such blessings in the world, to Parishes, Cities, and Nations, as
those souls are, that are rich in Grace. Oh they are great blessings to all
places where they come; they are persons that are fit for the highest and
noblest employments; there is not the highest work that is too high for a man
that is rich in grace; not the hottest work that is too hot for a man rich in
grace; nor the lowest work below a man rich in Grace: Such a man will not say,
I would do it, but that it is below my place, my blood, my parts, my education.
May Christ have honor? May others have good? if so, I will do it, says the
soul that is rich in Grace. What ever comes of it, and bless God for the
opportunity. In Dan. 6. 3. Then this Daniel was preferred above the Presidents
and Princes, because an excellent spirit was in him, and the King thought to
set him over the whole Realm. Why was Daniel set upon the Throne? but because
there was a glorious excellent spirit in him, that fitted him for the highest
employment. So Joseph was a blessing to his Masters family, and the people
among whom he lived. No such blessings to people and places, as souls rich in
Grace. So in Nehem. 7. 2. I Such a one will be Pater patriae, Father of his
Country.
gave my Brother Hanani, and Hananiah the ruler of the place, charge over
Jerusalem, (and why he?) for he was a faithful man, and feared God above many.
Oh the wisdom, the prudence, the zeal, the courage, the compassion, the
patience, the self-denial that should be in Magistrates! There is a truth in
that old Maxim, (Magistratus virum indicat) Magistracy will try a man. None
fit to rule, but such that are rich in Grace. What a world of good may a man
do with worldly riches, in a Parish, in a City, in a Nation? but that is
nothing to the good that a man may do that is rich in grace: Oh the sins that
he may prevent! Oh the judgments that he may divert! Oh the favors and
blessings that he may draw down upon the heads and hearts of people! I presume
you forget not what a blessing Moses, Joseph, Job, Nehemiah, Mordecai, and
Daniel, proved to the people among whom they lived, and these were all rich in
grace. A man rich in wisdom, rich in faith, rich in goodness, etc. Oh! what
a blessing may he prove to ignorant souls, to staggering souls, to wandering
souls, to tempted souls, to deserted souls? etc. Look what the Sun is to us,
that may a soul rich in grace, be to others, etc. Oh friends! would you be
blessings to your families? would you be blessings to the City, to the Nation?
Oh then labor to be rich in Grace, and do not think it enough that you have
so much Grace as will keep you from dropping into hell, and that will bring you
to heaven; but labor to be rich in grace, and then you will prove indeed a
blessing to the place and Nation where you live.

The Romans when they did perceive any natural excellency As those that were
called among the Romans the Curii, and Fabrit^i, etc.
to be in any persons, though they were never so poor and mean, they would take
them from their dinners of Turnips, and Watercresses, to lead the Roman Army.
It Is true, that natural and moral indowments will enable men to do much, but
grace will enable men to do ten thousand times more. There Is no work too high
nor too hard for souls rich in Grace; and therefore as you would be choice
instruments in the Lords hand, and eminently serviceable in your Generations, O
labor to be rich in Grace. It Is not he that has most wit in his head, but he
that has most grace in his heart, that is most fit for Generation-work.

Fifthly, A rich measure of Grace will bear out your souls in several cases;
therefore labor to be rich in grace. A rich measure of Grace will bear out the
soul under The golden n^me of Ch^^stians, is but as an Ornament to Swine,
says Salvian. He means such as content them selves with an empty name.
great means of Grace. When a soul is spiritually rich, this will bear him out
under great means; such a one will be able to look God in the face with joy and
comfort; he can say, it is true Lord I have had more means then others, and lo,
I am grown richer then others: Thou have taken more pains with me, then with
others, and lo, I bring forth more fruit then others; my five Talents are
become ten: But a little grace will not bear men out under much means of Grace.

Again, A great measure of Grace will bear the soul out under a great name,
as well as under great means: For a man Quid tibi pr^dest nomen, ubi res n^n
invenitur? What will the name avail, where the thing is wanting, says
Aug^st^ne.
to have a great name to live, and yet to have but a little life, is a stroke
of strokes; to be high in name, and little in worth, is a very sad and sore
judgment; to have a name to be an eminent Christian, and yet to be poor in
faith, in love, in wisdom, in knowledge, etc. is the greatest unhappiness in
the world. This stroke is upon many in these days; but that which is saddest
of all, is this, they feel it not, they observe it not; but now he that is
rich in grace, has something within, that will bear him out under a great
name in the world.

Again, A great measure of Grace will bear you out under great desires, as
well as under a great name. A man that is rich in Grace, may ask what he
pleases, he is one much in with God, and God will deny him nothing; the best of
the best is for this man, he may have any thing, he may have every thing that
heaven affords, is able to improve much, and therefore he may ask much, and
have it.

'Twas a sweet saying of one, O Lord, I never come to thee but by thee; I never
go from thee without thee.

Sozonem says of Apollonius, That he never asked any thing of God, but he had
it.

And another speaking of Luther, says, (Hic homo potuit apud Deum quod voluit)
He could have what he would of God. Rich men may long for this and that, and
have it, they have something that will fetch it, but poor men may not. Oh, now
who would not labor as for life, to be rich in Grace? Oh this will bear you
out under great means, and under great names, and under great desires;
therefore rest not satisfied with a little Grace.

But then sixthly, and lastly, Souls rich in Grace are the honor of Christ,
and the glory of Christianity.

As it is the glory of the stock, when the Grafts grow and thrive in it, even so
it is the glory of Christ when those that are ingrafted into him, thrive, and
grow: This declares to all the world, that Christ keeps a good house, and that
he does not feed his Children with trash, but with the choicest delicates, that
he is open-handed, and free-hearted. It Is the glory of the father, when the
Child grows rich under him; and the glory of the Master, when the Servant
grows rich under him; and so it is the glory of Christ, when poor souls grow
rich under him. The name of Christ, and the honor of Christ is kept up in this
world, by souls that are rich in grace; they are the persons that make others
think well, and speak well of Christ. You may at your leisure read the first
and second Epistles to the Thessalonians, and there you shall see what an
honor they were to the Lord Jesus, and the Gospel, who abounded in spiritual
riches. Such Christians that are like to Pharoah's lean Kine, reproach three
at once, God, the Gospel, and their Teachers: And this Age is full of such
Christians. It Is your greatest work in this world, to keep up the honor and
the glory of the Lord, and this you can never, you will never do, except you
labor to be rich in Grace: Let others labor for the meat that perishes, do
you labor for that which endures to everlasting life. When you come to dye,
and when you come to make up your Accounts, 'twill never be a grief (but a joy)
unto you, that you have made it your greatest business and work in this world,
to be rich in Grace.

But here you may say,

What Means must we use, that we may grow rich in Grace?

I Answer.

FIrst, Let no discouragements take you off from laboring to be enriched with
spiritual riches.

A soul that would be spiritually rich, must be Divinely resolved, that come
what come can, he will hold on in the use of means that he may be rich with the
riches of Christ. Josh. 24. 15.
Joshua was resolute in this Point, Choose you whom you will serve, whether the
Lord, or those other Gods that your fathers served, as for my part, I and my
house will serve the Lord. Luke 13. 24. Strive to enter in at the straight
Gate. The Greek Agenizesthe. Many men are like Cicero, not thoroughly resolved
in themselves, whether to follow Pompey, o^ Caesar; the riches of this world,
or the riches of another world, such men will still be poor.
word signifies, To strive with all your might, with all your strength, to
strive even to an Agony, to strive as they did for the Garlands, in the
Olympic Games. The word here used, seems to alude to their striving for the
Garland, where they put out themselves to the utmost. So in John 6. 27. Labor
not for the meat that perishes, but for that which indures to everlasting
life, which the Son of man shall give unto you, for him has God the father
sealed.

I have read of one, that did not fear what he did, nor what he suffered, so
he might get riches, For, says he, men do not ask how good one is, or how
gracious one is, but how rich one is. Oh Sirs! the day is a coming, when God
will ask how rich your souls are, how rich you are in faith, in wisdom, in
knowledge, in fear, etc. and not how rich you are in money, or in Jewels, or in
Land, or in Goods, but how rich are you in Grace? which should provoke your
souls to strive in the face of all discouragements to be rich in Grace. What
will not the Merchant do, and the Mariner do for these temporal riches? Oh
the dangers, the hazards, the tempests, the storms, the deaths that they run
through for earthly riches, which are never without their sting! And shall not
Christians labor in the face of all oppositions, after spiritual riches?

It is reported of Nevessan the Lawyer, that he should say, He that will not
venture his body, can never be valiant; and he that will not venture his soul,
will never be rich. I am sure that man that will not venture, and venture hard
in the face of all discouragements, to be spiritually rich, will never be rich,
he may be good in the maine, and may go to heaven in a storm; but he will
never be rich in spiritualls, that will not venture himself to the uttermost
for the gain of spiritual riches.

Secondly, Be fixed under a Christ-exalting, and a souleinriching Ministry.

Under that man's Ministry that makes it his business (not a thing by the bye,
but his business, his work, not to tickle the ear, to please the fancy, but)
to enrich the soul, to win the soul, and to build up the soul. 2 Timothy 4. 3.
For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine, but after
their own lusts shall they heap up to themselves teachers, having itching
ears. This Age, yea, this City is full of such slight, light, mad souls, that
love nor like nothing but what is empty and airy.

Jnnius confesses, That in his time there was one confessed, that he had spent
above twenty years in trying Religions, pretending that Scripture. Try all
things, and hold fast that which is good. It Is sad to see how many in our
days, under pretenses of Angelical seize, make it their business to
enrich men's heads with high, empty, airy notions, instead of enriching their
souls with saving truths; if these are not strangers to that wisdom that is
from above, I know nothing. Prove, 11. 13. He that wins souls is wise. The
Hebrew Velokeahh. He is the best Preacher, not that tickles the ear, but that
breaks the heart. Non qui aures ^e^ige* it, sed qui corpupigerit.
word signifies to catch souls by using all Art, and industry, as Fowlers do
to take Birds: No wisdom to that which wins souls from sin, and the world,
and that wins souls to Christ, and holiness; no teaching to this. Remember
this, you will never be rich in grace, if you care not who you hear, nor what
you hear. That Christ that commands you to take heed how you hear, commands you
also to take heed who you hear: And every soul won to God, is as a new Pearl
added to a Ministers Crown, etc.

But you will say to me,

How should we know which is a soule-inriching Ministry,

Take these three Rules.

First, Judge not of a soule-inriching Ministry, by the voice of the Minister,
nor by the multitude of hearers that follow him, nor by his affected tone, nor
by his Rhetoric, and flashes of wit, but by the holiness, heavenlinesse, and
spirituallnesse of the matter.

Some Preachers affect Rhetorical strains, they seek abstrucities, Many
Ministers are like empty Orators, that have a flood of words, and a drop of
m^tter. Multa loquuntur and nihil di^unt.
and love to hover and soar aloft in dark and cloudy expressions, and so shoot
their Arrows over their hearers heads, instead of bettering their hearers
hearts. Gay things in a Sermon, are only for men to gaze upon, and admire:
What are high strains, and flashes of wit, new-minted words, and phrases, but
like gay weeds, and blew-bottles to the good Corn? Truth is like Solomon's
Spouse, All glorious within: She is most beautiful, when most naked, as Adam
was in Innocence. Non quanta el^quentia sed quanta evidentia. Aug.


The Oracle would have Phillip of Macedon use silver Lances in winning an
impregnable Fort, etc. but Ministers must not use golden sentences, strong
lines, froth of wit: It is Iron, and not gold, that kills in the Encounter;
it is the steel Sword, not the golden, that wins the field, etc.

Secondly, Judge of it by its revealing the whole Council of God, the whole
will of God revealed in his word.

In Acts 20. 27. For I have not shunned to declare unto you the whole Council
of God. Some there be that make it Optimus text^arius est optimus. Theologus.
their business only to advance the glory of Christ, and to darken the glory
of the father; and some cry up the glory of the Father, and yet cast clouds and
darkness upon the glory of the Son; and what dirt and scorn is cast upon the
spirit by many vain, blasphemous persons, in these times, is notoriously
known; and if these men are not far from declaring Aglu^aidas never relished
any dish better, then wha^ was distasted by others. So do serious experienced
Saints relish those very truths best, that such corrupt teachers distaste most,
etc.
the whole Council and will of God, I know nothing. Christ must be held out in
all his Offices, for they all tend to the enriching of poor souls, to the
adding of Pearls to a Christians Crown. And clearly, it is sad to consider how
many there be that cry up one Office, and cry down another: Some cry up the
Kingly Office of Christ, but mind not his Prophetical Office; and some cry up
his Prophetical Office, but trample upon his Kingly Office; and some cry up
both his Kingly and Prophetical Office, and yet make slight of his Priestly
Office. Christians, fix your selves under his Ministry that gives the Father
his due, the Son his due, and the Spirit his due, that makes it his business
to open the treasures, and the riches both of the one and the other, and to
declare to you the whole will of God; for many there be Romans 1. 18.
that withold the word in unrighteousness, and that will only acquaint you
with some parts of the will of God, and keep you ignorant of other parts, whose
condemnation will be great, as well as just, etc. Melius est ut nos
reprehendant gramatici quam ut non intelligunt populi. Aug. in Psalm 138.
Christ and his Apostles labored to make men Christians, and not Critics.


Thirdly, and lastly, You may judge of it by its coming nearest to the Ministry
of Christ, and his Apostles.

There was no Ministry so soule-inriching, and soule-winning, as the Ministry
of Christ and his Apostles; Oh the thousands that were brought in by one
exercise! Let men of frothy wits say what they will, there are no Preachers to
these that come nearest in their Ministry, to Christ and his Apostles.
(Loquamur verba Scripturae, etc. said that incomparable man, Peter Hamus) Let
us speak the very words of Scripture, (for so did Christ, the Prophets, and
Apostles) let us make use of the Language of the Holy Ghost, and for ever
abominate those that profanely disdain at the stately plainness of Gods
blessed Book; and that think to correct the Divine wisdom and eloquence,
with their own infancy and Sophistry. Gods holy things ought to be handled
with fear and reverence, rather then with wit and dalliance. Spiritual
niceness is the next degree to unfaithfullnesse. No Ministry to that which
comes nearest to Christ, etc.

The Third Direction is this, If ever you would be rich in grace, be rich in
spiritualls, then keep humble.

Psalm. 25. The humble he will teach his way, and the meek he will guide in
judgment. James 4. He resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble. He
sets himself in battle array against the proud, as the Greek has it, but he
gives grace to Antitassetai.
the humble. He poures grace into an humble soul, as men do water or wine
into an empty vessel. Of all souls humble souls do most prize spiritual
riches; of all souls they most improve spiritual riches; of all souls they
are most fearful of loosing spiritual riches. In Isa. 57. 15. Thus says the
high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, with him will I dwell that is of
an humble and contrite spirit, and that trembles Sh^^hen. Humility as the
Violet, though the lowest, yet the sweetest of Flowers.
at my word. The word there rendered dwell, is an Hebrew Participle, and
signifies Dwelling. Thus says the high and lofty one, dwelling with him that
is of an humble and a contrite spirit. The word notes to us thus much, That God
will not dwell with an humble man, as a wafairing man dwells with his
relations, a few nights and away. Dwelling notes a constant, and not a
transient act of God; God will for ever keep house with the humble soul, when
once they meet, they never part: There is no such way to be rich, as to be poor
and low in our own eyes; this is the way to enjoy his company in whom all
treasures are.

Fourthly, Improve the riches that you have.

Improve that knowledge, that faith, that light, that love that you have. Those
that had two Talents, did by the improvement of them, gain other two; and
those that had five, did by the improvement of them, gain ten. Prove. 10. 4.
The diligent hand makes rich. Take hold of all opportunities to enrich your
souls with spiritual riches. Men will The ^ad^x H^r^ts, is to ^ dig in the
ground for gold, whence (...), fine precious gold Prove. 16. 16. The neglect of
golden soul enriching opportunities, has made many a man's life a hell; yea,
many a Courtiers life a ^ell, as all know, that know any thing of History, etc.
easily, readily, greedily, and unweariedly close with all opportunities,
wherein they may get earthly riches, and why should not you be as diligent in
taking hold of all opportunities to enrich your precious souls? Is not the
soul more then raiment, more then friends, more then relations, more then
life, yea, more then all? And why then do you not labor to enrich your
souls? Thou were better have a rich soul under a threadbare Coat, then a
threadbare soul under a silk or golden Coat. If he be a Monster among men,
that makes liberal provision for his Servant, his slave, and starves his wife,
what a Monster is he that makes much provision for his baser part, but none for
his noble part? A sloathfull heart in the things of God, is a heavy judgment.
Prove. 4. 31. I went by the field of the sloathfull, and by the Vineyard of the
man void of understanding, (Or as the Hebrew has it, The man that had no
heart, that is, to make use of his Vineyard) and lo it was all grown over
with thorns and nettles, etc. O the lusts, the wickednesses that will overgrow
sloathfull, sluggish souls! Spiritual sluggards are subject to the saddest
strokes: Oh the deadly sins, the deadly temptations, the deadly judgments
that spiritual sluggards will unavoidably fall under! None such an enemy to
himself, none such a friend to Satan, as the spiritual sluggard. It Is sad to
think how the riches of Christ, the riches of Consolation, the riches of
Justification, the riches of Glorification are brought to many men's doors, and
yet they have no hearts to embrace them; no judgment to this. Wherefore is
there a price in the Prove. 17. 16. Wealth without wit is i^l bestowed, etc.
hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing he has no heart to it? Well,
spiritual sluggards, remember this, When your consciences are awakened, this
will be a sword in your souls, that you might have been saved, you might have
been spiritually and eternally enriched, but that you have trifled and fooled
away golden opportunities, and your own salvation.

Fifthly, Walk uprightly, holily, and obedientially.

If ever you would be spiritually rich, look to your walking; it is not the
knowing soul, nor the talking soul, but the close-walking soul, the
obedientiall soul, that is in spiritualls the richest soul. Others may be
rich in notions, but none so rich in spiritual experiences, and in all holy
and heavenly grace, as close-walking Christians. Psalm. 84. 11. When my heart is
coldest and highest, I present God to my self under the notion of his greatness;
but when my heart is loose and fearing, then I present God to my soul under the
notion of his goodness, says Luther.
The Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withold from
them that walk uprightly. The upright walker shall be both of his Court, and
Council, he shall know any thing, and have any thing. In John 14. 21, 23.
compared. If any man love me, he will keep my Commandments, and I will love
him, and my father will love him, (what then?) we will make our abode with him,
and will manifest our selves to him. Certainly they cannot be poor, that enjoy
such Guests as these; they must needs be full, who enjoy them that are
fulness it self; God and Christ are overflowing Fountains, and holy souls
find it so.

Sixthly, Be most in with those souls that are spiritually rich.

Let them be thy choycest Companions, that have made Christ their chiefest
Companion. Do not so much eye the outsides of men, as their inside, look most
to their internal worth. Many persons have an eye upon the external Garb of
this and that Professor, but give me a Christian that minds the internal worth
of persons; that makes such as are most filled with the fulness of God, to be
his choicest, and his chiefest Companions.

In Psalm. 16. My goodness extends not to thee, says David (now David speaks
in the person of Christ) but to the Saints that are in the earth, in whom is
all my delight. There are Saints, and there are excellent Saints; now those are
the excellent ones, that are most rich in Heavenly Treasures; and these you
should make your bosom friends, your choycest Companions. Prove. 13. 20. He
that walks with wise men shall be wise. That is, he shall be more wise, more
humble, more holy, and more abounding in all spiritual riches. The word Rolech
that is rendered walk, is an Hebrew Participle, and signifies walking; to note
to us, that it is not he that talks with the wise, nor he that commends the
wise, nor he that takes a step, or two, or three with the wise, that shall be
wise, but he that gives up himself to the society and company of the wise,
that shall be more and more wise, more and more gracious, more and more holy.
He that comes where sweet Spices and Ointments are stirring, does carry away
some of the sweet savor, though himself think not of it. The Spouses lips drop
as the Honeycomb, Cant. 4. 10. the tongue of the just is as choice silver, he
scaters pearls, he throws abroad treasures where he comes. Prove. 15. 7. The
lips of the wise disperse knowledge. (The Hebrew word is a Metaphor from
Jezaru, from Zarah.
scattering abroad with a Fan; or from Seeds-men scattering abroad of their
seed in the furrows of the field.) They scatter their light, their love, their
Experiences, among those with whom they converse, as Seeds-men scatter their
seed in the field. Christ says his Spouses lips are like a thread of The very
He^then man could say, (Quando sapiens loquitur aulea animi aperdit) When a
wise man speaks, he opens the rich treasures and wardrobe of his mind, etc.
scarlet, with talking of nothing but a crucified Christ; and thin like a
thread, not swelled with other vain and wicked discourses.

The old zealous Primitive Christians did so frequently, and so effectually
mind and talk of the Kingdom of Heaven, and of the riches and glory of that
State, that the Ethnicks begun to be a little jealous that they affected the
Roman Empire: when alas their ambition was of another and a nobler nature.
Psalm. 37. 30. The mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom, and his tongue
talks judgment; for the Law of the Lord is in his heart. Prove. 12. 18. The
tongue of the wise is health, his tongue is a Tree of life, whose leaves are
medicinable. No way to be rich in spiritualls, like being much in with such
precious souls, whose tongues drop marrow and fatness.

Utterance is a gift, and dumb Christians are blameworthy, as well as dumb
Ministers. We should all strive to a holy ability and dexterity of savoury
discourse. If Christ should come to many of us, as he did to his two Disciples
(in that last of Luke) on Sabboath-dayes, and other times, and say to us, as to
them, What manner of communication had ye, or have ye? Oh! with what palenesse
of face, and sadness of countenance should we look? The story of Loquere ut
videam, is common, Speak that I may see thee, said Socrates to a fair Boy.
When the heart is full, it overfloweth in speech; we know Metals by their
tinkling, and men by their talking. Happy was that tongue in the Primitive
time, that could sound out Aliquid Davidicum, Any thing of David's doing; but
much more happy is he that speaks out Aliquid Christi, Any thing of Christ,
from experience.

Seventhly, If ever you would be spiritually rich, Then take heed of eating, or
tasting of forbidden fruit.

This stripped Adam of his Crown, of his Jewels, and of all his rich Ornaments
in a moment; and of the richest and Becanus tells us, That the Tree of
Knowledge was Ficus indica, and that it bears many leaves, and little fruit;
and so it is with those that taste and eat of forbidden fruit, etc.
greatest Prince that ever breathed, made him the miserablest Beggar that ever
lived. O take heed of tasting of poison, of eating of poison. A person that
has eat poison, will not thrive, let him take never such wholesome food; the
choycest Cordials will not increase blood, and spirits, and strength, but the
man will throw up all. Poor souls that have been tasting of poison, are apt
to find fault with the Minister, and sometimes with this and that as the cause
of their not growing rich in spiritualls: When alas, the only cause is their
eating of poison. These are like him in Seneca, that having a thorn in his
foot, complained of the roughness of the way, as the cause of his limping.
Sirs, it is not the Minister, nor this, nor that, but your eating of forbidden
fruit, that is the cause of your non-thriving in spiritualls. Sin is the souls
sickness, and nothing more prejudices growth, then sickness. Christians, if
ever you would be trees, not only having the leaves of honor, but the fruits
of righteousness, then take heed of sin, abhor it more then hell, and fly from
it as from your deadliest enemy, etc.

Eighthly, and lastly, Be sure to maintain a secret trade with God.

You know many men come to be very rich in the world, Acts 10. 3, 9. Genesis 21.
33. Exodus 14. 15. 1 Samuel 1. 13.
by a secret trade: Though many have not such an open trade as others, yet they
have a more secret Trade, and by that they gain very great Estates, as many of
you here in London know by experience. Take it friends as an experienced truth,
there is no such way under heaven, to be rich in spiritualls, as by driving of
a secret Trade heavenwards. It Is true, it is good for men to attend upon this,
and that, and the other public administration; for in all Divine
administrations God shows his beauty and glory; I, but such that delight to be
more Psalm. 63. 2, 3. Psalm. 27. 4. Psalm. 84. 10.
upon the public stage, then in the Closet, will never be rich in spiritualls;
they may grow rich in notions, but they will never grow rich in gracious
experiences. Oh! God loves to see a poor Christian to shut his closet door,
and then to open Mat 6. 6.
his bosom, and pour out his soul before him. God has very discoveries for
souls that drive a secret Trade. The best wine, the best dainties and
delicates, are for such: And I never knew any man or woman in my life, that was
richer in grace, then those that were much in closet communion with God. Much
of a Christians spiritual strength lies in secret prayer, as Sampson's did in
his hair. Nothing charms Satan, and weakens sin, like this: Secret Prayers
are the pillars of smoke wherein the soul ascends to God out of the
wilderness of this world. Secret prayer is Jacobs Ladder, where you have God
discending down into the soul, and the soul sweetly ascending up to God. No
way to be rich in spirituals like this, therefore be sure to maintain and keep
up a secret Trade between God and your own souls: Oh let God hear often of
you in secret. In Cant. 7. 5. The King is held in the Galleries. Oh! in the
secret walks, the soul meets with the King of glory: Oh! there the soul hangs
upon Christ, there the soul sucks and draws virtue from Christ, and there the
soul is made rich with the riches of Christ, Christ is much delighted and
taken with secret prayer. Cant. 2. 14. O my Dove that art in the clefts of the
rock, in the secret places of the stairs (that art got into a hole) let me
hear thy voice, let me see thy countenance; for sweet is thy voice, and thy
countenance is lovely. Secret meals are very fatning, and secret duties are
very soule-inriching. Christians, set more close to this work, and if you don't
thrive by it, trust me no more. And thus you see by what means you may grow
rich in grace.

The third thing I propounded to speak to, was,

Some Propositions concerning Spiritual Riches. Some Propositions concerning
spiritual Riches.

And the first Proposition is this.

ALL that do grow rich in Grace, they grow rich gradually. The Sun ascends by
degrees; Children, Plants, and Trees, they grow by degrees; so do Saints in
spiritualls. It Is true, many men as to temporalls, by the death of some friend,
or this or that providence, grow rich on a sudden: But no soul that is rich
in grace, but grows rich gradually. In Prove. 4. 18. But the path of the just
is like the shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day. He
proceeds from virtue to virtue, until at length he shines like the Sun in its
strength. And so in Mal. 4. 2. Unto you that fear my name, shall the Sun of
righteousness arise with healing under his wings; and you shall go forth and
grow up as Calves of the stall. Hos. 14. 5, 1, 7. I will be as the dew unto
Israel, he shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon. His
branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the Olive Tree, and his smell
as Lebanon. They that dwell under his shadow shall return, they shall revive
as the corn, and grow as the Vine: The sent thereof shall be as the wine of
Lebanon. I shall but hint at this now, because I have spoken more fully to it
already, etc.

The second Proposition is this.

Few or none are rich in all Graces. There are some men in the world that are
generally rich, that are rich in money, and rich in land, and rich in goods.
But where you have one man that is a general rich man in this sense, you have
ten thousand that are only rich in some one thing, as Money, Goods, or Land,
etc. so it is here. It Is a hard thing (if possible) to find a soul that is
generally rich: That is, rich in every grace, that is rich in faith, and rich in
wisdom, and rich in love, and rich in patience, etc. Abraham was rich in
Faith, and Job was rich in Patience, and Moses was rich in Meekness, and David
was rich in zeal, etc. but none of these were rich in every grace. And so in
these days you may find one Christian rich in one grace, and another Christian
rich in another grace, but where will you find a Christian that is rich in
every grace? Such that are rich in some graces, are yet very defective and lame
in other graces. No grace grows alike in all Saints. In the Parable some
brought forth thirty, some sixty, some a hundred, etc.
The Saints once at Rome were richer in wisdom and knowledge, then the Saints
at Thessalonica, Romans 15. 14. And the Saints at Thessalonica were richer in
faith, love, patience, and charity, then the Saints at Rome, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 4. 2.
8. compared with 2 Epist. 1. 3, 4. It is with Saints, as with sinners, one
sinner excells in one vice, another in another vice: So one Saint excells in
one virtue, and another in another virtue; one is rich in joy, in comfort,
another is rich in humility, in fear, another in faith and hope, and another
in love, etc. And mark how this arises.

It arises sometimes from hence, that every Saint does endeavor to excel in
that particular grace that is most opposite to his bosom sin: Now every Saints
bosom sin is not alike; it may be pride is one man's bosom sin, and hypocrisy
another man's bosom sin, etc. Now it is the very nature of grace to make a man
strive to be most eminent in that particular grace that is most opposite to his
bosom sin, and upon this account it comes to pass that one is rich in one
grace, and another in another.

Again, Some Saints have frequent occasions to act and exercise such and such
graces; others are called forth to act such and such graces; now the more any
particular grace is acted, the more that particular grace is increased;
frequent acts cause a stronger habit both in graces and in sins. If all
Christians should be rich in all graces, what difference would there be between
heaven and earth? what need would there be of Ordinances? and when would
Christians long to be dissolved, and to be with Christ? etc.

The third Proposition is this.

Souls may be rich in Grace, and yet not know it, and yet not perceive it. The
Child is Heir to a Crown, to a great Estate, but The Sun ascends with out
perception, and so it is often in this supernatural motion, etc. The Greeks
derive their word for desire, from a root that signifies to burn. Now if one
should heap never so much fuel upon a fire, i^ would not quench it, but kindle
it the more. The Application is easy. Genesis 28.
knows it not; Moses his face did shine, and others saw it, but he perceived
it not: So many a precious soul is rich in grace, and others see it, and know
it, and bless God for it, and yet the poor soul perceives it not: Now
because a right understanding of this, may be of much use to some sadded
dejected souls, I will show you how this comes to pass.

First, Sometime it arises from the souls strong desires of spiritual riches.
The strength of the souls desires after spiritual riches, does often take
away the very sense of growing spiritually rich. Many covetous men's desires are
so strongly carried forth after earthly riches, that though they do grow rich,
yet they cannot perceive it, they cannot believe it: It Is just so with many a
precious Christian, his desires after spiritual riches are so strong, that
they take away the very sense of his growing rich in spiritualls: Many
Christians have much worth within them, but they see it not. 'Twas a good man
that said, The Lord was in this place, and I knew it not, etc.

Again, This arises sometimes from men's neglecting the casting up of their
Accounts. Many men thrive, and grow rich, and yet by neglecting the casting up
of their Accounts, they cannot tell whether they go backward, or forward: It Is
so with many precious souls, they grow in grace, and are Seneca reports of one
Sexius, that he would every night ask himself these three Questions. 1 What
evil have thou healed this day. 2 What vice have thou stood against this day?
3 In what part art thou bettered this day? etc.
spiritually rich, and yet by neglecting the casting up of their accounts, they
do not know it, they do not perceive it, etc.

Again, Sometimes it arises from the souls too frequent casting up of its
Accounts. If a man should cast up his Accounts once a week, or once a month,
he may not be able to discern that he does grow rich, and yet he may grow
rich; but let him but compare one year with another, and he shall clearly see
that he does grow rich. Though most are to blame for neglecting the casting up
of their accounts, yet some are to blame for casting up their accounts too
often; for by this means they are not able to perceive their spiritual growth,
and so can neither be so thankful, nor so cheerful as otherwise they might.
Let there be some considerable time between your casting up of your Accounts,
and you will find that your souls are grown rich, though for the present you
perceive it not.

But then again, Sometimes it arises from the souls mistake in casting up of
its accounts. The soul many times mistakes, it is in a hurry, and there the
soul puts down ten for a hundred, and a hundred for a thousand; as sometimes
men in hurrying over their Books, they slip and make mistakes, and so they
think there is nothing got, whereas indeed there is much got, and in the close
they shall find it so. Many a gracious soul many times, takes a great deal of
gra^e for a little, and a little grace, for no grace. Look as Hypocrites put
down their Counters for gold, their pence for pounds, and always prize
themselves above the Market: So sincere souls do often put down their pounds
for pence, their thousands for hundreds, and still prize themselves below the
Market, etc.

The fourth Proposition is this.

That Saints must endeavor to grow rich in every Grace. It Is the duty and the
glory of Saints, to endeavor to grow rich in every grace. So the Apostle, 2
Pet. 1. 5. to 12. Add to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, etc. It is
the work, the duty, the glory of a Christian, to be still adding one grace to
another. So in Chap. 3. 18. Grow in Grace (that is, in every grace, but more
particularly and specially) in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

Grow in Grace, that is, grow in love, in faith, in humility, in meekness,
etc. but especially in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior, because that was
a special remedy against the errors of those times, etc. All the graces that
be in you, are weak, and therefore you had need to strengthen them all.

Again, You have the seeds of all corruptions in you, and is there any way to
be rid of every sin, but by thriving in every grace?

Again, You have opportunities as well to thrive in one grace, as in another.

Again, Will not Satan labor might and maine to keep your graces low and
poor? You never hurt him less, you never honor Christ less, you never mind
your work less, then when grace is weak and low: This he knows, and therefore
labors to keep your graces down*

Again, Are not you liable to several changes in this world? As to be rich
and poor, exalted and abased, now to relieve, and anon to be relieved; now
well, and anon sick; Whilst Pompey p^ospered, and Rome flourished, Cato stoutly
held and defended a Divine providence; but when he saw Pompey overthrown by
Caesar, his body cast upon the shore without honor of burial, and himself
exposed to the danger of Caesar's Army, he changed his opininion, denying tha^
there was a Divine providence, but that all things fell out by chance* etc.
now strong, and anon weak; now in storms, and anon in calmes; now tempted,
and anon delivered; now in one condition, and anon in another condition; now
up, now down; now forward, now backward, etc. Now pray tell me, does not the
several cha^ges and variety of providence that we meet with in this world,
bespeak us to be rich (not in some) but in every grace? Don't a state of
prosperity bespeak a man to be rich in wisdom, rich in humility, rich in
love, and rich in compassion? that his heart may be kept close to God in that
state, and that he may do nothing unworthy of God, who has done so much for
him: And now when God shall change the manner of his administrations toward
such a man, when God shall put out his Candle, pull off his Robes, and cloth
him with rags, and set him, with Job, upon the dunghill, don't this condition
bespeak much patience, much contentation, much self-denial, much faith? how
else will this man bravely bear up, when God shall write such bitter things
against him, and pass the sentence of death upon his nearest, and his dearest
comforts? If a man be not rich in one grace, as well as in another, when God
shall bring changes upon him, and pour him from vessel to vessel, his life
will be a burden, a hell unto him, etc.

Again, Consider this, growing rich in every grace renders a Christian most
lovely and beautiful in grace. As a growth in all the members of the body,
renders the body most lovely and beautiful; the perfect beauty and comeliness
of the body rises from the symmetry and fitness of the parts unto one another.
Rare and excellent beauty arises from the comeliness of all parts; if one
part be comely, and another deformed, then there is no perfect beauty. Well,
remember this, there is no such beautiful Christians, as those that grow rich
in every grace: Oh! they are the beauty of Christ, the honor of the Gospel,
and the glory of Christianity.

And so much for the fourth Proposition, viz. That we must labor to be rich in
every Grace.

The fifth Proposition that I shall lay down, is this.

Saints should labor more particularly, and more especially to be rich in
Faith. Though it is of concernment to believers, to be rich in every grace, yet
it is of special concernment to them to labor to be rich in this particular
grace of faith. In Jude, verse. 20. Building up your selves in your most holy
faith. It Is not enough to have faith, but they must build up themselves, and
build up one another in their most holy faith.

There are three things that the Scripture calls precious.

First, The Blood of Christ. In 1 Pet. 1. 19. Ye are not redeemed with silver,
and gold, but with the Precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish,
and without spot.

Secondly, The Promises are called Precious Promises. 2 Pet. 1. 4. Whereby are
given unto us exceeding great and Precious Promises.

Thirdly, Faith is called Precious Faith. Verse. 1. Unto them that have obtained
like Precious Faith with us. Now though it be of concernment for every Saint to
labor to be rich in every grace; yet more especially, and more particularly to
be rich in this Grace of faith, and that upon this account that follows.

First, Because that Faith is the souls greatest and choycest fence against
her worst enemies.

In Ephesians. 6. 16. Above all, take the shield of Faith, whereby ye may be able
to quench all the firey darts of the wicked.

Above all, take the shield of faith. Neglect no part of your Armor, but above
all look to the shield of Faith. Look what the shield is to the body, that is
Faith to a believers soul, to secure him against all the fierce and fiery
darts of Satan.

It is reported of Satan, that he should say of a learned man, Tu me semper
vincis.
Thou do always overcome me: When I would exalt and promote thee, thou
keep thy self in humility; and when I would throw thee down, thou liftest
thy self up in Assurance of faith. Faith makes the soul invincible, it makes
the soul victorious, it leads captivity captive, it binds Satan in chains, it
foiles him at every weapon; and therefore above all labor to be rich in faith.

Secondly, Growth in faith will advance the growth of all other Graces.

All other graces thrive in the soul as faith thrives, and no otherwise; be
rich in this, and be rich in all; be weak in this, and be weak in all. Faith
has an influence upon all other graces; it is like a silver thread, that runs
through a Chain of Pearls, it puts strength and vivacity into all other
graces. You never knew a man rich in any grace, that has not been rich in
faith. Every man's hope, joy, fear, love, humility, patience, etc. is as his
faith is. In Heb. 11. 1. Faith is the evidence of things not seen, and the
substance of things hoped for. Or as the Greek has it, The subsistence of
(...).
things hoped for. All other graces live upon faiths cost and charge. Look what
the breast is to the Child, wings to the bird, Oil to the wheels, and the
soul to the body, that is faith to all other graces in the soul of man.

It is reported of the Crystal, that it has such a virtue in it, that the
very touching of it quickens other stones, and puts a lustr^ and a beauty upon
them. I am sure it is true of faith, there is such a Divine virtue and power in
faith, that it will quicken and cast a luster and a beauty upon all other
graces in the soul of man; and therefore you should labor as for life, to be
rich in this particular grace of faith.

Thirdly, Consider this, Of all Graces* that be in the soul of man, faith is
the most useful grace, and therefore you should above all labor to be rich in
faith.

It Is a Christians right eye, without which he cannot see for Christ; it is his
right hand, without which he cannot do for Christ; it is his tongue, without
which he cannot speak for Christ; it is his very vital spirits, without which
he cannot act for Christ.

Some say that King Midas had obtained of the Gods, that whatsoever he touched
should be turned into gold. I am sure that whatever faith touches, it turns
into gold; that is, into our good. If our faith touches the Promises, it turns
them into our good; whatsoever faith lays its hand upon, it appropriates to it
self, and turns it into the souls good. If Psalm 63. 1. Psalm. 89. 26. John 20
28.
faith looks upon God, it says, This God is my God for ever and ever, and he
shall be my guide unto death. When it looks upon Christ, it says with Thomas,
My Lord, and my God. When it looks upon the Crown of righteousness, it says,
This Crown is laid up for me, etc. Faith is bread to nourish us, and wine to
cheer us, and a Cordial to strengthen us. Faith is a sword to defend us, a
guide to direct us, a staff to support us, a plaster to heal us, a friend to
comfort us, and a golden key to open heaven unto us. Faith of all graces is the
most useful grace to the soul of man. Without faith it is impossible Heb. 11.
6.
to please God. All those services are lost, wherein faith has not a hand. You
may write loss upon all the prayers Heb. 4. 2.
you make, and upon all the Sermons you hear, and upon all the tears you shed,
and upon all the alms you give, if all be not managed by a hand of faith.

Fourthly, You should labor above all to be rich in faith, because faith is
that Princely Grace that Christ is most taken with.

Cant. 4. 9. Thou have ravished my heart, my Sister, my Spouse, thou have
ravished my heart with one, of thine eyes, (that is, with that piercing eye of
faith that looks up to my Mercy-seat) with one Chain of thy neck.

There are two things that with open mouth speak out Christ to be most taken
with the faith of his people.

And the first is, His uncrowning himself, to Crown his peoples faith. Christ
does often take the Crown off his own head, and puts it upon the head of
faith, witness such passages as these (which are frequent in Scripture, Thy
faith has healed thee, Thy faith has saved thee, Thy faith has made thee
whole, etc. Christ takes the Crown off his own head, and puts it upon the
head of faith; and no wonder, for of all graces, faith takes the Crown off a
man's own head, and puts it upon the head of Christ. Man naturally is apt to
Crown any thing but Christ; he is apt to Crown his prayers, and Crown his
desires, and Crown his endeavors, etc. Oh but now faith acts like a King of
Kings, and uncrownes all* and sets the Crown upon the head of Christ.

And then a second thing that speaks out Christ to be most taken with the grace
of faith, is this, That he overlooks all other graces in comparison of faith,
as you may see in the Canaanite woman, Mat. 15. 21-29. The poor woman shows a
great deal of compassion, a great deal of wisdom, a great deal of
humility, a great deal of love, and a great deal of self-denial; but in the
close says Christ, O woman greae is thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou will. He does not say, O woman great is thy love, nor O woman great is thy
wisdom, nor O woman great is thy humility, and self-denial, nor O woman
great is thy patience, etc. but O woman great is thy faith. He overlooks, as it
were, all other graces, and sets the Crown upon the head of faith, O woman
great is thy faith. So in Mark 5. the woman that had a bloody issue twelve
years, comes to Christ for cure, and in the close of the story, says Christ
to her, Woman, thy faith has made thee whole. He does not say, Woman, thy
pressing hard to come to me, has made thee whole; but Thy faith has made thee
whole. He does not say, Woman, thy earnest desires and endeavors to be made
whole, has made thee whole, but Thy faith has made thee whole. He does not
say, Woman, thy fear and trembling has made thee whole, but Thy faith has
made thee whole, etc. So in Luke 7. ult. Thy faith has saved thee, go in
peace. Though she wept much, and loved much, yet Christ does not say, Thy
tears have saved thee, thy sorrow has saved thee. He does not say, Thy
humility, thy charity has saved thee; but O woman, thy faith has saved thee.
Christ overlooks all other graces, as it were, and casts a lovely eye upon the
grace of says, etc.

And then again in the fifth place, You should above all labor to be rich in
faith, because of all graces in the soul of man, faith makes him most lively
and active.

There Is no grace, I say, no grace in the soul of man that makes him so full
of life and action, as the grace of faith. Faith is the Primum Mobile, the
first pin, the first wheel True faith puts forth it self into vital
operations. Ferdinands of Arragon believed the story told him by Columbus, and
therefore he furnished him with ships, and got the West Indies, by his faith in
the undertaker But Henry the Seventh of England, believed him not, and
therefore trusted him not with shipping, and so lost all the purchase of that
faith, which purchase may yet be recovered, if the Lord shall please to own and
crown the just and noble design of General Pen, etc.
that moves all the golden wheels of obedience. In Heb. 11. you read what
those Worthies did, they left their Country, their kindred, upon a bare
command of God. Faith has Rachel's eye, but Leah's womb, it makes souls very
fruitful in ways of well-doing. Faith is as the spring in the Watch, that
moves the wheels; not a grace stirs, till faith sets it on work. Faith is like
Solomon's virtuous woman, that sets all her maidens to work. Faith sets joy on
work, Abraham desired to see my day, and saw it, and rejoiced. Faith sets love
on work, It works by love, Gal. 5. 6. It sets hope on work, Romans 8. 24, 25. It
sets godly sorrow at work, Zech. 12. 10. It sets patience at work, I believe
that God is wise and loving, and what he does is out of some noble design to
do my soul good, this spins out patience. Faith fits a man to do, to suffer,
to wait, to walk, etc. therefore labor above all to be rich in faith.

And then sixthly, Of all graces* faith renders the soul most invincible, and
therefore you should labor above all, to be rich in faith.

It renders the soul invincible and unconquerable under all the hardships and
trials it meets with in this world. Faith makes a man triumph in all the
changes and conditions of this life. It was their faith that made them
invincible in Dan. 3. 16, 17, 18. O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to
answer thee in this matter, if it be so, our God whom we serve is able to
deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine
hand, O King. But if not, be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not
serve thy Gods, nor worship thy golden Image which thou have up. And so Daniels
faith stopped the Lions mouths, it made him too strong for the strongest Beasts
of prey, as you may see in Dan. 6. Though the Enemies of a believer are very
subtle, strong, and experienced, and though the battle be hot and long, yet a
soul rich in faith shall have the day. Faith will render a believer victorious
in the close; He may suffer death (as Mori posse vinci non posse. Cyp.
Cyprian said to Cornelius) but never Conquest: Faith renders the soul a Lion,
a Rock, etc. It is reported of some of the Roman and Grecian Captains, that
they proved always As may be fully seen in the Book of Martyrs, and in Heb. 11.
victorious, and were never beaten by any. Such is the nature of faith, it
renders a soul victorious in all engagements: In all engagements faith brings
a man bravely off, and inables him to keep his ground, and triumph. Psalm. 60.
6, 7, 8, 9, 10. God has spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice, I will divide
Shechem, and meet out the valley of Succoth. Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is
mine, Ephraim also is the strength of my Faith alaers the Tenses, it puts the
future into the present, Gilead is mine, etc.
head, Judah is my Lawgiver, Moab is my wash-pot, over Edom will I cast out my
shoe, Philistia triumph thou because of me, etc. It Is not great resolutions,
nor big words, nor high looks, but faith, that will make a man stand fast in
shaking times. No hand can put the Garland upon a Christian, but the hand of
faith, etc.

And then seventhly, Above all labor to be rich in faith, because Satan will
labor might and maine to weaken your faith.

Oh! the great design of Satan is not so much to weaken you in externalls, as
it is to weaken you in internalls. Satan can be contented that men should have
their heads full of notions, and their mouths full of Religion, and their baggs
full of gold, and their chests full of silver, and their shops full of wares,
so their souls be either void of faith, or but poor and low in faith. Satan's
greatest plot is to weaken the faith of Christians, Luke 22. 31, 32. And the
Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired to have you, that he may
sift Satan knows that Nihil retinet qui fidem perdidit.
you as wheat, but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. Satan has
an akeing tooth at thy faith, his design is upon that, he will labor might
and maine to weaken that, to frustrate that, and therefore I have prayed that
thy faith fail not.

And then eighthly, Consider this, of all graces faith contributes most to the
bringing down of mercies and blessings upon your selves and friends, and
therefore you should above all labor to be rich in this particular grace of
faith.

Faith contributes to the bringing down of blessings upon our selves. In Dan.
6. 23. Daniel was delivered (says the Text) because he believed in his God.
'Twas his faith, and not his prayers; 'twas his faith, and not his tears;
'twas his faith, and not his sighs, that stopped the Lions mouths, and wrought
deliverance for him. So in Psalm. 27. 13. I had fainted unless I had believed
to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living. So in 2 Chronicles. 20.
20. Believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be established; believe his
Prophets, so shall ye prosper, and so they did. That Is a very famous Scripture
to this purpose, 2 Chronicles. 13. 15, 16, 17. Then the men of Judah gave a shout,
and as the men of Judah shouted, it came to pass that God smote Jeroboam and
all Israel Were men more rich in faith, they would be more rich in other
blessings, etc.
before Abijah and Judah, and the Children of Israel fled before Judah, and God
delivered them into their hands: And Abijah and his people slew with a great
slaughter, so there fell down slain of Israel five hundred thousand chosen
men. (Here was a dreadful slaughter; no wars, no slaughters comparable to
those the Scripture speaks of.) And the reason is rendered, verse. 18. Because
they relied upon the Lord God of their fathers. And as faith is the only way
to bring down a blessing upon our selves, so faith is the only way to bring
down blessings upon our friends and relations. Though another man cannot be
saved by my faith, yet he Genesis 39.
may be blessed with many blessings, upon the account of my faith. In Mat. 15.
22. to 29. it was the Canaanitish woman's faith that brought a blessing of
healing upon her daughter. And so in Mat. 8. 6. to 14. the Centurions faith
healed his servant that was sick of a Palsy, and from that very hour he was
healed. The servant got well by his Masters faith. And so likewise in Mark 9.
the faith of the father prevailed for the dispossessing of his Son. If thou
can believe (says Christ) all things are possible: And the poor man said
with tears, Lord I believe, help my unbelief. And presently Christ charged
the foul spirit to come out of him, etc. A believing husband, a bel^eving
wife, a believing Child, or a believing servant, may bring down (by the
actings of faith) many a blessing upon their relations. Faith has a happy
hand, and never but speeds in one kind, or another: It has what it would,
either in money, or moneys worth.

Apollenius, says Sozonem, Never asked any thing of God, either for himself,
or his friends, but he had it. And one pointing to Luther, said, There Is a man
can have any thing of God that he will ask.

And as faith brings down blessings upon our own heads, Faith has a kind of
Omnipotency in it, i^'s able to do all things, etc.
and the heads of our friends, so it often brings down wrath upon our enemies.
There Is nothing contributes so much to our enemies ruin, as faith does. I am
confident, it has neither been Armies, nor Navies, nor Parliaments, that have
had the chief hand in bringing howne the proud and stout enemies of Christ, and
Zion, in this and other Nations, but the faith of his despised people. One
Enemy may stand before Mary Queen of Scots, that was Mo^her o King James, was
wont to say, That she feared M^. Knockes prayers (who was a man of much ^^i^h)
more then an Army of ten thousand men.
the face of another, but what enemy can stand before the face and power of
faith? That Is a remarkable Scripture, Heb. 11. 33. Who through faith subdued
Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained Promises, stopped the mouths of
Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of
weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the Armies
of Alians. Other means were used, but that which did the work, and struck all
dead, was faith; faith ingages God in every encounter, and who can stand before
a consuming fire?

Polybius speaking of Horati^s his keeping of the field against his Enemies
Forces, says, That his enemies were more afraid of his faith, then of his war
like strength. And truly there is nothing that renders men more dreadful to an
understanding enemy, then their faith. Oh! it is brave for men to believe down
the powers of darkness, to believe down those that war against the Lamb, etc.
No way to get an Enemy down, like this; nor no way to keep an Enemy down,
like this: No way to save a Kingdom, like this; nor no way to keep a Kingdom,
like this; the Nation is beholding to none so much, as to believing souls. Oh
England! England! thou had long before this, been a prey to men that delight
in blood, had it not been for the faith of the Worm Jacob, etc. Christians, as
you would have Christ go on, and do more and more glorious things for
England, as you would be Crowned with the choycest and the chiefest blessings,
and as you would have vengeance executed upon all that hate, that wage war
against, and persecute Christ and the Saints, be mighty in believing.

Ninthly, and lastly, Faith is a root Grace, and will the branches flourish, if
the root wither?

O therefore water this root, have an eye to this root. If you have a choice
root in any of your Gardens, Oh how careful are you of it? you will mind it,
and water it, and look to it, etc. Well, of all graces faith is the root grace,
and if this dye, you will find your graces to languish; your hope, love, fear,
patience, humility, joy, etc. can never outlive your faith, these live
together, and they dye together; therefore above all labor to be rich in
faith, for this is a root grace, and if this flourish, all other graces will
flourish; but if this decay, all other graces will loose their strength,
beauty, and glory, etc.

And thus much for the fifth Proposition: We come now to the sixth Proposition,
and that is this.

That no gracious souls do at all times alike grow and thrive in spiritual
riches. A Child sometimes shootes up more in a month, then he does at other
times, in many months; and sometimes more And don't Plants and Trees sometimes
shoot up more in a week, then ^n many, etc.
in a year, then he does afterward in many years. So many a Christian thrives
more, and gets more spiritual riches in one month, then in many; in one year,
then in many. I appeal to your experiences, Christians, don't you find it so?
I know you do: To cite Scripture to prove this, would be to cast water into
the sea, and to light Candles to see the Sun at noone. Sin and Satan do
sometimes work more violently, and more strongly in the souls of Saints, then
at other times. Now when sin and Satan work most, and prevail most, then grace
thrives least. As the life of grace, is the death of sin, and the growth of
grace, the decay of sin, so the increase of sin, is the decay of grace; and the
strengthening No ships have it all times the same gales of wind, etc.
of sin, is the weakening of grace.

Again, No Saints have at all times alike gales of the spirit of God, and
therefore they do not grow in spiritual riches at all times alike. A man
thrives in spiritual riches as the gales of the spirit of God are upon him,
and no otherwise: When the spirit of the Lord does blow most sweetly Cant. 4.
ult.
and strongly upon his heart, then his graces thrive and flourish most, then
those beds of spices do yield the most fragrant smell. But when the spirit of
the Lord does withdraw, and withold his influences, how does the strength and
glory Latimer said of the Spirit, That it is coming, and going, etc.
of grace, wither and decay?

The Herb Heliotropium does turn about, and open, and shut, according to the
motion of the Sun, so do the graces of the Saints according to the internal
gales, motions, and operations of the spirit, etc.

Again, No Saints have at all times the like external advantages and
opportunities of growing rich in spiritualls. They have not the word, it may
be, in that power and life, as formerly; or it may be they enjoy not the
communion of Saints, as formerly, or if they do, yet perhaps those that have
formerly been as fire to warm and inflame them, are now become water to cool
them, and deaden them; or it may be they have not those advantages for Closet
duties, as formerly; or it may be the course of nature is changed, and if so,
it is no wonder that they thrive not in spiritulls, as formerly. When Children
have not as good food, and as good lodging, and as good looking after, as at
other times, no wonder if they thrive not, as at other times. When men have not
the same advantages and opportunites to grow rich in the world, as formerly,
do we wonder that they thrive not as before? Surely no.

And sometimes this arises from the breaking of some bone by sin; David found
it so. Many a man by breaking a bone Psalm. 50.
is much hindered from thriving in the world. O this broken arm, this broken
leg, has lost me many a fair pound, which otherwise I might have got. O
friends, sin is the breaking of the bones, the breaking of a man's peace and
communion Isa. 59. 1, 2. Chap. 64. 7. Gal. 6. 1.
with God; it is the breaking of his hope and confidence in God, it is the
dis-joyning of a man from God, and so it hinders a man's spiritual growth.
Believe it, Christians, if you play and dally with sin, if you fall in with
sin, if you make one with sin, you will never grow rich in spiritualls. Sin
will cause such a breaking of bones, as will undoubtedly hinder the prosperity
of your souls. And so much for the sixth Proposition.

The seventh and last Proposition I shall propound, is this. A man may grow
rich in those Graces that are more remote from Christ, that are less
conversant about Christ, when he does not grow rich in those Graces, that, as
special favorites, stand always at the elbow of Christ, and are most busied
and conversant about Christ.

Let me open it thus to you.

You know at Court there are some that have the honor to attend always at the
Princes elbow; and there are others that appertain to the same Prince, but are
more remote in their employments for him, etc. So in the soul, there are some
graces that are more remote, and not so conversant about the person of Christ,
as now Humility, Self-denial, Patierce, Meekness, Temporance, Sobriety, and
the like. Now though these graces do appertain to the same Prince, though
they are all servants of the Lord Jesus, yet notwithstanding they are more
remote, and busied about other objects, and things. O but now faith and love
are choice favorites that always stand at the elbow of Christ, faith and
love, are Christ's greatest favorites in Heaven. Now I say, a Christian may
grow rich in those graces that are more remote from Christ, that are less
conversant about the person of Christ, when he does not grow rich in those
particular graces that are most active about the person of Christ. He may grow
rich in Humility, in Self-denial, in Meekness, in Temperance, etc. when he
does not grow up in joy and delight, Some Limbs and branches of a Tree grow
more then others.
and comfort, etc. The Tree grows downward, when it does not grow upward; so a
soul may grow rich in some particular graces, when he does not grow rich in
other graces; he may grow rich in those graces that are more remote from
Christ, when he does not grow rich in those graces that are more conversant
about the person of Christ.

And so I have done with these Propositions, the serious minding of them may
prevent many Objections, and to many give satisfaction in several cases, etc.

The fourth and last thing propounded, was to give you

Some Notes of a person that is Spiritually Rich.
Clearly, As there are few worldly rich men to those that are poor, so there
are few in this professing Age, that will be found to be spiritually rich,
compared with the multitude of Laodiceans that swarm in these times. We have
many that say they are rich, and that think they are rich, when the truth is,
they have either no grace, or but a very little grace: And these five following
things do clearly evidence it, etc. Notes of a person that is spiritually rich.


FIrst, Rich men have more variety of objects to delight themselves with, then
poor men have.

They have Houses, and Gardens, and Lands, and Cattle, and Silver, and Gold,
and Jewels, and Pearls, and what not? to delight themselves with. Oh but poor
men have not such variety of objects to delight themselves with, as rich men
have. It Is just thus in spiritual riches. A man that is rich in grace, has
more variety of spiritual objects, about which his soul is most conversant,
then a man that is poor in grace. Joseph in Phar^ah's Court had more variety of
objects to delight him, then his brethren had to delight themselves in their
fathers house, etc.
He has more objects of love, of joy, of delight of content, to busy and
exercise his soul about, then others that are weak in grace. 2 Cor. 6. 10.
Enjoying nothing, and yet possessing all things. A soul rich in grace,
possesses and injoyes all things in Christ, and Christ in all things. They
enjoy all good in him who is the chiefest good, who is the spring and fountain
of good.

I have spoken largely to this already, and therefore shall content my self in
giving you this hint. It stands you upon to inquire what variety of Objects you
have to delight your souls in. But

Secondly, Rich men can reach to those things that poor men cannot reach to.

I would have such and such things, says the poor man, as the rich man has;
I would fare as he fares, and wear as he wares, and do as he does, but my
stock will not reach it. So a soul that is spiritually rich can reach to those
things that one that is poor in grace cannot reach unto. He can reach to those
joys, to those comforts, and to those contents, to those heights of communion
with God, and to those Visions and apprehensions of God, that a soul that is
not rich in grace, cannot reach to. Oh! I would feign have that comfort, and
that joy, and that peace, and that communion with God, and those Visions of
God, that such and such souls have, says a poor Christian, but I cannot, my
stock will not reach to it. It Is an Argument a man is grown higher, when he
can reach higher then he could before, whether it be a beam, or a pin, etc. So
it is an Argument that a soul is grown rich in grace, when he can reach beyond
what formerly he could reach unto; when he can reach beyond his inlargements,
beyond his incomes, beyond his comforts, to a Christ: When in duty, he can
reach above duty; when in an Ordinance, he can reach to Christ, above the
Ordinance; when under inlargements, he can reach above inlargements, to Jesus
Christ. Oh but now a man that has but a little grace, he can rarely reach
above his duties, above Ordinances, above Inlargements, to Christ, he is very
apt to sit down, and warm himself with the sparks of his own fire, and to
feed upon Isa. 50. 11. Isa. 44. 20.
ashes, as the Prophet speaks, etc. But now a soul that is rich in grace,
says, Well, these Ordinances are not Christ, these refreshings are not Christ,
these meltings are not Christ, these inlargements are not Christ, these are
sweet, but he is more sweet; these are very precious, but he is most precious.
And thou those that are spiritually rich, do out-reach all others, etc.

Thirdly, Rich men can with more ease and pleasure bear burdens, then poor
men can. A Tree that is well grown, stands it o^ in the worst storms, it
bends not, it breaks not, etc.


When Taxes and burdens are laid upon poor men, they sigh, and shrug, and
complain that they are not able to bear them, when rich men make nothing of
them. So souls that are rich in grace, can bear burdens, without a burden;
they can bear crosses, afflictions, and persecutions, with abundance of ease,
cheerfullnesse, and contentedness of spirit; they do not shrug, nor grumble,
but bear the greatest Trialls, with the greatest sweetness, as you may see in
Acts 5. They went out rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer for the
name of Christ. So Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 10. I take pleasure in infirmities, in
reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses, for Christ's sake.

I take pleasure. The Greek word is an emphaticall word, (...).
it is the same word that God the father uses to express his infinite delight
in his Son, Mat. 3. ult. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: Or,
In whom I am infinitely delighted. The same word the Apostle uses to express
the wonderful delight that he took under all his sufferings; he rejoices and
leaps under all his burdens. Oh but now a soul that is poor in grace, he cannot
bear a burden, without a burden; every light affliction turns him, and sinks
him; every Molehill is a mountain; every scratch on the hand, is a stab at
the heart; every wave is a sea, and the poor Christian sighs and groans, and
cries out, O no sorrow to my sorrow, no loss to my loss, no cross to my
cross; but souls rich in grace act quite contrary, as has been hinted, and
proved, etc.

Fourthly, Rich men are most envied.

History and Scripture speaks out this, as well as our own experience. The
rich man above all others, is the greatest object of envy, and it is as true
that such that are most rich in Numb. 16.
spiritualls, are of all men, the most envied. Moses and Aaron were rich in
spiritualls, and Oh! how were they envied by Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and
other wicked wretches? It Was said of Caesar, and Pompoy, That the one could not
endure a superior, nor the other an equal.
Ezra, Nehemiah, and Mordecai, were rich in spiritualls, and who more envied?
Among all the Prophets and Apostles, those have been most envied, that have
most abounded in spiritual worth; and to this very day, none are such objects
of scorn and envy, as those that have most of Christ within. Men that have
more leaves, then fruit, that have a golden outside, but a threadbare inside,
are less envied then those that are all glorious within. Men of greatest
excellencies, Psalm. 45. 13.
are the maine objects upon which the eye of envy is placed. Saul's envious eye
was placed upon David, and Cain's upon Abel, and Esau's upon Jacob, and Herod's
upon John, and the Pharisees upon Christ. Envious souls are like the Ravens,
that fly over the sweet Garden, and light upon the stinking Carrion. Envy does
ever ascend, it never discends: An envious man can with more ease dye
miserably, Socrates calls Envy (Se^ram animae) The souls saw, etc.
then see another live happily: An envious heart weeps to see others mercies,
and joys to see others miseries: An envious heart is like the Mear-maid, which
never sings but in a storm, and never mournes but in a calm. An envious man
cannot endure those excellencies in others, that he wants in himself; he loves
not any light that out-shines his own, any Crown that out-weighs his own,
etc.

Cimon the famous General of the Athenian Commonwealth, hearing a friend of
his highly commending his Martial Achievements, answered, That they were not
worthy of commendations, because they were not envied, etc.

Fifthly, Rich men are most tempted, and assaulted.

Pirates do not use to set upon empty Vessels, but those that are most richly
laden: And Beggars need not fear the Thief, though the rich man do. Those
that have been most rich in spiritualls, have been most assaulted and tempted
by God and Satan will t^y to the utmost those particular graces wherein any
Christian do'^ excel, etc.
Satan, witness Abraham, Job, Joshua, Peter, Paul, yea, Christ himself. The
best men have always been most and worst tempted; none so much in the School
of temptation, as those that are most rich in grace. There are none that are
such blocks, such mountains in Satan's way, as these; none do him that
mischief, as these; none are so active, and so resolute in their oppositions
against him, as they, etc. and therefore none so assaulted and tempted, as
they. And thus by these five things you may know whether you are rich in grace,
or no.

The next Use is this,

If the Lord Jesus Christ be so rich, then do not join any There is riches
enough in Christ to pay all your debts, and to satisfy Divine Justice to the
utmost farthing, without being beholding to your prayers, tears, or
humiliations: Christ will be Alexander, or Nemo, on earth. Kings love no
consorts, power is impatient of participation.

When Augustus Caesar desired the Senate to join two Consuls with him, for the
carrying on the Government of Suetonius.
the State, the Senators answered, That they held it a diminution to his
dignity, to join any with so incomparable a man, as Augustus Caesar was.

Was it a diminution to his dignity, to join others with We must say of
Christ, as it was once said of Caesar, S^cium habet neminem He may have a
companion, but he must not have a competi^or, etc.
him in the Government of the State? And is it not a diminution of the dignity
and glory of Christ, to join your actions and your endeavors with his blood,
in the business of your redemption? In Isa. 63. 3. I have trodden the
Winepresse alone, and of the people there was none with me. And in Isa. 44.
Thus says the Lord thy redeemer, and he that formed thee from the womb, I am
the Lord that makes all things, that stretches forth the heavens alone, that
spreads abroad the earth by my self. It Is a sad reproach to Christ, to join
any thing with him in the great business of your salvation, therefore abhor it
more then hell it self; let Christ be all in all.

Again Thirdly,

If Christ be so rich, then take heed of three things.

First, Take heed of sitting down dejected and discouraged under any losses or
troubles that do befall you, or that have or shall befall you for the name of
Christ.

Christ is generally rich, he is able to make up all your losses and wants.
Phil. 4. 19. But my God shall supply all your need, according to his riches in
glory by Christ Jesus, as he did the widows vessel. The fountain has not the
less water for the vessel it fills; nor the Sun the less light, for that it
gives forth to the Stars; so the Lord Jesus Christ has never a whit the
less for what he gives forth unto his Saints.

When Zelislaus, the King of Poland's General, had lost his hand in his
service, the King sent him a golden hand. Ah Christians! when you loose this or
that for him, he will send you a golden hand; if you loose a penny for him, he
will give you a Pearl. Christ will not live long in any man's debt, if he
should, he would loose his glory, etc.

Secondly, If the Lord Jesus be very rich, Oh then take heed of despairing, by
reason of your sins.

I confess, the least sin should humble the soul, but certainly the greatest
sin should never discourage the soul, much less should it work the soul to
despair. Read 1 Timothy 1. 13, 14, 15. and despair (I had almost said) if thou
can. Despairing Judas perished, when as the murderers of Christ, Acts 2.
believing on Christ, were saved. Despair is a sin exceeding vild and
contemptible, it is a word of eternal reproach, dishonor, and confusion; it
declares the Devil a Conqueror, and what greater dishonor can be done to
Christ, then for My sin is greater then can be forgiven, says Gain. Thou lie
Cain, says Augustine for Gods mercy is greater then the sins of all men and
its a great injury to God to distrust of his mercy.
a soul to proclaim before all the world, the Devil a crowned Conqueror? A
despairing soul is Magor missabib, A terror to himself, his heart a hell of
horror, his conscience an Acheldama, a field of black blood. He has no rest
at home, nor abroad, at bed nor board, but is as if infernal Devils followed
him in fearful shapes, terrifying and tormenting his perplexed soul. Eternity
of misery feared or felt, begets that Monster, which, like Medusas head,
astonisheth with its very aspect, and strangles hope, which is the breath of
the soul. As it is said, Dum spiro spero, so it may be inverted Dum spero
spiro, other miseries may wound the spirit, but despair kills it dead, etc.

Thirdly, If Christ be so rich, Then take heed of presuming. Christ is a Lion,
as well as a Lamb; he has a sword, as well as a Scepter.


Take heed of taking encouragement to sin upon this account, that Christ is
rich in grace and mercy. To argue from the riches of mercy, to sinful liberty,
is the Devils Logic. A soul that thus reasons, is a soul left of God, a
soul that is upon the last step of the ladder, a soul that Satan has by the
hand, and the eternal God knows whether he will lead him. What the women sung
of Saul and David, that Saul 1 Samuel 18. 6, 7. Romans 6. 1, 2.
had slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands, that I may say of
despair, and presumption, Despair has slain her thousand, but presumption
has slain her ten thousand. Shall we sin that grace may abound? God forbid:
How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? As the beams of the
Sun, shining on the fire, puts out the fire, so the shinings of Gods mercy on
us, should extinguish sin in us, as the Apostle argues, 2 Pet. 3. 15. from
Paul, Romans 2. 4. Christ seems to say to souls, as Thesius said once, Go
(says he) and tell Creon, Thesius offers thee a gracious offer, yet I am
pleased to be friends, if thou will submit, this is my first Message, but if
this offer prevail not, look for me to be up in arms. Ah souls! if you
shall abuse the riches of grace, to a presumptuous sinning against Christ,
Christ will take up Arms, and you shall dye for it.

The next Use is this.

If Christ be so rich, Oh then open to Christ when he Christ knocks by his
word, and he knocks by his rod; he knocks by his spirit, and he knocks by his
messengers, and he knocks by conscience, Oh open to him, for he is very rich.
Though you shut the door against a poor man, yet you will open it to one that
is rich, and why not then to Christ, who would feign have entrance. Rev. 3. 20.
Behold I stand at the door, and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open
the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.

Behold, I stand. I that am the King of glory, I that am Psalm. 24. 7, 8, 9.
Rev. 17. 14.
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. I that am rich in mercy, rich in goodness,
rich in grace, rich in glory, I stand at the door and knock. I that have gold
to enrich you, I that have eye salve to inlighten you, I that have glorious
Apparel to cloth you, I that have mercy to pardon you, I that have power to
save you, I that have wisdom to counsel you, I that have happiness to
Crown you, I stand at the door, and knock.

If any man will open. If the Master will not, yet if the servant will; if the
Mistrisse will not, yet if the Maid will; if the Parent will not, yet if the
Child will; if the rich man will not, yet if the poor man will; if the
Pharisee will not, yet if the Publican will;

I will come in, and will sup with him, and he with me. Jesus Christ has the
greatest worth and wealth in him, as the worth and value of many pieces of
silver, is in one piece of gold; so all the heavenly excellencies that are
scattered abroad in Angels and men, are united to Christ; yea, all the whole
volume of perfection, which is spread through heaven and earth, is epitomized
in Christ.

They ^ay it is true of the Oil at Rhemes, That though it be continually spent
in the inauguration of their Kings of France, yet it never wastes. Christ is a
pot of Manna, a cruise of Oil, a bottomless Ocean of all comforts, and
contents that never fail. A Saint may say, In having nothing, I have all
things, because I have Christ: Having therefore all things in him, I seek no
other reward, for he is the universal reward.

And then again,

If Christ be so rich, then sit down and wonder at his condiscending That one
so rich, should fall in love with such that are Rev. 3. 17. to 21, etc.
poor, wretched, miserable, blind, and naked; that one so high, should look so
low as poor we; that one so great, that one who is the Lord and Heir of all,
should match with us Heb 1, 2, 3, 4. Phil. 3. 17, 18, 19, etc. Ezekiel. 16.
that have nothing at all. O the breadth, the length, the depth, the highth of
Christ's love to unlovely souls! to such that had neither portion, nor
proportion, that had neither external, nor internal worth, that might in the
least draw his love toward them. You were indebted to God for the clothes you
wear, for the bread you eat, for the houses you live in, the air you breath
in, the beds you lie on, the ground you tread on, etc. Now for Christ to love
such, and to be willing to bestow himself upon such nothings, Oh! how should
this work them to spend their days in admiring and contemplating upon his
kindness, and goodness?

I have read a story of an Elephant, who being fallen down, and unable to
help himself, or get up again, by Love is like fire, very operative. Si non
(...), non est.
reason of the inflexiblenesse of his legs; a Forrester coming by, helped him
up, wherewith the Elephant, by the very instinct of nature, was so affected,
that he followed this man, would do any thing for him, and never left him till
his dying day. The Application is easy.

The next Use that we shall make of this Point, is this.

If Christ be so rich as has been discovered to you, Then As the people prised
David above themselves, saying, Austin says, He would willingly go through
Hell to Christ.
Thou art worth ten thousand of us, 2 Samuel 18. 3. so should Saints lift up
Jesus Christ above themselves, and above every thing below himself. He that
lifts not Christ up above all, has no interest in Christ at all. He that sets
not Christ above all, is not a Disciple of Christ, Luke 14. 26. If any man come
to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and
brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life Certe non ama^t illi Christum qui
aliquid plus^uam Christum amant.
also, he cannot be my Disciple. Surely they do not truly love Christ, who
love any thing more then Christ.

It was a notable saying of Jerome, If my father should hang upon me, my
brethren should press round about me, and my mother should stand before me: I
would throw down my father, I would break through my brethren, and I would
trample upon my mother, to come to Christ.

Other Saints have lifted up Christ above all their Lands, relations, and
lives, as you may see in Heb. 11. and so did a multitude of the Martyrs under
the ten persecutions, etc. As Pharaoh set up Joseph above all, and made him
Governor of the Land. And as Darius set up Daniel over all, so you. must prise
Christ, and set up Christ above all.

Remember a few things, that this may the better stick up on your hearts.

First, A Christ highly prized, will be a Christ greatly delighted in.

Every soul delights in Christ, as he prizes Christ, and no otherwise. The
reason of reasons, why Christ is no more delighted in, is because he is no more
prized among the sons of men. Cant. 2. 3. As the Apple Tree among the Trees of
the wood, so is my well-beloved among the Sons: I sat down under his shadow
with great delight, and his fruit was pleasant to my taste. The seeing of this
object delights the eye of a believer; the hearing of this object delights the
ear of a believer; the enjoying, the possessing of this object, delights the
heart of a believer. I sat down under his shadow with great delight.

The Apple Tree is delightful for shadow, so is Christ. He is a shadow to
poor souls when they are scorcht with troubles without, and terrors within.
Isa. 32. 2. And a man (that is, Christ) shall be as an hiding place from the
wind, and as a covert from the tempest, as rivers of waters in a dry place, as
the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.

The Apple Tree is delightful for pleasantness of fruit: So is the Lord
Jesus, for those pleasant fruits of righteousness and holiness that grow
upon him.

And the Apple Tree is delightful for variets: So is Christ, for there are all
varieties of excellencies in himself. Col. 1. 19. It pleased the father that
in him should all fulness dwell. We delight in persons and things, as we
prize them, and no otherwise. Jonathan highly prized David, and delighted in
him accordingly. Jacob highly prized Rachell, and delighted in her answerably.
You will delight in Christ as you prize him, if you prize him but a little, you
will delight in him but a little, etc. Secondly, Remember this,

A Christ hghly prized, will be a Christ gloriously obeyed.

Every man obeyes Christ, as he priseth Christ, and no otherwise. The higher
price any soul sets upon Christ, the more noble will that soul be in his
obedience to Christ. If Christ were more prized in the world, he would be more
obeyed in the world. A soul that highly prizeth Christ, is Non parentum aut
majorum authoritas, sed Dei docentis imperium. Jerome. The Command of God must
outweigh all authority and example of men.
better at obeying, then at disputing any command of Christ: If Christ will
command such a soul to step over the worlds Crown to take up his cross, the
soul will do it, as you may see in Moses, Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26. he sets a
higher price upon Christ's cross, then upon Pharoahs Crown. When Christ's
cross, and the worlds Crown stood in competition, upon a bare command of God
Moses steps over the worlds Crown, to take up Christ's cross. He chose rather
to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of
sin, for a season. And so Abraham upon a bare command of God, leaves his
Country, and his near and dear relations; he wholly resignes up himself to
God, he puts Mallum ru^re cum Christo quam regnare ^am Caesare.
his hand into Gods, and is willing that God should lead him whither he
pleases, and do with him what he pleases.

I remember an excellent saying of Luther, I had rather (says he) fall with
Christ, then stand with Caesar. And indeed every gracious soul that highly
prizes Christ, will rather choose to fall with Christ, then to neglect his
obedience to Christ. By obeying Christ we gain more honor then we can give;
by kissing the Son we do even command him, and make him ours, etc.

Thirdly, Christians, remember this, All the causes of prizing persons and
things, are eminently and only in Christ, which bespeaks you all to set a very,
very high price upon the Lord Jesus

You prize some for their beauty, why, the Lord Jesus Christ's beauty needs no
letters of commendation.
Christ is the fairest among the Children of men, Psalm. 45. 1, 2. Cant. 5. 10.
My Beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest, or, the Standard Bearer among ten
thousand.. You prize others for their strength, why, the Lord Jesus Christ has
in him everlasting strength, Isa. 26. 4. Trust in the Lord for ever, for in the
Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, he is the rock of Ages. You prive others
for bearing their fathers (...) Charakter tes hup^stase^s autou. The Character
of his subsistence. A comparison from the seal of a Ring, the fo^m of which is
imprinted in the wax.
Image, why the Lord Jesus bears the Image of his father. Heb. 1. 3. He is the
brightness of his fathers glory, and the express Image of his person. You
prize others for their wisdom and knowledge; such a one is a very wise man,
you say, and therefore you prize him; and such a one is a very knowing man, and
therefore you prize him; why, all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are
in Christ, Col. 2. 3. In whom (says he, speaking of Christ) are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge. The truth is, all those perfections and
excellencies that are in all Angels and men, they all center in Christ, they
are all epitomized in Christ. All the Angels in heaven have but some of those
perfections that be in Christ. All wisdom, and all power, and all goodness,
and all mercy, and all love, etc. is in no glorified Creature, no not in all
glorified creatures put together. But now in Christ all these perfections and
excellencies meet, as all water meets in the sea, and as all light meets in the
Sun. Others you prize for their usefulness, the more useful persons and
things are, the more you prize and value them. The Lord Jesus Christ is of
universal use to his people, why, he is the right eye of his people, without
which they cannot Christ is qu^qu^d appetib ^e, a^ O^igen speaks, whatever we
can desire. If we hunger and ^h^^st, he is p^bxlum anim^ the food of the soul.
see; and the right hand of his people, without which they cannot do, etc. He
is of singular use to all his people, he is of use to weak Saints, to
strengthen them; and he is of use to doubting Saints, to resolve them; and he
is of use to dull Saints, to quicken them; and he is of use to falling Saints,
to support them; and he is of use to wandering Saints, to recover them. In
prosperity, he is of use to keep his Saints humble, and watchful, spotless,
and fruitful; and in adversity he is of use to keep them contented and
cheerful. All which should very much engage our hearts to prize this Christ.

Again, We prize things as they suite us; why, Christ is not only a good, but
a suitable good. Christ is light to inlighten John 1. 8, 9 Phil. 5. 14.
us, and he is life to inliven us; he is riches to supply us, and he is raiment
to cloth us; he is a staff to support us, and he is a sword to defend us; he
is bread to nourish us, and he is water to refresh us, and wine to cheer us,
and what would we have more? Christ may well be compared to the Trees of the
Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 47. 12. which were both form at, and for Medicine.


Fourthly, Yet once more, that this may stick upon us, let us consider, That
where we are highly prized, there we highly prize.

Why, the Lord Jesus Christ does exceedingly prize every believing soul, yea,
even such poor weak Saints, that many swelled souls slight, and despise, as
persons of no worth, because they want that light and knowledge, and those
parts and gifts that others have. Well Christians, remember this, Christ prizes
you as the Apple of his eye, Zech. 2. 8. he prizes you as his Jewels, Mal. 3.
17. He prizes you as his portion, Deuteronomy. 32. 9. The Lords portion is his people.
He prizes you as his Gl^ry, Isa. 46. 13. He prizes you as his Ornaments, Ezekiel.
7. 20. He prizes you as his Throne, Jer. 40. 21. He prizes you as his Diadem,
Isa. 62. 3. He prizes you as his Friends, John 14. He prizes you as his
Brethren; Heb. 2. 11, 12. He prizes you as his Bride, Isa. 62. 5. He prizes you
above his Fathers bosom, for he leaves that, to do you service, John 16. 28.
Yea, he prizes you above his very Life, he lays down his life to save your
souls, John 10. Now oh who would not highly prize such a Christ, that sets
such an invaluable price upon such worthless souls.

Fifthly, and lastly, consider, That your high prizing of Christ will work you
to value the least things of Christ above the greatest worldly good.

'Twill make you value the least nodd of Christ, the least love-token from
Christ, the least good look from Christ, the least good word from Christ, the
least truth of Christ, etc. above all the honors, treasures, pleasures, and
glories of this world. Psalm. 119. 72. The Law of thy mouth is better then
thousands of gold and silver. Luther would not take all the world for one leaf
of the Bible. And oh that a serious consideration of these things might work
all your hearts to a high prizing of the Lord Jesus!

The next Use that we shall make of this Point, is this,

If Christ be so rich, then trust to Christ. Who will not trust a rich man?
Every one strives to trust a rich man, The rich has many friends. Why, the
Lord Prove. 14. 20.
Jesus Christ is very rich: Will you be persuaded to trust him? O trust him
with your best treasures, with your choycest Interpreters differ a^ont the
pawn or pledge which the Apostle committed to Gods custody. One says, I^ was
his soul. A second says It was himself (which is all one.) A third says, It
was his works. A fourth says, I was his sufferings. A fifth says, I was his
salvation. Without doubt 'twas all that was near and dear to him.
Jewels, with your names, souls, estates, relations. The Apostle was excellent
at this, 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know him (says he) in whom I have believed, that he
is able to keep that which I have committed unto him, until that day. I have
committed my soul to him, and my life to him, and my name to him, and all my
mercies and enjoyments to him. The child cannot better secure any precious
thing it has, then by putting it into the fathers hands to keep. Our mercies
are always safest and surest, when they are out of our hands, when they are in
the hands of God. We trust as we love, and we trust where we love; where we
love much, we will trust much; much trust speaks out much love, if you love
Christ much, surely you will trust him much.

That was a notable bold expression of Luther, Let-him that dyed for my soul,
see to the salvation of it. I have committed my soul to him, I have given it
up into his hands who is my life, who is my love, and let him look after it,
let him take care of it, in securing of that, he secures his own glory. Oh
that Christians would trust in this rich Christ for a supply of necessaries. Is
Christ so rich, and will you not take his word that he will not see you want?
Will you trust a rich man upon his word, and will you not trust a rich 1
Christ's promises are ever performed, 2 Cor. 1. 20. ^ His promises are
over-performed, 1 Cor. 2. 9. etc.
Christ upon his word? Do you believe he will give you a Crown, and will you
not trust him for a crust? Do you believe he will give you a Kingdom? and do
you doubt whether he will give you a Cottage to rest in? Has he given you his
blood? and do you think that he will deny you any thing that is really for
your good? Surely he will not, he cannot.

Again, Trust him for power against all the remainders of sin in you.

Has Christ freed you from the damnatory power of sin, Romans 8. 1. Romans 6. 14.
Heb. 13. 5.
and from the dominion of sin? and will not you trust him for deliverance from
the remainers of sin, Psalm. 65. 3. Iniquities prevail against me: As for our
transgressions, thou shall purge them away. O excellent faith!

Again, Trust him to bring you into the Land of rest.

Do you think that this Joshua is not able to carry you through all
difficulties, dangers, and deaths? Do you think that he will leave you to dye
in the wilderness, who have already had some glimpses of Heavens glory? O
trust to this Christ for the bringing of your souls into the Promised Land.
Christ would loose his glory, should you fall short of glory, etc.

Again,

If Christ be so rich, Then don't forsake him, don't leave Is there Riches of
Justification, and Riches of Sanctification, and Riches of Consolation, and
Riches of Glorification in Christ? Yes, why then do not depart from him, do
not You read of no Arms for the back, though you do for the breast. Phil. 6.
shake hands with him. That Is a sad complaint of God in Jer. 2. 12, 13. Be
astonished O ye heavens at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate,
says the Lord: For my people have committed two evils, They have forsaken me
the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out Cisternes, broken Cisternes,
that can hold no water. Is it madness and folly to fly from the fountain to
the stream, from the light of the Sun, to the light of a candle? And is it not
greater madness and folly to forsake the Creator, to run after the creature. O
say as Peter, Whither should we go, thou have John 6. 68.
the words of eternal life. To run from Christ, is to run from all life,
peace, and joy; it is to run from our strength, our shelter, our security, our
safety, our Crown, our glory. Lev. 11. 10. Crabbs, that go backward, are
reckoned among unclean creatures: The application is easy.

Origin coming to Jerusalem, after that he had shamefully turned his back upon
Christ, and his truth, and being exceedingly pressed to preach, at last he
yields, and as he opened the Book, he happened to cast his eye upon that place
of the Psalmist, What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou
should take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate Psa. 50. 16, 17.
instruction, and castest my words behind thee. Now the remembrance of his own
folly so reflected upon his conscience, that it made him close the Book, and
sit down and weep. Such as forsake a rich, a full Christ, shall have weeping
work enough.

That is a very dreadful Scripture, Jer. 17. 13. All you that forsake the
Lord, shall come to be ashamed, and they that depart from him, shall be written
in the dust. Can you read this Text, backsliding souls, and not tremble? etc.

Again,

If the Lord Jesus Christ be so rich, Oh then, all you that have an interest in
him, labor mightily to clear up My Brethren, it is one thing for a man to have
an interest in Christ, and another thing to have his interest cleared up to
him. I do speak it with grief of heart, That even among such Christians that I
hope to meet in Heaven, there is scarce one of forty, nay, one of a hundred,
that is groundedly able to make out his interest in the Lord Jesus. Most
Christians live between fear and hope, between doubting, and believing: One
day they hope that all is well, and that all shall be well for ever; the next
day they are ready to say, That they shall one day perish by the hand of such a
corruption, or else by the hand of such or such a temptation: And thus they are
up and down, saved and lost, many times in a day.

But you will say unto me,

What Means should we use to clear up our interest in I Will tell you, there are
six singular Means that you should Means for the evidencing our interest in
Christ.


First is this, Faithfully and constantly fall in with the interest of Christ.

Holiness is the interest of Christ, the Gospel is the interest of Christ, the
precious Ordinances are the interest of Christ, etc. Now the more sincerely and
roundly you fall in with the interest of Christ, the more abundantly you will
be confirmed and persuaded of your interest in Christ. Such souls The
Primitive Christians did generally fall in with the interest of Christ and they
generally had an assurance of their interest in Christ. Lam. 1. 16. Phil. 4.
30. Isa. 63. 10. Spiritus sanct^ est res delica^a. Psalm. 77. 2. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19.
as fall in with strange interests, or with base and carnal interests, may
justly question whether ever they had any real interest in Christ. Christians,
did you more sincerely and fully fall in with Christ's interest, you would less
question your interest in Christ, this would scatter many a cloud.

Secondly, Be kind to the spirit of Christ.

Do not grieve him, do not slight him. If you should set this spirit a
mourning, that alone can evidence your interest, that alone can seal up your
interest in Christ, by whom shall your interest in Christ be sealed up? O do
not grieve the spirit, by acting against light, against conscience, against
engagements; do not grieve him by casting his cordialls and comforts behind
your backs; do not grieve him by slighting and despising his gracious actings
in others; do not cast water upon the spirit, but wisely attend the hints, the
Items and motions of the Spirit, and he will clear up thy interest in Christ,
he will make thee say, My Beloved is mine, and I am his. C^nt. 2. 16


Thirdly, Labor more and more after a full and universal conformity to Jesus
Christ.

The more the soul is conformable to Christ, the more confident it will be of
its interest in Christ. 1 John 4. 17. As all good Orators endeavor to be like
Demosthenes, so all good Christians should endeavor to be like to Jesus
Christ, for therein lies their glory and perfection.
Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of
judgment, because as he is, so are we in this world. As he, so are we. The
Child is not more like the father, then then we are like our Savior. The Child
is the father multiplied, the father of a second edition. Our Summum bonum
consists in our full communion with Christ, and in our full conformity to
Christ. Oh if men were more universally conformable to Christ in their
affections, ends, designs, and actings, etc. they would have abundantly more
clear, full, and glorious evidences of their interest in Christ. A more full
conformity to Christ in heart and life, will make your lives a very Heaven, etc.

Fourthly, Interest Christ in the glory of all you enjoy, and in the glory of
all you do.

This is a precious way to have your interest in Christ more 1 Cor. 10. 31.
and more evidenced to your own souls. Such as are good at this, as are much
in this, will find Christ every day a clearing up more and more their interest
in himself. It Is not (usually) long night with such souls. O Christians!
interest Christ more and more in the glory of all your graces, interest him in
the glory of all your duties, interest him in the glory of all your abilities,
as Christ does interest you in himself, in John 1. 16. Rev. 1. 5, 6. 1 Pet. 2.
9.
his spirit, in his graces, in his riches, in his Titles, in his dignities, in
his offices. Ah Christians! did you interest Christ more in all you have, in
all you are, and in all you do, you would never be so full of fears, and
doubts, and questions, about your interest in Christ, as you are. Your
interessing of Christ in all you have and do, will speak out, not only the
The mother that strongly loves her child, d^es not question the truth of he
love to her child.
truth of your love, but also the strength and greatness of your love; and
where men love much, where they love strongly, there they do not question the
truth of their love.

The Heathen Gods were contented to divide their honors amongst themselves,
and hence the Senate of Rome rejected Christ, from taking him to be a God,
after that they had consulted about it, For (said they) if Christ come to be
acknowledged a God, he will not share with the rest, he will have all himself:
And so upon this reason they refused him. Christians, Christ will not have any
competitor, he will rather part with any thing, then with his glory. Isa. 42.
8. I am the Lord, that is my name, and my glory will I not give to another,
neither my praise to graven Images. Christ will rather part with his life, then
with his honor; therefore let every Christian say as David does 1 Chronicles. 29.
11, 12, 13. Thine O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and
the victory, and the Majesty, for all that is in the Heaven, and in the earth,
is thine: Thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head above
all: Both riches and honor come of thee, and thou reignest over all: And in
thine hand is power and might, and in thine hand it is to make great, and to
give strength unto all. Now therefore our God we thank thee, and praise thy
glorious name. And clearly friends, the more your hearts are led forth to
interest Christ in all you enjoy, and in all you do, the more clear and
glorious evidence you will have of your interest in Christ; let his honor and
glory lie nearer and nearer to your hearts, and you shall see that he has set
you as a seal upon his arm, as a seal upon his heart.

The fifth means to gain the knowledge of your interest in Christ, is, By
cleaving to Christ, and whatsoever is dear to Christ, in the face of all
miseries, difficulties, and dangers.

It Is nothing to cleave to Christ in fair weather, when every Psalm. 44. Acts
5. Heb. 11. Dan. 3. Acts 21. 13.
one cleaves to Christ, when every one professes Christ; but to cleave to him
in a storm, when every one runs from him, this speaks out a child-like
disposition, it speaks out a Jacob's spirit. Surely he must needs have much of
Christ, that nothing can take off from cleaving to Christ. When the soul says
to Christ, as Ruth said to Naomi, Whither thou Ruth 1. 15, 16, 17, 18.
go, I will go, and where thou lodgest, I will lodge, thy people shall be
my people, and thy God shall be my God. The Lord do so to me, and more also,
if ought but death part thee and me. When neither the frowns of men, nor the
reproach of men, nor the contempt of men, nor oppositions from men, can take
the soul off from cleaving to Christ, it will not be long before Christ speaks
peace to such a soul. Psalm. 63. 8. My soul follows hard after thee, thy
right hand upholds me. In the Hebrew it is, My soul cleaves to thee, or Dabka
naphshi.
is glewed to thee, as Jonathan's soul cleav'd to David, and as Jacob's soul
cleav'd to Rachel, in the face of all difficulties and troubles. Doubtless,
when the soul cleaves to Christ in the face of all afflictions and
difficulties, this carries with it Sha^nma, one of David's Worthies, stood and
defended the field, when all the rest fled.
very much evidence of its interest in Christ. In temporalls men cleave to
persons and things, as their interest is in them, and so it is in spirituals
also. Christ cannot, Christ will not throw such to hell, that hang about him,
that cleave to him.

Sixthly, and lastly, If you would know whether you have an interest in Christ,
Then be very much in observing what interest Christ has in you.

Observe whether he has the interest of a head, a husband, a father, or no;
Christ has a general interest in all creatures, as he is the Creator and
Preserver of them: And he has a heads interest, a husbands interest, a fathers
interest, only in them that have a saving interest in him. The interest of the
head, the husband, the father, is the greatest interest, it is the sweetest
interest, it is a commanding interest, it is a growing interest, it is a peculiar
interest, it is a lasting interest; and really, if the Lord Jesus has such an
interest in you, you may be as confident that you have a real and glorious
interest in him' as you are confident that you live. And thus much for the
means whereby you may come to know your interest in rich Jesus.

Before I close up this discourse, give me leave to speak a few words to poor
sinners, who to this very day are afar off from this Jesus, who is so rich in
all excellencies and glories. A USE of Exhortation to Christ-less souls.
Ah poor hearts! you have heard much of the riches of the Lord Jesus, and Oh
that I could persuade with you to get an interest in this Christ; get this
Christ, and you get all; miss him, and you miss all. It Is a matter of
eternal concernment to your souls; nothing can make that man miserable that
has this rich Christ; nothing can make that man happy, that wants this rich
Christ. In Prove. 4. 5, 7. Get wisdom (that is Christ) get understanding,
forget it not. Verse. 7. Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get
wisdom, and with all thy getting get understanding. And so in Prove. 16. 16.
How much better is to get wisdom, then gold, and to get understanding, rather
to be chosen, then silver. Had thou all the power of the world, without an
interest 1 Cor. 1. 25. to 29.
in Christ, thou would be but weak. Had thou all the wit and learning in
the world, without an Interest in Christ, thou would be but a fool. Had
thou all the honors in the world, yet without an Interest in Christ, thou
would be but base. Had thou all the wealth in the world, Dan. 4. 17. Luke
16. 2^, 23, 24, 25, 26. Mat. 13. 45, 46, 47.
yet without an Interest in Christ, thou would be but a beggar, etc. Oh
therefore labor for an Interest in Christ: Oh turn the wise Merchant at last.
The wise Merchant in the Gospel, parts with all to buy the Pearl, to get an
interest in Christ. Oh! it is your greatest wisdom, it is of an eternal
concernment to your souls, to sell all, to part with all, for an interest in
the Lord Jesus. Oh do not deal with your souls, when Christ is tendered and
offered to you, as sometimes simple people do when they go to Market, they
might have a good pennyworth, but that they are loath to part with some old
piece of gold, that has been given them by a father, or a friend; somewhat
willing they are to have the good pennyworth, but unwilling they are to part
with their gold. It Is so with many poor sinners, when the Lord Jesus Christ is
presented to their souls, as a very glorious pennyworth, somewhat willing
they are to have him, but unwilling they are to part with their old gold, with
some old sweet darling lust. But sinners, don't you deceive your own souls,
sin and your souls must part, or Christ and your souls can never meet: Sin
and your souls must be two, or Christ and your souls can never be one. Christ
is a most precious commodity, Prove 8. 11.
he is better then Rubies, or the most costly Pearls; and you must part with
your old gold, with your shining gold, your old sins, your most shining sins,
or you must perish for ever. Christ is to be sought and bought with any pains,
at any price; we cannot buy this gold too dear. He is a Jewel more worth then
a thousand worlds, as all know that have him: Get him, and get all; miss him,
and miss all.

Now if ever you would get an interest in Christ, and so by gaining an Interest
in him, be possessed of all the riches and glory that come by him, then be sure
to get your hearts possessed with these nine Principles that follow.

And the first is this,

That the great end and design of Christ's coming into the world, was the
Salvation of sinners. Get this Principle rooted in your spirits. I came not to
call the righteous (says he) but sinners to repentance. And Man. 9. 13. Mark
2. 17.
in 1 Timothy 1. 15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance,
that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. Christ lays aside his
Royal Crown, he puts off his glorious Robe, he leaves his fathers bosom, he
takes a journey from Heaven to Earth, and all to save poor lost sinners. That
which Christ had most in his eye, and upon his heart in his coming into the
world, was the salvation of sinners. Lay up this truth, feed upon this
Honeycomb.

Secondly, Get this Principle rooted in your hearts. Viz.

That none ever yet obtained an interest in Christ, but unworthy creatures.
When you are pressed to get an Interest in Christ, you are ready to say, O I am
unworthy, Will Christ ever look after such a one as I am?

I answer. Yes. For this is a most certain Principle, That none ever attained
an interest in Christ, but unworthy creatures. Was Paul worthy before he had an
interest in Christ? Wbat worthiness was in Matthew, when Christ called him from
the Receipt of Custom? And what worthiness was in Zacheus, when Christ called
him down from the Cycomore Tree, and told him, that This day salvation was
come to his house? Was Manasses, or Mary Magdalen worthy before they had an
Interest in Christ? Surely no. Though you are unworthy, yet Christ is worthy:
Though you have no merit, yet God has mercy: Though there is no salvation for
you by the Law, yet there is salvation for you by the Gospel.

Again, Christ requires no worthiness in any man before Such as shall go to
prove he does, must make a new Gospel, a new Bible.
he believes, and he that will not believe before he is worthy, will never
believe. If you look upon God with an Evangelical eye, you shall see that he
that is most unworthy, is most capable of mercy. A real sense of our own
unworthiness, renders us most fit for Divine mercy. This Objection, I am
unworthy, is an unworthy Objection, and speaks out much pride and ignorance of
the Gospel, and of the freeness and riches of Gods grace, etc.

Thirdly, Let this Principle dwell in you. Viz.

That Christ has lost none of his affections to poor sinners, by going to
heaven. Oh! how did his bowels work toward sinners, when he was on earth? And
certainly they work as strougly toward them now he is in heaven. His love, his
heart, his good will is as much toward them as ever. Christ is Alpha, and
Omega, Rev 1. 8.
the phrase is taken from the Greek letters, whereof Alpha Heb. 13. 8. Vide
Grotius.
is the first, and Omega the last. I am before all, and I am after all. Jesus
Christ, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. Christ is the same before
time, in time, and after time. Christ is unchangeable in his Essence, in his
Promises, and in his Love to poor sinners.

Fourthly, Get this Principle riveted in your hearts,

That he is able to save to the uttermost, all them that come unto God by him.
(...). The Original word signifies all manner of perfection.
Heb. 7. 25. He is able to save to the uttermost: That is, to all ends and
purposes, perfectly, and perpetually; he needs none to help him in the great
business of redemption, he is a through Savior, he has Trod the Wine Press
alone, Isa. 63. 3.

Fifthly, Get this Principle riveted in your hearts,

That the want of such preparations or qualifications Some men there be, that
would have men better Christians before they come to Christ, before they
believe in Christ, then u^u^lly they prove after they are come to Christ.
that many men lay a great stresse upon, shall be no impediment to hinder your
souls interest in Christ, if you will but open to Christ, and close with Jesus
Christ. Rev. 3. 18. Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my
voice, and open to me, I will come in to him, and will supp with him, and he
with me. Pray tell me, At whose door was this that Christ stood and knocked,
Was it not at the Laodiceans door? Was it not at their door that thought
their penny as good silver as any? That said they were rich, and had need of
nothing, when Christ tells them to their very faces, That they were poor, and
miserable, and Surely did legal Preachers seriously we^gh the following
Scriptures, they would not so vehemently (I say not angerly) press the
absolute necessity of such and such qualifications before faith in Christ, as
they do. Mark 16. 16. John 3. 34. Heb. 11. 6. Romans 14. 23. John ^. 12. Mat. 7.
17, 18. Mat. 12. 33. Romans 8. 2. Gal. 5. 6.
blind, and naked. None more unprepared, unqualified, and unfitted for union
and communion with Christ, then these lukewarm Laodiceans, and yet the Lord
Jesus is very ready and willing that such should have intimate communion and
fellowship with him.

If any man will open, I will come in to him, and will supp with him, and he
with me. The truth of this you have further evidenc't, Prove. 1. 20. to 24. and
Chap. 8. 1. to 6. and Chapter 9. 1. to 6. All these Scriptures with open mouth
speak out the truth asserted, viz. That the want of preparations or
qualifications, shall not hinder the souls interest in Christ, if the soul
will adventure it self by faith upon Christ. I pray what qualifications and
preparations had they in Ezekiel. 16. when God saw them in their blood, and yet
that was a time of love, and God (even then) spread his skirt over them, and
made a Covenant with them, and they became his. What qualifications or
preparations had Paul, Mary Magdalen, Zacheus, and Lydia? etc. And yet these
believed in Christ, these had a blessed and a glorious interest in Christ, etc.

I, but some may Object, and say,

What is the meaning of that Text, Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me all you that are
weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest? There is a threefold Answer
to be given to this Objection.

First, Though the Invitation be to those that are weary and heavy laden, yet
the Promise is made to Coming, to Believing. The Dove found no rest till she
returned to the Ark. No more will the troubled soul, till it returns to Christ.


Secondly, This Text shows only this, That those that are burdened and bowed
down under sin, and under the sense of Divine wrath, are to come to Christ;
and that there is no way for them to obtain ease and rest, but by coming to
Christ: But this Text does not show that only these must come to Christ, or
that only these may come to Christ.

Thirdly, and lastly, No one Scripture speaks out the whole mind of God, and
therefore you must compare and consult this Scripture with the Scriptures and
instances lately cited, Adoro pleni^udinem Scrip^uraraum. Te^cullian.
and then you will clearly see, That souls may believe in Christ, and come to
obtain an Interest in Christ, though they are not so and so prepared, nor so
and so qualified, as some would have them.

Sixthly, Get this Principle rooted in your hearts.

That Christ is appointed, and anointed by the father, Moses was fa^thfull in
his Office as a servant, but Christ as a Son, Heb. 3. 2. to 6. Christ had never
entered into glory, had he not been faithful in his Offices, etc.
to this very Office, of receiving and saving poor sinners. Turn to Isa. 61.
1, 2, 3, 4. John 6. 28. And Psalm. 68. 18. Thou have ascended on high, thou have
led captivity captive, thou have received gifts for men, yea, for the
rebellious also (what for?) That the Lord God might dwell among them. Christ
has received gifts for rebellious sinners, for rebellious Sabboth-breakers,
for rebellious swearers, for rebel^ious drunkards, etc.

That the Lord God might dwell among them. That is, that he might have near
communion and fellowship with them.

Seventhly, Get this Principle rooted in you,

That it is the delight of Christ to give poor sinners an interest in
himself. He is not only able to do it, but it is his delight to do it.
Christ's soul is in nothing more; witness his leaving his Christ did so much
delight, and his heart was so much set upon the conversion and salvation of the
Samaritans, That he neglected his own body, to save their souls, as you may
clearly see in John 4. (...)
fathers bosom, witness his laying down his Crown, witness those many
sufferings and deaths that he went through in this world: Witness those Gospel
acclamations, Mark 16. 16. Revel. 22. 17. Witness those persuasive
exhortations, and gracious impetrations and entreaties, Ezekiel. 33. 11. Mat. 11.
28. 2 Cor. 5. 20. Witness Divine Injunctions, and Comminations, 1 John 5. 23.
Mat. 11. 21. Witness those patheticall lamentations, Mat. 23. 37. Luke 19. 42.
Psalm. 81. 13. And witness the inward motions and secret excitations of his
blessed spirit, Genesis 6. 3. All which speak out his great willingness and
delight to save poor sinners. So in Psalm. 40. 7, 8. I delight to do thy will,
O my God, thy Law is in my heart. Or as the Hebrew has it, It Is in the midst
of my bowels. Now (mark) the will of the father was the salvation of sinners:
This was the will of the father, That Jesus Christ should seek and save them
that are lost, Mat. 18. 11. Now says Christ, I delight to do thy will O my
God. It Is the joy and rejoicing of my heart, to be a seeking, and a saving of
lost sinners. When Christ was hungry, he went not into a Victualling-house, but
into the Temple, and taught the people most part of the day, to show how much
he delighted in the salvation of sinners, etc.

Eighthly, Get this Principle riveted in your hearts,

That as there is nothing in Christ to discourage you Cant. 1. 3. The name of a
Savior is honey in the mouth, and music in the ear, and a Jubilee in the
heart, says one.
from looking after an interest in him, so there is every thing in Christ that
may encourage you to get an interest in him. Look upon his Name, Thy name is as
an Ointment poured out, and therefore do the Virgins love thee. The name of
Jesus has a thousand treasures of joy and comfort in it, says Chrysostom,
and so has all his other names. If you look upon Christ in his natures, in his
offices, in his graces, in his beauties, in his gifts, and in his works, you
will find nothing but what may encourage you to believe in him, and to resign
up your selves to him. Ah poor sinners! what would you have? Is there not
power in Christ to support you, and mercy in Christ to pardon you, and grace in
Christ to heal you, and goodness in Christ to relieve you, and happiness in
Christ to crown you, and what would you have more? Oh that you would believe!

Ninthly, Let this Principle be rooted in you,

That the surest way, and the shortest cut to mercy, and to get an interest in
Christ, is by a peremptory casting of the soul (by faith) on Christ. John 3.
16, 17, 18, 36. and 8. 24. and 16. 9. and 4. 50, 53. and 5. 24. and 6. 35, 40.
and 7. 38. and 11. 25, 26. and 12. 46. Acts 10. 43. Romans 3. 26. 1 John 5. 10,
11, 12.
There Is no way under heaven, to be interested in Christ, but by believing:
There Is no way to get an interest in the riches of Christ, but this, He that
believes shall be saved, let his sins be never so great; and he that believes
not, shall be damned, let his sins be never so little. And so much shall
suffice to have spoken concerning this great and weighty Point. I shall follow
what has been said, with my prayers, that what has been said may work for
your internal and eternal welfare, etc.

EPHESIANS. 3. 8. Unto me who am less then the least of all Saints, is this Grace
given, that I should Preach among the Gentiles, the Unsearchable Riches of
Christ.
THERE are two other Observations that arise from these words, I shall (by
Divine assistance) speak something to them, and so finish this Text. And the
first is this. Viz.

That it is the great Duty of Preachers, to Preach Jesus Christ to the people.
To me who am less then the least of all Saints, is this grace given, that I
should preach among the Gentiles, the unsearchable riches of Christ.

It Is the great Duty of Ministers to Preach the Lord Christ to the people. I
shall prove it, and then open it to you.

In Acts 5. 42. And daily in the Temple, and in every house, they ceased not to
teach and preach (what) Jesus Christ. So in Acts 3. 20. And he shall send Jesus
Christ, which before was preached unto you. So in 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24. and 2 Cor.
4. 5. We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your
servants for Jesus sake. So in Acts 4. 2. and 2. 35. and 9. 20. As soon as Paul
was converted, straightway he Preached Christ in the Synagogue, that he was the
Son of God.

Now for the opening of the Point, I shall only attempt two things.

1 Give you the Reasons, Why it is the great Duty of Ministers to preach Christ
to the people. 2 (Which will be the maine) To show you How they are to preach
Christ to the people.
I confess this is a very useful Point in these days, wherein many men
Preach any thing, yea, every thing but a crucified Jesus. Well Christians,
remember this, As it is your duty to take heed how you hear, so it is as much
your duty to take heed who you hear. Many there are that count and call
themselves the Ministers of Christ, and yet have neither skill, nor will to
Preach Jesus Christ, to exalt and lift up Jesus Christ in lip or life, in word
or work, a sad reckoning these will have to make up at last.

But to come to the Reasons of the Point, Why it is the great work and duty of
Ministers to preach Jesus Christ to the people.

First, Because that this is the only way to save, and to win souls to Jesus
Christ. There is no other way of winning and saving souls, but by the
Preaching of Christ to the people. In Acts 4. 10, 11, 12. compared, Neither is
there salvation in any other, for there is none other name under heaven given
among men, whereby Jewel, Cowper, and others, had no such pleasure or joy, as
they had in Preaching Christ unto the people.
we must be saved. You may Preach this, and that, and a thousand things to the
people, and yet never better them, never win them; it is only Preaching of
Christ, that allures and draws souls to Christ. John 17. 3. This is life
eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent. Ah! nothing melts the hearts of sinners, nor wins upon the hearts of
sinners, like the Preaching of the Lord Jesus. It Is true, the teaching of this,
and that opinion, may please many a man's fancy, but it is only the Preaching
of Christ that changes the heart, that conquers the heart, that turns the
heart, etc. Peter by Preaching of a crucified Christ, Acts 2. 14. to 42.
converts three thousand souls at once. Were Christ more Preached, men would
be more inamoured with him. He is only precious to them that hear of him, and
that believe in him. Christ is in all respects incomparable, and therefore as 1
Pet. 2. 7.
you would honor him, and win upon others, make him more and more known to
the world, etc.

Secondly, They are to Preach Christ to the people, Because it is the choycest
and the chiefest way to ingratiate Christ with poor souls. This brings Christ
and the soul together, and this keeps Christ and the soul together; nothing
indeares Christ to Mar^ian, Arch Bishop of Constantinople, said once of
Subba^ius, a wretched and unworthy man, whom he had O^dained to be a Presbyter,
We wish we had rather laid our hands on the briars, then on such heads.
the soul, like this. We see by woeful experience, Christ neglected, despised,
scorned, and trampled upon by most, and no wonder, for many Preach themselves
more then Christ, and they Preach men more then Christ, and their own notions
and impressions, more then Christ. Surely Christ is but little beholding to
such Ministers, and I think the souls of men as little, and Oh that they were
so wise as to consider of it, and lay it to heart! Surely a real Christian
cares not for any thing that has not (Aliquid Christi) something of Christ in
it. There is a strange and strong Energy or forciblenesse in hearing Christ and
his beauties and excellencies displayed and discovered.

The daughters of Jerusalem by hearing the Church presenting Christ in so high
a Character, and by describing and painting him out in such lively colors, are
so enchanted and inflamed, that, might they but know where to find him, they
would be at any pains to seek him. When Christ is set forth in his glories,
with much affection and admiration others fall in love with him, as you may see
by comparing Cant. 5. 10. -- ult. with Chap. 6. 1.

Thirdly, It Is their great duty to Preach Jesus Christ to the people, Because
the Preaching up of Christ, is the only way to Preach down Antichrist, or
whatever makes against Christ. Some would have Antichrist down, yea, they
would have him down root and branch, but there is no such way for his total
and final overthrow, as the Preaching of Christ; for the more the glory,
fulness, perfection, and excellency of Christ is discovered, the more the
horrid vileness, and matchless wickedness of the man of sin will be
discovered and abhorred, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10. And then In the
Canon Law the Pope is said to be S^lutus omni lege humana.
shall that wicked one be revealed. The Greek word (Anomos) properly signifies
a lawless, yokelesse, masterlesse Monster, one that holds himself subject
to no Law.

Pope Nicholas the First, said, That he was above Law, (because Constantine had
styled the Pope God) And of the same opinion were most of the Popes.

Whom he shall consume. The Greek word signifies to consume Analosei.
by little and little, till a thing come to nothing.

With the spirit of his mouth. That is, with the evidence and glory of his
word, in the mouths of his Messengers. The Ministers of the word are as a mouth
whereby the Lord breaths Bellarmine confesses, to his great grief That ever
since the Lutherans have declared the Pope to be Antichrist, his Kingdom has
not only not increased, but every day more and more decreased and decayed. Lib.
3. de papa Ro^. cap. 21.
out that glorious, mighty, and everlasting Gospel, which shall by degrees
bru^se Antichrist, and all his adherents, and break them in sunder like a rod
of Iron, etc.

When Christ was born, all the Idols that were set up in the world (as
Historians write) fell down. When Jesus Christ comes to be lifted up in a
Nation, in a City, in a Town, in a Family, yea, in any heart, then all Idols
without and within, will fall before the power, presence, and glory of Jesus.
Since Luther began to lift up Christ in the Gospel, what a deal of ground has
Antichrist lost? and he does and will loo^^ more and more, as Christ comes to
be more and more ^ened and lifted up in the Chariot of his word. Many in these
days that speak much against Antichrist, have much of Antichrist within them.
And certainly, there is no such way to cast him out of men's hearts, and out of
the world, as the Preaching and making known of Christ, as the exalting and
lifting up of Christ in the Gospel of grace.

A fourth Reason why they are to Preach Christ to the people, is this, Because
else they contract upon themselves the blood of souls.

There Is no other way for them to avoid the contracting of the blood of men and
women's souls upon them, but the The Germans have this Proverb (say they) The
pavement of hell is made ^f the bare skuls of Priests and the glorious Crests
of gallants. The^r me^ning is, that the more eminent any one is in Church or
State, and does not employ his eminency accordingly, the more low shall they
lie in hell. Rev. 18. 11, 12, 13, 14.
Preaching of Christ unto them. Now a man were better to have all the blood in
the world upon him, then the blood of one soul. The blood of souls, of all
blood, cries loudest, and wounds deepest: The lowest, the darkest, and the
hottest place in Hell will be the sad and dreadful portion of such upon whose
skirts the blood of souls shall be found at last. Hence that passage of Paul,
in 1 Cor. 9. 16. Woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel. The Motto that should
be writ upon Preachers Study doors, and on their walls, and on all the Books
they look on, on the beds they lie on, and on the seats they sit on, etc.
should be this, The Blood of souls, The Blood of souls. The soul is the
better, the noble part of man, it bears most of the Image of God, it is capable
of union and communion with God. Christ sweat for it, and bled for it, and
therefore woe to those Merchants that make merchandise of the souls of men.
This was a comfort and an honor to Paul, that he kept himself from the blood
of souls, Acts 20. 25, 26, 27. He appeals to them that they were witnesses
that he was free from the blood of all men. Paul had held out Jesus Christ in
his Natures, in his Names, in his Offices, and in all his excellencies and
perfections, and so frees himself from the blood of all men. And Ministers can
no way secure themselves from the blood of souls, but by Preaching up, and
living out a crucified Jesus.

The last Reason is this, Because the Preaching of Christ contributes most to
their comfort here, and to their reward hereafter; therefore they are to Preach
the Lord Christ to the people. When Luther was upon a dying bed, this was no
small Bernard comfortably observes, That Ministers have their reward, Secundum
laborem, not Secundum proventum.
joy and comfort to his spirit, Thee O Lord (says he) have I known, thee have
I loved, thee have I taught, thee have I trusted, and now into thy hands I
commend my spirit. There can be no greater joy to a Minister, then by Preaching
Christ to win souls to Christ. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 19, 20. For what is our hope, or
joy, or Crown of rejoicing, are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus
Christ, at his coming, ye are our glory and joy. They that by Preaching Christ,
win souls to Christ, shall shine as the Stars in the Firmament, Dan. 12. 3.
Every soul won to Christ, is a glorious Pearl added to a Preachers Crown. 1
Pet. 5. 4. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, you shall receive a
Crown of glory. A Crown imports perpetuity, plenty, and dignity, the height
of humane ambition.

It is the opinion of some, That there are three places of exaltation in heaven.

The first, and highest, is for converting Ministers.

The second, is for suffering Martyrs.

The third, is for persevering Christians.

Without doubt, those Ministers shall be high in heaven, who make it their
heaven to hold forth Christ, and to win souls to Christ; who are willing to be
any thing, to be nothing, that Christ may be all in all to poor souls. And
thus I have given you* the Reasons of the Point.

I shall now come to the second thing (which is the maine) and that is, to show
you

How Ministers are to Preach Christ to the people.
Many weak and slight spirits in these days, think that it is 2. Cor. 2. 16.
Who is sufficient for these things? Almost every Upstart in these days thinks
himself sufficient. Who am I? says Moses, who am I not, says every green-head
in these days.
as easy to Preach, as to play, and so they hop from one thing to another, and
those that are not qualified, nor fit for the least and lowest employment, yet
judge themselves fit enough for the greatest and the weightiest employment in
the world; and that which would certainly break the backs, not only of the
best and strongest men, but even of the very Angels, should not God put under
his everlasting arms. No labor to that of the mind, no travel to that of the
soul, and those that are faithful in the Lords Vineyard, find it so. Luther
was will not to say, That if he were again to choose his calling, he would dig,
or do any thing, rather then take upon him the Office of a Minister. And many
other eminent lights have been of the same opinion with him.

But what are those Rules that every Preacher is to observe How Christ must be
Preached, showed in 11 things.
in his Preaching of Christ to the people?

I Answer. These Eleven.

FIrst, Jesus Christ must be Preached Plainly, Perspicuously, so as the meanest
capacity may understand what they say concerning Christ; they must Preach
Christ for edification, and not to work admiration, as too many do in these
days. Paul was excellent at this kind of Preaching, 1 Cor. 14. 18, 19. he had
rather speak five words to edification, Preaching is not a matter of parts,
words, or wit, it is Scripture demonstration that works upon the conscience, and
that God ownes and crowns.
then ten thousand words to work admiration in ignorant people. So in 1 Cor. 2.
4, 5. And my speech, and my preaching was not with intising words of man's
wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit, and of power. That your faith
should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. As if he
should say, Such Preach with little power, who come with the excellency of
speech, or with the intising words of man's wisdom. Ah! many there are (I
speak it with grief, and to their shame) that delight to soar aloft in obscure
discourses, and to express themselves in new-minted words and phrases, and to
show high strains, and flashes of wit, and all to work admiration in the
ignorant. Such kind of Preachers are as clouds, and painted glasse-windowes,
that hinder the It was a saying of Luther, From a vaineglorious Doctor, from a
c^n^^ntious Pastor, and from unprofitable Questions, good Lord deliver his
Church
light from shining in upon souls, that hinder the Sun of righteousness from
breaking forth in his beauty and glory upon the spirits of poor Creatures. Woe
unto these men in the day when such souls shall plead against them, when they
shall say, Lord here are the persons whose Office and work was to make dark
things plain, and they have made plain things dark and obscure, that we
might rather wonder at them, then any ways profit by them. Aarons Bells were of
pure gold; our whole Preaching must be Scripture Proof, or we and our works
must burn together. The profoundest Prophets accommodated themselves to their
hearers capacities. Holy Moses covers his glistering face with a Veil, when he
was to speak to the people. Yea, it is very observeable, that the Evangelists
spoke vulgarly many times for their hearers sake, even to a manifest
incongruity, as you may see in John 17. 2. Rev. 1. 4. But above all, it is most
observeable concerning God the father, who is the great Master of speech, when
he spoke from Heaven, he makes use of three several Texts of Scripture, in one
breath, Mat. 17. 5. This is my beloved Si vis fieri bonus concionatur
Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him. This is my beloved Son; that
Scripture you have in Psalm. 2. 7. In whom I am well pleased; this you have in
Isa. 42. 1. Hear him; this da operam ^t sis bonus B^blicus. If you will be a
good Preacher, study to be well acqu^inted with the Scripture, said one in the
Monastry.
you have in Deuteronomy. 18. 15. All which may bespeak them to blush, who through
curious wisenesse disdain at the stately plainness of the Scripture; Oh how
unlike to God are such Preachers that think to correct the Divine Wisdom and
Eloquence, with their own infancy, vanity, novelty, and sophistry. Yea, Jesus
Christ himself, the great Doctor of the Church, teaches this lesson, Mark 4.
33. And with many such Parables spoke he the word unto them, as they were able
to hear it. Not as he was able to have spoken; he could have expressed himself
at a higher rate then all mortals can; he could have been in the Clouds; he
knew how to knit such knots that they could never untye, but he would not; he
delights to speak to his hearers shallow capacities. So in John 16. 12. I have
many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now: He that speaks not
to the hearers capacities, is as a Barbarian to them, and they to him.

He is the best Preacher (says Luther) that Preaches vulgarly, that Preaches
most plainly. He is not the best Preacher that tickles the ear, or that works
upon the fancy, etc. but he that breaks the heart, and awakens the conscience.
It Is sad to consider how many Preachers in these days are like Heraclitus, who
was called The dark Doctor, because he affected dark speeches. Oh! how do
many in these days affect sublime notions, uncouth phrases, making plain
truths difficult, and easy truths hard? They darken council by words without
knowledge, Job 38. 2. But how unlike to Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles,
these dark Doctors are, I will leave you to judge; nor would I have their
accounts to make up for all the world; I will leave them to stand or fall to
their own Master. God loves, ownes, and crowns plain Preaching, though some
account it foolishness, yet to them that are saved, it is the power of God, and
the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 20-30. I have stayed the longer upon this first
Direction, because of its great usefulness in these deluding days.

Secondly, As they must Preach Christ plainly, so they must Prove. 13. 17. Chap.
25. 13. Job 33. 23.
Preach Christ Faithfully. Ministers are Stewards, 1 Cor. 4. 2. and you know it
is the duty of a Steward to be faithful in his Stewardship, to give to every
man the portion that is due to him, cheering up those hearts that God would
have cheered, and weakening those wicked hands that God would have weakened, and
strengthening those feeble knees that God would have strengthened. Ministers are
Ambassadors, and you know it is the great concernment of* Ambassadors to be
very faithful* in their Masters Messages; God looks more, and is affected and
taken more with a Ministers faithfulness, then with any thing else. A great
voice, an affected tone, studied notions, and silken expressions, may affect
and take poor weak souls, but it is only the faithfulness of a Minister in
his Ministerial work, that takes God, that wins upon God, Mat. 25. 21, 23. Well
done good and faithful servant, The Office of a Minister, is the highest
Office, and if his Office be highest, his sai^hfullnesse must be answerable, or
he will be doubly miserable.
enter thou into the joy of the Lord. A joy too big to enter into thee, and
therefore thou must enter into it. This was Paul's glory, Acts 20. 27. that he
had not shunned to declare unto them the whole counsel of God; neither fear
nor favor swayed him one way or another, but he was faithful in his Masters
work; and usually God crowns him and his labors most, and sends most Fish
into his Net that is most faithful, though he be less skillful, that has
more of the heart in the work, though he has less of the brain.

The Maid in Plutarch, being to be sold in the Market, when a Chapman asked
her, Will thou be faithful if I buy thee? I, said she, (Etiam non emeris) that
I will though you do not buy me. So Ministers must be faithful, though God
should not buy them, though he should not thus and thus encourage them in their
work. Their very feet are beautiful, Isa. 52. 7.
who are faithful, and their message most comfortable to those that sigh and
mourn, that labor and languish under the sense of sin, and fear of wrath.

Thirdly, They must Preach Christ Humbly, as well as faithfully, Greg^ry
Nazianzen that famous Preacher, sets no other price upon all his Athenian
Learning (wherein he exce^l'd) the^ this, That he had somthin^ of worth to
esteem, as nothing in comparison of Christ.
2 Cor. 4. 5. We Preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our
selves your servants for Jesus sake. Paul does not complement as the men of the
world do, Your Servant Sir, but he spoke as it was, for there are no greater
Servants, then those that are Servants to the souls of men, for Jesus sake. So
John was very humble in the exercise of his Ministry, John 3. 30, 31. He must
increase, but I must decrease, etc.

Luther used to say, That a Minister must take heed of bringing three Dogs
into the Pulpit, viz. Pride, Covetousness, and Envy. The friends of the
Bridegroom must not woe and sue for themselves, but for the Bridegroom.
Dispencers of the Gospel are the Bridegroomes friends, and they must not speak
one word for the Bridegroom, and two for themselves, as has been the trade of
many weak and worthless men. It Is the greatest glory of a Minister in this
world, to be high in spiritual work, and humble in heart. Vainglory is a
pleasant Thief, it is the sweet spoyler of spiritual excellencies. Paul was
very humble in the exercise of his Ministry, none so high in worth as he, nor
none so low and humble in heart, as he; though he was the greatest among the
Apostles, yet he accounts himself less then the least of all Saints; yea, he
counted it not only his duty, but his glory, to be a servant to the weakest
Saints, To the weak I became as weak; who is weak, and I am not weak? who
is offended, 1 Cor. 9. 2^. 2 Cor. 11. 29.
and I burn not?

Fourthly, As they are to Preach the Lord Jesus Christ humbly, so they are to
Preach him Wisely. In Prove. 11. 30. He that wins souls, is wise; and indeed
the greatest wisdom in the world is requisite to the winning of souls to
Velokeach takes from Lakach, to take.
Christ. He that wins souls, or he that catches souls, as the Fowler does
Birds (as the Hebrew word imports) or Fishermen Fishes, he is wise. There is a
holy and a heavenly craft required in the winning of souls to Christ, 2 Cor.
12. 16. Nevertheless being crafty (says the Apostle) I caught If one soul is
more worth then a world, as he has told ^s, who only went to the price of it,
Mat. 16. 26. then they must needs be wi who win souls to Christ.
you with guile. He speaks of a holy and heavenly craft.

It is written of the Fox, that when he is very hungry after prey, and can find
none, that he lies down, and feigneth himself dead, and so the Fowls light
upon him, and then he catches them. Paul hungring after the welfare of the
Corinthians souls, makes use of his heavenly craft to catch them. There Is a
great deal of wisdom required to hold out Christ unto the people, not only
as a good, but as the greatest good, as the choycest good, as the chiefest
good, as the most suitable good, as an immutable good, as an independent good,
as a total good, and as an eternal good. Christ must thus be held forth to
draw souls to fall in love with him, and to work their hearts to run out after
him. There Is wisdom required to answer all cavils and objections that keep
Christ and poor souls asunder. There Is wisdom required to take souls off
from all false bottomes, that they are apt to built upon. There Is wisdom
required to present Christ freely to souls, in opposition to all
unrighteousness, and to all unworthiness in man. There Is wisdom required to
suite things to the capacities and conditions of poor souls, to make dark
things plain, and hard things easy. Ministers must not be like him in the
Emblem; That gave straw to the Dog, and a bone to the Ass, but they must
suit all their discourses to the conditions and capacities of poor creatures,
or else all will be lost, time lost, pains lost, God lost, Heaven lost, and
souls lost for ever.

Fifthly, They must Preach Christ Zealously, boldly, as well as wisely, Acts 4.
20. when they had charged them that they should Preach no more in the name of
Christ, why? say they, what do you tell us of the whip, or of Prisons, or of
this and that, We cannot but speak the things that we have seen and heard. So
in Jer. 20. 9. Thy word was in my As Croesus his dun^b Son did for his father.
heart as a burning fire, shut up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing,
and I could not stay. Isa. 58. 1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like
a Trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and the house of Israel
their sins. And Isaiah had his tongue touched with a coal of fire from the
Altar, Chap. 6. 6, 7. And when the Disciples were to go Basil, Luther,
L^timer, Dearing, and multitudes of others have been very zealous and
conragious in their Ministry, etc.
and Preach the Gospel, the fire sat upon their tongues, Acts 2. 34. the worst
of men are in a dead sleep, and the best of men are too often in a sinful
slumber, as the Spouse in Cant. 5. 2. and the wise Virgins in Mat. 25. and
therefore faithful Ministers had need cry aloud, they had need to be
courageous and zealous, to awaken both sinners and Saints, that none may go
sleeping to bell. Every Coward is a Murderer, as the Philosopher well observed:
The cowardice of the Minister, is cruelty; if he fear the faces of men, he is
a They that write the story of the Travels of the Apostles, report that Simon
Zelotes Preached here in England. If ever there needed some Zelots, it is now,
such as Epiphanius speaks of Eliah, That he sucked fire out of his mothers
breast.
murderer of the souls of men. Ministers must say as Hector in Homer, I will
combat with him, though his hands were as fire, and his strength as iron. Let
men's hands be as fire, and their strength as iron, yet Ministers must deal
with them, and strive to make a conquest on them, Exek. 2. 3 -- ult.

Luther professed, That he had rather be accounted any thing, then be accused
of wicked silence in Christ's cause. Let me be accounted (says he) proud, let
me be accounted covetous, let me be accounted a murdered, yea, guilty of all
Vices, so I be not proved guilty of wicked silence in the cause of Jesus Christ.

Themistocles being about to speak to the General of the Greeks Army, against
Exerxes, he held up his staff, as if he had been about to strike him, Strike
(said Themistocles) but yet hear. So should Ministers say, strike, but yet
hear; rail, but yet hear; despise, but yet hear; censure, but yet hear;
oppose, but yet hear; do what you will, but yet hear. Non amat, qui non
zelat, says Augustine, He is no friend to God, that is not zealous for him.

When one desired to know what kind of man Basil was, there was (says the
History) presented to him in a dream, a pillar of fire, with this Motto, Talis
est Basilius, Basil is such a one, and on a light fire for God. So every
Minister The father pays the Nurse, though the child dies. The Doctor has his
Fee, though the patient dies. And the Vine dresser has his reward though the
Vines wither. So will God deal with faithful Ministers. 2 Cor. 2. 15. ^sa. 49.
2, 3, 4.
should be all on a fire for God.

Sixthly, They are to Preach Christ Laboriously, painfully, frequently; a
Minister must be like the Be, that is still a flying from one Flower to
another, to suck out Honey for the good of others. Should not that dreadful
word make every idle Shepherd tremble, Jer. 48. 10. Cursed be he that does the
work of the Lord negligently. 1 Cor. 15. ult. Be ye steadfast and unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not in
vain in the Lord. Oh! the dreadful woes that are pronounced in Scripture
against idle Shepherds, Jer. 23. 1. Ezekiel. 13. 3. Chap. 34. 2. Zech. 11. 17.
Mat. 23. 13, 14, 15, 16, 23, 25, 27. The great Shepherd of our souls, the
Lord Jesus, was still a feeding of his flock, and much in provoking others to
the same work. John 21. Feed my Lambs, feed my sheep. 2 Timothy 4. Preach the word
in season, and out of season. Christ wept for souls, and bled for souls, and
prayed for souls, and shall not Ministers sweat much for souls, and work much
for the good of souls? Doubtless they will give up but a sad account to
Christ, that make any thing serve to fill up the hour, that spend two or three
hours at the end of a week to fit If a Minister had as many eyes as Argus. to
watch, and as many hands as Brtareus, ^o labor, he might find employment
enough for them all.
themselves for Sabbaoth-Exercises. Idleness is hateful in any, but most
abominable and intolerable in Ministers, and sooner or later none shall pay so
dear for it, as such, witness the frequent woes that are denounced in
Scripture against them. Where should a Soldier dye, but in the field? And
where should a Minister dye, but in the Pulpit?

Pompey, in a great dearth at Rome, having provided store of provisions for his
Citizens that were ready to perish, and being ready to put to sea, he commanded
the Pilot to hoise sail, and be gone; the Pilot told him, That the Sea was
tempestuous, and that the voyage was like to be dangerous, It matters not (said
Pompey) hoist up sail, it is not necessary that we should live, it is necessary
that they should be preserved The Angels on Jacob's ladder, were some
ascending, others discending, none standing o^ sitting still. Ministers must be
like them.
from ruin and famine. So should Ministers say, it is not necessary that we
should live, but it is necessary that poor souls should live and be happy for
ever, it is necessary that they should be acquainted with the things of their
peace, it is necessary that they should be delivered from the power of Satan,
and from wrath to come, and therefore it is necessary that we should be frequent
and abundant in the work of the Lord, and not plead storms or tempests, or
that a Lion is in the way.

It was Vespasian the Emperors speech (and may well be applied to Ministers)
Oportet imperatorem stantem mori, Sueton.
An Emperor ought to dye standing. A ^ Preacher (is Q^intillian (...) o^ an
Orator) should be Vir bonus dicendi peritus. A well spoken, and well deeded
person.


Seventhly, As they are to Preach Christ painfully, so they are to Preach
Christ Exemplarily. 1 Pet. 5. 3. Be thou an example to the flock. They must
Preach Christ as well in life, as in doctrine. Ministers must not be like the
Druggs, that Physicians say are hot in the mouth, and cold in operation; hot in
the Pulpit, and cold and careless in their lives and conversations. They must
say, as Gideon said to his Soldiers, Judge. 17. 17. Look on me, and do
likewise. Mat. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see
your good works, and glorify your father which is in heaven. They are John
the Abbot professes, That he had never taught others any thing, which he had
not first practiced himself.
called Angels, and they are called* Stars, because they should shine in
righteousness and holiness.

What Caesar once said of his wife, That it was not enough for her to be
without fault, but she should be without all suspicion of fault. may well be
applied to Ministers, who of all men in the world should be most free from the
very appearances of evil. The lives of Ministers oftentimes do convince more
strongly, then their words; their tongues may persuade, but their lives command.

Talk not of a good life (said the Heathen) but let thy life Tace lingua,
loquere vita
speak. God appointed that both the weights and measures of the Sanctuary,
should be twice as large as those of the Commonwealth, to show, that he
expects much more of those that do wait upon him in the Sanctuary, then he
does of others. Ministers should be like Musk among linen, which casts a
fragrant smell; or like that box of Spikenard, which being broken open, filled
the house with its odor.

Gregory says of Athanasius, That his life was a continual Sermon, and woeing
men to Christ. Aristotle requires this in an Orator, That he be a good man. How
much more then 1 Samuel 2. 17.
should Gods Orators be good and gracious? When Eli's Sons were wicked, the
people abhorred the Offering of the Lord; and what is that that renders the
things of God so contemptuous and odious in the eyes of many people in this
Nation, but the ignorance, looseness, profaneness, and The souls o^ Friests
(I may say, of Ministers) must b^ pu^er then the Sun* beams, says Chrysostom.
Juel. Bucer* and Bradf^rd, were famous examples for holiness.
baseness of those that are the dispencers of them. Unholy Ministers pull
down, instead of building up; Oh the souls that their lives destroy! These by
their loose lives, lead their flocks to hell, where themselves must lie
lowermost.

A Painter being blamed by a Cardinal for putting too much red upon the visages
of Peter and Paul, tartly replied, That he painted them so, as blushing at the
lives of those men who styled themselves their Successors. Ah! how do the lewd
and wicked lives of many that are called and accounted Ministers, make others
to blush?

Salvian relates, how the Heathen did reproach some Christians, who by their
ungodly lives, made the Gospel of Christ Salvianus de G. D. l. 4.
to be a reproach, Where (said they) is that good Law which they do believe?
Where are those rules of godliness which they do learn? They read the holy
Gospel, and yet are unclean, they hear the Apostles writings, and yet are
drunk, they follow Christ, and yet disobey Christ, they profess a holy Law,
and yet do lead impure lives. As this is very applicable to many professors in
these days, so it is applicable to many Preachers also.

I have read of a scandalous Minister, that was struck at the heart, and
converted in reading those words, Romans 2. 21. Thou which teach another,
teach thou not thy self? If this Treatise shall fall into any such hand, Oh
that it might have the same operation! Wicked Ministers do more hurt by their
lives, then they do good by their doctrine.

I have read of a Gentlewoman, that turned Atheist, because she lived under a
great learned Doctor, that preached excellently, but lived very licentiously.

The Heathen brings in a young man, who hearing of the adulteries and
wickednesses of the Gods, said, What do they so, and shall I stick at it? So
say most, when their teachers and leaders are lewd and wicked, what? do they
such and such abominations, and shall we stick at it?

When one deboist in life among the Lacedaemonians, stepped up, and gave good
counsel, they would not receive it; but when another of a better life stepped up
and gave the same counsel, Chrysostom Preached so feeling^y* and so
affectionatly, that his hea^ers thought they had as good be without the Sun in
the Firmament, as Chrysostom in the Pulpit.
they presently followed it. The application is easy. Every Ministers life
should be a Commentary upon Christ's life, nothing wins and builds like this.

Eighthly, Ministers must preach Feelingly, experimentally, as well as
exemplarily; they must speak from the heart, to the heart; they must feel the
worth, the weight, the sweet of those things upon their own souls, that they
give out to others. 1 John 1. 1, 2, 3. That which was from the beginning, which
we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have locked upon,
and our hands have handled of the word of life. (For the life was manifested,
and we have seen it, and bear witness, and show unto you that eternal life
which was with the father, and was manifested unto us.) That which we have
seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us;
and truly our fellowship is with the father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. The
highest Mystery in the Divine Rhetoric, is to feel what a man speaks, and
then speak what a man feels.

Praxiteles exquisitely drew love, taking the pattern from that passion which
he felt in his own heart.

'Twas said of Luther, That he spoke as if he had been within a man. Ministers
must so Preach to the people, as if they lived in the very hearts of the
people; as if they had been told all their wants, and all their ways, all
their sins, and all their doubts; no Preaching to this, no Preachers to these.

Ministers should not be like Caesar's Soldier, That dug a Fountain for
Caesar, and himself perished for want of water. Yet many such there be in
these days, that dig and draw water out of the Wels of Salvation for others,
and yet themselves eternally perish, by their non-drinking of the waters of
life. If they are Monsters (and not to be named among men) that feed and feast
their servants, but starve their wives, then what monsters are they that feed
and feast other men's souls, with the dainties and delicates of Heaven, but
starve their own? No misery, no Hell to this.

Ninthly, As Ministers must Preach the word feelingly, experimentally, so they
must Preach the word Rightly; they must divide and distribute the word
according to every ones spiritual estate and condition; they must give Comfort
to whom comfort belongs, and counsel to whom counsel belongs, Isa. 40. 1, 2.
Isa. 50. 4. 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11, 12.
and reproof, to whom reproof belongs, and terror to whom terror belongs. 2 Timothy 2. 15. Study to show thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs
not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth: Or word for word,
Rightly cutting into parts the word of truth. Some say the Metaphor is Ge^hard,
Perk^ns, etc.
taken from the Priests of the Old Testament, who having slain the Beasts that
were to be sacrificed, did joint and divide the same in an accurate manner.
Others say, it is a Metaphor taken from a Cutter of Leather, who cutteth off
Ch^ysost. Bulling ^. T^e^phyl etc.
that which is superfluous, when he cutteth out Raines and Thongs. So in the
handling of the word, Questions that are superfluous and unprofitable, ought to
be cut off, and that only is to be held forth, that makes for the hearers
instruction, edification, and consolation. Others say the Metaphor is taken And
if Galen could say, That in an^ tomizing ^ans brain, Physi^ians must carry
themselves as men do in the Temple, how much more m^st Ministers do so in
dividing the word of life.
from the cutting and squaring out of the Streets, and Highways, and seting
out the bounds of men's Lands and Possessions. Others by Cutting the word of
truth aright, understand the raising of right Instructions, by following the
rule of the word, only as a Plowman that draws or cutteth a right furrow in
the ground.

To divide the word aright, is to cut out (says Calvin, and others) to every
one his portion, as a Parent cutteth out bread to his Children, or a Cook meat
to his Guests. A general Doctrine, not applied, is as a sword without an edge,
not in it self, but to the people, who by reason of their own singular
senselessness and weakness, are not able to apply it to their own estates and
conditions: Or as a whole loaf set before Children, that will do them no good.
A Garment fitted for all bodies, is fit for no body; and that which is spoken
to all, is taken as spoken to none. Doctrine is but the drawing of the bow,
Application is the hitting of the mark. How many are wise in generals, but
vain in their practical inferences? such Preachers are fitter for Rome, then
England, souls may go sleeping and dreaming to Hell before such Preaching,
ere such Preachers will awaken them, and show them their danger. Oh that
therefore the people were so wise, as that when sin is reproved, judgments
threatened, mercies promised, and Christ freely and fully offered, they would
apply all to their own souls! This is the misery of many in our days, they
come to Sermons, as Beggars come to Banquets, carrying nothing but the scraps
away with them.

Tenthly, They must Preach the word Acceptably, as well as rightly, Eccles. 12.
10. The Preacher sought to find out Bikkesh ni P^hil, from Bakash, signifies an
ea^nest vehement seeking. etc.
acceptable words (or words of delight, as the Hebrew has it) and that which
was written, was upright, even words of truth. Ministers words should be
Divinely delectable, and desirable, they should Divinely please, and Divinely
profit, they should 'Twas a fi^e commendation given by Quintiliian, of
Thucydides, Thucydides writes thick and quick, close and clear he is solid and
s^ccint, se^tentious, and judicious.
Divinely tickle, and Divinely take both ear and heart. A Minister should be a
weighty speaker, he should cloth his Doctrine in such a comely, lovely dress,
as that he may by it slide insensibly into his hearers hearts; Ministers should
cloth their matter with decent words: The leaves give some beauty to the Tree.
Good matter in an unseemly language, is like a bright Taper in a sluttish
Candlestick, or like a fair body in unhandsome clothes, or like a gold-ring on
a Leprous hand. Truth (says one) loves to be plain, but not sluttish; as she
loves not to be clad in gay colors, like a wanton strumpet, so not in lousy
rags, like a nasty Creature. Aarons bells were golden bells (Dulce sonantes)
sounding pleasantly, and not as sounding brass, or tinkling Cymbals. Holy
Eloquence is a gift of the Holy Ghost, and may (doubtless) as Acts 18. 24.
well as other gifts of the spirit, be made prudently useful to the setting
forth of Divine truth, and the catching of souls 2 Cor 12. 16.
by craft, as the Apostle speaks; surely where it is, it may be made use of as
an Egyptian Jewel to adorn the Tabernacle.

Lactantius has well observed, That Philosophers, Orators, Lib. 5. cap. 1.
and Poets, were therefore very pernicious, in that they easily ensnared
incautious minds with sweetness of speech. Therefore Basil and Bucer were curt
and concise, full and clear in their discourses.
his advice is, Even in delivering the truth of Christ, to sweeten the speech
for the winning of them to Christ, who will neither hear, nor read, nor value,
nor regard the truth, except it be pollished and trimmed up in a lovely dress.

In the last place (and so to add no more) as they must Preach the word
acceptably, so they must Preach the word Constantly; they must not lay down
the Bible, to take up the sword (as some have done for worldly advantages) 1
Cor. 7. 20. 24 Acts 6. 2.
they must not leave the word, to serve Tables, as others have done upon the
same account; they must not change their black Clokes, for scarlet Clokes; they
must abide and continue in their places and employments; they must neither
change their work, nor their Master, Acts 6. 4. But we will give our selves
continually to pray, and to the Ministry The Shewbread stood all the week
before the Lord, ^o show that Preaching is not out of season on any day.
of the word. They would not assign their charge to some Surrogates, or
Deputies, that themselves might live at ease: No, they were peremptorily
resolved to hold on, to continue in these two choice duties, Prayer, and
Ministry of the word. So in Chap. 26. 22. Having therefore obtained help of
God, I continue unto this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying no
other things then those which the Prophets and Moses did say should come. 1 Timothy 4. 15, 16. Meditate (...) En toutois isihi* Spend thy ^me in them.
upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear
to all, or in all things. Take heed unto thy self, and unto thy doctrine:
Continue in them, for in doing this, thou shall both save thy self, and them
that hear thee. 2 Timothy 3. 14. But (...). Mean. Abide, keep hy station, ^hou
wilt be put to it, thou will me^^ with earthquakes.
continue thou in the things which thou have learned, and have been assured of,
knowing of whom thou have learned them. Eccles 12. 9. And moreover, because the
Preacher was wise, he still taught the people knowledge, yea, he gave good
heed, and sought out, and set in order many Proverbs.

Hosea was four-score years a Prophet to Israel, and yet did not convert them,
yet notwithstanding all discouragements, he continued constant, and that with
abundance of freshness, and liveliness.

Chrysostom compares good Pastors to Fountains, that Ch^ysost. in Mat. Hom.
15.
ever send ^^rth waters; or Conduites, that are always running, though no
Paile be put under.

Erasmus says of Hierom (Minima pars noctis dabatur somno minor cibi nulla
otio) He allowed least time for sleep, little for food, none for idleness. It
best becomes a Minister to dye Preaching in a Pulpit.

Now if this be so, Then by way of Use let me say, That this truth locks very
sowrely and wishly upon all those that Preach any thing rather then Christ.

The Lord be merciful to them, how have they forgotten the great work about
which their heads and hearts should be most exercised, to wit, the bringing in
of souls to Christ, and the building up of souls in Christ; where do we find
in all the Scripture, that Christ, his Prophets, or Apostles, did ever in their
Preaching meddle with businesses of State, or things of a mere civil
concernment? My Kingdom is not of this world. Who has made me a Judge? says
Christ. I hope it will not be counted presumption in me, if I shall propound a
few Rules for such to observe, that are willing to Preach Christ to poor
souls; I will only propound three.

And the first is this, If you would Preach Christ to the people, according to
the Rules last mentioned, then

You must get a Christ within you.

There Is nothing that makes a man indeed so able to Preach Christ to the
people, as the getting a Christ within him: And it is very observeable, that the
great Rabbis and Doctors that want a Christ within, they do but bungle in
the work of the Lord, in the Preaching of a crucified Jesus; and were it not
for the help of Austine, Chrysostom, Ambrose, and Tertullian, etc. what sad,
dead, and pitiful work would they make? Yea, for want of a Christ within, how
little of Christ do they understand? How little of Christ do they make known,
notwithstanding all their borrowed helps? Paul was a man that had got a Christ
within him, Gal. 2. 20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life
that I live is by the faith of the Son of God, etc. Compare this with Gal. 4.
19. My little Children, of whom I travel in birth till Christ be formed in
you. A Christ within, makes him travel in birth. Odino. 2 Cor. 11. 23. ult. As
Nurses to Princes children, are fed with the most delicate fare, but not for
their own sakes, bu^ for the childrens sake to whom they give Nurse. So it is
with many Ministers that want a Christ within. ^ Tim. 2. ^4, 25.
The Greek word Translated, I travel in birth, signifies not only the travel
of the woman at the birth of the Child, but also the painful bearing thereof
before the birth. The pains of travel breed not a greater desire to see a
Man-child borne into the world, then Paul's love bred in him, till Christ were
anew formed in them. No man did so much for the winning of souls to Christ, as
Paul; nor no man had so much of a Christ within him, as Paul. Nothing will
naturalize a Ministers heart to his work, like a Christ within; nothing will
make him so wise, so painful, so watchful, so careful to win souls, as a
Christ within; nothing will make him hold out, and hold on in the work of the
Lord, in the face of all oppositions, persecutions, dangers, and deaths, as a
Christ within. Nothing will make a man strive with sinners, and weep over
sinners, and wait upon sinners for their return, as a Christ within: Such
Ministers that have not a Christ within them, will find to comfort, and as
little success in their Preaching of Christ. Above all gettings, get a Christ
within, or else after all thy Preaching, thy self will be a castaway.

Secondly, They that would Preach Christ to the people, must

Study more Scripture truths, Scripture Mysteries, then humane Histories. They
must study Gods Book more then all other Books. The truth and antiquity of the
Book of God finds no companion, either in Age or Authority. No Histories are
comparable to the Histories of the Scriptures, Moses is sound more ancient then
all those whom the Grecians make most ancient, as Homer, Hesiod, and Jupiter
hims^l^, whom the Greeks have seated in the top of their Divinity.


For 1 Antiquity. 2 Rariety. 3 Variety. 4 Brevity. 5 Perspicuity. 6 Harmony. 7
Verity.

Gregory calls the Scripture (Cor and animam Dei) The heart and soul of God;
for in the Scriptures, as in a glass, we may see how the heart and soul of
God stands toward his poor creatures. It was the glory of Apollos, that he
was mighty in the Scripture, Acts 18. 24. John 5. 39. Search the Scripture,
says Christ. The Greek word signifies to (...).
search as men search for gold in Mines. You must search the Scripture, not
superficially, but narrowly. The Scriptures are a great depth, wherein the
choycest treasures are hid, therefore you must dig deep, if you will find,
Col. 3. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell richly in you. Or as the Greek has
it, (...)
Let the word of Christ indwell in you, as an ingrafted word, incorporated into
your souls. Let the word be so concocted and digested by you, as that you
turn it into a part of your selves. You must be familiarly acquainted with the
word, you must not let it pass by you as a stranger, or lodge and sojourne
with you as a wafairing man; it must continually abide with you, and dwell
richly in you. 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God,
and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness: That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
all good works. All Books and helps are not comparable to the Bible, for the
completing and perfecting of a man for the work of the Ministry.

That which a Papist reports of their Sacrament of the Mass, That there are as
many Mysteries in it, as there are drops in the sea, dust on the earth, Angels
in heaven, Stars in the sky, Attomes in the Sunbeams, or sands on the
seashore, Whiles they burned us, said Reverend Moulin, for reading the
Scriptures, we burnt with zeal to be reading of them. But where is this brave
spirit now?
etc. may be truly asserted of the word of God. No study to the study of the
Scripture for profit and comfort. Count Anhalt, that Princely Preacher, was
wont to say, That the whole Scriptures were the swaddling bands of the child
Jesus, he being to be found almost in every page, in every verse, in every line.

Luther would often say, That he had rather that all his Books should be
burnt, then that they should be a means to hinder persons from studying of the
Scripture.

The third and last Rule I shall lay down, is this, Such as would Preach
Christ aright to the people, had need

Dwell much upon the vanity of humane doctrines.

The vanity of which doctrines may be thus discovered.

First, They do not discover sin in its ugliness and filthiness, as the
Scriptures do. They search but to the skin, they reach not to the heart; they
do not do as the Master did in Jonah's ship, when they were in a storm.

Secondly, Humane doctrines have no humbling power in These things had need be
seriously minded in these days, wherein ^umane doctrines are so much exalted
and admired.
them. They may a little tickle you, but they can never humble you; they cannot
cast down Satan's strong holds, they cannot melt nor break the heart of a
sinner; they cannot make him cry out with the Leaper, Unclean, unclean.

Thirdly, Humane doctrines nourish not the noble part, the soul of man. The
Prodigal was like to starve before he returned to his fathers house. A man may
study much, and labor much, and lay out much of his time and spirits about
humane doctrines, and yet after all, be like to Pharoah's lean Kine. A man that
studies humane doctrines, does but feed upon ashes.

Fourthly, Humane doctrines cannot cure a wound in the conscience. The diseased
woman spent all she had upon Physicians, but was not a penny the better. The
remedy is too weak for the disease. Conscience like Prometheus Vulture, will
still lie gnawing notwithstanding all that such doctrines can do.

Fifthly, Humane doctrines are so far from enriching the soul, that they
usually impoverish the soul. They weaken the soul, they expose the soul to
the greatest wants, and to the greatest weaknesses; they play the Harlot with
the soul, they impoverish it, and bring it to a morsel of bread. Who so poor
in spiritual experiences, and heavenly enjoyments, as such that sit under the
droppings of humane doctrines?

Sixthly, Humane doctrines make men servants to the humors, and corruptions of
men. They make men pleasers of men, rather then pleasers of God: Yea, they make
men set up themselves and others, sometimes in the room of Christ, and
sometimes above Christ. I hope these few short hints may prevail with some to
fall in with this counsel, that so they may the better Preach the Lord Jesus to
the people.

And so much for this Doctrine.

EPHESIANS. 3. 8. Unto me who am less then the least of all Saints, is this Grace
given, that I should Preach among the Gentiles, the Unsearchable Riches of
Christ.
HAving spoken much concerning Ministers Duty, I shall now speak a little
concerning their Dignity, and so finish this Text.

Unto me who am less then the least of all Saints, is this Grace given, that I
should Preach among the Gentiles, the unsearchable riches of Christ. This
grace, this favor, this honor is given to me, that I should Preach, etc. I
look not upon it as a poor, low, mean, contemptible thing, but as a very great
honor, That I should Preach among the Gentiles, the unsearchable riches of
Christ.

The Observation that I shall speak a little to, is this.

That the Office of a Minister, or Preacher, is honorable.
For the understanding of this Point, Premise with me, two things.

First, That by a Minister, I understand one that is qualified according to
Gospel Rules, and that is internally called by God, and externally called by
the people of God, to the Ministerial Office.

The second thing that I would have you Premise with me for the understanding
of the Point, is this, That the common Apellation of those that are set apart
for the Preaching of the Gospel, in the New Testament, is (DIAKONOI.)
Ministers. So in 1 Cor. 3. 5. 2 Cor. 3. 6. and Chap. 6. 4. and Chap. 11. 15.
23. 1 Timothy 4. 16. And in diverse other places, the word Minister is a Title of
Office, service, or administration, given frequently to the Preachers of the
Gospel. As for the names of Ambassadors, Stewards, and the like, wherewith they
are often honored, they are figurative, and given to them by allusion only.

These two things being Premised, we shall now proceed to the opening of the
Point.

And in the first place I shall prove, That the Office of a Minister is an
honorable Office.

And then in the second place I shall show you, What honor is due to them.

And then in the third place I shall show you, How you are to honor them.

And then in the last place, we shall bring home all by A word of Application.

Christians, Give me leave to tell you this by the way, That since the Gospel
has shined in England, a godly, faithful, painful Ministry was never more
subtily and vehemently struck at by men that make a fair show, and by men of
corrupt opinions, and wicked lives. This Age affords many Church-Levellers, as
well as State-Levellers. Some there be, that under that notion of Plucking up
corrupt Ministers, would pluck up by the very roots, the true Ministry: But God
has, and will be still too hard for such men; if they will be Monsters, God
will be sure to be Master. His faithful Ministers Revel. 2. 1.
are stars that he holds in his right hand, and men shall as soon pull the Sun
out of the Firmament, as pull them out of the hand of God.

Now considering that there is such a spirit abroad in the world, I hope no
sober serious Christians will be offended at my standing up to vindicate the
Honor of a godly faithful Ministry. In order to which, I shall first prove
that the Office of a Minister is honorable, and to me these following things
speak it out.

First, The several Names and Titles that are given to them in Scripture, does
speak them out to be honorable. They are called Fathers, Stewards,
Ambassadors, Overseers, and Angels, as you all know that know any thing of
Scripture. To spend time to prove this, would be to light Candles to see the
Sun at noon.

Secondly, Their work is honorable. Their whole work is about souls, about
winning souls to Christ, and about building souls up in Christ, and to these
two heads, the main work of the Ministry may be reduced. The more noble the
soul is, O anima Dei insignita imagine, desponsa^a fide, donata spiritu, etc.
Bernard. O Divine soul invested with the Image of God, espouse^ to him by
faith, etc.
the more honor it is to be busied and exercised about it. Jam. 5. 20. Let him
know, that he which converteth the sinner from the error of his way, shall
save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.

Let him know: That is, let him take notice that an honorable and glorious
work is done by him. The soul is the immediate work of God, the soul is the
Image of God, the soul is capable of union and communion with God, the soul
is more worth then a world, yea, then a thousand worlds. Christ prayed for
souls, and wrought Miracles for souls, and wept for souls, and left his
fathers bosom for souls, and bled out his heart blood for souls, and is gone
to heaven, to make provision for souls, yea, he is now a making intercession
for souls. All which speaks out the excellency of their Office, whose whole
work is about souls.

The Jews say of Moses his soul, That it was sucked out of his mouth with a
kiss. Souls are dear, and sweet to God.

A third thing that speaks out this truth, is this* They are fellow laborers
with God. They are Co-workers with God in the salvation of sinners. And this is
a mighty honor, to be a fellow laborer with God, to be a co-worker with God,
1 Cor. 3. 9. For we are laborers together with God. Who would not work hard
with such sweet company? Who Mat. 5. 14. John 5. 35. Man. 5. 13. Mark 9. 49, 50.
would not affect, prize, love, and honor such service? Ministers are called
the light and salt of the world, because they inlighten blind souls, and
season unsavory souls, and so save them from corruption and perdition. Oh! to
be joined in any work with God, is an honor beyond what I am able to express.

The Senate of Rome accounted it a diminution of Augustus Caesar's dignity, to
join any Consuls with him for the better carrying on the Affairs of the
State. Oh but our God does not think it a diminution of his dignity, that even
his poor despised servants should be fellow laborers, and co-workers with him
in the salvation of souls.

Fourthly, The honorable account that the Lord has of them in this
employment, speaks out this truth, That their Office is honorable. In Mat. 10.
41, 42. compared. He that Kings and Princes have their Ambassadors in very high
account, so has God his.
receives you, receives me; he that receives a Prophet in the name of a
Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward. And Luke 10. 16. He that receives
you, receives me; and he that despises you, despises me. This honorable
account God has of all his faithful servants in this employment.

The fifth thing that speaks out this truth, is this, They serve an honorable
Master. They serve him that is all ear to hear, all hand to punish, all power
to protect, all wisdom to direct, all goodness to relieve, and all mercy to
pardon. They Habet omnia qui habet habentem omnia Aug. He has all, that has
the haver of all.
serve that God that is (Optimum maximum) the best and greatest. God has
within himself all the good of Angels, men, and universal nature; he has all
dignity, all glory, all riches, all treasure, all pleasure, all delight, all
joy, all beatitudes. Mark, abstracts do better express God, then concretes,
and adjectives. God is being, bonity, beauty, power, wisdom, justice, mercy,
and love it self. God is love (says the Apostle) in the very abstract. God is
one infinite perfection in himself, which is eminently and virtually all
perfections It Is truly said of God, that he is Omnia super o^nia.
of the Creatures: And Oh then what an honor must it be to those that are
employed under so honorable a Master?

Sixthly, Their very work and service is honorable. Why else did the Apostle
cry out, Who is sufficient for these things? Their maine work is to treat with
sinners about eternity, etc.
There is no such Embassage in the world, as this is, in which they are
employed. Ephesians. 6. 19, 20. Pray for me, that I may make known the Mystery of
the Gospel, for which I am an Ambassador in bonds. Faithful Ministers do
represent the person of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; their work is to
treat of Peace between God and man, or of open Hostility between the Creator,
and the Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20.

Seventhly, and lastly, Their Reward from God is honorable. Though the world
Crown them with thorns (as it did their Lord and Master before them) yet God
will Crown them with honor, Dan. 12. 3. They shall shine as the Stars in the
Firmament. You know Ambassadors have not preferments while they are abroad, but
when they come home into their own Country, then their Princes prefer them,
and put much honor upon them. So will God deal with his Ambassadors. 2 Timothy
4. 7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith, henceforth there God will at last highly reward those very services that
men don't regard, etc.
is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous
judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto all them also
that love his appearing. So in Isa. 49. 4, 5. I have labored in vain, I have
spent my strength for naught, and in vain, yet surely my judgment is with the
Lord, and my reward with my God. Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be
glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength. So in 2 Cor.
2. 15. For we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved,
Latimer in one of his Sermons, speaking of a Minister who gave this answer why
he left off Preaching because he saw he did no good. This, says Latimer, is a
very naughty, naughty answer.
and in them that perish. Ministers shall be rewarded according to their
faithfulness and diligence, though some perish. It shall be with them, as with
Vine-dressers, you know Vinedressers are rewarded according to their diligence
and faithfulness, though some Vines never bear, nor bring forth fruit at all.
As Ministers are diligent and faithful, so the reward, the Crown shall be
given full at last. You know the Barber is as much rewarded for trimming a
Black-a-more, though all his pains in rubbing him can never make him white, as
he is for trimming and rubbing of another man that is white, and by a little
pains is made more white. This is many-a-faithfull Ministers grief, that he
takes a great deal of pains in rubbing and washing (as it were) to make
souls white and clean, pure and holy, and yet they remain after all, as black
as hell; but surely their reward shall be never the less with God. The Nurse
looks not for her wages from the Child, but from the Parent. If Ministers, like
clouds, sweat themselves to death, that souls may be brought to life, great
will be their reward, though those souls should perish for ever, for whom they
have wept, sweat, and bled.

God will not deal by faithful Ministers, as Exerxes did by his Steer-man, who
crowned him in the morning, and beheaded him in the evening of the same day:
No, God will set an everlasting Crown upon their heads, who remain laborious
and faithful to the death. The world for all their pains will Crown them
with thorns, but God at last will Crown them with glory, he will set a Crown
of pure gold upon their heads for ever. And thus you have the Point proved.

The second thing that I am to do, is to show you

What Honor that is which is justly due to faithful Ministers.
Now this I shall show you in three things; there is a threefold honor that is
due unto them.

First, Honorable Countenance is due to them that are in so honorable a place
and Office as they are in, 1 Cor. 14. 1. Let a man so account of us, as of the
(...) Under-rowers to Christ the Master-Pilot, helping forward the ship of the
Church to the haven of Heaven.
Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13.
And we beseech you brethren to know them which labor among you, and are over
you in the Lord, and admonish you: And to esteem them very highly in love for
their work sake: Or, To esteem them more then exceedingly, or, more then
abundantly, (...).
as the Greek will bear. And so in 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule well
be accounted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in the word
and doctrine. The Greek (...).
word that is here rendered Labor, signifies not simply ((...)) to labor, but
to labor with much travel and toil, to labor even to lassitude, as he does
that cleaves wood, or that toileth in harvest, or that goes a warfare.
Preaching is a Our Savior at little part ^hirty, was ^eckoned by the Jews to
be toward fifty, John 8. 57. he had so spent himself in preaching. Preaching
is a spending painful work
most painful work, and enfeebleth a man exceedingly, whence the Prophet cries
out, My leanness, my leanness, Isa. 24. 16. No pains, no labor, no work to
that of the brain, to that of the mind, nor none so worthy of praise, as those
that are most in that labor, in that work. No men's work is so holy and
heavenly, as theirs, nor no men's work is so high and honorable, as theirs, and
therefore none deserve to be more honored, then they, though not for their
own sakes, yet for their works sake. Shall Turks and Papists so highly esteem
and honor every hedge-Priest of theirs, above their merits? And shall not
Christians much more honor their faithful Ministers? Faithful Ministers must
have countenance, as well as maintenance, they must have reverence as well as
recompense: You are not to nodd the head, and put out the lip, to scoff, and
mock, and jeere at them, Gal. 4. 14. And my temptation which was in my flesh,
ye despised not, nor rejected, but received me as an Angel of God, even as
Christ Jesus. When Ehud told the King of Moab, I have a Message to thee from
God, O King, he rose from his Throne, and bowed himself, Judge. 3. 20. Isa. 52.
7. How beautiful upon the Mountains are the feet of him that brings good
tidings, that publishes peace, that brings good tidings of good, that
publishes salvation, that says unto Zion, thy God reigns.

How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet? What Is their face then?
What Is their doctrine then? Their very feet when dirty, sweaty, and dusty, are
yet very beautiful and lovely.

It was a common saying at Constantinople, That 'twas better the Sun should not
shine, then that Chrysostom should not Preach.

I have read of one that said, If he should meet a Preacher and an Angel
together, he would first salute the Preacher, and then the Angel afterward. If
you do not give them honorable countenance, Jews and Turks, Papists and
Pagans, will in the great day of account rise up against you, and condemn you.
I could say much of what I have observed in other Nations and Countries
concerning this thing, but I shall forbear; should I speak what I have seen,
many Professors might well blush.

The Gretians use to give far greater respect and honor to their
Philosophers, then to their Orators, because that their Orators did only teach
them to speak well, but their Harvest-laboures have meat and drink, and double
wages. Some think that the Apostle has respect to the Law of the first borne,
Deuteronomy. 21. 17. in which a two sold portion is commanded to be given him. The
ancient Christians, as appears by Tertullian, were wont in their Agapes, or
Love Feasts to give their Ministers a double portion. Surely Ministers should
have such a liberal, honorable, and ingenious maintenance, as might set them
above the vulgar, as the firstborn by their double portion were set up above
the rest of their Brethren.
Philosophers did teach them to live well. Oh! what honor then is due to them
that do teach you both to speak well, and to live well; both how to be happy
here, and how to be blessed hereafter. And thus you see that honorable
Countenance is due to faithful Ministers.

Secondly, There is an honor of Maintenance, as well as an honor of
Countenance that is due to them, 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. Let the Elders that rule
well be accounted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in the
word and doctrine. For the Scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle the Ox that
treads out the Corn, and the labourer is worthy of his reward. It was not
the manner in the Eastern Countries to thrash out Corn as we do, but their
Oxen trod it out, to which the Apostle allegorically compares laborious
Pastors, who after a sort crush out that Corn of which the bread of life is
made, Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is taught in the word, communicate to him that
teaches in all good things. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for what a man
sows, that shall he also reap. So in 1 Cor. 9. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Who goes a
warfare any time at his own charge? Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of
the fruit thereof? Or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the
flock? Say I these things as a man? Or says not the Law the same also? For it
is written in the Law of Moses, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that
treads out the Corn. Does God take care for Oxen? Or says he it altogether
for our sakes? For our sakes no doubt this is written, that he that ploweth
should plow in hope, and that he that thresheth in hope should be partaker of
his hope. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if
we shall reap your carnal things? Mat. 10. 9, 10. Provide neither gold, nor
silver, nor brass, in your purses, nor scrip for your journey, neither two
coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves, for the workman is worthy of his meat.
Gods appointment in all these Texts, bespeak it.

Again, You may consider the necessity of it; how shall they go on in their
warfare, if they be troubled with the things of this life. Again, they are to
give them selves wholly to the work of the Ministry, 1 Timothy 4. 5. And again,
the equity and justice of the duty Christ and the Apostle shows in the
forenamed Scriptures, Mat. 10. 10. 1 Cor. 9. 10. The maintenance of the
Minister should be so free, and so liberal, as may testify that you honor
him in your hearts, and as may keep him from contempt and scorn in the world.
There are multitudes that grumble at the expense of a penny for the maintenance
of those Divine Candles that waste themselves to give light to them; that will
rather dye to save Charges, then spend a little money to save their lives, yea,
their souls. They like well of Religion without expense, in Basil, and a
Gospel without charge, but if it grow costly, it is none of their money. The
Scripture says, Buy the truth, but sell it not; you can never over buy it,
whatsoever you give for it; you can never sufficiently sell it, if you had all
the world in exchange for it.

It is said of Caesar, That he had greater care of his Books, then of his
Royal Robes; for swimming through the water to escape his Enemies, he carried
his Books in his hand above The Ministers maintenance is not to be esteemed of
the nature of Alms (as some would have it) but is a Tribute of honor, such as
is given by an inferior, to his superior.
the water, but lost his Robes. But alas! what are Caesar's Books to Gods
Book? The word is the field, and Christ is the Treasure that is hid in that
field. The word is a ring of gold, and Christ is the Pearl in that ring of
gold, and is it then worth nothing? Many deal with faithful, painful
Ministers, as Carriers do with their Horses, they lay heavy burdens upon them,
and exact work enough, and give them but easy Commons, and then to recompense
this, they hang Bells at their ears and necks. They shall be commended and
applauded for brave excellent Preachers, and for great paines-takers, etc. That
maintenance that is justly due to the Ministers of the Gospel, is honorable,
it ought to be suitable to their condition and dignity: The maintenance that is
due to them, is of the same nature with that which is given to Princes and
Magistrates, by those which are under them, and not a common maintenance which
superiors give to their inferiors, or servants.

Thirdly, There is an honor of Obedience and Service that is due to them. And
indeed, of all honors this is the greatest honor that can be cast upon a
faithful Minister, the honor of Obedience, Heb. 13. 7. Remember them that
have the rule over you, who have spoken to you in the word of God. And verse.
17. Obey them that rule over you. O submit your selves, for they watch for your
souls as they that must give an account, that they may do it with joy, and
not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you.

Obey them that have the rule over you. The word that is (...).
rendered Rule over you, in the seventh and seven-teenth verses, signifies
Captains, Guides: Faithful Ministers are your Captains, they are your
Guides, they are your Chieftaines, they are your Champions that bear the brunt
of the Battle, the heat of the day, and therefore you must obey them, even as
Soldiers do their Captains. So in 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. And if any man obey not
our words, note that man, and have no company with him. Brand him as infamous,
beware of him, let him see a strangeness in you toward him, that all may
avoid him, as one whose company is dangerous, and infectious. Ah Christians! by
your submission to their doctrine, you highly honor them, and you make their
heavy task to be easy and sweet unto them. Christians, it will be your honor
and happiness in the day of Christ, that you have lived out what they have
made out to you. I suppose you remember that happiness is not entailed to
hearing, or knowing, or talking, John 13. 17.
but to doing, If you know these things, blessed and happy are you, if you do
them. There are some diseases that are called There is no fear of know^^g too
much, but there is much fear and danger of practicing too little. I fear,
with St. Augustine, That many grieve more for the bar^nnesse of their Lands,
then for the barrenness^ of their lives. The more the Cypress is ^atered, the
more it is withered. Oh that it were not so with many in these days!
(Opprobria Medicorum) the reproaches of Physicians; and there are some people
that may be truly called (Opprobria Ministrarum) the reproach of Ministers, and
those are they that are great hearers, and talkers, and admirers of Ministers,
but never obey the doctrines delivered by them. The Corinthians were Paul's
honor, they were his living Epistles, they were his walking Certificates, they
were his Letters testimonial, 2 Cor. 3. 2, 3. The obedience and fruitfulness
of the people, is the Ministers testimonial, as the profiting of the Scholar
is the Masters commendations. Oh what an honor is it to a Minister, when it
shall be said of him, as one said of Octavius, When he came into Rome he found
the walls all of base materials, but he left them walls of Marble. So, here is
a Minister that found the people dark and blind, but left them enlightened; he
found them dead, but left them alive; he found them a proud people, but has
left them humble; a profane people, but has left them holy; a carnal people,
but has left them spiritual; a worldly people, but has left them heavenly; a
wavering people, but has left them settled and rooted, etc. No honor to a
faithful Minister, like this. And thus you see what honor is due unto them,
etc.

And now let me make a word of use, Christians, If their Office be so
honorable, then honor them. O give them the honor from darkness to light,
and from the power of Satan, unto God, but them? Who have built you up in the
light and love of Jesus, but them? etc. O don't cast scorn and reproach upon
them, but give them that honor that is due unto them.

But you will say to me, How shall we honor them?

I answer, You must honor them these five ways.

First, You must honor them, By hearing them, and giving Antisth^nes a
Philosopher, went every day six miles to hear Socrates.
credit to their Message. The want of this honor troubled Jonah too much. Who
has believed our report? Not to believe the report that they make concerning
God, and Christ, etc. is to cast the greatest dishonor that can be, upon them.
The wise men, Mat. 2. went many weary hundred miles to find Christ at
Jerusalem, some think near a thousand Nunquam nimis (...), quod nunqua^ sa^i,
dicitur. We can never hear that too often, that we can never learn too well.
miles. The Queen of Sheba some say went 964 miles to hear the wisdom of
Solomon; and what was Solomon's wisdom to that wisdom of Christ that is held
forth to souls in the Ministry of the Gospel. The Holy Martyrs thought no
weather too hot, no winter too cold, no journey too long, nor no torment too
great, to enjoy the Preaching of the Gospel, though darkly. The Heathen Priests
began with Hoc age, they thought it a very irreligious thing to be remiss and
vain, though in a vain Religion. Oh that vain Professors would remember
this, and blush!

Secondly, You may honor them By standing fast in the doctrine of the Lord
delivered by them. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 8. Ye are our joy, our Crown, if ye stand fast
in the Lord; else, says the If I forsake my profession, I am sure of a worse
death the^ Judge Hales had, said that Martyr.
Apostle, ye kill our very hearts. If after all our studying, wrestling,
sweating, and Preaching, ye shall play Apostates, and leave the precious ways
of God, and run after notions, and vain opinions which cannot profit you, nor
better you, you will kill many at once, your own souls, and our hearts.

Thirdly, You should honor them By being followers of them, so far as they are
followers of Christ. So in 1 Cor. 4. 16. Be ye followers of me, even as I am of
Christ. Chap. 11. 11. Bonus dux, bonus comes. A good leader makes a good
follower.
Heb. 13. 7. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 7. Phil. 3. 7. All these Scriptures bespeak you to be
followers of them, as they are followers of Christ.

Alexander had somewhat a rye neck, and his Soldiers thought it an honor to
be like him. Oh! it is an honor to Ministers, when their people are like them
in knowledge, wisdom, love, humility, holiness.

Plutarch said of Demosthenes, That he was excellent at praising the worthy
acts of his Ancestors, but not so at imitating them. Ah! many in these days
are excellent at praising and commending the holy and gracious actings of their
Prayer is (Porta coeli c'avis Paradisi.) The gate of heaven, a key to let us
into Paradise. The Jews fable, That our Savior by finding out the right
pronou^ciation of the name of God, did all his Miracles: But certainly the
right invocation of the name of God, would even make Ministers work Miracles
indeed.
Ministers, but not so at imitating them.

Fourthly, You must honor them By bearing them upon your hearts, when you
appear before the Lord in the mount. Ephesians. 6. 18, 19. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1, 2. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 25. Col. 1. 4. 3. Heb. 13. 18. Acts 12. 5. All these Scriptures do
bespeak Christians to bear their faithful Ministers upon their hearts when
they are a wrestling with God. None usually are opposed, as they; their wants
are many, their weaknesses are more, their work is great, their strength is
small. O pray, pray more and more for them, yea, pray believingly, pray
affectionately, pray fervently, pray unweariedly, that they may speak from the
heart, to the heart, that they may speak things that are seasonable and suitable
to the capacities and conditions of his people. They can tell when they want
your prayers, and when they enjoy your prayers; did you pray more for them,
they might do more for your internal, and eternal good, then now they do.

Lastly, You must honor them By adhering to them, and biding with them in all
their trials, afflictions, and tribulations that do or shall attend them. It Is
brave to own them in a storm, to own them when others disowne them, when
others oppose them, and act highly against them. Paul looked upon himself as
much honored by Onesiphorus owning of him in his chains, 2 Timothy 1. 16. The Lord
give mercy unto the house The Saints in the Primitive times did so stick and
cleave to those that were in bonds, that the very heathen admiringly cried out,
Look how the Christians love one another.
of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain: But
when he was in Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found me. The Lord
grant unto him, that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day. And in how many
things he ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou know very well. Chrysostom in
an Oration, says of Christians, That they would not be kept from visiting the
Confessors in Prison, although it was forbidden with many threatening terrors,
and it was great danger to them.

But to draw to a close, You have heard that the Office of a faithful Minister
is honorable, and you have heard what honor is due unto them, Let me
therefore desire you all To take heed of scorning, contemning, and despising
those that are faithful, that are qualified according to Gospel Rules.

That Is a sad word, 2 Chronicles. 36. 15, 16, 17, 18. God sent his Messengers early
and late to reclaim them, but they mocked the Messengers of God, and despised
his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against
his people, till there was no remedy, nor no healing. David never played such a
harsh part all his days, as he did to the Ammonites that dispitefully used his
Ambassadors, as you may see at large in 2 Samuel 10. Ambassadou^s are inviolable
by the Law of Nations, and the least indignity off^red to them, is to be as
severely punished, as if it had been offered to the person of that Prince whom
they represent.


The Romans sacked the famous City of Corinth, and razed it to the ground, for
a little discourtesie they offered to their Ambassadors. And they slew many of
the Illyrians, and the Tarentines, for misusing of their Ambassadors. And do
you think that the Lord is not as tender of the credit and honor of his
faithful Ministers, and that he will not avenge the affronts, wrongs and
injuries that are done unto them? Surely he will. Jer. 29. 17, 18, 19. Thus
says the Lord of Hosts, Behold I will send unto them the Sword, the Famine,
and the Pestilence, and will make them like vile Figgs that cannot be eaten,
they are so evil. And I will persecute them, with the sword, with the famine,
and with the Pestilence: And I will deliver them to be removed to all the
Kingdoms of the earth, to be a curse, and astonishment, and an hissing, and a
reproach among all Nations, whither I have driven them. But why will God do
this? Because they have not hearkened See 2 Kin. 17. 13, 14, 15. The Lamps went
out, and Leander was drowned, said he in the History.
to my word, says the Lord, which I sent unto them by my servants the
Prophets, rising up early and sending them, but ye would not hear, says the
Lord. Now mark, though these temporal judgments are not visible among us, yet
spiritual judgments, which are the worst of judgments, are very visible.
Though there be no sword, no famine, no Pestilence, yet there is spiritual
madness, spiritual drunkenness, spiritual giddiness. Oh! the blind minds,
the corrupt judgments, the hard hearts, the seired consciences, that are to be
found among the Professors of this age! As there are no mercies Jer. 13. 13.
Ezekiel. 23. 33. 1 Timothy 4. 2. Tit. 1. 15.
to spiritual mercies, so there are no judgments to spiritual judgments. Oh
the slightness, the coldness, the deadness, the barrenness that is abroad
in the world! God suites his judgments to men's sins, the greatest sins are
always attended with the greatest judgments. In these days men sin against
more glorious means, more great love, more clear light, more tender bowels of
mercy, etc. then formerly, and therefore God gives men up to more sad and
dreadful (spiritual) judgments, then formerly.

They say when Hercules drew up Cerberus from hell, he led him in a Chain, and
he went quietly till he came to the Horizon, and saw the peeping of the light,
but then he pulled so strongly, that he had like to have pulled the Conqueror
and all back again. Ah! it is sad when men had rather live in darkness, and
dye in darkness, and to hell in darkness, then they will see the light, enjoy
the light, and walk in the light. Many fret at the light, and at those that
bring it, as the Aethiopians once a year solemnly curse the Sun. Such souls
stand in much need of pity, and prayer.

And thus (according to my weak measure) I have given out what God has given
in from this Scripture, and shall follow it with my prayers, that it may be a
word of life and power, both to Writer, Reader, and Hearer. Amen.

Soli Deo Gloria in Aeternum.
FINIS.

