Britains Triumphs, OR, A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE WARS AND OTHER STATE AFFAIRS
OF Great Britain.

From the Death of the late KING, to the third year of the Government of the
LORD PROTECTOR.

Vide quam repent tempus res mutat humanas,
Tempora mutantur, nos et mutamur in illis.
LONDON Printed for Edward Farnham, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Popes-head-Alley, near Cornhill. 1656.

(...) that have happened in this little corner of the Earth for these five years
last past; which although peradventure they may be imbased by the course and
mean allay of this impolisht dress; yet in this as in all other Histories, you
may find some things which may aut prodesse, aut delectare, either profit or
delight thee: One wisely and truly calls History the faithful preserver of
things past, and the certain Prophet of things to come. First here is related
the Fall of one of the mightiest Monarchs in Europe, and in him of Monarchy it
self, with the several designs and transactions that were set on foot for the
instating of his Son in the Throne, and the fruitless events thereof. The
Conquest of Scotland. The Reducing os Ireland. The Revolt of the Carybe
Islands, and the reducing thereof; and of the Islands of Scilly, Jersey, and
Man. The Breach between England and the United Provinces, and all the memorable
Sea Fights that ensued thereupon. The Dissolution of the (commonly called)
everlasting Parliament. The Calling another Assembly or Parliament, with the
manner and cause of the dissolution thereof. The Lord General made Lord
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. the Solemnities used therein,
his Reception and Entertainment in the City of London; Other things of less
moment are interwoven and promiscuously mingled up and down the Book, as the
nature thereof requires: And further finding thy kind acceptance of the first
Impression, it has enboldened me to bring down the Story of all the Wars and
other memorable things of Britain, to the third year of the Protector; all
which as to matter and form, I leave to thy Impartial judgment there to be
arraigned, and condemned according to the nature of the offense; and withal I
request thee, that with patience, thou will pass by such faults as have
escaped the Press, whether verbal, syllabicall, or literal; and so farewell.

A COMPENDIOUS NARRATIVE of the most Important Affairs of Great Britain, from
the death of the late KING to the third year of the Government of his Highness
the Lord Protector.
AS to the external Causes of the many evils and miseries wherewith this Nation
has been afflicted for these few years past, much might be said, but the chief
I have reduced to the following Heads.

The first and general Cause was the Sins of the People, of the Plebeian rout)
and as discontented with their present condition, sought felicity in things
they wanted, Malv. Romans
and were still unsatisfied even in the accomplishment thereof: whence is
occasioned the hatred of tranquillity, the desire of motion, the loathing of
present things, and seeking after future.

Another principal Cause, Europe, not excelling in any thing that might be
called virtuous, but inured themselves to a soft and luxurious life, abounding
in all manner of voluptuous and effeminate pleasures, rejecting the more noble
dictates of nature and grace, not atchieving any one enterprise, that might
render them either feared abroad, or loved at home: but still wanting fuel for
the fire of their prodigality, daily invented some new and indirect courses and
ways to torment the people; whose jealousies and fears increasing with their
grievances, brought forth a most bloody and intestine war, which ended not
but in the subversion of Church and State, as then established, viz. Episcopacy
and Monarchy, the head of both being cut off and the bodies discomfited. And
though the King was judged to be the Patron of those many innovations and
miscarriages that befell the Church and Commonwealth, yet I am fully persuaded
they proceeded not from the depravedness of his will, but the flexibility of
his nature, overwhelmed by his pernicious Council, by which he seemed of a
lesser magnitude then otherwise he would have done; yet was he not the worst
although the most unfortunate of Princes: and in him ended Monarchy, but not
the miseries of these Nations: for after some years civil (and yet unnatural)
war betwixt King and Parliament, they at length terminated in the vanquishing
of his Armies, the surprizall, captivity and death of his person, upon a
scaffold before his Palace of White Hall, Jan. 30th. 1648.

The third and last Cause which I shall mention (though not the least,
slothfulness of the Clergy, who not only starved their flocks by withholding
the spiritual food of their souls, but also tormented their bodies, by
exhausting and sucking their bodily substance, insomuch that the Nation groaned
under the burden of their abominable corruptions, who should have been the
examples and leadingcards of piety and sanctity: yet did the popular fury
contribute more to the confusion of their Hierarchy, then all their Crime put
together; nor were they cried down with more heat, then afterward cried up,
verifying that of the Poet, Quid populi tibi voce places? Mori Epigr.
saepe optima caecus
Dat vitio, and temere deteriora probat.


Having now hinted out unto you the Causes of our Wars and the distractions
that followed (the beginning, progress and conclusion thereof, to the
beheading of the King, being accurately and briefly described by another hand)
I shall proceed to that which remains. May 's Brev.


No sooner was this mighty Prince bereaved of his life and dignity in such sort
as is before related, bnt Monarchy (the darling of the multitude) was voted
chargeable, unnecessary and useless, and the Government was resolved into that
of a Commonwealth.

Yet this mutation hapned-not for want of such as by a lineall descent, and
according to the usage of this Nation, might pretend a Title to the Crown: for
there was a plentiful Issue of the late King (both Male and Female) then
surviving, but from some other political reasons best known to the then
swaying Powers, the which added and ministered hopes equal to the discontents of
the people.

Now Charles (though eldest Son of the late King) inherited little save the
misfortunes of his Father, and what else he could chaulk out with his Sword;
yet his greatest hopes and expectations were from Ireland, where the several
factions united, proclaimed him King, and bent their whole strength against the
Interest of the Commonwealth of England; and in short space became so
formidable, and prevailed so much, that they possessed all the strong holds of
that Country ( Dublin and Londonderry excepted) both which were straightly
besieged, the former by an Army of 22000. men under the Marq. of Ormond, the
latter by a party of the Irish Rebels: he had likewise adjoining to the
territories of England, the Islands of Scilly, Jersey, and Man, which yet
advantaged him no more then by nourishing a few small Picaroons to infest the
narrow seas.

But his affairs in Ireland were no sooner at this height, but they begun as
suddenly to decline; for there being about 3000 Horse and Foot safely landed at
Dublin (as the forlorn of a greater body) they were joined with what other
Forces they could then make, all which made not above 9000 at the utmost, and
commanded by the valiant and never to be forgotten Coll. Mich. Jones, sallied
forth, and not only raised the siege, but routed the whole Army of the Marqu.
of Ormond, himself hardly escaping: about 2000 were slain in the place, and in
the pursuit, some thousands were taken Prisoners, as likewise all their
Ordinance, Ammunition, Carriages, Provision, with great store of rich Booty. To
add to their declining estate, and help forward the destruction of these grand
confederates, who were thus defeated in the midst of their mighty Attempts and
huge imaginations, General Cromwell landed in Ireland. Aug. 1649.
Oliver Cromwell Lord Deputy of Ireland landed at Dublin with a powerful Army
(about the midst of Aug. 1649.) well accommodated for the accomplishment of
that enterprise so happily began. And first he laid fiege to Drogheda, and in
small time (though with some difficuly and loss) took it by storm; and that
he might chastise their obstinacy, and strike terror into other Garrisons, put
to the sword all that were found in Arms, which were about 3000. Presently
after which there fell into his hands many other Garrisons, some by force,
others by surrender, viz. Trim, Dundalk, the Nury, Wexford, Rosse,
Bandonbridge, Kinsale, Passagefort, with many more too tedious to relate. In
other parts of Ireland, several Garrisons of the Enemy were taken, and many
considerable Parties were routed by others of the Parliaments Chieftains, viz.
the Lord Broghill, Sr. Charles Coot, Coll. Venables, Coll. Jones, and others;
and though this people have been still on the losing hand, yet have they held
out in Boggs and fastnesses even to this day; whereby we see, that the
vanquishing this Nation, was not so feasible as in the days of Henry the
second, who made it but a winters work to reduce and subject the people
thereof: a thing scarce credible (says our Author) that a Country so populous,
Dan. Chro.
a Nation of that disposition, should not lift up a hand to defend it self! But
it seems (says he) they were wholly unacquainted with such strange kind of
fights, or such weapons; insomuch that the terror thereof laid them prostrate
to the overrunner; but though the winning of that Nation was accomplished with
so much ease, yet in the keeping thereof, was more difficulty and cost. In
short, The Affairs of the Catholic and other their confederate party mouldered
and declined more and more, to the great grief and disheartning of the Royal
Party. Virginia and the Carybe Iflands revolt.


Much about this time happened a general defection of the English Plantations
from their obedience to the Parliament, viz. Virginia and the Carybe Islands:
where, in the ardency of Popular fury, Liturgy, and Monarchy were cried up, and
the Nonconformists were some stigmatized, some fined, and some banished; which
courses procured them no small trouble and loss, in the decay of their Trade,
and loss of their ships, all Nations being prohibited from trading or
traffiquing with them upon pain of forfeiture: Are reduced.
All which were in a few months reduced by a Fleet of ships from England under
Sr. George Ayscue, not being able to subsist for any considerable space of time
without Trade.

The English coasts were likewise miserably infested with Pirates from Scilly,
Jersey, Ireland, and France; but the very Prince of Pirates and Plunderers, was
one commonly known by the name of Prince Rupert, who with the remnant of that
Fleet, that (not long before) had revolted from the Commonwealth of England,
being about nine tall and warlike Ships, committed many spoils and
depredations, not only upon the English coasts, but in other places likewise,
whereby the Merchants inccurred no small loss.

Now for the encouraging of Trade and reducing of Pirates, a stout and lusty
Fleet of Ships, well rigged and manned were set forth, which (with Gods
blessing) scoured the channel and blockt up Prince Rupert in the Harbor of
Kingsale, which with the Town being taken by the Lord Genesis Cromwell, they were
forced thence to make all the sail they could away, (leaving about three Ships
behind) and at length arrived at Lizbon, the Impe^ial City of the King of
Portugal, and craved his protection, which was not denied them, the which
caused much trouble, loss and detriment to that King; and was the only cause
of that unhappy difference that fell out between him and this Commonwealth, as
hereafter will appear.

Other designs were set on foot by the Royal party, for the obtaining their
ends.

The first was tht Commissionating of James Graham Earl of Montrose, for ^he
raising what Forces he could in Holland and other parts to invade Scot^and.

The second was the procuring a Treaty between the Scots and their King,
whereby they might by force or ^raud work him into an absolute Sovereignty over
that Nation, making good that known distich, If the Lions skin will not
prevail,
They Will piece it with the Foxes tail.


To give more life to these undertakings, Ambassadors were dispatched to Spain,
Italy, Denmark, Sweden, Russia, Turkey, etc. in the name of Charles the Second,
King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, which Title
(with much confidence) ^he assumed to himself, yet obtained neither Men nor
Moneys worth noting from any of them, but excuses, pleas, and complements in
abundance; for alas they had rather he should not be at all, than be too great:
they that have equal dignity of birth, had rather have no equal than any
superior.

Montrose (according to his Masters Instructions, Montrose enters Scotland,
having got together some inconsiderable supplies of men and moneys) at length
lands in the North of Scotland, where he had not long been, ere he was assailed
and routed by a party from the Kirk, Is routed, taken prisoner and executed.
and his Person brought prisoner in most disgraceful manner to the Castle of
Edinburgh, where to fill up the measure of their malice, they hanged him ten
yards from the ground, an act so barbarous and inhumane, as admits of no
comparison: thus lived and thus died the Mirror of Manhood and Map of misery,
who for many years together had been a thorn in the side of the Kirk; witness
the several defeats he gave them, and who from small beginnings accomplished
vast enterprises, whose hard fateit was at last to fall into their bloody
hands, Sic transit gloria mundi. One would have thought this one act of theirs
had been of force enough to prevent all future overtures between the Scots and
their declared King: yet as if he had thoroughly learnt that lesson, Qui nescit
dissimulare ^^seit regnare, he took little notice ^hereof.

Next Montrose was executed Sir John ^^rrey, Coll. Spotswood, and others that
were the chief actors in that underta^ing, by which means they were rid of
(...) dangerous enemy.

On all this the English (like caute^ous statists) had a watchful eye, and on
every of those actings, whether o^en or secret, that might have any reflection
upon them or their affairs: and to the end they might the better sound the
contrivances of their adversaries, they endeavor to strengthen themselves by
foreign Alliance; and accordingly they sent Dr. Dorislaus, Dr. Dorislaus
murder at the Hague.
a wise and knowing man, as public Agent, into the united Provinces, whereby
to keep a right understanding and fair correspondency between the two
Republics: where he had not long been ere he was slain by six assassinates
that broke into his lodgings at the Hague in a disguised habit, by which means
they escaped unpunished, notwithstanding the many endeavors (at least
pretendedly used) for their apprehension. The author^^ of this Tragedy were
afterward known to be English Cavaliers, discontented at their declining
state, and loss of their old Master: one whereof was Coll. Spotswood before
mentioned, who at his death confessed he was an actor therein. Thus stood the
English affairs in reference to their enemies abroad, while they were in
somewhat worse plight at home: for amidst the several factions that sprung up
during these late wars, none was more desperate then that commonly known by
the name of Levellers, The Levellers mutiny.
who at once so wrought with the Soldiery, that a considerable party of Horse
withdrew themselves from the Army, and gathered together such others of their
party as they could conveniently, thinking thereby to force their Lords and
Masters to such things as their immature and unbridled apprehensions had
dictated to them: But by the care and industry of Genesis Fairfax, Are suppressed.
they are defeated at a place called Burford in Oxfordshire, and of those that
were taken, some were made exemplary, others were cashiered the Army, and the
rest upon their submission were taken into favor.

Not long after was brought to trial at the Guildhall London, Lilburne tried
at Guildhall.
the grand Champion, the chiefest and only Patriot of the action aforesaid,
viz. John Lilburne, a man of a restless and yet invincible spirit, that could
never be deterred with threats, or won with favors, by a special Commission of
Oyer and Terminer; where was present most of the Judges and Justices of the
several Courts at Westminster, the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, and several Aldermen
of London, with others of eminent quality. The Indictment with many crimes of a
treasonable nature, as being the Author of such and such Books mentioned
therein; which Books were fraught with the most shameful revilings, scurrilous
invectives, and malicious outcries against the Governors, and Government of
this Nation, that the heart of man could invent; calling them Tyrants,
Traitors, Conquering Usurpers, and what not? Now though nothing was more
generally believed, then that the Books aforesaid were of his own penning and
publishing, yet at his trial he made such an excellent, Is cleared and
released.
subtle and singular defense, that the Jury brought him in Not guilty,
whereupon he had his release.

By this time the several transactions that were between the Scots and their
King, had brought forth a Treaty at Breda in the Netherlands, The treaty
between the Scots and their King concluded.
a Town of special note belonging to the Prince of Orange, at whose cost and
charges it was both continued and concluded: now that part of the Agreement
that had the most especial influence on us, was, that they should endeavor to
the utmost of their power, to reinstate him in his Fathers Throne, invest him
in his Power and Greatness, and establish him in his just Rights and
Dignities: where we shall at present leave him to see how the affairs of his
Adversaries the English succeeded.

The differences that lately broke out between the King of Portugal and this
Nation, were now widened by acts of open hostility; for when the English
perceived, that neither entreaties nor threats would make him force Prince
Rupert out of his Harbor, and that the often applications and negotiations of
the English Agent Mr. Charles Vane, in order thereunto, could avail nothing,
but on the contrary prepared what Ships of war he had to join with Rupert,
and so to chase the English from his Coasts, they seized many of his Ships
richly laden both inward and outward bound: but the King doubting his strength,
desisted from falling upon the English Fleet, and sell to seize the estates,
and secure the persons of the Merchants and Factors residing in Lisbon and
other places under his Jurisdiction.

About this time likewise the English sent an Agent to the King of Spain, viz.
Mr. Anth. Ashcam, M. Ashcam the English Agent murdered at Madrid.
a most learned and excellently well accomplished Gentleman, who on the 5th. of
June, 1650. landed at Santa Maria; where (hearing of many threats against his
person) he procured a Guard that conducted him to Madrid, where is kept the
Court of the King of Spain. The first night it was his hard fortune to lie at
an Inn; the next day while with his Interpreter Signior Riba he sat at
dinner, six devils in the shapes of men, knocked at the door, had easy access,
and being entered Mr. Ashcam rose to salute them, whereupon the foremost stabbed
him in the head, and his Interpreter endeavoring to escape was stabbed in the
belly, both falling down dead in the place. Whence the murderers fled to the
Venetian Ambassadors house, but were denied entrance: whence they fled to the
Sanctuary, were pursued and carried to prison from thence by the Kings special
command, one of them only escaping. Hereupon arose a great difference between
the King and the Church, about the violation of the holy Sanctuary, and thereby
infringing the Sacred Rights and Privileges of the Church, and demanded that
the Assassinates should be delivered again into the Sanctuary. On the other
hand the Parliament of England by sundry Messages, earnestly pressed that Justice
might be severely inflicted upon those execrable offenders, that had
perpetrated so horrid and vile an act upon their public Minister. And indeed
it was a crime of so transcendent a nature, that me thinks it should not enter
into the heart of any considerate man to imagine of any expiation for them
here, however it may please God to deal with them hereafter. The Church
notwithstanding prevailed, so far as to interrupt the course of Justice, for
as much as their punishment has been hitherto fuspended, though for any thing
we hear they are yet in durance.

Near this time arrived in England the Lord Gerard Scarph, as Commissioner from
the States Provincial of Holland and West Friesland, and upon the 11th. of
June, 1650. he delivered his Message in Parliament; which though it produced no
more then a mutual desire of an amicable compliance, yet was it very well
resented by the Parliament, that they showed themselves the leading cards to
the rest of the Provinces at such a time as that.

Now when as the Treaty at Breda was fully ended, and that all their Jealousies
and animosities (notwithstanding the vast disproportion and notable antipathy
that was erewhile between the Royalists and Presbyterians) was by this means
fully allayed, at least in show. The Scots seemed to want nothing save the
presence of their King, whereby to crown their desires and confront the
English, in order whereunto he hasts from Breda to the Hague, from thence to
Scheveling, where he took shipping, and at last in despite of foul weather,
and the English Kingfishers that lay there to intercept him, he landed at the
Spey in the North of Scotland, where he found the greatest difficulty in
ascending the Throne, and least enjoyed it of any Prince that was ever heard or
read of. For upon all occasions he was compeld to trace the steps, and follow
the dictates of that haughty Clergy, in all their fanatic humors and
imperious decrees: who bereaved him first of all his old friends, Counselors
and confederates, whether of the Clergy or Layety, who (to say the truth) had
always accompanied his Father and him in all their dysasters and dangers; and
had shipwrackt their own fortunes to carine and repair his, though it may be by
this desertion he intended their restoration. But now the Scots had a King,
yet (as though they had none) they did what seemed right in their own eyes.

The first and most pernicious potion they made him to take, and of hardest
digestion, was the solemn League and Covenant, that ignis fatuus, and only
seminary of blood and mischief in these three Nations.

The next was a declaration of the Kirks own framing and fashioning; wherein he
is taught to renounce the sins of his Fathers house, and of his own, the
Idolatry of his Mother, by a constant adhering to the Cause of God, according
to the Covenant, in the firm establishment of Church government, as it is laid
down in the Directory for public Worship, Confession of Faith and Catechism:
This with diverse others of the like nature (although with much reluctance) he
also signed; which it is like, burdened his spirit, yet bettered not his
condition, which was like that of a Child under Tutors and Governors; for
there was not an Officer in that Church or Commonwealth, how vile and abject
soever in place or person, but enjoyed more freedom in body and mind then he.
Guarded indeed he was, but little regarded; so that move he must not but in the
sphaere of the Kirk; they were the primum mobile, whereby it is apparent that
the Government of that Nation was not truly Monarchical (though they had a
King) but Hierarchicall, the confusion whereof I shall now set before you.

The Parliament of England weighing right well the condition into which their
affairs were now reduced (by reason of the Agreement that was peeced up between
the Scots and their King) after a serious and solemn debate, Genesis Fairfax
lays down his Commission, which was presently conferred upon General Cromwell
Lord Deputy of Ireland.
voted that Thomas Lord Fairfax with the Army under his command should march
Northwards: who (after some conference had with the Parliament) and being
prompted by an indisposition of body or mind, laid down his Commission: which
was forthwith conferred upon Oliver Cromwell Lord Deputy of Ireland, who (in
order to this Northern expedition) arrived a while after from his victorious
archievements in that country, leaving his Son in Law Henry as Lord Deputy in
his room.

Accordingly Orders were issued forth for the speedy advance of the Army into
Scotland, who had no sooner begun their March, but the Scots took the Alarm,
and sent two or three Papers to Sr. Arthur. Hasterig then Governor of
Newcastle; wherein they expostulated the Case about the sudden approach of the
English Army, endeavoring thereby to impede their march, till such time as
their designs were ripe: alleging (as scar-Crowes to fright fools) the
Covenant, the large treaty and Union between the two Nations, with other
circumstances of the like nature, as frivolous as they were fruitless.

The Parliament of England then published likewise a Declaration, showing the
grounds and reasons of their Armies advance toward Scotland, accompanied with
another from the General and officers of the Army, The Declaration of the
English Army in their march to Scotland.
showing that that which moved them to that great undertaking, was not any
reliance upon the arm of flesh, or being lifted up with the remembrance of
former successes, or the desire of accomplishing any designs of their own that
they had forelaid, but the full assurance they had that their Cause was just in
the sight of God: looking at the precedent changes, and the successes that
produced them, not as the work of the policy or strength of man, but as the
eminent actings of the Providence and Power of God, to bring forth his good
will and pleasure, concerning the things which he has determined in the world;
adding that nothing was so predominant with them (next to their duty to God,
not to betray a cause to which he had so much witnessed) as the love they had
to those that feared God there, who might possibly suffer through their own
mistakes, or their disability to distinguish in a common calamity: of which
Christian love they hoped that they gave some proof when they were before in
Scotland with that Army, and were by God made isntrumental to break the power
of those that oppressed the godly Party there; for which (say they) their late
Engagement to their new King against England was no good requital, nor their
heaping on them the reproach of a Sectarian Army, a Christian dealing: all
which (by the grace of God) they could forget and forgive, and did (as they
say) desire of God that the precious might be separated from the vile,
beginning and concluding with a most solemn and dreadful imprecation and
appeal; That to the truth of these things the God of Heaven in his great mercy,
pardoning their weaknesses would judge of them when they came to meet the Enemy
in the Field.

This Declaration was sent by the General of the English Forces from their
Headquarters at Barwicke to Edinburgh by a Trumpeter, whom they blinded coming
and going: what effect this wrought, the sequel of the Story will relate.

From Barwick the Army marched to the Lord Mordingtons House July 22. 1650.
where they lay three days: on the 25. they marched to Copperspeth, the 26. to
Dunbar, where they received some provisions from the Ships sent on purpose to
attend the motions of the Army; forasmuch as the people of the Country had
forsook their habitations, and had left nothing behind that might accommodate
them. The Army thus refresht at Dunbar, marched thence to Haddington: Next day
hearing the Scots would meet them at Gladsmore, they labored to possess the
Moor before them, but no considerable part appeared, whereupon Major General
Lambert and Colonel Whalley men of approved courage with 1400. Horse were sent
as a Vauntguard to Mussleborough to attempt something upon the Enemy if
possible; The General with the residue of the Army marching in the rear, the
English and Scotch Horse had some encounters, but the Scots would not endure
the Shock: that night the English lay encamped close at Mussleborough; the
Enemy was within four miles of them, entrenched with a Line, flanked from
Edinburgh to Leith; the Guns from Leith scouring most parts of the Line, so
that they lay very strong: The English finding their Enemies were not easily to
be attempted, lay still all that day being the 29. which proved a sore day of
rain, and greatly disadvantageous to them, having nothing to cover them, all
which, expecting a speedy engagement, they did cheerfully undergo it; next day
being the 30. the ground very wet, and provisions being scarce, the English
resolved to draw to their Quarters at Mussleborough, to refresh and revictuall;
which while they were doing, the Scots fell upon their rear, and put them to
some disorder. But some bodies of the English Horse came forthwith to close
with them, which produced a hot and gallant skirmish, insomuch that at length
the English charged them so home, that they beat them to their very Trenches.
Major General Lambert in this dispute was run through the arm with a Lance
and wounded in another part of the body, taken prisoner, but rescued by
Lieutenant Empson of the Generals Regiment; several o^ the Scots were killed
and taken prisoners, with small loss to the English: among the rest there was
taken one Lieutenant Colonel, one Major, and some Captains, some persons of
note were likewise slain.

By this means the English had opportunity to march quietly off to
Mussleborough, which they did that night; but so wearied for want of sleep, and
tired with the dirtinesse of the ways, that they expected the Enemy would make
a sudden infall upon them, which accordingly they did. Between three and four
of the Clock next morning, being the 30. of July, with fifteen select Troops of
Horse under the Command of Major General Montgomery, and Coll. Straughan, who
came on with great resolution, beat in the English Guards, and put a Regiment
of Horse into some disorder; but the English presently taking the Alarm
charged, routed, pursued, and did execution upon them, within a quarter of a
mile of Edinburgh, taking and killing many, as well Officers as Soldiers: the
Scotch affairs succeeding in this sort, made them forbear such frequent
sallies, and keep within their intrenchments.

This was the posture of the Military affairs in Scotland, when to add to the
miseries of that people, all traffic and commerce was prohibited between the
two Nations. And such of the Scots as had their residence in England, were
commanded to depart the Land within ten days or thereabouts; their Ships (not
able to resist, having no Convoy) were often surprised by the English, insomuch
that they were in the road way to ruin: But seeing this Month of August
produced little of action from the Armies there, it will not be amiss to give a
brief account of such remarkable passages as about that time happened in England
and the neighboring Nations.

At London was apprehended, condemned, Col. Andrews beheaded at Towerhill.
and executed Colonel Eusebius Andrews, who being taken with a Commission from
Charles Stuart, and for entering into a conspiracy to undermine the Government
of England, suffered death as aforesaid.

From the united Provinces came account of some notable transactions, which
take as follows.

The Prince of Orange (Brother in Law to the Scots King, by marrying his
Sister, Daughter to the late King of England) aspiring to a higher degree of
Sovereignty over those Provinces then he or his Predecessors ever enjoyed, and
being thwarted in some of his projects when he was at Amsterdam, he thereupon
was so distested, that he resolved to right himself, by securing and putting
out the leading men in that Province of Holland, for which purpose he caused
all the Deputies thereof (being then at the Hague) to assemble, which they
refusing, he seized most of them, those of Amsterdam, (whom he chiefly defired)
escaped only. His next design was to have surprised the City of Amsterdam by a
stratagem, commanding the Horse to such a place, under pretense of conducting
his Mother, and shipped his Infantry at Vtrech in the ordinary Passage-boats,
to come all night, that they might be there early next morning, and the horse
to have their Rendezvous upon the Heath between Naerden and Amesford about
midnight, and to be at the Ports of the Town at the moment appointed; by which
time the foot should have seized on the Regulars and the S. Tunies Ports, and
have opened a passage for the Horse to enter; which design (if by a wonderful
providence of God in sending a fierce storm of rain that night, the intended
march of the Horse had not been hindered from coming to the place and time
appointed) had in all probability taken effect. Nor had the Town known any
thing thereof till too late. But the Hamburgh Post, as he was coming to the
Town met with several parties of Horse, riding to and fro about Amesford and
the Heath, yet who they were he knew not.

Hereof the Lords being informed, straightway caused the Ports to be shut, the
Bridges drawn, the Guards set, the Ordinance planted, and all warlike
preparations to be made; and all this while not knowing their enemies. But they
were not long in suspense, for notice was soon given, that it was Count William
with his Forces, whose designments being thus defeated, the Prince of Orange
accosts the Town with this following Letter.

Worshipful, Prudent, Discreet Sirs, and my very good Friends.
WHen I was last in the City for the service of the Country, I was so
strangely entertained, that not to be subject to the like hereafter, I found it
expedient to send Count William with the Troops following him into your City;
and ordered him to keep all things in peace, and quiet there, that I might not
be hindered by any all-affected, in such things as yet I have to propound unto
you, touching the service of the Country, wherein I require your good
assistance; And in considence thereof, commending you to the protection of the
most High, I remain

Hague, July 29. 1650. Your good Friend, W. Prince of Orange.


This stratagem (projected with so much secrecy and subtlety) failing, Count
William drew off his Forces to several Posts, with intent to block up the
Town, which being in a posture of defense, opened their sluices, and set the
Land under water round about; and having so done, they sent a Trumpeter to
Count William to know the reason of that so sudden approach, and to desire him
to retreat with his Army, who returned answer, that he could do nothing till he
heard from the Prince of Orange, yet a little after he thought fit to quit his
station and retire; yet the Deputies of Holland being fast in the Castle of
Lovenstaine, the Prince of Orange had the advantage of making his own
conditions which were these.

1. That the Town of Amsterdam shall agree with the other six Provinces for
continuing the Militia, as it is now settled for four or five years.

2. That the Prince shall repair to their City at pleasure, and be received
upon his entry with all respect and reverence, as was used in times past to his
predecessors, Lievtenants of Holland, and have access into their Assemblies.

3. That the Lords of Amsterdam shall at the next Assembly of the States, use
their utmost endeavors to allay all jealousies and to reconcile differences in
reference to the late action, and bury all in oblivion.

4. That the Lords Andrew and Cornelius Bicher, shall forthwith be removed from
Government, with respect had to their good Names, Integrity and future
Security; and if after they have had conference with his Highness the Prince
of Orange he shall persist in his opinion touching them, that then they shall
be rendered incapable of any Government hereafter.

Now though by this means he brought the States under his Lure, and subjugated
them to his humor; yet this was not the prize he run for, his greatest hopes
and highest thoughts being fixed on that inexhaustible treasure then in the
bank at Amsterdam, with which he might not only have raised his declining
state, but also mount to an absolute degree of Sovereignty and Supremacy over
that people, and likewise might have contributed much toward the repairing the
despicable and needy fortunes of his Brother in Law the Scots King, to the
troubling and disquieting the peace and tranquillity of these three Nations; to
all which it pleased God of his goodness to give a check.

The State of France had likewise a plentiful share in those encumbrances and
common calamities that are incident to Nations and people by reason of foreign
and domestique broyls; The present Cardinal Mazarine was looked upon as the
very efficient cause of all their civil discords, and the only ey-soar of that
miserable people; not much unlike the late blazing Star of Canterbury in
England, both Churchmen, and yet both Statesmen, of like interest with their
King; and of like power over the people, both alike emulated by the Nobility
for their Greatness, and of the Commonalty for their grievances; But like Fate
has not befell them; For this Cardinal is neither out of favor with his
Prince, nor is he fallen into the hands of the people, for though they have
often showed their teeth, it has never been in their power to bite.

For during the minority of the present King of France Lewis the 14. the sole
management of State affairs has been in the hands of the Queen Regent, and her
beloved Favorite Cardinal Mazarine; at which (after some years forbearance)
the chief of the Nobility uttered their discontents both publicly and
privately: whereupon three of them were arrested and sent to prison, viz. Lewis
de Bourbon Prince of Conde, Armant de Bourbon, Prince of Conti, and the Duke of
Longueville; this administered fresh occasion to the people to breath out their
discontents, those of Bordeaux against the Duke of Espernon more especially,
but all against the Cardinal; So that on a sudden the whole Kingdom was
inflamed with civil wars and the appurtenances thereunto unto belonging. The
principal promoters of and actors in those tumults, were two famous Amazones,
the Princess of Conde, and the Duchess of Longueville in behalf of their
imprisoned husbands: Many others of quality appeared also in their behalf, and
to make themselves the more formidable, contracted an underhand bargain with
the Spaniard, who (greedy to fish in such troubled waters) supplied them with
considerable sums of money. The Parliaments of Bordeaux, Paris, Dijon,
Toulouse, etc. countenanced these designs in opposition to the Cardinal and
his creatures: So that in short space Armies were raised on both sides, Towns
garrisoned, taken and re-taken, many men's lives lost, and the Country preyed
upon by all parties; The Spaniard being not only a fomenter of, but an actor in
these portentous divisions, for by this means he had the opportunity to march
to and fro in that Nation, without any considerable opposition, taking
Garrisons, and wasting the Country at his pleasure.

These Insurrections (after many ebbings and flowings, strange Revolutions and
transmigrations, too tedious here to insert,) at length produced the liberty of
the Princes, the withdrawing the Duke of Espernon from Bourdeaux, the banishing
the Cardinal with all his kindred and si lends from the Court and Kingdom:
yet was he longer banishing then banished; for it was not many months ere he
returned in great pomp and glory, to the extreme grief of his old malcontents
and competitors, the Prince of Conde, the Duke of Orleance and others; as
appears by the present troubles wherewith that servile people is yet afflicted:
where (praying for their deliverance) I shall leave them, and return to the
more proper subject of this discourse, viz. the English affairs in Scotland.

The month of August was nee^ done, and little action performed save the
taking of Collington house, and Readhall by storm, and in it the Lord Hamilton,
Major Hamilton and sixty Soldiers, 60. Barrels of Powder, 100 Arms, great
store of Meal, Malt, Beer, Wine, and other rich plunder: This was done on the
24 of Aug. 1650.

The body of the English Army removed forthwith from Pencland Hills, to
Collington, Readhall, and other parts within a mile of the whole Army of the
Scots; on the 27th. both Armies marched side by side, a great bog only betwixt
them, which hindered an engagement, yet the Great Guns played on both sides: Aug.
28. the Canon from the English Camp played hard upon the Enemy and greatly
annoyed them, all which provoked them not to fight, but still they kept within
the protection of the Bog: The English (being in some want of Provisions) drew
off to to their old Quarters at Pencland Hills, then with much difficulty to
Mus^leborough to recruit, which done they drew off their Forces, quitted their
Garrisons, and marched to Haddington; the Scots attending on their right wing,
fell into their Quarters with a r^solute Party, and were as valiantly repulsed
by a Regiment of Foot commanded by Coll. Fairfax.

September. 1. The Scots being so advantagiously drawn up at the west end of the
Town, the English drew Eastward into fair and champion ground, fit for both
Armies to engage in: but finding (after several hours expectation of the
enemies approach) that they would not move after them, but to dog them to
advantages, they marched toward Dunbar, whither the Scots moved apace after
them, and at a Pass endeavored to fall upon the rear, which the English
perceiving faced about to fight them: whereupon the Scots drew off to the
Hills, perceiving their 'advantage lay there, to impede the English at the
Pass at Copperspeth; which being effected, they bragged they had the English in
Essex his pound, meaning they had them upon the same lock the King had the Earl
of Essex at in Cornwall: so ready are men to promise wonders to themselves,
while they confer but with their own desires.

The English were indeed environed with all manner of apparent dangers; their
Forces were lessened, their bodies weakened with Fluxes, their strength wasted
with watchings in want of drink; wet and cold weather they were always
accompanied with, and much impaired in point of courage, 2000 at least being
disabled for present service, were sent at several times to Barwick.

The General and his Council of Officers finding the Army unfit for further
delays, The Scots defeated at Dunbar.
resolved next morning to break through that their Israelitish condition, by
falling on the right wing of the Scots, and either force a passage that way, or
perish in the attempt; and being imbattailed by break of day accordingly, they
fell upon the enemy with Horse and Foot very unanimously; who to hinder the
English at a Pass, drew up all their Horse upon their right wing, and
valiantly received the onset. The Word of the English was, The Lord of Hosts;
and that of the Scots was, The Covenant. The English as men endued with new
strength from on high, vigorously pressed forward, as resolved to become absolute
vanquishers, or to die martyrs. After one hours sharp dispute, the Scots were
wholly routed, their Cavilry fled, and the Infantry were all or most of them
slain and taken to the number of about 15000. There were taken 200 Colors, 10
Colonels, 12 Lieutenant Colonels, 9 Majors, 47 Captains, 72 Lievtenants, 80
Enfignes, befides Cornets and Quartermasters: 22 Pieces of Ordinance, with
several smaller Pieces, about 15000 Arms; those of quality taken, were the
Lord Libberten and his Son, the Lord Cranston, Sr. James Lumsdale, Lieutenant
Genesis of the Foot, Adjutant Genesis Bickerton, Scoutmaster General Cambill, etc.
At this engagement all the Forces of the English would not amount to 1200, and
the Scots were in number more then 20000. And as there was a general Fast
throughout England, to implore a blessing from Heaven upon the proceedings of
their Army in Scotland, so likewise there was appointed a solemn day of
thanksgiving to Almighty God for this mighty Victory obtained over the Scots in
the fields of Dunbar, Sep. 3. 1650. In the observation whereof many of the
Clergy showed themselves very froward and obstinate, of whom I shall have
occasion to speak more hereafter.

Sept. 7. four Regiments of Foot marched into Lies, where they found 37 Guns
mounted on Platform, some Shot and Ammunition with store of wealth.

The same day the Lord General Cromwell drew the rest of his Army both Horse
and Foot into Edenburrough without any loss save the Arm of a Soldier taken
off by a Canon bullet from the Castle. Sept. 6. being Sabbath day, General
Cromwell sent a Trumpeter into the Castle, to invite the Ministers to come to
their several Charges, which they resused, so that the English supplied their
places.

For some certain time the Army was busied in completing the Fortifications at
Lies, the most commodious Harbor for their accommodation in all Scotland.

Genesis Cromwell (after he had caused a Protection for Markets, and Liberty of
Trade in Edenburrough and Lies to be proclaimed by beat of Drum and sound of
Trumpet) marched forward Sep. 14. with his Army to Netherish, six miles from
Edenburrough, leaving Major General Overton with his Brigade behind. Sep. 15.
the Army marched beyond Linlithgow, but (by reason of the extremity of the
weather) they were forced to quarter there that night. Sep. 16. they marched
toward Falkirk; and from thence Sep. 17. within a mile of Sterling. Sep. 18. a
Council of War was called, and a Letter drawn up to be sent into the Town,
expressing their constant affection to, and tenderness of the People of
Scotland, which though they had not taken the desired effect, yet being so
far advanced into the Country with their Army, they now desired them to take
into consideration their former Papers, and deliver up that place for the
service of the Commonwealth of England. A Trumpeter being sent with the Letter,
a Gentleman on foot, with a Pike in his hand met him, and told him they would
not let him come in, nor receive his Letter.

In the afeernoon came a Trumpeter from the Scots, desiring a release of
Prisoners upon ransom: To which General Cromwell answered, That they came not
thither to make merchandise of Men, or to get gain to themselves, but for the
service and security of the Commonwealth of England.

The same day Orders were issued forth for the Horse and Foot to march toward
Sterling, in order to a storm, Ladders and all other necessaries being provided
for that purpose; but the strength of the enemy, and of the place, with other
disadvantages being considered, it was resolved that the Army should draw off;
which accordingly they did, Sep. 19. and marched to Linlithgow, which when the
General and his Officers had viewed, order was given for making several Works
for the security of the place, conceiving it might make a very considerable
frontier Garrison, lying in the heart of the Country, between Edinburrough and
Sterling: whence (leaving there five Troops of Horse, and fix Companies of
Foot) General Cromwell, with the rest of the Army marched back to
Edenburrough. Sep. 23. The Genesis and Officers kept a day of Humiliation.

About the same time the Kirk Party also appointed a solemn Fast, 1. To humble
themselves for their too much confidence in the arm of flesh. 2. For the
malignity and profaneness of their Army. 3. For the Plunderings and
wickedness of their Army when they were in England. 4. For their not
sufficient purging their Army. 5. For their Commissioners unlawful and
surreptitious manner of prosecuting the Treaty with their King, and their
crooked ways in bringing him home. 6. For their not sufficient purging the
Kings house. 7. For the just grounds they have, that his Majesty's Repentance
was not sound, nor from the heart.


From which time to the months end, little was done, save that Genesis Cromwell
took order for the effectual reducing of the Castle of Edenburrough: for which
purpose many miners both Scotch and English were procured to expedite the
business. Sep. 30. The English went so near the works of the Castle, as they
carried away one of the Scots Colors, 300 Muskets with other Arms, without any
loss.

October. 1. The Scots Galleries went on in order to springing the Mines, they
sent many great and small shot among them, yet nothing retarded the work.
October. 2. The English made a search in the high Church at Edinburgh, and found
there one great Iron Gun, 200 new Muskets, 16 barrels of Powder, 66 bundles of
Bandileers, 200 Swords, 200 new Halberts, 300 new Pikes and two load of Match.
That which was done the remaining part of this Month, was chiefly to beget a
right understanding and compliance with those that dissented from the King and
Kirk, viz. Col. Kerre, and Straughan, and their adherents: for which purpose
Genesis Cromwell sent Commis. Genesis Whaley with his own and another Regiment
toward them: in the mean while the Fortifications at Lies, and the mining at
Edinburgh went on prosperously: Then Genesis Cromwell with the residue of the Army
marched toward Glasco, but finding there little encouragement for longer stay,
they quickly returned, and in their way Garrisoned two strong Houses, both to
enlarge their Quarters, and to prevent the Mosse-Troopers from securing
themselves there.

Let the Reader now judge what a dysasterous condition this People was in, that
when an enemy was in the very heart of the Country, there should be so many
distractions and civil discords among themselves, even to the killing and
slaying one another. One Party in the North was for the King without the Kirk;
another Party in the West was for the Kirk without the King; a third was for
King and Kirk; and these were they then at Sterling, that bore the greatest
sway; viz. The Committee of Estates and General Assembly, all these had their
swords drawn one against the other. When things were at this pass, Genesis
Cromwell sent a Letter to the Committee of Estates, and another of the same to
Col. Kerre and Straughan, much like the former, and produced like effect.
Commis. Genesis Whaley that was sent with a party toward Kerre and Straughan,
accosted them first with a Letter, declaring, That it was not unknown what
Amicable ways they had used, to avoid the effusion of Christian blood before
and since they came into Scotland, which though hitherto had been ineffectual,
yet they should endeavor the same; Showing further, that their Arms were still
stretched out ready to embrace them, whenever God should incline them to come
in, and that they sought not domination over them, to enslave them, nor to
depresse their Kirk-Government, neither that they sought their Goods or
Estates, but to carry on the Lords work: And that if they would still be
blinded, and persist in gainsaying and opposing, then what further misery
befell their Nation by Famine or Sword, would lie heavy on them.

This Letter (though savouring so much of integrity and ingenuity) met with
nothing of like nature from their Adversaries, notwithstanding their pretended
desire of harkening to an accommodation.

For within short a space after Col. Kerre sent a Letter to Commiss. Genesis
Whaley then at Carlisle, which being contracted, speaks after this sort; That
though they were not in a capacity against the unjust invasion of the English,
yet were they in a capacity to suffer, and should submit to Gods will, either
by doing or suffering, until the time of their deliverance come; and that if it
were their happiness to perish in their duty, it would be a sufficient mercy
to them: and when the persecution had arrived to its height, their captivity
should be returned: adding that he thought it strange the English should talk
of a cessation, even while they were captivating their poor people, assaulting
their Garrisons, apprehending their godly Ministers, tearing them from their
holy callings, and from their holy sighing flocks: concluding, that the
departure of the English out of that Kingdom, and then desiring a Christian
Treaty or conference with them, would be a favor and mercy equally as great to
the one as the other. These were the effects of that (I will not say misguided)
zeal, by which these men were acted.

About the latter end of this Month the Prince of Orange departed this life,
Prince of Orange dies.
who so lately had put a hook into the Nostrils, and a Bridle into the mouths
of the high and mighty States, and in him the Scots King lost the great
interest he had in those parts; whom, though the States for his late Actions
when he was living hated, yet when dead they lamented: The Princess is
delivered of a Son.
About ten days after this, the Princess of Orange was delivered of a Son,
which did in part mitigate the grief that was conceived for the death of the
Prince.

Now seeing the Scots still slighted all the ways and means of a friendly
compliance, as appeared by another Letter from Coll. Kerre to Commiss. Genesis
Whaley, wherein he advises them ^o stand upon his Guard, and expect no further
Overtures; the English set upon new undertakings, and by a party of Horse under
Major Brown, took in a strong place called Dalhouse, and in it filtie Muskets,
fistie Pikes, four Barrels of Powder, some store of Provisions and Provender:
this was a supposed Harbor for those villainous people the Mosse-Troopers who
murdered diverse English men straggling or going for Provisions; they likewise
surprised a party of Mosse-Troopers in Darlington Castle, some of which were
shot presently upon the place. Then advanced Col. Monk with a party of Horse
and Foot to reduce Roselane Castle, seven miles from Edinburrough, which (when
he had sent in some Grenades among them) was yielded upon mercy. Major Genesis
Lambert presently after with a party of 2000 Horse marched toward Dumfreez,
Coll. Kerre being then about Peebles; Commiss. Genesis Whaley in his march toward
the enemy, took in Dalkeith Castle with a threatening Summons, where was store
of Arms, Ordnance, Powder, Match and Bullet (...) the wall of it was thirteen
foot broad at the top: Now Coll. Lambert having (not without some difficulty)
got over Hambleton River, quartered there that night; Coll. Kerre having notice
thereof early next morning, resolved to beat up their Quarters and fall in upon
them, and so to surprise the Major General, all which he attempted with
courage; but the English having a timely Alarm, Col. Kers party defeated, and
himself taken prisoner.
on a sudden encompassed most of the enemies Horse of whom they killed 100, and
took 100, they took likewise 400 Horse and Furniture, forsook of the Riders,
and pursued the rest as far as Air; in which pursuit Colonel Kerre himself
was wounded and taken, with his Capt. Lievt. Lieutenant Collonell, and
Straughans Major, Colonel Straughan came in to Major General Lambert.
etc. Collonell Straughan, Capt. Giffin, with some others of the dissenters in
the West, came then in to the Major General, who brought them all forthwith to
the Headquarters at Edinburgh.

December. The English having raised a Battery, planted their morter-peece, and
great Canon against Edinburgh Castle, and begun to play; the Enemy hung out a
Flag of defiance, in contempt thereof: but they had not played long ere they
took it in, whereby it was conceived some notable execution was done by four or
five shells that fell among them, and forthwith put out a white Flag on the top
of the Castle, and sent forth a Drummer offering to surrender, if they might
have leave to send to the Committee of Estates: which being denied they
accepted of a Treaty, and sent Major Abernethy and Capt. Hinderson to treat on
their part: Col. Monk, and Liev. Col. White were appointed to treat in behalf
of the English, the result whereof was to this effect.

That the Castle of Edinburgh should be surrendered up to his Excellency the
Lord General Cromwell, The strong and impregnable Castle of Edinburgh
surrendered to the English.
on the 24. of December. 1650. with all the Ordinance, Arms, Magazine, and
Furniture of War thereunto belonging.

That the Governor with all the Officers and Soldiers, should then march
forth with their Arms, Colors flying, Drums beating; matches lighted and
Bullet in mouth to such place as they shall choose.

That such Inhabitants adjacent as have any goods in the Castle, shall have
them restored unto them; and to that purpose they had liberty from the 19. to
the 24. of December. to fetch them away. There was taken in this strong hold five
French Canon, five Dutch half Canon, two Culverings, two Demi-culverings, two
Minion, two Faulcon, 28 Brass Drakes, two Petards, about 7000 Arms, 80 Barrels
of Powder, store of Canon Shot, with other provisions proportionable.

It may seem strange and almost incredible, that such a strong and impregnable
hold, as was that, should be so easily won, the like whereof is not in that
Nation; wherefore it was the common vogue of that time, and by many credibly
believed, that it was assaulted with silver engines; But whether it was
covetousness, cowardice, Treachery, or want that caused this sudden rendition,
I know not: But this I know and am sure, it made as much for, and was of as
great importance to the English, as can be imagined; for while that business
was yet in suspense, the Army was hindered from many attempts of great
consequence.

Nor was the Parliament of England less fortunate in their maritime affairs:
for the English Fleet under the command of Genesis Blake lying before Lizbon,
after they had destroyed several French Pirates, taken many Sugar Prizes
belonging to the King of Portugal, of great value, and scowr'd the Seas in some
sort of such others as had been so extremely prejudicial to the English
Merchants, especially those trading into the Levant Seas; they were constrained
partly by distress of weather, and partly to revictuall and water, to make for
some other port: in which time Prince Rupert with his Fleet (making a virtue of
necessity) hoisted sail, and steered their course for Malaga, where they burnt
and spoiled several Merchants Ships: Genesis Blake hereupon reduced his Fleet to
seven stout and nimble Frigots, and sent the rest home with the Prizes, and
with them he made all the Sail he could after the Enemy, and coming to Malaga,
heard they were gone toward Alicant, General Blake sailing thence betwixt
Cape degat, and Cape de Paulo took a French Ship of twenty Guns, and presently
after that the Roe-buck one of the revolted Ships fell into their hands, after
which they met with the Black Prince another of Ruperts Fleet, Prince Ruperts
Fleet destroyed.
which to avoid being taken, ran ashore and blew her self up: next day four
more of Ruperts Fleet ran ashore in the Bay of Cartagena, where they were cast
away and bulged: Some few days after General Blake set sail to seek out the
rest of Ruperts Fleet, which were two, steering his course toward Minorca,
Majorca, Humattera; but missing of them he gave over the Chase, and returned
for England, having done as much as could be expected from men valiant and
faithful, to the great encouragement of the Merchants, contentment of the
people, and joy of all well-affected people.

Notwithstanding all this, several designs were set on foot by unquiet and
wayward spirits in behalf of Charles Stuart, some by open insurrection, others
by secret combination, in which the Clergy had no small share, as shall be
declared hereafter.

There was executed at Tiburne one Benson for acting by virtue of a Commission
from the Scots King, Benson an Agent from the Scots King executed at Tiburn.
being in the same conspiracy with Col. Andrews who was beheaded as aforesaid.

Upon the same account rose a mutinous rabble in the County of Norfolk, An
Insurrection in Norfolk.
who for a while went roving to and again, pretending the ends of that
undertaking, was for the abolishing of Popery, restoring the young King to his
Crowns revenge of his Fathers death, for suppression of heresy and schism; Is
appeased and the ringleaders executed.
But as it was begun without order, so was it managed without resolution: For
the Parliament were no time-givers to growing dangers, but immediately gave
order for the suppressing them; So that 200 Horse from Lyn, and three Troops of
Horse from the Army, with some of the Militia Forces of that County, marched
toward them, upon which they were presently dispersed and some taken, whereof
about twenty were executed, who because they were persons of no great
eminency, I shall forbear troubling the Reader with their Names.

About this time also Sir Henry Hide being commissionated as Ambassador from
the Scots King to the Grand Signior at Constantinople, Sir Henry Hide executed
at the Old Exchange
stood in competition with Sir Thomas Bendish (then Ambassador for the English)
for his place: whereupon they had a hearing before the Vizier Bassa, the result
whereof was, that Sir Thomas Bendish should dispose of the said Sir Henry Hide,
as he thought good, who was straightway sent to Smyrna, thence into England,
and there condemned and executed for a traitor before the Royal Exchange in
London.

The war in Scotland was now almost at a stand, for the sharpness of the
Winter was such in that Northern Climate, that much could not be expected, yet
were all probable designs for the reducing that obstinate and hardy people put
in execution. The Scots were chiefly busied about the Coronation of their King,
which was performed at Scone, The Scots King crowned at Scone. Jan. 30. 1651.
Jan. 1. 1651. with as much solemnity and gallantry as their necessity and
poverty would permit; then they proceeded to the excommunication of Straughan,
Swimon, and others that came in to the English, made a shift to unite the other
Dissenting parties, and then put out an Act for new Levies to be made
throughout the Nation.

Soon after this Lievt. Genesis David Lesley with a party of 800. Horse made an
attempt upon Lithgow where was a Regiment of Horse under Col. Sanderson, who
being presently in a readiness to receive them, the Scots retreated without
entering the Town.

Next attempt of the English was for reducing of Hume Castle with two Regiments
of Horse and Foot, Hume Castle besieged.
commanded by Col. Fenwick, who coming before it sent in this Summons, which
with the answer for the unusual strain thereof I here insert.

SIR,
HIS Excellency the Lord General Cromwell has commanded me to reduce this
Castle you now possess, under his obedience, which if you now deliver into my
hands, for his service, you shall have fit terms for your self, and those with
you, and ease the adjacent parts of a great charge; If you refuse, I doubt not
but in a short time, by the Lords assistance to obtain what now I demand. I
expect your answer by seven of the Clock to morrow morning, and rest

To the Governor of Hume Castle.
Your Servant, George Fenwick.


Right Honorable,
I Have received a Trumpeter of yours, as be tells me, without the Pass to
render Hume Castle to the Lord General Cromwell: Please you I never saw your
General, nor knew your General; as for Hume Castle it stands upon a rock:
Given at Hume Castle this day before seven a clock: so rests without
prejudice to my Native Country,

For the Governor of Barwick.
Your most humble Servant, Th. Cockburne.


Notwithstanding this resolute and conceited answer, Assaulted and taken.
when the English with their Culverin and Mortar-piece had opened a small
breach, the Enemy beat a parley, and because they might not have such
conditions as they would, they were forced to take such as they could get, viz.
to surrender upon mercy, which was done accordingly.

Then Col. Monk with about three Regiments of Horse and Foot, laid Siege to
Tymptallon Castle, Timptallon Castle taken.
against which they played with their Mortar-pieces for the space of 48 hours,
but did them no hurt; then they played at the Castle with six battering Guns,
which did such notable execution, that the enemy beat a parley, and desired
terms to march away, but none would be granted, save that they should yield
themselves to mercy, which was at last accepted, and the Castle yielded, with
all the Guns, Arms, Ammunition, and provision therein: The taking of this
Castle was of great concernment to the English, who were ever and anon taken
and rifled by that Garrison; So that now the passage from Edinburgh to Barwick,
was in a manner clear. Notwithstanding which, and all the care that had been
used, the English were daily surprised and murdered in small straggling parties;
insomuch that General Cromwell was forced (for the fafeguard of his men) to
publish and strictly to put in execution the following Proclamation.

FInding that diverse under my command are not only daily spoiled and robbed,
but also sometimes barbarously and inhumanely slain by a sort of Outlaws and
robbers, not under the discipline of any Army, and finding that all our
tenderness to the Country, produces no better effect, then their compliance
with and protection of such persons, and considering that it is in the power of
the Country to detect and discover them, many of them being inhabitants of
those places, where commonly the outrage is committed, and perceiving that
their motion is ordinarily by the invitation, and according to intelligence
given them by Countrymen; I do therefore declare, that wheresoever any under
my command, shall be hereafter robbed or spoiled by such parties, I will
require life for life, and a plenary satisfaction for their Goods, of those
Parishes and places where the fact shall be committed, unless they shall
discover and produce the offender; and this I wish all persons to take notice
of, that none may plead ignorance.

Given under my hand at Edinburgh, November. 5. 1650. O. Cromwell.


Hereupon several Sums of Money were levied upon such Parishes and places where
any Robberies or Murders were committed; and likewise such persons as were
found to abett, act, or assist in the perpetrating any murders, were forthwith
condemned, and executed, according to the tenor of the aforesaid Proclamation.

The English in the next place designed the reducing of Brunt Island, and in
order thereto they shipped some of their Infantry; but either through the
Ignorance, mistake, or neglect of the chief Commander, the design for that
time was frustrated.

Genesis Cromwell with his Army marched from Edinburgh, and assayed several times
to pass over into Fife; but the violent season and difficult passage, forced
them to betake themselves to their former Quarters, which were the more
comfortable by reason of the Fleet of Ships that arrived at Leith with plenty
of provisions for Horse and Man; one whereof bound from Hamburgh with Cheese,
by distress of weather, was driven into the North of Scotland, where it was
seized: but the Master pretended he was bound for Haver de Grace in France, and
producing old Cockets, importing as much, he was dismissed, and a Scotch-man put
himself and goods aboard for France; whereupon they set sail, and about the
Frith were boarded by an Irish Man of War, who would have carried the Vessel
to Ireland, alleging they were bound for Leith: the Master stood to his former
relation, and desired they would take the report of a Scotchman who was aboard;
so that forthwith they left her, and she came safe into Leith, whence the
Scotchman was sent home to carry the News. These with many other the supplies
that were sent from England were a great heartning to the Soldiers in the
midst of those many hardships they were exposed to by diseases, and otherwise;
of which, the General himself had as great a share as any, for he had so many
violent fits of the contagious disease of that Country that brought him even
to the brink of death; yet the weakness and want of the General did neither
abate the Soldiers courage, nor retard the enterprises they designed for
completing their work; although other difficulties presented themselves, as so
many mountains of opposition, viz. the number of their enemies dispersed all
along the other side of the River to prevent their Landing, the danger of the
passage it self, and the unseasonablenesse of the weather; these Impediments
with the weak condition of the English, hindered any further proceedings for
some space of time.

During which Intervall there happened as remarkable an accident in England, as
any Story can parallel, which for the strangeness and rarity thereof, may well
merit my pains to recite, and the Readers patience to peruse. At Oxford (the
famous and renowned Nursery of humane Literature) was tried, condemned, and
executed, Anne Green, a Servant to Sir Thomas Read, at Ounstu in that shire,
who being with child by a Gentleman in that House, (as she affirmed to the
last) about the fourth month of her time, overworking herself fell in travel,
and (not knowing what it might be) went to the House of Office, where with some
straining, the Child fell from her unaware (as she said) being not above a span
long; and something appearing in her Linen that caused suspicion, search was
made, and an abortive Infant found on the top of the House of Office: so that
three days after, (being in that time before some Justices of the Peace) she
was carried Prisoner to Oxford, Anne Green hanged at Oxford, afterward she
revived and in yet alive.
where she was condemned, and hanged in the Castle-yard: After she had hung
about half an hour, (during which time she was pulled by the Legs, and struck
on the Breast by diverse of her friends, and others, that she might be out of
her pain) she was cut down, put into a Coffin, and brought to a House to be
dissected before some Physicians. When they opened the Coffin, they perceived a
rattling in her throat, a Fellow standing by, stamped upon her breast, and
belly; yet Doctor Petty and two or three more then present, fell speedily to
use some means to bring her to life, and opened a vein, laid her in a warm bed,
procured a woman to go into bed to her, and continued the use of diverse other
remedies, having respect to her sencelessness, head, throat, and breast, so
that in a few hours she spoke, the next day talked and coughed very heartily,
and in short space perfectly recovered: Upon which first her reprieve, and then
her pardon was procured: After this, she (as upon the Gallows) still insisted
upon her innocence and integrity, in relation to the fact for which she was
condemned. And indeed this was looked upon as a special providence of God,
thus to deliver her, who in the judgments of those that understood the
business, was deemed guiltless, Herein did the hand of God wonderfully
appear, in detecting the unadvised actings of men, and in showing us the danger
we are in, when we are swayed either by passion or prejudice against the
meanest of his Creatures.

The Parliament weighing how prone the people were to adore the shadow of the
late King, though the substance was destroyed, caused his Statue that was set
up at the West end of the Cathedral of St. Paul's to be pulled down, and that
also in the Royal Exchange, over which they caused to be wrote this Motto.

Exit Tyrannus Regum Vltimus Anno Libertatis Angliae restitutae Primo, Anno
Domini 1648. January 30.

They likewise caused that badge of Monarchy the Kings Arms, to be defaced and
expunged out of all Churches, Chapels, and places of public worship, and
Courts of Judicature, throughout their Dominions: and this indeed was a means
to make the giddy people forget the Garlic and Onyons of Egypt they much
hankered after.

And to add a more splendid luster to their strength and greatness; they were
highly courted by Ambassadors from the Neighboring Nations, viz. Holland,
Spain, and Portugal, yet the crafty Hollander held at a distance, as rather
willing the prosperity of the Royal party, then heartily desiring, or
effectually endeavoring a peace with them.

The Spaniard as he had better ends, so had he better success; though in all
his addresses he was still reminded of his suspending and delaying the
execution of justice upon the Assassinates of the English Resident at Madrid,
since which time till now the controversy between the King and Church about
that business has been in debate.

The Portugal Ambassador (after audience had before a Committee of Parliament,
The Portugal Ambassador dismissed home.
and several applications unto them) not being fully empowered, to give a
plenary satisfaction to the State, for their vast expenses, and to the
Merchants for their great losses, all occasioned by them, was at length dismissed.

Ambassadors extraordinary were sent from the Parliament of England to the
States of the United Provinces; English Ambassadors are sent into Holland.
their Names were Oliver St. John, and Walter Strickland, men of singular parts
and of approved integrity, who in gallant Equipage, with a magnificent train of
followers, set sail from the Downs, March, 11. 1651. On the 12. toward
Evening, they came to anchor before Hellevoit slugs, but not without some
danger: On the 13. they went in Boats to Roterdam, being met with Vessels from
the States, then by the English Merchants were conducted to the English house,
and nobly entertained. During their stay there, the Spanish Ambassador sent a
Gentleman to congratulate their safe Arrival, and to desire there might be a
fair correspondency and right understanding between their Lordships and him.
About two or three days after they set forward for the Hague, where by the way
the Master of the Ceremonies, with about thirty Coaches, met them, and
entertained them with some Complements, and conducted them to a House at the
Hague, prepared for their reception, where they were feasted three days by the
States, and then had audience: they have audience.
where the Lord St. John made a Learned and Eloquent Speech in the English
tongue, and then delivered a Copy thereof in Dutch and English, the heads
whereof were in effect as follows.

That they were sent over to the High and Mighty States of the Netherlands,
from the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, to make a firm League and
Confederacy between the two Republiques, if they think fit to accept thereof,
notwithstanding the many injuries the English have sustained from the Dutch
Nation.

Secondly, To renew and confirm those former Treaties and Agreements of trade
and commerce made between the two Nations.

Thirdly, He showed them the notable advantages of England, in respect of the
pleasant and commodious situation thereof, for the advancement of trade and all
other accommodations.

Lastly, He told them he was commanded by the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England to let their Lordships know how highly they resented the Execrable
murder of Dr. Dorislaus their Agent, and that he doubted not but that their
Lordships would use their utmost care and industry in causing a strict and
diligent search to be made after the Authors thereof.

After which the States (being acquainted with the many affronts the
Ambassadors Gentlemen and others their attendants, had received from English
Cavaliers and other ruffians) drew up a Proclamation and sent it to the
Ambassadors by the Lord Catz, to know whether they judged it full enough; the
contents whereof was, to forbid all manner of persons whatsoever, from giving
any affront, either in word or deed, to any of the Ambassadors retinue, upon
pain of corporal punishment.

Three ^moneths was now spent in this tedious and costly Embassy, and nothing
obtained save affronts and abuses of all kinds, and the Sword of Justice not
drawn in their behalf, against any one of that riotous rabble, that so
frequently swarmed at the Ambassadors gates, assaulting their servants, and
reviling their persons: of which injuries the Parliament being deeply sensible,
and wearied with expectation of what fruits this Treaty would produce, resolved
(that seeing all their Proposals and endeavors for a lasting and well grounded
Peace, were answered with dilatory shifts and evasions, on purpose to gain time
upon the English, till they saw on which side the chance of war in Scotland
would fall) to call home their Ambassadors; which sudden and unexpected news
did so surprise the Hoghen Mogens, that they courted them with frequent and
unusual visits; and with a multitude of feigned expressions; labored to beget
a good opinion in the English of the reality of their intentions toward an
amicable compliance with this Nation: notwithstanding all which the Ambassadors
soon after return into England, They return into England.
infectapace.

That which gave further cause of jealousy to the English, that the Dutch
played an underhand game with them was, because Admiral Van-Trump with a Fleet
of Ships lay hovering upon the Coasts of Scilly, as though he would make an
hostile attempt upon that place; but it being demanded of the States of
Holland, what was the design of their Fleet in riding so near that Island? It
was answered that they had no other design therein, but to demand restitution
of such Ships and Goods, as the Pirates thereof had taken from their People:
with which answer the Parliament were somewhat satisfied; but not to trust them
too far, speedy order was taken for reducing the same into their own hands.

Accordingly on the 18.th. of April, The Islands of Scilly reduced.
1651. Genesis Blake (with the addition of a squadron of Ships commanded by Sr.
George Aiscue, that were designed for reducing of the Carybe Islands,) set sail
and landed 300 Seamen besides Landmen upon the Isle. The Seamen with much
resolution, courage, and gallantry, led the Van, and easily made way for the
rest; so that they soon became masters of the Islands of Tresco and Briers,
took therein 150 Prisoners, and slew about twenty; they took also two
considerable Frigots, the one of 18, the other of 32 Guns; they likewise became
Masters of the best Harbor belonging to those Islands: Hence the enemy fled to
St. Mary's, their chief place of strength, which in short time was surrendered.
As to the exceeding great strength and commodious situation of these Islands, I
need not say much; for who so knows those parts, or has observed the Card,
will see what a necessity there was of reducing the same, and what a seasonable
mercy God was pleased to crown their endeavors withal, that they should gain
so considerable a place as that, being fortified both by Nature and Art,
without the loss of ten men, from first to last.

Upon misinformation of the state of Cornet Castle in the Isle of Guernsey,
Corner Castle in Guernsey assaulted, but in vain.
that then held out for the Royal party, a considerable number of Foot, with
Ladders and all things necessary, gave an onset; but whereas it was reported,
and believed, that there was but forty men in the Castle, and eighteen of them
unable for service, it appeared afterward that there were sixty able men
therein, enough to keep it against a far greater number then was before it, so
that their Ladders were beaten down and broken with stones, timber, and
^ase-shot from the flankers, and many of the Soldiers both slain and wounded,
insomuch that it proved a work ^oo hot for the assailants: nor was ^here more
safety in getting off, one or two Boats full of men being sunk by hot from the
Castle; but how badly soever the business succeeded, the Soldiers were not in
the least wanting in their duties.

There was executed at Towerhill one that had been a notorious stickler for the
Royal party by Sea and Land; Brown Bushel beheaded at Towerhill.
for several crimes of blood and treachery acted by him, while he was in the
service of the Parliament, and after his revolt known by the Name of Brown
Bushel.

And now once more let us advance Northward, Blackness taken by the English.
and observe the motions of the two Armies: The English (desirous to gain upon
their Adversaries, as much as consisted with policy and their own safety) with
a commanded party under Col. Monk, set down before Blackness, that had much
annoyed their Quarters by sheltring loose rogues and otherwise. After the
batteries were made, and some shot spent at it, they desired Quarter, which
(considering the strength of the place) was granted and the place sorthwith
yielded. O^ the other side the Scots begun to b^ both powerful and numerous to
the eye: For notwithstanding the many parties and Factions, Strifes,
Aemulations, Contentions, Divisions, Subdivisions, Excommunications, etc. they
peec't up an agreement (such as it was) to the seeming satisfaction of all the
dissenters: And now they join against the common Enemy, having their greatest
hopes wrapped up in a most notable design and confederacy, hatched by the Royal
Covenanters of England, and Scotland, whereby a general rising in the County
of Lancaster, and parts adjacent was contrived; who by joining with a
considerable force from Scotland, should have been able to confront the
greatest power the Parliament then had; and this plot had its rise and
progress from the Clergy, those feudatories of Rebellion and Treason; but by
Gods Providence was seasonably discovered; the Grand Agent hereof was Thomas
Cook of Grayes Inn Esquire, who was apprehended and carried before the
Council of State at White Hall, whence he made his escape, but in few days
after was retaken at a House in the Strand. Next discovery was by means of a
Ship bound from the North of Scotland to the Isle of Man, which by contrary
winds was driven into Air, and there secured and searched, wherein were found
many notable Papers, giving further light into the business.

Not long after this, a Party of Horse and Dragoons marched to Grenock, near
Dunbarton, where they seized Mr. Birkenhead, another Agent for the Royal
designs, about whom they found such Letters, Commissions and Instructions, that
therein their whole plot was discovered: Upon which the Parliament ordered,
that a considerable body of Horse and Foot should march Northward, under the
command of Major General Harrison, both to prevent insurrections and likewise
to oppose the Enemy, if they should make an inrode by the way of Garlisle.

At London was under question the most eminent actors in and contributors to
the Plot aforesaid, viz. Mr. Christopher Love, Major Alford, Major Adams, Col.
Barton, Mr. Blackmore, Mr. Case, Mr. Cauton, Dr. Drake, Mr. Drake, Capt. Far.
Mr. Gibbons, Mr. Haviland, Major Huntington, Mr. Jenkings, Mr. Jaquel, Mr.
Jackson, Lievt. Col. Jackson, Capt. Mussey, Mr. Nalton, Capt. Potter, Mr.
Robinson, Mr. Sterks, Col. Sowton, Col. Vauhan, and others; of all which there
suffered only two, Mr. Love and Mr. Gibbons executed.
viz. Mr. Love, and Mr. Gibbons: Now Mr. Love, although by many
circumlocutions, sleights, and evasions, he strived to clear himself, yet
besides the witnesses of his own party, that testified against him, he was
everted out of his own Narrative, as also out of the several Petitions
presented by him to the Parliament in his own behalf, after he was condemned;
which did but procure him a short respit from death: for, on the 22. of August,
1651. he with Mr. Gibbons aforesaid, were beheaded on Tower Hill; the rest upon
their humble Petitions and acknowledgements of their crimes were releast and
pardoned. And high time it was that such an exemplary piece of justice, should
be inflicted upon the proud and obdurate Clergy, who till then thought
themselves out of the reach of Magistratical power, and that their Function
might cloak their actions; but let them know that Magistracy is an Ordinance of
God as well as Ministry; for there is no power but of God, and the powers that
are, are ordained of God.

Therefore it would not be amiss, if our Governors in some particulars would
imitate the Republique of Venice. First, By not admitting Ecclesiastical
persons into secular Councels, because they have relation to another
Government, viz. Pontificiall. 2. By having-a special care to the Pulpit, and
the Press, that no Churchman from the meanest Priest, to the Patriarch, dare
tamper with the Affairs, designs, or transactions of the State: Howels Survey
of the Signiory of Venies.
It being too well known (says my Author) that Churchmen are the most
perilous and pernicious instruments in a State, if they misapply their Talents,
to poison the hearts of the people, to intoxicate their brains, suscitate them
to sedition and a mislike of the Government; and they have more power to do
this, in regard they have the sway over the noblest part of the creature, the
soul and intellectuals: therefore if any meddle with State-matters in the
Pulpit, they are punished in an extraordinary severe manner, and this (says he)
is alleged for one main reason why the Venetian Republique has kept their
Liberties inviolable; and if it shall please God to put it into the hearts of
our Governors, to take the like course, no doubt but we shall have the like
blessing.

There happened much about this time a petty insurrection in Wales, A rising in
Wales.
two or three hundred being got together in behalf of the Scots King, whom
telltale Fame (that has continual credence with the fickle multitude) had
possessed with pleasing (and yet untrue) news of the defeating Genesis Cromwell's
Army, and the advance of the Scots into England, which prosperous attempt had
an event suitable to the undertaking, viz. confusion and destruction.

The English being now desirous to put a period to the war in Scotland, by
gaining a passage over the River into Fife, for the facilitating their work,
and more easy transportation, caused several boats to be made, with which
they gave many great Alarms to the Enemy on the other side, as also to those in
Brunt Island, in order to what they further intended.

The Scots also made many infalls upon the out-quarters and Garrisons of the
English, wherein they had frequently good success, killing some, and slaying
others, having the advantage of the English by their knowledge of the Country:
for prevention whereof, orders were given out for drawing off their remotest
Garrisons, and contracting their Quarters, which was done accordingly, and the
Army put into a marching posture for Fife, for which purpose Blackness was
made their Magazine; but the Ground not yet affording either Grass, or Oats,
the enterprise was further suspended.

The Scots having completed their Levies to the Number of 15000 Foot, and 6000
Horse, marched on this side Sterling, to a place called Torwood, where they
were faced by the English, but would not be drawn to an Engagement, yet still
lay encamped behind bogs, and inaccessible fastnesses, on purpose to delay the
War: Upon which the English resolved to land some Forces on Fife side, The
English gain a passage over into Fife.
and for that end there was drawn out 1600 Foot, and four Troops of Horse
commanded by Col. Overton, who attempted to land at Queens Ferry, which on the
17 of July, 1651. with the loss of about six men was effected, and presently
they fell to entrench themselves: while this was doing, the Lord Genesis Cromwell
with his Army marched close up to the Enemy, that in case they had marched
toward Fife, he might have engaged their rear before they could have reached
Sterling: The Scots receiving the Alarm the same day, forthwith sent a
considerable party of Horse and Foot to the number of 4000 under Sir John Brown
to drive the English out of Fife: upon which Genesis Cromwell sent Major Genesis
Lambert with two Regiments of Horse and two of Foot to re-enforce the other
party, who in 24 hours were ferryed over, and joined, upon which Col. Okey with
his Regiment fell in among the Enemy, whereby they were forced to draw into a
Battalia, as did the English also, who were more in number then the Enemy,
though to equalize that they had greater advantages of ground. In this posture
they continued, facing each other about an hour and half; whereupon the English
resolved to attempt the Enemy by ascending the Hill, which being done (after a
short dispute) the Scots were utterly routed, 2000 or thereabouts were slain,
4000 of the Scots routed, slain and taken.
and 1400 taken Prisoners, whereof Sir John Brown the Commander in chief was
one, with Col. Buchanan, and many others of quality. Of the English there was
few slain, but many wounded: A further additional strength of Horse and foot
were sent into Fife, so to strengthen the English that they might be able to
encounter the whole body of the Scots Army, if occasion required.

Immediately upon this, Inchigarvey Castle surrendered to the English.
was surrendered to the English the strong Castle of Inchigarvey, situate on a
rock in the midst of the Fryth, between Queens-Ferry and North-Ferry, wherein
were 16 pieces of Ordnance.

July 27. The whole English Army appeared before Brunt Island, and sent in a
Summons, Brunt Island surrendered to the English.
for rendition thereof, unto which the Governor returned a modest answer, and
the next day accepted a Parley: Commissioners on both sides were chosen, and
after some debate it was agreed that the said Island, with all the Provisions,
Guns, and Shipping of War, should be delivered into the hands of the English
etc. and that all the Officers and Soldiers in the said Island, should march
away with Colors flying, Matches lighted, and Bullet in mouth. This place was
of much concernment to the English, and served for a storehouse of all
necessary supplies for the support of their Army.

Thence the Army marched without stay to St. John's Town, St. John's Town yielded
to the English.
a place of great strength and importance, into which the enemy had newly
boated a Regiment of Foot: yet when the English broke down their sluices, and
let the water out of the Graff, the enemies courage failed them, so that it was
in short space delivered.

This was no sooner done, but the main body of the English Army, were
constrained to attend more eminent service, viz. the pursuit of the Scots King,
who with an Army of about 16000 Horse and Foot, The Scots enter England by the
way of Carlisle.
had slipped into England by the way of Carlisle: accordingly most of the
Infantry were boated over to Leith, with as much expedition as could be, and
presently after the Horse: Orders were immediately given to Major Genesis Lambert,
to march with 3000 Horse and Dragoons, and (if he could) to get into the rear
of the enemy. Major Genesis Harrison was ordered likewise to to get into their
van, to stop them, and do what further he thought fit: besides these there was
about sixteen Regiments of Horse and Foot, with Genesis Cromwell upon their march
after the Enemy: And to prosecute the affairs of Scotland, Liev. Genesis Monk was
left with a party of 7000 Horse and Foot, who straightway took in the strong
Town and Castle of Sterling, Aberdeen, Abernethy, Dundee, Dunotter Castle,
Dunbarton Castle, with several others, so that the whole Realm of Scotland,
was (after a passage gained into Fife) with little or no difficulty subdued and
made tributary to the Republic of England.

The Scots Army, The Scots enter the City of Worcester.
after many halts and skirmishes, long and tedious marches, weakened in their
bodies, and distracted in their minds, decreasing rather then increasing, at
length put into Worcester; whence the King sent out his Letters mandatory to
Sir Thomas Middleton to raise forces for him, and to Col. Mackworth, Governor
of Shrewsbury to the like purpose, as he did to others also, but without
success. He was likewise proclaimed King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, in most places where he came: which blast of Honor (like Jonah's
Gourd) quickly vanished: for alas by this project of theirs, of coming into
England, they run themselves into inevitable danger, as the Poet says, Decidit
in Scyllam, qui vult vitare Charybdim; being environed on all sides with the
Militia Forces of the several Counties of the Nation, besides Genesis Cromwels
Army they so much dreaded; there was likewise a considerable body of Horse and
Foot under Major Genesis Lambert and Harrison that attended their motions. Col.
Robert Lilburne was left in Lancashire to hinder the Earl of Derby from raising
Forces in those parts; other parties were disposed into several other places,
to hinder the enemy of Provision, or stop their flight as occasion should be.M

The Earl of Derby being landed (as was expected) at Wyewater in Lancashire,
with about 300 Gentlemen and others, endeavored to raise the Country, while
the English were busied at Worcester, and in short space by the accession of
Papists, Royalists, and discontented Presbyterians, they increased to the
number of 1500: Genesis Cromwells Regiment of Foot being then at Manchester, was
appointed to meet Col. Lilburne at Preston: The Earl of Derby routed in
Lancashire
To prevent this conjunction, the enemy bent their course toward Marchester to
surprise the said Regiment; whereupon Col. Lilburne assayed to flank the enemy
in their march, and by that means to join with those Foot; which the enemy
perceived, and pressed to engage. Now though Col. Lilburn was overmatcht with
Foot in point of number, whereby the dispute proved tedious and difficult, yet
in the space of an hour, the enemy was totally routed, many persons of quality
were taken, as Col. Leg, Col. John Robinson, Col. Bayns, Col. Gerard, 4 Lievt.
Col. 1 Major, 4 Captains, 2 Lievtenants, 20 Gentlemen and Reformadoes, 500
Common Soldiers, with all their baggage, Sumpters, Arms and Ammunition, the
Earl of Derby's George, Garter, and other Robes with badges of the Order, but
he himself escaped and recovered Worcester: There were slain the Lord
Widrington, Sir Thomas Tildesly, Col. Matthew. Boynton, Sir William Throgmorton,
Sir Francis Gamuel, with some other inferior Officers, and about 60 private
Soldiers. Of the Parliaments party but ten were slain, but many wounded: For
this piece of service Col. Lilburn was bountifully rewarded, as he indeed
deserved.

Genesis Cromwell (who by delays never contributed to approaching dangers) with
his Army came to Worcester, before he was either desired or expected by his
Adversaries; when as the whole Army was presently disposed about the City, in
order to a close begirting thereof.

The first remarkable attempt, was the possessing a Pass upon the Severne, at
a place called Vpton, which was done by a party led on by Major Genesis Lambert,
and was presently made good by Lievt. Genesis Fleetwoods Brigade, who marched
toward the River Teame, over which was made a Bridge of Boats, and another
over Severn on the Generals side; upon which the enemy took the Alarm, and
drew out Horse and Foot, to oppose the Lievt. Generals passage; to whose relief
there was commanded over Colonel Inglesbyes, and Col. Fairfax Regiments of
Foot, the Generals Lifeguard, and Col. Hackers Regiment of Horse; all which
were led on by Genesis Cromwell in person: then was commanded over likewise Col.
Goffs, and Major Genesis Deans Regiments, who fell to scouring the hedges, which
the enemy had lined, and beat them from hedge to hedge, and being seconded by a
fresh supply (after about an hours sharp dispute) the enemy was forced to give
ground and fly to Powick Bridge, where with about three Regiments more they
maintained another hot dispute, but at length quitted their ground also, and
ran into Worcester, except some that were taken.

After which (renewing their courage) they drew out what Horse and Foot they
could on the Generals side, thinking most of his Army had been on the other
side, making a bold and resolute sally, whereby the Generals men were forced a
little to retire; but the scales presently turned, and in such sort that the
enemy was totally routed, The Scots routed at Worcester, Sept. 3. 1651.
both Horse and Foot, their Works, and Fort-Royall were taken, and their Canon
turned upon themselves, the Town also was straightway entered and sacked; most
of the Scots Infantry were slain and taken, but of their Horse above 3000
escaped, of which Col. Barton lying about Bewdly with some Horse and Dragoons,
took near upon a thousand; Col. Lilburne with the Generals Regiment of Foot,
met with the Earl of Derby, that lately so narrowly mist his hands, with the
Earl of Lauderdaile and above an hundred persons of quality more. In this
engagement and the gleanings thereof, there were taken prisoners near 10000,
and about 3000 slain: Those of Quality taken, were Duke Hamilton, Earl
Lauderdaile, Earl of Rothes Earl of Carnwath, Earl of Shrewsbury, Sir John
Packington, Sir Charles Cunningham, Sir Ralph Clare, Lord Spine, Lord Sinclare,
Earl of Cleveland, Earl of Derby, Earl of Kelly, Col. Graves, Mr. Richard
Fanshaw, Secretary to the Scots King: 6 Col. of Horse, 13 of Foot, 9 Lievt.
Col. of Horse, 8 of Foot, 6 Majors of Horse, 13 Majors of Foot, 37 Capt. of
Horse, 72 Capt. of Foot, 55 Quartermasters of Horse, 89 Lievtenants of Foot;
Major Genesis Pitscotty, Major Genesis Montgomery, the Lievt. Genesis of the Ordnance,
Adjut. General of the Foot, the Marshall, Quartermaster General, and
Waggonmaster General: 76 Cornets of Horse, 99 Ensigns of Foot, 30 of the Kings
Servants, 9 Ministers, 9 Chirurgions, 158 Colors, the Kings Standard, Coach
and Horses, with other rich goods, and his Collar of SS. Many Parties were
taken besides in several other places, as Warwickshire, Shropshire,
Lancashire, Cheshire, Yorkshire, etc. insomuch that few of that great Body
escaped, but were either killed or taken. Major General Massey being sorely
wounded, surrendered himself to the Countess of Stamford, and by the Lord Gray
of Groby her Son, was secured and sent to London, whence in short space he
made an escape: In another place was taken Major Genesis Middleton, and Lievt.
Genesis David Lesley; so that I may say, the gleanings of this Victory were not
much inferior to the harvest thereof.

Near this time, most of the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland, were taken at a
place called Ellet in that Nation, where they were assembled to propagate the
Royal designs: viz. Old Genesis Lesley, Earl Marshall, Lord of Keith, Earl of
Craford, Lord Ogilby, Lord Burgoiny, Lord Huntly, Lord Lee, with many Knights,
Gentlemen and Ministers: all which were soon after shipped and sent for England.

Such was the fate that attended the Scots and their King, that he who a few
days before was proclaimed King of Great Britain, had now neither Camp nor
Garrison, nor lodging to fly unto, or safely to repose himself in for shelter,
500 l. sterling being offered to any that should detect him; which
notwithstanding he escaped, making a disguised peregrination through City and
Country, till he met with a fit opportunity for his transportation into France,
where he now is. Yet of the great number of his friends, adherents and
followers that were taken, none of quality suffered but the Earl of Derby, Earl
of Derby beheaded.
who was beheaded at Bolton in Lancashire, and Sir Tim. Fetherston, others of
less note were executed at Chester, Shrewsbury and other places.

Nor did the Royallists themselves expect any other or better fortune would
attend them in this invasion, then that you have heard; as appears by Duke
Hamilton's Letter to Mr. Will-Crofts, taken among other Papers, a few days
before the fight, the sum whereof follows.

WE are all laughing at the ridiculousnesse of our condition, Duke Hamiltons
Letter.
who having quit Scotland, being scarce able to maintain it; yet we grasp at
all, and nothing but all will satisfy us, or to lose all: I confess I cannot
tell whether our hopes or fears are greatest; but we have one stout Argument,
and that is despair, for we must now either shortly fight or die. All the
Rogues have left us, I will not say whether for fear or disloyalty; but all now
with his Majesty are such as will not dispute his Commands.


So that you see, this undertaking was not the product of a mature and
deliberate counsel, but of necessity and desperation.

Soon after this the Parliament took order for reducing the two Islands of
Jersey and Man; that had been and would still be notable receptacles, for the
entertaining all manner of Fugitives and disaffected persons.

In order to which business, Col. Hayne with about two Regiments of Foot and
two Troops of Horse, on the 14. of October. 1651. were shipped at Weymouth for
Jersey; they were in all eighty Vessels, and set sail October. 17. but a storm
forced them in again. On the 19 they set sail again, and about 12 that night
came to an Anchor under Sark Island, next morning they bent their course
toward Jersey, and came to an Anchor in St. Owens Bay; next day they sailed
and Anchored before St. Brelades Bay, when the seas proved so rough that the
Fleet was scattered; notwithstanding on the 21 it was resolved that an attempt
should be made upon the Island that night at St. Owens Bay, being necessitated
thereunto for want of Horsemeat; in few hours after they embarked their men
aboard the small Boats, Gen Blake and all his Officers were very active in this
business, who about two hours after the flood, weighed Anchor, cut some of
their Cables, hoisted sails and stood in for the shore, and were soon aground
on the shore side, some at three foot, some at four, five, six, seven soot
water; their men presently leapt out, some up to the middle, some to the neek,
and ran ashoare; the enemy playing hard upon them with great and small shot,
and with their Horse gave a hot charge; yet after half an hours dispute, they
fled and left behind them 12 Guns, and some Colors at that place; after which
and that their Horse were landed, they marched further into the Island, and on
the 23. of October. possessed themselves of three Forts more with two Guns in each;
they marched on further till they came within sight of Elizabeth Castle, under
which was a Fort called St. Albans Tower, where was 14 Guns, the speedy
reducement whereof was resolved upon, The Island of Jersey reduced.
and a Summons sent in, and in two hours time it was delivered up. The next
business they had to do, was to take in Mount Orgueil Castle, which upon easy
terms was also surrendered. But Elizabeth Castle being a place of far greater
strength, was not reduced till the middle of December. following; the Governor
thereof Sir George Carteret, had large terms granted both to himself and all
with him, by reason of the mavelous strength and situation thereof, which was
such as might have cost much blood, treasure and time in the gaining of it.

October. 16. 1651. Under Collonell Duckenfield were shipped three Regiments of
Foot, viz. Genesis Cromwells Regiment commanded by Lieutenant Col. Worsly, Major
Genesis Dean's Regiment, commanded by Lievt. Col. Mitchell, and Colonel
Duckenfields Regiment, with two Troops of Horse, these were all shipped at
Chester and Liverpool for the reducing the Isle of Man: and on October. 18. they
hoisted sail, but by contrary winds, were driven into the Harbor of Beumorris,
on the 25. about two in the morning, the wind coming about somewhat Southerly,
with a pretty fresh gale, they set sail again, and about two or three a clock
in the afternoon, they had a clear view of the Calf of Man, Castle Rushen,
Derby Fort, Douglas Fort, and most part of the Island, as also of the
Islanders, both Horse and Foot in their several motions, mustering up what
strength they could: when by a sudden storm the Fleet was hindered from coming
up any thing near the shore; upon which they steered their course toward the
North end of the Island, and with no small difficulty fetched Ramsey-Bay that
night, where they cast Anchor, and with a small Party saced the Islanders, yet
was there no shot exchanged. October 16. came on board an Islander, employed by
the chief of that Island, to assure the English they should have no opposition
in landing, but might securely come under their Forts, which they had taken
possession of, for them, and that only two Castles held out, viz. Castle
Rushen, and Castle Peele, which were kept by the Forces of the Count of Derby:
now because he had nothing in writing to confirm what he had said, he was
distrusted; wherefore Major Fox was boated into the Island, to enquire the
truth of what the Islander had reported, and forthwith returned with the full
confirmation thereof; and presently after some came from the Island as
Commissioners, entreating that their poor Island might be preserved from spoil,
and the Inhabitants from undoing; by landing only some part of a Regiment, or
at the utmost, but a Regiment; upon which, they would bring Provisions at a
marketable rate, to the shore, The Isle of Man reduced.
to supply the wants of such as should continue on shipboard, and would assist
those that were to land; in reducing the Castles: which Proposals were in part
assented unto by the Commander in Chief Col. Duckenfield, being somewhat
obliged thereto by the civilities of the people. But on the 27. most of the men
on shipboard were endangered by a long and continued storm, many of the Vessels
not being able to ride in the Bay: one ran ashore and was bulged, but the men
saved, many others were driven severally up and down; which dangers by sea, and
delays by land, the Castles still holding out; on the 28. Horse and Foot were
ordered to come on shore, and being possessed of all the Forts in the Island,
Castle Peele and Rushen taken.
they besieged both the Castles of Peele and Rushen, in which the Countess of
Derby then was, both which were presently summoned and brought to very low
terms, without any blood shed; and delivered up to Col. Duekenfield for the use
of the Parliament of England, October. 26. 1651. Where was found store of
Ammunition and Provision of all sorts, and in the Harbor some Vessels also
were taken: These Castles were of such strength, that if it had pleased God the
defendants had not been possessed with a spirit of fear, much blood might have
been spent in the reducing of them.

In short space after there was surrendered to the Parliaments Forces, Cornet
Castle in Guernsey surrendered.
that strong and impregnable hold of Cornet Castle in the Isle of Guernsey.

The next remarkable passage of the Affairs of this Nation, was the decease of
two of the Parliaments Chieftains, one was General Popham, one of the Admirals
of the English Fleet, a man of singular worth and gallantry; yet his short
continuance in that employment, did not so much show us what he was, as what he
would have been, had it pleased the great Disposer of all things to have
prolonged his days.

The other was the never to be forgotten Henry Ireton Lord Deputy of Ireland,
under his Father in Law his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell, who ended
his days shortly after the siege and taking of Limrick in Ireland: a man who
for piety, prudence and policy in Civil and Martial affairs, equaled if not
excelled the most of men: yet was there left behind such worthy Patriots, and
Champions of their Country, as upon all occasions have stood in the gap of the
greatest difficulties.

The Parliament (being now thoroughly sensible of the many delays, mischiefs
and wrongs, for a long time, and even now practiced by the Hollanders, both in
their Treaties and traffic) set forth an Act for increase of Shipping, and
encouragement of Navigation, which was the most pleasing and advantageous Act
to the Merchants and Seamen that could be, and by which the hearts of those
rough spirited men were more endeared to the Parliaments Interest, then by any
thing they ever did, or could do: the heads whereof were these.

That no Commodity whatsoever of the growth or Manufacture of Asia, Africa, The
Act for Navigation.
or America, or any part thereof, as well of the English Plantations as others,
shall be imported into England, Ireland, or any the territories thereof, in any
ships or Vessels, but in such only as do truly belong to this Commonwealth or
the Plantations thereof, under penalty of the forfeiture of Goods and Vessels:
and of Europe the like.

That no Commodities whatsoever of foreign growth or manufacture, which are to
be brought into this Commonwealth in Ships belonging to the People thereof,
shall be by them shipped from any places, but only from those of the said
growth, production or manufacture; or from those Ports where the said
Commodities can only be, or usually have been shipped for transportation, and
from none other places.

That no sorts of Fish usually caught by the people of this Nation, nor any Oil
made of Fish, nor any Whale, Finne or Whalebones, shall be imported, as
abovesaid, but only such as shall be caught in Vessels belonging to the people
of this Nation, under the former penalty.

That no kinds of salted Fish, from the first of February, 1653. shall be
exported out of this Land, in any other save English Vessels.

Several other Exceptions and Provisoes there was in reserence to the
Commodities of East India, from the Levant Seas, from the Ports of Spain and
Portugal: This is the substance of that Act which did so exceedingly perplex
the avaritious, greedy and encroaching Hollander. Who notwithstanding set on
foot another Treaty with the English, by sending Ambassadors extraordinary, and
seeing they could not obtain their desires thereby, they assayed to do it by
force and treachery: which machinations, God (in mercy to this poor Nation) by
weak instruments, detected and turned upon their own heads: yet could they have
procured the calling in of that Act, they would hardly have stuck at any other
the demands of the English; but failing therein, they began to dispute that
ancient and unquestionable Right of the English Sovereignty in the narrow Seas,
by refusing to strike therein, for which they had the fortune to be always
beaten, not thriving in any such contempt or bravado; upon which occasion began
that sad breach between the two Republiques, the effects whereof we yet feel
and groan under; from which God in his good time will deliver us.

For in May, The first Sea Fight between the Dutch and the English.
1652. Van-Trump Admiral of the Dutch Fleet, with about 42 sail of Ships, was
discovered on the backside of the Goodwin-sands by Major Bourn, who commanded a
squadron of the English Ships, the Dutch bearing toward Dover-Road: upon which
the Greyhound Frigot was commanded to make sail and speak with them, which she
did, and then they struck their top-sayl, demeaned themselves civilly and said,
they came from Admiral Trump, with a Message to the Commander in chief of the
English Fleet: And coming aboard they saluted our Ships, and in order to the
satisfaction of our Nation, brought this account: That the Northerly winds
having blown hard several days, they were forced further Southward then they
intended, and having rode for some days off Dunkirk, where they had lost
diverse Anchors and Cables, professing they intended no injury to the English
Nation. Genesis Blake with the rest of the English Fleet, was at that time to the
Westward; but receiving speedy advice of all these passages from Major Bourne
made what haste possibly he could (...) ply toward them; and on the 19 of ^lay
in the morning, he saw them at ^nchor about Dover-Road, and being ^^ithin three
Leagues of them, they ^^eighed and stood to the Eastward, ^^here they met with
an Express from ^e States: whereupon he bastned ^ith all the sail he could
make toward ours, and bore directly up with ^ur Fleet, Van-Trump being the
head^ost.

Upon which Genesis Blake shot three ^uns at Van-Trumps Flag, but without Balls,
and Van-Trump answered ^ith a Gun on the averse side of his ^hip, signifying a
disdain, and in stead ^f striking his top-sayl, hung out a ^ed Flag, which was
the signal for ^is whole Fleet, and gave Genesis Blake (...) broadside; this was
the manner of ^he beginning of that Fight which has ^aused so much trouble to
the two Commonwealths; the continuance was ^or about four hours, until night
par^ed them, in which fight one of the ^utch Ships was sunk, and another of ^o
Guns taken, with the Captains of ^oth, and about 150 Prisoners; of the English
there were about ten sl^^ and forty wounded: the English A^^mirall received
much hurt in her Ma^^ Sails, and Rigging, many shot w^^ likewise placed in her
Hull, and t^^ hurt that was done to the rest of t^^ Fleet was not considerable.

This attempt of the Dutch wh^^ they were upon a Treaty, did so i^cense the
Parliament, that notwithstanding all the addresses and overtu^^ of their
Ambassadors, and the comi^^ over of two more, they could not a^^ pease them
without satisfaction for the injury.

Although in several Papers put (...) to the Council of State they labor to
excuse the same, alleging,

That the unhappy Fight between the Sh^^ of both Commonwealths, The Apology of
the Dutch Ambassadors for the late affront offered to the English in the Downs.
did happen with the knowledge and against the wills of (...) Lords States
General of the Netherland taking God the searcher of men's hearts witness the
same: and that by Letters a^^ Messages, they were daily assured of the
s^^cerity of their said Lords, and that with gr^^ and astonishment they
received the sat^^ News of that unhappy rash action; a^ thereupon fell into
consultatation about a r^medy to mitigate that raw and bloody wound: ^^d to
that end had appointed a solemn meet^^g of all the Provinces, whereby they
doubt^^ not (but by Gods favor) such present cure (...) these troubles may be
wrought, whereby ^^t only the outward cause of all further e^lls may be taken
away, but also by an in^^ne comfort, the minds may be redressed and reduced
again, to a better hope of the ^reaty in hand; and that this thing was most
^rnestly agitated by their Lords for the com^on good of both Nations, to shun
the detesta^le shedding of Christian blood, so much ^^sired by the enemies of
both Nations: ^hey therefore erave and beseech this Honor^ble Council, by the
pledges of common Re^gion and Liberty, to suffer nothing to be ^one out of too
much heat, that afterward ^^ay prove neither revocable nor repairable, ^^y too
late idle vows and wishes; but that ^hey might without delay receive a kind
Answer; which they desire so much the more, because the Ships of their Lords
and Ship^ers, as well in the broad Sea, as in the Ports ^^f this Commonwealth,
some by force and some ^^y fighting are kept.

Unto which the Parliament reply^d,

That calling to mind with what cont^nued demonstrations of friendship, The
Parliaments Answer to and resolution thereupon.
they have demeaned themselves toward their Neighbors of the united
Provinces, from the beginning of their intestine troubles, omitting nothing
that might tend to a good correspondency with them, do find themselves much
surprised with the uNsuitable returns tha^ have been made thereunto, and
especially a^ the Acts of Hostility lately committed in the very roads of
England, upon the Ships o^ this Commonwealth: Upon consideration o^ all which,
and of the several Papers delivered by the Ambassadors into the Councel^ of
State, they further answered: That as they would be willing to make a
charitable construction of the expressions in the said Papers, endeavoring to
represent the late Engagement of the Fleets to have happened without the
Knowledge, and against the Mind of their Superiors; So when they consider how
disagreeable to that Profession, the Revolutions and Actions of your State, and
their Ministers at Sea, have been in the midst of a Treaty offered by
themselves, and managed here by their Ambassadors; the extraordinary
preparations of an hundred and fifty sail of Ships, without any visible
occasion, and the Instructions themselves given by the States to their
Commanders at Sea; too much cause is found to believe, that the Lords, the
States General of the united Provinces, have an intention by force to usurp
the known Right of England in the Seas, to destroy the Fleets that are (under
God) their Walls and Bulwarks, and thereby to expose this Commonwealth to
Invasion at their pleasure, as by their late Action they have attempted to do:
Whereupon the Parliament conceive themselves obliged to endeavor, with Gods
assistance, as they shall have opportunity, to seek Reparation of the wrongs
already suffered, and Security that the like be not attempted for the future.
Nevertheless with this mind and desire, that all differences betwixt the
Nations may (if possibly) be friendly and peaceably compoled, as God shall open
a way by his providence thereunto, and circumstances shall be conducing, to
render such endeavors less dilatory, and more effectual then those of this
kind heretofore usually have been.

This short and smart answer contained yet something in it that tended to a
possibility of an accommodation; yet all the several conferences and debates
about this business came to nothing, but broke quite off, The Dutch
Ambassadors have audience and depart
and in short space after the Ambassadors had audience in Parliament, took
their leaves, and departed.

And now these two mighty States prepare to offend each other, and accordingly
Genesis Blake the English Admiral, with a gallant and resolute Fleet of ships,
advances Northward, toward the Isles of Orkney, to seize upon and hinder all
such as they should find fishing on those coasts; where he took 12 Dutch men of
War guarding their Busses, but most of the Busses were let go.

Sir George Ayscue with his Squadron of Ships being left to guard the narrow
Sea, The Fight between the Dutch and English Fleets near Plymouth.
discovered a Fleet of Flemings between Dover and Calice, being about 30; of
which 10 were taken and burnt, the rest ran ashore on the Coasts of France:
Many other Prizes were daily brought in (both of the Dutch and French) by the
Ships and Frigots of this Commonwealth. Thence Sir George Ayscue with his Fleet
sailed to the Westward, to seek out the Dutch Fleet, to guard the Seas, and to
conduct the Merchantmen that lay at Plymouth through the Channel: and being
about seven or eight Leagues off Plymouth, he received intelligence of the
Dutch Fleet, and presently a Council of War was called, upon which they
resolved to stand over for the Coast of France, as the most probable way to
meet with them; and the same day being the 16. of Aug. between one and two in
the afternoon, they had sight of the Dutch Fleet, and presently made what sail
they could toward them, to discover their number, being about 60 Sail of Men
of War, and 30 Merchantmen: the English were but 38. sail, four Fireships,
and four Scouts; yet they came up with the enemy about four in the afternoon,
and began the fight with much resolution and gallantry; Sir George and about
six other Ships charging through the whole body of the enemies Fleet, received
much hurt in their Hulls, Masts, Sails, and Rigging: yet did they tack-about,
weather them and charge them all again, and continued thus engaged in the body
of the enemies Fleet, till it was dark night; and had not the rest of the
English Captains failed to do their duties, this Dutch Fleet (in all
likelihood) had been wholly defeated. In this engagement the English had some
slain and some wounded, but of note they lost only Captain Pack, whose Leg
being shot off, he dyed soon after of it, who was an honest and valiant Seaman:
there was wounded Captain Lisle, and Captain Witheridge: a Fireship of theirs
was sunk, also two other Ships of the enemies were supposed to be sunk, but
what other loss they received, an account could not be had: the darkness of
the night put a period to the dispute, Both Fleets retire.
so that the Dutch stood away for the Coasts of France, and the English for the
Port of Plymouth, to repair their Masts and Rigging, without which they could
no further prosecute the enemy.

During this engagement, Genesis Blake came from the Northward into the Downs,
where there fell into his hands about six more considerable Dutch Prizes, and
sent some Frigots to the Westward, to reinforce Sir George Ayscues Fleet.
Presently after this, Capt. Penn with a squadron of Ships hovering about the
Coasts of France surprised six Ships more belonging to the Dutch, which had
been in the Duke of Venice service, and were now returned richly laden, all
stout Ships of War, and of great burden.

Sept. 5. The English Fleet under Genesis Blake riding in the Downs, receiving
intelligence of a French Fleet, weighed Anchor and stood over for the French
Coasts; about five of the clock they descryed them weighing Anchor in Calice
road, thinking by that means to escape: the night approaching, the English
chased them as far as they durst for the Sands of Dunkirk, took most of them,
and about midnight gave over: The Names of those taken were as follows.

The Triton commanded by Chevalier de Verdiel, a Ship of 31 Guns, in which was
Monsieur Bimulet, Commander in Chief of all the Fleet.

The Shepherd, commanded by Chevalier Boymerant, of 29 Guus.

The Gift of God, commanded by Chevalier de la Charta, of 30 Guns.

The Duchess, commanded by Monsieur de la Roch, of 22 Guns.

The Crescent, commanded by Monsieur de la Viel Dean, of 26 Guns.

The Hunter, commanded by Monsieur de la Gicleck, of 22 Guns.

The St. Lewis, commanded by Monsieur de la Gory, of 28 Guns.

A small Frigot of eight Guns.

Six Fireships.

This French Fleet was bound to touch at Calice, there to take in Provisions
and Men for the Relief of Dunkirk: but the English thus intercepting them, the
Dunkirkers despaired of any relief, and yielded it up to the Spaniards; the
like also did Graveling: this did in part retaliate for those great losses and
injuries the English had sustained from the French.

Sep. 27. The Fight between the Dutch and the English Fleets, called The
Kentish knock.
Genesis Blake with his Fleet, discovered on the backside of Goodwin Sands, about
60 sail of Dutch men of War, under the command of Admiral De Wit: on the
28. Genesis Blake with his Fleet got under sail, and bore in among the enemy, but
being upon a Sand called the Kentish Knock (under which the Dutch placed
themselves, that the English might be mischieved if they should endeavor the
weathergage,) they found they had not three fathom water, insomuch that the
General's Ship, the Sovereign, the Resolution, the Andrew, and others, were on
ground: but without any harm; they all got presently off, fell to the business
again, and staid by the enemy till night parted: After this dispute the Dutch
abode all night at some distance to Leeward of the English, as if they had an
intention to engage again. Next morning, Sep. 29. at day break, the Dutch Fleet
was seen about two Leagues Northeast of the English; who (though there was but
little wind and various) bore after them all the forenoon, but the wind coming
to North and B. West, they could not get up to them: yet some of the best
Frigots were commanded to bear up as near the Dutch as they could, and to keep
them in play till the rest of the Fleet could get up; and with much ado about
three a clock got within shot of the enemy, who fearing that by degrees, The
Dutch are shamefully worsted
the English Fleet would get within them, set up their main Sails and ran for
it, after whom about ten Frigots had the chase till six a clock that night.
Next morning Sept. 30. the English bore after them again with a fresh gale at
S. W. and pursued them until they had sight of West-Gabell in Zealand, and saw
them run into Goree. Hereupon the English concluded at a Council of War, not
to run further upon the Coasts of Holland, as well to avoid the shallowes, as
because of the want of Provision in the Fleet.

The loss that the Dutch apparently sustained was, that three of their Ships
were disabled in the first encounter, all their Masts being cut down, others of
them lost their heads, and others their Boltsprit-masts, and Yards, the Dutch
Rear-Admirall being towed by a Fly-boat of 32 Guns, was boarded by the
Nonesuch Frigot with 30 men, and the Fly boat with 30 more, but there being
water in the Hold, and wanting Masts and Sails, he took the Rear-Admiral, the
Captain and about 80 men out of them, and left the Vessels with the dead men
floating in the Sea. Of the English, the loss was not great, about forty
being slain and about forty wounded; in such shameful sort were the Dutch
defeated, who were so mighty at Sea, that they were a terror to the whole
Universe.

The fame of this unhappy breach between two such Potent States, quickly spread
it self into all places, that were any whit eminent for trade or commerce, and
the effects thereof were both seen and heard in the Mediterraan Sea, as well as
in the English Channel, whither the English had sent several Ships of War,
to secure their Merchants from the French Pirates of Toulon, Marsellis, etc. A
squadron whereof of four sail, viz. The Paragon, Four English men of War are
worsted by eleven Dutch men of War in the Straights.
Phoenix, Constant Warwick, and Elizabeth, (having under convoy three Merchants
Ships, two from Scandarone, and one from Smyrna) met with eleven sail of Dutch
men of War, who presently came up with the English, and began the engagement,
but night came on and parted them: next morning the Dutch began again, and
found as hot work as can be imagined from so small a number, two of their main
top-Masts being shot down, and one of their Ships fired, The Phoenix Frigot is
taken by the Dutch.
but afterward quenched: the Phoenix a stout English Frigot of 45 Guns, was
clapped on board by a heavy Dutch Ship, the men overpowered, and the Ship
taken. Of this petty success the Dutch exceedingly boasted: yet they bought it
dearly, and that by their number, not their valor; the English not giving out
so long as they had men or munition; for the Paragon lost 27 men, and had about
60 wounded; the Elizabeth had but two barrels of Powder left, so hard they
plied it, and to such stresse were they put: Yet in despite of their
Adversaries, they got safe with their Merchants into Portolongone; this fight
was near the Island of Corsica.

Upon the nick of this breach came into England an Ambassador from the Queen
of Sweden, where he ended his life, before he effected any thing: another also
from the King of Denmark, who being a contemporary, and confederate with the
States of Holland, durst not but dance after their Pipe; and as soon as the
ghastly wound between the two States began to fester, he departed the Land.

About which time the Parliament (considering the condition of the English
Merchants trading into the East Country, whose Ships (to avoid the danger of
the Dutch Men of War, then in the Sound) had put themselves into the
protection of the King of Denmark, but durst not venture home without a Convoy)
sent a Fleeet of 18 men of War, of good force to fetch them home, being in
number 22, and laden with such Commodities as the English had special occasion
for, and without which they could not prosecute the war with the Dutch.
Accordingly Sep. 19. they set sail out of Yarmouth road, and on the 20. they
came to an Anchor within two Leagues of Elsenore Castle; whence the Commander
in chief sent a Letter to the Governor of Elsenore, by the Greyhound Frigot,
and another to the Danish Admiral, to desire them to acquaint the King with
their coming, and for what; with a Letter to the Merchants, and Masters of the
English Ships at Copenhagen, to address themselves to the King, for the speedy
release of their Ships, then shut up within the Boomes at Copenhagen: but a
mile short of the Castle the Ship was stopped. Next morning the Captain went up
with his Boat, and delivered his Message and Letters, which availed nothing; so
that another was sent to the Merchants, and a Messenger to the King, but
without success; for he could not be admitted to speech with or sight of him:
At length two Lords were sent to Elsenore, unto whom two English Captains
repaired, and urged the restoring the Ships; and in stead of answering to the
business, they asked, Why their Ambassador had not audience? The several
transactions between the English and King of Denmark.
Whether they had a Letter from the State of England to their King? Why they
came so boldly upon his Majesty's Streams, and so near his House and Castle,
with such a mighty Fleet, without three weeks notice beforehand? All these
being impertineut to the business, a positive answer was urged by the English:
and on the 26. of Sept. they received a Letter from the King, That he would
secure them for the Merchants as carefully as he had done, but would not
deliver them to them: Whereupon the Merchants and Seamen being destitute of all
hopes of the releasement of their Ships, left them and came home with this
Fleet: who on the 27 of Sep. left the Sound, and steered their course for
England, and on the last of Sept. the Admiral of the Fleet, commanded by Capt.
Ball, ran on shore on the Coast of Shutland, and was there lost, but her men
saved: this Ship carrying the light, it was miraculous that the rest of the
Fleet were not all lost: this Ship was called the Antelope, an excellent
Frigot, and carried above 50 brass Guns: a little after that they took about 20
Busses, a Dutch man of War, and a Freebooter of 20 Guns; and on the 15. of
October. arrived safe in Burlington Bay.

Not long after this an Agent, by name Bradshaw, was sent to the King of
Denmark, to (...) if yet by fair means they could obtain their desires; but in
vain: for he did not only detain the Ships, but at length unladed them, and
sold the Goods. Which incivilities toward those that never injured him in the
least, but desired by all fair means, to enter into Amity with him, may one day
(by the good providence of God) be requited and avenged.

The Hollanders (drunk with rage, and greedy of revenge for those rubs the
English had lately given them, and for the continual loss of their Ships
daily surprised and in great numbers brought into our Channel) used their
utmost care and industry in rigging and setting forth their Fleet: which
(notwithstanding the season of the year) they effected; and December. 20. they
appeared on the backside of the Goodwin-Sands, being 90 men of War, and 10
Fireships; the English under Genesis Blake were but 42, and not half of them
manned, most of the best Ships being laid up when there was most need of them:
which default (without doubt) was caused through the improvident, treacherous,
finister and slothful actings of such as then steered the helm of this State,
whom God (in his due time) will bring to a reckoning for their miscarriages.
The English notwithstanding the paucity of their number, The Dutch and English
engage, and the English are worsted.
resolved to go out and sight them: and November. 30. being fair weather, both
Fleets plied to the Westward, and about eleven of the clock that day were both
engaged, the English having got the Weather-gage: in this sight half of the
English Fleet (as small as it was) came not up, pretending want of Men,
insomuch that a few Ships of the English bore the brunt of that fight with the
whole Fleet of the Dutch; the Vanguard, and the Victory engaging with 20 of the
Dutch from first to last, and yet got clear of them all. The Garland and
Bonadventure are taken.
In the evening the Garland, an English Ship of above 40 Guns, was boarded by
two Dutch Flag-ships, and after she had blown up her Decks, for want of men was
taken. The Bonadventure (a Merchants Ship) attempting to relieve the Garland,
was boarded, yet cleared her decks several times, the Captain whereof being
slain, the Ship was at length taken: Genesis Blake going in the Triumph to relieve
the Garland, had his foretopmast shot by the board, was twice boarded, and yet
got off safe, as did all the rest, except the two aforementioned, which though
they fetched not far, yet dearly bought: two other Ships likewise fell into
the hands of the Dutch presently after the Fight, but both Merchants Ships.
General Blake upon this, with his Fleet withdrew into Lee Road, to be
reinforced with Ships and Men. This Victory, such as you have heard, made the
Dutch greatly rejoice and insult; such is the vanity and levity of those which
gaze on the mere outside of things, as they present themselves at first view:
Nay by their Ambassadors they made the news thereof to echo in most of the
Princes Courts in Christendom: Mirum qutem quantum fama popular is addidit
fabulae.

But the English like a Bear robbed of her whelps, and awakened at this sudden
eclipse of their glory, splendour, and wonted valor, betook themselves to new
resolutions, for the quickening out a considerable Fleet, whereby to allay the
soaring pride of their adversaries, and to stifle those unruly clamours and
general discontents of the people every where murmuring and inveighing against
their Governors, as if they had (by secret and clandestine designs) contrived
the ruin of the Nation by a destruction of the Fleet.

And first they took into consideration, what due encouragement was fit to be
given to Mariners and Seamen: and ordered,

That the Wages of every able Seaman, fit for the Helm and Head, Top and Yard,
should be advanced from 18. s. the month, to 23. s. the month, and all the
rest proportionable.

That for every Prize they shall take, and shall so be adjudged in the Court of
Admiralty, they shall have ten Shillings for every Tun the said Ship shall
measure; and six Pounds ten Shillings four Pence for every piece of Ordnance,
whether Iron or brass, to be shared and divided amongst them proportionably,
according to their places and Offices in the Ship: and that they shall have all
Pillage they shall find upon or above the Gun-deck of any such Prize.

That they shall have ten Pounds a Gun, for every man of War they shall sink
or destroy, by Fire or otherwise, to be divided as aforesaid, with a months
gratis money to all that shall voluntarily come into their Service within forty
days.

That for supplying of necessary Provisions unto sick and wounded men aboard,
there be allowed five pounds for six months service for every hundred men.
That care be taken upon their discharge for the payment of their Tickets and
Conduct money.

That a covenient house be provided in or near Dover, Deal, or Sandwitch, as
an Hospital for the accommodation of such wounded men, as shall be there set
on shore. These with several other branches of the like nature were printed
and published, to the great satisfaction of the Seamen: insomuch that toward
the latter end of February, 1653. the English had a brave and resolute Fleet
out at Sea; notwithstanding all the care and industry of the Hollanders, to
hinder all Nations from bringing any Pitch, Tar or Masts into this
Commonwealth.

Febru. The English and Dutch Fleets engage near the Isle of Wight and Portland.
18. The Dutch Fleet in number about 80, with about 150 Merchantmen from Roan,
Nants, and Bourdeaux, were discovered between the Isle of Wight and Portland:
and about 8 in the morning, the headmost of the English Fleet came up and
engaged them, viz. the Triumph, where was Genesis Blake and Genesis Dean, with three
or four more; the rest were not able to get up, being to the Leeward: so that
them few were constrained to bear the first brunt, holding play with no less
then 30 of the Dutch men of War, and thus it continued till two a clock in the
afternoon; after which about about half the English Fleet came up, and engaged
the Dutch till the night parted. In this fight the English lost none save the
Sampson, a Dutch Prize, which being made unserviceable, was sunk by themselves,
the men being all taken out and saved, which Ship first sunk the enemy that
maimed her.

Febr. 19. The English made toward the Dutch, and followed them upon the chase
a good while, in which days service some of the enemies Ships were brought by
the Lee and destroyed.

Febr. 20. They Engaged the Dutch again, and the dispute grew hot, insomuch
that the enemy began to fire out of their sternmost Ports, and make away, so
that diverse of their Merchants Ships sell into the hands of the English: At
evening the English Fleet being against Bolo^^^ in France, and not far from
the shore, the wind at N. N. West, which was bad for them to get to their own
shore; they endeavored by haling upon a tack, to get Dover Road; but many of
their Ships having their Sails and Rigging much tattered and torn, they came to
an Anchor.

The English in this fight took about 50 Merchants, and nine men of War,
several of their men of War were likewise sunk by the English, beside what
the enemy themselves sunk that were made unserviceable, and by Letters out of
France, it was certified also that above 2000 dead bodies of the Dutch were
seen upon the French shores. Presently after this hot and terrible fight, there
was 1500 taken Prisoners and brought to London. Genesis Blake was wounded in this
engagement, several other Commanders of the English, of eminent worth and
gallantry, were slain and wounded also. Now though a particular account of the
Dutch loss could never yet be fully known, yet without all question, it was as
sad and dreadful a loss to that State, as they ever yet knew, for which let
Gods Name alone be magnified: and though I am none of those, Qui malis gaudeo
alienis, yet seeing (that by a kind of fatal necessity) the strokes of adverse
fortune must fall heavy somewhere, we ought with hands lifted up, to bless God
for our deliverance.

The Dutch being deeply sensible of this loss, sent a Letter to the Parliament
of England, yet signed only by the States of Holland and West Friesland: in
answer to which, the Parliament sent a Letter, signifying their desire of a
friendly compliance, for the avoiding the further shedding of Christian blood,
but nothing came thereon.

But lest the English should surfeit with excess of joy for their late
Victories over their enemies; God was pleased to give them a check, by an
unexpected defeat of their Ships in the Levant-Seas, which was as follows.

The English (having by a stratagem regained the Phoenix Frigot from the Dutch
as she lay in Leverne Mole) fitted themselves for another encounter with the
Dutch? Capt. Badiley with nine men of War, The English Fleet in the Levant
Seas, are again worsted by the Dutch.
weighed out of Portolongone, toward the relief of those other Ships under
Capt. Apleton, that lay in Levorne Mole, and for several months had been
cooped up by 22 men of War; hereupon the English Ships under Capt. Apleton
weighed out of the Mole, a little sooner then they should have done, and were
presently engaged by the whole Fleet of the Dutch, who having the advantage of
the wind, with their Admiral and two other Ships, clapped the Leopard aboard, a
stout English Ship of above fifty Guns, who bravely maintained the fight above
five hours against them all, till at length being overborne by the number of
the enemy, she was taken.

The Bonadventure by a shot in her Powder room, took fire and was blown up.

The Peregrine was engaged with foun or five of the Dutch at a time, and having
her Mainmast, and misen-Mast shot away, and being overpowered with number was
taken.

The Levant-Merchant was first boarded by one of the enemies Ships of 36 Guns,
and (after two hours fight) by another as big; the first of which sunk
presently after; yet was she also possessed by the Dutch.

The Sampson was boarded by young Trump, Rear Amirall of the Dutch on one side,
and by a fire-Ship on the other, so that she was quickly fired.

Some there were that did not stick to traduce Capt. Badiley and those with
him, as if he had been wanting in point of duty, toward the relief of the Ships
aforesaid: when as they were all well nigh destroyed, before he could possibly
come up. Where when he had done what in him lay, and seeing his Fleet in such a
hazardous condition, like a wise Commander, made all the sail he could away,
for preservation of that part of the Fleet; and this he has so clearly proved,
that he is wholly acquitted from having any hand in that miscarriage.

The Relation wherein this Commonwealth stood with the Neighboring Nations was
in this sort. The King of Portugal and the State of England conclude a peace.


The King of Portugal not able to resist so powerful a State as this (having
more then enough to do, to grapple with the wealthy Spaniard) sent over an
Ambassador extraordinary, with a sumptuous train of followers, to conclude a
Peace with the English; who (after many conferences, frequent addresses, and
large offers made) obtained the same; yet to this day he has not fully
fiuished his Negotiations, so as to satisfy the Merchants for their great
losses.

From France the English were courted by two Parties: A French Agent arrives at
London.
by an Agent from the King of France, desiring a release of his Ships taken (as
aforesaid) going to the relief of Dunkirk, as also that there might be a right
understanding between the two Nations. And by four Deputies from the Prince of
Conde, 4 Deputies from Bourdeaux arive at London also.
craving aid against the Cardinal and his creatures, who had straightly
besieged the City of Bourdeaux: all which Negotiations were ineffectuall, for
alas the breach was too high between the two Nations to be easily cemented.

Other Nations by Letters and otherwise endeavored to be mediators and
composers of those mortal jarres that were between England and Holland; as the
Queen of Sweden, the Cantons of Switzerland, the Imperial Cities of Lubeck and
Hamburgh, etc.

This was the posture of the Civil and Military affairs of this Nation, when
his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell (a man as it were by Divine
appointment set apart for great enterprises) perceiving the notorious
corruptions, dilatory proceedings, pernicious and arbitrary actings of the
Parliament, to perpetuate their session, and to inthrall the people (by
defrauding and disfranchising them of their ancient and undoubted Liberties of
equal and successive Representatives) entered the Parliament House, attended
with some of his principal Officers, and there delivered certain reasons why a
period ought to be put to that Parliament; The Parliament is dissolved.
which was presently done, the Speaker with the rest of the Members (some by
force, some through fear, and some murmuring) departed the House. For which
dysaster no man moved either tongue or hand in their behalf, it being generally
believed, that though the Nation possibly might not be bettered by this change,
yet a worse could not befall it. And thus was this mighty Council dissolved,
their Powers transferred into the hands of the Soldiery, and their Names
reproacht and vilified with the scorns and dirigies of the common people, who
being well pleased with the doing thereof, enquired not into the reasons or
causes why it was done. But to satisfy the wiser sort, and those that were
more curious enquirers into the true and genuine causes of things, General
Cromwell and his Council of Officers published a Declaration, the substance
whereof was as follows.

THat after God was pleased marvellously to appear for his people, The
Declaration of Genesis Cromwell and his Council of Officers.
in reducing Ireland and Scotland to so great a degree of peace, and England to
perfect quiet; whereby the Parliament had opportunity to give the people the
harvest of all their labor, blood and treasure; and to settle a due Liberty in
reference to Civil and Spiritual things: whereunto they were obliged by their
duty, engagements, and those great and wonderful things God has wrought for
them. But they made so little progress therein that it was matter of much
grief to the good people of the Land; who thereupon applied themselves to the
Army, expecting redress by their means, who (though unwilling to meddle with
the Civil Authority) agreed that such Officers as were Members of Parliament
should move them to proceed vigorously, in reforming what was amiss in the
Commonwealth, and in settling it upon a foundation of Justice and
Righteousness, which being done, it was hoped the Parliament would have
answered their expectations.

But finding the contrary, they renewed their desires by an humble Petition in
Aug. 1652. which produced no considerable effect, nor was any such progress
made therein, as might imply their real intentions to accomplish what was
petitioned for; but rather an averseness to the things themselves, with much
bitterness and opposition to the people of God and his Spirit acting in them:
in so much that the godly Party in Parliament were rendered of no further use,
then to countenance the ends of a corrupt Party, for effecting their desires of
perpetuating themselves in the supreme Government.

For obviating these evils, the Officers of the Army obtained several meetings
with some of the Parliament, to consider what remedy might be applied to
prevent the same; but such endeavors proving ineffectuall, it became evident,
that this Parliament, through the corruption of some, the jealousy of others,
the non-attendance of many, would never answer those ends which God, his
People, and the whole Nation expected from them; But that this cause which God
had so greatly blessed, must needs languish under their hands, and by degrees
be lost; and the Lives, Liberties and Comforts of his people be delivered into
their enemies hands.

All which being sadly and seriously considered by the honest people of the
Nation as well as by the Army, it seemed a duty incumbent upon us, who had seen
so much of the power and presence of God, to consider of some effectual means
whereby to establish righteousness and peace in these Nations.

And after much debate it was judged necessary, that the supreme Government
should be by the Parliament devolved upon known persons fearing God, and of
approved integrity for a time, as the most hopeful way to countenance all Gods
people, reform the Law, and administer Justice impartially: hoping thereby the
people might forget Monarchy, and understand their true interest in the
election of successive Parliaments; that so the Government might be settled upon
a right Basis, without hazard to this glorious cause, or necessitating to keep
up Armies for the defense of the same.

And being still resolved to use all means possibly to avoid extraordinary
courses, we prevailed with about twenty Members of Parliament, to give us a
conference, with whom we plainly debated the necessity and justness of our
Proposals: The which found no acceptance, but in stead thereof it was offered
that the way was to continue still this Parliament, as being that from which we
might probably expect all good things. This being vehemently insisted on did
much confirm us in our apprehensions; That not any love to a Representative,
but the making use thereof to recruit, and so to perpetuate themselves, was
their aim, in the Act they had then under consideration.

For preventing the consummating whereof, and all the sad and evil
consequences, which upon the grounds aforesaid must have ensued, and whereby at
one blow the interest of all honest men and of this glorious cause had been
endangered to be laid in the dust, and these Nations embroyled in new troubles,
at a time when our enemies abroad are watching all advantages against, and some
of them actually engaged in War with us; we have been necessitated (though
with much reluctance) to put an end to this Parliament.


This Declaration and proceedings of General Cromwell and his Council of
Officers, was attended with the consent of the Generals and all the Captains of
the Fleet, as also of the Generals and Officers of all the land Forces in
Ireland and Scotland.

But least the Magistrates, and other public Ministers of the Nation, should
be startled at this sudden change, so as to swerve from their duties; or others
should take occasion thereby to make disturbances in the Commonwealth, this
following Declaration, was published.

WHereas the Parliament being dissolved, persons of approved fidelity and
honesty, are (according to the late Declaration of the 22. of April last) to be
called from the several parts of this Commonwealth to the supreme Authority;
and although effectual proceedings are and have been had for perfecting those
resolutions, yet some convenient time being required for the assembling of
those persons, it has been found necessary for preventing the mischiefs and
inconveniences which may arise in the mean while to the public affairs, that a
Council of State be constituted, to take care of and intend, the peace, safety
and present management of the affairs of this Commonwealth: which being settled
accordingly, the same is hereby declared and published, to the end all persons
may take notice thereof, and in their sever all places and stations, demean
themselves peaceably, giving obedience to the Laws of the Nation as heretofore:
in the exercise and administration whereof, as endeavors shall be used, that
no oppression or wrong be done to the people, so a strict account will be
required, of all such as shall do any thing to endanger the public peace and
quiet, upon any pretense whatsoever.

April. 30. 1653. O. Cromwell.


These Domestic revolutions did in some measure heighten the spirits of the
Dutch, who thought that some eminent distractions and commotions (both by sea
and land) would thereupon ensue: but they were much deceived; for the Maritime
affairs of these Nations (wherein the woe or weal thereof consisted) were
carried on with as much dexterity, policy, and speed, as the necessity and
urgency of the occasion did require.

Now the Dutch having a great Fleet of Merchants Ships outward bound, durst not
adventure through the Channel; but with a Fleet of about 90 Men of War,
conducted them by the North of Scotland toward the Sound, and there met with
another Fleet of their Merchant men homewards bound, some from Russia, some
from the East Indies, and some from France: all which they conveyed home in
safety, not having met with the English Fleet either going or coming: which
having done, and hearing that the English Fleet was to the Northwards, they set
sail with their Fleet, and came into the Downs, where they took two or three
small Vessels, and made several shot into the Town of Dover, with which
bravadoes they greatly delighted themselves, and boasted that the English Fleet
was lost, that Hue and Cry must be sent after them, and such like speeches they
vented and vaunted with: when on a sudden the English Fleet arrived from the
Northwards, and on the 28 of May, came into Yarmouth Road. June. 1. Being at
Anchor in Sole Bay, they discovered two Dutch galliot Hoyes, to which chase was
given till the whole Fleet was discovered, but the weather proving dark, they
lost fight of them. June. 3. The English Fleet (being at anchor without the
South head of the Gober) discovered the Enemy about two Leagues to Leeward,
being about 100 sail: The Fight between the Dutch and English Fleets off the
Northforeland.
whereupon the English weighed and made sail toward them; between eleven and
twelve at noon both Fleets were engaged, and for some hours the dispute was
sharp, insomuch that about six a clock in the evening the enemy bore right away
before the wind, little more being done that night. Next morning early the
English were fair by the Dutch again; The Dutch are worsted, and many of their
Ships sunk and taken.
but there being little wind, it was noon ere they could engage them, and after
four hours dispute, the Dutch endeavored as fast as they could to get away;
but the wind freshing Westwardly, the English bore in so hard among them, that
they took eleven Men of War, and two water-Hoyes, six Captains, 1500
Prisoners, and sunk six Men of War more; the rest of the Dutch Fleet (if
night had not prevented) would probably have been cut off; but darkness coming
on and being near the Flats, and necessitated to stay and mend their Sails and
Rigging which were much shattered and torn, they came to an Anchor about ten a
clock that night. The loss which the English sustained in this fight, was of
Genesis Dean one of their Admirals, who with a great shot was taken off the first
days engagement; one Captain they lost beside, they had slain at the uttermost
not above 150 men, and about 240 wounded, but they lost not one Ship. That
which greatly animated the English, and discouraged the Dutch, was the
opportune and seasonable coming in of Genesis Blake with about 16 sail of stout
Men of War. The Dutch having (by the advantage of the night) got into the
Wielings, the Vlye and the Texel; the English called a Council of all the
Captains of the Fleet, to advise what was the most convenient course for
improvement of the victory to the best advantage: where it was resolved to make
what sail they could with the whole Fleet toward the Wielings, so far as with
safety they might, and so range the Dutch Coast till they came to the Texel,
where they lay for a pretty space of time, taking Prizes continually more or
less, to the woeful prejudice of the Dutch, whose Ships could in that while
neither go out nor come in, nor get together in any one Port, whereby to unite
and get to a head; in which condition, I shall for the present leave them.

Genesis Cromwell and his Council of Officers having finished their consultations
and resolutions about those Persons to whom the Legislative Power of the Nation
was to be committed; Warrants were issued out to each person so chosen in the
three Nations, to appear at the Councel-Chamber at Whitehall, July, 4. 1653. a
Copy whereof follows.

FOr as much as upon the dissolution of the late Parliament it became
necessary, that the peace, safety and good government of this Commonwealth
should be provided for; and in order thereunto, diverse persons searing God, and
of approved fidelity and honesty, are by my self, with the advice of my Council
of Officers nominated; to whom the great charge and trust of so weighty affairs
is to be committed. And having good assurance of your love to, and courage for
God, and the Interest of his Cause, and the good people of this Commonwealth.

I Oliver Cromwell, Captain General and Commander in chief of all the Armies
and Forces raised and to be raised within this Commonwealth, do hereby summon
and require you (being of the Persons nominated) personally to be and appear at
the Councel-chamber commonly known or called by the name of the Councel-chamber
at White Hall, within the City of Westminster, upon the 4 day of July next
ensuing the date hereof, and then and there to take upon you the said trust,
unto which you are hereby called and appointed to serve as a Member for the
County of (...) And hereof you are not to fail.

Given under my hand and Seal the (...) day of June, 1653. O. Cromwell.


July 4. The several Members met accordingly in the Councel-Chamber, where was
the Lord Genesis Cromwell, and many of his Officers about him, who standing up,
made an excellent, useful and seasonable Speech unto them; recounting the many
wonderful mercies of God toward this Nation, and the continued series of
providence, by which he had appeared, in carrying on this Cause, and bringing
affairs into the present condition.

He set forth likewise the progress of affairs since the famous victory at
Worcester, as also the actings of the Army thereupon, after diverse applications
to the Parliament, and much waiting upon them, with the grounds and necessity
of their dissolving the late Parliament, which he declared to be for the
preservation of this Cause, and the interest of all honest men who have been
engaged therein.

He in like manner held forth the cleernesse of the call given to the Members
then present, to take upon them the supreme Authority: and from the Scriptures
exhorted them to their duties, and encouraged them therein. He further defired
them that a tenderness might be used toward all conscientious persons of what
judgment soever.

Which having ended, his Excellency produced an Instrument under his own hand
and Seal, whereby he did with the advice of his Officers, devolve and entrust
the Supreme Authority and Government of this Commonwealth, into the hands of
the Persons there met: Who, or any forty of them, are to be held and
acknowledged the Supreme Authority of the Nation; unto whom all persons within
the same, and the territories thereunto belonging, are to yield obedience and
subjection. And that they sit no longer then the 3d. of November. 1654. And three
months before thein dissolution, they were to make choice of other Persons to
succeed them, who were not to sit above a twelvemoneth, and then to take care
for a succession in Government. Which Instrument being delivered to the
Members, his Lordship commended them to God, and with his Officers withdrew.
From thence the Members adjourned forthwith to the old Parliament House, and
there sat de die in diem.

About this time John Lilburne (of whom I have already made mention) being a
few months before banished the Land, by an Act of the foregoing Parliament,
for certain crimes laid to his charge; took occasion upon this change of
Government to come into England, and cast himself upon his Excellency the Lord
General Cromwell, craving his protection in several public addresses; who
unwilling to interpose or meddle with affairs of that nature, left him to the
Law: in so much that he was committed to Newgate, and the next Sessions or
Jail-deliver, John Lilburn tried at the Sessions in the Old Baily.
he was brought to trial in the Old Bailey, July 13. but nothing was done that
day, save that Council was assigned him according to his demand. July, 14. he
was again brought to the Bar, but refused to put in his Plea, unless he might
have a copy of his Indictment; which was at length granted him. July 15. he
appeared at the Bar again, but little was done that day. July 16. he appeared
and delivered in diverse Exceptions to the Bill of Indictment, which were signed
by his Council, and received by the Court; which day the Sessions ended, so
that the business was put off to the next Sessions. Aug. 13. he appeared
before the Bench again, and put in an Exception, demanding an Oyer of the
Judgment given against him in Parliament, as well as of the Act grounded
thereupon. Aug. 16. he appeared again, the Point argued on both sides, but
nothing more was done that day. Aug. 20. he was again brought before the Court,
where he joined issue, and pleaded not guilty; whereupon a Jury was impannel'd,
and Witnesses examined to make good the Charge; as also Witnesses on the behalf
of the Prisoner, who in making his defense, held the Court several hours; and
in answer thereunto the Council for the Commonwealth were also heard. The Jury
having the Charge, after hearing the whole business withdrew, Is quitted, by
the Jury.
and about twelve of the clock that night delivered up their Verdict, That they
found him Not guilty: whereupon he was sent back to Newgate, and soon after was
from thence sent to the Tower, where he yet remains.

Thus you see what endeavors were used to rid the Nation of this
inconsiderable fellow, by Trials, Banishment, and what not? but hitherto in
vain; when as many a gallant Heart far transcending him in birth and parts,
have fallen by the sword of Justice, in the twinkling of an eye: But it may be
God has reserved him to be a greater plague to this Nation, whose heart I fear
is the seed-plot of sedition and division. True it is, he is a man of a
penetrating judgment, quick wit, and voluble tongue, bold and confident in all
his undertakings: he is likewise peevish and passionate out of measure; affects
popularity, and is of an implacable spirit, not to be appeased but with the
blood of his adversaries: Nor can I deny but some of those things he aimed at
were honest, and useful for the people, but he steered not the right course to
attain those ends.

The condition of the English affairs in Scotland was now much after this sort;
The state of Scotland.
although the English had got into their possession most or all of the strong
Towns, Forts, and Castles in the Lowlands, yet many incursions were made
thereinto by the Highlanders, and such like loose and barbarous people,
committing many outrages, spoils and cruel murders upon the people and
soldiers in straggling parties; and forthwith would betake themselves to such
inaccessible fastnesses, that they could not be pursued: The like they do yet
daily in great numbers, and are headed by Glencarne, Atholl, Seafort and
others; the last of which was so bold as to send a Summons to a Ship that lay
at Anchor at Lewis Island, (having before surprised seven or eight men that
went ashore for Provisions) which Summons is as follows.

A Copy of the Summons.
BEing incited, not only by Conscience and Honor, to stand firm to the
Principles of Loyalty; but also disdaining even in rational interest, to stoop
to such a wavering and servile Power as now Rules; I have laid hold on those
men come ashore, as promoving the same: Wherefore I summon you to deliver your
Vessel for his Majesty's service; and being certainly persuaded, that all or
most part of you are with grief of heart employed in such service; I do assure
all that will voluntarily shun the unnecessary effusion of blood, by that
surrender, shall have such fair quarter as is sitting for me to grant, and as
your several conditions do require, and according to your demeanours herein,
you may expect to find me your Friend accordingly.

For the Captain, Soldiers, Master, and Mariners of the Fortune, These.
Seafort.


The affairs of Ireland were much after the same pass: The state of Ireland.
for the English having reduced all the strong holds of that Country, and shipped
away most of those Irish Rebels that (according to Proclamation) came in by
such a time, for Spain and other parts; except such as were found guilty of the
massacre of the Protestants at the first rebellion, who were in several places
of that Nation tried, condemned and executed, in great numbers, drove the rest
of the Irish into the Province of Conaught, and fell to approportion out the
Land of the other three Provinces, for the satisfaction of the Adventurers, and
of the arrears of the Soldiery; but are in some measure still molested by the
outlaws of that Nation, the Tories, Cosengermans to the ancient Picts, and
Redshanks of Scotland, and the Banditi in Italy.

The Hollanders (perceiving that nothing was to be got of the English but
blows, and sensible of their great losses) sent four Commissioners into
England, to set on foot the Treaty again, viz. Monsteur Bevering, Newport,
Younstall, and Vanderparre, who soon after his arrival departed this life: the
rest pursued their negotiations so close, that we are not left altogether
without hopes of an accommodation. Yet did not this Treaty produce either a
cessation, or any intermission of Arms; but all manner of hostility was
exercised on both fides, as appeared by another remarkable fight between the
two Fleets during the Treaty, which it is like much quickened the same, the
manner whereof was thus.

July 29. The English Scouts discovered a Dutch Fleet from the Wielings, of
about 95 sail of Men of War, upon which the English Fleet made what sail
they could after them, which the enemy discerning stood away; yet by five a
clock that evening, some of the English Frigots engaged them, and soon after 30
Ships or thereabouts got up and engaged, the rest of the Fleet being a stern;
those sew bearing the whole brunt of that days fight, till night came, and
forced both Fleets to retire: the Dutch were so plied in this first days
engagement, that they were discovered to send away some of their maimed Ships
in the night, and with their whole Fleet got by, striving to make a conjunction
with 25 sail of stout Ships they expected out of the Texel; which by plying up
toward them (undiscerned by the English) they obtained: which conjunction the
English (by reason of thick and foul weather) could not hinder by engagement,
nor otherwise. The Dutch and English Fleets engage.
Next morning the Dutch with their new recruits, fell upon the English Fleet in
a gallant posture, and fought courageously from five a clock in the morning,
till one in the afternoon, both Fleets passing through each other with much
violence, endeavoring to burn, fink, and destroy one another, as if the whole
business should have been decided by the event of this battle: yet the Dutch
never went off, but with the loss of some of their Ships, which were either
sunk or burnt: The Garland a stour Man of War (which the Dutch had formerly
taken from the English) was laid aboard by the Worcester Frigot and burnt: The
Triumph and the Andrew were clapped aboard by two or three Dutch fireships, and
received some hurt in their sails, but were quickly cleared of them, by the
valor and industry of some particular men. The Dutch seeing themselves in a
declining posture, many of their Ships being sunk and burnt, The Dutch are put
to slight, and many of their ships sunk.
and unwilling to abide a further hazard (their spirits being daunted) began to
bear away with all the sail they could make, and made directly for the Texel;
so that it was not thought convenient by the English, to be too bold with the
shore, not knowing how the wind might take them, many of their Ships being
disabled; but one or two small English Vessels kept fight of them till morning,
and saw them steer into the Texel Harbor, having Boats with lights to show
them the way in. Whereupon the English at a Council of War, resolved that the
whole Fleet should set sail for Sole-Bay, to dispose of such Ships as were
disabled, as also of their wounded men, and Prisoners. The loss which the
English received at this fight, was as follows. 300 Men were slain outright,
whereof seven Captains, Graves, Chapman, Tailor, Newman, Crisp, Owen, Cox, and
Captain Peacock: they had also 700 wounded, of which five Captains, Stokes,
Seaman, Rous, Holland, and Cubit. The particular loss which the Dutch
received, as to the number and quality of those that were slain or wounded,
came not to our knowledge: but the visible loss they had, was of about 30 Men
of War sunk and fired; their Renowned Lord Admiral Van-Trump was slain in
the midst of the engagement: and out of the Dutch Ships, that lay sinking in
the Sea, the English took out six Captains, and about a thousand other
Prisoners. This was the saddest conflict that has happened between the two
Republics, but a most seasonable victory to the English, who I hope will not
fail to make a good improvement thereof. For this piece of service, the
Parliament ordered that Gold Chains should be given to Admiral Blake and
Monk, as a mark of their favor, as also to Vice Admiral Pen, and
Rear-Admirall Lawson; other Chains were ordered to be given to the other
Flag-Captains, and Medals of Silver to the Officers of the Fleet. It was
afterward known by Letters out of Holland, that the Dutch loft about 6000 Men
in this engagement.

And now Reader (having brought thee well-nigh to the period of my discourse,
and hitherto entertained thee with the relation of things merely Civil and
Military) I shall (according to my skill) give thee some account of the state
of Religion, for these few years last past, which was such and in so many
shapes, that no one form can be assigned thereto: for in stead of an absolute
conformity in matters of Religion, there was a general nonconformity;
Heresies being daily broached in every corner of the Land, which continually
sprung up like Hydra's heads, one upon the neck of another, by which means the
minds of the people became unsettled and shaken in the Principles of Faith and
Doctrine; each particular faction tracing a different track to find the truth,
when as indeed, there is but one way, and one truth; the numbers and names
whereof if I should undertake to give you, I might reckon ad infinitum: viz.
Independents, Anabaptists, and those of several kinds; some for Imposition of
hands, anointing with Oil, and washing of feet; and some against them.
Brownists, Millenaries, Arminians, Socinians, Adamites, Diggers, Seekers,
Shakers, Ranters, Enthusiasts, Arians, Pelagians, cum multis aliis: of all
which I shall say only thus much, Let them grow together till the harvest, lest
in plucking up the tares, you pull up the wheat also.

This Parliament having sat about as many weeks as the other had done years,
though in that time (to give them their due) they had made several laudable
Acts, and of great utility and advantage to the people, viz. An Act for taking
off the Engagement; for taking off Fines from Original Writs and Declarations;
for clearing of Public Debts, and discovery of frauds and concealements due to
the Commonwealth: as also an Act for Relief of Creditors, and poor Prisoners,
which of all others, was of greater concernment to the Nation then any thing
they could do: Other Acts of less moment they made also, which I shall forbear
to mention. Yet in other things of no small consequence, there appeared such
consusion in their Councels, such contrariety in their opinions, such a
dissonaacy in their actings, and disparity in their aims, that they seemed to
be a mere monster with many heads; insomuch that it was not expected their
power (as then it stood) would continue unto the time prefixed.

For on the 10. of December. 1653. the Parliament (having heard the Report of the
Committee,

That they thought it sitting that Commissioners be sent into all the Counties,
and enabled to eject scandalous and unable Ministers; and also be empowered to
settle able Ministers in all void places.

That such as are or shall be approved for public Preachers of the Gospel,
shall have and enjoy such maintenance as is already settled by Law.

That upon hearing and considering what ^ath been offered to the Committee
touching propriety in Tithes, of Incumbents, Rectors, Possessours of Donatives,
or appropriate Tithes; It is the opinion of this Committee, That the said
persons have a Legal propriety in Tithes) The Parliament, I say, having spent
several days in debate of this Report, December. 10. put the first of these
Reports to the Question, viz. Whether the House does agree with the first
Clause of this Report? which was carried in the Negative.

Monday, December. 12. somewhat early, the House being sat, a Gentleman stood up
and moved,

That the sitting of this Parliament, as then constituted, would not be for the
good of the Commonwealth; and that therefore it was requisite to deliver up
unto the Lord General Cromwell the Powers which they received from him.

This motion being seconded by several other Members, the house rose, and the
Speaker with many Members of the House, departed and went to White Hall, where
they (being the greater number of the Members sitting in Parliament) did by a
Writing under their hands, The Parliament dissolved, December. 12. 1653.
resign unto his Excellency their said Powers; and Mr. Speaker, attended with
the Members, did present the same to his Excellency accordingly.

This was no sooner done, but (after serious consultation and debate about the
emergent occasions of the Land) the Lord General Cromwell was (in the presence
of all the Judges and Justices of the several Courts at Westminster, the
Barons of the Exchequer, the Keepers of the Liberties of England, the Lord
Major, and Aldermen of the City of London, with most of the chief Officers of
the Army) sworn Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and of all the Islands and Territories thereunto belonging: several
Articles by which he is to govern the People, being then read to him, to the
performance whereof, he took a solemn Oath in the presence of them all; the
sum whereof was,

That he should call a Parliament every three years. That the first should be
Sept. 3. 1654. That he should not dissolve it until they had sat five
months. That whatsoever Bill they should pass, if he should not sign it in
twenty days, that then it should pass without him. That he should have a
Council of select Persons to assist him, not under 13. nor above 21. That
immediately after his death, the Council shall choose another Protector before
they rise. That no Protector for the future shall be General of the Army. That
the Protector shall have power to make Peace or War. That with the consent of
his Council, he may make Laws which shall be binding till the next Session of
Parliament.

These with many more particulars you may read at large in the Form of
Government.

Soon after this he was proclaimed Lord Protector in the Palace-yard at
Westminster, and by the Lord Major and Aldermen in their Scarlet Gowns at the
Royal Exchange.

Not long after his Highness the Lord Protector was by the City invited to a
Feast at Grocers-Hall, the manner of whose reception was as follows.

He came from Westminster in a Chariot drawn with six Horses, in gallant
equipage; before him rode his Lifeguard, with most of his chief Officers, and
some of his Council; after them rode two Pages bareheaded in sumptuous
apparel; after them about twelve Lackeys, with velvet Caps in gray Liveries
with silk and silver Fringe; then came his Highness, as aforesaid, in a
Chariot, clad in a dark colored Suit and Cloak, attended by many of the
Nobility in their Coaches with six Horses. At Temple-barre his Highness was met
by the Lord Major and Aldermen, where the Recorder of London saluted him with a
pithy and excellent Speech. His Highness then came out of his Chariot, put on
a riding Coat imbroidered with Gold Lace, and mounted on horseback, two or
three of his horses of State being there led by: which done, the Lord Major
took the City-Sword, and carried it bareheaded from thence to Grocers-Hall, all
the way whereof the several Companies in their Liveries sat on both fides the
way, in Rails set up on purpose, with Streamers sticking up to distinguish each
Company. After his Highness had dined, and banquet was ended, he conferred
upon the Lord Major the Honor of Knighthood.

Which piece of magnificence had no sooner been performed, but as a Remora to
that happy settlement, so long contended for by all good men, there
conspicuously appeared a most subterranean work of darkness, A plot discovered
a secret conspiracy carried on by the old restless party on the behalf of
Charles Stuart, which being discovered Feb. 18. 1653. eleven of them were sent
close prisoners to the Tower of London, where being retained a short time, his
Highness clemency extended so far as to set them at liberty.

About the same time as a sure testimonial of the peoples affection to his
Highness Government, Addresses from all parts of the Nation.
there appeared addresses and congratulations from all parts of this Nation,
Scotland and Ireland; his Highness likewise by way of Retaliation, made
several good Acts, tending to the glory of God, and the good of the
Commonwealth, more especially that for the approbation of public Preachers:
But at present leaving this let us look Northward, where, about this time, high
were the expectations and hopes of the Scots, partly from the unsettled spirits
of some male-contented persons in England, as also from the great promises that
their King made to them, by his Agents, insomuch that they doubted not but to
have once more a fair trial of their quarrel in the field, and to that end
having received ample Commission from their King, they had suddenly formed an
Army of about four thousand Horse and Foot, The Scots rally.
being headed by the Earl of Glencarne and Kenmore; but this bubble was soon
broak by the vigilance of Colonel Morgan, Are routed.
who with about 1500 horse and foot, Feb. 17. came to the Lough, where Glencarn
and the rest were at a Rendezvouze, and after a little dispute, he totally
routed their Army, having killed of them about 150. Glencarn himself hardly
escaping with forty horse. But leaving Scotland, we present you with the main
business in agitation at this time, viz. The Dutch Peace, The Dutch Peace
concluded.
to which end four Ambassadors from them having resided here all last winter,
and having well nigh-finished their business, in February two of them went
over, the Lord Newport, and Youngstall, for full power and ratification, and
having returned and landed at the Tower Wharf, March 3. 1654. were honorably
attended through the City, and the next day had audience of his Highness,
declaring their full impowerment from their Superiors, for the ratifying of the
Peace lately agreed on, desiring a speedy cessation of Arms on both sides: This
was the effect of what was by them delivered; and accordingly to the great joy
of all the Reformed Churches, on the 5 of April following, the Articles of
Peace betwixt both States were signed and sealed on both fides, and shortly
after proclaimed both in England, and in the Netherlands. The Dutch Ambassadors
the day after the Peace proclaimed were nobly entertained and feasted by the
Lord Protector.

As to the affairs of Ireland, The state of Ireland.
much cannot be said, more then some years past, saving that the Country more
and more tends toward the center of settlement through the great vigilance of
the Lord Deputy and Council there, who having through a great deal of
difficulty gone through with the work of transplanting the Irish into the
Province of Conaught, by means whereof the lives and estates of the English are
thoroughly secured, and upon the generalty of that Country there appears a good
face of health and quiet.

Now whilst Ireland was in this quiet state, the old malignant Party, was
hatching new broyls in the heart of England; A second Plotdiscovered.
as appeared upon the discovery of a barbarous conspiracy on the 20th. of May,
1654. undertaken by diverse persons of several interests in general, their
intent being by a villainous assassination to have turned the State into blood
and confusion: a piece of treason so much the more to be detested in England,
in regard the generous nature of the English does usually abhor such unmanly
practices, so that they have very rarely been heard of amongst us: diverse were
apprehended about it, and examined, as Gilbert Gerard Esquire; and John Gerard his
brother, John Jones, an Apothecary, Thomas Tudor, with several others, who
were all of them committed to the Tower, and shortly after a high Court of
justice being erected these three were tried in the first place, viz. John
Gerard, Somerset Fox, and Peter Vowel, who being found guilty were condemned to
be hanged, The plotters executed.
and it was accordingly performed on Peter Vowel; Gerard upon petition was
beheaded, and Somerset Fox for his ingenuous and submissive confession his
Highness pardoned.

Upon the same day that these Plotters suffered, Don Pautalcon sa brother to
the Lord Ambassador of Portugal, having been Prisoner in Newgate a long time,
The Portugal Ambassadors brother beheaded with Gerard.
for a Riot by him and others committed at the New Exchange, and having been
lately brought to his trial at the upper Bench bar, was at first very
peremptory, refusing to be uncovered, or to plead; but at length he was told by
an Interpreter that he ought to plead or to undergo the Law, which was to be
pressed to death, which having a while slighted, he at length pleaded not
guilty, but being found guilty he was condemned to be hanged, but through the
favor of the Court the sentence was altered, to be beheaded; which was
accordingly performed, on the 10. of July, on Tower Hill with Gerard: an
exemplary piece of justice.

These Plots in England being thus nipt in the bud, Middleton routed in
Scotland.
did nothing discourage the Scotch malignants in the Highlands, but that they
brought their designs to more maturity; for having got some addition of
strength by the landing of Middleton out of Holland as Generalissimo, they soon
got the repate of terming themselves an Army; but as a means for the dispelling
of that Scotch mist, Monk was sent into the North as General, where having
attended their motions, and sat hard upon their skirts some certain time, on
the 21 of July, 1654. he engaged them by Loughgery, and after some small
resistance, totally routed them and all their hopes together.

September. 3. 1654. Parliament met Sep. 3.
According to Writs formerly issued out, the Parliament met at Westminster,
where after a Sermon preached by Mr. Marshall, they repaired to the Parliament
House, and having chosen William Lenthall their Speaker, they then began to
question the lawfulness of the power that called them thither, insomuch that
his Highness considering the growing evils that were like to afflict the
Nation in case of new changes, and revolutions, appointed a Test or Recognition
of the Government, which was to be signed by them before ever they entered the
house again, which being accordingly signed by the generalty of them, they took
their places again, and having sat full five months, and in that time done
nothing of that main work which they were called together for, which was by
their unity to cement the hearts of the people of this Nation together, but on
the contrary, by their several divisions and animosities (much like to
Sampson's Foxes fastened together at the tails) they feed the Common people
with hopes that they should once more have a day of it, which till their
sitting they despaired of; all which his Highness considering of, on the 22 of
Jan. actually dissolved them: Dissolved Jan. 22.
and full time it was, for before their dissolution, to wit on the 10 of
January, 1655. a new conspiracy was detected against his Highness, and the
present Government, the venom and contagion of which had spread it self into
most parts of this Nation, Sir Henry Littleton, Sir John Packington, A third
Plot discovered.
with several other were apprehended about it; on the Lilburnian account was
apprehended their grand stickler Major Wildman, as he was dictating to another
a Pamphlet bearing this title, A Declaration setting forth the grounds and
reasons of our taking Arms against Oliver Cromwell: Nay so general was this
design, that although very much of it was discovered, yet their confidence was
so great, that they feared not but to carry it on without their friends already
in prison about it, and to that end upon the 13. of March divtrs persons came
post from Salisbury, giving an account of the rising of a party of Cavaliers in
those parts, who came into Salisbury on the Lords day at midnight, about 200 in
a body, the assizes being there held by the Lord chief Justice Rolls, and Judge
Nicolas, where having clapped guards to all the Innes of the Town, their
insolence transported them so far, as to take away the Judges commissions,
and having seized on all their horses left them, and marched away toward Poole,
being headed by one Wagstaffe, Penruddock, and Jones, Captains in the late
Kings Army: and further to show the condition of this frantic generation, at
the same time another party of them endeavored the surprizall of the Town and
Castle of Shrewsbury, Shrewslury surprised.
but being timely discovered, were prevented.

News was likewise brought of a fresh party risen in Mount Gomeryshire, A party
risen in Mountgomery-shire.
where they were increased to the number of 800, acting both publicly and
considently.

A messenger came also out of Nottingham-shire, And in Nottingham-shire.
which brought information of a party of 500 Horse that were gotten together in
the Forest of Sherwood, in that County, having a Carriage laden with Arms,
with them; and being consulting in a by Inn, how to manage their business, a
sudden fear taking them, they cried out they were betrayed, and so dispersed
themselves.

Letters came likewise from Coll. And in Northumberland.
Lilburn out of the North certifying that in Northumberland there was another
party up, but they being betrayed by their own fears, and jealousies dispersed
again of themselves.

And for a final conclusion of all these risings, And in Yorkshire.
there was likewise an endeavor in Yorkshire to form a party, many being met
for that purpose, upon Hesham Moor, with an intent to seize York for Charles
Stuart, they had two Carts full of Arms and Ammunition with them, and diverse
of the Gentry, amongst whom was Sir Henry Slaigsby, Sir Richard Malleverer; but
they likewise dispersed, perceiving no such appearance as they expected. Sir
Henry Slaigsby was taken; Sir Richard Malleverer escaped. The like success of
these unfortunate men you may expect in this following relation.

On the 16 of March 1655 came Letters from Captain Vnton Crook, signifying the
total defeat of the Cavaliers under the command of Wagstaffe, Jones,
Penruddock, and Groves, for having persued them out of Wilt-shire into
Devonshire, Wagstaffe and Penrudock routed.
he having only his own Troop fell into their quarters, in a Town called South
Molton, where after four hours dispute with them, he took some 60 prisoners,
and near 140 Horse and Arms; Wagstaffe escaped, Jones Penruddock and Groves he
took, where having delivered them over to the high Sheriff of the County, they
were committed to Exon Gaol, where having a short time reamained, a commission
of Oyer and Terminer, Are tried condemned and executed.
was issued forth for the trial of the Western Cavaliers at Salisbury, where
30 were convicted, and 14 condemned, Penrudock and Groves were two of them for
Treason, in levying war: and on the 3 of May, execution was done upon three
of them, by name, Lacas, Thorp, and Kensey; Lacas was beheaded, the other two
were hanged. News came likewise from Exeter, giving information, that on the 9
of May, execution was done there upon 14 of the condemned persons, on the 9 of
May, Penruddock and Groves had so much favor showed them as to be beheaded:
the greatest part of them were reprieved (whereof Jones was one) by order of
his Highness. Jones repreived.


And further for the securing of the peace of the Commonwealth it was ordered
that diverse persons prisoners in the Tower, Diverse Risers sent to Plantations.
who were in the last years conspiracy against his Highness person, and most
of those in the Gaols of the West, who were in the late rebellious
Insurrection, should be sent away to foreign Plantations.

Now on the other hand, Mr. Copleston knighted.
as a special remark of true valor, on the 1 of June, Mr. Copleston high
Sheriff of Devonshire, was Knighted by his Highness for the good service he
did in his Country, at the time of the late Insurrection, his Highness
likewise gave him the Sword he Knighted him with, as a further addition of
honor.

May the 2. 1655. An Ambassador from Spain
The Marquess of Loyd, extraordinary Ambassador from his Majesty of Spain,
arrived at Dover, and so coming to Greenwitch, was there attended by the Master
of the Ceremonies, and diverse Gentlemen of his Highness, from thence by water
to Tower-wharf, where he was met and conducted thence with a stately train of
Coaches through the City to Westminster, there to receive the usual
entertainment, for three days, after which his Excellency removed to Dorset
house, in Salisbury Court, and on the 8 of May, Has Audience and takes his
leave.
his Highness gave public audience to the Lord Ambassador in the banqueting
house, and having had several other audiences, and nothing concluded, on the
12 of June following he took his leave of his Highness, where many complements
passed between them at the interview.

The peace (as you have heard before) being lately concluded with the Dutch,
Pen's expedition.
and to the intent that the bulwarks of this Commonwealth should not consume
away to no advantage, it was therefore resolved for the equipring out of a
Fleet, which having been at last brought to perfection, on the 27. of December.
1654. they set sail from Portsmouth, under the command of General Pen, and
Venables, upon an unknown expedition, but to clear doubts, in part conceiving
their design: on the 1 of May, 1655. came Letters from General Pen, dated at
the Barbados, March 19. certifying the good condition of the whole Fleet, Is
at Bardoes.
having arrived there on the 28 of January following, and there he seized on 18
Dutch Merchant men, who traded there contrary to an Act of the long Parliament:
as also by later Letters from them it appeared that they set sail from
Barbados the 30 of March, and sailed for Hispaniola, where after their
landing, having received some small check (verifying that excellent saying, Man
proposes but God disposes) they re-embarqued for the Island of Jamaica, At
Jamaica.
where they arrived the 10 of May following, being in full possession of it,
after some small resistance by the Spaniards, and receiving it as an earnest
penny of those great things that shall be done by the English Nation in Gods
good time upon the perfidious Nation of the Spaniards.

Now somewhat to raise the spirits of the English again, whom any ill fortune
dejects, take an account of the wonderful success it pleased God to bestow
upon General Blake, against the Turkish Pirates of Tunis, General Blakes
success against the Turks.
where he having on the 18 of April, 1655. demanded of the Dye of that place
satisfaction for some Ships which they had taken, as also the Captives of our
Nation; but being denied either of them, and withal they giving some provoking
terms, as in these and such like words. These are our Castles of the Galletta,
and the Ships and Castles of Porto Ferino, do what you can, do not think to
fear us with the show of your Fleet. The General seeing himself so slighted,
called a Council of War, where after the seeking of counsel of the Lord to
direct them in that business, they resolved to burn those Ships that lay in
Porto Ferino, if it were possible, being nine in number, which they thus
effected: the Admiral, Vice Admiral, and Rear-Admiral lay within Musket shot of
their Castle, which had 20 Guns in it, playing continually both upon it and
their Forts, the wind likewise favoring, it pleased God to put such courage
into the English, Their 9 Ships sired.
that in four hours time all their nine Ships were burnt down to the water by
the English Boats; in which notable service, there were lost in the whole Fleet
but 25 men, and 48 wounded, which mercy was the more signal, considering that
there was 120 Guns planted on the shore, and in the Castle against them.

June 12, A fourth plot suspected.
Upon suspicion of a new Plot there was committed to the Tower the Lord
Willowby of Parham, Mr. Seymore, the Lord Newport, Mr. Newport, with others, of
which more in it is due place.

July 4. Major Sedgewick set sail.
Advice was brought that Major Sedgewick with a gallant squadron of Ships, 12
in number, and Colonel Humphreys with his Regiment of Soldiers, designed for
the assistance of our Generals in the West Indies expedition, did set sail out
of Dover Road the 2 of July: the Lord prosper them.

August 31. Genesis Pen arrived from West Indies.
General Pen arrived at the Spithead, near Portsmouth, from Jamaica, with part
of the Fleet, having left a considerable Squadron behind him in those seas. He
came from thence the 25 of June, and being come as far as the Havana in the
Island of Cuba, the Ship Baiagon fell on fire, by negligence, and so perished
in the sea, blowing up many of her men that were in her. The Army left at
Jamaica was commanded by Colonel Fortescue, the squadron of Shps, by a truly
valiant man, Vice Admiral Goadson.

Likewise on the 9 of September following arrived General Venables in the
Maston More Frigot, Genesis Venables likewise arrived.
very weak, having been at deaths door, so that in all probability nothing but
change of air would have saved his life.

Now here by the way, take a relation of a President seldom heard of, the
resignation of the Queen of Sweden, The Queen of Swedens resignation.
who from a powerful Princess put her self into the condition of a Lady
Arrant; now whilst she was projecting the business, these propositions she
made to the Prince her Successor.

1. She will retain the best part of the Kingdom, and the custom to her self.

2. She will be no subject, but free of her self without control.

3. She will travel whither she pleases.

The Prince replied, 1. That he would not be a King without a Kingdom. 2. He
will have no Rival more then she a Superior. 3. He will not hazard himself
about her designs abroad.


But how these differences in these proposals were composed I know not. But in
a short time she wholly resigned all, leaving her self only the bare title of
the Queen of Sweden, having ever since rambled up and down according as her
wild fancy led her: and for the to tall finishing of the comic Scene, she has
at length resigned up her Religion, and is received into the bosom of the
Church of Rome; which City having at last arrived to, I there leave her: and
return to the happy success of the Lord Whitlock, who having gone Ambassador
into Sweden, and there resided about eight months, having finished his
affairs, in concluding a firm peace with that Crown, returned to London in
February, 1654.

Sept. 5. It was confirmed from Bayonne, and Sant Sabastian, that the King of
Spain had made a seizure of the persons and goods of the English.

October. 24. A Peace with France concluded.
The Articles of peace betwixt France and England were signed by the
Commissioners empowered by special Commission for that purpose from his
Highness the Lord Protector on the one part, and on the other part, by his
Excellency the Lord Ambassador of France: and on the 28 of November. Publication
was made of the treaty of Peace, first in the Court of White Hall, by the sound
of Trumpet, and the Heralds attending in their formality: Afterward in the
Palace-yard at Westminster, and in all the usual places throughout the City of
London. The like was by appointment to be done the same day at Paris, all
ceremonies of public rejoicing were expressed by the Family of the Lord
Ambassador of France, as also by all the generality of the people of the City
of London.

And now Reader have I brought my Story from the end of one Monarchy to the
third year of the Government of his Highness: under which (if is please the
wise Disposer of all things, as well as persons, to grant us Peace, both at
home and abroad) both thou and I may live to see happy days. And if it shall
please God to spin out the thread of my life to some considerable length, I
shall afford the world some other things of the like nature: but if not, I am
content to acquiesce in the good will of him that dwelt in the Bush, and so
Farewell.

THE END.

