TWO TREATISES: I. The Saints Communion with Jesus Christ, Sacramental,
Spiritual, and Celestial; wherein Ministers and Christians are excited to a
Conscientious Administration, and Participation of that, of late time, in many
places, too much neglected Ordinance, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper;
wherein that great Controversy of a free Admission is debated. II.
Acquaintance with God; the nature of it opened, the practice persuaded,
encouraged, directed, cautioned. As it was lately delivered to the Church of
God at Great Yarmouth, By John Brinsley, Minister of the Gospel there.

London, Printed for Tho. Newberry, at the Three Lions in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange. 1654.

REader, pardoning those (too many) mispointings, which (specially in the
former of these Treatises) has sometimes rendered the sense perplexed, be
pleased to correct these literal and verbal mistakes of the Press.

ERRATA.

Page 11. line 21. read those, p. 19. l. 23. r. his own, p. 23. l. 23. r.
prophecy, p. 28. l. last, r. intimation, p. 29. l. 12. r. Sun of Righteousness,
p. 33. l. 5. r. those, p. 34. l. 5. r. as comfortable a way, p. 39. l. 11. r.
drink, p. 47. l. 18. r. third, p. 50. l. 10. r. promised, p. 52. l. 17. r.
presidency, p. 57. l. 1. r. not for, p. 79. l. 23. r. ye, p. 88. l. 14. r. to
strengthen him against, p. 90. l. 13. r. ingenuously, p. 95. l. 21. r. be they,
p. 128. l. 17. r. paucos, p. 160. marg. r. (...).

THE Saints Communion WITH JESUS CHRIST, Sacramental, Spiritual, and Celestial.
Wherein Ministers and Christians are excited to a Conscientious Administration
and Participation of that, of late time, in many places, too much neglected
Ordinance, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. As it was lately delivered to the
Church of God at Great Yarmouth, By John Brinsley, Minister of the Gospel there.

London, Printed for Tho. Newberry at the Three Lions in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange. 1654.

To the Reverend, and my much honored Fathers, and Brethren, the Ministers of
the Gospel in the Church of England, who desire to be found faithful. Grace,
Mercy, and Peace.
(Reverend, and much honored in the Lord)
PArdon the presumption of this Dedication, which has fallen to you, not more by
choice, then necessity. In this ensuing Tract, (as the Text offered, and the
exigency of the times required it,) I have taken occasion, once and again, to
excite Christians to a conscientious attendance upon that sacred Ordinance, the
Sacrament of the Supper, as being both a sign and a seal, a representation and
a pledge of that blessed Communion, which they hope to have another day with
Jesus Christ, and one with another in the Kingdom of their Father. Now so it
is, that in the way of this motion, (at the request of some now walking abroad)
I foresee a double rub, which without your help I am not able to remove. The
one is, the late disuse of this Ordinance in some places; the other, the
promiscuous prostitution of it in others. The former of which deprives many of
this Sacramental Communion, who are desirous of it, and in measure fitted for
it. The latter discourageth some others, who out of tenderness of Conscience
dare not communicate; where they conceive (though without any just ground)
their bare presence may make them accessory to such a profanation. Upon this
double account it is, that I now make this Prefatory address to you; wherein
the sum of my request is, That so many of you as are interested in the
(supposed) guilt of either of these, would be pleased seriously and speedily to
apply your selves (so much as in you is) to the redress thereof. A sad thing it
is, which the Church complains of in a litteral sense, Lam. 4.4. That children
should cry for bread, and that there should be none to break it to them. And it
is no less, that the children of the Kingdom should cry for Sacramental Bread,
and that there shall be none to break it unto them; none to administer this
Ordinance to them, to which they have as good right, as to any other. Pardon me
here, if I take the boldness to mind you of what I know you cannot but
remember, and will be ready to acknowledge, that you are not Lords, but
Stewards of the mysteries of God. Now (as the great Apostle makes the
Application of this doctrine, 1 Cor. 4.1, 2.) It is required in stewards, that
a man be found faithful. Many other qualifications there are requisite in such
an officer; but none more, none so much as this of fidelity. And wherein does
that consist, but in a free distribution of what is committed to him according
to his masters will for the good of the family, Giving to every one his portion
in due season? Luke 12.46.
And this it is which I do here humbly beg from all of you, that you would in
such a way approve your selves faithful to God, and his people, by a free
dispensation of all Ordinances, which he has betrusted you with. This some,
and many of you have done, and do, in the dispensing of the Word; and why not
also the Sacraments. Surely, these are to be looked upon amongst those sacred
Mysteries; by which name they were known to some of the Ancients, who were wont
to call the Eucharistical Elements (...), Dreadful Mysteries. And as sure I am,
that the due administration of them is within the compass of your Commission:
As of Baptism, so of the Supper; which our Savior in the first Institution
held forth to his Apostles with an Hoc facite, Do this; 1 Cor. 11.24, 25.
directing them, (as it is conceived) what they (and all the Ministers of the
Gospel in succeeding ages, there represented by them) were at that time to do
in participating, and afterward in dispensing of that Ordinance, viz. To
imitate his example in taking, blessing, eating, drinking the Sacramental Bread
and Wine, giving both to the people in commemoration of his Death and Passion.
This, in obedience to his command, they afterward accordingly did. Let not any
of their Successors then lay aside this Ordinance, nor yet without unavoidable
necessity suspend it. Our blessed Savior, knowing his departure to be at hand,
how desirous was he to celebrate the Paschal, and Eucharistical Supper with
his. Apostles? (...), With desire (says he to them) I have desired to eat this
Passover with you, before I suffer. Luke 22.15. And let the like motive prevail
with you, not knowing how nigh the time of your departure may be, not to put
off from month to month, from year to year (as in too many places of late
times has been done) the celebration of this Ordinance: In which neglect, as
the Ordinance suffers not a little, so the Church much, and that more ways then
one.

And as for you (my Brethren) who do hold forth this Ordinance, let me (in the
name of your Master and mine) beg it at your hands, that you would endeavor to
dispense it in such a way, as those who have most right unto it, may not be
disheartened from partaking in it. Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take
up the stumbling block out of the way of my people; so runs the Proclamation,
Isai. 57.14. Which let it so far take place with you, as that you may not by
any act of yours obstruct, or (so much as in you lies to remedy it) suffer to
be obstructed the way to the Lords Table, whereby any of his people should be
hindered from having Sacramental communion with him. Amongst which obstructions
I know none at the present more obvious, then that which I have pointed at, of
promiscuous and mixed communions, the admitting of all sorts to this Sacrament.
Which, however happily it be not so just a ground of stumbling to others, as
they may make it, yet in it self it cannot be denied to be an abuse, and
profanation of that Ordinance. So it was looked upon in the last age, and that
by such as were free from the imputation of (since so called) Puritanism. Si
quem indignum esse palam constiterit, is ad coenam a pastore minime est
admittendus, quia sine Sacramenti id profanatione fieri non potest. Nowelli
Catech. in quarto, pro pe ad finem; Im pr. Anno 1570.
If any be openly known to be unworthy, the Pastor ought not to admit him to
the Supper, because it cannot be done without profane abuse of the Sacrament;
As that Reverend Dean of Paul's, Dr. Nowel in his approved, and then Authorized
Catechism has resolved it. And it is no other doctrine, then what the Church
then held forth in her Rubric before the Communion; where she not only
allows, but enjoins her Ministers not to admit persons scandalous, or malicious
to the Lords Table. Not suffering them to be partakers of the Lords Table,
etc.] Rubric before the Communion.
Let not this Direction and Injunction then be slighted by any of you, who
account it your Honor to be called the Sons of that Mother: But looking upon
this, not only as your liberty, but your duty, see that with holy care and
conscience you apply your selves to the discharge of it. It is that which the
Lord tells his Prophet Jeremy, (being then in a distracted condition in
regard of the present times, and not knowing well how to demean himself in the
execution of his office in the midst of so many discouragements as he then met
with,) If thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shall be as my
mouth. Jer. 15.19. This would he have him do in his teaching, to put a
difference betwixt the good and the bad, Preaching Gospel to the one, and Law
to the other; confirming and comforting the former, sharply reproving and
menacing of the latter. And so doing, the Lord tells him he should be his
mouth, approve himself a true and faithful Minister of his. And what is there
said of that part of the Ministerial Office, not unfitly may it be applied to
this, the dispensing of this Sacrament. If herein you shall separate the
precious from the vile, put a difference betwixt those who (as to Man) are
worthy and unworthy, reaching forth this Ordinance to all, and only such, as
in the judgment of a well-regulated Charity may be looked upon as meet guests
for that Table, now shall ye be as Gods hand, owned by him in this your
Ministration.

Thus have I briefly presented my desires to both of you. To which, what answer
I am like to receive at some hands, I cannot but foresee; and therefore give me
leave to meet it with a short Replication. True it is, the Administration of
this Ordinance, and that in such a way, it must be acknowledged to be the
Ministers duty; but how shall it in these times be discharged by him? What,
shall every Pastor then assume and exercise a sole power and jurisdiction over
his flock, to admit and refuse as it pleases him? To this I will not, I dare
not, say Amen. That which Prelacy has disclaimed, let not ordinary Pastors
make challenge to. What remedy then (it will be said) is to be found, and used
for this mischief of mixed communions? To this I shall desire an answer may be
received from that forecited Author, which I presume may find better
acceptance from his hand, Magist. Quod ergo remedium huic malo inveniendum est,
atque adbibendum?
then mine.

In Churches wel-ordered and wel-managed (I shall give it you in his own words,
as I find them translated) there was ordained and kept a certain Form and
Order of Governance. Audit. In Ecclesiis been institutis atque moratis, certa
ut [Pag. 92. Matthew. 18.15, 16, 17. Acts 14.23 and 15.4, 6. d. 22.24.20. d. 17.
f. 28. 1 Cor. 6.2.1, 2. and 12. d. 28. and 14. c. 26. g. 40. 1 Timothy 5. c. 17.
Tit. 1. b. 5.] antea dixi, ratio atque ordo gubernationis instituebatur atque
observabatur. Deligebantur Seuiores, id est Magistratus Ecclesiastici, qui
Disciplinam Ecclesiasticam tenerent atque colerent: Ad hos authoritas,
animadversio, atque castigatio censoria pertinebant: [1 Cor. 5. a. 1.4.5. and
11. c. 16. d. 18, etc.] Hi adhibito etiam Pastore, si quos esse cognoverant,
qui vel opinionibus falsis, vel turbulentis erroribus, vel anilibus
superstitionibus, vel vita vitiosa flagitiosaqve magnam public offensionem
Ecclesiae Dei adferrent, quique sine coenae Dominicae profanatione accedere non
possent, cos a^ Communione repellebant, atque rejiciebant, neque rursum
admittebant, donec poenitentia publica Ecclesia satisfecissent. Nowelli Catech.
ubi supra.
There were chosen Elders, that is, Ecclesiastical Magistrates, to hold and
keep the Discipline of the Church. To these belonged the Authority, looking to,
and Correction, like Censors. These calling to them also the Pastor, if they
knew any that either with false opinions, or troublesome errors, or vain
superstitions, or with corrupt and wicked life brought publicly any great
offense to the Church of God, and which might not come without profaning the
Lords Supper, did put back such from the Communion, and rejected them, and did
not admit them again, till they had with public penance satisfied the Church.]

This was the best, and only solution, which that judicious and authorized
Catechist in the last age was able to hold forth. And truly for my part, I must
profess, that (seeing the late Reverend Assembly could not) I do despair of
finding out a better. All the remaining scruple then will be, what shall be
done in those places where such assistants are not to be found? In the
resolving whereof, I shall humbly crave your help; only taking the boldness to
leave this motion with you. That where a Juridical cannot be obtained, you
would rather choose to act in a Precarious, and Pastoral way, then to suffer so
great and useful an Ordinance to be laid aside, as of late times in too many
places it has been.

More I have not, save only to apologize for one other Branch of the Treatise,
wherein I have freely declared my apprehensions concerning the gesture, which
is in this Congregation used, viz. Of sitting at the Table in the act of
receiving. This I have commended, and must commend, as conceiving it most
agreeable to the first pattern, and to the subsequent practice of the
Proto-primitive Churches in the Apostolical times, as also suiting best with
the nature of the duty; and consequently freest from all just exceptions. But
not with any intent to censure all other different forms of administration; as
well knowing, that all places of public meeting cannot with convenience admit
of this. Which having presented unto you, I shall now leave you, where I found
you, under the gracious protection and guidance of him, who holds the seven
Stars in his right hand, and walks in the midst of the seven golden
Candlesticks: Humbly subscribing my self

The unworthiest of your fellow servants. Joh. Brinsley.
Great Yarmouth. Jan. 31. 1652.
TO THE Christian Reader.
(Christian.)
WHen I first took up this Text, it was far from my thoughts that my
MEDITATIONS thereon, should have been made any further public, then as the
Pulpit rendered them. But since that, sadly laying to heart the long, and yet
continued disuse of that Sacred Ordinance, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
in many places; with the slighting and neglecting of it in some others, where
it is held forth in a regular way, according to the Primitive Pattern, I have
been induced to cast abroad this spark, which Providence had put into my hand.
Which I have done, not with a desire of kindling any fire of contention in the
Church (which being already broken forth into such open flames, calls for
water, not for oil,) but of a holy zeal, and fervor in the hearts and spirits
both of Ministers and People, that both may be excited in the fear of God, and
in obedience to the command of their blessed Lord and Savior, speedily to set
upon some effectual course, whereby this Sealing Ordinance, being of so great
concernment to the Church, may be restored to Liberty with Purity. May the
success herein in any degree answer my Intentions, I shall bless God for it,
and rest,

Thine in all Christian services, John Brinsley.
YARMOUTH. Jan. 31. 1653.
The Saints Communion with Jesus Christ.
Mat. 26.29. But I say unto you, I will not henceforth drink of this fruit of
the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in the kingdom of my
father.


HAving had occasion in the morning in the Celebration of the blessed Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, to open unto some of you the three verses foregoing,
wherein we have set forth unto us the primitive institution of that Ordinance,
I now take hold of these words following, which Saint Luke annexeth to the
Passover, Luke 22.18. but Saint Matthew and Mark to the Lords Supper; not
improbably (as Paraeus conjectures) they might be twice repeated, Nihil impedit
quin his idem repetiverit de utroque poculo. Paraeus, ad loc. Vide Fulk and
Cartwright, Annot. ad loc. Parts, Prediction, Promise.
as an Appendix to both. I shall here look upon them as I meet with them, in
reference to the latter, as relating to the Eucharisticall Cup, which the
Demonstrative particle in the Text, (This) this fruit of the Vine, (...)
plainly points at, as being the next Antecedent to it. So looking upon the
words, I shall take notice in them of two things; a Prediction, and a Promise,
or a Valediction and a Consolation. The Prediction, or Valediction in the
former part, where our Savior takes his farewell of his Apostles, of ever
having any more such communion with them upon earth, and fore-warneth them of
his death, being then at hand; [I say unto you, I will not henceforth drink of
this fruit of the vine] The Promise, or Consolation in the latter, where he
comfort them with the hope and assurance of a better Communion [untill that
day when I shall drink it new, etc.] Part 1. The Prediction, or Valediction.
These are the two maine parts of the text, which I shall handle severally and
briefly, rather glossing upon every thing, then dwelling upon any thing. I
begin with the former, the Prediction, or Valediction.

I will not henceforth drink of the fruit of the Vine] Where the first
inquiry must be, The fruit of the vine, what?
what we shall here understand by this fruit of the Vine; this some have made a
question, and (as Maldonate says) a great question, Quid Christus vitis
generationem hit appellat, magna est question. Maldonat. ad loc.
but without any just ground or cause that I know; the phrase is obvious and
plain; (...) Genimen vitis (as the vulgar Latin has it) the geniture, or
product, the fruit of the Vine that is, Wine; which as elsewhere it is called,
the blood of the Grape, Genesis 49.11. so here, the fruit of the vine.

Quest. This Periphrasis why here used.
But why does our Savior here make use of this Periphrasis, this
circumlocution? why does he not speak plainly, and simply, I will no more
henceforth drink of this wine, or any wine?

A. Here (to let other answers pass) that of Grotius (and some others) seems
most natural, Groti. ad loc. Cameron, Myrothec. ad loc.
who informs us from the Rabbis, that this was the usual Language in the
celebration of the Passover, where mentioning the Cup, Benedictio sis tu
Domine Rex mundi, qui das nobis fructum vitis. Maldonat. ad loc.
they were wont to call it by no other name but (...) the fruit of the vine. So
ran their set form of Benediction, which the Master of the feast was wont to
use in their consecrating of that cup. Blessed art thou O Lord God, King of the
world, who have made the fruit of the vines. And hereupon our Savior, as he
borrowed most of those Sacramental actions which are used in his Supper from
the Passover; so also he retains this phrase and manner of speech, calling
the Sacramental Cup, the fruit of the vine.

Obs. 1. The Sacramental Cup, Wine, not Water. Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 8.
(...), ibid.
Such it was in the first institution, the fruit of the vine, wine, not water,
(as Chrysostom observes) from this text, against some pernicious Heretics in
his time (as he calls them) who clean contrary to our Saviors practice,
Joh. 2.9.
who turned water into wine, they turned the Sacramental wine into water; nor
yet wine mixed with water, Nor wine mixed with water.
(as they of the Church of Rome will have it, putting a mystery in it) but pure
wine, the pure blood of the grape, (as it is called, Deuteronomy. 32.14) such it was
in the first institution: and let not any dare either to change, or yet
adulterate it with any unwarrantable mixtures. Sacramental elements not to be
changed or adulteruted.
We know what is said of the Word, Revel. 22.18. If any man shall add unto
these things, God shall add unto him the plagues written in this book. And
truly of no less dangerous consequence is it, to add to the Sacraments,
whether to the number of them, or to the substance of them, or to the
significant Ceremonies about them. Herein let Christians have an eye to the
first pattern, and cleave as close to that as may be, without either Addition
or Subtraction; both which Papists are eminently guilty of in the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper; of the one in taking away the Cup from the people, and so
giving them but a half Sacrament; of the other, in mingling water with their
wine; which whatever show of wisdom it may carry with it (as Paul says, those
legal observances kept alive by some in his time did Col. 2.23.) yet it is no
other but a piece of that (...) Will Worship, which God will never own or
approve. There is a first Observation. Sacramental wine the same before and
after Consecration.


Obs. 2. The fruit of the Vine] Such was this Sacramental Cup before
Consecration, and such it was after; so our Savior here expressly calls it.
That Cup which in the verses foregoing he had blessed, in this verse he
calls the fruit of the vine. Where then is that Transubstantiation which they
of the Church of Rome dream of? who tell us, that the very substance of the
Elements is changed by the words of Consecration, so as they remain no longer
Bread and Wine; but the Body and Blood of Christ, under those forms and
appearances: now surely this was a mystery which our Savior took no notice of,
which if he had, he would not still have called the Sacramental Cup, as here
he does after Consecration (as if it were purposely to prevent all
misconceivings about his former figurative expressions) the fruit of the vine.

Obs. 3. Again, this Sacramental Cup our Savior himself here drinks of,
Christ's communion with his Apostles. (...). Chrysostom: Hom. in Mat. 26.28 An
argument against Transubstantiation and Consubstantiation. Manifestum
argumentum contra Transubstantiatores, and Consubstantiatores, Parae ad loc.
so much is here plainly intimated and implied [I will not drink hence-forth]
so then, he had drunk of it at that time, communicating with his Apostles in
eating of the same Bread, and drinking of the same Cup with them (which
Chrysostom writing upon the former verse observes) and if so, here is then
another stone (as Paraeus observes) to throw at the forehead of Romes Goliath,
their doctrine of Transubstantiation; as also the Lutherans doctrine of
Consubstantiation; both which are struck dead with this one blow. If Christ
himself did eat of the Sacramental Bread, and drink of that Sacramental
Cup with his Apostles, then certainly it was not (for substance) his own Body
and Blood. What shall we imagine him to feed upon himself? to eat his own
flesh, to drink his own blood? Of all Arguments taken up and made use of
against these two dangerous errors, I know none more strongly concluding, and
clearly convincing then this; which let it therefore be laid up carefully, and
remembered for the establishing of our hearts in the truth of God against them.

Q. Why Christ communicated with his Apostles in the Supper.
But it may be demanded, wherefore did our blessed Savior thus communicate
with his Apostles? Why did he eat of that Sacramental Bread? Why did he
drink of that Sacramental Cup? Had he any need of either?

A. Not so, being himself the Substance, he had no need of those shadows;
being himself the thing signified, he had no need of those signs. Neither
could he expect any benefit to himself from this Ordinance, yet he
participateth in it; even as before he had submitted himself to the Sacrament
of Baptism, to be baptized by John, not that he had any need of it (being the
immaculate Lamb of God, free from all defilement of sin, he needed no
washing) or expected any benefit by it, but that he might fulfill all
righteousness. So he tells the Baptist, Mat. 3.15. yielding this as a reason of
his submission to that Ordinance; [Thus it becomes us to fulfill all
righteousness.] To this end he came into the world, Christ fulfilled the
righteousness both of the Law and Gospel.
and this he did, he fulfilled all righteousness, the righteousness of the
Law; and thereupon it was that he submitted himself to these legal
Ordinances, the two Sacraments of the Old Testament, Circumcision and the
Passover. And in like manner he was to fulfill all the righteousness of the
Gospel; and thereupon he submitted to these Gospel Ordinances, the Sacraments
of the New Testament, Baptism and the Supper; which he did, not for his own
benefit, but ours. Thus was he Baptized, that he might confirm John's Baptism,
and sanctify ours. And thus did he partake with his Apostles in this Sacrament
of the Supper, that he might commend it to them and us, teaching us (as by his
Doctrine, so) by this his example.

In the general, Christians not to slight Ordinances.
not to slight Ordinances; not to neglect, much less contemn them. What? was
the Lord Christ himself thus made under Ordinances, as under Legal, so under
Gospel Ordinances, and shall any that call themselves Christians set themselves
above them? Shall he that was the Institutor and appointer of
Gospel Ordinances, as being the Lord of them, submit himself to them? and
shall any who call themselves his Servants, advance themselves above them?
trampling upon them by a mean and low estimation, as if they were empty and
worthless dispensations, as to them? (as some of late times have not spared to
call them.) To all such let me speak in the words of our Savior, Mat. 10.25.
It is enough for the Disciple that he be as his master, and the servant as his
Lord] Not above him; far be this Luciferian pride, this worst of prides, (such
is spiritual pride) from every of us. Far be it from us, upon this, or any
other ground, Among other, not the Sacrament of the Supper.
to contemn any Ordinance of God.

In particular, not this Ordinance; this sealing Ordinance, the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper; slight it not, neglect it not, but with care and conscience,
in obedience to that command [Doe this] attend upon it, and make use of it,
where we may enjoy it according to Christ's Institution. What? do we see our
Lord and Master Christ sitting at Table with his Apostles, eating of the
Sacramental Bread, and drinking of the Sacramental Cup, as it were, beginning
to them and us; and shall not we pledge him, imitate him? It is that which our
Savior tells his Disciples, when he had washed their feet, Joh. 13.15. I
have given you an example (says he) that ye should do as I have done] And
the like I may say of this his communicating with them; herein he gave them and
us an example, that we should do as he did.

And great reason we should do so; our blessed Savior had no need of this
Sacrament, yet partakes of it, to show his subjection and obedience to
Gospel-Institutions. How much more then should we do the like, who (if we know
our selves) cannot but know, that we have continual need of these Ordinances,
and this among the rest, for the confirming and increasing of our faith, and
other Graces in us; which if not fed with these Spiritual viands, are as
subject to decline and decay, as our bodies through want of our ordinary repast.

Be excited then in the fear of God, Christians excited to a conscionable
attendance upon the Lords Supper.
you who now stand at a distance from this Ordinance, and are strangers to it,
that you would labor to acquaint your selves with it; and for you who have
engaged your selves to attend upon it, that you would do it more frequently,
more constantly, more conscionably.

To set on which motion let me mind you, Christ himself present at every
Sacrament.
that you shall have Christ's company at every Sacrament; so runs the Promise,
Mat. 18.20. Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in
the midst of them.] A promise which however it has a special eye at the
administration of Ecclesiastical Discipline, yet it extends generally to al
other religious duties. Where two or three are met together to pray, to hear
the Word, there will Christ afford his presence in the midst among them; and so
he will in the celebration of this Sacrament; Christ will ever make one at his
own Table, being always present there, though not corporally (as he was here
with his Apostles) yet spiritually. And that

1. As a Spectator, As a Spectator observing. 2. The Guests which do come.
an Observer, cying (1) the Guests; so did that King in the Parable, when his
Guests were set, who came to celebrate the Nuptials of his Son, himself
comes in to see them, Matthew. 22.11. Thus does the Lord Christ (the Master of
this feast) take a view of all those who present themselves as Guests at his
Table; so as if there be but one without his Wedding Garment (the Garment of
imputed righteousness, and inherent holiness, of which two this Garment is as
it were) woven, the one being as the Woof, the other as the Warp) he cannot go
unspied. Among the twelve there was one Judas, (who I am sure was at the
Passover, and for ought I know might as well be at the Lords Supper also;) Him
the Apostles suspect not, when their Master told them, that one of them should
betray him, they were every one ready rather to suspect themselves, then him;
Is it I Master? Is it I? yet our Savior espieth him, and points him out to
them. Thus, if there be a Judas, an Hypocrite, a close Hypocrite, (for such a
one was he) that shall dare at any time to draw nigh to this Table, how closly
soever he may carry it, so as to deceive all those that sit at Table with him,
yet can he not go undiscovered; there is one that sees him, even the Master
of this feast, the Lord Christ, who is there present, eying and observing the
Guests, taking notice with what preparation, what disposition, what affection
they come to his Table, and how they demean themselves being come thither.

And whilst he thus observes those that come, Those which absent themselves.
he also takes notice of those who absent themselves. So did that King in the
Parable (in the place forenamed:) He was very sensible of that dis-respect
shown to himself in the slighting of his invitation. And so sensible is the
Lord Christ of the like dis-respect offered to himself in slighting this
Ordinance of his, wherein he calls men to have communion with himself; he
sees who they are that answer the invitations of his Ministers, with such vain
and slender excuses, as too many at this day do. One likes not the company,
amongst whom he apprehends some not so approveable as they should be, and
upon that account he forbeareth this feast, because the hands of some of the
Guests are not so clean washed as he conceives some to be. A second will not
endure to be questioned by the Porters, the Door keepers, what he is, and what
he comes about; I mean, to submit to any examination, or trial by any
Church Officers touching his qualifications, and fitness for that Ordinance. A
third scruples at the manner of Administration, and among all other things, the
gesture now used, viz. sitting, especially at the Table, which he looks upon
as too familiar and homely (though it be (for substance) the very same with
that wherein our Savior at first administered it, and his Apostles received it,
which was a Table gesture, the same that was then used at the Passover, and at
other ordinary meals. A fourth likes not the tongue that blesses, or the hand
that reaches forth the Elements. A fifth (it may be) is not in love and
charity with some, nor yet desires to be. Thus do men cast stumbling blocks in
their own way, finding out some pleas and excuses to keep them from this
Ordinance; but whether they be such as will justify this their refusal and
neglect, let them see to it, knowing that they must one day give an account
hereof to the Master of this feast, who is thus present there as an Observer.

And secondly, Christ present as a Communicant.
as a Communicant, communicating with those that come. Such is this Sacrament,
a Communion betwixt Christ and the Believer. The cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we
break, is it not the communion of the Body of Christ? (says the Apostle, 1
Cor. 10.16) A Sacrament, wherein Christians have communion, as one with
another, so all with Christ; who being there spiritually present, does (as it
were) sup with them, Rev. 3.20
and they with him; he reaching forth unto them (by the hands of his Ministers)
the outward signs, and together with them the things signified by them,
Himself, his own Body, his own Blood. This he did to his Apostles at the
institution of this Sacrament, reaching forth the Bread and Wine to them, he
gave Himself with them; Take, eat, this is my Body, this is my Blood, drink
ye all of it. And the like he does still, wherever this Sacrament is duly
administered, Christ being there present, as the Master of the Feast, he offers
and tenders his own Body and Blood to those, who upon Gospel conditions will
receive him.

All which should induce Christians to a conscientious attendance upon this
Ordinance, to come to it readily, and to use it reverently. But I promised not
to dwell upon any thing.

We see what is here meant by this fruit of the vine, and how our Savior
himself drank thereof, communicating with his Apostles in this Sacrament of
his Supper, touching which he now gives them to take notice, that this was his
last Supper, the last Sacrament, the last meal that ever he should eat with
them upon earth. Henceforth (says he) I will not drink of this fruit of the
vine. Christ knowing his departure to be at hand, institutes and celebrates the
Sacrament of his Supper.
]

Henceforth] This our blessed Savior here certainly foresaw, that his Passion
and departure were then at hand, that the time was now come, when that
Prophesied (which himself speaks of, verse thirty one of this Chapter)
should be accomplished upon him and his, viz. That the shepherd should be
smitten, and the sheep of the flock should be scattered abroad (which was made
good in his Passion, where his Disciples lest him, every one shifting for
himself; and that he was now to leave the world, and them in it. Now
foreseeing this, he takes this opportunity for the instituting of this
Sacrament for the use of his Church, as also, for the holding of communion with
his Apostles; which he did first in the Passover, and then in the Supper,
which succeeded it. This he did, and that so much the rather upon this account.
So he tells them concerning the Passover, Luke 22.15. With desire have I
desired to eat this Passover with you, before I suffer. For I say unto you, I
will ot any more eat thereof, etc.] and the like we may conceive concerning
the Supper.

Obs. The like are Christians to do upon a like account, not knowing how short
their time may be, how long they shall have opportunity; they are

1 To do good while they may; Christians to do good while they may.
expressing their affections to their Brethren while God gives opportunity; so
does our Sasiour here, knowing that he had not long now to be with his Church
upon earth, but that he was now to drink his last draught, he begins a
health to it, let not any catch at the expression, as giving any countenance to
their intemperance in drinking of those Healths, which are always sickness to
the soul, and often to the body, or yet stumble at it, it being no other then
what the Psalmist makes use of, Psalm. (...)
116, 13. I will take the cup of salvation; Calicem salutum (as the Original
has it) the cup of Healths; so he calls that cup which the Israelites were
wont to take and drink at the offering of their Eucharisticall Sacrifices, and
giving thanks to God for their deliverances. And the like cup our Savior here
takes, first in the Passover, then in the Eucharist, drinking of it, and (as
it were) beginning to his Church, thereby laying the foundation of an
Ordinance, which should be of perpetual use unto it in all succeeding ages.
Thus are Christians, not knowing how short their time is, they are to do good
while they may. So the Apostle presses it upon his Galatians, cap. 6.10. As we
have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially to them
who are of the household of faith.] (...) whilst God continues to us our lives,
and puts advantages into our hands, make use of them for the good of others;
working whilst our day lasts. So did our blessed Savior, as he tells his
Disciples, Joh. 9.4. I must work the works of him that sent me while it is day,
the night comes when no man can work.] The like do we, knowing that the night
is coming; it may be the night of affliction and trouble, which being a time of
suffering is not so fit for working; such a night was that which came upon our
Savior in his Passion, which (speaking to the chief Priests and Elders) he
calls their hour, and the power of darkness, Luke 22.53. a time wherein he
had not that opportunity of working such works as formerly he did; or else the
night of death, wherein there is no more working. There is no work, nor desire
in the grave whither thou go (says the Preacher) Eccl. 9.10. no more doing
of good to others. Those Gifts or Offices which God gives unto men for the use
and benefit of others, they are only for this life. Whether there be
Prophesies, they shall fail, or whether there be Tongues, they shall cease
(says the Apostle) 1 Cor. 13.8. such gifts shall be of no use in heaven. And
therefore those who are betrusted with any of them, let them improve them now,
laying them out in Gods way for the good of their brethren. Thus let Christians
be doing of good.

Which they are to do at all times, Specially when they apprehend their change
to draw nigh.
especially when the time of their departure seems to draw nigh. Thus is it
with natural motions, the nearer their end the swifter they are. Let it be so
with Christians, to whom God is pleased to give any inclination or warning of
their approaching dissolution, let them now take all advantages that his
providence puts into their hands, and be (as they may) active and vigorous
in the improvement of them for good, that so when they shall come to take their
leave of, and give their last farewell to the world, they may then set, as the
Sun in a clear evening, and as the Son of righteousness here did, full of
luster and splendour, leaving the comfortable warmth and influence of their
beams behind them.

2. Christians to improve all advantages for their Spiritual good. Attending
upon Ordinances.
And upon the like account Christians are to receive good, readily embracing,
and carefully improving all opportunities which God puts into their hands,
for the furthering of their Spiritual welfare, in special attending upon his
ordinances, Word and Sacraments.

1. The Word.
Attending upon the Word, not knowing but that every Sermon may be their last,
that the Word may be taken from them, or they from the Word, it ought to be
their care to attend upon this Ordinance, and to make use of it while they have
it. This is that our Savior presses upon the Jews, Joh. 12.35. Yet a little
while (says he) is the light with you, walk whilst you have the light.] So
long as Christ and his Apostles were with them, the light of the Gospel shined
amongst them; this light he wills them to make use of, walking, that is,
believing in it (as the verse following explaines it) and stearing their course
by it; otherwise he tells them what they might expect [Lest darkness come upon
you] so it did not long after his departure from them, as it was pre-signified
in that prodigious and preter-naturall Eclipse happening at his Passion, where
the Sun was darkened at noonday, Amos 8.9
so as there was darkness over all the Land (the Land of Judea) Matthew. 27.45.
A sad presage of an ensuing darkness, which not long after came upon that
people, a dreadful darkness, a darkness of ignorance, and a darkness of
misery: Of ignorance, the light being taken from them they were struck with
spiritual blindness. I would not brethren have you ignorant of this mystery,
that blindness is in part happened unto Israel (says the Apostle) Romans 11.25.
Of misery, this light being gone, O what a sad and dismal day came upon that
Nation, a day of darkness, and of gloominess, a day of clouds, and of thick
darkness, wherein their Sun was turned into darkness (as the Prophet Joel
describes the day of their calamity, Joel 2.31. such was the darkness which
came upon that Nation for their not making use of the light while they enjoyed
it. The like may they justly expect who make no better use of the light of the
Word, whilst it is continued unto them. Children who play out the Candle that
is allowed them, go to bed in the dark; and what better can they look for,
who trifle away the time and means of grace, then that they should go to bed
in the dark, dye without comfort.

Which let it take place with you that hear it this day, God is pleased as yet
to continue unto you the Gospel of peace, and the peace of the Gospel. As yet
the promise holds good to you, which the Lord makes unto his people, Isa.
30.20. Though there be given unto you the bread of adversity, and the water of
affliction (though God be pleased to exercise you in sundry kinds, having
with-drawne from you many of these Temporal mercies which formerly you have
enjoyed) yet your Teachers are not removed into corners, but your eyes as yet
see your Teachers. But how long this mercy shall be continued unto you, who
knows? how soon the Shepherds may be smitten, and the sheep of this fold
scattered, who can tell? who knows but that every Sermon that we preach unto
you may be the last? And that we shall speak no more to you in the name of the
Lord. O that this consideration might work you to a more conscientious
attendance upon this ordinance. The Sacrament of the Supper.


2 And as upon the Word, so upon the Sacrament, the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, which through the mercy and goodness of God is yet held forth unto you
in this Congregation, and that in a comfortable way (I mean for the manner of
Administration) as (for ought I know) you shall meet with it elsewhere upon
earth. This is your Privilege, which many others in this Nation want, and
bewail the want of it. What our Savior once said to the Jews in his time,
Matthew. 13.17. Many Prophets and righteous men have desired to see the things
which you see, and have not seen them.] Let me apply unto you, and to your
present condition; many, both faithful Ministers, and private Christians have
desired, and do yet desire to enjoy this Ordinance in such purity, as it is
dispensed in among you, but cannot yet obtain their desires. But how long this
mercy shall be continued unto you, you know not; hereof you have sad presidents
in diverse parts of this Nation, where the use of this Ordinance being for a
time unhappily discontinued (such is the calamity (that I say not the iniquity)
of the times) they know not how in any comfortable way to their own
satisfaction and others, to retrive and recover it again. My hopes are, that
this shall not be, and my prayers and endeavors shall be whilst God continues
me among you, that this may not be your lot; but though this Ordinance be
continued unto you, yet you know not how long you shall be continued unto it.
Though this Tree of life (like that in the Revelation, chap. 22.2.) shall, (as
it has done) still yield her fruit every month, yet you, (who are to reckon
your lives not by Months, but by days, Few and evil have the days of the
years of my life been (so runs Jacobs computation) Genesis 17 9. Man that is
borne of a woman is of few days (says Job, Job 14.1.) when one Sacrament is
past, how do you know whether you shall live to see another? And therefore (in
the fear of God) upon this ground be persuaded, you who are capable of it, and
in measure fit for Sacramental communion, to a more conscientious attending
upon this Ordinance.

Which exhortation let me direct to two sorts of persons:

1 You who as yet stand aloof off from it, The Sacrament of the Supper not to
be neglected.
waiting (it may be) to see which way the wind will turn, what changes and
alterations time may bring forth, that so you may more wisely (as you think)
comply with it; what know you but that your change may be at hand, and may
prevent (as to you) any other changes. And if so, think aforehand how sadly
this may lie upon your spirits in the day of sickness, at the hour of death,
that you have upon such slight and unwarrantable grounds neglected this
Ordinance of God, which (through his blessing upon it) might have been of
special use, for the comforting and strengthening of your hearts at that time,
when you shall have most need of comfort.

2 For you, But often received.
who have given in your names, and new-ingaged your selves to a conscionable
attendance upon this, as upon other public Ordinances of God in this
Congregation; do not you think, that a quarterly Communion (as was heretofore
accustomed) will now serve your turn. If this Sacrament be oftener held forth
(as in this place it has been, and I hope shall be) I know not why (without
some just impediment) you should absent your selves from it; you will not do
it by your meals, which serve for your bodily refreshment; so often as your
Tables are spread you afford your presence, and why should it not be thus at
Gods Table? surely thus it would be, were you but as sensible of Spiritual
decays as of Corporal, and had but as good an appetite to the food of your
souls, as of your bodies. To quicken which appetite lay this consideration to
heart, that you know not how nigh the time of your Passion or change may be;
Who knows what Cup, what bitter cup is coming toward him? or how nigh he may
be to his last conflict with that last enemy, Death? wherein all comfort will
be little enough; upon this account neglect not this viaticum, this sovereign
cordial, to drink of the fruit of the vine, the Sacramental Cup, so often as
it is by the Ministers of God, in his name and way, reached forth unto you.

And thus drinking of it, Christians to receive every Sacrament as their last.
ever drinking it as your last cup. So does our blessed Savior here, knowing
that it should be so. And do we the like, not knowing but it may be so. None
of us when we come to the Table of the Lord, but may take up our Saviors
words, and say, that for ought we know, we shall henceforth no more drink of
the fruit of the vine, but that this may be our last Sacrament. And so looking
upon it, let it be our care and endeavor, as (when we come) to come with due
preparation, so in the act of receiving to raise up our hearts, that what we
do, we may do it with all our might, with all possible intention of soul and
spirit; certainly this we would do, were we but assured (as our Savior here
was) that the present Sacrament should be our last; O how would we then bend
our spirits to the duty? Do we the like at every Sacrament, not knowing but it
may be so; so eating the Sacramental. Bread, and so drinking the Sacramental
Cup, as if it were our laft farewell to all Creature Comforts, and Ordinances.
So does our blessed Savior here, celebrating of this Feast with his Apostles,
and having drunk of that Sacramental Cup; Henceforth (says he) I shall drink
no more of this fruit of the vine.] Part 2. The Ptomise, or Consolation.
There is his Prediction, or Valediction.

The Consolation or Promise follows [untill that day, when I drink it new
with you in the kingdom of my Father.]

Until, A word spoken in season.
a word spoken in season, which (as the Wiseman says) is verbum bonum, a good
word, Prove. 15.23. Like apples of gold, with pictures of silver, Prove. 25.11.
Amiable and acceptable; such was this [Untill] unto the Apostles here, who
could not but be much troubled at the former words, to hear that their Master
and they must now part, that this was the last meal that ever they were like
to have together; this could not but be a sadding to their spirits. So was it
to the Elders of Ephesus, when Paul told them, that they should see his face no
more, Act. 20.25. This made a deep impression upon their spirits (as the last
verse of that Chapter informs us.) And they all wept sore (says the thirty
seventh) and fell on Paul's neck and kissed him, sorrowing most of all for the
words which he spoke, that they should see his face no more.] To think what
loss themselves and the Church should have in Paul's death, this struck them
to the heart; and questionless it could not but do the like to the Apostles
here, to hear the like from their master; that he and they must now part, that
this was the last Cup that ever he should drink with them; this could not but
be a sad word to them. To allay this grief, he therefore prefently subjoynes
this consolatory promise, staying their hearts, and comforting them with the
hope and assurance of another, and a better communion one day; [Untill that
day, when I shall drink it new with you in my Fathers kingdom.]

Q. Until that day] But what day was that? a question, What day is here spoken
of?
and a great question among Expositors; a fourfold opinion I find about it.

A. 1. A fourfold opinion about it. A. 1. The time of our Saviors abode upon
earth, after his resurrection.
Some (in the first place) understand it of the time of our Saviors abode upon
earth after his resurrection; during which time he had communion with his
Apostles, appearing to them, and conversing with them; which he did at sundary
times for forty days together (as Saint Luke reports it, Act. 1.3.) And thus
conversing with them, he also ate with them; this he did more then once. So
we find him, Luke 24.41. where coming to his Disciples, he demands of them.
Have ye here any meat? And they giving him a piece of broyled Fish, and an
Hony-combe, He took it, (says the text) and did eat before them.] The like
we find again, John 21. where our Savior putting the like question to Peter,
and some of the Apostles with him, Children, have ye any meat? Verse. 5.
Afterward he dined with them upon their miraculous draught of fishes, Ver. 12,
13. And thus eating with them, (though it be not expressed, yet) it is more
then probable, that he also drank with them. So much is collected from that
speech of Peter to Cornelius and his company, Petrus non dixit Christum
comedisse ac bibisse cum discipulis, sed discipulos comedisse ac bibisse cum
Christo. Camer. Myrothec. in Act. 10.41.
Acts 20.41. where speaking of Christ, he tells them, God showed him unto us,
who did eat and drink with him, after he rose from the dead.] This did Peter,
and the rest of the Apostles: And they eating and drinking with him, (by the
leave of that learned Cameron) it cannot well be conceived, but that he did the
like with them; both eat and drink with them. And drinking with them, not
improbably he might drink wine also, which was no unusual drink in that
Country. And to this, some conceive this speech of his here to relate.
Chrysostom. Theophy l. Euthym. Bez. Gr. Aun. This Exposition disallowed for 3
Reasons. Maldonat. ad loc.
So diverse of the Ancients (to whom Beza seems not averse) look upon this
place.

But with them I cannot go along. Three Reasons I find given against this
Exposition: A first, taken from these words [Till that day] which seems
(says Maldonate) to point at some remoter time, then this. Secondly, Our
Savior was not as yet entered into his Fathers Kingdom; Calvin ad loc.
being in that interval, in a middle state, betwixt mortality and glory, as
himself tells Mary, John 20.17. Touch me not (says he) for I am not yet
ascended unto my Father.] But thirdly, should we suppose him then in his
Fathers Kingdom (as he was upon the confines of it, Calvin ib.
being then in a state of immortality) yet the like cannot be said of his
Apostles, their condition being not yet changed. Upon these grounds, I shall
lay aside this first Exposition.

Secondly, The day of Pentecoft.
Others (in the second place) by [That day] understand The day of Pentecost. Of
this day our Savior had spoken to his Apostles before, telling them, that then
they should see the Kingdom of God come with power. So Saint Mark sets it down,
Chap. 9.1. Verily I say unto you, that there be some of them which stand here,
who shall not taste of death, till they have seen the Kingdom of God come with
power.] So it did at that day, when after our Saviors Ascension, the Holy
Ghost was poured out upon the Apostles in such a wonderful manner, to the
admiration of all the beholders; in so much, that some of them spared not to
say, That they were full of new wine, Acts 2.13. Now did the Kingdom of God
come with power; Carthus. ad loc.
the Gospel being by this means wonderfully propagated. And here (say some) was
this promise made good: Here did Christ, coming in his Kingdom (as Saint
Matthew has it, Matthew. 16.28.) drink this fruit of the Vine new with his
Apostles; Communicating unto them such extraordinary gifts and graces.

Thirdly, [That day] understand the time, or Kingdom of Grace, The time of
Grace under the Gospel. Beda. Hieron.
under the Gospel: This is ofttimes called the Kingdom of God. And in this
Kingdom, Christ has a Communion, a sweet Communion with his people, as it were
eating and drinking with them. This he does Sacramentally in his Supper; where
he may be said to drink this wine new with them at every communion. And this he
does spiritually, by communicating the Graces and Comforts of his Spirit unto
them. Such is that communion which he makes promise of, to every one that will
hear his voice (the voice of the Gospel) and open the door, (the door of his
heart, to receive, and entertain him by Faith and Love.) I will come (says he)
and sup with him, and he with me, Revel. 3.20. That is, Communicate Graces and
Comforts to him, holding a comfortable communion with him. Thus does Christ (as
it were) feast with his people upon Earth, bringing them into his Banqueting
House, (or House of Wine) (as the Spouse phraseth it, Cant. 2.4) the Public
Assemblies, where his Ordinances are as so many Conduits, running with the best
wine; through which, he conveyeth purest and choicest comforts to the hearts of
his people, chearing and refreshing them; and in a spiritual way, (as it were)
inebriating them, as the vulgar Latin renders that of the Psalmist, Psalm.
36.8. Inebriabuntur ab ubertate domus tuae, They shall be inebriated with the
plentiful fullness of thy house. And in a like sense Christ may be said to have
drunk of the fruit of the Vine, with his Apostles after his Ascension; still
holding communion with them, being absent from them in Body, yet he was present
with them in Spirit; sending the Comforter to them. This he promised to do,
Joh. 14.16. and 15.26. And this he did, thereby supplying the want of his
bodily presence, and filling their hearts with joy, according as he had
promised he would do, Both these expositions disallowed.
Joh. 16.24.

But I shall not dare to vouch either of these Expositions more then the
former. The Communion which our Savior here permitted unto his Apostles, he
says it should be in the Kingdom of his Father; which term, I conceive
cannot so fitly be applied either to the day of Pentecost, or yet to the
Kingdom of Grace; which though it be sometimes called the Kingdom of God, and
of Christ, Luke 17.21 Ioh. 18.36. Regnum Patris nunquam nisi caelum vocatur.
Maldon. ad loc. The kingdom of glory.
and often times the Kingdom of Heaven, yet never do we find it called the
Kingdom of the Father, (as Maldonate well observes.)

In the fourth place then, (to hold you no longer in suspense) understand we
this of the Kingdom of glory. This is the Fathers Kingdom. [Then shall the
righteous shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father (says our
Savior) Matthew. 13.43. that is, in the Kingdom of Heaven, the Kingdom of
glory. And this our Savior calls the Kingdom of his Father. The kingdom of
glory the Fathers kingdom. Solus pater non descendit de caele, Maldon. ad text.
Lorinus in Act. 10.44 The kingdom of glory the place of the Fathers residence,
Joh. 1.14.
So is the Kingdom of Glory, in a peculiar way, the Fathers Kingdom. I find
two reasons given for it.

1 In as much as there has been the Fathers Residence, there has he
manifested the presence of his Glory in a more constant and continued way then
either of the other persons; As for the Son, the second Person, he came down
from Heaven, and was Incarnate, leaving the bosom of the Father he came and
dwelt amongst us, dis-robing himself of his Majesty and glory, he took upon
him the form of a Servant. Phil. 2.7.
And the Holy Ghost, the third person here descended upon him, Joh. 15.26
and after his Ascension was as it were employed by him as his Agent, each of
them occasionally appearing, and manifesting their presence upon earth in
several transactions; but the Father in the mean time still kept the Throne
of his glory in Heaven, showing himself the King thereof.

2 But (secondly, The Prefidency of the kingdom of glory, resting in the
Father.
and as I conceive more genuinely) the Kingdom of the Father, in as much as
the precedence and chief Government of that Kingdom shall for ever rest in
him. As for the Kingdom of Grace, that is committed to the Son, who sitting
at the right hand of his Father in Heaven, rules in the midst of his enemies
upon earth; but the Kingdom of Glory is more peculiarly the Fathers, to whom
the Lord Christ shall at the last day resign up that his Oeconomicall Kingdom
(as they call it.) That Kingdom which as Mediator he has received from his
Father, he shall then surrender it up unto him again, as the Apostle tells us,
1 Cor. 15.24. Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered the Kingdom
unto God, even the Father.] So as from thence-forth and for ever that Kingdom
shall be the Fathers Kingdom.

And in this Kingdom it is that our Savior here promises to his Apostles
this Communion, telling them, that henceforth he would no more drink of the
fruit of the vine, until that day that he should drink it new with them in
that Kingdom, the Kingdom of Heaven.

Object. But understanding the words thus, Did not Christ eat and drink with
his Apostles, after his Resurrection.
here an obvious objection meets us. What, did not Christ eat and drink with
his Apostles upon Earth, after his Resurrection?

Ans. 1. To this it is answered by some, ate with them, A threefold answer.
Pest resurrectionem comedisse legitur, bibisse vero non legitur. Camer. Myroth.
ad loc. Nec erat moris apud Judaeos bibere vinum in prandiis ac caenis
quotidianis, sed tantum in solemnioribus conviviis. Piscat. Schol. ad loc.
yet there is no mention made of his drinking with them. And so non creditur,
quia non legitur; being not recorded, we are not bound to believe it. But this
I have already shown to be a mistake.

2. Supposing that he did also drink with them, yet there is no necessity, to
conclude, that he drank wine with them. Nay it is more probable (says
Piscator) that he did not, in as much (says he) as it was not the custom of
the Jews to drink wine at their common and ordinary meals, but only at their
more solemn Feasts and Banquets. But this also may seem to be an evasion,
rather then a solution; and therefore I shall not fly to it, neither need I.

3. Yield it, that our Savior, Christ's eating and drinking with his Apostles,
after his Resurrection, no natural actions. Maldon. ad loc. (...). Chrysostom.
Hom. in Text. Calvin. Maldon. ad loc.
as he ate, so he drank with his Apostles, and that, wine also, (which
Chrysostom takes for granted) yet did he not now do it humano, and consueto
more, so as formerly he had done, and as he did at this his last Supper. He did
not now, either eat or drink for any bodily nourishment or refreshment, having
no more need of meats or drinks, nor yet in a way of social communion; only
for the confirming of the Faith of his Apostles in the certainty of his
Resurrection, he showed them what he could do. So as he did there (as it were)
eat and not eat, drink and not drink. Even as speaking to his Apostles after
his Resurrection, Luke 24.44. he tells them, These are the words which I spoke
unto you, while I was yet with you.] Why, was he not then with them, when he
thus spoke to them? Yes, but not as formerly, when he conversed with them in a
terrestrial and temporal life. So he ate and drank with them now, but not as
formerly. Quia id non nisi veluti per transennam fecit, non ducit in numerum.
Maldon.
This was not in him now any natural action; and therefore he overlooketh it,
as being a thing by the by: Telling his Apostles, that he would not any more
thus drink with them, until that day when he should do it in the Kingdom of his
Father. The fruit of the Vine, how drunk in Heaven.


Q. But how says he, that he would then do it? What is there any eating or
drinking in Heaven?

Answ. Not literally.
Not so. This is a conceit for Mahumetans, not so Christians. Eating and
drinking are for Earth, not for Heaven. Even as our Savior answering the
carnal reasonings of the Sadduces, against the Resurrection, tells them, That
in the Resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as
the Angels of God in Heaven, Matthew. 22.30. In the state of glory, Gods Saints
shall live an Angelical life; no more subject to any bodily necessities, or
infirmities. Not standing in need of marriage, or yet of meats and drinks. The
Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, says the Apostle, speaking of the
Kingdom of Grace, Romans 14.17. much less the Kingdom of glory, where there is no
need, no use of either; and therefore away with all such gross and carnal
imaginations. For our satisfaction taking notice, But mystically and
metaphorically.
that these phrases of eating and drinking are in Scripture used in a double
sense. Sometimes literally and properly, sometimes mystically and
metaphorically. And both these ways is this word [Drinking] used in this verse.
In the former part of it properly, for natural and corporal drinking; in the
latter part metaphorically, for mystical and spiritual drinking.

And what we say of the act, we may say also of the object. The fruit of the
vine, which our Savior did drink of, as in the Passover, so in his Supper,
was natural Wine; that which here he promises to drink of, is Mystical and
Spiritual. The same word used in two different senses in the same sentence.


Neither let any here stumble at this so sudden a change of the sense. That the
same words should be with one and the same breath, in one and the same
sentence, used in two different senses. This being no unusual thing in
Scripture; no other then what we find often practiced by our Savior himself,
Non solam sine vitio, sed cum magna etiam oraiionis elegantia. Maldon. ad loc.
and that not only without any absurdity (as Maldonate notes upon it) but with
a special elegance and accurateness of Speech. Thus speaking to that Disciple,
who being invited to follow him, desired that he might first go and bury his
Father, (be assistant unto him in his decrepit age, and perform his last office
to him, when he should dye) Let the dead (says he) bury their dead, Matthew.
8.22. Let them that are spiritually dead, bury them that are corporally dead:
Those who are dead in sin, bury those that are dead for sin. So again, speaking
to the Woman of Samaria, Joh. 4.13, 14. He tells her, Whosoever shall drink of
this water, shall thirst again: But whosoever shall drink of the water that I
shall give him, shall never thirst.] Where in the former part, he speaks of
natural water, such as she gave him: In the latter part of mystical and
spiritual water, viz. The Grace and Spirit of Regeneration. And so are we to
understand that passage, Mark 10.15. where our Savior blessing the children
which were brought to him, tells his Disciples, That whosoever shall not
receive the Kingdom of God, as a little child, he shall not enter therein.
Where by the Kingdom of God in the former part, we are to understand the
Doctrine of the Kingdom, the Gospel; In the latter part, the Heavenly Kingdom,
Eternal life and glory. And the very like do we here meet within the Text.
Drinking of the fruit of the Vine, in the former part it is to be understood
properly, of natural wine, in the latter part mystically of spiritual wine.

And so much is not obscurely insinuated in that Addition, Celestial Glory
called New Wine.
which is here put to it, where it is called New Wine. Until I drink it new.
Thus the Spirit of God in Scripture, is wont for the most part (as it were)
emollire Allegorias, Solent (...) aliquo additamento emolliri. Grot. ad loc.
to soften Allegories, which otherwise might seem hard, by some such
additaments. As the Apostle speaking of Christ and his blood, he calls it
Spiritual drink, and him a Spiritual rock, 1 Cor. 10.4. Thus Saint Peter
speaking to believers, he tells them, That they as [lively stones] were built
up a [spiritual house] an holy Priesthood to offer up [spiritual sacrifice.] 1
Pet. 2.5. In like manner the Spirit speaking of Rome, (or the Roman Empire)
where the Bodies of Gods Saints should lie slain, he styles it, That great
City, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, Revel. 11.8. Not literally,
but mystically; and such is this Wine which our Savior says here he would
drink of in his Fathers Kingdom; not natural, but mystical wine, which he
therefore calls new. Even as the Church of God, whereof Old Jerusalem was a
Type, is called The New Jerusalem, Revel. 21.2. (...), that is, Not the
earthly, but the Heavenly Jerusalem, Jerusalem which is above, (as the Apostle
calls it) Gal. 4.26. Even thus our Savior speaking of Celestial glory, Wine
an emblem of Celestial Glory. Vide Grot. ad Text.
and happiness here, he calls it New Wine, (...), that is, Wine of another
kind, (...) (as Grotius explains it) Intellectual, Spiritual Wine.

Wine.] Thus the Rabbinical Jews were wont to set forth eternal life, by wine
kept from the beginning of the world, from the first Creation. And the like
expression the Spirit of God may be conceived sometimes to make use of. In that
55 of Isaiah, v. 1. Christ is brought in making Proclamation, Ho, every one
that thirsts, etc. Come and buy wine and milk; Under those two words
comprehending all spiritual and heavenly blessings, Grace and Glory. And thus
do some understand that Speech of Christ to his Church, Cant. 5.1. Where he
tells her, I have drunk my wine, with my milk.] This he did (as he says) in
his Garden, by which they understand the Heavenly Paradise, where he promised
the penitent thief to meet him. Here does Christ solace himself, after all his
sorrows and sufferings upon earth, enjoying celestial glory and happiness:
This he here calls by the name of Wine, Resembling it in the properties of it:
[the fruit of the vine.] and that not unfitly:

1 Wine is a generous, sweet, and delectable liquor, most pleasant to the
palate, Wine delectable.
and grateful to the stomach, one of the preciousest juyces that the earth
produces. Hence it is that the mutual love betwixt Christ and his Church is
compared to Wine, and preferred before it, Thy love is better then wine (says
the Church to Christ) Cant. 1.2. How much better is thy love then wine? (says
Christ to his Church) Cant. 4.10. more sweet, more pleasant; such is the glory
of Heaven, yielding an unspeakeable complacency to the soul; such as none can
apprehend, but they that are possessed of it: Even as none can tell how
grateful and delectable Wine is, but they who have tasted of it. So is it with
heavenly bliss, such is the excellency of it, as none can conceive, but those
who are entered into it, and swallowed up of it. Eye has not seen, ear has not
heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, what things God has
prepared for them that love him. 1 Cor. 2.9.

2. Wine, as it is delectable, cordial; Wine Cordial.
not only pleasing the palate, but chearing the heart. Should I leave my
wine, (says the Vine in Jothams parable) which cheareth God and man, Judge.
9.13. Wine makes glad the heart of man (says the Psalmist) Psalm. 104.15.
Whereupon Solomon (called by the name of Lemuel, that is, of God, a King of
Gods making) Prove. 31.6. advises to give wine to those that are of heavy
hearts. Wine being of a spirituous nature, it exhilarateth the spirits, it
makes merry, Eccles. 10.19. And in this property again, it is a fit emblem of
heavenly joy: Where ever the Kingdom of God is, there is joy. It is so with his
Kingdom of Grace, of which the Apostle tells us, that it consists in
Righteousness, Peace, and Joy, Romans 14.17. much more in his Kingdom of glory
there is joy. Enter thou into thy masters joy, Matthew. 25.23. And nothing but
joy. Here upon Earth the Christians Wine is mixed with water; his joys and
comforts are allayed with a mixture of crosses and sorrows. But in Heaven there
is pure wine, pure joy; and that fullness of joy. In his presence is fullness of
joy, Psalm. 16. last. It is so in Heaven, at Gods right hand, in the presence of
his glory. Thus celestial happiness is set forth under the name of wine. And
that

New wine] So called, Celestial glory, why called new wine.
not only because it is of another kind (as I said) but of a better, a more
excellent kind. Soleut Hebraei quitquid prastanthus est, atque suavius, novum
appellare. Maldon. ad loc. (...) excellentiam. Sic and (...), Apoc. 2.17. and
3.12. Novum etiam apud latinos dicitur quicquid egregium est. Pollio and ipse
amat nova carmina -- Camer. Myorth. ad Text.
Thus the Hebrews, (as Maldonate notes upon it) are wont to call a thing that
is excellent, New. O sing unto the Lord a new song, (says the Psalmist) Psalm.
96.1. and 98.1. that is, (as he expounds it) an excellent song. In this sense
(among others) the Gospel command concerning love, may be called a New
commandment, 1 John 2.7, 8. and the Gospel covenant, a new covenant, Heb. 8.8.
And such is this wine in the Kingdom of God, new wine, true Nectar (which the
Poets fained to be the drink of the gods) of a more excellent kind then any
here upon Earth.

Thus does Christ still reserve the best wine to the last: Christ still
reserveth the best wine to the last.
So he did in a literal sense at that marriage feast in Cana of Galilee, which
he graced with his own presence, as the Master or Ruler of the feast tells him,
Joh. 2.10. And this he does in a spiritual sense. As he did here for himself,
so for his Saints he reserveth their best wine for the last; not so with wicked
men. They drink their best wine first; Not so for wicked men.
having their portion in this life, here they meet with many carnal comforts
and contentments, which it may be the dearest Saints of God want. But their
worst is to come. So our Savior tells them, Luke 6.25, 26. Woe unto you that
are full, for ye shall hunger; woe unto you that laugh now, for ye shall mourn
and weep. Here they have their sweet wine, but there is sower and bitter wine
reserved for them; even that wine which is prepared for Babylon, Rev. 14.10.
The wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup
of his indignation. Of this wine shall the worshippers of the Beast drink, all
Idolaters, and with them all other wicked and ungodly men. But for his Saints.
But it shall be otherwise with Gods Saints and Servants. Here it may be God may
deal with them as the Jews dealt with our Savior, Mat. 27.34. when they gave
him Gall and vinegar to drink; he may make them drink the wine of astonishment
(as the Psalmist complains, Psa. 60.3.) wringing out unto them waters of a full
cup (as he elsewhere speaks Psalm. 73.10.) laying out unto them a large
measure of sore afflictions; But there is better Wine reserved for them
hereafter. New wine, excellent wine, joy infinitely transcending all joys
earth can afford: This was Christ's portion, and this shall be their portion; So
much they are assured of, Isa. 65.13, 14. Therefore thus says the Lord God,
Behold my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry, behold, my servants shall
drink, but ye shall be thirsty; behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall
be ashamed; Behold my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry
for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation of spirit.] Such a change can
God make in the affairs of this world, and I doubt not but he will yet do it
in a great measure for his Church in the latter days, to which that promise
seems to relate: But however such a change there shall be hereafter: There is
wine, new wine reserved and laid up for the Saints in heaven, which the men of
this world shall never taste of. This wine our Savior here promises to
himself, that he should drink of it, which accordingly not long after he did
upon his ascension into heaven, then having finished his suffering work, he
entered into his rest, from thenceforth enjoying unspeakable glory and
happiness. And herein he tells his Apostles that they should also have a share
with him. So it follows; Until that day, Judas excluded, though not from
Sacramental, yet from Celestial communion with Christ.
when I shall drink it new with you.] with you] What, with all of them? not
so, if Judas were in the company; which some conceive that he was not, taking
up this for an argument against it, because Christ here promises to those who
drank of that cup with him in the Sacrament of his Supper, that he would drink
it new with them; Vobiscum ad plures, non ad om. ner referendum est. Aquin. ad
loc.
a matter wherein Judas had neither part nor lot. But supposing him to be
there, yet will not this create any great difficulty, the promise being
indefinite, not universal, extending to the generality of them; to as many of
them as had there not only a Sacramental, but also a spiritual communion
with him.

With all such will Jesus Christ drink this new wine in his Fathers Kingdom;
Such as have communion with Christ upon earth, shall have communion with him in
Heaven.
have a blessed communion with them in heaven.

Mark it, this is the Observation which I have been long making way to. Such
as have communion with Jesus Christ upon earth shall have communion with him in
heaven. Christ will not drink this new wine alone; he is not, will not be
satisfied unless his Saints partake with him: Thus he is brought in expressing
himself to his Church in the place forenamed, Cant. 5.1. I am come into my
garden, my sister, my spouse, I have gathered my myrrh with my spices, I have
eaten my honey comb with my honey, I have drank my wine with my milk; eat O
friends, drink, drink abundantly O beloved.] Thus does the Lord Jesus Christ
call his Church to communicate with him, as in his Kingdom of Grace here, so of
Glory hereafter, where entering into his Garden, his heavenly Paradise, he does
as Job speaks of himself Job 31.17.) not eat his morsel by himself alone,
or drink his wine alone, engrossing that heavenly glory to himself, but he
calls his Saints and Angels to the participation of it. This is that which
he makes promise of to his Apostles, Matthew. 19. where when Peter (speaking in
the name of the rest (as often on other occasions he does) demands of his
Master what recompense they should have for that love and respect which they
had shown unto him, in forsaking al for his sake, he receives this answer from
him (ver. 28.) Verily, I say unto you, that ye which have followed me in the
regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit on the throne of his glory; ye
also shall sit upon twelve thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel.] They
should be sharers with their Master in his glory, when he should sit as a King
upon his Throne, they should sit as his Peers about him; when he should sit as
Lord Chief Justice upon the Bench, they should sit as his Justices, as his
Assessors. To the like purpose is that other promise. Luke 22.28, 29. where our
Savior, to take his Apostles off from that vain contention of theirs about a
temporal superiority, a secular primacy; he tells them that in as much as they
had been partners with him in his Sufferings, and had hitherto owned him in his
worst condition, therefore they should also communicate with him in his glory,
[I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me, that ye
may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom, etc.] Thus having had communion
with him upon earth, he promises them that they should have communion with him
in heaven. A Promise which in effect speaks the same thing with this here in
the Text; where their Lord and Master eating and drinking with them in the
Sacrament of his Supper, tells them, that one day, he would drink that wine
new with them, have a sweet and blessed communion with them in the Kingdom of
his Father, whereof that Sacramental Communion was a Representation and a
Pledge; this he promises to his Apostles.

And what he promises to them, the like (for substance) shall he perform to
all who have a like communion with him: even to all true believers, such as
here follow him, by profession and imitation; they shall be with him; where I
am, there shall also my servant be, Joh. 12.26. This was a branch of his last
Will, as he declares it, Joh. 17.24. Father, I will that they also whom thou
have given me (given to believe on me, as the 20. ver. explaines it) be with
me where I (...) that they may behold my glory] I, and not only behold it, but
partake in it; The glory which thou have given me, I have given them (so we
have it ver. 22.) That glory and happiness which God the Father had by promise
insured upon his Son Christ, by a like promise Christ makes it over to all
true believers, estating it upon them. And giving them a title to it here, he
will put them into the actual and full possession of it hereafter. Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the world, Matthew. 25.34 Such a blessed Communion shall they have with Christ
in heaven, who have here a spiritual communion with him upon earth.

Quest. Celestial communion begun at the day of death.
But when shall they have this communion?

A. I answer, The beginning hereof shall be at the day of death. To day shall
thou be with me in paradise, says our Savior to the penitent thief, Luke
23.43. promising to meet with him in a place of rest and happiness; whether his
soul was translated upon the dissolution and separation of it from the Body.
Thus it is said of Lazarus, that dying, he was forthwith carried by the Angels
into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.22. his soul (his better part) was conveyed in
recessum quietis aeternae, into the retiring place of eternal rest in Heaven,
where he should have communion with Abraham, the Father of the faithful, and
with other Saints and Angels. Here begins that blessed communion which the
Saints shall have with Jesus Christ. Upon their dissolution they shall
thenceforth be with him, beholding, enjoying him, and haing enjoyed of him. I
desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23.

But the perfection hereof is reserved to another day, Perfected at the
Resurrection.
the last day, the day of the general resurrection and judgment, when the
bodies of Gods Saints being raised out of their dust, and reunited to their
glorified spirits, shall be made joint partakers of eternal glory and happiness
with Jesus Christ. Now shall this their blessed communion be at the full, which
was before but in the change; and hereupon it is, that our Savior here in the
Text refers this his drinking of this new wine with his Apostles unto that
day, (...), until that day, the day of judgment, which is frequently in
Scripture by way of eminency so called [That day. The day of judgment called,
That day.
] But the Brethren are not in darkness, that [that day] should evertake you as
a theif, (says the Apostle to his Thessalonians, 1 These. 5.4. speaking of the
day of the Lord, (as the second verse explains it) the day of his coming to
judgment. He shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in
all them that believe [in that day] (since the same Apostle,) 2 These. 1.10. I
know whom I have believed (says he) and I am persuaded that he is able to keep
that which I have committed unto him against [that day.] 2 Timothy 1.12. And
again, Hence forth is laid up for me a crown of glory; which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give unto me at [that day.] 2 Timothy 4.8. meaning, the time
of Christ's second coming, his coming to judgment; So called by way of ^minency.
which is called That day (as I said) by way of excellency, as being the most
remarkable day, the last and great day: A day full of glory to Christ, of joy
to the godly, of sorrow to the wicked. A day which shall swallow up all days;
after which there shall be no more vicissitudes, and successions of days and
nights; but one perpetual day for the righteous, for whom light is sown (as the
Psalmist has it. Psalm. 97.11.) One perpetual night for the sinners and
ungodly, who are children of the night, 1 These. 5.5. And at this day it is,
that our Savior here promises to drink this wine new with his Apostles,
because then, and not till then, he should have a full communion with them, and
they with him in his Kingdom of glory. So is that forenamed place most fitly
and genuinely to be understood, Matthew. 19.28. Ye which have followed me in the
Regeneration, where the Son of Man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye
also shall sit upon twelve thrones, etc.] Where those words [In the
Regeneration] are more fitly referred unto the latter part of the verse, then
to the former (as Beza and Grotius note upon it) as pointing at the day of the
general Resurrection, which shall be a day of renovation; when there shall be
new Heavens, and a new Earth (as St. Peter tells us) 2 Pet. 3.13. and a general
restitution of all things (as he also says of it) Acts 3.21. This time our
Savior there calls the Regeneration, (...), because then the sons of God
shall be, as it were, begotten again the second time; being here begotten to a
lively hope (as the same Apostle has it, 1 Pet. 1.3.) they shall there be put
into the actual and full possession of the thing hoped for, Receiving the end
of their faith, the salvation of their Souls, (as it there follows, verse. 9.)
Then shall they sit with Jesus Christ, having a full communion with him; then
shall be that great and solemn feast of which our Savior speaks, Matthew.
8.11. When, Many shall come from the East, and from the West, and shall sit
down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God. Gods Saints
shall be gathered from all quarters of the world, and brought to that (...),
that Caenaculum, that large upper room (possibly represented by that, wherein
our Savior celebrated the Passover, Luke 22.12.) The heavenly Guest-chamber,
where they shall have a sweet communion with Jesus Christ, and one with
another. Then shall be that great Supper, the last marriage Supper of the Lamb,
(of which, that mentioned Rev. 19.9. shall be a praeludium) when he shall drink
this new wine (of which, not improbably that new wine which he made of water,
at the marriage in Cana of Galilee was a Type,) with all those who have here
had a spiritual communion with him upon Earth.

Quest. And why will he thus drink this new wine with them? Why Christ will
communicate his glory to his Saints.
Thus make them partakers of this glory and happiness?

Answ. To this I may answer. First, This will he do to them, because they are
his favorites; Ahasuerus going to the banquet of Wine, They are his favorites.
which Esther had prepared for him, takes Haman along with him, being his
special favorit, Esth. 5.5. Such were the Apostles to Christ, being upon earth;
and such are all true believers to him, being in Heaven: All Friends. Ye are my
friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you, John 15.14. All Favorites. The
people upon whom Jesus Christ has set a peculiar love, ( who has loved us,
and washed us from our sins in his own blood, Rev. 1.5.) whom he has taken
into a nearer relation to himself, then others; they are his Brethren, and
Sisters, and Mother, Matthew. 12.50. And upon this account it is, that he calls
and brings them to this banquet of wine, to drink this new wine with them.

Secondly, Christ honored and glorified in his Saints.
them he himself is honored and glorified in them and by them. So much we may
learn from the Apostle, 2 These. 1.10. where speaking of Christ, and his second
coming, he says, He shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be
admired in all them that believe. Mark it. At this day Christ shall be
glorified, not only in himself, but also in his Saints; whose glory, as it
comes from him, so it redowndeth also to him, and reflecteth upon him, so as
he is thereby made more glorious; this grace and goodness which he exercises
upon them in so glorious a manner, being matter of everlasting admiration to
all that behold it: Even as the glory of the Court is the honor of the King.
Thus the glory of the Saints is the glory of Christ, whose members they are.

And their joy is his joy; The Saints joy Christ's joy.
so he calls it, Joh. 17.13. These things spoke I in the world, that they
might have my joy fulfilled in them.] [my Joy] so he calls their joy, (as for
other reasons, so), because he rejoices in the welfare and happiness of his
people. Their joy shall be his joy; Even as their sufferings upon earth are
his sufferings. (...), (as Paul calls them, Col. 1.24.) [the Remainders] That
which is behind of the afflictions of Christ; Even so their joys are his
joys; which shall not be fulfilled without them. Whence it is that the Church
is called his fullness, Ephesians. 1.23. The fullness of him, that fills all in
all. Such is the love of Christ to his. Church, that though he have a fullness
in himself, and that not repletive only, but diffasive also, communicating of
his fullness to others, not receiving any thing from them, yet he accounts
himself defective, unless he have his Church joined to him, and made
partakers of the same glory with him. But I shall no longer dwell upon
doctrinall Illustration.

That which now remains is practical Consolation, Exhortation.

Use 1. Consolation. Consolation to such as have communion with Christ upon
earth.
So our Savior himself here intends what he says to his Apostles, that it
might be as a Cordial, first to himself, then to them. To himself, to
strengthen his approaching Passion; to them, to comfort them concerning his
departing from them: And both these ways let it be useful unto us; I mean
such, and only such as have communion with Jesus Christ. In respect of
themselves, a Cordial against present sufferings. or fears.
Being in our measure such, now take this,

1 As a Cordial against present and imminent, felt or feared Tentations. In
this case let Christians look beyond the present; their present sufferings or
fears, setting before them this cup, this cup of new wine, prepared in heaven
for them, after they have finished their suffering work. So did our blessed
Savior here, apprehending that bitter cup coming toward him, which he was to
drink in his passion, he sets before him this cup, this sweet cup, which he
should drink of in his exaltation. This is that which the Apostle tells us,
Heb. 12.2. where speaking of Christ, and his exemplary patience in his
sufferings, he says, that for the joy which was set before him, he endured the
cross, and despised the shame, etc.] Thus did he drown all his sorrows and
fears in this cup of new wine, in the apprehension of that heavenly glory which
waited for him after his suffering work was over. In this way it was (as is
most probably conjectured) that the Angel of God is said to have strengthened
him in his Agony, Luke 22.43. And there appeared unto him an Angel from heaven
strengthening him.] This he did, not by infusing, or communicating to him any
power or virtue, Christus enim destitutus Divinitatis in se habitantis virtute,
humanaeque naturae relictus, ac proinde, (...), opus habuit Angelorum solatio.
Gro. Annot. in Lu. 22.43. New wine for heavy hearts.
but by presenting unto his humanity (his divinity being for the present
asleep, and the influence of it for the time suspended, (as Grotius there
ingeniously explains it) the certain assurance of a speedy victory, and ensuing
glory. And in the like way let me (as an Angel, and Minister of Christ)
strengthen your hearts against what ever tentations and sufferings ye are
subject unto, viz. by setting this new wine before you.

So Solomon (or rather Bathsheba, for he learned that lesson from his Mother,
as in the first verse of the Chapter he acknowledges) advises in the place
forenamed, Prove. 31.6, 7. Give strong drink to him that is ready to perish, and
wine to those that be of heavy hearts; let him drink and forget his poverty,
and remember his misery no more.] And this counsel shall I here lay hold upon,
making use of it in a spiritual way, giving this new wine to those that are of
heavy hearts, presenting unto dejected spirits in their disconsolate condition
this cup of consolation, which I shall desire all such not only to taste, but to
drink of, and that a hearty draught, to sit at it. So do Wine bibbers use to
do at their wine, against whom the Prophet denounces that woe, which I shall
desire all such Good-fellowes to take notice of, Isa 5.11. Woe unto them that
rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink, that continue
till night, till wine inflame them.] Christians to sit at this wine.
They sit at the wine; the like let Christians do at this wine; in the drinking
whereof, there is no fear of excess; sit at it, continue by it, I mean, by
Divine meditation, and serious contemplation, often setting before them the joy
and glory of Heaven, which God has prepared for his Saints and servants, after
that they have suffered a while. Here (it may be) they meet with many a bitter
draught, they have their affliction, and their misery, their wormwood, and
their gall, (as the Church describes her sad condition in Babylon, Lam. 3.19.)
But let them remember there is wine, new wine laid up in Heaven for them. A
Cordial for such as suffer for Christ.


And how should the thought hereof comfort and strengthen the hearts of all the
sons and daughters of Sion, in the midst of what ever sufferings? especially,
if they be sufferings for Christ. Now let them know, that drinking of his Cup
here, they shall drink of it hereafter. Drinking of his bitter cup, they shall
drink of his sweet cup; drinking of his Vinegar, his old and sour wine here,
they shall drink with him of his new and sweet wine another day. Having thus
communion with him in his sufferings upon earth, they shall have communion with
him in his glory and happiness in Heaven. Ye are they (says our Savior to his
Apostles) who have continued with me in my temptations: Therefore I appoint
unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed me, that ye may eat and drink
at my table in my Kingdom, Luke 22.28, 29. Thus being sharers with Christ in
his Cross, they shall be also in his Crown. If we suffer with him, we shall
also be glorified with him; reign with him, Romans 8.17. 2 Timothy 2.12.

Christians! Christians to have an eye to the recompense of reward.
Be ye more in the thought of this, feeling your hearts oppressed with the
weight of temporal sufferings, do but cast the glory of Heaven into the
contrary balance against them. So did Moses, of whom the Apostle tells us,
Heb. 11.26. That he esteemed the reproach of Christ (for Christ's sake) greater
riches then the treasures of Egypt; for he had an eye to the recompense of
reward; not only to the earthly Canaan (as Grotius would have it) but to the
heavenly, and to the glory thereof.

This is the Christians (...), of which the same Apostle speaks in the
Chapter foregoing, Verse. 35. Cast not away your confidence, which has great
recompense of reward; not only temporal, but eternal. And this it was, which
Moses there had an eye at, the reward of eternal life. This it was, that he put
in the scale against all his sufferings: the like do we; which doing, we shall
find this infinitely preponderating and weighing down the other. So it did at
Paul's beam. I reckon (says he) that the sufferings of this present life are
not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. So it
is. The (...), the sufferings, the Martyrdoms of this present life; be hey
never so many, never so great, yet they are not (...), they hold no proportion
with the recompense of reward, the glory of Heaven: The one being comparatively
light, the other ponderous; the one momentany, the other eternal. So the
Apostle weighing them in the balance of the Sanctuary, sets his Tekel upon the
former, in that elegant Enantiosis of his, 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light affliction,
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding, and eternal
weight of glory. Ever then let this be in our right eye. In imitation of our
heavenly pattern, set we this joy before us: And herewith stay our hearts
against whatever apprehensions, or fears.

Yed, A Cordial in the last agony.
even of death it self. That is a Cup which we must all drink of, sooner or
later; and to flesh and blood it is a bitter cup. The bitterness of death is
past (says Agag, when he thought to have escaped with his life,) 1 Samuel 15.32.
I find more bitter then death (says the Preacher, of the deceitful woman,)
Eccles. 7.26. Death is a bitter cup; it will be found so to those who have
nothing to sweeten their mouths with. To allay the bitterness of it, sweeten it
with this new wine, the apprehension of heavenly glory; which being tasted of,
apprehended by Faith, will be of sovereign use to comfort the heart, and bear
up the Spirit in the midst of this last agony. Of such use was it to our
Savior, and of such use let it be to all that are his.

Thus in the midst of what ever conflicts here we meet with in our warfare upon
earth, remember we what is laid up in Heaven for us; what through Christ (being
his, his Subjects, his Soldiers,) we may certainly expect and look for, when
we have finished our course.

It was the speech of the Roman General, wherewith he is said to have
encouraged his Soldiers, being to engage in a hazardous battle; So dine ye
this day (says he) as remembering that ye are to sup in another world. Muscul.
ad Text.
This Speech Musculus (writing upon the Text) takes notice of, as a passage
which has been looked upon by many, as worthy to be remembered by Christians.
But how much more (says he) is this sentence of our Savior here to his
Apostles, worthy to be recommended to them, and inculcated upon them? Where he
makes promise to those who shall stick close to him, following him (as his
Apostles had done) that they shall sup with him in another world; have a sweet
communion with him, drinking of this new wine with him in the Kingdom of his
Father. Thus make we use of this in our own personal tentations and sufferings.

2. In respect of others. A Cordial for such as are to part with their nearest
and dearest relations.
When we are to part with our nearest, and dearest relations, Husbands to part
with their Wives, Wives with their Husbands; Parents with their Children, or
Children with their Parents: These are to be taken from us by death, who while
they lived, were the delight of our eyes, and the joy of our hearts, among the
chief of our earthly comforts.

This is a time wherein comfort is very seasonable. Now a cup of consolation
would do well. Such a custom there was amongst the Jews, (as we may learn from
the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 16.7. where speaking of those calamitous times which
should come upon that Nation, wherein all neighborly offices of love and
respect one to another, should be wholly neglected and laid aside, among other
things, he says, That they should not give the cup of consolation to their
Brethren for their Father, or for their Mother,) when any of their friends were
in heaviness for the loss of those who were near and dear to them, not to put
them to the trouble and charge of a feast (as the custom now a days is, Long
secus quam apud nos in usu est, ubi viduae morte conjugum graviter afflictae
mensam vicinis, and cognatis infiruunt. Cartwright. Com. in Prove. 31.6, 7.
not so fitly and approvedly, as our reverend Cartwright notes it, writing upon
Prove. 31.6, 7.) but either to invite them to their Houses, or else to send in
to them provisions of meat and drink, that so by eating and drinking with them,
they might help them the better to digest, and put over their grief. This was
that which the Prophet there calls the cup of consolation. Such a cup our
blessed Savior here gives to his Apostles. His departure being now at hand,
and he taking his leave of them, leaves this consolation with them; that
however he and they should part for a time, yet it should be but for a time.
There should come a day when they should meet again, and then they should drink
a better cup, have a better communion together, then now they had. And the like
cup of consolation let me this day put into the hands of all such among you, as
either at present are, or (how soon, you know not) may be in the like
condition; whom God has called, or shall call to part with your dearest
relations (as a parting there must be:) Know you, and consider, that this is
but a parting for a time. This I speak in reference to such, as you have
comfortable hopes of, that they are dead in the Lord. Indeed, as for others,
such as live and die without hope; to part with them, is a sad parting: But
being such, such as are fallen asleep in Christ; now know, that your parting with
them, is but for a time, not for ever. Though they shall not return to you, yet
you shall go to them (as David said of his child, 2 Samuel 12.23.) So as you and
they shall have a meeting in Heaven, where you shall both have a sweet
communion with Jesus Christ, and (so far forth as may make for your mutual
happiness) one with another; drinking of this new wine, joys, Exhortation to
make sure our communion with Christ upon Earth.
which shall never more know what any mixture of sorrow means. This by way of
Consolation.

2. Which that we may accordingly apply, and bring home to our selves, be we
exhorted (in the second place) every of us, to endeavor to make this sure to
our selves, That we be (as Paul calls believers, Romans 9.8.) Children of the
promise; such as to whom this promise belongs. Who they are, I have hinted to
you already, in laying down the Doctrine, viz. Such as have communion with
Jesus Christ upon Earth. Such only shall have communion with him in Heaven.
Every of us then have an eye to this.

And here content not we our selves with an outward, Not contenting our selves
with visible and Sacramental communion.
visible communion: Not, but that also we must have a regard unto this, to have
an outward communion with Jesus Christ, to own him, follow him in a visible
profession of his Name, Which yet is not to be neglected.
and to meet him in his Ordinances; as in hearing of his Word, so in partaking
in his Supper to eat and drink with him at his Table.

Which Ordinance Christians ought the rather to have regard unto, and make use
of, in as much as it is both a sign and a pledge of their heavenly communion.
Sacramental communion.
Such is this Sacramental communion in the Supper.

First, sign representing it. So it does, A sign representing the heavenly
communion.
and that most lively; specially as that Ordinance is now administered unto you,
and received by you in this Congregation; where your sitting at the Table, and
there eating and drinking of the Sacramental Bread and Wine together, Sitting
at the Table, a Mystical ceremony, representing the communion of the Saints in
Heaven.
carries with it a more lively representation and resemblance of that heavenly
communion, which one day you hope to have with Jesus Christ, and with his
Saints and Angels, then any other form or manner of Administration does, or can
do. So much is not obscurely insinuated unto us in those expressions, which our
blessed Savior is pleased to make use of in describing and setting forth that
heavenly communion; which he does by sitting, Matthew. 8.11. Many shall come from
the East, and from the West, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob, in the Kingdom of God. (...), Accumbent, sit down. A metaphor taken from
feasts, or banquets, where men of different conditions sit down together, so
having a civil communion one with another. So do the guests, whilst the
servitors stand by; as the story tell us Martha did, while Lazarus, with the
rest, sat at table with our Savior, Joh. 12.2. And so again, by eating and
drinking at the Table, Luke 22.30. I appoint unto you a Kingdom, etc. That ye
may eat and drink at my Table. (...), At my Table. An expression questionless
derived from his last Supper, which he had then administered; where his Apostles
sat down with him, eating and drinking at his table. Thus they then celebrated
the Passover; not standing (which gesture was appropriated unto that first
Passover in Egypt, because they were to eat it in haste, (as Moses tells them,
Exodus 12.11.) but sitting, their ordinary table gesture, as the Evangelists
Matthew and Mark both express it, Matthew. 26.20. Mark 14.18. And in the same
posture they celebrated the Eucharistical Supper; sitting, and eating, and
drinking at the Table. Which was to them a representation of that heavenly
communion, which there he promises they should have with him in Heaven;
shadowing it out not only in the actions of eating and drinking; but also in
the posture of sitting, and eating and drinking at the table. A gesture not
subject to any just exception.
Which I desire it may be the rather taken notice of, for the satisfying of
such as make a scruple of the like manner of administration at this day: Which,
being so conform and agreeable to the Primitive pattern, cannot, I am sure,
upon any just ground be quarrelled with.

Secondly, Sacramental communion is a sign, Sacramental communion a pledge of
celestial.
so a pledge of the heavenly communion. As a sign representing it, so a pledge
sealing, assuring it to all the worthy receivers of that Sacrament. And upon
this double account (amongst others) it ought not to be neglected, but
conscientiously attended upon, where it is according to Christ's Institution
held forth.

But Christians may not rest here, External communion not to be rested in.
in such an external communion. This Judas had; he followed his Master in an
outward profession, as well, as the rest of the Apostles; he heard his word; he
participated with him in the Passover, and for ought I know, in the Supper
also. Yet had he nothing to do with this promise; being first a Traitor to his
Master, and after, his own executioner, he went (...), to his own place, (as
St. Luke tells us, Acts 1.25.) that is, to that Hell, which was a place more
fit for him, then that wherein he was among the Apostles; and a place to which,
for his treachery and perfidiousness, he was by God justly designed, (as that
Text is commonly (and I think properly) expounded.)

See then that we go further, that we have an inward, spiritual, Inward,
spiritual communion to be sought after. Romans 6.5.
invisible, mystical communion with the Lord Jesus. That, being ingrafted into
him, not only Sacramentally (as all persons baptized are) but really, and
truly united to him by faith and love, we be made partakers of his Spirit,
which may transform us into his Image. Ephesians. 3.17.
That Christ may dwell in our hearts, being present in us by the influence of
his Grace and Spirit; communicating to us the virtue of his death and
resurrection, Phil. 3.10.
whereby we may be enabled to die unto sin, and to live unto righteousness;
showing forth his virtues, expressing his life, imitating his obedience, in
doing and suffering the will of our heavenly Father; not only hearing, but
receiving his words (as the Apostles are said to do, John 17.8.) not only
eating of his bread, and drinking of his cup in the Sacrament, (which many do
upon earth, who shall never eat or drink at his table in Heaven) but that we
eat his flesh, and drink his blood; applying the merits of his death unto our
selves, unto our justification; looking up to him, and by faith hanging upon
him for a continual supply of his Spirit, whereby we may be strengthened in the
inward man, Ephesians. 3.16. 2 Cor. 3.18.
and changed from glory to glory; growing from grace to grace, until we shall
all come in the unity of the Faith, and knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ (as the
Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4.13.) Having such a communion with this our blessed
Lord and Savior here, in his Kingdom of grace upon earth, we shall have a
blessed Communion with him in his Kingdom of glory in Heaven, where we shall
drink of this fruit of the Vine new with him to all eternity. Which honor and
happiness may he vouchsafe to every of us, To whom with the Father, and the
Holy Ghost, be praise and thanks giving now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Acquaintance WITH GOD: THE Nature of it opened, The Practice Persuaded,
Encouraged, Directed, Cautioned. As it was lately delivered to the Church of
God at Great Yarmouth. By John Brinsley, Minister of the Gospel there.

London Printed by R. I. for Tho. Newbery at the three golden Lions in Cornhil.

To the right Worshipful, the Lady ANNE WENTWORTH, at her house in
Somerleyton, in the County of Suffolk.
Madam,
I Can not, I may not forget those respects which my self some years since
found from your late honored Husband, and your self; how, during my exile (in
the late difficult times) from the Great Yarmouth
place to which God first called, and has since returned me, you were pleased
to provide me a residence and subsistence in your neighboring The Island of
Lovingland.
Patmos; where for some time I exercised my Ministry, first as a Teacher, in a
Lownde
Village near you, and after as a Pastor in the Somerleyton.
place of your own habitation. As a grateful acknowledgement of that
immerited favor (not having a better present) I do here put this small Tract
into your Ladyships hand. The subject matter whereof (what ever the Workmanship
be) is such, as may deserve a reception. Acquaintance with God, it is the chief
happiness of the reasonable creature. This, (I trust) your Ladyship is not
altogether a stranger to. My desire is, that you may grow up to a further
degree of this blessed familiarity. And to that end I shall crave from you a
serious perusal of this small Manual; wherein you shall find, as the Nature of
this great Duty opened, so the Practice of it Encouraged, directed, Cautioned.
May my labors in this way prove useful to your Ladyship, I shall look upon it
as the best retribution that I am, or ever shall be able to make you. In the
desires and hopes whereof, I humbly take my leave, resting

Your Ladyships Obliged to serve you in all Christian Offices, JOHN BRINSLEY.
Yarmouth 14. July Anno. 1653.
Acquaintance with God.
Job 22.21. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace; thereby shall
good come unto thee.


IN this Verse (as Junius looks upon it) we have a brief Epitomie and
Summary of all the Counsel and Comfort which the wise Temanite Eliphaz holds
forth unto his afflicted friend Job in the latter part of this Chapter. Junii
Ann. ad loc.
Mine eye at present is principally upon the former of these, Counsel; which,
setting aside the mistake in the personal Application of it, we shall find in
it self wholesome, and sovereign.

Acquaint now thy self with him] that is, with the Almighty: so the 23. verse
makes it out, with God. Where, before I come to the substance of the Counsel,
let me by the way take notice of that circumstance, which I meet with in the
Particle [ Now.]

Acquaint [Now] thy self.] The word in the original is ( Na) (...)
which may be translated either quaese, or nune; either, I pray thee, or now.
In the former sense it is used often, as a particle of observation, entreating,
and beseeching one; So it is translated in the verse following: And so
Tremellius (with whom our former Translation agrees) here renders it. Assuesce
quaese. Acquaint thy self, I pray thee, with him.]

Now, shall we so look upon it, then it denotes and imports the affection of
the speaker; who having before dealt somewhat harshly and rigidly with his
friend Job, now he changes his note, speaking to him in a more mild and
gentle language, that so his former words might the rather take place with him,
and be the better digested by him. To which end also he here intimates unto him
the serious and earnest desire which he had of his good and welfare, that by
harkening to his advice, he might reap the comfort and benefit of it. [ I pray
thee.]

With such affection ought Gods Interpreters, Messengers, his Ministers to
speak unto his people. How ever they are not to spare their sins, but to deal
plainly with them, Tit. 1.13.
rebuking them, and that where need is (...), cuttingly, sharply; setting
their sins in order before them, thundering out the Judgments of God against
them in case they shall persist in them (as Eliphaz here does in the former
part of this chapter) yet withal they are to deal lovingly and affectionately
with them, imitating the Physician, who wraps his bitter pills in Sugar; or
gives his Patient some sweet morsel after a distasteful potion: Thus are they
to sweeten tart Reprehensions, with mild and affectionate Insinuations;
breathing love into the bosoms of those whom they are enforced to deal
harshly with, making it manifest they desire nothing more then that their
advice and counsel may be accepted of them. To which end (however they may (as
Gods Messengers in an authoritative way command, yet) they are to become
Suitors to them. As Paul says to his Philemon ver. 8, 9. Though I might be
much bold in Christ, to enjoyne thee that which is convenient; yet for loves
sake I rather beseech thee.] Thus are the Ministers of Christ to deal with
those committed to their charge, entreating, beseeching, what they might
command: I beseech you Brethren (says Paul to his Romans) chap. 12.1. As if
God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to
God, 2 Cor. 5.20. A language fit for a Gospel Minister. But I shall not dwell
upon it.

2 Others (with whom our present Translation goes along) look upon it as an
Adverb of Time, Nunc, Now acquaint thy self with him.] Take it so, it admits
of a twofold reference, either to Jobs present condition, or to Eliphaz his
foregoing Discourse.

1 To Jobs present condition, which was an afflicted state, he then lying
under the hand of God, under many sad and grievous afflictions. In this
condition Eliphaz may be conceived here to bespeak him after this manner: [ Now
acquaint thy self with him.]

Time of affliction is a proper time, a fit season for poor sinners to come in
unto God.

Conversion and true repentance, which are never out of season, are then very
seasonable. Come (says the Church) and let us return unto the Lord, for he
has torn, and he will heal us: he has smitten and he will bind us up.] Hos.
6.1. Not to come in unto God at such a time, is a double iniquity, no small
aggravation of a former Rebellion. So the Lord charge it upon Israel, in that
known place, Amos 4. where he repeats this as the burden of his complaint,
Amos 4. v. 6, 8, 9, 10, 11.
no less then five several times. I have done thus, and thus to you; smiting
you with this judgment, and with that, But yet ye have not returned unto me,
says the Lord.

Applic. Taking notice hereof, let Eliphaz his ( now) in this sense take place
with every of us, who in any degree are brought into Jobs condition.

Is it so, that the hand of God is out against us in what kind soever it be?
Now, now acquaint our selves with him, and make peace. A proper time for such a
purpose. When the wrath and displeasure of God is kindled against us, and breok
forth upon us, then to seek unto God. In their affliction they will seek me
early (or diligently,) Hosea 5. ult. To this end, it is that God breaks forth
upon those whom he has a gracious purpose toward. 2 Samuel 14.
Even as Absalom dealt with Joah, when he would not come at him, he sets his
field on fire to bring him to him. Thus deals God sometimes with his own
people; when they estrange themselves from him, and other invitations take not
place with them, he causes the fire of his wrath to break forth upon them, by
that means to bring them home to himself. Herein then let God have his end;
which if we do, we shall have the comfort and benefit of it. Now acquaint thy
self with him.

The other reference of this particle ( Now) is to Eliphaz his foregoing
discourse. Eliphaz had been discoursing unto Job, Acts 24.5.
(as Paul did once unto Felix) of judgment: Showing what disasters, what
mischiefs had befaln wicked and ungodly men, such as had no regard to have any
acquaintance with God, and to walk with him. Have thou marked the old way
(says he) which wicked men have trodden? Verse. 15. (the old way, or the way of
the old, viz. The old world before the flood, (as some expound it) which were
cut down before the time, whose foundation was overflown with a flood, Verse.
16. They were swept away with that universal deluge. Thus dealt God with them:
And after the like manner he often deals with others, who walk in their ways.
[ The remnant of them the fire consumes (says the words before the Text)
Verse. 20. Such others as they were, God destroys, if not with water, yet with
fire; which he does sometimes literally, as he did them of Sodom and Gomorrah;
often times metaphorically, consuming them by his judgments, his wrath breaking
forth upon them like unto fire. Now seeing it is so, seeing this is Gods
ordinary dealing with wicked men; Therefore, or Now acquaint thy self with him.

Observe. Such use ought men to make of the judgments of God executed upon
others. Judgments which they see, which they hear of, they are thereby to be
deterred from walking in wicked ways. Poena ad parvos, terror ad omnes. Some
are punished, that all may be warned. To this end, God requires that judgment
should be executed upon the presumptuous sinner in so severe and exemplary a
manner, Deuteronomy. 17. That man shall die, Verse. 12. Die without mercy. And
wherefore so? The reason follows; And all the people shall hear, and fear,
and do no more presumptuously. And the like use should men make of divine
judgments executed upon wicked and ungodly men, whom God makes spectacles of
his vengeance and wrath. Seeing them, or hearing of them, they should fear to
sin presumptuously, not dare to go on in a course of sin: But breaking off
their sins by repentance, they should come in unto God, betaking themselves to
the working of righteousness. When thy judgments are in the earth, the
inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness, (says the Prophet) Isai.
26.9. they will learn, that is, they do, or ought to do it.

Applic. And this do we. None of us but have seen, or heard of terrible
judgments executed upon presumptuous sinners; such as have had no regard to
walk with God; how the fire of his wrath has broke forth upon them in temporal
plagues and punishments; so as they have been cut down before the time, taken
away by untimely deaths, not living out half their days (as David says of
Bloody and deceitful men, Psalm. 55. last.) and their foundation has been
overflown with a flood.] God has sent some sweeping judgments upon them;
beginning and making an end at once (as he threatens against the house of Ely,
1 Samuel 3.12.) Now let all these be as so many warning pieces unto us; teaching
us to decline those ways which they have trodden, that so we may never pledge
them in that cup of wrath and vengeance which they have drunk of. Now acquaint
thy self with him, etc.]

But I pass from the circumstance to the substance of this counsel; wherein I
shall take notice of two things.

First, Of what is here implied, then what is expressed.

1. That which is implied, is, wicked and ungodly men are estranged from God.
So much this phrase imports: To get acquaintance with one, it imports a
foregoing strangeness. And so much Eliphaz here intimates concerning Job,
judging him to be such a one, a wicked, and ungodly man, he looks upon him as
a stranger to God, one that had no acquaintance with him. And such is the
condition of all those who are really such, they are strangers to God. So we
find them called, Joel 3.17. where the Prophet speaking of the New Jerusalem,
the Church under the Gospel, he says, [ She shall be holy, and there shall no
stranger pass through her any more;] that is, such shall be the purity of the
Church, as that there shall be no unclean, no profane person in it. So the
Prophet Isaiah expounds it, Isai. 35.8. where holding forth the like prophecy,
he says [ A highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called the way
of Holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it.] And Saint John more plainly,
(if we shall understand that prophecy concerning the New Jerusalem upon Earth,
as very fitly we may) Revel. 21. last, There shall in no wise (says he) enter
into it any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, etc.]
Such shall be the purity of the Church in the latter days, through the strict
exercise of Discipline, that no profane person shall be admitted into the
bosom of it, to have and hold communion with it. Lo, these are the strangers
which the Prophet Joel there speaks of; even all wicked and ungodly persons,
who are strangens to God.

Such they are, being first, born so. The wicked are estranged from the womb,
(says the Psalmist,) Psalm. 58.3. Being alienated from the life of God, through
the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their mind (as
Saint Paul says of the Gentiles, Ephesians. 4.18.) Such are all men by nature,
before God take acquaintance of them, reveal himself unto them; they are little
better then (as the same Apostle faith of them, Chap. 2.12.) (...), without God
in the world; having no acquaintance with him, mere strangers to him.

Which natural strangeness (in the second place) is habituated, Paul says of
his Colossians before their conversion, Col. 1.21.) Alienated, and enemies in
their minds by wicked works. Such is the condition of all wicked, yea, and of
all carnal men, before the grace of God meet with them.

Applic. And being such, let none rest in such a condition. A condition, how
sad? how uncomfortable? how miserable? So men would account it to be wholly
estranged from the Sun, the Fountain of light and heat. Such is God to the
soul, the Fountain of all comfort and happiness: To be estranged from him, did
men but rightly apprehend what it is, they should not need to be told that they
are miserable. In this estate, let not any soul of us sit down, but stir up our
selves to seek after God, to get acquaintance with him.

That is the thing which is here expressed. Acquaint themselves with God. This
is the lesson which Eliphaz here holds forth unto Job. Acquaintance with God,
the nature of it opened.
And I wish it may make an impression upon every of our hearts that hear it
this day; which that it may the better do, I shall first by way of Doctrinal
Explication open to you the phrase, and the duty; and show you what it is for a
man to acquaint himself with God.

Acquaint thy self] Hasken (says the Original,) A word, which (as our New
Annotators well observe upon the Text) is to be found in this conjugation (in
Hiphil) but only in two other places, besides this, in the Scripture. The one
is Psalm. 139.3. where David speaking of Gods omniscience, his all-seeing
providence, he says, Thou art acquainted with all my ways. (Hiskaneta)
Assuevisti, (...)
thou art accustomed, acquainted. Where the word imports the full and perfect
knowledge which God had of David's actions and words: So the next verse explains
it [ For there is not a word in my tongue, but thou know it altogether,
Verse. 4.] The other place is, Numb. 22.30. where Balaams Ass arguing the case
with her master, and reproving him for smiting and threatening her in that
manner, for going out of her way, and falling down to save his life, she
demands of him, [ Was I ever wont to do so unto thee?] Where the word (being
the same) imports a customary use and practice.

Now from these two places being put together, we may collect and take up what
is the full comprehension of this word here in the Text, where Eliphaz advises
Job to acquaint himself with God. [ Acquaint thy self with him.] That is, first
learn to know him, then accustom thy self unto him, walk with him. In these two
stands the acquaintance which one friend has with another: First in knowing,
and then conversing each with other. And in these two stands a Christians
acquaintance with his God, in knowing of him, and walking with him.

1. acquaintance consists, is knowledge. A man can never be said to be
acquainted with a man whom he knows not: And so is it with God. That a man
may be acquainted with him, he must know him; and that with a threefold
knowledge; a knowledge of Speculation, Faith, Experience.

1. A knowledge of Speculation, a general knowledge. To know that there is a
God, and who that true God is; and what a one he is; what is his Nature, and
what is his will. Such a general knowledge one man must have of another, before
he can be acquainted with him. And so is it with God: That a man may acquaint
himself with him, he must have some knowledge of him; and that not only a
confused, but a distinct knowledge. Such is the knowledge which friends and
acquaintance have one of another. They do not only know each other by the
face, but (as Isaac knew his sons) they know their voice, their demeanor and
disposition. And such a knowledge must they have of God, who would be
acquainted with him: Not only a confused knowledge. Such was the knowledge of
the Gentiles, the Heathen, of whom the Apostle says, They knew God, Romans 1.21.
This they did naturali jure, non familiari (as Tertullian distinguishes,
Tertul. De spectaculis, citat. per H. Grotium ad loc.
) only in a natural way; they knew God by the light of nature, beholding him
in his works; but this was not worth the name of knowledge. And therefore the
same Pen elsewhere without any contradiction affirms the contrary, That they
did not know God, 1 These. 4.5. The Gentiles which know not God. Though some of
them knew him by his works, yet they did not know him, in and from his Word, by
the Scriptures. Thus must they know God (in some measure) who would have any
true acquaintance with him. They must know him to be such a one, as he has
revealed himself in his Word; One God, Three Persons; a Great, a Glorious, a
Wise, a Gracious, a Just, a Merciful, a Pure and Holy God; a God reconciling
the world to himself, in and through his Son Jesus Christ. Withal, they must
know so much of his will, as may serve to regulate them in their duty toward
him. Without this there can be no intercourse, no acquaintance with him. This
is requisite, but not sufficient.

2. knowledge of Faith Whereby a man apprehends this God to be his God. A man
is not said to be acquainted with a man, unless he have some interest in him.
Though otherwise he know him never so well, yet unless there be some friendship
betwixt them, he is not said to be acquainted with him: So is it here. A man
that is said to be acquainted with God, he must apprehend him as his God, a God
in Covenant. Such was Abraham's, and Moses his, and David's acquaintance with
God. They looked upon him as their God. The Lord is my rock, and my fortress,
and my deliverer; my God, my strength, in whom I will trust, etc. (says the
Psalmist,) Psalm. 18.2. This is the knowledge of Faith. Concerning which, God
makes that promise to his Church under the Gospel, Jer. 31.34. They shall all
know me from the least of them to the greatest of them.] They shall know me to
be their God, a God reconciled to them, a God in Covenant with them. So he
explains himself in the words following [ For I will forgive their iniquity,
and I will remember their sin no more.] Thus must they know God, who would be
acquainted with him.

3. knowledge of experience. This is sometimes called by the name of
acquaintance. (...)
As it is said of Christ, (...)
Isa. 53.3. That he was a man acquainted with sorrows; Notus agritudine, i.e.
Expertus infirmitatem, Montan.
that is, one that had an experimental knowledge of humane infirmities. And
such a knowledge have they of God, who are said to be acquainted with him; they
have an experimental knowledge of him, and of his divine perfections. Such was
that knowledge of God, which holy Job says he had attained to, after his
afflictions, and Gods manifesting himself unto him in that sensible manner, Job
42.5. I have heard of thee (says he) by the hearing of the ear, but now mine
eye sees thee.] Job had before heard much of God, much of his power, wisdom,
mercy, goodness, etc. which he had received from his Ancestors, having himself
had the benefit of a religious education; but now his eye saw him. God had now
given him a sensible and experimental knowledge of himself, causing him to see
and feel what he was to him. And such a knowledge (in some measure) is requisite
to the completing of this acquaintance with God. It is not enough for men to
hear of God, what a one he is; nor yet to believe, what they hear. But they
must see God, have some experimental knowledge of him, specially of his dealing
with themselves; of the exercise of his power, wisdom, goodness, mercy for
their good; and that specially for the good of their souls; in working
effectually upon their hearts, by his Word and Spirit; in alluring and drawing
them unto himself; in letting out himself to them; in giving them victory over
their corruptions; comforting them with inward and spiritual consolations;
hearing and answering their prayers, etc. Here is the first thing, wherein this
acquaintance with God does consist, in knowing him, with a knowledge of
speculation, farth, experience.

The second thing is Communion with him, walking with him. Such acquaintance
had Enoch with his God, he walked with him, Genesis 5.22, 24. The like had Noah,
of whom it is said, Genesis 6.9. And Noah walked with God.] Thus do they that are
of acquaintance, walk together. As David says of his false friend, his
acquaintance (as he calls him) We took sweet counsel together, and walked
unto the house of God in company, Psalm. 55.13, 14. And by walking and
conversing together, they come to increase their acquaintance. So is it betwixt
God and man. Man acquaints himself with God by walking with him; which consists,

1. In apprehending his presence in all places, taking notice of him as a
witness to all his actions, words, thoughts. This it is to walk before God;
which the Lord requires Abraham to do, Genesis 17.1. And which David resolved he
would do, Psalm. 116.9. I will walk before the Lord in the Land of the living.]
Liphni Jehovah, (...)
ad facies Domini, (...)
before the face of Jehovah, in his presence, always eying and beholding him.
Thus did Moses walk, of whom it is said, That he saw him that was invisible,
Heb. 11.27. Setting God before him; as David says of himself, Psalm. 16.8. I
have set the Lord always before me, because he is on my right hand, etc.] Thus
did he walk with God, living continually in his presence.

2. To walk with God, is to observe his steps, his goings. Thus did the
Israelites walk with God, through the Red Sea, and the Wilderness. They have
seen thy goings, O God, (says the Psalmist,) even the goings of my God, my
King, in the Sanctuary, Psalm. 68.24. What goings? Why, his goings through the
Sea, Ainsworth ad loc.
(so the Chaldee there paraphraseth it, The house of Israel have seen the going
of thy Majesty upon the Sea,) and his going in the Wilderness; so the seventh
verse of that Psalm may seem to explain it, [ When thou wentest forth before
thy people, when thou did march through the Wilderness.] There did they walk
with God, beholding and observing him in the several tokens, and manifestations
of his presence among them; and in this way they came to be acquainted with
him: And in the like way Christians come by their acquaintance with him, by
thus walking with him, by beholding and observing his goings, his special
providence, the exercises of his power, mercy, and justice, upon themselves
and others: Observing his works, and diving into them. The works of the Lord
are great (says the Psalmist) sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein, Psalm. 111.2.

3. To walk with God, is to converse with him. Thus do friends, walking
together, they converse each with other, speaking to, and hearing one another.
And thus do Christians acquaint themselves with God, by having such a converse
and communion with him; often speaking to him, and hearing him speak to them.
Speaking to him in prayer and praise; hearing him speak to them by his Word and
Spirit. Thus have the Saints of God acquainted themselves with him, often
speaking to him. So did Daniel, whose constant course was to make his addresses
unto God three times a day, Dan. 6.10. He kneeled upon his knees three times a
day, and prayed, and gave thanks unto God, as he did aforetime.] And David the
like [Evening and morning, and at noon, will I pray and cry aloud, etc.] Psalm.
55.17. Such was his set and constant course of devotion; besides many
occasional addresses upon emergent occasions. Seven times a day will I praise
thee, (says he,) that is, often, Psalm. 119.164. And thus speaking to him, they
were as ready to hear from him. I will hearken and hear what the Lord God will
speak, (says the same Psalmist,) Psalm. 85.8. And the like are all Christians
to do; thus acquaint themselves with God, by thus conversing with him.

4. And lastly, walk with God, following him, walking in his ways. Thus do
servants follow their masters, walking in their way, the way which they have
gone before them: And thus are Christians to acquaint themselves with God, by
thus going along with him, following him, walking in his ways. That is one of
the characters of David's blessed man; He is one that walks in the ways of his
God, Psalm. 119.3. that is, in his Law (as the first verse explaineth it.) This
Law he receives from the mouth of his God. So Eliphaz exhorts Job to do in the
verse after the Text (which Junius looks upon as exegetical to it) Receive, I
pray thee, the Law from his mouth, and lay up his words in thine heart.] This
does the true Christian. And having thus received the Law from God, being
acquainted with his will, now he yields a willing and cheerful obedience
thereunto; serving God (as David advises his son Solomon to do, 1 Chronicles.
28.9.) with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind. And thus does he
acquaint himself with God.

Now put these together, and you have (as I apprehend) the full import of this
phrase; what it is for a man to acquaint himself with God. The doctrinal part
of which duty being thus opened, I shall now come to that which I principally
aim at, Application.

Which I shall direct only in that way wherein here I meet with it in the
Text, The practice of the duty persuaded
a way of Exhortation. Acquaint now thy self with God, says Eliphaz to Job.
And let me in the Name of God bespeak every soul that hears me this day, in
the very same language, Now acquaint you your selves with him. A lesson useful
and needful for all sorts of persons. Amongst whom we shall find.

1. Some, and that the greatest part, who have no acquaintance with God at all;
they are mere strangers to him. Such are all ignorant persons, who have no
knowledge of God. Such there were some amongst the Corinthians, as Paul tells
them, 1 Cor. 15.34. Some have not the knowledge of God, I speak it to your
shame.] The shame of the persons guilty of it, and of those that tolerated them
amongst them. And would to God the like might not be too truly said of this, or
any other Congregation, that there are some amongst them, who whilst they bear
the names of Christians, yet in reality they are little better then Atheists;
they have no knowledge of God, no true, sound, distinct knowledge of him. Now
as for such, the evidence against them is but too clear, that they have no
acquaintance with God. They are estranged from him through the ignorance that
is in them, because of the blindness of their minds, (as Paul says of the
Gentiles in the place forenamed, Ephesians. 4.18.)

And such are all profane and irreligious persons; of whom we may say as the
same Apostle does of the Heathen, Romans 1.21. That when they knew God, they did
not glorify him as God. They do not walk according to the light which they
have; though they know God with a kind of speculative knowledge, (it may be)
yet they do not walk with him. They seldom or never think of him, God is not in
all their thoughts (as David says of the wicked man, Psalm. 10.4.) They do not
apprehend his presence with them; they observe not his goings; they regard not
the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands, (as the Psalmist says
of them, Psalm. 28.5.) They have no converse with him; they are such as call not
upon God, (which the same Psalmist makes a character of a wicked man, Psalm.
53.4.) They have no regard to follow God, to walk after him; they are such as
hate instruction, and cast his words behind them (as you have it, Psalm.
50.17.) Saying unto God, though not with their tongues, yet in their hearts
(with those in Job, Chap. 21.14.) Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge
of thy ways.] Now as for such, it well may nay it must be concluded against
them, they are far from having any acquaintance with God at all. And so this
counsel is very proper for them. Now acquaint ye your selves with him.

2. Others (in the second place) they have some acquaintance with him; they
know somewhat of him, and their desire is to his Name, to walk with him, and
approve themselves unto him; but they are not acquainted with him as they
should be, and might be: Their acquaintance with him is but overly, not so
intimate and familiar as some of the Saints of God have attained to, and
themselves might attain, were they not wanting to those means of communion,
which God is pleased to afford them. And who is there amongst us, but may, and
must acknowledge our selves to be of this number.

True, there is indeed a generation of men (some whereof, and too many are said
to be in this Nation at this day) who pretend to extraordinary familiarity and
acquaintance with God, as if they did already know him, as they are, or shall
be known of him. But I presume there are none of them within the reach of my
tongue at present: If there be, let me only tell them, that had they more true
acquaintance with God, they would think more meanly of themselves, then now
they do. When Job came to see God, then he abhors himself, Job 42.5, 6.

For you, looking upon you all in one of the former Classes, let me direct the
Exhortation to all and every of you, Now, I pray you, acquaint your selves with
God. You that have yet no acquaintance with him, seek it. You that have some
acquaintance with him, labor to confirm and increase it. To these two sorts of
persons, I shall speak severally, and apart: Beginning with the first.

1. acquaintance with God; you have only heard of him by the hearing of the
ear, but your eye has not seen him; or if it has, it has been only in the
glass of the creature. Some general knowledge (it may be) you have of God, but
no practical acquaintance with him. To you be it spoken, and that with the like
affection that Eliphaz is here conceived to speak unto Job with; Now, I pray
you, acquaint ye your selves with him. Do not you sit down contented in this
your estrangedness; but seek acquaintance with God.

Which counsel, that it may take place with you, let me first awaken you by
giving you to know, that if you be not acquainted with God here, you shall
never be acquainted with him hereafter. Mark it, (and the Lord set it on upon
your spirits;) If you will not acquaint your selves with God here, you shall
have no acquaintance with him hereafter. Now this latter (I presume) there is
none of you, but would be loath with. Loath would you be to hear that dreadful
doom pass from the mouth of God, when you shall come to stand before his
Tribunal, Depart from me ye cursed, I know you not. None of you but would then
be willing and desirous that God should own you, and take acquaintance of you.
And if so, then acquaint ye your selves with him now. No acquaintance upon
earth, no acquaintance in Heaven. There is no room for strangers. What the
Prophet Joel in the place forecited, says of the New Jerusalem upon Earth, is
much more true of the New Jerusalem in Heaven, Joel 3.17.
There shall no strangers pass through it, or yet enter into it. None but such
as have some acquaintance with God.

Being thus awakned, now give way to some Arguments to persuade with you, to
seek after this acquaintance. For which I shall not need to go far. This verse
whereof the Text is part, furnishes me with two, which may serve instead of
many. In thus acquainting your selves with God, you shall have peace, and good
shall thereby come unto you.

1. Hereby you shall have peace. So some (and that not amiss) look upon this
passage in the Text, as an argument or motive to induce Job to seek
acquaintance with God. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace.] (...)
Pacem habete, Have peace, or, so shall thou be at peace. This shall a man get
by this his acquainting himself with God; he shall have peace. A blessing which
is not to be found in any other way. As for wicked and ungodly men, who by
their sinful ways and courses, alienate and estrange themselves from God, there
is no peace for them. There is no peace to the wicked, says my God, Isa.
48.22. and 57.21. Possibly they may (as too often they do) speak peace to
themselves (as the false Prophets did to the Jews, Jer. 6.14. saying, Peace,
Peace, when there is no peace. No, being strangers to God, they are strangers
to peace. This is a portion which God reserves for those that are of his
acquaintance. The Lord will bless his people with peace, Psalm. 29. last. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee (says the
Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 26.3. In (perfect peace) peace, peace, (...)
(says the Original,) that is, (...)
all manner of true and found peace. And such peace shall they have who thus
acquaint themselves with God; they shall have Peace, peace; outward peace,
inward peace.

1. Outward peace, outward tranquillity. This is that which Eliphaz elsewhere
promises unto Job upon this very condition, of seeking unto God, and
acquainting himself with him. So doing (says he) The Beasts of the field shall
be at peace with thee. And thou shall know that thy Tabernacle shall be at
peace, Job 5.23, 24. This is the next and surest way even to outward peace, to
be first at peace with God, to be acquainted with him. When a man's ways please
the Lord (says the Wiseman) he makes even his enemies to be at peace with
him, Prove. 16.7. This God can do; and this so far forth as shall be good for
them, he will do for those who acquaint themselves with him; command peace for
them, outward peace.

2. However (in the second place) they shall have inward peace; Peace of
Conscience; which is their peculiar portion. As for wicked men, who are
estranged from God, they may enjoy outward peace, but inward peace they are
strangers to it. However their Consciences being asleep, they may be for a time
at peace, feeling no inward disquietment, yet when God comes to awaken them
(which sooner or later he will do) acquainting them with their condition,
showing them their estrangedness from him; now there can be no peace, nothing
but horror and terror; a hell in their souls. There is no peace (no inward
peace) to the wicked. But such peace have they who are acquainted with God;
having him to friend; apprehending him as their God, a God reconciled to them
in Christ. Now being justified by faith, they have peace with God, Romans 5.1.
Inward peace, their Consciences being quieted with the true sense, and
apprehension of his love and favor to them. Thus they live in peace: And living
in peace, they die in peace: Entering into peace (as the Prophet Isaiah says
of the Righteous man; Isa. 57.2.) departing hence in peace, into peace; with
peace in their souls, unto eternal peace and rest with God in the Heavens. Here
is the first of those advantages and benefits which the Text holds forth to
those who so acquaint themselves with God. In so doing they shall have peace.

2. thereby good shall come unto them.] Good. This it is that all men desire;
Who will show us any good? (say they) Psalm. 4.6. Now this shall they attain who
thus acquaint themselves with God. Good. A threefold good. The first of Honor;
the second of Pleasure; the third of Profit. These are the three chief goods,
which the men of this world so earnestly desire, so eagerly hunt after. And
behold all these meeting together in a Christians acquaintance with his God.
Here is true Honor, Pleasure, Profit.

First, Here is Honor: Upon this ground, mean men are sometimes ambitious of
getting acquaintance with great personages; though they get nothing by it, nay
it may be pay dear for it (as sometimes they do) yet it is a credit, it is an
honor to them. Now what an honor is it to be acquainted with the great God of
Heaven? This was man's chief honor at the first, That he was of Gods
acquaintance, having a nearer familiarity and communion with God, then the rest
of the Creatures; then was man in honor, Psalm. 49.12. And this is the highest
honor that he is now capable of upon Earth, to be restored to some degree of
that acquaintance. This was Abraham's honor, that he was called the Friend of
God, Jam. 2.23. And this was Moses his honor, that the Lord spoke unto him face
to face, as a man speaks unto his friend, Exodus 33.11. No honor like unto
this, for man to know God, jure familiari (as he phraseth it) in a familiar
way, to be acquainted with him. To be acquainted with a Prince, so as to have
his eye and his ear, to have free access into his presence upon all occasions,
to speak familiarly to him, to converse with him, what an honor is it
accounted? Such honor (and infinitely greater) have all Gods Saints, who have
the like acquaintance with him.

Secondly, Here is Pleasure. Upon this ground again men ofttimes are willing to
embrace acquaintance with others. Their society is pleasant and delightful. And
such is this acquaintance with God; it affords sweet pleasure and delight
unto the foul. So Eliphaz tells Job in the 26 verse of this Chapter. Then thou
shall have thy delight in the Almighty.] Acquainting thy self with him, thou
shall not only be sustained by him, but thou shall find special delight, and
singular pleasure in him. So do the Saints in Heaven, standing continually in
the presence of God, they find an unspeakable delight and complacency in him.
In thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy right hand there are pleasures for
evermore.] Psalm. 16.11. And the like in their measure do the Saints upon earth;
in their converse and communion with God, they find a sweet soul-complacency.
Thence it is that communion with God is called sometimes a delighting in God.
Delight thy self also in the Lord, Psalm. 37.4. That is, have communion with
him; which who so have, they shall find delight in him. So runs the promise,
which the Lord makes unto those who conscionably observe his Sabbaths, on those
days acquainting themselves with him, Isa. 58.13, 14. If thou turn away thy
foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the
Sabbath a delight, (taking delight in the duties and offices of the day,) etc.
Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord;] Thou shall find in him such
abundant matter of delight, as shall minister a fullness of satisfaction unto
thy soul. To the same purpose is that other promise held forth by the same
Prophet. Isa. 55.2. Hearken diligently unto me, (says the Lord) and eat ye
that which is good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness.] Not in
carnal, but in spiritual delights, and pleasures; which as far excel all
sensual and earthly delights, as fat meat does that which is lean. These are
the pleasures wherewith the Lord will satisfy those that betake themselves
unto him, making him their refuge, putting their trust under the shadow of his
wings; They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and
thou shall make them drink of the rivers of thy pleasures, (says the
Psalmist,) Psalm. 37.7, 8. Such entertainment will God give to those who
acquaint themselves with him. Blessed is the man whom thou chusest (says the
same Psalmist,) and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy
courts; we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy
temple, Psalm. 65.4. Such pleasure is there in this acquaintance with God.

3. And (thirdly) there is Profit in it. That is the Question which those
wicked ones in the Chapter before the Text ( Job 21.25.) propound to themselves
and others. What is the Almighty that we should serve him; and what profit
should we have, if we pray unto him?] And so those Hypocrites in Malachi the
like. What profit is it (say they) that we have kept his Ordinances, and that
we have walked mournfully before the Lord of hosts? Mal. 3.14. And thus carnal
men are ready to think of this the Christians acquainting himself with God,
that there is nothing to be got by it, that there is no profit in it. But
herein how far are they mistaken? Never was any man a looser by his
acquaintance with God. Great is the gain, great is the profit hereof. Godliness
with contentment, is great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6. Godliness is profitable for all
things, having the promise of this life, and that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8.
Such is the profit of this acquaintance. Great good shall come thereby; and
that both Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal. Of the former of these Eliphaz
makes large promises unto Job in the sequel of this Chapter; where explaining
what good should come unto him upon his acquainting himself with God, among
other things he tells him, Then shall thou lay up gold as dust, and the gold of
Ophir, as the stones of the brooks, Verse. 24. And in the Verse following, Then
shall thou have plenty of silver, Verse. 25. Gold and silver, these are the
Worlds goods, most commonly (how properly I will not say) called by that name.
And these he makes promise of, and that in abundance to Job. Which promise God
will make good, so far as shall be good for those who perform this condition.
Friends do not use to deny their intimate acquaintance, any common favor that
they can do for them. Such are these blessings, the blessings of Gods left
hand, (as Solomon describes them, Prove. 3.16.) they are but common favors. And
being such, God will not withhold them from those that acquaint themselves with
him, so far as they may be expedient for them. No good thing will he withhold
from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11. However, he will not be wanting to
them in those two other and better kinds of good things, Spiritual and Eternal.
The Lord will give grace, and glory, (says the former part of that Verse.)
Grace here, glory hereafter. So true is it, what Eliphaz here tells Job, that
acquainting himself with God, thereby good should come unto him; as Honor and
Pleasure, so Profit.

And Arguments (methinks) I should need to use no more, to induce you to
hearken to this counsel. Any one of these will prevail with men to embrace
acquaintance with men. O let all of them prevail with us, to embrace
acquaintance with God.

Quest. But will God be acquainted with us, poor, vile, Encouragements to the
duty.
worthless creatures that we are, how shall we dare to take acquaintance of the
great God?

Answ. encouragements, which may serve as further induce ments to bring in poor
sinners unto God.

1. Consider, that he disdaineth not the acquaintance of the least of men, or
of the greatest of sinners. This Princes and great men for the most part do.
Job speaking of some, who had him in derision in his adversity, he says they
were such, as whose fathers he would have disdained to have set with the dogs
of his flock, Job 30.1. So low they were in condition, and so far beneath him
in the time of his prosperity, that he would have disdained to have had any
thing to do with them, to employ them in the meanest office about him. But it
is otherwise with the God of Heaven; whose Majesty, though it be so great, that
it is a kind of humbling to him to behold the things that are in Heaven, and
in the Earth (as the Psalmist phraseth it, Psalm. 113.6.) Yet he vouchsafes
graciously to acquaint himself with the meanest of those that shall seek
acquaintance with him. Such was the condescension of the Divine Nature, that it
disdained not that near acquaintance with the humane; to take the nature of man
into a personal union with it self. And such was the condescension of our
blessed Savior upon earth, that he disdained not the acquaintance of those,
who upon a vulgar account were the vilest of men, even of Publicans and
Sinners, Matthew. 9.11. And such is the gracious condescension of the most high
God; that he disdaineth not acquaintance with any of those who desire
acquaintance with him.

2. Nay (secondly) he offers and tenders this acquaintance to them. This do not
great personages ordinarily to their inferiors. Their acquaintance must be
sought, and it may be bought; they do not use to offer it. But this does the
Lord our God. He offers his acquaintance to poor sinners; he puts forth the
hand to them, (as Absalom is said to have done to those who came nigh to tender
their duty, and do him obeisance, 2 Samuel 15.5.) he inviteth them to come in,
that they may have acquaintance with him. This he does in the offers and
tenders of grace held forth in the Gospel, which he sends forth his Ministers
to declare and publish. Even as that great Feastmaker in the Gospel, who sent
forth his servants into the high ways, to invite and compel those whom they
found, to come in to his Supper, to eat and drink with him, Luke 14.23. So does
God send forth his Ministers with the like commission, to invite and compel, by
Gospel promises, and legal threatenings, all sorts of poor sinners to come in,
that they may have communion with him.

3. And this he does (in the third place) out of his mere grace and favor,
only for their good, their benefit; not for any gain or advantage to himself.
Upon that account it was that Absalom offered himself in that over-familiar
manner, to those that came nigh him. His design was to make advantage of their
acquaintance. But this cannot God expect from man. Can a man be profitable unto
God? (says Eliphaz in the beginning of this Chapter, Verse 2.) No, God is not,
cannot be a gainer by our acquaintance. That he offers it, seeks it, it is
for our good, our benefit; that we may be made happy and blessed in it, and by
it. O then let not this grace of God be in vain to any of us, but accept we
this so gracious an offer; acquainting our selves with him.

And this do we forthwith. Now acquaint thy self with him (says Eliphaz to Job
here.) And let me in this sense say the same words to every soul among you,
that is yet estranged from God. Now acquaint thou thy self with God. Now, now,
whilst God is pleased to offer and tender this acquaintance; which how long he
will do, who knows? He that offers it to day, it may be will refuse it to
morrow. If the door of grace be once shut, then they who stand without may
knock, as it were taking acquaintance of God, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us,
but they shall receive no other answer, then that which there follows, Luke
13.25. I know not whence you are. And therefore, As the Holy Ghost says, To
day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, (Heb. 3.7, 8.) Now,
whilst the day of grace lasts, now come in. Now is the accepted time, now is
the day of salvation, (2 Cor. 6.2.) Now, whilst the golden scepter is held
forth; whilst the Gospel is preached unto you. And therefore estrange your
selves from God no longer; but now come in, and acquaint your selves with him.
Do it forthwith.

Knowing, that acquaintance is not ordinarily got of a sudden. The word in the
Text (as I showed you) it imports a customary practice. And such is
acquaintance, it is not commonly attained but in continuance of time, by
renewed and repeated acts of commerce. And so is it with this acquaintance with
God. True it is, sometimes God comes in, in extraordinary ways appearing unto
men, after a sort, as he did to Moses in the Bush, (Exodus 3.4.) thoroughly
acquainting himself with them at the first meeting, as he did with Paul, Acts
9. But this is not his ordinary course. Acquaintance, as with men, so with God,
in an ordinary way, is not the work of an hour, or a day. And therefore
forthwith set upon it.

Quest. But how shall we go about it? In what way shall we come to obtain this
blessed acquaintance?

Answ. Directions for getting acquaintance with God.
were but come thus far, thus to seek after God, how they might acquaint
themselves with him? As for you who are unfeignedly desirous of it, take these
few, and plain directions.

1. In order hereunto (as I told you in opening the nature of the duty) the
first thing to be done, is to know him. And thou Solomon, my son, know thou the
God of thy Fathers, and serve him, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. No knowledge, no
acquaintance. And therefore, that you may have acquaintance with God, let it be
your care first to know him. To which end, consult not only the Book of the
Creature, but also of the Scripture: That you may know him not only by his
works, but by his word. Know him to be such a one as he has there revealed
himself to be. What he is in himself, what he is in his Son, what are his
properties, what his will. This is the key that must let you into this
acquaintance, The key of knowledge.

2. Then (secondly) lay aside such things as may obstruct and hinder this
acquaintance. What those are, the Lord himself will tell you, Isa. 1.16. Wash
ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, etc.
Then come and reason with me.] Mark it; there is no parlying, no reasoning with
God, no acquaintance to be had with him, unless all known sins be laid aside. A
rebel that would have any acquaintance with his Prince, must first throw down
his arms, lay aside the weapons of his rebellion. And so must they who would
have any acquaintance with God, they must put away sin, all sin. Sin being Gods
enemy, so long as we hold a correspondency and acquaintance with it, we can
have no acquaintance with God. This is that which Joshua tells the people,
Josh. 24.19. Ye cannot serve the Lord, for he is an holy God, he is a jealous
God, etc.] A jealous husband cannot endure a corrival in his love, that his
wife should communicate her self, between him and a stranger. No more can God,
that those who pretend to love him, and to desire intimate acquaintance with
him, should embrace the bosom of any sinful, inordinate lust. And therefore
either resolve to break off acquaintance with the one, or never seek
acquaintance with the other. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will
not hear my prayer (says David,) Psalm. 66.18. He will not own me, he will have
no acquaintance with me. No, God is of purer eyes then to behold evil, and
cannot look on iniquity; so the Prophet Habakkuk describes him, Hab. 1.13. And
therefore, you that desire to acquaint your selves with him, give a Bill of
Divorce to all sinful lusts, putting them away out of your hearts and lives,
resolving never more to have any acquaintance with them, to give any
entertainment to them.

3. Then (in the third place) being thus prepared for this acquaintance, now
make use of a Mediator. This course do men take, who desire to acquaint
themselves with the Prince, or some great personage, being themselves
strangers, much more if they have been enemies to him; they make use of some
special favorite to make way for them, to procure access into his presence, and
to ingratiate them with him, that so they may get acquaintance with him. Now
such is the condition of all men by nature, in reference to God; they are not
only strangers to him, but enemies; (Alienated, and enemies in your minds by
wicked works, says Paul of his Colossians before conversion, Col. 1.21.) And
being such, that they may get acquaintance with God, their only way is, to
make use of a Mediator. What Mediator? Why, as there is but one God, so there
is but one Mediator betwixt God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. He
is the great favorit of Heaven, of intimate acquaintance with God the Father,
having lain in his bosom from all eternity. Make use of him then; by Faith,
laying hold upon him, and so come unto God by him, presenting your selves unto
God in his Name, through his Merit, and Mediation, craving acceptance in, and
through him.

4. And thus coming unto God, then (in the fourth place) in humble-wise take
acquaintance of him. Now in all humility challenge thy relations, calling him
thy God, and thy Father. Now look upon him as a God reconciled to thee, in and
through Jesus Christ, and welpleased in him. This is my welbeloved Son, in whom
I am welpleased, (says the voice from Heaven, Matthew. 3.17.) (...). Wel-pleased
with him, and with all whom he beholds in him. Here is now the Christians
entrance into this blessed acquaintance.

Which being thus happily begun, confirm and increase it. Had Eliphaz here
looked upon Job, as in truth he was, as a man that had some acquaintance with
God already, yet might he have said unto him what here he does, acquaint thy
self with him; do it more and more. And the like let me say unto you, who have
already through grace obtained some acquaintance with God, Acquaint you your
selves with him. Still labor for a further degree of acquaintance: Alar, as for
that acquaintance, which as yet you have, it is comparatively but flender and
overly; labor for a more intimate, a more familiar acquaintance with your God.

Quest. But how, or in what way shall that be attained?

Answ. A useful Question. Directions for increasing this acquaintance


First, By a further enquiry after him.

Secondly, A serious and frequent meditation of him.

Thirdly, A diligent observation of him.

Fourthly, A frequent intercourse with him.

Fifthly, A close and constant walking before him.

These are the chief steps of this Ladder, by which a Christian may ascend to
an intimate acquaintance with God. Herein let me desire you to go along with
me; as with your attentions now, so with your practice hereafter.

1. The first step is, A further inquiry after God. Then shall we know (says
the Prophet) if we follow on to know the Lord, Hos. 6.3. Alas, Christians! that
which the best of us know of God already, is but the least part of what we are
ignorant of, (...). We know but in part (says Paul of his Corinthians, and of
himself,) 1 Cor. 13.9, 12. Such is the knowledge of God, which the most
illuminate Saints here attain unto. It is but defective, and imperfect. As for
those who think they know any thing (are most highly opinionated of their own
knowledge.) Paul will tell them, They know nothing yet as they ought to know, 1
Cor. 8.2. And therefore let it be our endeavor to follow on to know the Lord;
Still enquiring further after him; after his Nature, Attributes, Will. This is
that which Paul beggeth in the behalf of his Colossians, that they might
increase in the knowledge of God, Col. 1.10. And this let every of us labor
after. In thus following on to know the Lord, we shall know, we shall come to
have more acquaintance with him.

Secondly, Thus enquiring after him, be serious and frequent in our meditation
of him. In this way David came by his acquaintance with God; by being still
with him. When I awake (says he) I am still with thee, Psalm. 139.18. Still
with him, by way of Meditation and Contemplation of him, thinking of him. Thus
was he with God at his lying down, in the night season. He remembered him upon
his bed, and meditated on him in the night watches (as himself speaks,) Psalm.
63.6. And thus was he with him at his rising up. As in the night, so in the
morning. Still he was with God. And so let it be with us, as many as desire
acquaintance with God. Be we still with him. Meditating of his Attributes, his
Works, his Word, his Testimonies, his Law. It is one of the characters which
David gives of his blessed man; His delight is in the Law of the Lord, and
therein does he meditate day and night, Psalm. 1.2. In this way a man comes to
be acquainted with a thing; by often looking upon it, often thinking of it. In
this way acquaint we our selves with God.

Thirdly, Thus contemplating of him, be we also diligent in observing him;
Eying and observing his goings, his providence; specially his special
providence; the out-breakings of his power, wisdom, justice, mercy, goodness;
and that as upon others, so especially upon our selves. Observe what God is to
us; how good, how gracious; how he preventeth us with his mercies; how he
steppeth into us in our straits; how he comfort us in our tribulations; how
he makes his goodness to pass before us. And here, make we special observation
of his secret and spiritual in-comes to our souls; how he meets us in our
approaches unto him; what answers he returns to our prayers; what entertainment
he affords us in his house; how he satisfies our souls with marrow and
fatness (as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 63.5.) How he kisseth us with the kisses
of his mouth, (as the Spouse phraseth it, Cant. 1.1.) What intimations of his
peculiar love he affords us; how he works upon our hearts by his Word and
Spirit. These are the goings of the Lord, in, and upon the hearts of his
people; which those, who would have intimate acquaintance with him, must make
diligent observation of.

Fourthly, In the fourth place, thus observing of him, have frequent
intercourse with him. In this way men come to be acquainted, by having frequent
interviews, often meeting together, to see one another, to discourse and
converse each with other. And in this way acquaint we our selves with God:
Often coming into his presence; often meeting with him. Meeting him in public,
in his Ordinances, in his public worship. Here it was that David got much of
his acquaintance with God, by meeting him in his sanctuary. I have seen thee, O
God, in the sanctuary, Psalm. 63.2. And here meet we with him; conversing with
him by speaking to him, and hearing and receiving from him. Speaking to him by
Prayer; hearing from him in his Word; receiving from him the pledges of his
love in the Sacraments. And thus meeting him in public, do the like in
private. Public interviews without private intercourse, will never breed
intimate acquaintance. And therefore as we meet God in his house, so meet him
in our own houses; as we meet him in the Church, so meet him in the Closet;
keeping constant course of private devotion; going unto God at set times, so
upon all emergent occasions, to make suit for mercies we want; to return
praises for mercies received. No better way to get acquaintance with God, then
thus frequently to pour forth the heart before him, (as the Psalmist speaks,)
Psalm. 62.8. to pour it out by way of Confession, Petition, Thanksgiving.

Fifthly, To these add in the last place, a close and constant walking with,
and before him. A constant adhering, and close cleaving unto him. This is that
which Moses presses upon the people, Deuteronomy. 10.20. and 13.4. You shall serve
him, and cleave unto him. And this do we; Cleaving to him in affection, and
conversation. In affection, fearing him, loving him, trusting in him, depending
upon him. In conversation, walking before him as in his presence, endeavoring
to approve our selves unto him in our whole course, not willingly doing ought
that might offend him, that might cause him to turn away his face, and estrange
himself from us; but serving him without fear, in holiness and righteousness
before him, all the days of our lives. Thus walking with God, we shall daily
grow up in our acquaintance with him.

Which that it may not be inordinate, Caveat. In acquainting our selves with
God, see that we keep our distance. This do inferiors use to do, who acquaint
themselves with superiors; such as are far above them in place and estate, they
keep their distance, not being too familiar with them. The like observe we in
this our acquainting ourselves with God. He being in Heaven, we upon Earth; he
an infinite Majesty inhabiting that (...), that unapproachable, unaccessible
light, (as the Apostle describes him, and it, 1 Timothy 6, 16.) And we poor
worms, creeping upon this Molehil of Earth, in acquainting our selves with him,
keep our distance; be not too familiar with him; whether it be in our enquiring
after him, or observing of him, or conversing with him, or walking before him.

1. In our enquiring after him, keep our distance. This is the charge which the
Lord wills Moses to give unto the people, when himself was to appear upon
Mount Sina, Exodus 19.12. Thou shall set bounds unto the people round about,
saying, Take heed unto your selves, that ye go not up into the Mount, or touch
the border thereof. And again, Verse. 21. Go down, charge the people, lest they
break through unto the Lord to gaze, etc. And this charge let us observe. Take
we heed of coming too near unto God in our enquiries after him; of being too
familiar with him. This I look upon, as a weakness in Moses himself. God having
been familiar with him, Speaking unto him face to face, as a man speaks to
his friend, (as it is expressed, Exodus 33.11.) that is, more plainly and
familiarly then with others; hereupon Moses takes the boldness to desire to see
his face, his glory; And he said, I beseech thee show me thy glory, Verse. 18.
i. e. A full manifestation of his Majesty, which, as the Lord there tells him,
was more then he, or any other mortal Creature was capable of, [ Thou can not
see my face; for there shall no man see me, and live, Verse. 20.] Take we heed
of the like presumption. Is it so, that God has acquainted himself in a more
familiar way with us, then with others: take heed of being over-bold with him;
of advancing too far in our enquiries concerning him, concerning his Nature,
Counsels, Will, Works. For his Nature, let it be enough that God makes his
goodness to pass before us, and that he gives us a sight of his back-parts.
For his Counsels, dive we not too far into them; but standing afar off, admire
and adore what we cannot comprehend, crying out with the Apostle, (...), O the
depth! Romans 11.33. For his Will, content we our selves with that part of it
which is revealed: Remembering, that secret things belong unto the Lord, but
revealed things to us, and to our children, Deuteronomy. 29. last. Let us not dare to
look into Gods Ark, to pry into the Cabinet of his secret Counsel. Here
remember we that of the Apostle, Romans 12.3. (...), Not to be wise above that we
ought to be wise; but to be wise unto sobriety. And for his works, be not too
inquisitive after a reason of them. Let it be enough to us, The Lord has done
it, in whom there can be no improvidence or unrighteousness. Thus keep our
distance, come not too near unto God, in enquiring too far after him.

2. And so (secondly) in our observing of him, keep our distance, come not too
near. It is no good manners for a servant to follow his master so close, as to
tread upon his heels. Thus do they follow God, who pretending to a more then
ordinary acquaintance with him, will take upon them to make a sudden and
peremptory construction, and interpretation of all his Providence, of his
proceedings and dealings with themselves, and others. Collecting and concluding
(that which the Preacher says, No man can know, Eccles. 9.1.) Love or hatred,
from that which is before them Concluding Gods love to themselves, from his
blessing and prospering of them in outward things; his hatred of others, from
his correcting and afflicting of them. This the Psalmist, however by many
cross-providences he was tempted to it, yet upon second and serious thoughts he
durst not do it, as he tells us, Psalm. 73.15. If I say I will speak thus,
(says he) behold I should offend against the generation of thy children.]
Should he judge of men by Gods outward dispensations, and dealings with them,
he might easily wrong both him and them, in censuring godly men to be
Hypocrites, because it may be they are most acquainted with affliction. That
was the mistake (as of the rest of Jobs friends, so) of Eliphaz here, who
looked upon Job, as a man that had no acquaintance with God, because the hand
of God lay so heavy upon him. Take we heed of making the like constructions of
Gods providential dispensations. This is to be too familiar with God, to follow
him too close.

And so is it, when men shall make Providence their guide to follow, their
Compass to stear by, their Rule to walk by; not expecting any further
manifestation of Gods will and pleasure from his Word.

3. Keep our distance in conversing with him. Thus do inferiors in the civil
intercourse, which they have with their superiors; though acquainted with them,
yet they observe their distance, not being too familiar with them; but showing
such respects to them in their language and deportment, as their eminency
requires. And the like do we in our spiritual intercourse and communion with
God; in speaking to him, in hearing or receiving from him, take heed of being
too familiar with him. So was that proud Pharisee; when he came into the Temple
in that bold and consident way; instead of confessing his sins, presenting unto
God a catalogue of his good works, [ God I thank thee, I am not as other men,
etc. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess,] Luke
18.11, 12. Thus does he (as it were) take and challenge acquaintance with God,
upon the account of his own demerits. Far be the like presumption from every of
us. Coming unto God, be it in public, or in private, come we with all humility
and reverence. So comes the poor Publican there in the verse following. He
observes his distance, he stands afar off (in some remote part of the first
Court of the Temple,) not so much as lifting up his eyes to Heaven (so taking
unto himself shame and confusion of face,) but smiting upon his breast, (in
token of true and hearty contrition) he says, God be merciful to me a sinner.]
And so coming, the sequel tells us, that he went away justified, rather then
the other,] Acquitted and accepted. Do we desire to find the like respects
from God; let all our addresses unto him be in the like manner, with an humble
and awful reverence of his Majesty. Here take heed of being too familiar with
him. That is the caveat which the Preacher gives to those who make any public
address unto God, Eccles. 5.1. Keep thy foot, when thou go into the house of
God; alluding (as some conceived) to that of God to Moses, when appearing to
him in the bush, he bids him, Put off thy shoes from thy feet, Exodus 3.5. in
token of reverence; or (as others) to that ordinary custom of the Priests, who
were to wash their feet, when they came to officiate before the Lord, Exodus
30.19, 21. Thus he requires all who come before the Lord to offer up any
spiritual sacrifice unto him, to take heed to their feet, as to their outward
gestures, so specially to their inward affections. Keep thy foot, when thou
go into the house of God, and be more ready to hear, then to offer the
sacrifice of fools. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be
hasty to utter any thing before God; for God is in Heaven, and thou art upon
Earth, therefore let thy words be few. Thus come we before God in public;
reverencing his sanctuary, (as the Lord requires, Levit. 19.30. and 26.2.) And
thus come we to him in private; with all due reverence and obeisance:
Remembering that they who would serve God acceptably, must serve him with
reverence and godly fear, Heb. 12.28. In both, so take acquaintance of God, as
yet observing and keeping our distance.

4. And lastly, In our walking before him; See that we so walk before him, as
that yet we walk after him. So Moses requires the people to do, Deuteronomy. 13.4. Ye
shall walk after the Lord your God.] So do servants walk after their masters,
and mean personages after their superiors. And so do we after our God. Not
running before him. So did those false Prophets of old, of whom the Lord
complains, that they ran before they were sent, Jere. 23.21. And so do they,
who thrust themselves into any public services and employments, which God has
not called them to. They herein go before God. For us, herein know we, and keep
we our distance, following after him. If the Lord be God, follow him, (says
Eliah to the people,) 1 King. 18.21. Desire to see God go before us in all our
ways, taking our directions from him. Not, presenting unto him such services as
we think sitting; but such as himself requires. Withal, walking humbly with
him. He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require
from thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy
God? (says the Prophet, Micah 6.8.) Thus walk we with him, humbly; humbling
our selves to walk with him (as the Hebrew has it.) So walking with him here,
we shall live with him hereafter; enjoying a blessed communion with him unto
all eternity. Amen.

FINIS.

