Confidence Dismounted; OR THE Astronomers Knavery ANATOMIZED.

By WILLIAM BROMMERTON A Well-wisher to the Commonweal.

woodcut

LONDON Printed for to undeceive the People, April 5. 1652.

Confidence Dismounted.
Friends,
HAving taken into my serious consideration, that solar Eclipse, which on the
29th. of March last, we did perceive, I thought good to demonstrate unto you,
the folly, or rather knavery of our insipid Astrologers, and nonsensicall
Almanack-makers, who in their book Entitled Black Monday, spoke of such an
Eclipse that it would be so dark, that one man should scarce see another; but I
think in the darkest night a man may spy such Astrologick knaves as they are,
among a thousand: who by their knavery have cousened the whole Nation: and were
not our prudent Governors more merciful then they are honest, some of them
might be forced to crave an alms in Moore fields again, or else be deprived of
all that money which they have cheated the Commonweal of, and then be carried
to Tyburne and hanged at the States charge.

Though the Task be infinite hard, to contain such great beasts in so little
paper, yet for the worlds satisfaction, or rather admonition, that they never
give credit to such false knaves any more, I will delineate to life the
proportion of some of their writings.

The chief and primary error, on which many others hang, concerns the Suns
Eclipse, which (they said) would be so great, that this age could not
parallel it, which we find to be as false as the Devil their father, or as
Envy or Emulation their Mother, but to pass over this; pray Mr. Culpepper
where was the thunder and Lightning on the twelfth day of March last, as for
your part, you like an unskilful Musician, have made a discord by not keeping
true Time; You have screwed your pegs too high I Will assure you, Could you stay
no longer, but must you show all your folly, or rather Knavery at once? so that
now you are become like Ciciphus his stone, which no sooner up hill but down it
tumbles again, so thou have no sooner got thy plush jacket upon thy back, but
it must turn to rags, and thou must follow thine own Trade again.

You know it is the custom of Lovers, after the breach of their League and
amity, to send back those gratuities which formerly passed betwixt them, as
tokens of their natural affections; So I believe Mr. Culpeppers plush jacket
must go off again, and truly in my judgment, a whip, and a Jacke of Apes his
coat, were fitter for him, he has got himself a s^tten cap, and a Periwigge
forsooth, but my opinion is, that a white cap and a halter would become him
better.

I Will assure you, if I could find no better then these sort of men to converse
with, and to spend my time withal, I would turn Momus, and for ever hate the
society of men; I have seen an Italian Comedy, consisting of a Lover, a Woman,
a Zany or Fool, and a Devil, and to it I may fashion the world, for that is
the Stage, the people the Actors, each degree have their Zany and their Devil,
now if the Zany will steal his Masters Apparel, and make between Vice and
Virtue no difference, blame not the discretion of the Master, if it devise new
fashions till either the foolish Zany be tried, or the Devil for his pride
fetch him away, this you may apply at your pleasure.

You may observe them often to quote a great deal of Scripture, because they
would seem Saints, but I fear God has little to do with them, or ever will
have, but to punish them for their sins; The Devil could do as much as they,
for his own advantage, as appears in his tempting of our Savior: how many
places of Scripture did he then quote? but let them take heed to themselves,
least God taking notice of their sin, does where his sword, and bend his bow,
and destroy them from off the earth.

If my paper were made of the skins of croaking Toades, or speckled Adders,
my Ink of the blood of Scorpions, my pen plucked from the Screech Owls wing,
they were but fit instruments to write concerning such pick-pockets, and
Newgate birds, for they are more venomous, more poisonous, more ominous then
the worst of these; Might I be their Judge, there should not one man of them
be left in this Commonweal; they have swome long enough in the golden floods
of prosperity, now it is high time there should be an ebb, and their ship
run on ground, their names have flourished long enough, it is now high time
to have their names grow odious, grievous, and abominable in the ears of all,
as doubtless it will, seeing deceit is so predominant in their hearts.

Their pretentions are, that their judgments are balanced with prudent
advice; I, that is a sign indeed by their true prediction; come, come, I see
they are a pack of Knaves well met together, Grantham-cheates, never a barrel
of better herring of them; Foul shame take them all, is this their studdy with
a pox to them, to fill the ears of the people with lies, and to make a mountain
of a Mole hill; for the future let them talk what they will, we will believe
them when we list, I see they are Rebels to all Authority, Rebels against the
Law of man, Rebels against the Law of God, who strive to be honored as Gods on
earth, but the Devil shall honor or believe them again for me, for I think he
is the fittest companion for them.

Oh! it grieves me to think upon that simple deluded multitude, that so run
after this sect of Knaves (for so I may justly term them) some asking whether
they shall be rich and some one question, and some another, and these same
cunning Knaves will always tell them a good fortune, that they may draw their
money from them the more liberally: let me entreat you now never to meddle with
them more for if they will cheat a whole Nation, as it is apparent they will,
certainly they will cheat one particular man.

Oh friends, friends, it is a sad thing when we run after the creature, and
forsake our Creator, and desire them to reveal unto us the hidden mysteries of
God: Oh it is a hideous sin, this was Saul's sin, who when God had obscured the
light of his countenance from him, presently goes to a Witch, and desires her
to raise him up Samuel, but he received a sad answer; so it will be with us, if
we like Saul run after this wicked sect of men, to desire them to resolve us
in questions of that nature; No, no, this is not the way to have any affliction
removed but rather increased, but if thou art afflicted pray, for prayer does
please God, if it be framed after a right manner: therefore he that desires to
be heard, let him pray wisely, that is, that he pray for those things that
serve for the glory of God, and not for maintenance of his lust.

But to conclude as I began, that great Eclipse which these Astrologicke fools
spoke of, I dare boldly affirm, had not they proclaimed it to be such a horrid
one, there had not one man in this City so much as taken notice of any Eclipse
at all.

Mr. Lilly and the rest of you, let me advise you to furnish your selves with
horn books, and learn your A.B.C. again. I am

A Well-wisher to the Commonweal, WILLIAM BROMMERTON.
London this fifth of April 1652.
FINIS.

