THE Sacred Ordinance OF ORDINATION, By Imposition of the Hands of the
PRESBYTERY.

As it was lately held forth in a Sermon Preached at the solemn Ordination of
Ministers in the City of Norwich June 11. 1656.

By John Brinsley Minister of the Gospel at Great Yarmouth.

Whereunto is also affixed the Word of Exhortation given to the Persons then
and there Ordained, being useful to all others of the same Tribe.

By Nic. Ganning, B. D. Minister of the Gospel at Barnham-Broom.

LONDON: Printed by Rob. Ibbitson, for Tho. Newberry, at the Sign of the three
Lions in Cornhill. 1656.

To the deservedly honored, the faithful Dispensers of the Mysteries of Christ
in the County of Norfolk.
Especially such as were Assistant or present at the late solemn Ordination of
Ministers in the City of Norwich. June 11. 1656.
Much esteemed in the Lord,
WHat was lately at the request of some of you Preached, is now (with some
small Additaments) upon the like score Published. Wherein you have a brief
account of a Gospel-Ordinance, a leading, and (take it in a qualified sense) a
Fundamental Ordinance, upon which all other public Ordinances (as to the right
manner of dispensing them) have a dependence, Touching which, we may say that
it is no small comfort to us, (and we presume the like to you) that so many,
so fitted and qualified for the work of the Ministry, have in these dissolute
and discouraging times appeared willing to put themselves (...) it, (...) that
in Gods way. A hopeful intimation, that God has yet a gracious purpose toward
this poor Church of his, that he has a Harvest yet to be gathered in this
field, whereunto he is pleased to send forth such a succession of Laborers.
Hereunto you have also (at the same entreaty) affixed the latter service of
that day, the word of Exhortation; which gives the like account of what is
required at the hands of such servants of the Lord, as are thus dedicated unto
him, and so, fitly serving as an Applicatory supplement to the aforesaid
Doctrine. May both these conduce to the furthering of that good work, for which
they were, and now are intended, we have what we aimed at, and shall (...)
that God who makes us in the least degree Instrumental in any service to him
and his Church. In the desires and hopes whereof we sit down, and rest

Your unworthy Brethren and Fellow Laborers in the Lord. J.B. N.G.


THE Sacred Ordinance OF ORDINATION: BY Imposition of the Hands of the
Presbytery.

As it was lately held forth in a Sermon Preached at the solemn Ordination of
Ministers in the City of Norwich, June 11. Anno. 1656.

By John Brinsley Minister of the Gospel at Great Yarmouth.

LONDON: Printed by Robert Ibbitson, for Thomas Newberry, at the Sign of the
three Lions in Cornhill, over against the Great-Conduit, 1656.

THE SACRED ORDINANCE OF ORDINATION: BY Imposition of the hands of the
PRESBYTERY.
1 TIMOTHY 4.14. Neglect not the Gift that is in thee, which was given thee by
Prophesy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery.


IN this Text, which I have now singled forth; as being very suitable to the
present Occasion, we have an Apostolical charge directed by Saint Paul to his
Son Timothy, therein (to break in upon the words abruptly) we may take notice
of two things. The Object, and the matter. The object, or thing, whereabout
this charge is given, which in the general is here said to be a Gift, [the gift
that is in thee] then more particularly described and set forth by the manner,
or means of collating and conferring it, which is partly Extraordinary, partly
Ordinary. Extraordinary and occasional [which was given thee by prophesy]
Ordinary and Instrumental [with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery]

The Matter, what it is that he here gives him in charge concerning this gift,
viz. that he should not neglect it [neglect not the Gift which is in thee,
which was given thee by Prophesy, with the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery.]

These are the particulars, which here offer themselves to our consideration;
which (through divine assistance) I shall touch upon severally, but very
briefly, rather glancing at each of them, than insisting upon any of them, I
begin with the first, the object of this Charge.

The Gift which is in thee] (...), the gift, or grace, or gift of grace (for so
the word properly signifies)

Quest. But what gift? what grace?

Answ. For Answer, we may take notice of two sorts of gifts or graces spoken
of in Scripture. (...) non tantum gratiam gratis datam sed etiam gratiam gratum
facientem significat. C. A. Lapide ad Text.
In the Schools commonly known and differenced by those obvious terms, of
gratiae gratum facientes, and gratiae gratis datae (which terms though being
exactly scanned, they are not so proper, but liable to just exception, yet, in
as much as they have been long received, and being warily understood, they may
be safely and profitably retained) graces rendering acceptable, and graces
rendering serviceable. The former, the graces of sanctification, wherewith a man
being endued (being first justified by the blood of Christ) comes to do that
which is acceptable to God, the latter, graces of edification, whereby a man is
enabled to do service unto others. Now of this latter kind is the gift or
grace, which here we meet with, a gift given unto Timothy, for the benefit of
others. That is agreed upon at all hands.

Quest. But yet the question goes on? what gift was this?

Answ. Here I find Expositors not agreeed. Some understanding it of an
extraordinary gift, as of Tongues, or Miracles, which kind of gifts were in
those Primitive times conferred upon diverse, and that sometimes by Imposition
of hands. Puto agi de dono linguarum. Grotius ad Text
(as I shall show you anon) And so Grotius (as some others before him, taken
notice of by Aquinas) here looks upon this gift. But that Timothy, was the
owner of any such gift, Scripture has not acquainted us; And if he were, yet
this cannot so properly be said to have been conferred upon him, by the laying
on of the hands of the Presbytery, which being but ordinary hands, were not so
fit for the conveying of extraordinary grace.

Others (and that the generality) understand it rather of an ordinary gift; yet
with some difference. Some expounding it of a ministerial gift, whereby he was
fitted for the work of the ministry, to teach, and exhort, and rebuke, etc.
This (say they) was the gift which was in him, (...). Others of the Ministerial
Office and Function, with the Power and Authority belonging thereunto, so
diverse both ancient and modern.

Now to whether of these two to incline my self, I am somewhat dubious. And
therefore, that I may be sure not to miss the sense, I shall do what I suppose
I safely and fitly may (and what Aretius, Aretius Loc. Com. de manuum
impositione. Loc. 65. (...) officium scil. cum gratia buic officio and muncri
necessaria. C. A. Lapide ad Text.
and some others have done before me) put them both together, hereby
understanding (to use his terms) both Munus and Habilitas, the Ministerial
office and ability: Both these we find sometimes set forth by this word,
called gifts; So the word is used, Romans 12.6. Having then gifts] what gifts?
why? whether prophesy, let us prophesy, or ministry, let us wait on our
ministring] (so it there follows) by the one (as some conceive) denoting the
gift of teaching by the other the office, both (...), gifts. So again, Ephesians.
4.8. It is said of Christ, that when he ascended up on high, he gave gifts unto
men (I confess the word there is not the same, yet of the same import, (...),
dona, gifts) meaning thereby not only ministerial gifts; and abilities, but
offices also. So the eleventh verse explains it [He gave some Apostles, and
some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers.]

And not unsitly may both these being put together, be thus called a gift. To
the making of a thing to be a gift, there are two things requisite. It must be
gratuitum and commodum, freely given, and somewhat that is worth the giving.
And such is the ministerial office, being accompanied with suitable
qualifications; It is a gift freely given, (...), freely given to the Church,
and freely given to the Person on whom they are conferred; and that to the
great benefit and advantage of the Church, the end thereof being for the
perfecting of the Saints, and the edifying of the body of Christ (as the
Apostle there sets it out, Ephesians. 4.12.) which if duly weighed, and serioussy
considered, might serve to conciliate and gain more respect to this office,
than at this day it meets with at many hands in the world. But I may not turn
aside.

We have found out what gift this was. Come we in the next place to take
notice of the way and means whereby this gift was conferred upon (or rather
conveyed to) Timothy. Where we shall first begin with that which was
occasional [which was given thee by prophesy.]

Quest. Where we must again make the like enquiry, what is hereby meant?

Answ. To this I find diverse Answers returned, diverse senses being put upon
the word Prophesy. Some whereof (I confess) are scarce worth the taking notice
of. Prophetia est forma Sacramenti Ordinis Lapid. ad Text.
As that of Lapide (for which yet he alleges some of the learned, with whom
himself chooses to concur, who hereby understands, the mystical words used
in Ordination, which he interprets to be the form in this Sacrament of order
(as he calls it) as Imposition of hands is the matter. Hec coactum videtur,
Lapid. ad Ibid.
And no better is that of Vatablus (taken notice of, and censured by him) who
here turns the particle, (...) into (...), per into ad, The Gift which thou
have received by Prophesy, that is, (says he) ad Prophetiam, to the end that
thou may prophesy, teach, and instruct the people. Leaving these, more
genuinely; Consult we the word. (...), prophetia, Prophesy, it properly
signifies a prediction. a foretelling of a thing to come, now this is twofold;
Ordinary and Extraordinary. Ordinary, humane and conjectural, extraordinary,
divine and infallible. Now of which of these shall we understand the word in
the Text? why, take it which way we will, we cannot take it amiss. Both
these had passed upon this our Candidate, Timothy, before his ordination to the
ministry.

1 There was an ordinary Prophesy, and prediction concerning him, which was
humane and conjectural. His younger years had put forth many early buds and
blossoms; such as gave all that knew him comfortable hopes of a plentiful
aftercrop. They saw him to be so qualified both with gifes and graces; Graces
of sanctification, and Gifts of edification, that they voted him fit for the
ministerial office, looking upon him as a very hopeful instrument, likely to
do much service in the Church of God. Thus was he both thought and reported of
by those that knew him, so you find it Act. 16.2. where you have this
testimouy given of him. He was well reported of by the brethren that were at
Lystra and Iconium. Prophetiam by accipio pro piorum omine faelici and
conjectura Aretius ad Loc.
Here was a conjectural prophesy which went of him: of which Aretius
understands the Apostle (at least in part) here to speak.

2 But this was not all; Besides this there was a prophesy of a higher nature,
that had given Testimony concerning him; a divine prophesy. Of this speaks this
our Apostle himself, Chap. 1. verse. 18. of this Epistle. This charge I commit
unto thee, son Timothy, according to the Prophesies which went before of thee]
meaning divine revelations inspiring some of the Prophets of those times,
directing them to point out some choice and singular persons for the work of
the ministry. Thus was Paul himself, with Barnabaas singled forth, Act. 13.2.
As they ministered unto the Lord, and fasted, the holy Ghost said ( viz. by a
prophetical inspiration to some one, or more there present) Separate me
Barnabas and Saul to the work of the Ministery] And in such a way was Timothy
here called forth to the undertaking of this his ministerial office; not only
by the common vote and approbation of those to whom he was known, but by a
special direction from God, intimating and making known his mind and will
concerning him.

And this our Apostle here takes notice of, Meminit hujus Prophetiae Pauius
tum ad commendationem Timothei tum ad sui ex cusationem, Esti. ad loc. Hoc
diserte hic commemorare videtur Apostolus, ne remere juvenis ad Evangelistae
munus ascirus vidererur. Beza Annot. ad loc.
mentioning it as being both the occasion of, and warrant for, Timothies
ordination, and calling to that office; which he does the rather (as Beza and
Estius note upon it) as for Timothies commendation, so for his own vindication,
that none might censure him for what he had done, judging that he had done
rashly, and unwarrantably, in imposing hands upon a person so young as Timothy
was.

Applic. Wherein let Paul be propounded as a Pattern to all those who shall at
any time have any hand in this great and weighty business of Ordination. Let
them learn from him to be cautious and wary on whom they lay on hands. Lay
hands suddenly on no man (it is Paul's charge to Timothy) 1 Timothy 5.22.
especially, if they be young. Let them see that they have good warrant for
what they do.

To which end let them have an eye to these two things, to this double
Testimonial.

1 The first Humane, that they be such persons as are well reported of, by
those amongst whom they live, and to whom they are known. This is one of the
characters that the Apostle gives of a Bishop, a Gospel Minister, 1 Timothy 3.7.
He must be one that has (...), a good Testimonial, a good report; yea (...),
of those that are without, without the Church, no members of it, much more of
them that are within, such must the conversation of a meet Candidate be, not
only unblameable, but laudable. And withal he ought to be such a one as upon
whom a humane and conjectural prophesy has passed, one whom others look upon
for his parts and gifts, as a hopeful instrument of doing service in the Church
of God.

2 And besides this humane, let them look for somewhat of a divine Testimony,
though not in an extraordinary way, as Timothy had (that is not now to be
expected) yet in an ordinary; that they be such persons as in whom, in the
judgment of a well regulated charity, they themselves may see somewhat of God,
of his grace and spirit sanctifying of them, and so fitting them for this so
weighty a service.

And now, these two concurring, they may comfortably go on in ordaining and
setting apart such a one thereunto, which how it is to be done, the next
clause will inform you.

With the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery] Where again we must make
further enquiry; what is here meant by the Presbytery? what by Laying on of the
hands of the Presbytery?

Quest. 1. For the former, (...), hereby some would understand the office of a
Presbyter. So Erasmus here transsates it, Authoritate sacerdotis. To which
sense I find (what I wonder at) Mr. Calvin here not wholly averse, yea,
Omuibus expensis, diversum sensum non male quadrare fateor, ut sit nomen
officii. Calvin ad Text. Quod de Impositione manuum Presbyterii dicitur, non it
a accipio quasi Paulus de seniorum collegi^ loquatur, sed hoc nomine
Ordinationem ipsam intelligo Calvin. Instit. lib. 4. Cap. 3. Sect. 16. Cameron
Praelect in Mat. 18.15.
elsewhere wholly for it, but by the favor of so judicious an Expositor (then
whom I know none more) we may take notice, first, that the word here used is
never taken in scripture in this sense. Neither can it well bear it. True
indeed (as the learned Cameron notes upon it) were it (...), it might be so
construed, Presbyteratus, the office, or dignity of a Presbyter, but not so
(...).

And secondly, If the word would bear it, yet the scope of the place will not.
For should we so read it, [ with the laying on of the hands of the office (or
dignity) of a Presbyter] I must profess (with the same Author) I should not
know what sense to make of it.

And therefore letting that pass; enquire we how this word is elsewhere used.
That we may soon see, there being but two other Texts where it is to be
found. The one Luke 22.66. where we read of the Elders of the people; (...).
The other Act. 22.5. where we meet with the estate of the Elders, (...); In
both places thereby meaning the great Council of the Sanhedrim, a College or
company of officers, to whom the Government of the Church was committed. Here
is the Original, both of the name and thing, from whence it was derived (as
most other things concerning Ecclesiastical Government were) unto the Christian
Church; which in like manner had its Presbyteries, Societies, and Companies of
Church officers, to whom the Government of the Church was in like manner
committed. And in this sense (without question) are we to look upon the word
here in the text, as denoting Caetum, seu Collegium Presbyterorum, a Company of
Presbyters. Herein the generality of Expositors, both Ancient and Modern,
Presbyterium qui hic collectivum nomen esse putant, pro Collegio Presbyterorum
positum, recte sentiunt meo judicio, Calvin ad Text.
both Protestant and Romish, do fully accord; Mr. Calvin also among the rest
(upon second thoughts) yiedling his free assent thereunto.

Quest. Only the question remains, what kind of Presbyters were these?

Answ. To this shall we give the Doctors of the Church of Rome, leave to
return the Answer, most of them will roundly tell us, that they were Bishops,
Bishops as distinct from Presbyters; wherein they plead the consent of some of
the Ancients. Such was the office (say they) to which Timothy was ordained, not
of a Presbyter, but of a Bishop. Now it was never the custom for Presbyters to
ordain Bishops. No, The less is blessed of the better, (the greater) faith the
Apostle speaking of the Priestly office) Heb. 7.7. Not the greater of the
less. Presbyters are ordained by Bishops, not Bishops by Presbyters, And
herein we find them seconded by some of our own of late times, who contend
that the office to which Timothy was ordained, was the office of a Bishop, an
Archbishop, a Metropolitan. And consequently the Presbytery here spoken of,
must be a company of Bishops (at least) not of ordinary Presbyters.

In pursuit whereof, some there are who spare not to affirm, that in Paul's time
there was no such order in the Church. No Presbyters properly so called. True
indeed in a large sense (say they) the Apostles (some of them) sometimes style
themselves so, as Peter and John; who write themselves Presbyters; 1 Pet. 5.1.
2 Epist. Joh. 1. and 3. Epist. 1. But strictly and properly there was then none
of this order. None at least till St. John's time, the last of the Apostles.
Then indeed (say they) was this order introduced as a middle office betwixt
Bishops and Deacons. But before that, there were no other ordinary offices in
the Church, but these two, taking the word Bishops, in a strict acception; and
consequently the Presbytery here spoken of could be no other. So high are some
flowne in these distracted times; being (as they say) of some Meteors, set on
fire by an Antiperistasis.

But as for this opinion, as it is but novel, newly hatched, and singular, so I
suppose it is not like to be long lived, it being such as the best friends to
Episcopacy, (which the moderate party are) (I presume) will not be willing to
own. Neither indeed is there any reason they should, in as much as it runs so
directly cross; as to clear evidence of Scripture, so to the general (if not
universal) consent of all divines both Ancient and Modern; who look upon the
office of a Presbyter, as in Order and Time precedent to that of a Bishop. Yea
so necessarily preceding it, that who ever shall be ordained a Bishop, per
saltum, not having first a Presbyter, they pronounce his Ordination invalid, a
mere nullity. So it is agreed both by Protestants and Papists. Yea by the
moderate on both these parts it is also yielded, that Presbyiery is the highest
order of ordinary Gospel ministry. Episcopacy not being a different Order from
it, but only a different degree in the same Order a dignity conferred upon
some one of the Presbyters, and that for orders sake, to prevent division and
confusion.

So then, leaving these forced senses, take we the word as it sounds,
understanding by it a Combination, or company of Presbyters, properly so
called, ordinary Ministers of the word, Pastors and Teachers, such as labored
in the word and doctrine, whether the Ministers of one Church or more; a
Congregational or Classical Presbytery (as they are now distinguished) is
uncertain. M. Beza is for the former, nominating the place where Timothy was
elected; and (as he, supposes) ordained, Lystris ascitum fuisse constat ex
Act. 16.2. etc. Beza. Gr. Anno. ad Loc.
viz. at Lystra; and that he conceives by the Presbyters, the Ministers of
that Church; taking the conjecture from that forecited Text, Act. 16.2. whether
so or no, as it is but conjectural, so is it not material. A company of
Presbyters, there were which made up this Presbytery. And from (or rather
through) their hands did Timothy receive this Gift. Sorunnes the Text, The Gift
which was given thee by Prophesy, with the laying on of the Hands of the
Presbytery.

Quest. 2 (...)] Imposition of hands, a Rite or Ceremony of very ancient use,
and that in diverse cases. Four, or five of which we meet with in the Old
Testament. 1 In Benediction and blessing. Thus the story tells us, Genesis 48.14.
how the Patriarch Jacob laid his hands upon the heads of Ephraim and Manasse,
which he did for the blessing of them, as the 20 verse explains the mystery of
it. 2 In Oblation, in offering sacrifices to God. So you find it, Exodus 29.
where Aaron and his Sons are ordered to lay their hands upon the head of the
Bullock, which was to be sacrificed, verse. 10. and so in like manner upon the
two Rams verse. 15.19. thereby dedicating and consecrating of them unto God. 3
In Attestation, in giving evidence against a Capital offender, of this you read
Lev. 24.14. where the Law for punishing the Blasphemer, requires, that his
accusers should lay their hands upon his head, for the confirmation of their
Testimony. 4. In Resignation. Thus we find the Children of Israel (some chief
among them in the name of the rest) laying their hands upon the Levites (which
they did) not to ordain them to their office, no, that was done by Aaron, by
whom they were offered up unto the Lord, (as the next verse has it) but that
thereby they might declare and testify both their Resignation and Approbation
of them, how that they did for their parts, give up all the carnal and worldly
interests which they had in them, and did approve of that office which was then
to be conferred upon them. 5 In Designation, in designing and appointing one
to an office. Thus Moses designing Joshua to be his successor; he does it
with this Ceremony, by laying on his hands upon him, Numb. 27.18.

Of such use was this Rite under the old Testament, from whence it was
transferred unto the New, where we shall also find it used in an equal number
of Cases. First, In Benediction. Thus our Savior is said to have blessed those
children which were brought unto him, by putting his hands on them, Mark.
10.16. Secondly, In Miraculous operations, in healing of bodily diseases. Thus
our Savior is said to have wrought that cure upon that infirm woman Luke
13.13. by laying his hands upon her. and the like power he gave to his
Apostles, after his departure, as also to some others in those primitive times.
They shall lay their hands on the sick, and they shall recover, Mark. 16.18. An
experiment whereof Ananias made upon Saul, who recovered his sight by his
laying on his hands upon him, Act. 9.17. Thirdly, In Extraordinary Collations,
in conveying of miraculous gifts. Thus did Saul also receive the Holy Ghost (as
it there follows) And the like did many others, by laying on of the hands of
the Apostles, as you find it in the Chapter foregoing, Act. 8. verse. 17.18.
Fourthly, In that Apostolical institution of Confirmation (an Ordinance which
the Church of God, after some foul depravations of it, has now unhappily lost,
the restoring whereof according to the Talem man nuum impositionem quae
simpliciter loco benedictionis fi^t, laudo, and restitutam hodie in purum usum
velim. Calv. Instit. lib. 4. Cap. 19
Primitive pattern is much to be desired, as being very useful to the Church,
and that as at all times, so especially in these times whereinto we are
fallen, whereof I have Doctrine and Practice of Paedobatisme, p. 76, 77, 78, 79
Printed Anno. 1645.
elsewhere given a public account to the world) of which, (after many of the
Ancients) Mr. Calvin and Beza, Hic unus locus abunde testatur hujus Ceremoniae
originem fluxisse ab Apostolis Calv. Com. ad Loc. Piscator Chemnitius,
Hemingius, Ursinus' D. Fulk, D. Willer, etc. Vide (...), I. H. B. N. Manuum
impositionem cum Baptismo conjungit, quia ut duo erant Catechumenorum ordines,
ita duplex erat Ceremonia, etc. Vide Calvin, Com. ad. loc.
with diverse others of our modern divines, eminent both for learning and
piety, do understand the Apostle to speak, Heb. 6.2. where among his six
Principles of Christian Religion, he reckons this for one, the laying on of
hands; which being joined unto Baptism, and coupled with it, it seems to
import some reference and relation, that the one should have to the other (as
Calvin also observes upon it) and so cannot so fitly be understood of any
other thing as of Confirmation, wherein the Children of Believers having been
baptized in their Infancy, after that they had been competently instructed in
the doctrine of that faith, whereinto they had been baptized, were confirmed by
the Imposition of hands, and so received for complete members of the Church.
Fifthly, and most usually in Ordination of Church Officers. Thus did Timothy
receive this Gift, his Ministerial office, by, or with the Imposition of the
hands of the Presbytery.

Imposition of hands] a Mystical Ceremony, and that very significative. Being
used in ordination of Ministers, diverse things may be conceived to be
represented and signified by it. Letting pass what the Church of Rome will
tell us, Hac impositione manuum sistitur Ecclesiae, ut haec quoque admoneatur,
Deum per hanc personam, and ejus ministerium; velle ipsos docere, etc. Chemnit.
loc. de Ecclesia. p. 159.
that hereby an indelible Character is imprinted upon the person ordained, and
that Grace, yea Gratia gratum faciens, is conferred by it, Certe utile est
ejusmodi symbolo cum ministerii dignitatom populo commensari, tum eum qui
ordinatur admoneri, ipsum jam non esse sui juris, sed Deo and Ecclesiae in
servitutem addictum. Calvin Instir. lib. 4. cap. 3. Sect. 16.
and that ex opere operato, so as the person is hereby rendered the more
acceptable unto God. Take what the true Churches of Christ hold forth unto us.

1. Hereby it is declared, and that both publicly and solemnly, who they are
that are set a part to the work of the Ministry; that so the people taking
notice thereof may be thereby induced to give such respects unto them as
belong to their office. To this end it is that civil Magistrates used to be
installed with such solemnities as they are; for the conciliating of respect
from the people under their Government. And upon a like account is this
solemnity used in the Ordination of Ministers.

2. Hereby the persons ordained are dedicated and consecrated unto God, and set
apart to his service, even as the Sacrifices under the Law, by the same
Ceremony were set apart from a common to a sacred use.

3. Hereby a Gift is conveyed; viz. that Gift here spoken of in the Text.
(...). Both the Ministerial Office and Grace. Both here said to be conveyed
unto Timothy, by this means, by laying on of the hands of the Presbytery.

Object. Not so (say some) this is more than the Text will avouch, which says
only, that this Gift was given him [with] the laying on of their hands, not
[by] it. So they distinguish between these two particles, (...) and (...), by
and with. The former of which is here applied to Prophecy, (...), by
Prophecy, the latter to the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery: (...),
with laying on, etc.

Answ. But this is but a nice and overcurious criticisme, Compare Act.
13.17.14.27. and 15.4. with verse. 12. of that Chapter. Vide Bez. Gr. Annot. ad
loc.
thus to distinguish betwixt these two particles, which are not seldom
indifferently used, the one put for the other (as it is observed by Beza and
others) Letting go other Texts, consult we, but that one which is parallel to
this, 2 Timothy 1.6. there we shall find this (...), turned into (...), stir up
the Gift of God which is in thee, by the putting on of my hands, (...).

Repl. True (say they) Paul might say this of his hands, which had yet virtue
in them to confer extraordinary gifts. But so have not the hands of the
Presbytery, whether extraordinary, or ordinary.

Answ. To this let it be answered, that though they have no such virtue in
them, yet they may be employed as instrumental, in conveying of what is not in
their power to give. And this is all that we intend when we say that this
Gift is conveyed by Ministerial hands; we do not say, conferred as attributing
any proper Efficiencie to these hands, but only conveyed. Such is this
Ceremony of imposition of hands in Ordination; it is only a vehiculum, a moral
Instrument, whereby this gift is conveyed.

1. The Office. Hereby the person ordained is empowered for the exercise of his
Ministerial function, in dispensing of Word, Sacraments, Censures, all in an
authoritative way. Even as Joshua was installed in his office by laying on of
Moses his hands.

2. As the Office, so the Grace. This is also conveyed by this Ceremony, where
it is rightly used and received. So much our learned Cartwright sticks not to
grant to his Adversaries of Rhemes, writing upon this Text. That Grace is given
(says he) by, Cartwright, Confut. of the Rhemists, in Text.
and with the Ordination of Ministers, when it is duly given, and received, we
willingly yield, because the words of the Scripture bear it. Grace given in
Ordination, and that by imposition of hands, as he there intends it.

Quest. But what Grace? and how given?

Ans. I answer; Ministerial Grace, suitable to that sacred function. This is
hereby given to the persons thus ordained, being such as are fit for, Haec
impositio significat collationem gratiae non quod Ministri dent gratiam, sed
quod significant gratiam datam a Christo, Aquin. Com. ad Text. Cartwright. ib.
and do make a right use of this ordinance. Given to them, not by the opus
operatu^^, the work done, as if there were any such intrinsecal virtue in this
Ceremony. This we renounce as a Popish dream, and that too gross to be owned
by some of their Doctors. But only this is (as I said) a vehiculum, an
Instrument, and a means whereby this Grace is conveyed. So Mr. Cartwright there
within a few lines explains himself. It is a frantic device (says he) to
imagine, that by the very work of imposition of hands, grace is given, which is
only the instrumental mean, whereby it is given. In such a way it is, that
Sacraments convey Grace; not by any Efficiency in themselves, but only as
Instruments, whereby the Spirit of God conferreth that Grace which is
represented aed signified by them. And in such a way may this Grace be said to
be conveyed by imposition of hands in this ordinance of Ordination. Whence it
is that Mr. Calvin, (who is not wont to be loose and lavish in his language,
nor yet ready to gratify his Adversaries of Rome, Impositionem manuum, qua
Ecclesiae Ministri in suum munus initiantur, ut non invitus patior vocari
Sacram entum, ita inter ordinatia Sacramenta non numero. Calv. Inst. lib. 4.
cap. 14. Sect. 20. Superest impositio manuum, quam ut in veris legitimisque
Ordinationibus Sacramentum esse concedo, etc. Calv. ibid cap. 19. Sect 31.
by complying with them in any thing that may be in the least prejudicial to
the Truth) declares himself, once and again, not to be unwilling to indulge
this Ceremony thus used, the name of a Sacrament. Non invitus patior vocaris
Sacramentum. Not that he is willing to allow it a room among the ordinary
Sacraments, which are seals of the Covenant of Grace, of which kind he owns
only two. But in as much as herein it resembles a Sacrament; it being by divine
Ordination instrumental, as a morralsign in conveying Ministerial Grace, as
the signs in the Sacraments are in conveying the Grace of the Covenant. So he.
Nec hic ritus est inane spectaculum, sed cum precatio accedit, impetratur
spiritus Sanctus ordinando, nisi ipse sit impius Hypocrira. Heming. Com. ad
Text.
Wherein we shall not find him singular. Surely (says Hemingius) this
Ceremony of imposition of hands it is not inane spectaculum, a mere Pageant, to
be gazed and looked upon, but an operative sign, which being (as it ever must
be) accompanied with prayer, now the Holy Ghost is hereby impetrated and
obtained for the person or deined, unless he be one that is an Hypocrite.

And to him consents Aretius, who also writing upon the Text, and taking notice
how God was wont heretofore in the Primitive times to own this Ordinance of
his, by giving some evidence that the person so set apart was well pleasing to
him, he adds, Et indubie, Indubi^ si idem symbelum rire administraretur, adhuc
hodie. in Electionibus non minus quam oli^n effet efficax, si max me externa
and insolita ratione sese non execeret spiritus Sanctus, Aret Com. ad Text.
And without doubt (says he) If the s^^e rite were in a due manner still
abserved in the Blection of Ministers, it would be found to be no less
effectual than heretofore; however the Holy Ghost may not show himself in such
external operations, as then. Here is another use of this Rite, this Ceremony,
and that a Principal one.

4. Hereby a charge is imposed. Thus Moses laying his hands upon Joshua, Illo
ipso etiam ritu tanqua^m solemni voto and obligatione, is qui vocatus est,
obligatus cor^ Deo, sub testimonio Ecclesiae ad eam fidelitatem in Ministerio
prestandam, quam Dominus in dispensationibus suis requirit, 1 Cor. 4.2.
Chemnit. Ioc. de Ecclesia. p. 137.
he is said to give him a charge before all the people, Numb. 27.23. And in
like manner the Ministers of God laying their hands upon the persons ordained,
they do thereby in the name of God impose a charge upon them, even the same
that Paul does here upon Timothy, not to neglect the gift which thereby they
receive, but seriously with their Heads and Hearts to intend that Ministration
committed to them, lest otherwise the hand of the Lord go out against them, and
fall heavy upon them.

5. (To name no more) Hereby a blessing is assured. A threefold blessing.
Divine Protection, Direction, Assistance. Thus is the hand of the Lord said to
have been upon his servant Ezra, Ezra 7.6.9. According to the good hand of his
God upon him, God was pleased to exercise a gracious providence toward and
upon him, in protecting, directing and prospering him in his undertakings. And
thus shall the hand of the Lord be upon his faithful servants, his Ministers,
going about his work in his name; which is represented and assured to them by
this Rite, this Ceremony in their Ordination, the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery. Ceremoniam pro ipso actu Ordinationis posuit. Calv. ad Text.


Of such excellent use then is this Ceremony. And hence is it, that it is here
as (elsewhere) put for the whole work of Ordination. Not but that therein there
are other actions of special import, such are the word and prayer. The two
ordinary means whereby every Creature of God is sanctified, as our Apostle
tells us in the fifth verse of this Chapter. Sanctified in a general way, so as
they may be comfortably used, with expectation of a blessing upon them. And by
these means the persons ordained come to be sanctified in a special manner, in
a peculiar way; by the word and prayer, which are the essential parts of this
Ordinance (as might be showed; if need were.) But in as much as this Ceremony
is most obvious and observable to the eye, therefore the whole action takes
the denomination from it, being called, the laying on of hands.

And thus have I with what brevity might be, Applicat.
paraphrased upon this former part of the Text. From whence I might now deduce,
or rather take up diverse doctrinal informations, touching the business which
we are here met about this day, the ordinance of Ordination.

1. So I call it (let that be the first of them) and that not without good
warrant from my Text, the Ordinance of Ordination. And that not a humane, but a
divine Ordinance, and so of perpetual use unto the Church of God; which were it
but believed, surely it would not be so slighted, as by many it is at this
day. Paul's charge to Timothy here is, that he should not neglect the Gift
which he had received in, and by his Ordination. How is it that so many among
us so slight this gift, as that they will not receive it in this way? No, if
they have but a Call (as they call it) an Election by two or three, and can by
any means procure a formal Approbation, or yet a Toleration; it is enough for
them. A Gift they have already (at least as they think) and they look out for
no more. Now they let upon the work, and that not as Probationers, for trial
sake, in order to Ordination (which being done with the Allowance of those who
have power to lay on hands, and that for some competent time, until Ordination
can be obtained, I have nothing to say against it) but in a fixed way, as
their settled employment. Taking upon them not only to preach (which properly
they cannot be said to do without Ordination; Teach they may, but preach they
cannot. How shall they preach except they be sent? Romans 10.15. Preach as
Ambassadors, Officers, in an authoritative way; this they cannot do without an
authoritative mission) but also to administer the Sacraments, and that not only
Baptism, (which upon what account I know not) has heretofore been looked upon
as of an inferior nature, and so permitted in some cases to be dispensed by
secular hands) but also the Lords Supper; wherein what do they but abuse the
Ordinances of God, and abuse his people, gulling and deceiving them, by giving
them shells for kernels, shadows for substances? So necessary is Ordination (I
mean, for the substance of it) as that (in an ordinary way) none can perform
any ministerial act without it. But I must but touch upon things, only giving
you a hint of what might have been enlarged.

2. In the second place, as Ordination it self is necessary, so this Ceremony
used in it, of imposition of hands, is more than indifferent. Mark it, I do not
say, absolutely necessary, so essential unto this Ordinance, as that it should
be null and void without it. I shall herein be as tender as I may. But more
than indifferent, an adjunct which ought not to be severed from it. For this
besides the constant, and almost universal practice of the Church, in all
times, in all places (which ought to bear more than a little sway with those
that live in the bosom, and acknowledge themselves members of it) Scripture
evidence (me thinks) should be clear and convincing enough. For practice, how
is it that Paul, and Barnabas, though persons extraordinarily qualified and
dignified, were thus set a part, by laying on of hands? Act. 13.3. And here
Timothy in like manner; And so all the Elders, the Ministers of those times; a
thing so apparent that it cannot be denied. And whence is it that the whole
action (as I have shown you) was denominated from this Ceremony, commonly known
by this name of imposition of hands? a plain evidence that this was always a
part of it, never omitted.

Object. Why? but it may be said, though we have President for it, Licet
autem nullum extet certum precep tum de manuum impositione, quia^ tamen fuiffe
in perpetuo usu Apostolis videmus, illa tam acurata little observatio
praeceptive nobis esse debet. Call. Instit. l. 4. cap. 3. Sect. 16.
yet no precept. So as though it may be done, yet there is no necessity that
it should be so.

Answ. 1. Suppose it that we have not, yet (as Calvin concludes) inasmuch as
we find it in such constant use among the Apostles, and their next
successors, their so exact observing of it, may well be instead of a Precept
unto us.

2. But secondly, if we have not an express precept for it, yet an implicit
one we have, which is tantamount: what else means that of Paul to Timothy,
where he charge him not to lay on hands suddenly, on any man; 1 Timothy 50.22.
surely that Caution implies an injunction; whilst he prohibits the manner,
he requires the thing; whilst he forbids him to lay on hands suddenly, he
intimates it as his duty to do it regularly.

Obj. But it may be said. However this was then used, yet there is no
necessity it should now be continued, in as much as this G^^^^ny has lost the
virtue which then it had. Even as it is with ^utream unction, the anointing of
the sick, it was then practiced with an Apostolical warrant, Jam. 5.14. but
having since lost that efficacy which then it had, it has from those times
been laid aside.

A. But so has not Imposition of hands in Ordination, which that ever it was
miraculous we read not, however, not the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery. The same use which then it had, it still retains, and so, as it
has been, so still it ought to be continued in the Church. But I come not
here to dispute this point, Vide jus divinum Ministerii Evangelici Part 1. Cap.
12. and M. Laz. Seamans Answer to Chillenden. Hoe postremo habendum est, non
universam multitudinem manu^ impo^uisse sai^ manistris, sed solos Pastores.
Calv. Instit. ubi supra.
which has been sufficiently done by the pens of others of late times. Pass
we on.

In the third place; As hands are to be imposed in Ordination, so see what or
whose hands. Not the Peoples. They indeed may with some color lay claim to a
(...), but not so to a (...), to a lifting up of their hands (as the manner
anciently was,) in the electing or approving of their Ministers, but not a
laying on their hands in ordaining them. Surely as this finds no warrant from
scripture, so neither is it consonant to Religion, or right reason, that they
who are not invested with any such power themselves, should derive it unto
others, so giving that which they have not, whether formally or vertually. And
if so, what needed Paul to have left Titus in Crete to ordain Elders in every
City, (which he did, Tit. 1.5.) if the people might have done it? Surely this
must be the Presbyters work.

4 And that not of one single Presbyter, however qualified, however dignified.
Scripture speaking of this Imposition, it still speaks of hands in the plural
number, not singular, (...) (says the Text) The laying on of hands. And that
not of one single person, but more, not of one Presbyter, but of the
Presbytery. Thus was Timothy here ordained.

Obj. But here a stone lies in my way, which must be removed; was not Timothy
ordained by Paul's hands, and his alone? The Text is express, 2 Timothy 1.6. where
giving him the like charge concerning this gift, he minds him that he has
received it by the putting on of his hands. How then by the hands of the
Presbytery?

Answ. To this it is answered by some, that the Gift there spoken of is not the
same with this in the Text; but some miraculous gift. So Diodate conceives of
it. Diodate in 2 Timothy 1.6.
It should seem (says he) that by the Imposition of Saint Paul's hands, Timothy
received the miraculous gifts, and by the Imposition of the College of Elders
hands, he was installed in the Ministry. But in as much as we do not find
either from Scripture, or any sure record of Antiquity, that Timothy had any
such miraculous gifts, therefore we wave that conjecture.

2 More probably and genuinely; it is conceived by others, (and that by the
generality of Expositors) that Paul and the Presbytery did join in the same
Ordination, in ordaining Timothy to his Ministerial office, they laid on hands
together. Nullus est dubitandi locus quin Timotheus a seniorum collegio electus
fuerit, qui toti Collegio praeesset. Cameron Praelect in Mat. 18. and 15
Only he as a (...), the leader, and foreman in that service (which well he
might be, being an extraordinary person) they joining with him as ordinary
officers. Thus did Timothy and Titus, afterward ordain, not alone, but with
others, only themselves, being as leaders in the work. A pattern which was
afterward followed by the Church, Ex Dei ordinatione perpetua necesse fuit,
est, and erit, ut in Presbyterio quispiam and loco, and dignitate Primu^,
actioni gubernandae presit. Beza de Ministr. Evang. Grad. Cap. 23. Tales
Episcopos divinitus, and quasi ipsi^s Christi voce, constitutos, absit ut
unquam simus inficianti. Idem ibid. Cap. 21.
which in her ordinations was wont to have a (...); a Primus Presbyter, one
first; (to whom after ages, appropriated the name of a Bishop, which in the
Apostles time was alike common to all Presbyters) who for orders sake lead the
way, having the first hand in services of this nature. So as these two may well
stand together. Timothy was ordained by the laying on of Paul's hands, and yet
by the hands of the Presbytery.

Quest. But here falls in a question which some may think to be pinching to
us, who are here met together about this service this day. Where there is not
the same order observed, is the ordination valid? May the Presbytery without
such a (...), without a Bishop lay on hands?

Answ. In Answer to this, I shall not much regard, either what they of the
Church of Rome, or any overheated spirits among our selves have determined,
who in the want of this order, make a nullity of the Ordinance, pronounce the
ordination invalid and void; by which harsh censure of theirs, what do they but
most uncharitably; and even unchristianly, degrade, though not all, yet the
greatest, and most considerable part of the Ministers of Christ, in the
reformed Churches throughout the world, making them no Ministers, and so
unchurching their Churches. Leaving them.

As for the more moderate spirits among our selves, (with whom I desire only
to deal, and for whose sakes it is that I speak what I do) how ever they look
upon this as the more regular way, more agreeable to the practice of Antiquity,
and the Scripture pattern, yet they freely yield it, that where this is not to
be had, where either there are no such Bishops, or those not fit, or not
willing to ordain any but of their own faction, themselves being not Orthodox,
or else (which is all one) not permitted to exercise that part, of their
supposed Jurisdiction, now the Presbytery, ordinary Presbyters, may do it
without them. So our eminently learned and judicious Davenant, lately a star of
the first magnitude in this our Horizon, (being himself also soon after a
Bishop) has plainly determined it. In Ecclesia turbata, ubi Episcopi omnes in
haeresin aut Idololatriam inciderunt, etc. si Orthodoxi Presbyteri (ne pereat
Ecclefia) alios Presbyteros cogantur ordinare, ego non ausim hujusmodi
Ordinationes pronunciare irritos and inanes. Davenant determi. Quest 42.
In Ecelesia turbata etc. In the troubled state of the Church, where ordination
cannot be received from Episcopal hands, it both may and ought to be from the
hands of Ordinary Presbyters. To which Armacham, (by him cited) in one case
agrees, viz. when the Bishops are all dead. And indeed (what he there also
takes notice of) it is no less than a wonder, that those who in some cases
(in case of imminent danger) will allow any private person, a midwife, or
whoever) to baptize an Infant, (which by divine institution belongs only unto
Ministers) and account it valid, yet will rather suffer the Church to go to
wrack, and perish, than to admit of Ordination by the hands of Presbyters;
which if rightly considered, and applied to the present times, I presume may
be sufficient to satisfy any such well-advised and moderate spirits, as his
was.

To this I might add what is taken notice of by others, and that from the
concessions of some of those who have appeared for, Vide jus divinum Regim.
Eccl. p. 132.
and pleaded the cause of Episcopacy among our selves, who have freely and
ingenuoussy acknowledged, (what indeed cannot be denied) that Presbyters as
Presbyters, are endued with an intrinsecal power and authority to ordain
others, having been only limited and restrained in the exercise of that power
by the Discipline of the Church, for orders sake; which Discipline being now in
this Nation for the present (at least) laid asleep, it cannot be thought any
usurpation in them, to assume and exercise that power, which is confessedly
intrinsecall to their order. But I have neither time, nor will, to wade into
debates of this nature. I have done with Doctrinal informations.

To which, had I any time further to spend, I might now subjoyn some Practical
Applications, and that both to Ministers, and people. 1 To Ministers, such as
would be, such as are.

1 Such as would be, Candidates, Expectants, such as intend and desire the
work and office of the Ministry (which who so are in measure fitted for it,
and have a sincere intention of doing service to God and his Church in it,
without any Ambition may do, as our Apostle tells us, 1 Timothy 3.1.) let them
here see what door it is that they are to enter at, and see that they ENTER in
by that door. Not taking upon them this office without a calling. No man takes
this honor unto himself, (says the Apostle, Heb. 5.4. speaking not de facto;
but de jure; not what men do, but ought to do,) not take upon them the
ministerial office without a warrantable Call thereunto; Which Call consists,
not merely in personal qualification, or yet in a popular election, but also in
a Potestative mission, a Regular Ordination. And let them enter in at this
door, which the true Shepherd is said to do, John 10.2. And who so does not,
has a black Character set upon him in the verse there foregoing.

2 For such as are already entered in by this door, let them take up from what
has been spoken, both Counsel and comfort.

1 Counsel. Let this their Ordination which they have received, leave upon
their hearts and spirits an indelible Character, continually minding them, how
they were thereby set apart, dedicated and consecrated unto God for the service
of his Church. So as now they are no longer their own. Ye are not your own,
says the Apostle of private Christians, 1 Cor. 6.19. much less public
Officers, Magistrates: Ministers, they are Gods and his peoples, not their own,
specially the latter, who with their own consents are given up to the Lord, and
his Church, and that for ever. Now being so, let them not live to themselves.
None of us lives unto himself (says the Apostle) But whether we live, we
live unto the Lord, Romans 14.7, 8. And so let his Ministers live. Live to the
honor and glory of their Lord and Master, going about his work and service in
his name, and in his strength. Not in confidence of their own Arm, but his;
Which doing

2 Now let them comfort and encourage themselves in the Lord their God, being
assured that so long as they are with him. he will be with them, his hand
shall be upon them. Thou have beset me before and behind, and laid thine hand
upon me, (says David, speaking of Gods providence toward himself,) Psalm.
139.5. And thus shall the hand of God be upon his faithful Ministers; his
good hand, his Right hand. That is the hand which is laid on in Ordination, the
right hand. And this hand of God shall be upon his Ministers, being faithful
in their Ministrations, now let them know, that he has laid his right hand
upon them; which meditation may be, and let it be useful to them in diverse
cases.

1 To bear up their hearts and spirits against that mean esteem which they meet
withal in, and from the world. The world sets them on the left hand; We are
made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things even
unto this day (says Paul of himself, and his fellow laborers) 1 Cor. 4.13.
(...), the sweepage, and offall of the world. Such is the lot sometimes,
oft-times, of Gods faithful Ministers, though really such as the world is not
worthy of, yet they are meanly, if not basely, esteemed of, they are set on the
left hand. But what of that? so long as they are, (which they are) the men of
Gods right hand (as David says of himself, Psalm. 80.17.) having his right hand
laid on them. No small honor. So it was to Ephraim; that he being the younger
brother, his Grandfather Jacob should lay his right hand upon him, which the
story tells us he did: and that wittingly, that he might put the more honor
upon him, Genesis 48.14. And so it is to the Ministers of Christ, who for the most
part are (as Ephraim was) younger brethren (take it metaphorically, or
literally, it still holds true) and so set (as Ephraim also there was, on
Jacobs, verse. 13.) on the worlds left hand, that God should lay his right hand
upon them, this is no small honor, no mean dignity, sufficient to countervail
what ever contempt the ungrateful world can cast upon them.

2 Against meannesse of estate. As for left hand blessings, worldly wealth,
they have it may be but a small portion of it, in comparison of others? Though
it may be they are not reduced to such extremities as Paul was; who tells us
of his hunger, and thirst, and cold; and nakedness, 2 Cor. 11.27. yet they are
dieted with a mean and scanted competency, far inferior to what others enjoy.
But what of this? Let it be enough to them. the right hand of their God is
upon them, assuring their interest in the best of blessings, which right hand
blessings are.

3. Against opposition, affronts, troubles, persecutions, which they are
subject to meet withal, in and from the World. These in some kind, or other,
they must make account of. But let them not be disanimated thereby; let them in
nothing fear their adversaries. So long as the good hand, the right hand of
their God is upon them, they are safe enough; that is a strong hand. Thou have
a mighty arm, strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand, Psalm. 89.13.
This hand being upon their heads, they shall need no other helmet; this will
be to them a helmet of salvation. Only let it be their care to do the work of
the Lord faithfully, and then let them quietly repose themselves under the
covert of his hand, being assured of a gracious protection from that God, whom
they serve in the Gospel of his Son.

4. I might yet go on. Let this be to them a Catholicon, a comfort and
encouragement in all their straits, all their doubts and difficulties, when
they know not what to do, which way to look, now let their eyes be unto their
God, whose hand is still with them, If I take the wings of the morning, and
dwell in the uttermost part of the Sea, even there shall thy hand lead me, and
thy right hand shall hold me, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 139.8, 9. Such a
gracious providence does God exercise, as toward all his servants in general,
so toward his Ministers in special. In all places, in all conditions, he will
be with them, to support them; to conduct them. But I am straightened.

2. A word for the people; and but a word. Let them own this Ordinance of God,
and that by owning them that are put under it. We beseech you Brethren to know
them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord (says the Apostle, 1
These. 5.12.) The Officers of Jesus Christ, such as are set apart unto his
service, and come in his name, with his authority. Know them, and that so as to
yield unto them such respects as are due unto them upon that account. Esteeming
them very highly for their works sake (as it there follows, verse. 13.) not
grudging them that (...), that double honor, of Reverence, and maintenance,
which our Apostle in this Epistle avoucheth the faithful Ministers of Christ,
to be worthy of, 1 Timothy 5.17. with all, obeying them. Obey them that have the
rule over you, and submit your selves (says the Apostle to the Hebrews,
speaking there not of Magistrates, but of Ministers, such as watch for the
souls of men (as it there follows) Heb. 13.17. obey their Doctrine, and submit
to their Government, so far as they teach from God, and command for God. So
doing, you shall not feel of that hand, which being laid upon them, is ready to
go forth against those, who will not hearken unto them. But I may not give way
to further inlargements, being also prevented in what I should have done, in
speaking somewhat of the latter part of the Text; wherein we have the matter
of this charge, which we meet with in the first word.

Neglect not] (...). In which word we have a (...), more intended than said.
Neglect not, that is, with care and conscience attend thy ministerial office,
laying out that Talent which God has committed unto thee, stirring up the Gift
which thou have received. So he elsewhere explains and inforceth this charge,
2 Timothy 1.6. whereof I put thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of
God, which is in thee] (...), a Metaphor taken from fire, which is ready to go
out, unless it be stirred up. Even so are Ministerial gifts, unless they be
exercised. And therefore as the Priests under the Law had a care of that holy
and heavenly fire upon the Altar, to preserve and cherish it, by adding fuel
to it, and stirring of it up; so ought Gospel Ministers to have of their gifts,
which they have received from God, maintain and cherish them, seeking to
increase them by the constant exercise of them, laying them out for the glory
of God, and good of his Church.

Appli. 1 A seasonable charge for you (my Brethren) who are this day to enter
upon this Ministerial office; you are here to receive the like Gift that
Timothy did, and that in the like way. Now to every of you be this word
spoken, and I wish it may be engraven upon each of your hearts, so as you may
have it in a continual remembrance, (...), Neglect not this gift. You know how
it fared with the servant in the Gospel, who hid his Talent in a Napkin; It
turned to a bad account to him in the end. And so will Gifts to their owners,
where they are not improved. And therefore what you have received, or shall
receive, see that you lay it out for your masters advantage, therein seeking
the glory of God, and good of his Church. So doing, be you comfortably assured
of what you have heard, that the good hand of your God shall be with you, and
upon you, to protect, direct, assist, and bless you. Whereof take the
Imposition of hands this day as a pledge. But I shall not here anticipate what
you shall anon receive more fully from another hand. To which referring you,
beg we a blessing from God upon what has been spoken.

FINIS.
AN Exhortation given to the late ordained Ministers after the Ordination, in
the close of the day thereof, Norwich June 11. 1656.
IT is no part of my task to intermeddle at all with any controversies about
the Ordination of Ministers: either to enter into the question, of what
necessity it is to be an ordained Minister? or into that other, in whose power
it is to ordain, and to whom properly it belongs.

This was the task of that Reverend Divine who preached the Sermon to you, who
very dexterously and judiciously has acquitted himself therein, mine is only
to speak to you who are now ordained, to put you in mind of your duty as ye are
Ministers.

And all which I shall speak in this matter, both for the help of your memories
and mine own too, I will reduce to these three summary heads.

First, To show you the great burden of your Office, and what a weighty
calling ye have taken upon you to discharge.

Secondly, To show you the great peril and hazard ye run, in the not
discharging of it aright.

And Lastly, On the contrary, the great reward which remains for every faithful
Minister, for every one that conscientiously and in some good measure
discharges it as he ought.

And in instructing you herein, I desire to instruct my self, as being one of
the same function with you.

First, For the burden and weightinesse of the Calling: when I consider how
Moses, and Jeremiah, and Jonah, Prophets all, sufficiently and abundantly
gifted, did so earnestly decline it: and when I find the great Apostle St.
Paul, accounting himself as insufficient for the work of the Minitery: and not
only the most fushcient of the Apostles, but the most able also of all the
ancient Fathers (great St. Augustine) shedding tears at the time of his
Ordination, how can I, or any of you, but tremble at the burden of it?

As for Moses, how unwilling he was to undertake so great a burden, does many
ways appear in Scripture, and that very remarkably: for when God called him to
the office of a Prophet, and made choice of him to go unto Pharaoh, we shall
find him strangely drawing back the shoulder more then once or twice.

First, At the very beginning, when God first spoke unto him of it, Exo. 3.11.
Come now therefore, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh, etc. And Moses said unto
God, who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh? who am I, there is the first
expression of his unwillingnesse unto it.

Then again, after God had told him, that he would certainly be with him in
the work, yet he has another excuse for his backwardness; in the first verse.
of the next Chapter, Exodus 4.1. But behold they will not believe me, for they
will say, the Lord has not appeared to thee.

And after God had provided against this excuse also by three miraculous signs,
which he enabled him to perform, yet still he draws back, and makes a new
excuse, he pretends now that he wants eloquence, verse. 10. O my Lord, I am
not Eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou have spoken unto thy servant:
but I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.

Yea further, after God had stopped his mouth here also, telling him that he
would be with his mouth, and teach him what he should say, yet for all this,
when he saw none of his excuses would hold, he then in plain terms lays down
his Commission, and desires God to send another in his stead, verse. 13. And he
said, O my Lord, send I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou will send, that
is, by some other more fit than my self, (as Interpreters expound it) so
Calvin, Rivet, and others.

Neither could God get him to go, till his anger was kindled against him, nor
till he provided a second to go along with him, till he told him his brother
Aaron should go as an assistant with him in the work, as it is in the next verse

And that which aggravates all the rest, is, that even before God called him
unto it, there was no man fitter for so great a work, either in regard of all
outward accomplishments of body, or abilities of mind.

For outward bodily endowments, he was a goodly child, as soon as ever he was
born Exodus 2.2. which though it be but obscurely there expressed in the Hebrew
Original, yet the Apostle to the Hebrews sufficiently explains it, when he
styles him, (...), a proper Child, Heb. 11.23. Nay, St. Stephen goes further
than the Apostle, and says that he was (...), Divinely proper, or in a Divine
manner fair: and therefore it is translated in our English, Exceeding fair,
Act. 7.20. which is an Hebraisme, usual in Scripture, that those things which
are excellent in their kind above the rest, have the Epithete of [Divine] added
unto them: as the Cedars of God, and the mountains of God, in the Psalms, that
is, exceeding tall Cedars, and exceeding high mountains.

And as in outward bodily endowments he excelled; so for abilities of mind,
he went beyond the rest of his fellow brethren the Jews, as in all kind of
humane learning, especially in that wherein the Egyptians were eminent, having
had his education in the King of Egypts Court, and that as the adopted Son of
Pharaohs Daughters. St. Stephen has a full and punctual place for this, Act.
7.22. And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was mighty
in words and in deeds. Ye hear he was learned in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians, and therefore the fitter to be Gods Ambassador unto them: yea and
he excelled in that very Eloquence whereof before he complained unto God,
that he was defective, for he was (...) (says St. Stephen here) he was
mighty in words, as well as in deeds, he was a powerful speaker. And yet for
all this fitness which was in him, no man fitter, you see how unwilling he
was to undertake this office, no man unwillinger: and therefore I have the
longer insisted upon it, as being the notablest instance which I meet withal.

Neither was it so in Moses alone, but in the next place in that other great
Prophet, the Prophet Jeremiah, ye may see a great backwardness also to enter
upon this function, Jer. 1.6. for after God had called him unto it in the verse
before, he presently cries out: Ah, Lord God! Behold I cannot speak, for I am a
child; he excuses himself too for want of Eloquence, as Moses did before,
Behold I cannot speak, (says he) for I am a child! not as if he were a child
in age (Interpreters do not think so) but he means it that he was a child in
knowledge and understanding, as the Apostle to the Corinthians speaks; and in
regard of his unfitness to so weighty a function: so he thinks of himself, and
so he undervalues himself, in his own opinion. And therefore in an
apprehension of the unsupportablenesse of the burden of it, he cries out with
a lamentable voice, Ah Lord God, behold I cannot speak! etc. for the Hebrew
word here used, is interjectio dolentis, an interjection of lamentation or
groaning, translated elsewhere in Scripture, alas.

And yet God did not call him from the Plow, as he did the Prophet Elisha, nor
from the Herdmen, as he did the Prophet Amos: Nor from the fishermen, as he
did his Apostles, Peter and Andrew, James and John, for how much more then
would he have uttered such words? but God calls him from among the Priests,
from the Priests that were in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin, verse. 1. where
no doubt he had the education of a Scholar.

And in the third place, as great a backwardness was to be found in the Prophet
Jonah: for though it was not upon his first call to be a Prophet, as the two
former were; yet upon his first call to be a Prophet to the Heathenish
Ninevites, he showed as strange an aversness as either of the former, Jon.
1.3. for it was not only a bare unwillingnesse that appeared in him, nor only
a peremptory refusal of it, but a direct flying from the presence of God upon
it, a quite forsaking of the land of Israel, and going unto Tarshish a strange
Country.

Neither could God get him to go on his message to Nineveh, till he had given
him a second call unto it, Jonah 3.1. and ye know how he was fain to be
prepared too to the entertainment of that second call, it was a bitter pill
that he was enforced to take for a preparative, before the Physic would
kindly work upon him, as the two first Chapters of his Prophesy shows: he was
fain to have a terrible storm at Sea about his ears, the lot falls upon him to
be cast overboard, to appease it, a Whale comes and swallows him up into her
belly: and when he had been once thoroughly schooled for three days, and three
nights, in the Whales belly, (in the belly of hell as himself calls it) then
upon the Whales disgorging of him upon dry land, he begins to listen to the
second call of God, and not before.

And as ye have thus seen it in three great Prophets, two whereof were two of
the greatest that ever were: so ye may behold it also, in the greatest Apostle
that ever was, even St. Paul himself: for was not he brought up at the feet of
a learned Gamaliel, that great Rabbi? does he not say of himself; that he was
not a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles? and that though he was rude in
speech; yet not in knowledge, 2 Cor. 11.5, 6. nay he was so far from being
rude in speech too (though the false Apostles gave out so of him) that there is
most admirable Eloquence in all his Epistles: which made that golden mouthed
Father, St. Chrysostom so to admire him, and which made St. Augustine put it
for one of his three great wishes, that he might but once have heard him
preach out of a pulpit: and was he not the great Doctor of the Gentiles,
destined peculiarly unto them above all the rest of the Apostles? And yet for
all these his great abilities, and great sufficiency, ye may hear him crying
out in his own name, and in the name of all the Ministers of the Gospel: who is
sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2.16. And if thou were not, O holy and
great Apostle, who ever was, or shall be sufficient?

And as the ablest of all the Apostles felt his shoulders aching under the
burden of it, so the greatest of all the Ancient Fathers was as sensible of it,
before he entered upon it: even St. Augustine himself, who has been always
accounted the most learned of all the Fathers. whether of the Greek or Latin
Church; and yet he could not abstain from weeping (as I said before) at the
time of his Ordination to the Ministry, out of an apprehension of the
weightiness of the function which he was then to take upon him, as himself
writes in his Epistle to Valerius; Hin^ erant lacrymae illae; quas me fundere
in Civitate Ordinationis meae tempore nonnulli fratres animadverterunt. And
when the same Valerius would have him become his Colleague and Copartner with
him in his Episcopal office at Hippo, he was so far from an hasty accepting
of it, that he weilds it off, and expostulates the matter with him, what he
meant to lay such an insupportable burden upon his shoulders, Jubes er go ut
peream Pater Valeri? ubi est charitas tua?

And I would wish all young Scholars and Students in Divinity, next unto the
two Epistles of St. Paul to Timothy, and that to Titus, to read over this
Epistle of St. Augustine to Valerius: Where they shall find how difficult a
task the Ministerial function is, and how unwilling that great Light of the
Church was to undertake it.

Besides all these choice and pregnant instances, it will many other ways
appear, what a weighty Calling the Ministry is, and how great the burden of it.

True it is, that there are many honorable titles given to the Ministers of
God in Scripture: as that they are Men of God, Gods Ambassadors, Gods
Stewards: that they are Rulers, Elders, spiritual Fathers the Angels of the
Churches, the Stars of the Churches, and the like: but all these do as well
include their Duty as their dignity, and are as much for the Onus of the
Ministry, as the Honos of it.

Is it not a weighty Calling that requires so much Learning and Knowledge, so
much wisdom and Prudence, so much labor and pains for to manage it; and that
has so many dangers attending it, and so many enemies to grapple with? Is not
a cure of souls an heavy burden; I fear me, the heaviest under heaven.

Surely Saint Paul would never have written two large Epistles to Timothy upon
this subject, if there had not been great need of a thorough instruction in
this so weighty a function.

For is it an easy matter to perform those duties, which in those Epistles he
enjoins him, in the name of all Ministers of the Gospel? I will select some of
them for a taste; as that 2 Timothy 2.15. Study to show thy self approved unto
God, a workman that needs not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of Truth.
For though to study, to approve our selves to God, and to become workmen that
need not to be ashamed, be both of them duties of a very large extent: yet
even that one alone, of rightly dividing the word of truth, what a great deal
is there in it? for (...), rightly to divide the word, is not so much to divide
a Text, as we use to say, but to give every one his portion of the Word
according as he stands in need, Comfort to him to whom comfort belongs,
Reproof to him to whom reproof belongs, conviction to him, to whom conviction
belongs, instruction to him, to whom instruction belongs, and the like: This is
rightly to divide the word of God, and what a great deal of skill, and a great
deal of wisdom is there requisite to the doing of it?

Our Savior himself tells us so in the parable in the Gospel, Mat. 24.45. Who
then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord has made Ruler over his
household, to give them meat in due season, or as St. Luke has it more
explicitly, to give them their portion of meat in due season, (...) is his
word, every one his demensum, that is most agreeable for him, Luke 12.42. such
a one must be a faithful and wise servant that can do this, says our Savior
here, or a faithful and wise Steward, as he other Evangelist expresses it.

It is a point of wisdom then, and requires much dexterity, to know when to
play the Boanerges, and when to play the Barnabas: when to be a Son of thunder,
and when to be a son of Consolation, when to thunder out the terror of the Law
against men, and when to beseech them in the mild and still voice of the
Gospel: for both these must be done by the minister of Gods word, but when and
how to do them hic labor, hoc opus est.

Other places of the same Apostle unto Timothy, I will but mention only, for
brevity sake, as that of his 2 Timothy 4.2. Preach the word; be instant in season,
out of season: reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering and doctrine;
That also of his 1 Timothy 4.16. Take heed to thy self, and to the doctrine;
continue in them: for in doing this, thou shall both save thy self, and them
that hear thee. And what a great deal is there in either of both these?

And so likewise in that which he has unto Titus, Tit. 1.9. Holding fast the
faithful word as he has been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine,
both to exhort, and to convince the gainsayers. (...), that he may be able to
confute the adversaries, as the original word properly signifies; now what a
great deal of skill and ability is required to the doing of that, ye al easily
understand: for every one that is able to exhort, is not presently able to
confute: and yet every Minister of the Gospel ought as well to be able to
confute, as to exhort; as he ought to be (...), so he ought o be (...):
else what should become of such times as ours; wherein there is so much need of
Confutation of all manner of errors and heresies.

Besides the duty of Preaching, what a great deal of skill does it require for
to Catechize? what a great deal of dexterity to resolve scruples and cases of
Conscience? what a great deal of wisdom and experience to bind up broken
hearts, and wounded spirits? what a great deal of watchfulness to know the
state of the whole flock? and what a great deal of wary circumspection in his
carriage toward them all.

As for Catechizing, to lay the foundation well, that requires a wise
Master Builder, as the Apostle himself tells us, 1 Cor. 3.10. And indeed the
Master builders of the reformed Churches, went this way to work at the first
beginning of the reformation of Religion, which they performed with such
felicity of success, that the Catechismes of the two chiefest reformers of the
two great parties of protestants were accounted the usefullest of all their
other writings: for not only great Luther said it himself, that of all his own
works none did please him but his Catechism; and his book deservo arbitro (as
Sturmius relates that he read it in one of his Epistles:) but also great
Calvin's Catechism was inso high esteem in the Church of God, that it was
thought worthy to be translated into all the three learned Languages, both
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin: Tremellius putting it into the Hebrew, and Henry
Stephen into the Greek.

And herein the crafty Jesuits have learned to play the Apes of the Protestant
writers, as in studying the tongues, and many other things, so in this of
Catechizing: they knowing full well the great necessity of it; and so may we
among our selves by the ignorant backsliding of so many from the truth in these
days.

And as for resolving cases of conscience, as it is a very necessary duty of a
Minister, so it needs a very skilful and able Divine: and though he Popish
writers have herein got the start of our Protestant Divines, they having been
always accounted the greatest Casuists, although with abundance of dross in
them; yet ever since that godly-learned man, Mr. Perkins, did set Case-Divinity
on foot, by resolving so many cases of Conscience, in his long continued
preaching on that subject, many eminent Divines have since betaken themselves
unto it: as Dr. Ames, and Dr. Rivet upon the Decalogue; and diverse other in
these days; Dr. Ames confessing that his hearing Mr. Perkins preach thereupon
when he was a youth, made him ever after in love with that part of Divinity,
in his preface to his Cases of Conscience.

And so for the binding up of broken hearts, as it is a most sovereign part of
the ministerial office, so it requires a most knowing and experimental Divine
for to do it: a great deal of wisdom also and discretion must be used toward
such, and they are very tenderly to be handled. And as many worthy Ministers
are very excellent in this kind; so Reverend Mr. Greenham had in his time a
most singular faculty herein, whose works remain yet behind for us.

And for the careful inspection over the whole flock, the Minister as he has
curam animarum, so he has curam uniuscujusque animae, he has the charge of
every soul in his parish, and must give an account for every one that belongs
to his charge: according to that of the Apostle; Heb. 13.17. They watch for
your Souls, as they that must give account, etc. Which inspection over every
one in particular of the Flock, seems to be intimated in that complaint which
God makes of the Shepherds of Israel by his Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 33.4. The
diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick,
neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought agian
that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was lost, etc.
Now how great and weighty a burden this is, and what a discerning spirit it
requires in a Minister, every one may easily perceive; it is indeed the right
Episcopal part of every Ministers office, as the Original word properly imports
even this oversight over the whole flock, so as to take care of every one of
them as much as may be: according as St. Paul has it to the Elders of
Ephesus, Act. 20.28. Take heed to your selves, and to all the flock over which
the. Holy Ghost has made you overseers: (...), so the Greek runs. And as
well St. Peter, as St. Paul, 1 Pet. 5.2. The Elders which are among you, I
exhort: feed the Flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof,
etc. (...), is the word again.

Has he not the sick to visit, the ignorant to instruct, the unruly to
admonish the feeble minded to comfort, and these as well privately, and from
house to house, as publicly: agreeable to that notable example of St. Paul,
Act. 20.20. I have showed you, and have taught you publicly, and from house to
house.

And add to all these; what an exemplary pattern he ought to be to the whole
flock, and how unblameable in his carriage to them all: how he ought to preach
unto them by his gracious life, as well as by his zealous doctrine: according to
that observable passage of st. Jerome, in an Epistle of his to F^biola, Tanta
debet effe eruditio Ministri Dei, ut et gressus ejus, et motus, et universa
vocal^a sint; ut quicquid agit, quicquid loquitu^, sit doctrina populorum, in
one word that in every thing which he does he may always teach thereby. Which
is no more than what both St. Paul and St. Peter give in charge to Ministers:
St. Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.12. Be thou an example of the Believers, in
word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity and St. Paul
to titus, Tit. 2.7. In all things showing thy self a pattern of good works. And
as well St. Peter as St. Paul, 1 Pet. 5.3. Neither (...) being Lords over Gods
heritage, but being ensamples to the flock.

One thing more there is, which I count none of the smallest part of the
Ministerial burden, especially in these times of ours: and that is, the
Administration of the Sacraments; for though I be no patron of mixed communions
(as they call them) or a promiscuous reception of all sorts, unto the holy
Sacrament of the Lords supper, whether they be ignorant or scandalous: yet
seeing every Minister, as he is called a Minister of the Word and Sacraments,
so it is his duty to do both: me thinks all the wisdom and discretion that
can be, should be used by him, rather than wholly to fail of executing this
main branch of his office; Doubtless he ought as to be very conscientiously
prudent, so to be very prudently conscientious in this matter.

And so much the rather, because it has been always the devils main policy,
to cast in a bone of contention into the Church of God, about this holy
Sacrament; as appeared first by the Papists Transubstantiation, and afterward
by the Lutherans Consubstantiation, and now in our days, by this so much
controverted point of mixed Communions: by all which the Church has been so
rent and divided; as by nothing more; as Lavater in that excellent piece of
his, Historia Saeramentaria has evidently shown, that old wily Serpent, making
that to be the greatest cause of division among Christians, which ought to be
the greatest cause of union among them, as St. Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 10.17. We
being many are one bread and one body, for we are all partakers of that one
bread.

And as it requires so much skill, and so much prudence to manage well the
function of the Ministry: so in the next place is it not a work of much labor
too, and great pains? surely it must be a very laborious work, when in
Scripture the Ministers of God are compared to Husbandem, to builders, to
harvest-labourers, to Shepherds, to Watchmen, to Soldiers, to Nurses, and the
like. To husbandmen, and builders, ye may see them both in one verse, 1 Cor.
3.9. We are laborers together with God, ye are Gods husbandry, ye are Gods
building. To harvest-Labourers, that ye have in the Gospel, Mat. 9.38. Pray
ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth Laborers into
his Harvest. To shepherds, Ezekiel. 34.2. Son of man, prophesy against the
Shepherds of Israel. To Watchmen, Ezekiel. 33.7. Son of man, I have set thee a
watchman unto the house of Israel. To Soldiers, so St. Paul to Timothy, 2 Timothy
2.3. Thou therefore endure hardness, as a good soldiers of Jesus Christ. To
Nurses, so he speaks of himself, 1 These. 2.7. We were gentle among you, even
as a Nurse cherishes her children. All which are no small laborious works.

And in the last place, as for the dangers that attend this weighty calling of
the Ministry, and the enemies they have to grapple with, they are very many
and great; for there is no kind of men whatsoever, that have more opposition
usually against them, than the faithful Ministers of the Word, they are the
very Mark at which both the Devil and the world do especially aim; indeed both
Devil and world do strike at all good men, at all that carry the Image of God
about them: but most especially at the faithful Dispensers of Gods word, their
greatest rage have been always against them: they know full well that to be
true of all faithful Pastors, which was prophesyed of Christ the chief
Shepherd, Zach. 13.17. Smite the Shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered.

First, The Devil, he rages against the Ministers of God above all other men,
because he knows they give the greatest blow to him, and are the greatest
pullers down of his Kingdom: and therefore ye shall find him standing at the
very elbow of Joshua the high priest to resist him, when he went about so good
a work as the rebuilding of the Temple, Zach. 3.1. etc.

And ye know our Savior told St. Peter, that the Devil had a mind to winnow
him as Wheat: and not him only, but the rest of the twelve Apostles: for so the
words run in the plural number, Luke 22.31. Simon, Simon, Behold Satan has
desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat: (...). And the other
Apostle, St. Paul too, who was none of the twelves, he tells us of a messenger
of Satan to buffet him, 2 Cor. 12.7. and more expressly, that he was hindered by
him more than once from coming to preach to the Thessalonians, 1 These. 2.18.

Nay ye know he was not afraid to se^ upon Christ himself, who was the great
Prophet of his Church; and the Prince of Pastors; for he was no sooner
baptized and initiated into his prophetical office by a voice from heaven,
saying, This is my beloved Son hear him, but presently he was led up into the
wilderness to be tempted of the devil, Mat. 4.1.

Thus you see how the Devils greatest malice is always against the faithful
Ministers of the word, because it makes his Kingdom to fall down; according to
that saying of our Savior to his seventy Disciples, whom he sent abroad to
preach: I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven, Luke 10.18. down falls he
when the word is powerfully preached, as judicious Calvin has very excellently
expounded that place.

And as Gods Prophets and Ministers have the Devil most raging against them, so
does the world most rage against them too, the men of the world set themselves
against them on all hands.

That it was so in the time of the Old Prophets, ye have it out of Christ's own
mouth, Mat. 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets and
stonest them which are sent unto thee. Yea St. Stephen tells them, which of the
Prophets have not your Father persecuted? Act. 7.52.

And so it was with the Apostles afterward, and other Pastors and Teachers of
the Evangelical Church, as well as of the Jewish, the world have always been
about their ears: according as St. Paul tells us what fightings he had with
them, 2 Cor. 7.5. and therefore he bi^s Tymothy, in the name of all Gospel
Ministers: Fight the good fight of Faith, 1 Timothy 6.12.

And the reason of it, is the very same which our Savior gives, why the world
so extremely hated him, Joh. 7.7. The world cannot hate you (says he to his
kindred) but me, it haterh, because I testify of it, that the works thereof are
evil.

That is the reason then, why the world so hated him and all his faithful
Ministers since, it is because they reprove vice in them, men cannot endure to
be told of their faults. They hate him that rebukes in the gate, Amos 5.10.
for that was the place where the Prophets used to denounce woes.

Now it is the very office of the blessed Spirit in the mouths of his
Ministers, to reprove the world: as Christ himself says of him John, 6.8. When
he is come, he will reprove the Wir^^ of s^r^e. etc. There is no zealous
preacher that comes in the Spirit and Power of Elias, as John Baptist did, but
he has the many neaded Hidra of sin to conflict withal: and the more
zealous he is against it, the more does the world hate him, the more enemies
does he get amongst them.

Do ye not think that we are like to have opposition enough on all hands,
when we have both the opinions of men, and the vices of men, to speak against,
both errors in Doctrine, and errors in life to deal withal.

There are ever and anon errors and heresies springing up in the Church, but
especially in these our days, how many strange and prodigious opinions, have
been broached among us, all which we that are Ministers must oppose, it is our
duty to defend the Truth, against all encroaching error whatsoever; we above
all others must earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered unto
the Saints, as St. Jude speaks, for it is that which is committed to our
keeping, we are betrusted with it by God: according to that of the great
Apostle unto his Timothy, and it is the very farewell clause of his whole
Epistle, 1 Timothy 6.20. O Timothy, Keep that which is committed to thy trust; and
that is the precious treasure of truth, as both the context shows it, and
Expositours interpret it: Custodi Depositum, id est, deposi^um veritatis, says
Beza.

And how many hornets then must the Minister needs have about his ears, who
stands out at the staves end against the errors of the times, he shall have a
load of malice, and a load of defamation, and a load of undermining, laid upon
him from them that be contrary minded.

And do yet think he can expect less, when he comes to reprove the sins of
the time, and to tell men of their faults, O no! they cannot endure to have
their beloved sins meddled withal, to have their bosom sins touched: that
is, to touch the sore place, men kick and fling when the Minister comes to
that. Herod was delighted with John's preaching for a while, he heard him
gladly, Mark. 6.20. but no sooner does he meddle with his Herodias, his
darling sin, but off goes his head.

Now every faithful and zealous Minister knows he cannot discharge a good
Conscience, unless he boldly and impartially reprove sin in men, he shall
otherwise be guilty of their blood, Ezekiel. 338. and therefore he does his
duty, though he procures himself never so many enemies by it and never so much
danger follow upon it.

And thus ye have the first general head somewhat largely insisted upon to show
you what a weighty Calling it is to be a Minister. I shall be briefer in the
other two.

The Second general Head which I propounded to you, was the great peril and
hazard ye run, in the negligent performance and undue execution of this so
high and weighty a function, and that will appear. in these two main branches:
First, The Wrong which therein you do unto your selves: And then the wrong ye
do to others, to those that are committed to your charge.

For the Wrong which hereby ye procurd to Your selves; it is not small. Ye
become the unsavourest falt of the earth, fit for nothing but the Dunghill,
which is our Saviors own expression,Mat. 5.13. Ye are the salt of the earth:
but if the Salt has lost his favor, wherewith shall it be salted? it is
thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden under (...)
of men.

And when God begins to enquire into such unlavoury Salt, he does not easily
make an end, as these days of ours are a sufficient evidence of it, according
as he says by his Prophet Malachi of the Priests of those times, Man. 2.9. I
have made you contemptible and buse before all the people, according as ye
have not kept my ways, etc.

Besides, God does use to take away the gifts of such Ministers and deprive
them of those excellent endowments of mind, with which he had richly furnished
them, so that afterward they become men of no esteem for their parts: he takes
away their talent from them which was wrapped up in a Napkin, or hid in the
earth, as it is in the Gospel, Mat. 25.28. Take therefore the talent from him,
for use limbs and have limbs, as we use to say: so, use gifts, and have them:
use gifts, and increase them: Habe^^i dabitur, to him that has shall be given,
as it follows in the next verse.

But that which is the main of all, such Ministers endanger theirown fouls, and
run the hazard of losing everlasting salvation: and what a pitiful thing it
is that any of us whose office it is to convert men's souls, and to save the
souls of others, should fall short of saving our own souls; that Judas who had
once a place among the number of the twelve Apostles, must yet at length go to
his own place in hell, as it is, Act. 1.25. From which Judas by transgression
fell, that he might go to his own place.

For I will not enter into that needless question, whether on unconverted
Minister can convert souls, or no, though I know nothing against it in
scripture.

And yet this is not all, for such Ministers do not only endanger their own
salvation, but they shall have an heavier punishment of damnation than others,
being such men as knew their Masters Will more: as our Savior informs us, Luke
12.47. That servant which knew his Lords will, and did not according to it,
shall be beaten with many stripes; for he speaks there of that faithful and
wise Steward, whom his Lord shall make Ruler over his household, as appears out
of verse. 42. and those Stewards are his Ministers, in the judgment of the best
Expositors.

And as ye shall thus wrong your selves, if ye be not faithful Ministers of
the Gospel: so in the second place shall ye also wrong others, in no small
measure, even those that are under your charge and to whomsoever ye relate as
Ministers.

For instead of converting souls, ye will pervert them, instead of endeavoring
the salvation of others, ye will as much as in you lie procure their
damnation, whether by starving their souls in a negligent feeding of them, or
by infecting their souls with unwholesome and corrupt food, or else adificando
in gehennam, by building them up into hell through an evil example and vicious
life: when that is built up with one hand, is pulled down with another.

And what a fearful sin is it to be guilty of the blood of souls, as God
himself calls it by his Prophet Ezekiel? His blood will I require at thine
hands, Ezekiel. 33.8. and yet how many ways may a Minister be accessory to this
Soul-murther?

If David so earnestly prayed, Deliver me from bloud-guiltinesse, O God, Psalm.
51.14. how much more should every good Minister pray against this worst of
murders? for if God uses to make such inquisition after bodily murder, which
is the lesser, and so severely punishes it: then much more will he do it
after the other, which is the greater, even the murder of souls.

Surely an evil and unfaithful Minister is one of the greatest partakers of
other men's sins, of any rank of men, and has herein the greater account to
give unto God: so that not without great cause did that good man pray, Lord
forgive me my other men's sins.

And thus ye have the second general Head more briefly dispatched; to show you
the great peril and hazard ye run, if ye do not faithfully discharge such
a weighty Calling as this is which ye have undertaken.

The Third and Last general Head remains yet behind, and that is the great
reward, which ye may expect, upon the faithful discharge of your
ministerial-office; which though the ungrateful world should deny you, yet ye
should be sure to receive it at the hands of God: and that both here in this
life, and hereafter in the life to come.

And for the faithful Ministers reward here in this life.

First, Ye have the Promise of Gods assistance, that he will be with you in
the work, and will help to bear the burden with you: which is the Conclusion
of all St. Matthews Gospel, in the last verse of it: Go ye and teach all
Nations, etc. and lo I am with you always, even unto the end of the world;
Christ says, he will be with them even unto the end of the world: and
therefore it must be meant of all the faithful Ministers of the Gospel, while
the world shall stand, for the Apostles were not to live to the end of the
world.

And as ye have the promise of his assistance to help you forward in the work,
which many a faithful Minister has experimentally often found, beyond
expectation: so in the next place ye have the promise of his protection also,
to uphold and defend you against all the adversaries that ye shall meet withal
in your Ministry.

For he it is that holds the seven stars in his right hand. Rev. 1.16. that
is the seven Angels of the seven Churches, which are the Ministers of them,
verse. 20. Christ holds them fast in his right hand, against all opposition
either of world or Devil against them. And hereupon he so incourageth his
Prophet Jeremiah, in that very observable place, Jer. 1.18, 19 Behold, I have
made thee this day a defenced City, and an iron pillar, and brazen walls
against the whole land; and they shall fight against thee, but they shall not
prevail against thee for I am with thee, says the Lord, to de^^^er thee. And
the like encouragement does he give to his Apostle Paul, against all the
opposition which he should meet withal in the City of Corinth, Act. 18.9.10.
Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace, for I am with thee, and no
man shall set on thee to hurt thee, for I have much people in this City.

Besides, he has declared unto you in his word, how ill he takes it at the
hands of them that shall in any kind wrong you, or misuse you, yea or that
shall not give that respect or esteem which is due unto you, Luke 10.16. He
that despises you, despises me: and he that despises me, despises him
that sent me. But for those that harm and injure you, and set themselves as
enemies against you, there is a most formidable place of Scripture for them,
which I can never read without serious musing on it, and gaining encouragement
from it in no small degree: it is a direful imprecation by way of prediction
Deuteronomy. 33.11. And of Levi he said: Bless Lord his substance, and accept the
work of his hands: smite thorough the loins of them that rise against him, and
of them that hate him, that they rise not again.

And as he declares how he ill takes it at the hands of such as shall wrong you
and disrespect you, so on the contrary, how well he takes any kindness done
unto you, Mat. 10.41, 42. He that receives you, receives me: he that
receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward:
And whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones, a cup of cold
water only in the name of a Disciple, he shall in no wise loose his reward.
And this did clearly appear in the good Shunamitish woman, who showed so much
kindness to the Prophet Elisha, as to provide all things needful for his
entertainment as often as he passed by her house, 2 King. 4.10. for God
rewarded her with a Son being childlesse, verse. 16. and him raised to life
again, when he was dead verse. 35.

And though these rewards from without were not, yet the sweet inward peace and
comfort which arises to a man's self, out of a consciousnesse of the sincerity
of his faithful discharging of the Ministry, this alone were reward enough
here below.

But in the second place, the reward which you shall receive hereafter in
another world, the reward in heaven which remains for every faithful Minister,
that no doubt is exceeding great, and such as may thoroughly encourage you, and
prick you forward to the work.

For though we do not peremptorily determine with the Schoolmen among the
Papists, that there are several Aureolae, as they call them, several distinct
Crowns of glory, for several ranks of Saints in heaven: as one for Apostles,
another for Prophets, another for Martyrs and the like, among which they
foolishly reckon one for Virgins too: yet as we have sufficient ground in
Scripture for several degrees of glory in heaven, so we have enough there for
our encouragement, that the faithful Pastors of Gods Church will be more than
ordinarily rewarded for their labor in the kingdom of heaven.

For besides our blessed Saviors Euge in the Gospel: Well done thou good and
faithful servant, thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee
ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, Mat. 25.21.
Besides this, we have a more express place in the Prophesy of Daniel; Dan.
12.3. They that be wise, shall shire as the brightness of the firmament: and
they that turn many to righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever.

St. Paul calls the Thessalonians whom he had converted unto God, his Crown of
rejoicing in the day of the Lord Jesus, 1 These. 2.19. and St. Peter tells us of
an immarcessibilis gloriae corona, a Crown of glory that fades not away, which
shall be put upon every faithful Pastors head at the last day by Christ
himself, that (...) and chief Shepherd of his flock the Church: as ye have it
lively and sweetly laid forth, 1 Pet. 5.4. The Elders which are among you, I
exhort, feed the flock of God which is among you, etc. And when the chief
Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of glory that fades not
away. Here is the faithful Pastors Aureola, if they will needs have it so
called.

To which I will add but one notable saying more of that famous Father St.
Austin, in his Epistle to Valcrius: Nihil difficilius, laboriosius,
periculosius Episcopi, aut Presbyteri, aut Diaconi officio: sed apud Deum nihil
beatius, si eo modo milit etur quo noster imperator jubet: There is nothing
more hard, nothing more laborious, nothing more dangerous than the ministerial
office: and yet with God there is nothing more happy (says he) nothing more
rewarded in heaven, if it be faithfully executed as it ought.

And thus ye have the third and last general head laid forth unto you, the
great reward which shall certainly be conferred upon every faithful Minister
of the Gospel.

And now Brethren, out of all these three main considerations which I have here
mentioned unto you: that it is so high and weighty a Calling, that we run so
great a hazard in the negligent performance of it, and that on the contrary so
great a reward remains for every one that faithfully discharges it: let both
you that are this day newly initiated into it by Ordination, and all of us
also, whosoever else are of the same ministerial function, let us all be
stirred up to set our selves the more strenuously about it, and with all
carfulness and watchfulness for to manage it. That shall be my closing speech.

Labor to put in ure both the precept and the practice of the great Apostle
St. Paul: his Precept unto Archippus, Col. 4.17. And say to Archippus, take
heed to the Ministry which thou have received in the Lord, that thou fulfill
it; let that be the utmost both of your and our endeavor, to fulfill the
Ministry which we have received. And labor as well to follow the practical
example of the same great Apostle, as a most renowned pattern and president for
all Ministers while the world shall stand, it is Act. 20.24. But none of these
things move me, neither count I my life dear unto my self, so that I might
finish my course with Joy, and the ministry which I have received of the Lord
Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God. He says, that no affliction
whatsoever, neither bonds and imprisonment, nor martyrdom it self, should
withhold him from fulfilling his Ministry, and so finishing his course with
joy: agreeable to that Swannes song of his, which he uttered when he was
ready to be offered up in sacrifice for the faith of the Gospel, 2 Timothy 4.7. I
have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith:
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, etc. And
therefore this saying of his in the Acts, he spoke unto all the Elders of
Ephesus whom he had sent for unto him, propounding his own example before
them, whereby they might learn how to fulfill their Ministry: which is that
which both ye, and all other Ministers ought to be always learning how to
perform.

Which that ye may the better do, give me leave for a conclusion of all, to lay
you down briefly some helps and furtherances thereunto. I will first remove the
hindrances, and then give you the helps.

1 Take heed of an ambitious and proud Spirit, of an high and domineering
spirit, such, as would not only Lord it over Gods heritage, as St. Peter
speaks, but also over your fellow brethren in the Ministry: for this is just
Diotrephes his spirit, of whom St. John complains, that he was (...), One that
loved to have the preeminence, and to be leader of all, 3 John 9. I Wrote unto
the Church, but Diotrephes who loved to have the preeminence among them,
receives us not.

And indeed it was this that first brought in the typhus papalis in the Church.

First, They labored for the primacy, and that by degrees ushered in the
Supremacy, for the Bishop of Rome, had at first but primam sedem, before the
rest of the four Patriarchs of the Christian Church; it was this same (...),
and this same (...) which made him at length affect to be Episcopus Oecumenicus.

And though now Bishops be put down yet must every Minister among us beware of
any risings of a domineering spirit within him: for if as Luther was wont
sententiously to speak, that every man had a Pope in his belly: then surely
much more did he mean it of Clergy men, who have been ever too much addicted
to this fin.

Begin then to lay a low and deep foundation in humility: especially the
better gifted any of you be, or have the better parts, as the more dangerous
inlet unto pride: according to that of the Apostle, knowledge puffs up, 1
Cor. 8.1. And remember that qualification, which among the rest, the same
Apostle requires in those which are to be made Ministers, 1 Timothy 3.6. Not a
novice, least being lifted up with pride, he fall into the condemnation of the
Devil, he was very careful least any Minister should be tainted with that
Devilish and Luciferian sin of Pride, by which the Devils got so great a
fall: How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning? Isa.
14.12. which though it be literally understood of the great King of Babylons
fall, yet mystically of the Devils fall, in the judgment of Interpreters, who
was once a good Angel, and a bright shining star.

2 Take heed of a covetous spirit, of a lingering desire after preferments and
gainful places: for nothing will sooner Wyerdraw a Minister from a careful and
faithful discharge of his office, nothing will sooner make him turn a Balaam,
who loved the wages of unrighteousness as St. Peter speaks, 2 Pet. 2.15. and
nothing (if need be) will sooner make him turn from the truth, than that same
(...), that being given to filthy lucre, which both the great Apostles, do so
much inveigh against, 1 Timothy 3.3. 1 Pet, 5.2. And that it often makes men
swarve from the Truth, not only experience in all ages of the Church has made
it manifest, but St. Paul tells us plainly so, 1 Timothy 6.10. The love of money is
the root of all evil, which while some have coveted after, they have erred from
the faith (says he) which is meant of fides quae creditur, and not of fides
qua creditur: of the faith which we do believe, and not of that by which we
believe.

Do none of you then turn secular Priests in the truest sense: according to
that of the Apostle to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2.4. No man that warreth, intangleth
himself with the affairs of this life; after he had said unto him in the verse
before: Endure thou hardness as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. And according
to his own example toward the Corinthians, in that memorable Apophthegme of
his, worthy to be every good Ministers Motto, Non vestra quaero, sed vos, I
seek not yours but you, 1 Cor. 12.14.

3 Take heed of a temporizing and timeserving spirit, as another vice which is
a great obstruction to the faithful discharge of a Ministers office: when
Ministers are more ready by their practice, to interpret in the worst sense the
doubtful reading of that place to the Romans, than in the best sense, Romans
12.11. and are rather for (...), than (...): rather for being fervent in spirit
serving the time, than fervent in spirit serving the Lord. Although Beza says,
that in every authentical ancient Greek Copy, it is, (...), and so translated
in the vulgar Latin: and yet Erasmus would needs render it, Tempori
servientes, but there are few Scholars but know, how he followed it too well
by his practice, being neither fish, nor flesh, neither perfect Papist, nor
perfect protestant, as it is commonly said of him now, and was so then, when
he lived in the beginning of Luthers reformation.

But such a base compliance with the times (be they what they will) as it
becomes not a Minister of God, of all other men, so it will much cool his
zeal to God and his truth; and by degrees take away all his fervor from an
impartial reproving of the sins and corruptions of the time, which he ought to
do.

4 Take heed of a vain glorious spirit, of all desire of applause from men in
the preaching of the word, as the very bane of all faithful Dispensing of the
Gospel: for this is for men directly to preach themselves, instead of preaching
Christ, which the Apostle does so labor to ward off from himself, 2 Cor. 4.5.
We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; according as he explains
it more fully, in his other Epistle to them, 1 Cor. 2.4. And my speech, and my
preaching, was not with entising words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of
the spirit, and of power. Indeed it is this powerful preaching, which must do
the deed for the conversion of souls: not as if there were no use of an holy
eloquence, which is an excellent gift of God, for then the holy spirit would
never have noted it out unto us, that Apollos was an eloquent man, Act. 18.24.
and we know that he had his part in watering that great Church of Corinth, as
St. Paul had in planting of it: I have planted, Apollo watered, but God gave
the increase, 1 Cor. 3.6. and there was St. Chrysostom among the Ancient
Fathers, and St. Bernard among the middle age writers, who did excel in this
gift, in their frequent preaching, and were the powerfullest preachers in their
times.

But when men will make use of this and other of their gifts, only for their
own credit sake, and to cry up themselves in the Pulpit, without making the
glory of God and the good of others their chiefest and their only aim, this is
that which will make a Minister of the Gospel fall short in his faithfulness,
and to seek himself, 1 These. 2.4, 6.

St. Jerome, that devout and learned Father, has a very pious passage to this
purpose, in an Epistle of his to Nepotian, Docente te in Ecclesia, non clamor
populi, sed gemitus suscitetur: lacrymae auditorum, lauds tuae sint; Let the
many weeping eyes, the sighs and groans of thy auditors, be thy commendation
when thou preachest (says he) and not the vain applause of men, and indeed it
is that which will commend thee with God, and with all good men.

Thus having briefly removed the hindrances, let me now more briefly propound
unto you the helps and furtherances; and so an end.

1 Be much in prayer, as that which will much help forward the fulfilling of
your Ministry: for if Prayer be the Christians daily exercise, then how much
more should it be the Ministers daily and continual exercise? And if any thing
may be obtained by Prayer, then how much need has a Minister of God to be
frequent at it, who has so many things to pray for, in behalf of so weighty a
Calling? and if our Savior himself spent a whole night in prayer unto God,
when he was to choose his twelve Apostles, setting them apart for the work of
the Ministry, Luke 6.12, 13. then how much far greater reason, has every
Minister among us, to be much in prayer unto him for himself, that he may be
able to go well thorough with so hard a task.

The practice of great Luther is very famous for this, and very exemplary for
all of us Ministers: who though he was a man of the most Heroical and undaunted
spirit that we read of, yet he made a great deal of more use of his vehement
spirit of Prayer, whereby to set upon the work: for so we find it recorded of
him, that he did Tres ad minimum horas, easque studiis aptissimas in orationem
ponere; spend no less than three hours daily by himself in prayer, and those
which were the fittest hours for his study too; And I believe that he lost no
time in so doing, toward his Ministerial employments.

2 Be diligent in study and meditation, that ye may this way also be the
better furnished and prepared for so weighty a function: for as all our
studying will do little good, except we further it by our frequent praying, so
all ur praying will not be sufficient except we join industrious study and
meditation with it, both which together are the means appointed by God.

And therefore is is an injunction given by St. Paul to Timothy: Till I come,
give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine, 1 Timothy 4.13. as well to
reading, as to preaching: and so much more to reading, because so much the
better to preaching; and in the next verse but one, Meditate upon these things,
give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to all. Whence
Luther again added this second help to the former, in another sententious
saying, which he was wont to utter: Tria faciunt Theologium, Oration,
Meditatio, Tentatio: these three things make an accomplished Divine, Prayer,
Meditation, and Temptation; for as for the latter of the three, himself was so
much exercised with the Devils Temptations, that he thought him the most
experienced Divine that was most troubled with them: and indeed next unto
Christ himself, I have not read of one more assaulted with them, than this
greatest Engine of the Churches reformation.

3 Labor to Preach out of love to the peoples souls, Which Christ has
redeemed at so high a price: as St. Paul intimates to the Elders of Ephesus,
when he charge them to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with
his own blood, Act. 20.28.

For seeing, what shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world, and lose
his own Soul, as our Savior says? how should we Ministers be moved with
bowels of Compassion unto the souls of men, to draw as many of them as possible
we can out of the Devils kingdom, it being our office to save Souls.

To which end, me thinks there is such a remarkable saying of the great
Apostle concerning himself, that I know not another in all his Epistles which
has more wrought upon me as a Minister, or may more move any Conscientious
Minister, if seriously thought upon: it is, 2 Cor. 12.15. I will very gladly
spend and be spent for you, though the more abundantly I love you, the less I
be loved. Here was love indeed to the souls of his people.

4 And Lastly, Labor to preach out of love to the Lord Jesus, the great
Shepherd of the sheep; and whose they are, John 10.14. which if we do, it
will make us the better do the former duty; for our love to Christ, will force
us to bear love to men's souls, which he has so dearly bought. And if once the
love of Christ come to constrain us, as the Apostle speaks, then we shall play
the zealous and the faithful Ministers to purpose: it is only this that can
make us become martyrs if need be, and to lay down our lives for the Sheep,
and for the chief Shepherd too: ask old Ignatius else, that most Ancient
Father, when a little before his glorious martyrdom he uttered these most
affectionate words, Amor meus crucifixus est; my Love was crucified.

And therefore was it, that no less than three several times together, Christ
said unto St. Peter: Simon son of Jonas; love thou me? feed my Sheep, John
21.17. which I could wish both you, and I, might always hear sounding in our
ears, as a most sovereign motive to fulfill our ministry to the utmost of our
endeavors: Love thou me? feed my Sheep. And which as it was in a manner the
conclusion of our Saviors words, a little before his Ascension into heaven: so
it shall be the conclusion of my Exhortation unto you.

FINIS.

