Britains Glory: BEING A RELATION OF THE SOLEMNITY Wherewith the English Nation
Residing in LIVORNE, Entertained the Joyful Tidings of His Sacred Majesty's
Happy Return to His ROYAL THRONE.

JULY 13. Stilo Novo.

LONDON: Printed for Edw. Farnham in Pope's Head Alley, 1660.

Britains Glory.
THE News being arrived by a Corriere dispatched from London to these
Merchants, of his Maj^sti^s appearance at the said place, and of the
magnificent preparations there made for his entry, confirmed by the printed
paper; There were in this City appointed four persons viz. M^. Henry Brown,
Walwin Guascon, Thomas Goddard, and Gilbert Seerl, These with Joseph Kent
superintendent, chose other Counselors, to consent and resolve what was
needful for a demonstration of the Nations gladness and resentment of his
Majesty's Recovery.

After the expense of some days by a great number of laborers, and direction
of Engeniers was framed in midst of the Piazza a losty Fabrique, supported by
four great Columns curiously wrought with Carved work, and Painting, which with
other Inventions added Splendor to the Show on the days of Feasting.

The first of those three chosen for that purpose being Wednesday the 13th.
July. The design was proclaimed early in the morning from the mouths of a 150
Chambers.

About ten of the Clock began a peal of Ordnance fired aboard seventeen English
Ships within the rode, which lasted all day, during which time the harmony of
Trumpets was heard throughout the City, who with Peach-colour'd-Banners
attended the Prizes; by Intervalls refreshing themselves at the Merchants
Habitations, who generally for these days kept Open house.

About dinner time, the Feast being that day in that of Morgan Read Cons; the
arms of the King were with great rejoicing reared; at which action, as also on
the arrival of the Deputys and Captain of the Merchant Ships were fired 20
Chambers, the like at Mr. Dethicks, where were entertained the Commander of the
men of War and other Gentlemen, and every health proclaimed by their report,
on a sign given by their Butlers of its promotion.

Near seven at night they began an orderly March along the Great-street, where
they were encountered by a multitude of strangers, whose curiosity had made
leave their own home to view our English, who richly accoutred their Hats laden
with ribbon of no mean price, where through the Gold and Silver the silk seemed
to peep and ow its peach color for the King.

At the house of Mr. Will. Mico in the said great-street was seen the Portrait
of the King in a rich frame under a Canopy of Damask

Within Mr. Dethicks appeared a great square Lanthorn having on one side
painted the Kings Arms with the French Motto, Dieu et Mon Droit, and on the
other a flourishing Oak with golden-fruit, on the Boughs were placed three
royal Crowns with this inscription, Floret querous, Rex amplius. At Mr.
Sidny's was another Lanthorn Octangular with the Atchivements of the Kings of
Great Britain, and on the contrary side a Dragon devouring Cromwell: others of
this nature were seen at Mr. Child his house and many of the Nation.

From Mr. Mollish and Brown's was continually distributed bread and wine to all
comers, and along the Neighborhood to the house of Charles Longland was
scattered money and comsets, being a place of great concourse for the indigent
rabble, whom the Soldiers could not impede from mustering in troops.

The Feast ended. the Pretenders entered the Lifts, being 12 Lads habited in the
English Livery, who placed on a row, the sign being, given made trial of their
Active running, and the Prize was given him, shook first Hand with the Goal,
being some else of damask embellisht with Ribbon and a Satin pendant, whereon
was portraid the Kings Arms.

This ended gave way to the Bonefires, which were kindled, as also a train to
150 Chambers and numerlesse Rockets; besides which on the Fabrique (where were
fixed lights on all sides to discover the rarity of the Painting,) were placed
fire Serpents affording a delightful though irregular motion in the Air; and
after the Consumption of diverse Gironels or Fire wheels succeeded two Pyramids
stuffed with Fire-work with exquisite order, the Windows and Turrets of the
English shining with Torches and Candles burning some hours together.

Wednesday the 14th was renewed the firing the Chambers, the distribution of
Bread and Wine, and scattering Comfets and Money, with the loud-mouth's Guns
roaring from the Ships.

About four of the Clock appeared a Triumpham Chariot, on the Piazza drawn by
Horses, upon it was seen a woeddy meuntain, thereon a gilt Oak rich of Silver
leaves, and on the Boughs three Crowns Royal beset with Pearl, in the midst
of this Chasriot richly girdled with a fair Gallery with four silver infants at
the corners, sat the Majestique statute of Peace, about her lay scattered Arms
and the neglected implements of War;

On the front of the Gallery was written this verse. Arbor honoretur, cujus nos
Vmbra tuetur.
To' th Stock we will homage yield
Whose shade does prove our shield.


This no small Pageant being born twice round the Piazza was at last settled to
the public view of the people, and right against the place of the
forementioned motto, sprang from the foot of the said Hill two Fountains of
Wine, which continued running for all comers during the Feast.

Under the greatest Pageant, on a great Pedestal of the same work stood a fair
statue of the King richly adorned and glittering, by the mixture of Gold
interwoven in the habit, on the top of the said Pile was a St. George on
horseback with Lance in rest in a posture of wounding an Overgrown Dragon
under him.

At Mr. Mico's was added the portraiture of General Monck placed beneath that
of the King, with addition of many Tablets with Motto's and fireworks, and a
continual clangor of Trumpets.

The hour for the race being come, the Great-street swarmed with Ladies,
strangers, and Citizens, who in their Coaches were seen laden with those
additional attractives of bravery.

Not inferior was the appearance of 12 English Cavaleers, bravely mounted,
their Horses-mains plaited with Ribbons, who accompanied the Prize for that
day, which was Cloth of Gold, and a banner with the Kings Arms; while this was
conducting before the Judges, the Deputies were seen with a high Civility
presenting Poems wrought in honor of his Majesty, to the Ladies and Gentry.

After this the Bridles of six high metald Barbs were slipped, whose eager
spirits not brooking delay, did not precisely start on the sign given,
wherefore none could rightly be judged Victor.

In the evening Torches and Lanthorns were alighted at each man's door, the
Chambers had again found their voices, and the fire works were renewed on the
Pageant.

After this the Triumphant Chariot was brought from the Piazza, and conducted
by a number of Torches before Mr. Mico's door, by whom were made an Noble
Invitation, the street by the multitude of Torches resembling noon day; From
within the Chariot was heard a Symphony of diverse instruments, and by exquisity
Musicians were sung diverse Ayrs to a Person of Quality in that House, whereof
the crowd were partakers.

The harmony ceasing, the Banquet was prepared, to which came the Governor of
the Arms with the ^fficers, and sundry Merchants of the City It would swell
this relation to a volume to describe the magnificence of the Supper, the
delicacy of the Pare, and generosity of the Wines tendered to the Palats of more
then 50 guests. It Was indeed extraordinary, and no less to see so many Glasses
of sundry shapes and several walks (like- Chessemen) whose Leader was one of
six foot high, and of an indifferent Capacity.

It happening that on this day was Celebrated the Festival of the Grand Dukes
Nativity, in honor whereof the Nation had ordered the English Ships to proceed
on firing their Guns, which they did. To the increase of this Mirth the
Governor of the Arms being at the Banquet on purpose began six-glasses to the
Health of his Majesty, and in demonstration of the unspeakeable joy possessing
his Highness of Tuscany, for his Majestys happy return to his Royal Throne, the
sign being given, the Guns from over the Colonels gate and the Pisan (which
had been silent 40 years) began; and so round the Town rang a Royal Peal, which
being so unexpected, caused no small astonishment to the Company, who in
requital began that of the Grand Duke, which was proclaimed by the thundering
of the Guns aboard Ship, which continued almost all night.

Thursday the 15th, Barbaresco (a Gent: Groom) pretending that his Horse who
had got, and kept the start of the rest the day before was voted Victor, and
deserved the Prize notwithstanding the dispute; wherefore the Judges were or
dered to consult with the Governor and Auditors; after many depositions they
bandied, the result was that the starting not being fair were should run
again the next day.

The Triumphant Chariot being brought on the Piazza to its station, the
Conduits were again opened, whence the thirsty were satiated. At noon the
Nation, were invited and plentifully Feasted at Mr. Mellish and Browns, where
was daily distributing Bread and Wine, and scattering Money to the poor, and
also the Health of his Majesty and Royal Family went round, to every one were
fired 32 Chambers, so that the incessant noise seemed a continued Battle;
Others of the Nation were feasted by Mr. Serle.

The hour of seven at night being ordained for a Prize of Cloth of Silver, the
reward of the nimblest rowers at Sea, people swarmed at the Boca or Port, on
the walks leading to the Fortress and Mould were Coaches crammed with Ladies,
though many were got into Felucca's, and notwithstanding such a press of Boats
that carried people, the Competitors were scarce discerned. However it was
infinitely pleasing to see so many small Vessels ordered in Squadrous, which
with their continual firing made it seem a Sea fight which lasted two hours.

After sunset the Bonefires were renewed and 200 Chambers shot off. On the
Grand Pageant besides Rockets and Gironels (as were on the foregoing nights)
fire was given to a dreadful Dragon, from whose jaws and eyes flew such a
quantity and variety of flame that it was esteemed the finest rarity had yet
been seen.

The Livornesi desirous to augment the Pastime of that night, had framed a
Pageant drawn with horses richly trapped, which about night when the fireworks
ceased they brought on the Piazza guarged with men in rich Liveries and
Torches: This they fixed at the Governors door. Thereon was a beautiful Pile or
Structure representing the grot or den of Sleep circled with Golden Stars,
therein were exquisite Musicians in habit alike with fair Plumes making a
consort of voice to the Harmony of diverse Instruments Represented, Sleep
awakened by so loud Acclamations for the present Joy, and courting certain
Gentlemen to participate, which they did by an addition of Music. Which device
being so suddenly put together was little inferior to the rest of the
Inventions.

This Pageant having made its Exit, the English Nation to honor the Governor
brought another of theirs upon the Piuzza attended with a Cavalcata and store
of Torches, placing it before the Palace, where with excellent Music the time
was spent till midnight.

The Festivals had ended here but the second Prize still depending, another
race was agreed to be run on Friday the 16th, which coming at the horu
appointed the steeds were ranked, and on the Trumpets sound they fairly started
and ran, the premio assigned the Deserver.

But because the conclusion of these Rejoycings would not have suited with the
magnificence they were begun if only this Race had been the Period; About
sunset was seen in the Piazza another Pageant whereon the King Arms were
elevated and of a large dimension, and when the light had fully given way to
darkness, the Gironels and other fireworks on the upper part played. After
them a great quantity of Reckets wherewith the said Arms very Artificially
were compassed, whence very often they dispersed pretty fancies, the splendour
of Lights and Torches being as the former; so this night as Mr. Sidneys.

For the close, fire was put to a great Gironel which in form of a Diadem
Crowned the said Arm's, which in a moment vented so many flames, at once
covering the Piazza, as if fire had rani'd from Heaven, with which and the
general applause of the multitude the Show was ended.

FINIS.

