The IRISH PAPERS, Containing the Lord Digbyes Letter, And the Lord Inchiquins
answer, with other special Passages of the Overtures concerning the whole
design in Ireland, The Plot of the Rebels discovered: And preparations for
the coming in of the Marquisse of ORMOND to the Parliament, whose strength in
Dublin is between 5. and 6000. Men.

October 1. 1646.
These Jrish Papers are appointed to be printed, and are published according
to Order.



LONDON, Printed by F. Leech, Anno Dom. 1646.

A Copy of the Lord George Digby's Letter to the Lord Inchiquine.
My Lord,
I Have several times (While I was in England) endeavored (though
unsucksesfully) to convey unto your Lordship this truth, that amongst all the
Calamitites of my Country, and misfortunes to the King my Mr. there has not
happened any thing of a more near, and personal affliction to me, then the
separation from his service, and interests a person from whom I had so high a
value, and particular a friendship, as for your Lordship: and upon whose
affection, and abillities I had founded so great part of my solidest hopes for
his Majesty's Restoration.

And really (my Lord) how opposite courses soever, we have since run, and
appear still engaged in: I must profess that I have ever cherisht all the
arguments I could possibly raise to persuade my self that either some strange
mistake, or some desperate malice of others have occasioned this separation:
And that only the impossibility of our meeting to clear them had continued it.

Wherefore (my Lord) we being now both upon a sceene, where it will depend
merely upon our own wills to give our selves that satisfaction, concerning one
another opinions, and actions, (which a much less kindness then ours was,
might challenge.)

I send this not only to invite, but even to conjure Your Lordship, to pay
that duty to former friendship, as to agree of the place, and manner where
(upon the mutual security of our own honors) I may wait upon you, and enjoy
the happiness of an hours or twos Conference with you, from which I hope
their may be much advantage produced to the public, and am most assured, at
least of much satisfaction to our selves, since certainly, either I shall have
so much reason to work upon you, or yours so much power on me as though not
to alter my opinion in relation to the public, yet so far to inlighten me in
what concerns my own particular, as not to let my public engagements in the
contrary way be any longer any impedement to my resuming in a private one, the
affection wherewith I was formerly.

My Lord; Your Lordships most affectionate humble servant. George Digby.
K^lkenny, Sept. the 2d 1646. To the Right Honorable the Lord Inchequin:

This letter was sent from Kilkenny after that the Lord Digby was come thither
with the Marquess of Ormond, and the Forces from Dublin.

The Lord Inchequin having received this letter, by a messenger from the Lord
Digby, peruseth it, disdaines the perfidious traducement of it; and returns
his Lordship a plenary answer as follows.

The Copy of the Lord Inchequins Answer to the Lord Digbies Letter.
My Lord:
THe place you are now in, whom I know to be a person in whom his Majesty
reposed so much trust, And the peace now concluded by His Majesty's authority
to the utter ruin (as I conceive) of all that profess the Protestant Religion
in this Kingdom, and submit thereunto; have evidenced to the whole world those
just grounds that caused my separation from that Your Lordship is pleased to
call his service, and interests, though I assure my self it tends to the ruin
of both.

I find Your Lordships opinion, in relation to the public so settled, that I am
not so vain to entertain a hope of altering Your Lordship by my reasons: And
I am very sure (though I must acknowledge your reasons and abilities to be
great) my resolutions are built upon such a foundation as can never be moved:
And therefore cannot imagine what advantage can be derived to the public by
our personal meeting, the honor whereof J may not (for any particular
respect) allow my self. And for the private friendship (with the mention
whereof you are pleased to honor me) the public impediments being removed, J
shall be ambiti^us to have it renewed, and shall also account it an honor to be
esteemed by you,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble servant Inchiquin.
Cork the 9th of Sept. 1646. For the Lord Georg Digby;

But the mean while the Lord Castle-haven informs the Marquisse of Ormond
that a Plot is taid against him, and the Lord Digby by the old Nalive Irish, to
cut them off, and that the Assembly of the Catholic Clergy are designing to
declare the supreme Counsel perjured, and to excommunicate them for
concluding that peace without them. This causes Digby and Ormond to have back
to Dublin with their forces, the Clergy of Dublin commend the work, pray to
have their Hirarchy and Book of Common Prayer continued, But the Popish Clergy
at Waterford declare the supreme Counsel to be perjured, and proceed to
excommunication, send out their curs^s, and thunderbolts, and resolve to
advance the popish Religion, or else to yield to no peace, and after many
meetings, and diverse consultations had in that assembly, at last they resolve
to send Propositions to the Marquisse of Ormond, whereunto if he will consent
then they will yield to a peace, else declare open War against the power of
the King, as well as against the Parliament.

The Marquisse of Ormond hereupon musters up his strength in Dublin, which
amount to 5. or 6000. men able to bear arms, which if he will declare
himself for the Parliament (as some hope and expect)) freland will (probably)
be an easier work to (...) then was before thought on, for entertainment
whereof there are preparations to some Overtures.

FINIS.

