FIVE NEW PLAYS, ( Viz.) THE Madd Couple well matched. THE Novella. THE Court
Beggar. THE City Wit. THE Damoiselle.


By Richard Brom.



LONDON* Printed for Humphrey Moseley, Richard Marriot, and Thomas Dring, and
are to be sold at their Shops, 1653.

portrait Reader, lo here thou will two faces find,
One of the body, the other of the mind;
This by the Graver so, that with much strife
We think Brom dead, he is drawn so to the life
That by's own pen's done so ingeinously
That who reads it, must think he nere shall die.
A. B.
J. (...)ss Sculpsit.


TO THE READERS.
BELOVED,
BEING to write to a multitude of you, (for I know you will be many) I forbear
Epithets, because the same will not fit all; and I hate to make difference
among Friends. I have often considered with my self, whether I were best to
Dedicate this Book or no; and I have thought on the maine ends of Dedications,
which I find generally to be Flattery or Want. To the one my nature was ever
averse: And (were my Debts all paid to me and by me) I should not be much
concerned in the other. As for the two ordinary pretenses, namely, Gratitude,
or Patronage, like Religion and Liberty, they are made but the Vizors to
somewhat else. For is it not a high piece of Gratitude, when an Author has
received favors from his Mecaenas, to requite him with a Book; and to take,
or expect, two or three Pieces from him for it, when another man shall buy the
same Book of the thriving Stationers, for half a Crown? And for Patronage or
Protection, I would feign know, if an Author writes like a Cockscombe, whether
any Patron can protect him from being laughed at. And he that writes well, makes
every one his Patron without a Dedication.

But in Epistles of this nature, something is usually begged; and I would do so
too, but, I vow, am puzzled, what. It Is not acceptance, for then you will expect I
should give it; it is not Money, for then I should loose my labor; it is not
praise, for the Author bid me tell you, that, now he is dead, he is of
Falstaffs wind, and cares not for Honor; it is not pardon, for that supposes a
fault, which (I believe) you cannot find. But, if you will know what it is, it
is, that you would expect nothing else of Preface, or Apology, from

Yours, as his own, A. BROM.

A Praeludium to Mr. RICHARD BROMES Plays.
THen we shall still have Plays! and though we may
Not them in their full Glories yet display;
Yet we may please our selves by reading them,
Till a more Noble Act this Act condemn.
Happy will that day be, which will advance
This Land from dirt of precise Ignorance;
Distinguish Moral Virtue, and Rich Wit,
And graceful Action, from an unfit
Parenthesis of Coughs, and Hums, and Haes,
Threshing of Cushions, and Tau^o^ogies.
Then the dull Zelo^s shall give way, and fly,
Or be converted by bright Po^sie.
Apollo may enlighten them, or else
In Scottish Grots they may conceal themsel^es.
Then shall Learned Johnson reassume his Seat,
Revive the Phoenix by a second heat*
Create the Globle anew, and people it,
By those that flock to surset on his Wit.
Judicious Beaumont, and the Ingenious Soul
Of Fletcher too may move without control.
Shakespeare (most rich in Humors) entertain
The crowded Theaters with his happy vein.
Davenant and Massinger, and Sh^rley, then
Shall be cried up again, for Famous men.
And the Dramatick* Muse no longer prove
The peoples Malice, but the peoples Love.
Black, and white Friars too, shall flourish again,
Though here have bin none since Queen Mary's reign.
Our Theaters of lower note in those
More happy days, shall scorn the rustic^ Prose
Of a Jack pudding, and will please the Rout,
With wit enough to bear their Credit out
The Fortune will be lucky, see no more
Her Benches bare, as they have stood before.
The Bull take Courage from Applauses given,
To Echo to the Taurus in the Heaven.
Lastly, St. James may no aversion show,
That Socks, and Buskins tread his Stage below.
May this Time quickly come, those days of Bli^^e
Drive Ignorance down to the dark Abisse.
Then (with a justly attributed praise)
Wee^ change our faded Broom, to deathlesse Baies.
Aston Cokaine.

To the Stationer, on the publishing Mr. Bromes Comedies.
SInce Poems of this nature, honest Friend,
Do, of themselves, nor praise nor discomend
An Author or his Work; but He, and It,
Must by the Readers Palate rise or set;
What need we write Encomiums, or expose
Our judging Rhymes, to be laughed at in Prose?
We Are like Godfathers (as they are used of late)
Not to Engage for Children, but give Plate.
And truly scarce there is a Poet known,
That praises others wit, but claws his own.
But it is the Custom, and who will not submit,
Must be esteemed a Schismatic in wit:
And therefore in obedience to the power,
I Will tell the World, I Have read these Poems over,
And in them find so natural a vain
Of clean, rich Fancy, in so pure a strain:
That I may safely say, who does not love it,
Cannot for his life write any thing above it.
This witty Pen, this mirthfull Comic style,
Makes us at once both serious, and smile.
Wraps serious truths in fab'lous mysteries,
And thereby makes us merry, and yet wise.
No Gods, or Goddesses his rimes supplied,
One he adored, and all the rest defied.
No stradling Tetrasyllables are brought
To fill up room, and little spell, or naught.
No Bumbast Raptures, and no lines immense,
That Is called (by the courtesy of England) sense.
But all is so plain, that one may see, he made it
TO inform the understanding, not invade it.
And the designs so probable, that though
They be not true, it is like they may be so.
Thus Travellour-like, I do inform our Nation,
Being returned, what is my Observation.
But if, as Coriat did, I do relate
Buildings, and Gallowses, not Acts of State;
Pardon my want of skill, and I Will be Debtor
To him, that on perusal notes things better.
Alex. Brom.

Upon the Ingenious Comedies of Mr. Richard Brom.
SEE the strange twirle of Times! when such poor things
Outlive the Dates of Parliaments, or Kings!
This Revolution makes exploded Wit
Now see the fall of those that ruined it.
And the Condemned Stage has now obtained
To see her Executioners Arraigned.
There Is nothing permanent; those high great men,
That rose from Dust, to Dust may fall again.
And Fate so orders things, that the same hour
Sees the same man both in Contempt, and Power.
For the Multitude, in whom the power does lie,
Do in one breath cry Hail, and Crucify.
Time was, when Learning, Poesy, and Wit,
Were counted Sacred things, and hard to get.
Time was, when Plays were justly valued, when
Poets could laugh away the Crimes of men.
And by Instructive Recreations teach
More in one hour, then some in ten do preach.
But Times are changed; and it is worth our note,
Bishops, and Players both suffered in one Vote.
And reason good, for they had cause to fear 'em, ('em.
One did suppress their Schisms, and the other jeere.
Bishops were guiltiest, for they swelled with Riches,
The Other had naught, but Verses, Songs, and Speeches.
And by their ruin, the State did no more,
But robb the Spittle, and unrag the poor.
And the Stern Poet, challenging as due
His ancient right, with freedom to speak true;
Dived into secrets, and 'cause he would not be bribed
To silence, nor compliance, was proscribed.
While those in Cloakes, and double Caps, so long,
So long did thrash in their inspired throng;
Till at the last, instead of Curbing Sin,
By corrupt lives, and jars, they brought it in.
But now new Stars shine forth, and do pretend,
Wit shall be cherisht, and Poets find a Friend.
This makes these sleeping Poems now creep forth,
As innocent of wrong, as full of worth.
Where Vice, and Vanity, are laughed to scorn,
And unstained Virtue to the Skies is born.
May this Work prove successful, and we find
Those men, that now are Powerful, to be kind!
And give encouragement to Wit, and Worth,
That things of Weight may come with boldness forth!
For, to the being of a happy State,
Pleasure, and Profit must Incorporate.
And if we in our Bellies place our sense,
'Twixt Beasts, and us, pray what is the difference?
Poets are the Custodes of our Fame,
Were It not for Homer, where is Achilles Name?
Let Soldiers then protect, while Poets praise;
Since that, which Crowns the Brows of Both, is Baies.
ALEX. BROM.

PROLOGVE.
HEre you're all met, and look for a set speech,
Put into Rhyme, to court you, and beseech
Your Worships, but to hear and like the Play,
But I, I vow, have no such part to say.
I Am sent a woing to you, but how to do 't,
I have not the skill; it is true I Have a new Suite,
And Ribbons fashionable, y^lipt Fancies,
But for the Complements, the Trips, and Dances,
Our Poet cannot abide um, and he swears,
They Are all but cheats; and sugared words but jeeres.
He Is harkening there: and if I go about
To make a Speech, he vows, h^'le put me out.
Nor dare I write t'you: therefore in this condition,
I Will turn my courtship into admonition.
When a good thing is profer'd, don't be nice,
Our Poet vows, you shall not be profer'd twice.
The Persons of the Comedy.
Careless, a young wild Heir.

Sir Val. Thrivewell, his Uncle that adopted him Heir.

Saleware, a Citizen and a Cuckhold.

Saveall, Sir Valentines demure Steward.

L. Lovely, a Wencher.

Bellamy, a woman disguised, and his Steward.

Wat, a blunt fellow, Carelesses Servingman.

Old Bellamy.

Lady Thrivewell.

Mrs. Alicia, Salewares light wife

Mrs. Crostill, a rich Vintners Widow, and humorous.

Phoebe, Careless his Whore.

Closet, an old C^one, Nursekeeper to L. Thrivewell.

Apprentices.

Servingmen.

And Attendants.

1. Mad couple.

2. Novella.

3. Beggar.

The Scene LONDON.

A MAD COUPLE WELL MATCHED.
ACT. I.
SCENE. I.
Carlesse, Wat. Car. THou have delivered my Letter?


Wat. Yes Sir, to Mr. Saveall your Unkles friend: But he has stood your friend
so long, and so often, to so little purpose in moving your Uncle for you, that
he holds it utterly in vain, to urge him any further, he told me.


Car. Thou should have told him, I would not be so answered.


Wat. Yes; and then he would have told me, let your Master take his course.


Car. Then you should have told him again, I have taken all the courses I could,
or as any Gentleman can to maintain my self like one; But all my courses are
run out, and I have not breath, nor know any ground whereon to begin a new one,
unless that thing my Uncle sets me up again, nor have I any means to attain
to that, but by his Mediation.


Wat. Then would he have told me again, what all your courses have been.
Namely, running into debt by all the ways can be imagined, and cheating by all
could be invented, then that the said thing, (as you call it) your Uncle,
before he cast you quite off, had redeemed you out of Prison, and several
holds, within the space of 15. Months 14. times.


Car. That was not once a Month then, or if it had, what had that been to him?
'twas I that suffered, thou should have told him, not he.


Wat. He would have told me then again, That several Redemptions, cost your
Uncle at least 2000 l. And that upon your last revolt when he quite gave you
over for a castaway, two years since, he cast the third thousand with you,
upon condition never to afflict him more. And then he Married in hope to get an
heir.


Car. I that Marrying spoy'ld all.


Wat. Because you should not after his death cast away all the rest of the
thousands, and ten thousands which you might have lived to inherit, if your
Unkles love or Mr. Savealls counsel could have prevay'd with you against the
Divill, and Debauchednes.


Car. Pox on it, let it all go, let that wretched Uncle go, and let Saveall
go for a punctual ass as he is. I confess he has by his saving help
peec'd me with my Uncle a score of times at least. What had once more been to
him?


Wat. Sir, it were better for you to think upon some course by our self, and
me your Creature (that have stuck to you, or followed you through all fortunes)
to maintain Rich Lace, and Bravery upon you. And think in time too before
this be worn out, upon some new ways for your supplies --


Car. I cannot, nor will I trouble my brains to think of any, I will rather
die here in Ram alley, or walk down to the Temple, and lay my self down alive,
in the old Synagogue, cross-leg'd among the Monumentall Knights there, till I
turn Marble with them. Think quoth a ^ what should I think on?


Wat. On your poor Whore Sir (as you have brought her) she is in worse case
then your self; your Clothes are good enough --


Car. I there is the Devil. I would do something for her if I knew how. But
what have I not done that can be done by a forlorn heir?


Wat. Why though the Dice, and all other Household games, and all the Cheats
belonging unto them have fayld you by your and their discoveries, till none
dare venture so near you as a Man hu^les a Die or Skirrs a Card. Though all
your hidden ways in Hide-parke races are trod out, and all your bowling
booties beaten bare off of the Grounds and Allies; and the sweet Honey-combes
of all your Cockpit cosenages cut off. Though all your Arts of borowing are
crossed out of all Men's Books before you offer at 'em, while your old Debts
stand fairly written, and all your Marts miscarry of putting out for credit,
Venison to Citizens, or early Cherries, Codlings and Apricocks to their Wives
avail you nothing, cannot something yet be found?


Car. Nothing, nothing. All Projects are confounded.


Wat. Did your Father leave you nothing but wit to live upon for this? And did
he leave you that but for years, and not for Life? and is the term expired?


Car. Hold thy peace. I am casting for something to be done by me, that shall
be worth, and cost my life, to shame my Uncle.


Wat. There Is a plot! Think of your poor whore Sir, how shall she live, if you
cast away your self?


Car. I must leave her once thou know.


Wat. If you could leave her now, and betake your self handsomely to other
Women, I have thought on a course.


Car. What, quickly, what is it?


Wat. To set up a Male bawdy house.


Car. Fie upon'^.


Wat. You are handsome, lovely, and I think able to do one Man's work, two or
three such Gentlemen more which I know, and can describe to you, with the ways
I Will find to bring in custom shall fill your purses --


Car. And empt our bones. I ever had enough of one Mistress Variety would
destroy me. No Gentlemen can be able to hold it out. They are too weak to make
common He whores.


Wat. For a little while Sir, till we have got a stock of rich clothes; And
then we will put Drey-men, and Wineporters, Cornish Wrastlers and such like
into those clothes; and make them Country Cavaliers. Have you not seen course
snowt-faire drudges, clapped into bravery, that would do more bodily service in
a Brothell then twenty Ladies Daughters? They are the Game-beares of a
Bawdy House, can play ten single courses for a cleane-bred Gentle-womans one,
we will hire fellows for groates a piece a day, that shall (without the
additaments of Clary, Cawdle or Cock-broth) get us forty pieces a Man before
Night, or perhaps a hundred by next Morning, out of such she* customers, as an
Aunt of mine shall find ou^ for us.


Car. O base Villain! No I Will never fall so deep below a Gentleman, as to be
Master of a Baudy-house.


Wat. Very good decayed Gentlemen have done a much; though I urge this, but for
your pastime sir.


Car. No my first plot shall stand, I will do some notorious death-deserving
thing (though these clothes go to th'Hangman for it, what care I) in defiance
of him that was my Uncle, and his Methodicall, Grave, and Orthographicall
speaking friend, Mr. Saveall that calls People Pe-o-ple.


Enter Saveall. O Mr. Saveall how have you honored me, how am I bound to you
for this visit! Sir hearing that my Uncle was come to Town, and you with him, I
did presume to write to you.

Sav. Send forth your Man.


Car. Go forth --


Exit Wat. Sav. One Servant is not fit for all Offices, although you keep no
more; you presumed indeed, I can no less then call it a presumption, although
it were but unto me you write; I speak not this in the behalf of any dignity
in me; but that you should overweene that I had ability to wrestle any more
with your overgratefull Uncle in your behalf. Therein was your outrecuidance.


Car. The miserablest Man on Earth! in having we^ried out my worthiest friend,
on whom the sum of all my hopes was cast.


Sav. No, I am not wearied; But still in the same full strength: yet my modesty
disswadeth me from using strength above reason, and my reason prevails with
me not to strive against a Torrent.


Car. He is then inexorable, and I must perish. But did you try him for me this
last time?


Sav. I have both tried, and tempted him to his vexation.


Car. But did you urge that pious act of mine Which he once vowed should never
be forgot, O^ unrewarded by him?


Sav. Your standing upon merit in that Act
Perplexeth nature in him, and confounds
Both your desert, and his benevolence,
And now since you have urged it, I Will tell you,
Your Act was undeniable, most noble,
And glorious in a Nephew, greater piety
Could not have been expected in a Son:
When from the Swords of Thieves and Murderers,
Your valor rescued him -- But --

Car. I and my Man I Am sure made four of the stowtest purses fly for it, that
ever set our Country of the skore: After they had him down, and their points
at his breast and throat, he crying out for help, when I came on by chance at
a time too when I was in his displeasure, nay he hated me a whole year
together before that, and yet I did it, and more then so --


Sav. Fare you well Sir, I thought to have said all this for you, and more then
so too. But --


Car. Nay sweet Mr. Saveall --


Sav. Good Mr. Careless, as I can hear I would be heard sometimes.


Car. Ind^ed I cry you mercy, pray sir speak.


Sav. I was commending of your act, and do so still.
You did express your self in blood and nature
A perfect Kinsman; and your piety
Drew blessings on you: for whereas before
Your Uncle left you off to Reprobation,
He then receives you a Son, (being his Sisters.)
Adopted you, intended you his heir,
And out of his Estate then presently
Allowed you two hundred pounds per annum,
And gave your Man for what he suffered
In the confl^ct an hundred Marks --

Car. Poor Rogue! and he deserved it, I Will be sworn for a Thieves mark that
he received; a cut of the Cockscombe that cracked his skull, so that ^ee could
never bear his drink since, as he could have done before. For sir, as we came
in, I having put by the thrusts of three of 'em, the fourth man with a full
blow --


Sav. Fare you well Sir the second time --


Car. Nay courteous Mr. Saveall.


Sav. I came to speak not with you altogether, but unto you for to be heard.


Car. Sir I will hear you with all due respect.


Sav. Your Uncle having done so gratefully, and so plentifully for you.
You building still on merit for that service,
Did hold him so fast bound that you presumed
To run upon more extravagancies
In all the out-wayes of debauchery,
Till for the one good deed you did for him
He did you forty, in restoring you
From Surfets, Wants, Wounds and Imprisonments,
Till overborne with charge, and more with anguish,
At your outrageous, unexampled Riots,
He gave you an irrevocable farewell, yet then at your departure. --

Car. Yet then I lived and could have done till now, merely by being his
Nephew, and supposed his heir, had not he married; but his Marriage turned the
hearts of all believing Citizens from me, where before a Tailor could have made
me run through all the credit in the Town, When in a suit Chinquant, and
Ala-mode They could inform themselves, whose heir I was, But to say truth I
vexed him into Wed-lock, for before he valud not a Wife at a batchelors Button.


Sav. Farewell to you the third time.


Car. Sir, you shall see me die first, and that instantly; That you may tell
my Uncle I Will be no more his trouble, or charge, unless in charity he will send
to bury me.


Sav. You will not desperately work a violent end upon your self?


Car. No Sir, the D^vills not so great with me; but my heart, I feel it ready
to break. My Uncle is no more my Uncle, nor you my friend, all by my own
fau^t, and what should I do here, but in to my Bed, and out of the World
presently. Wat. Wat.

Enter Wat. I here Sir!


Sav. I have dalyed too long, and tempted him too far I fear.


Car. Lay down my Bed.


Wat. Your Wench is come indeed, but I hope you will not to bed before he be
gone.


Car. Lay down my bed I say. But first unbutton me.


Wat. Lord how his heart beats! pangs of death I fear.


Sav. Not so I hope. I will now come to the point Sir, Mr. Careless be
comforted.


Car. I am, and well resolved, I thank my better Angel.


Sav. Your Unkle's friends with you.


Car. Alas, how can that be?


Sav. I thought your spirit had been higher.


Car. It will be Sir anon, I hope.


Sav. I have but dallied with you to search your temper.


Wat. But you have searched too deep I fear sir.


Car. Ah! --


Sav. Your Uncle is friends with you, I say so far as to make a further
trial of your nature, you may be yet his heir; for your Aunt despaireth of
any Child by him, having fruitlesly been married now these two years.


Car. Ah! -- But good Sir, can this be?


Sav. It is, and I will bring you to him. And see that all be well.


Car. Your noble friendship has revived me sir, O run and fetch my cloak.

Enter Wat with his Cloak. Tell Phebe I cannot stay to give her any
satisfaction now, I must go see my Uncle first.


Exit Wat. Sav. Poor Gentleman, how weakly he stands! The sight of his Uncle
will recover him. Come Mr. Careless let us go.


Car. Sir what do you think if I should first according to the reformation of
my mind cut off my undecent hair, and change this garish apparel for a civil
well worn Students suit, I can be fitted presently hard by.


Sav. No, the mind reformed is enough, your habit well becomes you.


Exit. Wat. Now Wit and't be thy will go with him. And I hope this will be his
last hot fit of the Uncle.


Enter Phebe. Phe. Your Masters gone forth it seems.


Wat. Called by his fortune, he is so.


Phe. Shuns he the sight of me? i will overtake him.


Wat. O your patience sweet Mistress Phebe, a little patience.

He Is gone to be happy, and to make you happy. I dare promise you a Satin
Gowen within this sea'night.


Phe. For let me tell thee Mistress Phebe bright He Is reconciled to his Uncle
Knight.

Away Pimpe, Flamsted, I came to be serious with him, to let him know the
miseries I suffer, by the wrongs he has done me, and that I can nor will no
longer bear 'em.


Wat. Nor him neither will you? Take heed what you say Madam Marion*


Phe. No nor him neither, you pandarly Parasite, till ^e make his vows good,
and me an honest Woman.


Wat. Birlady, a shrewd task, and I fear an impossible work.


Phe. Sir, I will claw your ugly Face till thou undertak'st it with him, to
make it easy.


Wat. Hold, hold, I Will do you all the good I can,


Phe. O will you so?


Wat. How desperately valiant a Whore grows, when she is so poor that her
clothes fear no tearing.

But by what means can you hope to bring this work about?


Phe. You know I have a wealthy Kinsman in the City.


Wat. O Mr. Saleware, and he has a Wife too that bears it up bravely.


Phe. Pimpe impudent, shall I claw your Face into blushes at my injuryes, to be
mocked out of my Maydenhead, when I was upon a good Match in the Country; Then
with a promise of Marriage, to be enticed from my friends into fools Paradise
(that was a new title for the City) and here to be used, and abused from
Lodging to Lodging, by him that now flies me, for the decays he has brought
me to? But my Kinsman has money though I have none, and for money there is Law
to be found, and in a just cause he will not let me sink, he says: for I have
told him all.


Wat. But not the how many times, the whens, the where is, and the
wherewithalls, I hope have you?


Phe. Sirrah, I shall show you and your Master too a way to more civility,
since I am thus abused, and slighted.


Wat. You have schoold me handsomely, and brought me into sense of your
injuries: you have been overwrong'd, but not over-wrought, nor over-worne, you
do excel in Beauty, Strength and Spirit, which makes you in your very anger
now appear so lovely, that I profess my self your Creature. What would a
kiss of this fair Hand now make me do, and of those Lips what not?


She strikes him. Phe. Away you Creature.


Wat. Leave these temptations; do not strike me too deeply in love with you.


Phe. Away you Creature.


Wat. It Is true I am your Creature, as I am my Masters; And sometimes the
serving Creature, breaks his fast with a bit off the Spit before the same meat
is served up to his Masters table, but is never denied to Diue upon his Masters
leavings, you cannot think what an appetite that frown gives me.


Phe. You are no saucy Rascal.


Wat. Good wit too! My appetit^ needs no Sauce; nor shall you need to make use
of Law, or Friend against my Master, but my self.


Phe. You!


Wat. Be ruled by me, if I do not lay you down, and join with you presently
in a course that shall content you, then -- hang me Lady at your door. --


Phe. What do you mean?


Wat. In the next room we shall find Pen, Ink and Paper, you shall write him
such a Letter (as I will dictate to you) that shall so nettle him.


Phe. Nay I did intend to leave him part of my mind in writting before I went.
--


Enter Saleware. Ph. O Cosen, I want you. --


Wat. A pox of this interupting Cuckold, he hinders all Trading, but his
Wives, zownds I was going with full speed a Tilt, as the learned say, had not
this horne-head come, we had writ lines together should have put down Her^ and
Leander --

Hark you Mistress Phebe, is this your Kinsman that you told me, you had told
all the business to?


Sale. Yes, sir, I am the Gentleman, and she has told me so much, Sir that I
must tell you, to tell your Master from me, and as I would tell him my self
if he were here personally present, he is a most dishonest Gentleman if he
do her not lawful right by Marrying her; and that right I came to demand, and
obtain of him, or to denounce the Law against him.


Wat. How happy are you, that you came short to tell him so, else he would ha^
so beaten you, as never was Citizen beaten, since the great Battle of
Finsbury-Field.


Sal. Your great words cannot make* me fear his blows (I am not dashed nor
basht) nor cross him out of my Book, for fear of any such payment. I have
him there for four score pound as you know, though you are pleased to forget
me, But Sapientia mea mihi stultitia tua tibi.


Wat. Cry mercy Mr. Saleware, is it you? I hope Mistress Saleware is well, your
most exquisite, and most courtly wife; the Flower-de-luce of the City.


Sal. Well wag well, you must not now put me off with my wife, she is well and
much respected; I come to speak of, and for my distressed Kinswoman, her whom
your wicked Master has most wickedly dealt withal. He has deflower'd and
deluc'd her, and led her from her Friends, and out of her Country into Fools
Paradise -- By making her believe he would Marry her, and here he has put her
on, and put her off, with hopes and delays till she is come to both woe and
want; And (which may prove her most affliction, if he be suffered to forsake
her) she is with child by him.


Wat. Say you so, Mistress Phebe? here is small show of it yet.


Pre. Sirrah, I shall show you and your Master too a way to more civility, if I
be thus abused and slighted.


Wat. By the way Mr. Saleware, how many children have you by your most amiable
wife?


Sal. Sir, that needs not to fall by the way of our discourse.


Wat. But by the way I speak of getting children. Or I pray tell me, did not
you correct one of her children once, for which your wife reprehended you, and
bad you correct your own? And how then shall my Master be sure that this (if it
be one) is his?


Sal. What an Asinego's this? I shall find a time sir, to talk with your
Master. In the mean time I tell you that my Kinsewoman is a Gentlewoman of as
good blood as himself, and of the best in Herefordshire.


Wat. Yes, Welsh-blood.


Sal. And shall find friends that shall not see her abused by you nor him.
There is Law to be found for money, and money to be found for Friends, and
Friends to be found in the Arches, and so tell your Master, come away Cosen.


Wat. But one word before you go Sir, is this Gentlewoman, (who was but a
Country Chamber-maide when my Master took her to his mercy) of such boasted
blood, your Cozen by your own, or by your Wives side I pray?


Sal. Sirrah, like a saucy companion as you are, though you meddle with me that
am a Common-councell-Man; I charge you meddle not with my wife, you have had
two or three jerks at her.


Wat. I was warned before Sir, in my own understanding: for she is for great
persons.


Sal. Then know your distance Sir.


Wat. Yet give me leave to wait you down Sir, cud shoe did it tell it Kinseman
that it is got with Champkin.


Phe. You are a Pandarly Rascal, and I Will be a terror both to you, and your
Patron.


Exit omnes. Enter Thrivewell, Lady. Thr. How can you think so?


La. Think! I see it apparently upon your Face, and hear it in your sighs,
your broken sleeps to night, when your own groans waked you, declard no
less; But had I had the power of some wifes with their husbands I could have
fetched it out of you waking once (^ thank you) you took me in your arm, but
when you found 'twas I you turned away as in a dream.


Thr. Sure you dream now, whence can this talk proceed else?


La. I must not give it over till I know the cause of your melancholy fit, do
you doubt my duty, or my loyalty? perhaps you do, and so make me the cause of
your affliction.


Thr. May such a thought within me, stick me to the endless torments.


La. It Is lately entertained, what e're it be; you came heart whole to Town,
and Joviall. Have you been drawn for security into Bonds by any of my friends,
for great sums, and forced to pay 'em?


Thr* Fie, fie.


La. Are any great friends of yours in question, attainted, imprisoned, or run
away?


Thr. Psewh.


La. Or are you further grieved about your Nephew, Careless? I thought that
your friend Saveall, and my self had made his peace with you; and that you had
sent for him, do you repent that?


Thr. No, no, sweet heart, he shall be welcome. And pray let me entreat you
make no further inquisition; If (as you suppose) there be a trouble in my
thoughts, I shall soon pass it over.


La. Tell me, or I shall prove the greater trouble. I would those few examples
of women, that could not keep their husbands counsels had been burnt, and
the woman too rather then I should be distrusted thus, and slighted by a
Husband --


Thr. Nay then you will grieve me indeed.


La. There has been many examples of discreet women that have not only kept
their husbands counsels, but advise and help 'em in extremities, and delivered
'em out of dangers.


Thr. I pray content your self.


La. Be you content to tell me then what troubles you. And I pray you tell me
speedily, now presently; or (excuse me in my vow,) it is the last request that
ever I will make to you, and the last question I Will ever ask you, and (the
easier to get it from you) I promise you by the continuance of my faith to you
(which by this kiss I seal) Be it a deadly injury to my self, I will forgive
it freely; not be troubled at it.


Thr. I shall do that now, which few wise men would.
But she is discreet, and has a fortitude
Above the boast of women; should that fail,
And this too weighty knowledge for a wife
Should prove a torment to her, I Am excused
She pulls it on her self, and for Revenge
Should she against her protestation move it,
I am enough above her.

La. You are resolved it seems to keep your secret Unto your self, much good
Sir may it do you.


Thr. No, you shall know it, sir, and (if unshaken
Now, in your love to me) the wonder of all wives
You Are bound by a fair pledge, the kiss you gave me,
To be unmoved, and to forgive it though
It be a deadly injury to your self;
It is, and it is a great one; and so great
But that you have sealed my pardon, the hid knowledge
Of it should feed upon my Heart, and Liver,
Till life were banished thence, rather then pull
Your just revenge upon me; yet you frown not!
But before I declare it to your Justice,
Let me renew your mercy. Kiss.
And on this Altar, which I have profaned
While it breathed sacred incence, now with penitence
Offer religious vows, never to violate
My Faith or Love to you again. One more Kiss.
Before you hear it: for if then you stand not
Firm to your Mercy, it must be my last.

La. What do you but violate your Love to me,
Now in your most unjust suspicion?

Thr. I Will trespass so no more; yet many husbands
(I wish they had my sorrow, and no less
Purposer to reformation) wrong their wives.

La. Leave these perambulations; to the point:
You have unlawfully lain with some woman!

Thr. It Is said; and now your doom.


La. Ha, ha, ha. Here Is a busiesse!
Would somebody heard you faith: nay of five hundred
That now might overheare us (I mean not only
Gallants, but grave substantial Gentlemen)
Could be picked out a twelve good men and true,
To find you guilty, I would then condemn you,
But such a Jury must be pannell'd first.

Thr. And can you be so mild? then farewell thought.


La. Thought of your Mistress Sir, And then farewell
My jealousy, for let me tell you Sir,
That I have had an ache upon these brows
Since your last being in Town. And since you have dealt
So faithfully as to tell me it is one,
(There Is no more, is there?)

Thr. No upon my vow.


La. Name me the woman: if it be the same
That I suspect, I Will never suspect more.

Thr. As faithfully as to my Confessor; Light weight*
Saleware my Silke-mans wife.

La. The same I meant,
You Are a fair dealing husband. On what condition?
Come this is merry talk. Prithee on what condition?
Only to bring good custom to her shop,
And send her husband Venison (flesh for flesh)
I did observe you bought all there last term,
And wished me to her Shop, and Mr. Saveall
With diverse others to bestow our moneys.
Troth she is a handsome one; Prithee on what conditions?

Thr. Thou shall know all to purge me of my folly.


La. Well said.


Thr. After a costly, and a tedious Suit
With many an answer no, and no such Woman,
At length she yields for a hundred pieces;
Had 'em, and I enjoyed her once.

La. That was,
When you last Term sat up all Night, and said you sat up with the three Lady
Gamesters.

Thr. It is confessed.


La. Fair dealing still.


Thr. But here was the foul dealing, and for which
I hate her now: I having paid so great a fine, and
Taken possession thought after to deal Rent-free.

La. A Pepper-corne a quarter, if she be Pepperproofe.


Thr. But she at my very next approach, which was but yesterday denies me
Egresse, except I make it a new purchase at the same former rate, and so for
all times after.


La. Troth it is unreasonable, a hundred pound a time? How rich would Citizens
be, if their wives were all so paid, and how poor the Court and Country! But
hushed, here comes Mr. Saveall with your Nephew, I take it; A handsome
Gentleman, could he be so debauched?


Enter Saveall, Careless. Sav. Sir, I have brought you home a Reformado* and
do entreat (for what I have said unto him, and he has fairly answered unto
me) that words may not by you be multiplied.


Thr. Not a word of unkindnesse, Nephew, you are welcome, give me your hand.
George, thou art welcome.


Car. I shall be George of horseback once more I see. In all humility I thank
you Sir.


Thr. Nay now thou speak, and look too tamely George, I would have thee
keep and use the lively spirit that thou had, but not to let it fly at
random, as it has done George.


Car. Sir, I have learnt now by the inconveniences I have met with, in those
extravagant out fl^ghes, the better to contain it within the limits of your
leave, and fair allowance hereafter.


Thr. Well said, and again welcome George. But (and this you shall give me
leave to say Mr. Saveall) I remit your thanks for any inclination I had toward
this reconcilement till I do you some further kindness; only you had good
advocates, who pleaded friendly for you, Mr. Saveall, and your Aunt there
before she ever saw you whom you may thank.


Car. A man must be so tied now.


Thr. Pray take notice of her.


Car. I cannot use respect enough Sir.


Thr. I like that modesty.


Sav. Doubt him in nothing, for he is come home.


Car. Madam as you are my gracious Patroness, and my self so all unworthy, my
duty checks me in my approach to you.


La. You are the more entirely welcome Cosen.


Kiss. Car. She Kisses like an old man's wife, That is, as a Child late
sterv'd at Nurse, sucks a fresh flowing Breast.


La. You must not Sir be bashful.


Car. 'Twill less become me to presume good Madam.


Thr. George, here is a Lodging for you in this house, and my Table has a place
for you, send for your man to wait upon you.

Have you Wat still?


Car. Yes Sir, an honest true hearted civil fellow he is, as I have managed
him, he can say grace now.


Thr. The world's well mended. To morrow you shall give me a note of your debts
George, which I Will take order for, if I may presume you have any.


Car. Some driblets Sir, My credit has not lately wronged me much.


Sav. You speak sententiously, for credit sought With Tradesmen, then their
wares are dearer bought; So Gentlemen are wronged.


Thr. Then not to wrong our selves, lets in to Dance.


Exeunt omnes. ACT II.
SCENE I.
Alicia, Lady, Servingman, Prentice. Al. ALL Cheape-side, and Lombard street
Madam, could not have furnished you with a more complete bargain, you will
find it in the wearing, and thank me both for the goodness of the stuff, and
of the Manufacture.


La. But now the price Mistress Saleware. I grant your Commodity is good, The
Gold and Silver Laces, and the Frienges are rich, and I hope well wrought. Has
your Man made a note of the particulars, and their prices, at the rate of
ready-money (for I buy so) and not as you would book 'em to an under-ag'd
heir, or a Court-Cavalier to expect payment two or three years hence; and
find it perhaps never. I come with Here is one for the other.


Al. I know your Ladyships payment such; And they are prized so Madam to a
farthing.


La. Let me see, broad plate Silver and Gold-lace, 206 Ounces half, and a
dram, at five and ten pence the Ounce. 60 l. 5 s. 3 d. ob. 4. five and ten
pence an Ounce is dear.


Al. I protest unto you Madam that parcel of Lace for a Bed as you intend it,
was bespoken, and agreed for at six shillings the Ounce by a very great person:
but because ready money came not to fetch it off, Fortune reserved it here for
you, you could not have been so fitted on the sudden else within London walls;
and I am glad the same fortune was so favorable to me, as by my hands to
design it for your Ladyships use and pleasure. I hope Madam we shall hear of a
young heir a coming shortly, and that will make it a rich and fortunate Bed
indeed; And then Sir Olyv^r would thank me too.


La. What a bold slut it is, well then the rest of the particulars here of
Laees, and Frienges, Loopes, and Buttons, makes the sum of all an hundred pound
eight shillings four pence, halfe-penny. I am no good Arithmetician, but if
any be overcast, and overpaid, you must allow restitution.


Al. Yes, good Madam.


La. Is all put up into this Box?


Al. All Madam.


La. Give me my Purse. Take you home that while I make payment for it; your
Gold-weights Mistress Salewa^e.


Exit Servant* Al. Here Madam all in readiness.


La. You take no Gold but what is weight I presume.


Al. It Is but light pains to weigh it Madam. But let me save your Ladyship
that labor.


La. Nor shall it be your trouble, command your Servant I pray for a glass of
your beer --


Al. Some beer for my Lady presently.


Exit. Prentice. La. That I may tell you in more privacy, what perhaps you
would not have him hear: for Prentises though they are bound to keep their
Masters secrets, are not all privy to their Mistresses; that is more a
Journeymans Office.


Al. Your Ladyship is pleased.


La. Not very well with my self, for I have gone beyond my Commission in this
bargain, and exceeded my Husbands allowance. Here Is one hundred pounds eight
shillings 4 d. ob. in the Bill, and he allows me but the bare hundred pound.


Al. The od money is but a small matter Madam.


La. A great matter in an honest poor Country Ladies purse, may serve her a
whole Christmas at Post and Pare, or Farthing gleeke, when the gay Gamsters
wives of the City may command the hundreds, out of the purses of such poor
Ladies Husbands. But here is the odd money, eight shillings four pence, half
penny, and so all is paid.


Al. What means your Ladyship?


La. Do you not understand me then? I Will tell you that which I thought fit to
conceal from your servant; And from your husband too had he been here,
perhaps he knows not on it. My husband left with you, or lent you the last
Term a hundred pound, which he assigned to me; and now I have it in
Commodity. Had you forgot it, when it was to do you a good turn, when your
absent husband faild you, and you wanted it.


Al. A good turn Madam?


La. Yes, was it not to have the free use of a hundred pound ready money, a
whole quarter of a year, through a dead Vacation, and at last to take it out
in wares? A good turn I think for a Trades-woman; take heed you do not by
your fullennesse make me suspect another kind of good tu^ne, or that you did my
husband any to my injury, nor deny the receipt of his money, lest I take up a
violence that will not become me, no^ you be able to bear. Be therefore well
advised both in what you say, and who hears m^. Somebody comes.


Enter Prentice with Beer. Al. Madam your Beer.


La. I'^e pledge you Mistress Saleware.


Al. I shall presume then Madam -- Drinks.


La This was right cast, was it not friend?


Pre. Your Ladyship will find it so -- La. Drinks.


Al. And I hope you will find your money so well bestowd Madam, that you will
vouchsafe always to know the Shop.


La. Ever upon the like occasion, Mistress Saleware, so most kindly farewell
sweet Mistress Saleware.


Al. The humblest of your servants Madam. Open the Boot for my Lady.


La. It Is done my Coachman does it.


Exit. Al. I would the Devil were in your Coachmans Coat to take his carriage
for his pains.


Lady returns. La. One word more Mistress Saleware, can it be he?


Al. Lay your comands on me good Madam.


Curtsie. La Not to your trouble, I perceive a young Gentleman attends for
conference with you. Is not his name Fitzgerrard?


Al. No Madam, his name is Bellamie, much depending on the young Lord Lovely.


La. I thought I had known him, he is a handsome youth. I cannot blame you now
with him: but beware of old Knights that have young Ladies of their own. Once
more adieu sweet Mistress Saleware.


Exit. Al. Most courteous Madam -- and once more to the Devil. But on my life
her chaste Ladyship is taken with this beard-lesse Bellamie. How she shot eyes
at him!


Bell. Now may your servant obtain a hearing L^^y.


Al. My ears are open Sir.


Bell. But you are sad or angry, why seems that brow to threaten a subjection
over him that is your vanquished captive; or has Cupid placed his Bow there
bent at me, whose heart already lodges all his Arrows, never to be restored
but by your pity?


Al. Fie, fie upon it! what talk is this? I am vexed, and you would m^^ me.


Bell. What has displeased you?


Al. A cross business that has happened in my Shop to day, I being none of
the wisest Chapwoman, have undersold a parcel of the best Commodities my
husband had. And should he know it we should have such a scwable.


Bell. Husbands should be so served that do impose Those mercenary Offices on
their wives.


Al. Talk so, and I will hear you, your amorous notes sound like
Play-speeches.


Bell. Servile, nay slav^sh Offices, ranking their wives with their prentises.


Al. They pretend only that we should over-looke our servants, when they but
set us there for show to draw in custom: but in making us such overseers they
are overseene themselves; Shopkeepers-wives will be meddling and dealing in
their kind, and as they are able, as well as their husbands (some much better,
and more profitable) but I was overreach'd I confess.


Bell. For no great matter I hope.


Al. No, the matter was not much (that never fretted me) but the manner has
eene killed a She shopkeeper. I cannot be long-lived, here under a Pent-house,
as my Lord (you know) told me when he said he would shut me out of this
servitude, and that I should change my Coat, though my husband could not,
before he were an Alderman, and be ranked with Ladies.


Bell. My Lord has still the same regard of you.


Al. So it appears by the Tailor and the Mercer, whom he sent four days
since to measure me out, and suit me to his Honor, and no return of them
found, yet his Land might ha^ been measured all and sold, while a poor suit
is dreampt on, had he borne the mind of some Lord?


Bell. I doubt not but this paper will clear that jealousy. And while you
read I Will speak that which I dare not utter through, Sighs and Blushes to an
entire attention.

I am of Noble-blood my self, freeborn,
And not without good education;
But since I am engaged in this employment,
And made an instrument of others lust,
I find my self a scandal to my Name,
To Honor, and to Virtue, the base blot
Of Pandare sticking on me. But not this*
Alone is my affliction. Here Is my torment,
That while I do true service to my Lord
(Whom I must ever honor) in my Agency
Unto your self (whom I cannot but love)
I find my self a Traitor to his trust,
In my negotiation for my self.
Nor can I find it possible to desist,
Mine own attempts, to you, or forbear to urge
Your constancy to him.

Al. How easy a work
'Twere for one woman to supply 'em both,
And hold her husband play to level Acoile,
A wooden two-leav'd book, a pair of Tables
Would do it.

Bell. How wretched is that suppliant, who must make
Suit to obtain that, which he fears to take!

Al. At the bear at the Bridge-foot six a clock, good.

Sir, I find my Lords honorable appointments here, and have heard you all this
while.


Bell. Now I could wish, and was in hope you had not.


Al. I will not blame you on your Lords behalf;
Because you have enough rebuked your self.
But Sir, if you presume upon the favor
I give your Lord, and therefore to obtain me,
Cause I am his, you undervalue me
To think that I can stoop unto his servant,
Though almost his Companion, you may think
After that degradation by degrees,
I may, in time, descend unto his Footman, I Am no cast
Garment of his Lordships yet.

Bell. You have schooled me fairly, I am humbled, Lady --


Going. Al. Dee hear, dee hear sir, Mr. Bellamine,
One word before you go.

Pren. What would he buy Mistress? can you take his money?
Sir dee hear?

Al. Pray attend you the the other end of the Shop, If I cannot handle a Customer,
why dos ^your Master trust me? Could a frown fright you? Let a smile then
cheer you.


Bell. And that is a heavenly one,
As that of Cynthia at Endymion.

Al. Pray leave your Player-like passionate expressions* And if you love me,
like a Man speak to me.

As I am a Woman; are you silent? if you doubt the length of my man's Ears at
that distance, you may whisper what so? But that is a right shop-whisper indeed
with Trades-women that are handsome; Is that the most you will give sir? Could
I afford it so, do you think I Would make two words w'ye? yet this before you go
-- Kiss. Now match it for the price I Will give it you for nothing.


Bell. I shall forget I have a Lord. I must forget him here.


Al. Do so, and if (I say) you love me, speak plainly what you* would have
me do, or what you would do with me (I love to dant these young things that
love before they can love to the purpose, or speak to it* handsomely like a Boy
that would feign be shooting at wild-fowle, before he knows how to discharge
a Birding-piece) I would hear you speak, you have often mu^tered and fribled
some intentions toward me, but I would hear you speak. Come, if you love me
lay by the fear of the Lord that sent you, and tell me roundly now, what you
would have me do?


Bell. I would entreat you --


Al. Well; what?


Bell. That you would be pleased --


Al. With what? or to do what?


Bell. To wear this pair of Silk stockins for me*


Al. Is that all your suit, it is granted, with my thanks to you; Have you no
more to say?


Bell. Yes, I say you are the beautifull'st of Women; and that my Lord in your
enjoyment is the happiest --


Al. Nay think not of your Lord, but ask me, something.


Bell. I would but dare not hope for such a favor, ^ou'l never grant i^, my
unworthiness.


Al. How can you tell?


Bell. You will not wrong my Lord, so as to do it.


Al. Not in his sight perhaps. What is it? come.


Bell. It is --


Al. It is then, let it be so. Go to School child.


Bell. It is -- That you would, let me -- give you this ring,
And grace it with your Finger.

Al. Will that be a wrong to your Lord?


Bell. Yes, to wear any favors, but his own.


Al. Dos he know this?


Bell. No, nor I would not that he should (and given by me) for all the Rubies
in Cheapside, where I bought this but now, over the way.


Al. Come sir, I Will dally w'ye no longer, I know what you would have with me.


Bell. And now you will betray me: I am shamed then and undone.


Al. No, but I have you o'^ the hip. It Is plain you would lie with me: deny it
if you can.


Bell. O dear, did I say so now?


Al. What need you when I know it, you would lie with me, and you shall. Take
courage man.


Bell. But, in good earnest, shall I? shall I?


Al. Yes, in good earnest, you will find it no trifling business, when you come
to it once. But sir, upon condition.


Bell. Any condition Lady.


Al. All purpose on it is lost, and all comes out else.


Bell. Name your condition, I Will perform it if it be in the power of my life.


Al. You saw here at your coming a fair Lady.


Bell. I took no notice of her.


Al. But she did of you, she is called the Lady Thrivewell.


Bell. Sir Oliver Thrivewells Lady?


Al. The same, you have known her it seems.


Bell. Seen her before she was married.


Al. I will be brief with you, as you love me she loves you as eagerly, but
with much more boldness, you saw her whisper me, and how loath she was to
depart, when her eye was upon you.


Bell. I did observe it.


Al. She is my noble friend, and the sweetest Lady, I need not set her out.
But though you think you suffer in your honor, in being an instrument twixt
your Lord and me, with the base blot of Pander sticking on you, (these were
your words) I have engaged my self for her to be your Pandaresse; be so, I
shall be even with you in business if you account it so.


Bell. What dee mean Lady?


Al. To urge against my self, for that sweet Lady, which no Woman else I
think would do, that loves you so unfainedly as I. But it is my fate, and the
injunction I must lay upon you, to make me yours. That first you give your
self to her Embraces; I Will give you means for your access to her, and your
success with her, which done, and on your faith affirmed to me, it is so, I
will perpetually be yours more freely then your Lords.


Bell. You urge this but to try my constancy.


Al. For that I Will satisfy you soon, my husband coming we must to night at the
Bear --

My Lord writes so.


Enter Saleware. Sal. And there I will direct you in your progress.

Ally how do? Mr. Bellamy how is it? How dos my noble Lord? You are sad
methinks. Have you overbought any thing here, and so repent your bargain? Or
cannot my wife, and you agree upon it* you must use Mr. Bellamy kindly my sweet
Ally: he is our noblest Lords most special favorite, and must find all fair
dealing here, as well when I am abroad as at home sweet heart.


Bell. You hear not me complain sir, fare you well.


Exit. Sal. What an Assinego's this! He might have thanked me for my good
words, though I meant him no good will, I hope thou have overreach'd him indeed.


Al. Thomas your hopes are vain, Thomas in seating me here to overreach, or
underreach any body. I am weary of this Mechanic course Thomas; and of this
courser habit, as I have told you diverse and sundry times Thomas, and indeed of
you Thomas that confine me to it, but the bound must obey.


Sal. Never the sooner for a hasty word, I hope sweet Ally; Not of me nor of
my shop I prithee at seasonable times Love. But for thy habit (though this be
decent on a Citizens wife) use thine own fancy, let it be as Courtly, or as
Lady-like as thou please, or my Lords desires.


Al. Then I am friends again.


Sal. Troth, and I Will call thee friend, and I prithee, let that be our familiar
and common compellation: friend it will sound daintily, especially when thou
shall appear too gallant to be my Wife.


Sa. Then let it be so friend.


Al. Intruth it shall, and I am very much taken with it. Friend I have found a
Customer to day that will take off my rich parcel of broad Bed-lace, that my
Lord Paylate bespoke, and left on my hands, for lack of money.


Al. I have sold it already friend, with other Laces at a good rate.


Sal. And all for ready money friend?


Al. Yes friend, a hundred pounds, and somewhat more.


Sal. Who would be, or who could live without such a friend, in such a shop?
This money comes so pat for a present occasion, to stop a gap. It has stopped a
gap already friend.


Al. I have disposed of the money, the odd hundred pound for apparel, friend,
and other accommodations for my self.


Sal. Never the sooner for a hasty word I hope friend.


Al. I have done it friend, whereby to appear more Courtly, and Ladilike as
you say, to gain you more custom to your Shop.


Sal. Uuch friend -- Is it so?


Al. And friend you must not be angry, or think much of it, if you respect
your profit friend.


Sal. I were no friend but a wretch if I would. No let it go friend, and --
Sapientia mea mihi is my word, I must not grudge at my friend in any thing.


Al. Then friend, let your shop be your own care for the rest of this day, I
have some business abroad.


Sal. Whither sweet friend?


Al. Is that a friendly question?


Sal. I am corrected friend, but will you not take a Man to wait upon you?


Al. To watch me, shall I? and give you account of my actions? was that spoke
like a friend?


Sal. I am again corrected friend,
Do your own pleasure, you will return to supper.

Al. Yet again?


Sal. And again, I am corrected friend?


Al. Neither to supper, nor to bed perhaps.


Sal. Never the sooner for a hasty word I hope.


Al. But if I chance to stay, you cannot be a faithful friend and ask me
where, or in what company, friendship you know allows all liberty.


Exit. Sal. Sapientia mea mihi. A wity wife, with an imperious will,
Being crossed, finds means to cross her Husband still;
And Tradesmen that so match, must not with Gall
Temper their Wives, but sweetly by wit-all.

Exit. Enter Careless, with two Letters in his hand, and Wat with a Candle,
and Wax. Car. Dos not the World come finely on, Wat, ha?
And have not we convenient commings in already, ha!

Show Gold. Wat. Better then we know how to have paid, for that is the glory
on it.


Car. I need no more insconsing now in Ram-alley, nor the Sanctuary of
White-fryers, the Forts of Fullersrents, and Milford-lane, whose walls are
daily battered with the curses of bawling creditors. My debts are paid; and
here is a stock remaining of Gold, pure Gold hark how sweetly it chincks.


Carless seals his Letters. Wat. Yes, and 'twill ring the changes shortly.


Car. For necessaries Wat, for necessaries it shall change, and Ring all out,
and 'twil so long as I have an Uncle, and know to manage him, let money fly,

I can no faster spend then he supply.


Wat. For necessaries sir, but you must not now count Sack and Tobacco, Whores
and Fiddlers in abundance, necessaries.


Car. Why pray?


Wat. Because you will have but little then for extraordinaries, That is to say in
a Gentleman for charitable, and pious works and uses.


Car. The fellow's spoy'ld.


Wat. Not spoy'ld neither: For I would but wave your purpose of flying at all
new Game, and neglect your poor whore, who now begins to be so violent for
wrongs, she can no longer bear, that she intends to pursue you with her
complaints hither to your Unkles House.


Car. My Unkles house? my house. Is not the first Mornings draught mine?


Wat. With great reason, for you are first dry in the morning.


Car. Is not the question first asked me, what will you have to breakfast?
what will please you for Dinner, and what for Supper? Has not my Uncle let out
moneys, and taken Bonds and Morgages in my name? do not his Tenants crowch to
me, and his servants all call me young Master? And dos not my Uncle take care
to marry me to ten thousand pound, and a thing like a wife?


Wat. You have got a brave possession here, I must needs say; and I applaud
your fortune most in this, tha^ your young Aunt the noble Lady here, who you
see feared would prove a cruel Stepdame to you, appeare^ to be more friend to
you then your Uncle. It Is a mo^^ gracious Sunshine in her.


Car. She shall lose nothing by it. I have thought a way to requite her.


Wat. But sir, for Mistress Phebe, will you take no order for the poor soul?


Car. I do not like your zealous solicitation, but her^ an order for her, in
answer of her Malipert Letter yo^ brought me last night. Give it her, and these
five pieces upon condition that she never come, write, or send to me again,
till I send to her.


Wat. That Is somewhat hard Sir.


Car. Nay look you Wat, you are a little mistaken i^ me. I must give over
whoring, for special causes there unto me moving.


Wat. O now I find you. And 'twere richly wort^ your patience, if you could
win the Widow by it, for whom you stood in fair election once, until your
last debauchment.


Car. I shall stand fairer for her sir, when I leave working but a week or
two, shall I not?


Wat. Yes, if you leave it quite, but to forsake her whom you have brought low,
to fall to others, were such a thing --


Car. Well sir, it may be I will, it may be I will not, what is that to you? carry
you the Letter, and the Money, and try how that will work with her.


Wat. I Will do my best, but if she should exclaim, and bring on her Cosen Mr.
Saleware to be clamorous --


Car. Her Cozen's a Cuckold, exclaim and clamorous! give me my money again.


Wat. Nay I am gone sir.


Exit. Enter Saveall. Car. The Rogue's in faction with 'em; O noble Mr.
Saveall, you have most fairly kept your minute with me, I have written my
Letter, sealed it and all, here to the Widow.


Sav. So early? that is well.


Car. I have written no less then six large Epistles this morning, and sent'em
now by my Man to be conveyed into the Country to Lords and Knights, with all
the news spiritual, and temporal, foreign and domestic that could possibly
fall into a private Gentleman's Collection.


Sav. Is it possible?


Car. With such dexterity, that if I would make a Trade on it, I could undo all
the Newes-mongers in Town that live by it.


Sav. It is a most commendable practice in a Gentleman, and it will mature your
judgment in the both Commonwealth and State affairs, and in short time
invite you unto the chair of Helm.


Car. When I am once married, and settled, you shall see what an ass it is, he
believes me.


Sav. How am I comforted in my Meditation for you, and how overjoyed will your
Uncle be at the use you make of your retirements!


Car. I confess it is (by reason of my unwontednesse to it) some difficulty
for me to write to women; wherefore since you have so nobly undertaken the
conveyance of this, let me beseech you to apologize for the rudenes of my style.


Sav. To the fair hands of the most acomplish'd in virtue Mistress Anne
Crostill, present, I pray with my service; The outside has no rudeness on
it, and (I doubt it not) she shall find within all sweetness and urbanity.


Car. As you may interpret it to her sir.


Sav. Sir, what I have already said, and do intend to say unto her from your
Uncle, and my self on your behalf, together with what you have here written,
shall (I doubt it not) prepare so fair a way of proceeding for you; That at
your visit of her you may say, veni, vidi, vici, she is your own.


Car. And then -- a ha, Mr. Saveall!


Sa. Expect your fortune modestly, and when it comes embrace it with discretion.


Car. Sir, I am edified.


Sa. It is well if you be so; I will put my undertaking in action presently,
Pray for my good success.


Car. I dare not tell him now I cannot; but I wish well for the Moneys sake;
and let the Vintners pray, and all the decayed Sparks about the Town, whom I
will raise out of ashes into flame again. Let them pray for my good wokes. O
my young Lady aunts grave waiting Woman. If she were not hers, and out of this
house I should take her for a Bawd now. But being hers, and here how much may I
mistake? all flesh is frail.


Enter Nurse with Caudle cup. Nur. Not to disturb your morning Meditations, my
Lady has sent you --


Car. And you have brought me, what sweet Mistress Closet?


Nur. A part of her Ladiship^ own breakfast, it is very cordial and
comfortable to the spirits, I assure you, and delectable to the younger sort,
and profitable to the old.


Car. One of Robert Greenes works, or the mad Doctor that preaches boyld in it
I think.


Nur. It Is a composition of mine own Sir, of many excellent decoctions, of
most wholesome restorative, and costly ingredients.


Car. That it was sent by her makes it more excellent, whose bounteous care of
me, I must acknowledge exceeds all cost in carving to me, and countenancing me
at her Table, in gracing me in presence of the Ladies that come to visit her;
in giving charge for decency in all things for my Chamber, my fires shining, my
odours burning, my livery served in, my soft and costly bed prepared and spread
with perfumed linen -- here is Ambergreece in this now --


Nur. O is it so, do you find that?


Car. But though she is my own Unkles wife, I could ^'ne say it is pity a young
man had her not.


Nur. What a wag's this?


Car. She is a most sweet Lady.


Nur. She is a sweet Lady indeed, I can best speak it that have known her
from the womb hitherto: A sweet infant she was borne, and a sweet babe I
swadled it, and a sweet child I nursed it, I traynd it up a sweet child. It
was in manners a sweet child, at her Book and Sample a sweet child. I never
whipped it but once, and then it was sweet too, and sprawl'd but a little, and
whimper'd but a little it was so sweet a child; And so she grew upwards, and
upwards toward woman, and a sweet youngling she was, and so grew upwards and
upwards toward man, and then a sweet Bride she was, and now a most sweet
Lady she is, (as you say, and I commend you for it) And so she stands at a
stay. For now she grows no more upwards then upon her Wedding day, not
upwards as I would have her upwards, here I mean young Gentlemen, could I but
see a sweet babe of hers once by my Master, I could be then content to sleep
with my Ancestors.


Car. I had rather see your Gibship hanged up with Polcatts in a Warren, and
your sweet Lady with you, though I confess that were some pity. I hope her
barrenness, or his will preserve her from my curse.


Nur. I hope still, and she hopes still; and I make him of this broth for
every morning, and many other good strengthening things (I cannot say for the
same purpose) for I shall never see him have an heir by her.


Car. Excellent! that is best of all.


Nur. Because you then are heir, say you so? Is that your love to your Aunt?


Car. No I protest Nurse, I meant by the broth, the bottom was the best of all.


Nur. Then I cry mercy.


Car. Cannot all thy art, and her cost find help for my Uncle, think thou,
to get a child?


Nur. Help! what dee mean. He might have help and helps enough, were she
not too virtuous.


Car. Still thou mistak'st me Nurse.


Nur. Away wag away, your Aunt loves you too well to think so of her.


Car. Nurse as I hope to inherit any thing hereafter --


Nur. I should but serve you well to tell her your good thought of her.


Car. Nurse, by this good -- piece I think no harm.


Nur. Nay, nay.


Car. Take it I say. And tell her if thou will, that I love her so well, that
were she not mine Unkles wife, I would get her an heir my self rather then
be his.


Nur. Kind young Master, now I am heartily sorry that I moved you.


Car. And for my Uncle were I his heir apparent, I rather wish he might live
till all this World were weary of him, and the next afraid to take him.

Then I survive him (Tonuge, a pox punish you for lying)

Now I live well, and merrily good Nurse,

Wealth and Estates, bring cares and troubles with them,

Were all young heirs of my contented mind,

Parents and Patrons would be better prayed for.


Nur. Good Gentleman.

Nurse Closet.


Lady within -- Closet -- Nur. O my Lady calls.


Car. Present my thanks and best respects unto her.


Nur. I should have told you first -- I have forgot. My head is naught,


Car. What member have thou good then?


Nur. My Lady desires you -- This talk has put me out -- O this head! My Lady
desires you --


Car. Desires she me Nurse?


Nur. Yes sir, she desires you.


Car. Refuse me if I desire not her as much, for all she is my Unkles leavings.


Nur. My Lady desires you.


Car. And she shall have me Nurse -- And she were ten Unkles wives, and she
ten of mine Aunts.


Nur. O this head! nay now you will not hear me, she desires you to go
abroad in the Coach with her.


Car. Any whither, to Islington, Newington, Padington, Kensington, or any of
the City out-leaps (I know'em all) for a spirt and back again, tell her I am
up and ready for her, and could have been without her stirrup porredge, though I
thank her for her care. A man can not be too well prepared, or provided for so
sweet a Lady, in so much distress. A very Andromeda, chained to a Rock.


Takes up his Cloak and Sword* Nur. What Is this you say? I understand no word
of it, I would take your answer right, though I falter'd in my Ladies message.


Car. The Devils in this overruning Tongue of mine, I could find in my heart
to worm him out with my teeth.


Nur. What must I tell my Lady Sir?


Car. That I am more obliged to her Ladyship then I was to my Mother, she has
brought me a new man into the World, and that my Being and my Life is hers.


Enter Lady. La. I hope he is a true convertite, did I send you to hold
discourse here, Closet?


Nur. Nor did I Madam but I could hear this Gentleman a whole day methinks.
He speaks so acknowledgingly of your Ladyships virtue, and goodness toward
him.


La. I am beholding to him, will you go with me Nephew to the Exchange? I am
to buy some toys there for the Country, you may get a fancy by it.


Car. Good, I must wear her favors.


La. Or cannot you forbear your study so long?


Car. To do you service Madam, under whose commands I build my happiness.


La. Be not at the distance of complement with me good Nephew.


Car. I would not be thought insolent dear Madam.


La. Come the Coachman grumbles at my stay, and 'twill be Dinnertime
presently, so the Cook will be angry too.


Car. You are all tenderness to your servants Madam.


Exit. Nur. A sweet Gentleman, and bountiful, if my Lady had been blessed with
such a Husband, what a place had I had!


Exeunt Omnes. ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Crostill reading a Letter, Saveall. Cross. Do you know the contents Mr.
Saveall of the familiar Epistle you have brought me here?


Sav. No Lady, but I guess it a fair expression of the Writers affection to
you, although he desired me to crave your pardon for the rudeness of his
style, it being the first that he has composed of that consequence.


Cross. Ha, ha, ha, I Will trust you sir, with the full knowledge of it, pray read
it your self.


Sav. I find she is pleased, and my endeavor prosperous, for the young
Gentleman, I am sorry that I delaid a day in the delivering of it.


Cross. Pray read it out sir, for I find it so pleasant that I could hear it a
whole day together.


Reads. Sav. In the first place you shall give me leave to wonder at your
impudence (though it be but in your dreams) to have a thought that I ever
intended, or can be drawn by persuasion, force, or the power of witchcraft to
marry you --

Bless me! sure if he writ this, the Devil dictated to him.


Cross. On sir, that is but his first charge.


Sav. Secondly, I am to tell you, that I am warm in mine Uncles favor. And
it is not a piece a time, or five pieces for a piece of pleasure can undo me;
and so I can have change, and escape the captivity of Wedlock.

This could no otherwise be done but by the Devil that ought him the shame.


Cross. What follows I pray, there is the first and second point past? mark his
method.


Sav. Thirdly, and lastly, let me advise you, since you are so hot upon
Marriage, though I assure myself you love none but me, (and I thank you
for it) that you frame or dissemble an affection to some one of the City, who is
but comparative to your self in blood and fortune, and so you may make by-use
of me as your friend, and have children like me,


GEORGE CARELESS.


Cross. Have you ever heard so queint a Love Letter?


Sav. Lady, the injury done in it, to your self is unanswerable, but my wrong
in being his Messenger, I will make him answer.


Cross. Excuse me Sir, he has done me a favor; I pray inform him so with my
great thanks. But for what you conceive a wrong to your self, use your
discretion, you have no more to say to me for him at this present, have you sir?


Sav. Not for him but against him, I will un say all that I said before
intended for his good.


Cross. But i will not hear you wrong your former love, and judgment of him so,
which made so deep impression here, that I had locked his love up as a Jewel
in my Breast, and you in striving now to wrest it thence may break the
Cabinet; I rather wish you will be a friendly means to draw his presence hither,
that I my self may mildly question him.


Sav. Are you serious Lady?


Cross. I fear I shall not rest before I see him, but do not tell him that,
lest in this ^ullen humor, he force his absence to afflict me more; I Will
hold you sir no longer, deal for me as you can, I know you have a guess at my
desire.


Sav. I Will do you service in it.

Exit Crostill. I guess that her desire is to do some act of Revenge upon
him. And (so it be not mortal) it were but Justice in her for so gross a
scorn by him cast upon a well reputed Gentleman. Yet is it observed in her
that she has a violent humor to do, and not to do things oftentimes wilfully
against all good council or persuasion, she has the spirit of contradiction
in her, and an unalterable resolution upon sudden intentions, a most
incorrigible will she has that will not bow nor break. This cross abusive
Letter therefore may do good upon her, however mischievous he might intend
it. If she meant well to him before, it may the faster bring her on, but it
amazes me that he should write so, bearing his Uncle, and my self in hand,
that he so fairly loved her, and besought us to negotiate with her for him,
should she forgive it, yet the wrong to us in his vile manners is
unpardonable, and so sir, I come to you.


Enter Careless. Car. O Mr. Saveall --


Sav. What mischief or despite have I e're done you,
That could provoke your desperate spleen against me,
To wound mine honor?

Car. What do you mean good sir?


Sav. You have employed me basely, made me your
Carrier of scandal, and scurrility to the hands
Of nobleness and virtue. Could the Fiend
Lust that is in you suffer you to write
No other Sense or Language to a person
Of her fair Name, and Worth, then such as Ruffians
Would send to strumpets? or it being such. Enter Wat.
Could not a Porter, or your Pandare there
Serve for the lewd conveyance?
What a welcom's that!

Sav. You might safer
Have sent it so, and your own right hand with it;
Then to have drawn my just revenge upon you.

Draws. Car. Hold I beseech you, and sir, though I lose the Widow by my error
(which was indeed but a mere accident) let me not be so miserable made as to
lose you, before you hear a short Examination --

Delivered you the Letter which I sent
Yesterday to the Damsel that you wot of?

Wat. Yes sir, she read it, kissed it a hundred times,
Then made a bosom Idol on it,
And says you are the noblest Gentleman,
Under a Saint that e're took care for sinner.

Car. Hell take her for a mistaking whore,
She has the widows Letter, and the widow hers,
I found it sir, when you judiciously
Said it was Ruffian-like, and Strumpet* language.

Wat. How could you err so strangely?


Car. O slightly, slightly, curse of my heedless brain!
And then too be trapp'd with carelessness.
When I was so religiously resolved,
T'incline to virtue, and a Marriage life,
Thinking with one hand to cast off my follies,
And to take hold of virtue with the other,
For sir, (I will confess my self to you)
The Letter you conveyed was in defiance,
A loose lived wanton, intended to a whore,
That impudently hopes an interest in me.

Sav. It was not so directed.


Car. I there was
(The Hell confound it on it) my giddines:
I sealed both Letters e're I superscrib'd 'em,
And so gave each the contrary direction.

Sav. 'Twas a gross carelessness, and if you lose
A fortune by it, do not blame your friends.

Car. That fortune should favor a whore before
An honest woman. 'Twas the sweetest Letter,
The daintiest winning things -- (the Devils in it)
She must not carry't from the widow so.
Fetch me the Letter again.

Wat. Do you think she will part with it sir?


Car. Cannot you beat it out of her sir?


Wat. I cannot tell how to do that.


Car. Thus sir -- i will give you demonstration, you malicious Rogue, you that
conspirst with her to betray me, so good a Master I have been to thee, and so
good a friend to her, i will recompense you both.


Wat. You have undone us both, and will discard us now you are warm in your
Unkles bosom again -- but --


Car. But what you Traitor you?


Wat. You put me in good mind, and if I do not somewhat.


Car. I owe you somewhat for your last-nights absence, too pernicious Villain
that kepst thy self out of the way of purpose that I should be drunk, and
abuse my self, and the house here all lay of your absence, There Is somewhat
more for that.


Beats him. Wat. It Is all upon account sit.


Car. Who knows an honest Servingman that wants a good Master.


Exit. Sa. Was it your man's fault Mr. Careless? if I be not revenged etc.


Car. No faith, To speak truth he was as much abused in it, as you in doing a
thing as contrary to his vile conditions, as you did to your noble Name. But I
crave only your pardon, I know not what I do besides. This cross blow of
chance staggers my reason so --


Sa. Well sir, since I have found the error, my reason reconciles me to you,
and since it grew out of your equal intent to cast off the evil, as to
embrace the good, I will re-mediate for you to the widow.


Car. But yet she will know I have had a whore. Yet then you may say, it is such a
running Disease among young Gentlemen, that not one of a hundred has escaped it,
that have proved stayed men afterward, and very sober husbands; As look you
yonder is one may prove, whom now I have in good sooth a great desire to beat.


Enter Lady, and Bellamy talking. Sa. In your Aunts presence, and your Unkles
house; Though I were not his friend; could you be so outrageous? I muse I see
him here though.


Car. Cry you mercy sir, are you his friend?


Sa. I make my self so, he being dependent to my noblest Lord, whom I am
bound to honor.


Car. What Lord I pray, that I may honor him too.


Sa. The Lord Lovely.


Car. That loves women above wine, wine above wealth, wealth above friend, and
friends above himself. There Is no scandal in all that sir.


Sa. It goes so of him indeed, but he loves honor above all those.


La. Mr. Saveall a word.


Sa. Your servant Madam.


Car. In the name of flesh, for what dos his Lordship employ that Angle-worme
to my Aunt? He has had her this hour in private conference, close chamberd up
together, not so much as Matron Nurse in the room with 'em, It Is a fine sleeke
thing, and almost pity to hunt it, but sure I must beat it, as place and time
convenient may serve.


La. Pray^ Mr. Saveall move you my Husband for it, I would not meddle in his
money matters willingly.


Sa. Five hundred pound for my Lord upon the mentioned security, I will break
it to sir Oliver.


Car. Is that the business after so much privacy? ^very pretty, my Aunts a
woman too, and me Uncle may have as forked a fortune, as any of the City, that
lend out money to hedge in Lordships.


La. I am his Lordships servant.


Bell. And I your Lordships good Madam. And yours Mr. Saveall.


Sa. I am for your way Mr. Bellamy.


Car. And I sir, and't please you.


Exit. Sav. Bell. La. George Careless, I would speak with you.


Car. May I not wait upon your Gentleman to the Gate Madam?


La. No good George, though I commend your courtesy, yet would I not you should
neglect your own dignity.


Car. Umh -- I am under Government.


La. The young man, if you have modesty will think you mock him, if not you will
make him become arrogant, know you not whose man he is?


Car. No it is apparent, this over-slighting of him proclaims she loves him,
whose follower Madam, and I know Lords followers, Knights fellows.


La. Not all Lords followers to all Knights George.


Car. To as many as their fair Ladies will give way to, that are not
faint-hearted.


La. I understand you not George; something troubles you, you are not right to
day.


Car. I am only as I am in your favor Madam.


La. Come I know what perplexes you* and it is therefore that I desire to talk
with you; I am not angry with you, but let me tell you George, although not
openly I took notice of the pickle you came home in last night, after your
Uncle was in Bed; to whom, mervayling at your absence I excused you, as gone at
my request to visit some Ladies with whom you staid Supper, I told him, when
you were with your Roucers.


Car. But did you never go?


La. Indeed I did, and he was satisfied.


Car. O my sweet Lady Aunt^! I was indeed amongst'em, and deeply merry.


La. And drunk as deeply!


Car. I will abuse your goodness so no more.


La. Say and hold George, for your own good.


Car. What Is now become of me, I am under correction.


La. I would you could have seen your self, and how your disguise became you,
as I was told, I do but friendly tell you of some passages, as they were to me
related, by those whom I have charmed to speak no more on it. Be secure
therefore in your Uncle.


Car. O my dear heavenly Aunt!


La. First, at the door you bounc'd like a Giant at the Gate of an enchanted
Castle, before which could be opened offense was taken by you at your
Sedan-men; for asking money (as appeard afterward) more then you brought from
the Tavern, and leaving their office fouler by a distempered stomach-full,
then you found it. In the strife for these sad causes your Sword being seized
on, you being unable to use it, were found by my servants at Luggs with your
brace of Corpse bearers, in the dirt, and their poor hovill Chair turned on his
ridge in the Kennell.


Car. I Will never be drunk again.


La. I hope you will say so, when you have heard all George; but by the way
your late stock being spent, here are ten pieces toward a supply.


Car. O sweet golden Aunt!

Well sir, the striefe appeased, you were taken in. Then hay is there no Sack
in the house? It Is for you in you Chamber is replid, up you are had, where is the
Rogue my man? not seen since Yesterday; Fetch me a wench. Bless us cries old
Sim the Butler, we have none in the house, nor cannot send for any out of doors.
Do -- tell me that? is not my Ladies Woman, my Ladies Chamber-maide, the
Laundry-maide, the wench under the Cook, my Ladies Nurse old Winter plum, nor
my Lady her self within? I know, or will know all the she things in the house.


La. But why me up in your bedroll George?


Car. P^eigh.


Beats his head La. You remember none of this!


Car. It is not worth it Madam.


La. Nor how you scared Chambermaid, whom I sent in love to see care taken for
you, not dreaming of any ill thought in you, do you remember how you told her,
and what you would give her, when your Uncle died for a small present courtesy?
she was feign to saisfie you with a false promise to steal to bed to you
before four men could force, or humor you into it.


Car. What an unhallowed Rascal was I!


La. It Is well you consider it now. And still consider George.

How ill excess of Wine, Roaring and Whoring becomes a Gentleman, and how
well sobriety, courtesy, and noble action, and dangers wait upon the one sort,
and what safety accompanies the other!


Car. Wine, Roaring and Whoring, I will lay that saying of yours Madam to my
heart; but Wine is the great wheel that sets the rest a whirling.


La. True George, for had you not first been ^ullied with Wine, you would not
have abused your self to ha tumbled in the dirt with your Litter-mules, nor
offered to seduce my Chamber-maide. Suppose you had overcome her, how could you
have come off but with shame to your self, and the utter ruin of the poor
Wench?


Car. Still she corrects me for my meddling with base matters and people, she
is not angry she says, though I called for her last night i'my drink, she
gives me money, I will now understand her, and whereunto all her former favors
and her later admonitions are directed, and presently appear a grateful
Nephew.


La. Nay, be not sad upon it George, as I would win you from your faults, I
would have you still be cheerful. If any thought troubles you, you may be free
with me George.


Car. O Madam you have made me, and now take me to you.


La. How mean you?


Car. Freely and wholly, the truest, faithfullst servant, and I think the
ablest that any Lady of your lacks and longings ever bestowd a favor on,
though I say'^ my self. You Will swear't when you have tried me, and't be but
hourly for a month together.


La. Is the man sound troe?


Car. I defy Surgeon, or the Potecary can come against me.


La. Sound in your senses sir, I mean.


Car. O for blabbing Madam never fear me, now I am resolved to live soberly,
and be only yours. And with such pleasure, with such safety, secrecy, and
fullness, I will so constantly supply you, that you shall not have time to
dream of the defects of your old man.


La. Do you mean your Uncle, and not know whose wrong you unnaturally and
sinfully pursue?


Car. No man living Madam can do it for him, more naturally and less
sinfully; I am of the same flesh and blood, and bring his youth to your
pleasure, how can you think old Unkles children are got? or how came up the
proverb, She is one of mine Aunts, do you think? You would have a child by
him. All your Cawdells and Cock-broaths will never do it, An old man's
generative spirit runs all into brain, and that runs after covetousness too,
get wealth, not children. Believe it, much Nephews help belongs to it, and
then the children are not degenerate, I cannot think but many Unkles know it,
and give way to it, because stranger bloods shall not inherit their Lands, and
so sweet Aunt if I live not to inherit his, my son may, in your first born.
There will be a sweet comfort to you.


La. But is all this in earnest?


Car. In earnest? yes, And I pray so take it, and let it be a bargain, and now
presently in the Chamber, I will make you my first payment for the purchase.


La. Fie, fie, you do but say so?


Car. That shall be tried presently. Come sweet Madam, I find you are willing,
and I swear I am resolute, and will be as secret as your own woman, if you
will not go I protest i will carry you.


La. Nay preythee George set me down a little.


Car. Psewgh -- I need none of these whesings I.


La. But prathee tell me, do thou not all this only to try me, or am I a
Rogue think you, or would thou seriously that thine own natural Uncle, thy
bountiful Patron, nay thy father on the matter, should suffer such a wrong,
and done by us?


Car. Hark there again, Madam have I not proved sufficiently and plainly,
that I shall in doing the feate for him do him the greatest right in the
world, in getting him, and you an indubitable heir, and to give him both the
comfort, and the glory of it?


La. Was ever such a Reprobate?


Car. And you can do him no wrong (though you had not a Ladies privilege) to
Cuckold him, for assure your self he Cuckqueanes you, now come Madam.


La. You speak not on your knowledge.


Car. I never was his Pimpe, but what I have heard, I have heard. Now come
Madam.


La. I heard Mr. Saveall protest within these three days that he thought my
Husband the chastest man (of a Gentleman) that he knows.


Car. O did he so, Madam, believe it they two have whor'd together, and that
Saveall has pimpt for him oftener then you ever lay with my Uncle.


La. What! since he married me?


Car. What else? Saveall is not only his grave Parasite, but his Pimpe, and
has spent my Uncle more in these civil punctual ways, then I in all my whole
debauches, what did you think he kept him for? O they are a brace of subtle
dry Tweakes, come now Madam.


La. What an inhumane Villain's this*


Car. I Will tell you all now upon our inward acquaintance.


La. You have told too much already to have any acquaintance with me at all,
nor shall you, unless you presently recant all that you have, or would have
said upon this subject.


Car. Madam --


La. Stand further and reply not, less I call in those that shall sadly
silence you. Have you abused your Uncle, and the next best friend you have in
the World, in hope thereby to abuse me most, that was no enemy of yours till
now you justly have provoked me?


Car. I took not a right course.


La. Was this the best construction you could make of my love to you, or a fit
requital, to make me an incestuous Whore?


Car. Yes, yes, a pox my course was right enough, but I undertook her at an
ill season. Her spruce springall left her but now, i will tell her so Madam.


La. Come I perceive you are sorry; and that is a part of satisfaction.
Therefore for once I Will wink at your transgression, especially before others.
Here Is one you see.


Enter Closet. Car. I do, the Devil blind her.


Nur. Madam --


La. But tempt me so again, and i will undo you.


Car. I know how you will undo me witty Madam, Ah --


Aside. La. Nay be not sad George, discover not your self, and you are safe,
for once I tell you.


Car. She Will come about I see.


La. But will you Cozen go, and do that for me?


Car. Most readily good Madam, I have your full directions.


La. All Cosen, if you forget not.


Car. I cannot be so negligent in your service Madam, I find by this feigned
errand she dares not trust her trollop there, I love her wit now too.


Exit. La. He is both schoold, and coold I hope. Now Closet what is your News?


Clo. Of a Citizen Madam that entreats to speak with your Ladyship.


La. Do you not know his Name, or Trade?


Clo. Yes, I had both eene now, but I have such a Head.


La. If you have lost 'em by the way pray go back and seek 'em, or bring you
his business.


Clo. I asked his business Madam, and told him he might trust me with it
without a hand to his book, but he said it could not be delivered, but by his
own word of mouth to your Ladyship.


La. What strange matter is it troe? or what Citizen, is not his Name Saleware?


Clo. Yes Madam, and he is a (O this head) a --


La. A Silkeman is he not?


Clo. Yes Madam the same.


La. I hope his impudent Wife has not told him all; if she has, where is his
remedy in this Woman's Lawcase?


Clo. There Is a Gentleman with him too Madam.


La. Then we shall have it, It Is his Wife sure, well I am prepared for the
encounter. Bid 'em come up, if they grow violent or too bold with me, i will set
my Nephew George upon 'em. It Is not his Wife, what Creature is it troe with me,
Mr. Saleware?


Enter Saleware, Phebe. Sal. Craving your pardon Madam, a few words in the
behalf of this poor Kinsewoman of mine, touching a Gentleman, who I hear
lives in your House, Mr. George Careless, Madam, by whom she has received
much injury.


La. How sir I pray?


Sal. Pray Madam read this Letter, weep not, but hold up thy head Cuz, we
will not be dashed, nor basht in a good cause; pray read you Madam.


La. I am now (Lady) in favor with my Uncle, and in fair possibility of a
good Estate, deporting my self (I intend to do) a civil Gentleman. To which
end (induced as well by reason, as by long continued affections) I tender my
self to you in the holy condition of Marriage. If you vouchsafe your consent,
(which is my most earnest request) I shall not only declare my self a good
Husband, but the most happy,


GEO. CARELESS.


Sal. Wherein appears the injury to your Kinswoman?


Sal. In flying from his Word, and Deed Madam. He has borne her in hand these
two years, and use her at his pleasure, detaining her from her choice of many
good fortunes, and at last sends her this to make amends for all, and denies
his act the next day, sending his man to take the Letter from her, pretending
'twas directed to another. But never the sooner for a hasty word Cosen, we will
not be dashed nor basht, I warrant thee.


La. Here Is the direction. To the Lilly white Hands of Mistress Mariana
Gymcrack, is that your Name Lady?


Phe. I am the sorrowful one that is known by it Madam.


Sal. Never the sooner for a hasty word Cosen.


La. I conceive the business, and find the error, and my great doubt is over.


Sal. Weep not I say.


La. What would you have me do Mr. Saleware?


Sal. You have discretion Madam, and I made choice of your Ladyship to open
this matter unto you, rather then to Sir Oliver himself, whom I would not
willingly exasperate against his Nephew, you may be pleased in a milder way to
temper him, and work a satisfaction for my Kinsewoman; Sir Oliver and your
self Madam, are noble Customers to my Shop, and for your sakes I would not
deal rigourously with your Kinseman, if a gentle end may be made. But, if you
cannot so compound it, the Law lies open, money and friends are to be found, a
good cause shall not be sterv'd, I will not be dashed not basht, Sapientia mea
mihi is my word, and so good Madam you know my mind.


La. It Is pity a Gentlewoman should suffer too much, and I like her so well at
first sight, that I am easily moved to do good for her, is she your
Kinsewoman in blood Mr. Saleware, or your wifes?


Sal. Mine I assure your Ladyship, though my wife can boast as great and noble
friends I thank fortune, as the wife of any Tradesman that carries a head in
the City, (but that is by the by) yet I came of a better house, and am a
Gentleman borne, none disprais'd.


La. Well Mr. Saleware, leave your Kinsewoman with me a little while, you shall
not be scene in my act, i will try what I can do for her.


Sal. With all my heart good Madam, and dee hear Marina, This is a noble Lady,
bear your self discreetly in the business, and toward her: you may get a
Husband by it, or at least a composition that may purchase one to sholder you
up. But carry it high and worthy of the house I brag of, or -- Sapientia mea
mihi, stultitia tua tibi, That Is my sentence.


Phe. Well sir, you need not doubt my high Carriage.


La. Closet.

Enter Closet. Madam.


La. Take* this Gentlewoman to your Chamber, and I charge you let none see her,
or take notice of her, but your self and me, till I give order.


Exit Closet. I shall do something for her doubt not Master Saleware.

Exit. Lady. Sal. I shall be bound to your Ladyship, now to my Shop, to which I
thank my Wife she has been a Wildcat these two days, which must be borne
with as we are friends. And from my House all Night, and yet no
Greene-goose-faire-time; Nor though she were so absent must I be so unfriendly
as to question her, where, or with whom she was; a new Article this twixt Man
and Wife! But Sapientia mea mihi, stultitia sua sibi. Thus it must be where Man
and Wife are friends, and will continue so in spite of chance, or high heeld
shoes, that will awry sometimes with any Women. She is not yet come home
here. What The Shop discovered, Alicia, and Bellamy.
Ladies that, and not my Wife there to handle her handsomely for her Money? My
servants are such Assinegoes! stay, are mine eyes perfect? It Is she, it is my
Friendwife, and in the Courtly habit, which so long she has longed for. And my
Lord Lovelies Gammed with her. His Lordship lay not at home to Night, neither
at his Lodging, I heard that by the way. I cannot think my Lord and she both
sat up all Night to see the Tailors at work, and to hasten the finishing of
those Clothes, if she were with him which I would not be so unfriendly to
inquire for the worth of a Wife. 'Twas right honorably done of him to send her
home as gallantly attended as attired, if she die -- a -- a -- lie with him
all Night, which I will not be such a beast to believe although I kn^w it. I
must come on her with a little wit though, for which I will precogitate.


A. Once more your story, for I am not satisfied with thrice being told it.


Bell. Can a Woman take so much delight in hearing of another Woman's pleasure
taken?


Al. As it was given by you I can, for I am prepared by it to take pleasure from
you, and shall with greediness expect it till I have it.


Bell. Then know I pleased her so, that she protested, (and I believe her) her
Husband never pleased her so.


Al. Or any other man you should have put her to that, her Husband's but a
Bungler.


Bell. How know you that?


Al. I do but guess.


Bell. Nay she swore deeply, and I believed her there too, no man besides her
husband but my self had e're enjoyed her, but let me tell you Lady, as she
was amply pleased she may thank you.


Al. For sending you, I know she did and will.


Bell. That was the first respect, but not the greatest:
For in our Act of love, our first and second Act --

Al. Indeed!


Bell. In real deed, I can speak now like an emboldened Lover.


Al. Well, but what in your Acts of Love?


Bell. I had you still in my imagination, and that enabled me to be more
grateful to her Ladyship, which wrought her thankfulness to you, expressed in a
hundred pieces, sent by me, more then I told before, which are your own she
says, since the other morning she was here with you.


Al. That token confirms all. Had I the spirit of Witchcraft, when putting upon
chance for my Revenge, to find Reward! Have you the money?


Bell. Safe at my Chamber for you.


Al. O you are cunning, less I should break with you you thought to oblige me
by it.


Bell. I Will rather run and fetch you twice the sum, I concealed it only to
give it you unexpectedly.


Al. Sweet Bellamy I am yours, I could be sorry now I have lost so much of
thee. This Kiss, and Name your time --


Sal. Would they had done whispering once, that I might enter safe in my
manners.


Bell. To morrow night.


Al. Shall you be ready so soon think you after your plentiful Lady-feast.


Bell. O with all fullness both of Delight and Appetite.


Al. And with all faith and secrecy I am undone else, you know my vows unto
my Lord.


Bell. And can you think I dare be found your mean, to break'em.


Al. No more my husband comes. Pray Sir return my thanks unto my Lord for his
right noble bounty, and not mine alone, for so my husband in much duty bound
also presents his thanks unto his Lordship.


Sal. Yes, I beseech you sir.


Bell. I am your willing Messenger.


Sal. He is my most honored Lord, and has so many ways obliged me both by my
wife, and in mine own particular that --


Bell. I take my leave.


Exit. Sal. Still this is an Assinego. I can never get him to stand a
Conference, or a Complement with me. But Sapientia mea mihi, what was that
friend you made me send thanks for to his Lordship, what new favor has he
done us, besides his council -- These Clothes, the cost was mine you told me,
out of the odd hundred pound you took, what late Honor has he done us?


Al. I^t not enough I know Friend? will you ever transgress in your
impertinent inquisitions?


Sal. I cry you mercy friend, I am corrected justly.


Al. Will you never be governd by my judgment, and receive that only fit for
you to understand, which I deliver to you undemanded? Do not I know the weight
of your floor think you? Or do it you on purpose to infringe friendship, or
break the peace you live in?


Sal. Never the sooner for a hasty word, I hope Friend.


Al. Did you not Covenant with me that I should wear what I pleased, and what
my Lord liked, that I should be as Lady-like as I would, or as my Lord desired;
that I should come, and go at mine own pleasure, or as my Lord required; and
that we should be always friends and call so, not after the silly manner of
Citizen and Wife, but in the high courtly way?


Sal. All this, and what you please sweet Courtlyfriend I grant as I love
Court-ship, it becomes thee bravely.


Al. O dos it so?


Sal. And I am highly honored; And shall grow fat by the envy of my repining
Neighbors, that cannot maintain their Wives so like Court-Ladies, some
perhaps (not knowing we are friends) will say she is but Tom Salewares Wife,
and she comes by this Gallantry the Lord knows how, or so. But Sapientia mea
mihi, let the Assinegos prate while others shall admire thee, sitting in thy
Shop more glorious, then the Maidenhead in the Mercers arms, and say there is
the Nonparrell, the Paragon of the City, the Flower-de-luce of Cheapside, the
Shop Court-ladie, or the Courtshop Mistress, have my sweet Courtly friend?


Al. How do you talk? As if you meant to instruct'em to abuse me.


Sal. Sapientia mea mihi.


Al. To prevent that I will remove out of their walk, and keep shop no more.


Sal. Never the less for a hasty word I hope Friend.


Al. Fie, it is uncourtly, and now i will tell you Friend, unaskd, what I have
done for you besides in my late absence, and all under one.


Sal. Under one! yes, I could tell her under whom if I durst.


Al. What Is that you say Friend? me thinks you mutter.


Sal. No Friend, I was guessing what that other thing might be that you have
done for me, all under one. You have taken the House i will warrant, that my
Lord liked so.


Al. By my Lords favor and direction I have taken it, And I will furnish it so
Courtly you will admire.


Sal. Must I then give up Shop, or lie so far remote?


Al. No you must keep your Shop Friend, and lie here if you please.


Sal. And not with you but there?


Al. No not with me at all Friend, that were most uncourtly.


Sal. But I shall have a Chamber in your house, and next to yours. Then in my
Gown and Slippers Friend at Midnight -- or the first Cock. --


Al. Softly for stumbling Friend, i will do you any honorable offices with my
Lord, as by obtaining suits for you, for which you must look out, and find
what you may fitly beg out of his power, and by courtly favor. But keep your
Shop still Friend, and my Lord will bring and send you such custom, that your
Neighbors shall envy your wealth, and not your Wife; you shall have such
commings in abroad and at home, that you shall be the first head nominated in
the next Sheriff season, but I with my Lord will keep *you from pricking. Be
you a Citizen still Friend, it is enough I am Courtly.


Sal. Here Is a new Courtly humor, I see no remedy, unless I run my self out
of credit, defy the life of a Citizen, and turn Courtly too.


Al. What Is that you say? do you not mutter now Friend?


Sal. No, not a syllable Friend, but may not I give up Shop and turn Courtly
too Friend?


Al. As you respect my Lord, and your own profit, you must be a Citizen still,
and I am no more a Citizens Wife else, and she must be a Citizens Wife, that
wust do all in all with my Lord Friends. Though my Lord loves the Clothes of
the Court, he loves the diet of the City best Friend, what ever I wear
outwardly he must find me Citizens Wife, which Friend, O he is a sweet Lord.


Sal. Well it shall be then as the sweet Lord will have it, Sapientia mea mihi.


Exeunt omnes. ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Lord Lovely, Crostill, Bellamy. Lo. LAdy, it is true he is a bashful
Lover,
Unskilled to court a Widow, has not yet,
The Act methodicall to swear he loves you,
Must and will have you, nor the moving boldness
To stir your blood by putting of you to it,
Or showing you how it is, before the Priest
Declares it lawful. But he has love and sweetness,
Which you will find with full and rich content;
And look (look here) what a long, middle finger he has,
Which with thin Jaws, and Roman Nose,
Are never failing signs of Widows joys.

Cross. Your Lordship is disposed to mirth;


Lo. It is
My care to put you in a course of mirth,
Nay of felicity.

Cross. In marrying of that stripling!


Lo. Do not think sl^ghtly of him, tho'he appears
Modest and bashfully, if I have any judgment,
He Is a fit match for you. His outward fortune
For his estate, I will make good to him,
And for his inward virtue never doubt
He Will make that good to you; However still
He holds his much commended Modesty.

Cross. My Lord you much commend his modesty,
And bashfulnesse, urging your confidence
Of his strange inward hid abilities
( I hope your Lordships pardon) can you tell,
If he has with that bashful modesty
Got any of his Mothers Maids with child?
Or of his Fathers Tenants Wifes, or Daughters?
I would have some assurance.

Lo. Then i will tell you.
These Widows love to hear of manly acts,
And choose their husbands by their backs, and faces.

Cross. My Lord you said youl'd tell me.


Lo. Yes, but I would not have you cunningly
To sift discoveries from me to his wrong.

Cross. I am loath to speak so plainly to you my Lord,
But by the worst that you can speak of him
I may the better like him.

Lo. That Is her humor;
Then hark you Widow, to avoid his blushes,
Suppose I tell he has got a bastard.

Cross. You may as well suppose i'l^ say 'twas well.


Lo. What say you to two or three!


Cross. The more the merrier.


Lo. He has no less then five old Gentlemen's Young Wives with child this
Moon, but got all in One week.


Cross. Indeed!


Lo. Yes, in good deed, and lusty.


Cross. Good deed call you it, to get other Men's Children?


Lo. Suppose they have the husbands consents.


Cross. I suppose they are wittalls then.


Lo. No they are wisealls, and it is a thing in much request among landed men,
when old and wanting issue of their own, to keep out riotous Kindred from
inheritance, who else would turn the Land out of the Name.


Cross. An excellent policy!


Lo. You know the Lady Thrivewell.


Cross. And her old husband, and his riotous Kinseman too.


Lo. You will hear more hereafter, but now to him again, for whom I am
spokesman.


Cross. In a strange way me thinks.


Lo. He is sent for far and near on those occasions, he is of so sweet a
Composure, and such sure taking metal, that he employes my care to have him
well bestowd before he begins to wast.


Cross. Is It possible he has done so much, and says so little?


Lo. The deepest waters are most silent,

But he can speak, and well to Bellamy.


Bell. My Lord.


Lo. I have made your love known to this Lady.


Bell. My love my Lord?


Lo. And have begun your suit; follow't your self.


Bell. My suit my Lord to her? I never moved your Lordship to it, Though I presume
she may be a happy fortune to one of my condition; a poor and younger brother;
only made rich and happy in your Lordships service, and overflowing favors.


Lo. Which i will take off of you if you slight my care in seeking your
preferment to this Lady, of beauty equal with her fair estate, in both which
she is great, and her achievement will be the Crown, and the continuance of
all my favors to you, you are lost* if you pursue it not, I would thy old
Uncle Bellamy saw thy Bashfulnesse.


Cross. Your Lordship seems now to woo for me, not him, however I am bound in
thanks to your nobleness, in your fair proportion, I hope, I shall not be so
poor to require an advocate, when I shall yield to have a husband. But your
mirth becomes your honor, and the young gentleman's reservednes him, Ha, ha, ha.


Lo. How mean you Mistress Crostill?


Cross. I do commend your mirth my Lord, for the lusty strain you spoke him
in, that he had yet five children in one week, wherein I may presume you
thought you had moved to my liking, ha, ha, ha --


Lo. I am glad I have made you merry, But you will wish if you reject him --


Cross. If I reject one that tenders not himself! yet I commend his caution.


Lo. As how I pray?


Cross. As thinking I am one of your cast pieces
(Knowing how well your Lordship loves the game)
And now would put me on him,
But you misprise me sinfully sweet Youth
In such a thought, how e're you should not scorn
To ride in your Lords cast boots, though you be Gentleman of's house.

Lo. Come now he shall have none of you.


Cross. I Will hear him say he will not first, by your Lordships leave.


Lo. Spirit of contradiction!


Cross. Stay sir, would you be content to have me?


Bell. You heard my Lord say I should not.


Cross. But say he say again you shall, speak, will you have me?


Lo. Say no ( I find her now) that is the way to win her.


Cross. Without instructions good my Lord.


Bell. Lady I find so much your scorn already,
That to be wedded to it, I should despair
(My much unworthiness considered) to convert it
Ever to love, and it is your love, before
Your Person or Estate, that my affection
Ought to direct me to.
In answer therefore, to your will, you have me,
I must say no, till I perceive some sign
Of love in you toward me.

Cross. I now he speaks!
Some signs of love in me? How would you have it?
Must I declare it to you, before you seek it?

Bell. No; I would seek it zealously, but my Lord
Is off on it now, and I may lose his favor.

Cross. Is your love limited by his favor then?


Bell. Not limited: but (as it is as yet,
But in its infancy) a little checked,
Though it still grows, and may extend beyond
All limitation to so fair an object
As is your self: But still my own demerit
Curbs my ambition more then love emboldens.

Cross. He speaks within me now.


Enter Saveall, Careless. Sa. Stay, let us retire. Here is the Lord Lovely.


Car. Be he a Lord of Lords i will not retire a foot.


Lo. What servants Mistress Crostill do you keep.
To let intruders in?
O Mr. Saveall!

Carless salutes Crostill, and puts by Bellamy. Sa. The humblest of your
Lordships servants.


Lo. What Gentlemen is that you bring with you?


Sa. It is the Newphew of the good Knight Sir Oliver Thrivewell, of which Sir
Oliver, I have procured unto your Lordship the sum which you desired by your
servant Mr. Bellamy.


Lo. For that I thank him and you, but I could wish you had not brought that
Nephew hither now.


Sa. Certes my Lord I am sorry.


Lo. My reason is, I have entered Bellamy a suitor to the Widow.


Sa. He also comes a suitor.


Lo. And is in deep discourse with her already, I Will see fair play.


Car. But you shall hear me Widow, and that to the point and purpose.


Lo. Lady at my request, do this Gentleman (who made the first approach) the
favor to be, heard, and answered first.


Car. As his approach was first my Lord, she has heard him first already, and
my request is to be heard now, and then let her answer both him, or me, or
neither, what care I?


Lo. Your Name is Careless I take it.


Car. I came to talk with this Gentlewoman.


Cross. Pray my Lord forbear him, and let him speak, what do you say sir?


Car. I say I love you, do resolve to marry you, and then to use you as I list.


Cross. I say I love you, do resolve to marry you, and then to use you as I
list. -- To Bell. --


Bell. This to me Lady? i will take you at your word.


Cross. Stay, I do but tell you what he says.


Car. Take her at her word again sir, and I shall take you by the luggs. I say
again you shall have none but me.


Cross. I say again, you shall have none but me, -- To Bell.


Car. What, do you fool me, or him, your self, or all?


Cross. Pray sir how old are you?


Car. Are you good at that, pray sir, how old are you? -- To Bell.


Lo. You press beyond your privilege, which is only to speak to the
Gentlewoman.


Car. My Lord I am a Gentleman.


Lo. You may tell her so.


Sa. Let we beseech your Lordship.


Take him aside. Car. How can you use a Gentleman that loves you
Dearer then Life, and only bends his study
By all means to deserve you, one that (can not?)
Will not, while there are ways to die, live out of
Your favor, with so much despightfull scorn,
That when he speaks his soul to you through his lips,
You make his Language yours, and give't a Boy?

Cross. What Gentleman's that you speak of?


Car. The man that speaks it I am he.


Cross. All this sir in effect, and more of my affection, can I speak to you.


Car. Uns, but you shall not, you mistake the person to whom you are, or ought
to direct your affection, you mistake strangely.


Cross. No more then once a Lover, or at least,
A bold pretender, having in civil language
Expressed in writing his affection
To a chaste Mistress sea^'d, and directed it,
And on the contrary, courted his virtuous friend in brothell language;
To a lewd strumpet. Have I hit you sir?

Car. What can I say now! Slife if that anger you after the error found, and
confessed, i will write worse to you, and in earnest.


Cross. Mr. Bellamy some other time I shall be glad to see you.


Car. She means that to me now, but i will take no notice; i will find as good
a Widow in a Tavern Chimney, O she is a dainty Widow!


Cross. He looks with scorn at me, I must not lose him, yet dare not stay,
for fear I tell him so.
I humbly crave your pardon good my Lord,
For my ill manners, and abrupt departure;
The cause is urgent, and I beseech your mercy,
Question it not.

Lo. Let your will guide you.


Cross. Mr. Saveall I thank you for my Suitor.


Car. Nay but Lady.


Cross. Yes you shall controwle me in my own House.


Exit. Car. Yes, yes, I mean so too, but you shall woo me hard first.


Lo. It Is a mad Widow, which of these two now think you has the Better on it?


Sa. I think he shall in the end have the best my Lord, that can slight her
most.


Lo. It Is my opinion too, and hear me --


Aside. Car. Sir, I have seen you but twice, and it has been at places where
I cannot allow of your resorts, first at my Aunts, and now here at my Widows.


Bell. Your Widow sir! I thought she had been the Widow of one deceased.


Car. Thou art a witty, pretty Child. But do you here use your wit, out of the
smell-reach of your Lords perfumed Gloves, and I shall take you by the Nose.


Bell. Forbear sir, I have a Handkercher.


Car. And let me find you there no more, nor here I charge you.


Bell. I hear your charge sir, but you must leave it to my discretion to obey
it, or not.


Car. Trust to your discretion!


Lo. And so commend me to my Lady Thrivewel Come Bellamy away, what is your
discourse?


Bell. All fair and friendly my Lord.


Car. Very good.


Lo. So should it be with Rivalls, fare you well Mr. Careless.


Car. Your Lordships -- with a whew.


Sav. Will you walk homewards?


Car. Excuse me sir I pray.


Sav. It will not be convenient to return this day unto the Widow.


Car. Fear it not sir, I like her not so well now.


Sa. Do your pleasure.


Exit. Car. Have you cross tricks Mistress Crostill? well I will go drink your
Crotchets out of my Pate, then home, and do that which mine Aunt and I must
only know. This is her Night of Grace, if she keep touch with me.


Exeunt Omnes. ACT IV. SCENE II.
Enter Lady, Phebe, Closet. La. IN truth your story is pitiful, but your own
folly has brought your scourge upon you.


Phe. 'Twas through the blindness of my love, and my credulity Madam, wrought
by his strong Temptations.


La. Well, for this once i will strain a point of honor for you, chiefly indeed
in answer of his rude unnatural presumption in attempting me. That a Villain
can still be so barbarously lustful! If in this way I fit him not, and cause
him to desist his beastly purpose, I will discover all to his undoing. Closet
you know my mind, and fu^l directions for the conveyance of our design.


Clo. Yes Madam, doubt not. Though I have but a naughty head at most, other
matters, I dare not trust it for a sure one at such conveyances.


La. I presume to further the matter, he will come home Drunk by his not coming
to Supper.


Clo. Then he may forget what he so much expected, or sleep away his
expectation.


Phe. No, he will then be the more vehement till his desire be over.


La. You know his humor best it seems, away, away, my husband comes.


Exit ^lo. Phe. Enter Thrivewell and Wat. Thr. Well Wat, for this discovery
i will make thy reward worth ten such masters services.


Thr. Sweet heart I have a suit to you -- But first what Woman's that with
Nurse?


La. A Kinswoman of hers whom she would prefer to me, but I have answered
her, I will not charge your purse with more attendants; only I have given her
leave to entertain, and lodge her this night.


Thr. That Is my good Girl.


La. Now what is your suite sir, (as you are pleased to call it) which I would
have to be your free command?


Thr. It Is for my absence from thee, to accompany Mr. Saveall, to bring a dear
friend on his way to Gravesend to night, who is suddenly to depart the Land.


La. These sudden departures of friends out of the Land, are so frequent, and
that I may believe you intend really, and no fained excuse; now will I think
as long as you have good and substantial Made-worke at home, that you will
seek abroad for any more slight sale-ware.


Thr. No more o'that Sweet heart, farewell, expect me early in the morning.


Exit. La. I am glad of his absence to night, lest there should happen some
cumbustion in the house by his un^uly Nephew, in case he should discover my
deceit in beguiling him with his own wench instead of me, I do even tremble to
think upon the unnatural Villain, that would offer so to wrong his Uncle. I
thought I had schooled him sufficiently, and beaten him off at his first
attempt, and he to assail me again with more forcible temptations urging me
to a promise.


Enter Closet. Clo. The young Gentleman is come in Madam, and as you foresaw
very high flowne, but not so drunk as to forget your promise! He Is going to
bed in expectation of your approach.


La. And have you put his Damsel into her nightattire?


Clo. Most Lady-like I assure you Madam.


La. And let her be sure to steal from him before Day.


Clo. Yes, with all silence Madam, she has promised.


Ex. La. May Ladies that shall hear this story told,
Judge mildly of my act since he is so bold.

ACT IV. SCENE III.
Saleware, Bellamy. Sa. NAy but look you Mr. Bellamy, it is not I protest that
I am jealous, I make this inquiry for my wife. I jealous? I an Asinego then, I
am as confident of my wife, as that she is in this house, how ere you deny her
to me.


Bell. Why Lady, you are not jealous now? If you were not, you would believe me
she is not here.


Sa. Without equivocation, Mr. Bellamy, she is not here -- indeed, under your
foot, but she is here in the house, and under some body for ought any body
knows, but my self, that do confide in her as I say, and will know no such
matter; And so my Lords will be done with her, I hope I shall see her well to
morrow, and at her own house.


Bell. Can such language proceed out of any but a jealous mouth?


Sa. What an Assinego's this! I say again, I do confide in her, nor will I be
dashed, or basht at what any man says of, or against her; And therefore me
thinks it is very strange that you should deny her to me, that comes not to
molest her.


Bell. There you are again. But since no denial will serve your turn, indeed
she is here in this house, and in bed by this time.


Sa. Away, away, you mock in faith, you are a wag she is no more here then I am,
if sh^e were here can I think you would tell?


Bell. How came you to think, or dream she was in this house at all?


Sa. I neither thought it, or dreamt it. I but sir, a waterman brought me a
Letter in have from one Mr. Anonimus, intimating that my Ally was with a
private friend at this house, and to lie here all night (a very likely matter)
what private friend has she but my Lord, and that in a right honorable way, I
confide in 'em both for that; but at this house is such a thing my Lord having
diverse Lodgings, and she a house of her own at his dispose and command, that
is such a thing to be thought or dreamt on!


Bell. Why came you to inquire then of such a thing?


Sa. Why sir, this Anonimus writ that I should come hastily hither, and ask to
speak with you Mr. Bellamy, and I should know further; hither I came, here I
find you* you deny she is here, and what do I inquire any further?


Bell. You hear me say again she is here.


Sa. Go you are a wag again, she here? is my Lord here? or any private friend?
alas, alas you are too young Mr. Bellamy, and may as well persuade me I am
jealous.


Bell. Well sir, to put you out of all jealousy and doubt (if you be in any) I
was the Anonimus that sent you the Letter to draw you hither and declare my
self your friend, which shall instantly be manifest to you, if now you have a
mind to lie with your own wife before any other man.


Sa. Then she is here indeed belike.


Bell. Pray come with me into the next Chamber.


Sa. This is some waggery plotted by my wife, I smell it.


Exit. The Bed put forth, Alicia in it. Enter Bellamy, Saleware, with Light.
Bell. But you must be sure to say when she discovers you, that you came of your
own accord, unsent for, as inspired or possessed by some Dream or Vision, to
find her here.


Sa. Well, if this be not my wifes waggery in a maine proof of her chastity, I
am not here. I will do so sir.


Bell. So then, obscure your self a while, while I approach her.


Al. Who Is there?


Bell. It Is I, your servant Lady.


Al. Sweet Bellamy why come you not to Bed?


Sa. Good.


Al. Dos the love that was so hot, and the desire that was so fervent, begin to
cool in you?


Sa. Good again, as if he an Assinego had ever made love to her fine waggery!


Al. Has my mere consent to satisfy you, cloyed you?


Sa. Consent to my Lords man, a likely matter!


Al. Or did you court me to a promise only to try my fidelity to your Lord,
and then betray me?


Bell. Dear Lady think not so, but that I am struck into stone with wonder,
and amazement at the most unexpected accident that ever crossed a Lover.


Sa. Dainty waggery this, what little mad Rogues are these to plot this to make
me jealous?


Al. Pray, are you serious? what is the accident?


Bell. I will not be so crossed, but kill him rather. To enjoy such a Mistress, who
would not kill a horned beast? yet blood is such a horror --


Sa. Very pretty.


Al. Will you not tell me?


Bell. Speak lower gentle Lady.


Al. Why prithee, who can hear us?


Bell. I know not by what Magic your jealous husband has made discovery of our
being here, he wrought sure with the Devil!


Al. I am undone then. He will tell my Lord.


Sa. I shall undo my self then Friend. No, Sapientia mea mihi. Be not dashed
nor basht for that good Friend, if there were any such matter: but this is
waggery, fine waggery plotted betwixt you* to tempt my jealousy, but never the
sooner for a hasty word I warrant you. Mr. Bellamy that my Wife is here I thank
you; But how I came to know it you shall never know from me; you sent not for
me, I am sure you were not the Anonimus. Indeed it should have been Anonima
Friend-wife: for it was thy act I dare swear; However you do not hear me
say I was sent, or writ for at all, more then by a Dream or Vision: But here I
am and mean to remain to night; I hope the house can afford you another Bed
in it Mr. Bellamy, and you to leave me to my own Friend-wife, I like the
lodging most curiously sweet Friend, and I prithee, lets try heartily what
luck we may have in a strange place, I would so feign have a little one like
thee.


Bell. I Will leave you to your wishes, a good night to you.


Al. Pray sir a word first, husband be farther.


Sa. Faces about Tom Saleware, and march forwards.


Al. You told me sir, of a hundred pound that your sweet Lady Thrivewell sent
me.


Bell. It Is true I have it for you.


Al. But she has since countermanded you to keep it, has she, and to mock my
expectation of that, and you* why have you foold me thus?


Bell. I rather should suspect your craft in this prevention: but love forbids
me, and I must conclude, it is witchcraft in your husband.


Al. Come let us kiss friends, and (sweet) to morrow night I will prevent his
Witchcraft, in the full enjoyment of our free pleasures: be you true to me.


Bell. May all that is Man in me forsake me else.


Al. Another kiss and then good night.


Sa. Are you ^still whispering? no matter, let 'em whiswer.


Bell. Good night.


Exit. Al. Now may the spirits of all injured women, be added to mine own, for
my revenge, which I this night will dream of slighted and mocked, he and his
like shall know,

That when a yiedling woman is so crossed,
All thoughts but of revenge with her are lost.

Sa. O he is gone -- Ally, Friend I would say, And now I prithee tell me how,
or why thou came hither.


Al. Will you pardon me?


Sa. Yes faith, I were no friend else.


Al. 'Twas but to try if I could make thee jealous.


Sa. In waggery! did not I say so! when do my prophecies fail?


Al. But what brought you hither think you?


Sa. A Letter from one Anonimus, but i will eat Spiders, and break if you sent
it not.


Al. Give me the Letter.


Sal. Where is it? facks I have lost it.


Al. 'Twas I indeed that sent it.


Sa. Did not I say so too? and that it should have been Anonima, Sapientia mea
mihi, when do my prophecies fail? i will to bed instantly while the prophetic
spirit is in me, and get a small Prophet or a Southsayer.


Al. No, i will have no bedfellow to night.


Sa. Nere the less for a hasty word, I hope Friend.


Al. I am at a word for that.


Sa. I Will lie upon thy feet then.


Al. Well, you may draw the Curtains, and sleep by me.


Sa. Sapientia mea mihi, stultitia tua tibi.
Puts in the bed,

Exit. ACT IV. SCENE IV.
Phebe passes over the stage in night attire, Careless follows her as in the
dark. Car. MAdam, Madam, sweet Madam, 'twill not be day these three hours,
stay but three minuits longer, but a touch more, she is whipped into her Chamber.
Could I but find the Door -- I know my Unkle's from home -- O she returns
with light: that is well.


Enter Lady, a light. La. What aile you! Are you mad?


Car. Would not any man be mad for losing such a Bedfellow? sweet Madam, let
us retire without any noise.


La. What an insatiate beast are you? would you undo for ever both me and your
self?


Car. Not with one do more I warrant you, come away Madam, Madam, somebody
knocks mainly at the gate; and I believe it is my Master returned before his
time!


Enter Closet. La. I cannot think it is he.


Car. It Is the Rogue my man I warrant drunk, and has forgot I turned him away,
but he shall spoil no sport. Come away Madam.


La. Closet, go your ways down, and hark before you --


Clo. -- I will Madam --


Exit. Car. So now come Madam, I commend you in the charge you have given your
watch-woman.


La. What charge do you guess?


Car. Why to tell my Uncle (if he be come) that he must not come near you,
that you have had no rest to Night till just now you are fallen asleep, and so
forth.


La. Go you are a wicked fellow; I am sorry for any the least favor I have
done thee, and do thou dare to attempt me once more, i will have thee turned
headlong out of my doors.


Car. I have got her with child to night, with a spark of mine own spirit,
and longs already to do me mischief. The boy will be like me, therefore it is
pity to knocked of the head: But come Madam the other crash and good night, must I
drag you to it?


La. Touch me but with a finger, and I Will raise the House.


Car. You dare not sure, and now take heed you vex me not, have you not been my
whore?


La. You dare not say so, for spoiling your fortune.


Car. Faith but I dare, and if you will not obey me in a course of further
pleasure to night, fetch me a hundred pieces to take a course abroad withal,
do ye look? I Will make you fetch me hundred after hundred Huswife, when I
want it, or shall be pleased to call for it. All comes out else, the gates of
your fame flies open Lady, I will proclaim our Act.


La. Dare you forfit your own Reputation so?


Car. I shall gain Reputation by it in the company I keep abroad, and if the
Cuckold my Uncle come to the knowledge of it at home, I shall possess him that
you lustfully tempted me to it.


La. Can thou be so villanously impudent todestroy thine own fortune to ruin
me?


Car. You may conceal all then, and so will I, and mend my fortune by yours, I
will live bravely upon your fortune, and the heir which I have got to Night
shall inherit it, my Unkles estate. And therefore indeed I would have all
conceald; for my child's good, or rather for mine own: for it shall go hard if
I put him not into a course in his minority to consume the estate upon me
before he come to age.


La. I am undone.


Car. And O that ever I did it!


La. Thou Villain, have undone me.


Car. Come i will do you again, and then all is whole again;
You Are both undone, O you prodigious monsters
That have betwixt you made me monster too!
What Is to be done, but that I kill you both,
Then fall upon my sword.

Enter Thrivewell Saveall. Sav. Sir, you resume the temper of humanity,
And let the Law distinguish you from them,
You neither are to be their Executioner,
Nor to fall with them.

Thr. Life to me is torment.


Car. O the Devil, what a case am I in now!


La. Pray hear me sir?


Thr. Can more be said to aggravate thy shame,
Or my affliction, then I have heard already?

Sa. Let me entreat you hear her.


La. What shame did you, or what affliction I
Suffer, when you discoverd unto me
Your bargain of a hundred pound in Saleware,
You understand me. How was life a torment
To me then think you?

Thr. Did you not vow forgements then? and thus,
You freely would forgive my act? and thus
Now to revenge it on me to my ruin,
And your own endless infamy? O it is horrid.

La. It Is no revenge at all, only a show
To startle you, or try your manly temper,
And so near to be even with ye as to let you know,
what some wife might perhaps have done being so moved,
It was my plot indeed to strain you hither to this false
fire discovery, for which i will give you reasons.

Thr. O gross dissimulation.


La. Mr. Saveall, you have done many fair offices for his Nephew, do this for
me, entreat him to a Conference a few minutes in my Chamber; if I clear not my
self in his and your opinion, and that by witnesses, let me be found the shame
of all my Sex.


Sa. Sir, my counsels have been prevalent with your judgment, let me persuade
you.


Thr. But I will have that friend thrust out of door first.


La. I would not that you should, nor give a look, or word to him till you
have heard me; Then exercise your Justice.


Sav. Sir be induced to it.


Thr. You have prevayl'd.


La. Go to your Bed again George, and sleep, be not afraid of Bug-beares.


Exit. Car. Hows this? She Is come about again, and has patched all up already.
I hope she will work mine Uncle to reward me for my Night-worke, and bring him
in time to hold my sti^rop while his George mounts her; She Is a delicate
well-going beast! I know but one to match her in a course, just the same pace
and speed as if I had only had the breaking, and managing of her my self,
but the mark goes out of Phebes mouth now; and i will play my Aunt against all
the Town. But how she thought to fright me with villain and impudent. And
now go to bed George, ha, ha, ha, I find her drift. No wit like women's at a
sudden shift.


ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Old Bellamy, Lovely. Lov. BEllamy thou art welcome, and for thy Nephew I
must ever thank thee, he is my best companion.


Old Bell. O my good Lord without boast be it spoken, I have ever been right
and straight to your honor, and never did you an ill office in Man, Woman, or
Child, what I have said of 'em they have proved at first, or I have wrought 'em
to at last. But what do I speak on it, I have ever been for your Lordship,
all things I have sworn for you, I have fought for you, I have brok'd for you;
I have pimpt for you, but what do I speak on it?


Lo. You need not Bellamy: for I know all.


Ol. B. Oh the Gentlemen's Wives, and Farmers Daughters that I have presented to
you in your Summer Progresses, and winter Journeys about the Countries. But
what do I speak on it --


Lo. Because thou love to champ upon the bit to please thy old coltish tooth
still, thou love the memory of the former sweets which now thou can not
relish.


Ol. B. And here in the City, I have pledged more of your several Mistresses,
then in my conscience there be honest Women in it. But what do I speak on it?


Lo. I never had so many man.


Ol. B. Or if you had, what do I speak on it? and in my conscience again, I
have drunk more to your Lordships health in my days, then any Wine-cellar in
the City at this day, contains of Spanish French, and Rhenish; but what do I
speak of that either?


Lo. True Bellamy, fall then upon ^ome other subject.


Ol. B. Yes, my good Lord, and I pray your Lordship tell me, dos not my Nephew
drink and wench pretty handsomely? I would feign have him take after me, and
not his drunken father.


Lo. How well he shifts his subject, wicked old fellow!


Ol. B. Dos he not begin to fall to yet?


Lo. Not he.


Ol. B. Not a bit nor a soope? dos he do nothing by example? or has your
Lordship left it? or dos he carry it like a Gentleman?


Lo. Discreetly and Virgin-like.


Ol. B. Pretty commendation for a young Courtier.


Lo. I would for my deserved love to him have put him upon a fair young Widow
of a great fortune, but could not make him look upon her like a suitor.


Ol. B. Just such a bashful puppy was my brother, his Father; I wonder how my
Mother came by him; My Father was right, and she was right, and I have been
right, but what do I speak on it?


Lo. True Bellamy, speak of somewhat else.


Ol. B. The Boy will nere grow up to me, I thought to have left him somewhat, I
must discard him.


Lo. If you do, he is in me provided for.


Ol. B. What can your Lordship love him for?


Lo. Come i will tell thee, and be comforted. He has something of thee in him.
He will pimpe most conveniently.


Ol. B. That Is something indeed.


Lo. And for his modesty which is a rare benefit of nature in him, I dare trust
him with a Mistrisse, as I would an Eunuch.


Ol. B. Benefit! A defect I fear, yet I may hope in time some Mistress of your
Lordships may tempt, and bring him forwards.


Lo. No I am confident -- Now your news.


Enter Page, whisper. Good Bellamy walk in the Gallery a while.

Ol. B. Some Mistress is coming to him, but what do I speak on it?


Exit. Go bid her come in. Exit. Page.
What brings her so unseasonably?
Enter Alicia, Saleware. Al. Stay you at distance yet a while Friend, till I
call you.


Sal. Faces about Tom Saleware.


Exit. Lo. How now! How is it with my love? Ha! How comes a trouble on this
Face, where my delights are ever wont to Revell?


Al. O my Lord --


Lo. Say who has injured thee? Has thy husband taken up the uncivil boldness
to abuse thee? or be it any other man, it shall be death, or an undoing to him.


Al. My Lord, I am wronged, but would be loath to engage your noble person in my
quarrel, some servant of yours may do it.


Lo. Of what condition is thy wrong? tell me; and who of my Servants thou
would have to right thee?


Al. I would have Bellamy, how think you? is he faithful to you?


Lo. How can thou question it? Has he not ever been so?


Al. Your Lordship has well trusted him I know.


Lo. I do not know the man, I trust, or love so well.


Al: But would your Lordship part with any Jewel, or choice thing you love,
and have intended only for your own particular use, to him, or let him be your
own partner in it?


Lo. Troth I think I should; only thy self excepted, but what is thy wrong I
prithee, or wherein should Bellamy right thee?


Al. Bellamy has wronged me to think me so unworthy as to be tempted to his
lust; Bellamy has wronged your honor in that ambitious attempt.


Lo. Thou amazest me.


Al. And Bellamy must right me, and your honor; or you must cast off him or me.


Lo. Give me at least some circumstance to make this probable.


Al. Must not* I be believed? you shall have instance then to make it truth,
Friend Thomas.

Pray verify unto my Lord the discovery you made last night of me, and Mr.
Bellamy.


Enter Saleware. Sal. 'Twas thus my Lord an't like your Lordship, my wife was
forth at evening ant like your Lordship, as she may have often been ant like
your Lordship, and may be as often again ant like your Lordship.


Lo. Well pray thee on.


Sal. Forth she was ant like your Lordship, I staid supper, and almost bed
time for her ant like your Lordship; And had even given her over for all night
ant like your Lordship, as I may of any night ant like your Lordship.


Lo. O^ I pray thee.


Sal. Yes ant like your Lordship upon some private notice given to me an't like
your Lordship, that she was at a private lodging ant like your Lordship, with a
private friend ant like your Lordship, over I went, and found her abed ant like
your Lordship, and Mr. Bellamy even ready to go to bed to her ant like your
Lordship.


Lo. Is this true?


Sa. As true as your Lordship lives ant like your Lordship.


Lo. How could you be betrayed so?


Al. The Villain fetched me forth, and lodged me there as by your
appointment, and for your own pleasure; but when 'twas late, and that your
Lordship came not, thinking he had an advantageous opportunity, he soon
discovers his love to me, and his treachery to your Lordship; I being in a
strait only Aside.
(finding happy means to send for my husband to prevent him) made him a false
promise being secure in my husband; and what had followed your Lordship
understands.


Lo. I Will nere trust man can blush and weep again.


Sa. Insooth ant like your Lordship I thought all had been but waggery ant like
your Lordship, to tempt me unto jealousy, and my wife knowing well enough that
I was by, bade Sweet Bellamy come to Bed, O Wag!


Lo. What messenger brought you the notice Mr. Saleware?


Sa. A waterman my Lord, and like your Lordship, here is the letter, and like
your Lordship.


Al. You told me you had lost it, when I asked ^ort to burn it.


Sa. I thought I had Friend, but I found it now, and given it my Lord before I
was aware Friend.


Al. Hell take that Letter.


Sa. Now abotts on it for me, if thou be angry Friend.


Al. You had better ha swallowed it full of Ratsbane.


Sa. Nere the sooner for a hasty word I hope Friend.


Reads. Lo. Mr. Saleware, if you will avoid a new addition of horns, come
with this bearer over into Montagues close, where you shall find your Wife
with a private Friend, at a private lodging; Have thither, and ask for one
Bellamy.

Anonimus. What Ridles this? This is Bellamies own hand, I know it, why should
he send to prevent himself? or how could she write his Character? This Woman
is not right.


Al. Do you note my art my Lord, to write as in a Man's Name, when I wrought it
my self?


Sa. And did not I tell you Friend, it should have been Anonima? Sapientia mea
mihi.


Lo. Within there call Bellamy.


Enter Page. Pa. He Is not within my Lord, and has not been to night.


Al. His absence is another circumstance to a probability my Lord.

But he was seen this morning to go in at Sir Anthony Thrivewels.


Lo. Go let my Coach be ready presently.


Exit. Pa. He should receive 500 l. there for me, I trust he will not ^urnish
himself with it for a flight.

Al. My Lord I gave you an inkling of a familiarity betwixt him and the Lady
Thrivewell, he has since declared their act of lust to me, and urged it for an
instance to my yiedling.


Lo. Can you affirm this?


Al. Yes, to his face and hers.


Enter Saveall. Lo. O Mr. Saveall! welcome.


Sa. My Lord your servant Bellamy is receaving your money at Sir Anthony
Thrivewells.


Lo. I thank you.


Sav. But my Lord, there is fallen an unhappy accident between Sir Anthony,
his Lady and his Nephew, in which your servant Bellamy also is concerned; And
your Lordship is much, and most humbly besought by the Lady to hear, and
examine the difference.


Enter Old Bellamy. Lo. I was preparing thither. Oh Mr. Bellamy, you have not
eavesdropt, have you?


Old Bell. Will you pardon me my Lord?


Lo. Yes if thou have.


Old Bell. I have my Lord, and am overjoyed to hear so well of my Nephew.


Lo. You may hear more anon, come all along with me.


Ex. Omnes. Old Bell. I may hear more anon, your Lordship though knows not of
what so well as I do know.


Exit. ACT V. SCENE II.
Enter Thrivewell, Careless, Lady, Pheb^, Closet, Wat. Thr. I Need not cast
thee off, or bid thee go Now, and for ever from me, thine own shame Will force
thee hence.


Car. You are deceived in that.


Thr. What is thine own take with thee, here it is all Phebe.
Thou ever getst, or can expect from me.

Car. She was mine own before your wife became our coupler, in English plain
our Bawd.


Thr. Use no uncivil Language while you are well.


Car. For which you have your witnesses, this false Traitor, that brought you
on.


La. By my direction George.


Wat. No Traitor neither fince you left to be my Master, wounded and turned me
off.


Car. And this dark Lantern here, this old deceptio visus, That juggled the
wrong party into my Bed.


Clo. Ha, ha, ha.


Car. Do you grin Grim Malkin? But sweet Madam, if your fine Springall
Bellamy had lien there in my stead she would ha^ brought the right party; your
Ladyships Lilly white self.


Thr. How Is that?


La. No more of that good George.


Car. Nay, it shall out, since you have wrought my ruin, I will be the
destruction of you all; And therefore now hear me O Knight, and first resolve
to make me rich in my reward, for wonders i will unfold.


Thr. Can thou expect reward from me for any thing that can by thee be
utterd?


Car. Reward? why not? why should not you reward my good Offices as well as
punish my ill? I must and will rely upon you for all the good that can befall
me; or if I must expect no further from you, i will give't you gratis, And if
you be any thing but a Wittall hear me.


La. What do you mean?


Car. To set you out livelyer, then all your paintings: or dee hear, will you
give me a hundred pound a quarter for my silence?


La. Not a penny; if you seek my undoing, heaven forgive you.


Thr. What (Villain) can thou speak to her prejudice?


Car. That which (if you are no Wittall) you will be leath to hear, but you shall
have it.


Thr. Dare thou talk so?


Car. And since you hold my attempt at her, so heinous, you may be pleased to
know I was incited to it by example of him I named, that smooth Faced Bellamy.


Thr. Dare thou accuse her with him?


Car. You may ask her bolster there, her Madam Nurse old Mother Cock broth.


Clo. O me.


Car. I, O you ask her sir, what she did with him, or he with her, in their
two hours privacy in her chamber, when he came to take up five hundred pound
for his Lord, There was a sweet taking up, sir she confessed all to me, and on
purpose, I dare be sworn to embolden me in my attempt to her Ladyship.


Clo. I confess?


Thr. What did she confess?


Car. That he made use of your Bed with your wife, what language shall I
utter't in? you were best fee it done before you believe it.


Thr. O me most miserable if this be true!


Car. Well, there is for them two.


La. Go Closet till I call you.


Exit Clo. Car. Now for that Rogue (because I must expect no further good of
you, but this which is mine own you say) i will lay him open to you, you
remember how once I ingratiated my self to you by rescuing you from a Robbery
and Murder (as you supposed) for which you took me into favor --


Thr. Yes, and have wished a thousand times since, that I had lost the thousand
pound I had about me then, and taken some wounds for it in exchange rather then
by that rescue to have taken thy Viperous self into my bosom.


Car. This Rogue plotted that business, 'twas a mere trick of his invention.
The supposed Thieves were his companions, and wrought by him only to scare you
and run away when we came to your succor, only to indeare me to you. There
was no hurt meant, but the slap I gave him over the Pate to color the
business, with little blood, I wish now I had cleft his brains.


Thr. Your wish though against your will is a good reward to him, for I love him
the better for his wit in that plot, and care of his then Master.


Car. Do you so sir? Then 'twas mine own invention, let him deny't if he can.


Wat. Indeed the plot was his sir, I only found the Actors.


Thr. I cannot condemn the conceit however; and am something taken with the
wit on it, would all the rest were no worse.


Car. And now I have utterd my whole mind sir, and you declard I must expect no
further good of you, come away Phib, I have injured thee long, i will make the^
now amends for all; i will marry thee, and sell Tobacco with thee.


La. Let him not go sir, I beseech you in this desperate way, nor till I answer
to his accusation.


Thr. Sir you shall stay, and make your self good before authority, or clear
my wife.


Car. You Will have your house then known to have been a bawdy house?


Thr. The Courts of Princes and Religious Houses May so have been abused.


Car. Under such Governesses.


Thr. You Will anon be silent, what is the matter? we are busy.


Enter Closet. Ser. Mistress Crostill, Madam is come in great have to visit you,
and a Kinseman of your Ladyships with her.


Thr. At such a time? excuse your self.


Ser. They are here sir, enterd against all resistance.


Enter Crostill, Fitzgerrard. La. Mistress Crostill! you have much honored me --
Cozen Fitzgerrard! welcome.

Fit. I have a private suit to you Madam.


La. Pray Mr. Thrivewell entertain the Lady.


Car. Another sprunt youth.


Cross. Sir, I perceave some discontent here, I hope your*
Nephew has not again displeased you?

Thr. He is a villain, seeks my utter ruin,


Cross. Pray say not so, for fear you force me love him.


Thr. You are undone for ever if you do.


Cross. Do not say so, for fear I fly to him,
The thought of him already breaks my sleeps,
I could not rest to night for thinking of him,
Which made my early have to unload my mind,
Presuming that your judgment may excuse
A simple Woman's weakness, what is she
That he courts so?

Thr. I tell you, she is a Whore with Child by him, lays claim to him, and I
think he will marry her.


Cross. Still you speak better of him, and my love must not see him so lost,
sir let me speak with you.


Car. Me Lady? I am busy; I am busy.


Cross. What metal am I of? his scorne's a Lodestone;
No Courtship like his carelessness to me;
And all dispraise speaks for him,
Sir I will speak with you.

Car. I blush for you, what would you say now, were it not too late?


Cross. Nay only to your ear.


Car. Stand off a while Phib.


Goes aside. Fit. His Lordship Madam shall give me account
To each particular.

La. You shall do well to put it to him Cosen --
Husband, I overheard you, and commend you,
That though you cast your Nephew from all hopes
Of good from you, you will not yet destroy
His fortunes other ways.

Thr. How do you mean?


La. For that I find by your reviling him
You more inflame that cross fantastic Widow
With eager love to cast her self upon him.

Thr. Had I thought so, I had spoke well of him Against my conscience.


La. No, let me entreat you.
Be that way charitable, and speak worse;
The worse the better.

Car. Tempt me not good Lad^,
To your own prejudice, your destruction;
I am one you cannot live and lie withal
A fortnight you, alas you are but a grissell,
Weak picking meat; Here Is one will hold me tack,
Seven constant ordinaries every night,
Noonings, and intermealiary Lunchings,
At freedom every day, hold belly hold,
The Cupboord never shut.

Cross. I understand you not.


Car. Nor mind me Lady; Twill be better for you.
You had a thin chin'd husband, played at Doublets with ye,
And that perhaps, but twice or thrice a week,
You are incapable of better Game,
Here Is one shall hold me Tick tack night by night,
And neither of us guilty of a Why-not,
She Is bred up to my hand, and knows her play.

Cross. Can you so slight me?


Car. Slight? I honor you.
In caring for you to preserve your life,
And your estate, which I confess my self
Unworthy of: besides I am engaged
To do a poor soul right for my issues sake
She goes withal.

Cross. But say on composition she acquit you.


Car. O but conscience is conscience.


Cross. I Will die or have him presently.
Can you refuse me for a prostitute whore?

Car. Take heed what you say, i will shake your estate,
If you dare call her whore before witnesses.

Cross. Call all the World to hear me Madam,
Sir Anthony, and the rest, be all my witnesses;
Give me your hand sir, here before you all
I plight my faith upon this Gentleman,
He is my Husband, and I am his Wife.

Thr. You are then undone.


Cross. I care not sir, for your ill will: no more shall he.


Car. Are you caught Widow? Future, for Unkles now?


Cross. Why answer you not me, in troth plight?


Car. I do, but yet I tell you again conscience is conscience;
The Woman's not compounded with.

Cross. I Will give her a brace of hundred pounds.


Phe. The Woman will not take it.


Wat. The Woman shall take it, for now know sir, I love you not so ill as to
undo you. This Woman has been mine as much as yours, she has done as much
with me for Offices, and Service I have done for her, as she has done with
you for Love and Money, let her deny't.


Car. I have lately suspected so.


Wat. And if her Friends will make her brace of hundreds a leash i will marry,
and honestifie her.


La. Honest Wat in good earnest ^ Gentlewoman with your hand give him your
consent, and i will supply you with the od hundred pound, for Wats love to his
Master.


Thr. Will you?


La. Yes, and with your allowance; it shall be in lieu of the hundred I took
in Commodity of her Kinswoman Mistress Saleware, which would never thrive with
me (as it may properly with them) as 'twas the price of lust you know it was,
and how untowardly things have chanced amongst us since it was so; And now that
I have declined it, you shall se^ how sweetly all will be reconciled.


Thr. Do as you please.


La. Go get you to the Priest presently, and bring him hither for thy Master,
Wat.


Exit Wat. Phe. Enter Lord Lovely, Old Bellamy, Saveall, Saleware, Alicia. Lov.
Madam you sent for me, though I had former cause to require a conference with
you.


La. My cause my Lord, is almost ended among our selves. Pray let your former
therefore be determined first, your Lordship may be pleased to sit.


Lo. I desire first by good Sir Anthony's patience, Madam a word with you in
absence of all the rest, except this Gentlewoman.


Thr. With all respect my Lord.


La. No you shall stay, and all the rest, speak openly my Lord, I do beseech
you.


Lo. My modesty forbids.


La. I Will speak it for you then; Good my Lord sit judge* This Woman comes to
accuse me of incontinency with your servant Bellamy, is it not so?


Old Bell. I marry dos she Madam to make her word good to my Lord that he would
have lien with her too; And says that Bellamy affirmed to her that he did, I
mary did he with your Ladyship.


La. Ha, ha, ha, I have a Nephew here affirmed as much.


Enter Wat whispers. Car. I am sorry I said so much, 'twas but my suspicion in
the days of my wickedness, I am honest now, and can think no such matter --
O is the parson come --


Exit Ca. Cross. Wat. Thr. I fear I shall be wretched.


Sav. You are wretched in your fear, note your Wifes confidence; Can Guilt
look with that Face?


Lov. I understand that Bellamy is in your house.


La. Forth coming my good Lord. Good Master Bellamy, fetch your Nephew, you will
find him in my Chamber.


Exit. Fitz. And in this respect you shall give me leave
My Lord to call your honor into question.

Lov. You Are very ^ound with me Mr. Fitzgerrard,
What is your question?

Fitz. Where is my Sister Amie?


Lov. Ask you me?


Fitz. Yes, and in honor you are to answer me,
It is too evident, your courtship won
Her Virgin honor.

Lov. Then I forced her not.


Fitz. The blame of that lay therefore on her self,
That loss I seek not after: but I ask
Her life and being (if she live or be)
Of you my Lord, since it is manifest,
She left her friends, and Country shortly after
Her folly had betrayed her into shame,
To be at your dispose, as we presume
She is since in her two years absence; we
Have sought all other ways in vain; you shall
Do therefore well my Lord to render her,
Or give me leave to urge you ^'an account
Of what is become of her.

Lov. You cannot sure
Compel me sir.

Fitz. To hazard of my life I will my Lord.


Lov. That she is lost I am grieved; But for your stout demand i will answer you
at Weapons, time and place convenient.


Enter Old Bellamy, and Bellamy in a Woman^ habit, Closet. Old Bell. I Will end
your difference Cosen Fitzgerrard, here is your Sister Amie my Lord, here is
your servant Bellamy, whom I preferred to you as my Nephew, to be a Go-betwixt
you and Mistresses, which quality I now abhor, as I could wish your Lordship
would leave -- Wenching for this inconstant Woman's sake that would be
prostitute unto your servant. 'Twas a flat bargain, and but a flat one, but
for the nonperformance her husband may thank their party of Sex, not his
wifes want of desire.


Sal. Nere the sooner for a hasty word I hope.


Old Bell. What further end she had to serve your Lordship she may relate her
self.


Bell. Lost to my self, and friends being made unfit
In any other Region to appear,
And more unable to live other where;
Then in the presence of my loved Lord
(Although not as my self) I did assume
That Masculine boldness* so to let you know
My Lord, that I more fully could subsist
By the mere sight of you, and so contain
My self, then she your more respected Mistress
Could in the rich and plentiful enjoyments
Of your most real, and essential favors.

Lov. Sweet let us speak aside.


Sal. What ails my Friend? is not all this now but a plot to make me jealous?


Al. I am discovered and undone.


chafes. Sal. Nere the sooner for a hasty word I hope Friend. Come leave your
waggery, is not all this but a plot now to make me jealous?


La. Your Plot good Mistress Saleware would not hold.


Sal. Nor shall it hold good Madam, I cannot be jealous, Sapientia mea mihi.


La. Yet the young Gentleman (such as you see he is) has lien with me of old,
before I was married; do not look so dismaydly, I will not detect you with my
husband for a hundred pound --


Sal. Nor will I be jealous for a thousand Madam, your plot's too weak Facks,
but where is my injured Kinswoman, Madam?


La. O Phebe Gin crack! she is by this time righted, that is Married.


Sa. Sapientia mea mihi, again then for that, that was my plot, and it held
Madam.


Lov. My dear, dear Amie, and my Bellamy,
I do commend your vow of future chastity,
Vowing the same my self, and here before
Your Brother, and these friends to help your marriage
I freely give you two hundred pounds a year
During your life.

Sav. Now do you note the effect of all Sir Anthony?


Thr. I do with my much joy.


Lov. And Mistress Saleware, for your falsehood
(Which I forgive, because you are a Woman)
I quit familiarity with you, and advise you
To love your husband, giving him no cause
Of fear or jealousy.

Ali. Your Lordship counsels well.


Sal. Hang fears and jealousies, I would there were no greater in the
Kingdom, then in Tom Salewares Coxcombe; But by your favor friend, we will be
friends no more, but loving man and wife henceforward.


Ali. That shall be as you please.


Music. Enter Careless, Crostill, Wat, Phebe. La. See new Married couples,
please your Lordship to take notice?


Lov. Salutes the Brides. Car. Uncle and Madam, I am come to call you to my
house to Dinner, and your Lordship if you please, and all the rest here, I want
one, my Rival Bellamy, where is he? we will be all friends to day; and at night
sweet heart, -- at night, at night, at night --

We Will get the Boy that shall become a Knight


Cross. You promise lustily.


Wat. And Phebe if thou be not better provided already, if I get not thee
with Squire, let me turn clown.


Car. But where is this Bellamy, what new Ladies that?


Old Bell. This new Lady sir, is that Bellamy you inquire for.


Sav. The same Gentleman that you accused your Aunt with.


Clo. That I confess had line with her.


Car. Ha, is it so in faith? and (now I think on it) in troth I thought so; would I
have tax'd'her think you, but with a Woman? pray Mr. Bellamy let me salute
your lips, and good Uncle now we are Neighbors, and both good Housekeepers,
let us not be strangers to one another.


Thr. Well sir, as I shall find you by your wifes report I shall be still your
Uncle.


Car. I shall be his heir in spite of the Devil, and all his works and mine.


Lov. Come Madam, I find here is Music, let us lead the Brides a Dance to
stir their appetites to Dinner.


Dance. Car. And now my Lord to grace our Wedding feast,
As you in honor are the greatest Guest
You have full power to welcome all the rest.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
WEll! had you Mirth enough? much good may't do you,
If not, it is more then I did promise to you.
It Is your own fault, for it is you, not we
Make a Play good or bad; and if this be
Not answerable to your expectation
Ye are the freeborn People of this Nation,
And have the power to censure Worth and Wit,
But we must suffer for what you commit.
Yet wee're resolved to bear your gentle Hands,
And if you will tie us in any Bands,
Let us be bound to serve you, and that is thus,
To tell you truth, as long as you serve us.
THE NOVELLA, A COMEDY.

Acted at the Blackfriars, by his MAJESTY'S Servants, Anno 1632.

WRITTEN By RICHARD BROM.

MART. Hic totus volo rideat Libellus.
LONDON.

Printed for RICHARD MARRIOT, and THO. DRING, and are to be sold at their Shops
in Fleet Street, 1653.

The Persons of the Play.
Two Senators.
PAntaloni Guadagni
Fabritio, Son to Pantaloni. Piso, His Friend. Francisco, Lover of Flavia.
Horatio, His Friend -- Servants to Guadagni.
Nanulo, Astutta,
Nicolo, Servant to Pantaloni. Victoria -- The Novella. Jacconetta, Servant to
Victoria. Flavia, Daughter to Guadagni. Paulo, -- By-named Burgio.
Swatzenburgh. Two Lawyers.
Cheqinno, Prospero,
Peddler, Woman. Zaffi, an Officer.
The Scene Venice.

PROLOGUE.
SHould I not speak a Prologue, and appear
In a starched formal Beard and Cloak, I fear,
Some of this Auditory would be vexed,
And say this is a Sermon without a Text.
Some think it so essential, that they say
Nor fool, nor Prologue, there can be no Play.
Our Author's unprovided, and does vow,
What e're I say must stand for Prologue now;
Then have at wit for once, why may not I be
Inspired with wit, and sense extempore?
But first I Will tell you, that I bad commission
From him to tell you that he will not petition
To be dubbed Poet, for he holds it fit,
That naught should make a man a wit, but wit,
He Will 'bide his trial, and submits his cause
To you the Jury, so you will judge by Laws.
If Pride or Ignorance should rule, he fears
An unfaire trial, 'cause not tried by's Peers.
Faith be your selves a while, and pass your vote
On what you understand, and do not dote
On things 'bove nature or intelligence;
All we pretend to is but Mirth and Sense.
And he that looks for more, must ee'ne go seek
Those Poet-Bownces that write English Greek.
Our Author aims only to gain you laughter,
Which if you will not, he will laugh ^^ you hereafter.
THE NOVELLA.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Piso, Fabritio. Pi. COme, I protest i will have you home again,
And tell all to your Father, if you go not
More cheerfully on about this business.

Fab. O Piso I dearest (dearest?) only Friend,
That Name of Father it is, that checks my blood,
And strikes a filial Reverence through my Soul;
Lays load upon my loins, clogging my steps,
And like an armed Angel warnes me back.

Pi. So, so, he runs away to proper purpose
That bears his Hue and Cry in's conscience.

Fab. It is not yet daylight: night will conceal
My secret purposes. I will return.

Pi. Do so; and damn thee blacker then the night,
Thee and thy Father too for company
Express your filial Reverence so, do so.

Fab. Dear Piso peace.


Pi. Peace fond Fabritio.
Do thou not fly from him to save his Soul?
His and thine own to boot? will not thy stay
(Stay not to answer me) ruin your Family;
Cut off all hope of Blessing, if not Being
Of your Posterity? and all this by obaying
A wilful Father in a lawless Marriage;
More fatal (I foresee't) then ere our State
Of Venice yet produced example for.

Fab. O now thou tear'st my very bowels Piso,
Should I consent (as I dare not deny
My overhasty Father) to this match,
I should submit my self the most perfidious,
That ever shadowed Treachery with Love.
No, my Victoria, sooner shall this steel
Remove thy hindrance from a second choice,
Then I give word or thought, but to be thine.

Pi. Why fly we not to Rome then, where you left her,
And shun the danger of your Fathers Plot,
Which would not only force you break your Faith
With chaste Victoria, but to wed another,
Whose faith is given already to another?
Double damnation! 'Twere a way indeed
To make your children bastards of both fides.

Fab. Can there no way be found to shun the danger
Of this so hastily intended Marriage,
But by my flight, and the most certain loss
Of mine inheritance?

Pi. That would be thought on.


Fab. Stay; who comes here?


Music, and diverse Gentlemen pass to and fro with lights, at last Enter
Pantaloni, lighted by Nicolo, with dark Lanthorns. Pi. Some Night-walkers,
that throw
Balls at their Mistresses, well of all Cities
Under the universal reign of venery,
This is the civill'st! in what sweet tranquillity,
The subjects pass by and salute each other!
Stay, what grave beast, what reverend Gib is that?
(In The name of darkness) dropped out of a gutter?
O age what art thou come to!

Fab. Pray forbear.


Pi. Look there Fabritio, Venus can it be?


Feb. Come you are deceav'd.


Pi. Nay now I know I am not,
For by that little loving glimpse of light
That leads him on, Fabritio, it is thy Father.

Fab. I pray thee peace.


Pi. What will this City come to?
A young man shall not shortly venture to
A vaulting School for fear he jumpe in the
Same sadle with his Father, to the danger
Of his old bones. Enter Francisco, and Horatio.
Stay here comes more. This is
Some special haunt! sure it is the habitation
Of the Novella lately come to Town,
Which draws the admiration of all
The Rampant Gallantry about the City!

Fab. They say she is yet a Virgin.


Pi. And is like
So to continue, still she prove stale fish,
At the rate she is stamped for: for she has set
Such a large price upon her new nothing,
That Venery and Prodigality are at ods
About her, it seems thy Father could not bargain.

Fab. Fie! 'twas not he.


Pi. Not he! peace and stand close.


Fran. Is she so rare a Creature, this Novella?


Ho. Rare? above excellent (man) it is unpossible
For a Painter to flatter her, or a Poet to belly her
In aiming to augment her beauty: For
I saw her that can judge.

Pi. Now if a man
Were to unkennell the handsomest she Fox
In Venice, let him follow these dogs. Sure
She is eathed hereabouts. They have the sent.

Fran. You have not seen her often?


Hor. Only thrice
At Church, That Is once for every day, that she
Has beautified this City.

Pi. What rare help
May this be to devotion, that he speaks of!

Fran. And all this Beauty, and this seeming virtue Offered to sale?


Pi. I thought 'twas such a piece.


Hor. Thence only springs the knowledge of her worth
Mark but the price she is cried at: two thousand Duccats
For her Maydenhead, and one months society.

Pi. What a way, now, would that money reach
In Buttock-beefe.

Hor. She is indeed for beauty,
Person, and Price, fit only for a Prince:
I cannot think a less man then the Duke
Himself must bear her; and indeed 'twere pity
That she should sin at less advantage.

Fran. Why do we then make way to visit her
By our expense in Music?

Pi. A wary whore-master: I like him well:
A penneyworth for a penny would be looked for.

Hor. Why Francisco? Why?


Pi. Francisco! is it he?


Hor. Although her price be such to be sold for
In ready money, she is yet allowed
To give herself for love if she be pleased.
Who knows how well she may affect a man
(As here and there a Woman may by chance)
Only for virtue? That Is worth our adventure,
But I wish rather we could purchase her
At the set price betwixt us for a twelvemonth
Our friendship should not suffer us to grudge
At one another good turns.

Pi. There Is love in couples,
What whelps are these? sure this Francisco is
The late forsaken lover, betrothed to Flavia
Whom now thy Father would so violently
Force thee to marry.

Fab. Would he had her Piso.


Pi. O here they pitch, stand close, we will hear their Music.


Song. Hor. Come sad Francisco, we will to morrow see
This Miracle of nature, whose mere sight
Will wipe away the injury thou sufferd'st
In Flavia; and make thee quite forget her.

Pi. It Is he, and I will speak to him.


Hor. Good forbear.


Pi. Francisco must not so forget his Flavia.


Hor. What are you?


Pi. Men, that would have you be so,
And not to wanton out your holy vows Draws
Dancing your selfs to th'Devill.

Fran. What do you mean?


Pi. I mean, Francisco, you too much forget
The love you bore to Flavia, she to you,

Hor. She has forsaken him, and is bestowed
(Forced by the torrent of her fathers will)
On young Fabritio, Pantalonies Son.

Pi. Here stands the man denies it, speak Fabritio.


Fab. Not that I undervalue Flavius worth,
But not to violate her faith by breach
Of mine, were all this signiory her dowry
(Here is my hand Francisco,) i will not wed her.

Fran. I must embrace you sir.


Hor. And Gentlemen,
My Lodging is not far, please you retire,
And there repose your selfs until the light
That now is near at hand, shall point you forth
A way to future comfort; you shall find
Good wine and welcome, please you to accept it

Pi. Your offer sir is large: yet let me ask
If we may rest securely for a day;
Lurk close and private, till the appointed hour
For this forced Marriage be over-slipp'd,
In case that our necessity may require it?

Hor. I understand you, Take mine honor of it.


Pi. Be cheard Fabritio, thou shall not to Rome,
We may prevent thy danger nearer home.
Now night we thank, and follow thee away
(As being thy servants) from the approach day.

Hor. You conclude well, lovers and sprights are
Night-walkers, warned away by th'morning Star.

Ex. ACT I. SCENE II.
Enter Guadagni in his Study. A Taper, Baggs, Books, etc. Gua. Whilst yet the
Leaden fingered god of sleep
Keeps close the eyelids of fantastic youth,
Feeding their acry fancies with light dreams,
Of wanton pleasures; giddy, vain delights,
The ever watchful cares of aged Parents
Throw open the gates and windows of soft rest,
Making our midnight noone, to guard and order
The wholesome fruits of our continual labor.
Wholsome and happy offsprings of my pains
Thus I salute you and implore your safty,
And thus that you may rest, grow and increase
Mine eyes prevent the breakers of your peace.
But see the morning hastens to relieve me!
Day spreads apace, and warmes the provident hand
Do out the useless taper. Hoe! what hoe! Enter Nanulo, Astutta.
Nanulo! Astutta! is it midnight with you?

Nan. Your servants are all here and ready sir.


Gua. About about, you drowsy headed drones,
Where is my Daugher?

Ast. Up and ready too sir.


Gua. Sirrah haste you to Pantalonies house.


Nan. The rich Magnifico?


Gua. Who else, you Rat?
Tell him I do attend his coming hither,
To expedite the work we have in hand.

Nan. It shall be done sir, please you give me passage.


Gua. Here take the Keys; lock the door after him
Then call my Daughter to me.

Ast. See she is here sir.


Ex. Nan. Ast. Gua. Flavia my Girl, see how my early ^^r^
Provides for thee, The toil of many years
By daily travail, and my nightly watches
Lies here in readiness to build thy for^une.
And take it willingly, since thou consentst
To match unto my will; whereby this Coin,
Thy self, and both our joys may find increase.
I can no less then thank thee Flavia,
Although I must confess, my suit was long,
And grievous to me, ere thy childish will
Yielded to my appointment of a husband:
For whom (with no small joy I speak't) thou did
Cast off (indeed) the off-^cum of his blood
The poor, degenerate in fortune, fellow,
I scorn to name him.

Fla. Alas my Francisco --


Gua. By which thou gain'st the Nonpareil of heirs
In all this wealthy City.

Fla. Sir it is not
The Riddance of the one, to gain the other,
Both which are equal blessings unto me
Can ad unto my present happiness
More, then the thought of your paternall wisdom,
Whose provident care was author of this good:
Chiefly to you I therefore wish the comfort.

Gua. It will be so: I find it my dear child
For though thy joy I know will be abundant
Mine must exceed, that includes thine with it.
Why smil'st thou Flavia? to think how dear
Thy Hymeneall day, to morrow is?

Fla. No I could weep for that.


Gua. How! ha! what is that?
This money's mine again, and thou art not
If thou do wish one days procrastination,
Degenerate brat, changeling --

Fla. Dear Father -- Father --


Gua. Thou Have seen thy last of happiness: all content
From this black minute, and thy self are strangers.

Fla. Sir, I beseech you hear me --


Gu. Get you in
I Will mew you up where never Sun shall show
Into what endless misery i will cast thee;
Nor any sound bring succor to thine Ear.
To call thee back from torment.

Fla. Sir, -- dear sir --


Gua. My self will be your Keeper, Cook, and Carver.


Fla Indeed you will be sorry.


Gua. Sorry! for what?


Fla. For the mistake you run away withal.


Gua. Did thou not say thou wept'st, because to morrow was come so nigh?


Fla. So nigh and yet not come sir,
Fearing how many dangerous hours are thither.

Gua. Ha! I begin to be now sorry indeed.


Fla. Loves Minutes, sir, are days, and hours are years,
When each protracted, multiplies our fears.

Gua. Now I am sorry with all my heart; and here is a
Thousand checqines to expiate my trespass.
But do not let thy husband know of them
Till he redeem a fault to their full value,
Oh mine own Gi^le, my honey, honey Girl?

Fla. Was not I si^ applauding of your wisdom,
And giving you the glory of my comfort
In this approved match?

Gua. Thou did, thou did,
With tears of joy I must confess thou did.

Fla. Had you but heard me out, I had magnified
My fortune, sprung out of your providence.

Gua. Speak yet, and I will hear attentively.


Fla. First then, how first your admirable wisdom
Weighing how I had settled my affection
Upon Francisco excellent in parts,
Of noble blood, how ever low in fortune,
You gave your free consent (knowing your estate
To be a portion fitter to restore him
Unto the dignity of his Ancestors,
Then to be added to another Mu^k-hill)
That I should be his wife --

Gua. What Is this you say?


Fla. Nay dear sir fly not off.


Gua. Well, on then, on.


Fla. I say you gave consent, that I should be
Wife to that noble Gentleman (pray sit still sir)
As you had foreseen my future happiness
Only in him consisted -- sir until
This wealthy heir, young Fabritio,
You Neighbor Trades-mans Son, of great estate,
Was by his father tendered unto you
For me a husband, then unseene by me:
But since I must confess a proper man,
Worthy a fitter Wife --

Gua. Sweet Modesty.


Fla. But that your wisdom needs will have it so,
By reason that his heaps may purchase honor,
Which to'thers wants can never wash away,
But farewell him: I must look this way now;
And crown your wisdom with this closing point,
That whereas I betrothed was to Francisco,
And Pantalonies Son unto another,
(A Lady as it is justified at Rome)
You force me on this man, the fittest husband
On whom to make my party good hereafter,
Who shall not dare to upbraide my breach of faith.

Gua. And is it not a sound policy my Flavia? A Bell rings.
But now no more; old Pantaloni comes,
I take it. How now! dos he not come?

Enter Nanulo. Nan. Signor Pantaloni, sir, entreats you
Meet him on the Rialto instantly,
That you may go to the Advocates together.

Gua. It is my Flavia interchangeably
To seal your Marriage covenants; make thee happy,
Look to my house and havings; keep all safe,
I shall be absent most part of this day,
Be careful Girl, thine own special good
Requires thee to it: and therefore I dare trust thee.

Fla. Happy success attend you sir, whilst I Rest here in prayers for you.


Gua Thanks my child,
Come sirrah lock the door. But first (dee hear)
Beware that none have entrance in my absence
Except Fabritio, Pantalonie's Son;
Or such as I have warranted, look to it.

Nan. With due respect.


Gua. Come lock the door I say.


Exit. Fla. I, I, be sure of that, and I could wish
My thoughts were prisoners too: that they might fly
No further then the casement, or the wicket;
Where they (loose things) get out, and nothing bring
Back to this heart, but cold and sad returns.
O my Astutta --

Enter Astutta. Ast. Now or never help me!


Fla. As thou did ever dream what true love was,
Fancy some way to quit me of this bondage;
Or else contrive this hour to be my last.

Ast. What! would you disobey your Father? what!
So good, so careful, and so wise a Parent?

Fla. O do not vex me into longer life.
Either speak help, or let me die in silence.

Ast. Yes, at sixteen; you would die at sixteen?


Fla. Else let thy pity of my youth preserve me.


Ast. O Cupid what a Termagant tyrant art thou
Over poor subjects of sixteen! There is not one
Among a hundred of those ticklish Trifles
But is more taken with a Toy at sixteen
Then six and twenty: because by that time
The edges of most maydenheads are allayd.

Fla. Nay dear Astutta have thou thought a course?


Ast. What to prevent your Father, my good Master?
Think you I can turn traitor to his trust,
And cross his purpose for your Marriage?

Fla. If Knife, or Poison, Fire, or Water may
Remove this wretched cause, i will do it else.

Ast. Yes, you were best leap from the top o'th'house
Into the Cavail grande: and there perhaps
Some courteous Gondaliar may catch you up,
And waft you to some house of dear delight.

Fla. Thou tortur'st me.


Ast. You see the door is shut,
And Go-by-ground your fathers Giant here
More stern then Cerberus holds fast the Key,
You can make no ex^u^sion; nor let in
Any attempt for your redemption:
No Letter or a Message can approach you,
But by this Gyant-dwarfe your Fathers Agent,
Though I my self were wicked to assist you.

Fla. O could thou be so virtuous! Then I know
Some quaint devise would issue from thy brain*
To conjure and controwle his weaker spirits.
Thou know I have command of Gold and Jewels
Enough to buy a Senators large conscience:
Do thou command it all to win him to us,
That petty thing. Dos he appear bribe-free?
Is he the only officer uncorrupted?

Enter Nanulo. Nan. Madona Flavia* news.


Fla. What I beseech you?


Nan. From your elected Bridegroom, brave Fabritio.


Ast. Dissemble patience as you are a woman,
Or hope to be; and hear him handsomely.

Fla. How dos he Nanulo?


Ast. That was well said.


Nan. Well and respectfull toward you it seems,
For he desires you not to stir abroad,
As I could wish you would not --

Fla. Insolent slave!
You know I may not stir beyond the Key
You keep, and yet you wish me stay within.

Ast. Will you mar all? the reason?


Nan. The reason is, he means to send anon
A Mercadante from the Merceria,
The famous Peddler woman of this City
With her most precious wares; for you to choose
What you shall like, and take them as his presents,
(A ceremony used on wedding Eves)
Such Rings, such Things, such Knacks, such Knots and Bobs;
Such Curles, such Purles, such Tricks and Trilly bubkins
As Mayds would turn no Mayds almost to see 'hem!
And can you yet be angry at such news
With me the gladsome bringer?

Ast. Very good!
I have heard of this rare Pedler-woman;
And that she is much used in close affairs
Twixt parties He and She; and do not doubt
Since you make golden offers (gentle Mistress)
To work her to your ends, as near (dee mark?)
As woman's wit may reach at such a pinch,
Pray let her come.

Fla. Well sir, you know I shall not stir abroad;
When she is come she is welcome with my thanks.
Return so by the messenger.

Nan. Most readily.


Exit. Ast. Now M^stris if I chance to set the sadle
On the right horse; that is, to place your Mayden-head
Where you would feign bestow it, I trust you will
Out of your store reward me with a dowry
Fit to convey me to a Tradesmans* Bed.

Fla. Yes, and wish there a second Maydenhead,

On the condition.


Ast. Well, be cheerful then,
And clear those cloudy looks, awake your senses,
Refresh your temples, rowse invention up.
I have found ground to build on; but there lacks
Much rewing, squaring, joynting, to make sure,
Against all storms, our lofty Archi'ture,
Come up to council?

Fla. Now thou comforts me.


Exeunt. Om. ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Pantoloni, Guadagni, Nicolo, with a Zaffies habit under his arm. Pan.
IS this Checquino's house, your Advocate?


Gua. It is, and Prospero your learned Council
Is with him here, attending too, our coming.

Pan. It Is well, Give me my writings Nicolo,
Please you to enter: I Will dispatch my man, Exit. Guad.
And follow instantly. Now Nicolo,
About the serious business Nicolo,
In which this morning I instructed you.

Nic. For your revenge sir.


Pan. Right my Apprehension
On that discourteous, cursed Curtezan,
Twill breed me more delight, then all the dalliances
I could have found in her most free ambraces;
I hug my quick and sweet invention for it;
Here take this gold; this bright refulgent gold,
Twenty Checquines, and promise twenty more
On the performance of the brave exploy't
Twill take unto my wish, I do foresee't.

Nic. Twill be sir, such a notable Revenge
That the report of it in after-ages
Will either mortify concupiscence
In young lascivious Harlots; or, at least,
Fright out of them their itch of wronging age:
They shall no more dare to put youthful tricks
On years, and gravity.

Pan. Right my Nicolo.


Nic. Sli'd sir, and if you should not be revengd,
An old man should not step in the Bordello
Without the taunts of Boys and Gondelie^s,
Crying take heed, old man, you be not served
As the Movella fitted Pantaloni.
So, in short time, the City were well served
When age shall be ashamed to crawle to lechery.

Pan. Right, witty Knave. Go heartily about it,
Think what a Master it is thou do it for,
That has no slender tie upon thy duty;
One that has bred thee from a youngling up
To this maturity.

Nic. I must acknowledge it.


Pan. And Nicolo, it was no petty kindness
To manumize your Father from the Galley
Which you cannot forget.

Nic. Yet must I hear it --?


Pan. But i will urge thee no further. Boy be careful;
Work but this for me with effect and speed,
And bind me as a Father to thy need.

Exit. Nic. You have even spoiled all now. I had as good a mind
And thought to have gone as heartily about
This piece of villainy as the Devil, that
Is in my Master could devise, or wish
Till that ore-doing spirit put me out;
Could he not see 'twas well; and mischievous
Enough in conscience, but himself must cross it?
Dos he think by redeeming of my Father
To slave me with his boasts, and foul upbraydings?
Had he still rowd in the gally, I not knowing,
The toil, the smart and grief had been his own:
Now I inherit what was then his pain,
Hearing continually the clash of's care,
And his f^ll stripes, out of this Bablers mouth,
Which more then kills my thanks; it wreaks my Spleen.
To br^g of benefits one has bestowne
Does make the best seem less, and most seem none:
So often times the greatest courtesy
Is by the doer made an injury.

Enter Fabritio. Fab. Nicolo well met. I saw you house my Father,
And waited for you. Come you shall draw near.
This is a near friends Lodging Gentlemen, Piso* Francisco, Hora* at a Table,
Wine, etc.
My fathers special man I told you of;
Pray bid him welcome.

Hor. Most entirely,
Please you to sit sir: Here Is a short potation.

Pi. But good Lyatico I assure you si^
I Will be your taster to quit fear of danger, Piso drinks.
And now i will let you know we have made oath
Upon this nimble master of invention
This sprightly liquor to be firm, and faithful
To one another in a present project.
Take you the ^ame, and grow in one with us.

Nic. May I not ask what end your project aims at?


Fra. Nor what, nor unto whose --


Pi. Let it suffice,
We carry that about us shall end you, They draw Stillettoes
And presently, if you comply not with us.

Nic. Nay, nay, by fair means Gentlemen I pray.
I am apt enough to mischief of my self.
Look ye. I swear with you.

He drinks. Hor. It Is well. Now know
It Is for the good of your young Master here.

Nic. Then you would use me in some treachery Against my old one.


Pi. Thou art a Soothsayer.


Nic. Look you, i will swear again, I like your oath,
Your deep Lyatick oath here, wondrous well.

He drinks Fab. It Is well done Nicolo: try the bottom often -- thrice


Nic. I will comply now and complot with you,
And was indifferently prepared before.
Provided always that it tend not to
Danger of's Life.

Fab. Could think me such a Villain?


Nic. Nay, if it were, 'twere no disparagement
To stake my head with yours. But Gentlemen,
Please ye fall roundly now upon the business,
I have now sworn enough.

Pi. Then you must answer
To these intergatories. First do you know
If the old men Guadagni and Pantaloni
Do hold their purpose for their match to morrow
Betwixt Fabritio here, and Flavid?

Nic. They are marying of 'em now at their Lawyers,
By Deed and Covenant, under Hand and Seal.
I left them, and their Books there now together,
And for the Priest to morrow is the day.

Hor. Is not Fabritio mist at home this morning?


Nic. No, not at all, the old man's mind's so carried
Upon the wings of this new marriage f^rtune --
I cry you mercy sir, you are the Gentleman
I think, that should have had her.

Fra. In good time sir.


Nic. In good time may you I Will do something for you*


Fab. Honest, deserving Nic.


Nic. Sir thus it is:
My Master sent in my young Masters name,
(The more to indeare his service and his care
To the young Lady) that the Merchantesse,
The rich She peddler of the Merceria
Should visit her to day with all her wares,
For her to take her choice to deck her Brideship;
If you know how to plough now with that Heyfar
You may herhaps convey a message to her.

Hor. I know her, and will fit you with directions.


Fra. Thou have given a hint, for which I will renown thee.


Pi. But Nicolo, where was your reverend Master
Attended by your self before daylight?

Fab. Prithee inquire not further, 'twas not he*


Nic. The doubtful light deceav'd you sir.


Pi. No more then Noon in faith, a man may spy
An old whore-master in the darkest night
Like an old Cat, by the gloring of his eyes.
Will his old Mutton-mongership nere leave?
He is already known sufficiently
Thorough the City for his gift that way;
And yet he will deny his son free choice,
And force him marry one he not affects.

Hor. That is his drift, whereby he may inherit
From him the same licenciousnesse; and make
The World acknowledge him the more his Son.

Pi. But has he made the purchase? has he bought
The famous piece of flesh, the rare Novella?

Nic. I could unshale a plot.


Hor. Nere doubt but do it then,


Pi. My noble Nicolo out with it I say.


Ni. I would entreat the favor of this Senate
I might unfold it only unto one.

Fra. Take your free choice.


Nic. To you young Master then,
Take heed we render not ridiculous
Your Father to the wildness of their youth:
But to your self I will disclose a secret
That may be wrought to your advantage.

Fab. On.


Nic. It Is true, my Master was with the Novella
Drawn by the loose desires of wanton flesh;
But such a foul affront he did receave
As justly does provoke his dire revenge,
Which he has trusted me to execute.

Fab. How Nicolo? but first what was the affront?


Nic. He bargained with her; and for some large price
She yielded to be his. But in the night
In the conditioned bed was laid a Moore;
A hideous and detested Blackamore,
Which he (demanding light to please his eye,
As old men use all motives)
Discoverd and enraged, forsook the house;
Affrighted and ashamed to ask his coin again.

Fab. But seeks Revenge How, how, good Nicolo?


Nic. Thus sir, you know what common disrepute
Falls upon Man or Woman that is found
Conversing with the common City-hangman,
That nearest Kindred after such converse,
Shun their society, as they would do him
(The Hangmans self) so odious are they held
Except it be those officers allowd
By the State-publick to negotiate with him.

Fab. I know it Nicolo. But what can follow?


Nic. It Is plotted that the Hangman shall go to her,
And be discovered with her in such sort,
As her disgrace shall force her fly the City,
And I have undertaken to effect it.

Fab. It must be then by bribing of the Hangman:
And how can thou do that with thine own safety?
Thou may be so discoverd and so hated.

Nic. For that observe the politic invention
Of my old Master! the habit of a Zaffi,
One of the inferior Ministers of Justice,
That walks between the Senate, and their Friend
The Executioner of their commands.

Fab. But what disguise shall shroud the Hangman thither, whose own shape is as
horrid as the Plague?


Nic. The habit of some stranger in the City,
Which here is gold to purchase.

Fab. Thou have informed,
Nay more thou have inspired me Nicolo!
I shall find way by this, to break the contract
My Father would enforce; preserve his credit,
And save the poor Novella from the same
My father threatens by his own disgrace
Be then but true to me.

Nic. Sir, if I fail --


Fab. Enough: I Will trust thee. Keep the gold thy self:
Give me this Habit. Get thy self another
In all points like it, and in that return
Unto my Father, confidently tell him
The Hangman undertakes it, and at five,
Soon in the Evening, in strangers habit,
He will accost her.

Nic. Sir --


Fab. I Will see it performed,
Trust to my word and care, and thy reward.

Nic. I leave all to you sir. And crave my dismission.


Pi. What! Has he done?


Fab. Most friendly. Farewell Nicolo. Exit. Nic.
He has given me plot enough, if I but work it;
And it produce not Comic sport in the end
I must subscribe my Wit is not my Friend,
I must crave your assistance Gentlemen.

Hor. We have been plotting too.


Fra. And though our proj^ct run not the same way,
It may conclude with yours to crown the day.

Pi. So to your several ways.


Hor. I am for the Novella.


Exeunt Omnes. ACT II. SCENE II.
Victoria above, looking in a Glass, Jacomo, Paulo, by-named Burgio. Vic. SO I
am ready: And trust me Jacconetta
My pretty Moore, (for so I still must call thee
For thy dear Masters sake that gave thee to me)
Thou art grown skillful in these quaint attires,
So lately unacquainted with my wearing:
Thou have played the good beginner at this dressing,
And by thine industy and further practice,
I doubt not but my Knowledge will grow ripe.

Pau. And by that Knowledge, you your self soon rotten. Aside.
O! could these Creatures grow still toward ripeness;
O^, being ^ipe, abide so, and no further,
What excellent fruit they were!

Vic. What say you Borgio?


Pau. I say among the twenty thousand Curtezans
In and about this City, none becomes
The dressing, or the habit like your self;
Your most unparalled* self! But, noblest Lady,
Think it is your person beautifies the Dress,
Not it, your person.

Vic. Why not it my person?


Pan. Yes, as the flame the fuel;
To work it into coals, and so to ashes.

Vic. Still Borgio in your old morality!


Pan. These Tires, these Chains, these Paintings, and these Gawds
Are but the sprigs and leaves, the butchers use
To set out flesh to sale with; or, at best,
But the gay Garlands which adorn the Beast
Prepared for Sacrifice --

Vic. Peace Borgio, peace.


Pan. And as those Beasts, so senseless are you women
Of the most certain danger you put on,
With your vain glorious gayety; chips and strawes,
To kindle fire of lust, in whose lewd flame
Sinkes (with Troyes Buildings) Natures choycest
Flame.

Vic. I would I understood this misery!
Deal freely with me Borgio, what new art
Have thou in practice, that thou setst a face
Shiningly varnished with Divinity
On a profession, that makes Nature vile
In her own shame? Lust's instrument!
Nay case of instruments, holding all means
For propagation and maintaining of it;
To make thy Gain out of its dregs and fragments.
Tell me, do think by preaching modesty
To quit thee of the baseness of thy trade;
A poor necessitous Bravo? or have hope
To live upon my honesty, and yet be still
Thy self a Ruffiano?

Pan. I would give over, would you; and change my Function.


Vic. Ha, ha, ha, --


Jac. What mean you Borgio, would you now spoil all?
Did you instruct her in this way of profit,
And no less pleasant too, then profitable
(As most of my Books titles are) whereby
She was so well resolved to go on --

Pan. Hold thy peace fool: she will run on the faster.
Thou know not how much harm, preaching has done
Amongst women. She will prove the only Sweep-stake
In all the City.

Jac. O are you there Devil?


Vic. Sir, leave this grumbling, or i will turn you off
Amongst your Brothers, and your Sons Ruffianos,
To lurch in the night betwixt eleaven and two
To rob and drown for prey; till being taken
Imediate Hanging follows.

Pan. I Am now your Creature;
My noble resolute Mistress; now I adore you:
Now you shine bright; your bravery now becomes you,
Yet (let me tell you under fair correction)
I have some cause to hinder your desires,
And theyrs that seek you more, yet, for a time.

Vic. Your reason sir?


Pan. You know I was preferrd to you for a Bravo
Of long and dear experience: I have served
Six, the most famous Dames, this City bred
These sixty years; none scorning my advise,
By which, and their endeavors they grew up
To purse the price of Providence; which bestowd
The most in public, some in pious uses
Purchac'd them fame, almost Canonization.
The last and least of them, Margarita Emiliana
Founded the Augustinian Monastry
I showd you late; where she has daily prayers.
These women, whom successively I served,
Fell not by rash adventure unto all
Great Fortunes offers; but by sound advise
(Which kept their Bodies sound and 'rich'd their coffers)
Were long e're they embraced; by which their price
And beauty grew of greater estimation,
My profit in this too is unneglected:
For long suspense, and tedious Expectation
Bring me more certain fees; where, if you fell
Imediatly to work, my work were done,
And your own too, perhaps too soon: witness the falls
That Pox and Poverty have brought on many!
When their youths flame was spent and they rejected,
When others of their Sisterhood were embraced
Into a wholesome Nunnery.

Vic. This fellow speaks my thoughts. Borgio, I thought
You had respect to your particular profit
In all this winding wariness for my good.

Pan. You may conceive, 'twould grieve me, that (where now
You have continual new, and bounteous suitors,
That yield me fees for the bare sight of you)
You should in yiedling to their common use
Send one man cloyd away, t'affright another
From his approach.

Vic. Borgio, no more of this,
A dear friend put you to me, for whose sake
I hitherto have followed your advise,
In hoysting up the price of my virginity.

Jac. To such a rate no common purse dares venture,
Nor common folks presume to approach the house.

Vic. And such as did attempt, by offering less,
I have sent back with shame; as the old youth
Last night, for which I thank thee Jacconetta*

Jac. I think I coold his grave concupiscence.


Vic. And therefore, doubt not, careful Borgio,
Unless I meet a husband by the way
I will not stoop this month at a less rate,
Then the proposed sum and your consent.

Pau. I thank you more then if you had possessed
Me of the value of that sum proposed.

Jac. He means her Maydenhead! I faith good sir,
The mark's grown out of your old chaps, or else
Hang me if I believed you, by that little
I know of man.

Vic. So now about our business.
Some of my visitants I know are near,
Wayt circumspectly Borgio.

Pau. You need not doubt me.


Exit. Vic. There is some hidden virtue in this fellow,
Or dangerous ill: but whether let it be;
As was my Birth my purpose shall be free.
Make fit my Chamber Jaconet. But first
Give me my Lute; and set me for the sign
O what I mean to be, the famed Novella.

Song. Whilst she plays and sings above, Paulo waits below: Many Gallants
pass over the stage gazing at her, Piso is received in by Paulo, after him a
French Cavalier, then a brave Spaniard, and after him a glorious German. Paulo
takes fees of all as they enter the house. The Song ended, Paulo appears above
with Victoria. Vict. Now Borgio, how speaks your muster roll?
What? are you full?

Pau. I have an army royal
Of Princely spirits, ready for encounter.

Vic. But one at once good Borgio.


Pau. I have encamped them each in several quarter.
Here lies the no less politic then stout
Italian force, and there your sprightly French;
Here the brave Spaniard, there the German bold;
Here the Polonian, and Sclavonian there;
Persian and Grecian --

Vic. Pray thee hold. No more.


Pau. It Is not your house can hold, (would I admit'em)
One of each several nation would throng in
To make his battery on your virgin Fort.
The rich Piazza, on her greatest Mart
Boasts not more Nations; nor St. Mark himself
The understanding of more Languages
Then I (could I find house-roome) could receave,
To be made one by your interpretation
O what a Daring glass is sparkling beauty;
Fetching ambition from above the p^tch
Of towering Eagles, or Sky-touching La^ks
Down with a glance into the Nets of Love!

Vic. Praythee speak nearer home, who have thou housed?


Pau. I have culled from the pack a special prince;
Four glittering Gallants; one of Italy,
For our dear Countries sake; But then a Monsieur,
A joviall Frenchman, all of flame and spirit.

Vic. I shall not dare to meddle with his glory
For fear I fall with Semele, who next?

Pau. A Spaniard next, that, to adorn his pride,
Wears an Ep^tome of both the Indies.

Vic. I saw his punctuality pass by.


Pau. And did you note his stiff reservednesse?
He dares not cough for breaking of his chain,
But then there is a Dutchman, (Cargo lustick!)
A jolly strong chind German, princely borne;
A Landsgrave at the least; whose very bluntness
Promises more then the sharp-set Italian,
The fiery Frenchman, or the doughty Diego
In all their eager pursuit.

Vic. That man Burgio!
You have bestowd them all in several Rooms?

Pau. O like fierce Beasts, from sent of one another.


Vic. Then first, in fair requital of the Music,
I do imagine some of them bestowd
On me, this morning e're my Love appears
To feed their eyes, let Music feast their ears.

Exeunt Om. ACT III.
SCENE I.
Piso, Victoria. Pi. WHy not me, Lady? stand not I as fair,
And fit for your embrace as any man?

Vic. Yes sir, it is granted; and as acceptable
I yield to none.

Pi. It Is but to try my Courtship, I presume,
That you put on this coyness, and to draw
More ample testimony of affection,
By Protestation, Prayers, Compliments;
The weakest ceremonies due to love;
Mere noise and Lip-labor, with loss of time.
I think with scorn upon such poor expressions,
And am above the art of Amorists,
That cringe and creep by weak degrees of Love;
To Kiss the hand, the Cheek, the Lip, then cry
O Divine touch! then smirk, and then embrace,
Then nuzzle in the Elysium of your bosom,
And be entranced! means fit for duller spirits,
To gather heat and strength of appetite.
My desire speaks in Loves true dialect;
And, from my heart inflamed, you may perceive
Loves fire rage in mine eyes, enough
To melt to yeildingnes a frozen breast.
In this I talk too much. I find you yiedling.

Vic. And I my self too blame --


Pi. Let us retire then.


Vic. Mistake me not good Signior. Keep your distance:
I blame my self to let you overweene
By my long silence, that immodesty
To be in me, that might embolden you
To your and my dishonor. Pray desist,
And let the friendly welcome you have found
Persuade your fair construction.

Pi. Is this earnest?


Vic. Yes in sooth is it.


Pi. I Will be playner then,
What make you here in the Smock-Faire, precious Mistress?
Or why these dressings, these perfumes and paintings?
Do you wear the habit of our Curtezans,
And, by their art, call Gazers to your beauty,
Full of high hopes and flames of ardent Love,
Thus to delude, and make them witnesses
Of a cold seeming Chastity? what n^w Art
Is this? it cannot be to get a husband!

Vic. Nor a child neither sir, that is less.


Pi. That Is soon believed, yet, no disparagement
To your expert sufficiency in the trade:
For the best Carpenters make fewest chips,
There Is very few of all your function fruitful:
Yet some there be approved men at arms
Famous in public service; and a many
Good handy craftsmen in the Arsenall
Bred by this bounteous City from such mothers
That nere could boast their fathers; and as many
Daughters (if they prove worthy in their feature)
Succeed their active Mothers in their fortunes.

Vic. You are better read then I sir.


Pi. It Is common knowledge Lady. Nor do I
Read this t'informe your self, who were instructed
(I make no doubt) before your price was set,
By all examples to your present practice.

Vic. Sir, I must tell you now, you grow too lavish;
So, as I fear foul language; to'avoyd which
Let me entreat a fair departure hence.

Pi. Lady, this overacted State might fit
The wife of a Clarissimo, or the bashful
Daughter of some Patrician: but in you,
A pi^ce set out to sale, it but appears
Affected singularity, more unsuitable
To the temptations you wear about you
Then the holy seeming pictures in your Chamber.

Vic. Why should it trouble you sir?


Pi. It dos, to think what new and secret aim
You may intend by this; in taking on you
The habit, and the name of Curtezan:
And, first, to set a price so far beyond
The strength of any ordinary means;
And then to show a carriage that may strike
Lust out of countenance! O the Knot's dissolved!
O Oedipus! O Sphynx! I now have found it
You fish for Fishermen (it is pregnant truth)
She claps a Cardinal aboard at least:
It Is not a Lay-mans purse, or Learning can,
Or purchase, or confute you, is it not so?

Vic. Now you are foul indeed, and I must plead
My privilege against you sir, you know
I have a freedom grounded upon custom
Here in this City, for a month to make
Choice of my Lodging, set what price I please
Upon my self; admit what visitants
I shall think fit; no other, nor no more;
And this without control, or least exception
Of you or any man; secured by the City,
So safe from outrages, that least abuse
May, on my just complaint, be punishable
In whomsoever by affront dares grive me.

Pi. I fear she will prove another creature then
The Beast I took her for: she knows her strength*

Vic. Yet thus much (for you are a Gentleman)
I Will yield for satisfaction unexacted:
If in this Months space, in that honored way
(For I despair not of a husband sir)
Of holy Marriage, I be not promov'd;
Nor, by that time prefixed, the great Son tenderd
(Great as you terme'^) for my virginity;
And that I stoop for less, here is my hand,
I will be yours as freely as mine own
At your own price.

Pi. Said like a noble Wench,
Only a word by way of friendly advise,
And so farewell. This Maydenhead of yours,
By you so highly pris'd; now being ripe
(And therein only merchantable ware)
Will, if you oversl^p the season, grow
Suddenly fulsome, straight way stale, then Rotten:
Think upon choycest Fruit, or Foul, or Fish,
Rich Wines, or any Rarity; how soon
Their virtue's lost.

Vic I am enough instructed.


Pi. O^ce more farewell -- pray ponder on these things.


Vic. Fear not I shall.


Pi. Could you consider how 'twould grieve a soul
Endued with Reason, Knowing, the true use
Of Nature's delicates, to see 'hem lost,
O^ spoiled for want of seasonable ta^^ng,
I know you would, and thank me for my counsel.

Vic. Indeed and so I do.


Pi. Indeed farewell then.


Exit. Vic. He Is gone, at last the tedious storm is over.
I shall want day, as well as patience
T'indure and answer all the rest so largely,
See my sprightly Frenchman! I must look
For a hot O ^s^t now, though a short Skirmish.

Enter Horatio, like a French cavalier, Paulo presents him. Hor. Let me in my
approach admire that Object
That vindicates the voice of Fame, in proving
She^ was no Liar in the loud reports,
That blazed it for the Beauty of the World!

Vic. Good sit beware idolatry.


Hor. The Egiptians,
Would they forbear their wonted heathenish worship,
And fall in adoration of this face --

Vic. Indeed i will hear no more.


Hor. Lady you must,
You are so far above the pitch of flattery
That highest courtship in our best of Language
Wants due expression of your supreme graces:
And not to tender you the height of praise
Were mere Rusticity, rather profanation.

Vic. Yet. Let me stay you there, and let me tell you
You have worded well your high conceit of me,
But in a way so low, so undeserving
A courtiers art, that I have found you none.

Hor. No Courtier Lady?


Vic. No, no Courtier sir,
How can it fall in courtly understanding*
That beauty can be conquered by it is praise?
It breeds but less respect, and often times scorn
From those that are ambitious of praise
On such praise-givers. And if you came only
Thus to pronounce my praise, you have said enough.

Hor. Nay dearest Lady, saving your displeasure --
I must come closer to her, she will forget Aside.
She is a whore else.

Vic. Sir, your further pleasure


Hor. To tell you, Lady, now I like your wit
Equally with your beauty; briefly of which
A word or two, and so unto our business.
(You tax me with the loss of time already)
You do consider fitly, that to praise
What we would purchase makes the value higher:
It is the chapmans rule to discommend.

Vic. Right sir, were you to buy a Horse or Jewel,
You would not praise it past the price propounded.

Hor. Yes, where I find the worth exceed the price.


Vic. (I am betrayed. He brings the Money sure)


Aside. Hor. And, that you know I do esteem your worth
Above all Salary, I yield my self,
Fraught with unvaluable Love and Honor
To be the due reward of your embraces.

Vic. What Is this si^, to a thousand double Duccatts?


Hor. You cannot think so poorly, or if so,
Perceive them in a taste of my endowments.
First see my late composure; where the flame
Of the soule-ravishing art of Poesy
May light your judgment 'bove the love of money.

Vic. You Will say my soul is noble, then if I
(As I protest I do) complain the wants
Of even the best professors of that art.
The words are set.

Hor. To notes my voice can master?


Vic. Please you to read 'hem sir, and in requital
Of such a debt, my maid shall sing 'hem for you.

Enter Jacconetta. Jacconetta, observe this Dity. He Reads the Song.

Let not the corrupted steame
Of invective breach blaspheme,
Ladies for those artfull graces
Which they lay upon their Faces:
Ceruse and Vermillion there
As aptly may be laid.
As (to cover Nature bare)
All other parts be clad.
Be we sick in any part,
Pained, or Lame, we seek to Art,
(Nature's Rector) to restore
Us, the strength we had before.
Who can say a Ladies Face
Less meriteth the cost,
Or the privilege, or grace
Her other parts may boast?
Ladies no, since Time may steal
Natures bounty, learn to heal;
And with nimble hand repair
Teeth and Lips, Cheeks, Eyes and Hair;
Filling wrinkles, purling veins:
That unperceav'd may be
Upon your looks, the strokes and pains
Of Age and Casualty.
Vic. Now try your voice, Maid.


Jac. Sings. Hor. However 'twas well Sung, you seem to slight
In such requital, my esteem of you:
But yet there rests in me a quality,
I may suppose not so to be requited.
Please you command your Music, I will Dance,
To what you first shall name of latest practice.

Vic. Your skill has made you confident; and I
Do so much honor these endowments in you,
That I my self will answer you in this.
Name you the Dance sir.

Hor. To come the closer to you, the Novella.


Vic. I am but weakly practiced yet in that.


Hor. Some other then.


Vic. No let it be the same.
Go play it Jacconetta, the Novella.

Exit Jac. Hor. I do begin to doubt my qualities
Will not pass here in payment at the rate
My schooling cost me, when she repayes all
I can bestow, in the same coin again:
But since I Am in, i will on, and make the best
Both Face and Legs I can in it.

Dance. Hor. How like you it Lady?


Vic. For so much sir as you have excelled me
I crave your kind acceptance of my thanks.

Hor. I still had rather you were pleased to accept
Me and my whole deservings. I come to you.
If you esteem of Courtship, Language, Quality,
Sorting a Gentleman of best degree,
The Mixture of whose knowledge with his practice
Cost thrice your golden Son; let me and those
Be made the meed of your most sweet enjoying.

Vic. I will not make you such a loser sir,
But rather wish you had your money again
Those excellencies cost.

Hor. You do not flout me Lady?


Vic. No, i will speak plainly sir, these qualities
Might on some thriving Stage, and lucky legs
Bring you your money again, winning, perhaps,
The love of some old Lady, by stirring up
The embers of affection, rather lust.

Hor. Did ever woman talk so?


Vic. But certes here
They will not pass for ready money sir.

Hor. I dreampt as much. She has a devilish wit.


Vic. My courtesy si^ forbids me bid you hence;
But having private business of my own
I must crave leave to leave you to the thought
Of what two thousand Duccats are.

Exit. Hor. Be hand'd.


Enter Paulo. Pau. Is it performed sir? have you done the feat?


Hor. Pox of your Fates.


Pau. Just as the Music played I warrant you
Sir, 'twas a moving Lesson; played to th'life.
We struck it home, that you might do so too.

Hor. The Rogue, too, jeeres me! sir I should do well
To strike, or beat your undeserved Fee
Out of your bawdy Pocket.

Pau. As if you had not done the do you came for!
What pretty ways can Gentlemen find out
To save their moneys! It Is worth praise in some,
That have but little, or come hardly by it,
By travail, study, or laborious toil,
Dear shifts sometimes, and dangerous ways with hazard --

Hor. Very good!


Pau. But for you Gallants, that have, as it were
Wealth above with borne with you, and still growing
Up with you, past the reach of your expenses;
And never sweat, but for your exercise,
Or what your exercises bring you to!
For you to think your pleasures costly; feign
Excuse for petty fees, now the great charge
Is paid, and your desire satisfied --

Hor. No more.


Pau. Alas sir, what is a poor Duccatoun
After a thousand Duccats? --

Hor. Have you done?


Pau. Would you had not; 'lesse my reward were better.
See, see, the bed made smoth again and all!
(O precious craft!) as here had nothing been!
Well would ye were all as wise in greater matters.

Hor. It Is the Rogues humor: I will give him something
For abusing me. There Is your Duccatoun
To work more affability in your Mistress
Against my next approach.

Pau. It seems then yet
You are not cloyd with her deliciousness.

Hor. Nor had one taste (I swear by life and honor)
Of all my hopes, more then her Hand and Lips.

Pau. Have you not in that a double meaning sir?


Hor. I vow, for ought I know she is a virgin.


Pau. You Have satisfied me, and perhaps my art
May in your absence work a little for you.

Hor. Think of me then.


Pau. My profit pricks me to it.


Hor. Respect it then, Adieu.


Exit. Pau. Serviteur Monsieur.
The fear of thee is past. I was almost
In a cold sweat: but all the danger now,
Lies on the the other side of the house; my Don
My hot Goat-^ver'd Diego, should he now
Discharge his Pistols on her, they would prove
More forcible then Cannon-shot on me. Enter Pedro, Victoria.
Faith quit me of suspect. How big he looks!
As if he scorned repulse. If he grow violent
I Will bring the Duchman in to cool his pride,
And set them by the ears for our Low Countries.

Exit. Ped. I have not in all Spain (where Majesty
Enthroned sits upon the brow of beauty,
And crown the Ladies with prerogative
'Bove all the women of the Earth) incountred
With such a scorn, as here. Discourteous woman,
Worthless and ignorant of the weighty trust
Was tenderd to thee in my blood and honor.

Vic. Your blood and honor, will not feed or cloth me.


Ped. I will not change a word more with a mouth
So full of rudenes, and mechanic baseness.

Vic. Not upon my submission sir?


Ped. It must be great and sudden if it move me.


Vic. He looks that I should kneel and beg a Kiss.


Ped. Why seek you not to expiate your trespass
By tender of your self to my embraces?

Vic. I cannot do it: My virgin Modesty
Denies that freedom.

Ped. I Will no more delay,
I see it is only force must conquer you.

Vic. You will not ravish me! within there! help!


Enter Paulo, Jacconetta. Pau. What! is the great some tendered?
Do you want hands to tell your money Mistress?

Vi. No, to take off the hands of Rape and Outrage
This proud imperious Spaniard gripped me with.

Pau. Signior you must not gripe nor grope here
Under the sum prefixed; two thousand Duccats.
We have arithmetique to receave them by
In your own Pistolets, or pieces of Eight
In Rialls, if you please; but not one single one
To be abated, my most thrifty Don;
Whom I cannot abuse enough me thinks,
I have seen one in your shape so well presented.

Ped. Villain, i will have thee whipped for this affront,
Thy fault is punishable by the Law.

Pau. Not in defense of honor dear Don Tarquin.
Preventing Rape and Murder.

Ped. Villain die.


He draws Pistol. Pau. Not at this distance sir,
Besides here is aid.

Enter Swatzenburgh. Swa. Hence you Muskitta. Give a look more this way
I Will force thee take thy wings out at the window.

Ped. Borne down by Bravoes! let the place protect ye,
By my few minutes patience. My revenge
Shall shortly speak in thunder.

Swa. Hold your peace;
And vent not here your loud Rodomontadoes
Lest I spit lightning.

Ped. Well si^ I am silent.


Pau. Be so my politic Don. This Hans has snapt her;
The Dutch man carries her from your great claim:
And this may be an ominous portent
Against your title to the Netherlands,
It may hold in the great work sir, as well
As in this small assay.

Ped. Abused and Jeered!


Pau. Nor they hear me not my noble Signior,
I Will tell you for your satisfaction
This Alinanie is a you^ker that would marry her,
And she nor I durst bear it otherwise,
(Knowing by chance he slipped into the house,
And overheard us) when you come again
I will inform you further, you shall find
My information worthy of a fee.

Ped Take from my hand a piece of four Gazetts.


Pau That Is three pence sterling, you are bounteous sir,
So, now, look big and vanish.

Exit Pedro. Vic. I have not sir, in my short story strayd
In the least syllable from truth, and were
The eyes of all the world fixed upon
My seeming Levity, my mind should be
Still constant as the center to that end
Reserved in my free thoughts.

Swa. Why was the sum, then, of two thousand duccats
Proclaimed the price of your virginity?

Vic. To keep the flesh flies off, you know my aim sir.


Swa. I find the noble Lady; nor can I
Further attempt a breach upon your honor.

Vic. Upon those terms I pray sir be my Guest,
I have by this time a sl^ght Dinner staying.

Swa. You favors make me bold.


Vic. See all in readiness Jacconet.


Exit Jac. Swa. I Will drink a frolic Lady;
M^^th and good wine take me: My loose desire
Is to chaste love refined by Vesta's fire.

Exit. Pau. Am I a prophet? sure the Dutchman's taken
In a chaste snare indeed. I did but forge it
For an excuse to calm and rid the Spaniard,
And he seems to prevent my fiction: yet
Presumption shall not sway me. Women's wiles
Are often times past prevention, and men catch
Sense of the wrongs, which to prevent they watch.

Exeunt Omnes. ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Flavia, Astutta with a Letter. Ast. IF this move him not, nay prevail not
with him
To the accomplishment of your desire,
Would I were a man, both for your sake and his.

Fla. What would thou do?


Ast. First take away the cause
Of your Greene-sicknesse by killing him; then
Cure you my self.

Fla. What wonders thou would do!


Ast. I, if I were a Man and able to do what I
Now desire (for I would have mine own desire still)
I would do wonders indeed. Believe it Mistress,
An able man that has but a weak woman's desire
Has an unknown thing; and may do any unknown thing, for ought I know --

Fla. I pray thee leave thy idle pratle, and let
Me hear thy moving Letter.

Ast. Hear it then,
As your own Act and Deed, and quickly sign it.

MY dear Francisco, If you intend not my death, help me to break Prison this
Night: Else though my Execution be appointed to morrow morning by a forced
Marriage, I will prevent it by a speedier way, and by my own hand die,

Yours and Love's Martyr.
Here, write your Name.




Fla. But thou have set him down no means*


Ast. That Is in the Postscript, mark,

The last minute that I will expect you shall be three in the morning, when
from the back Window I will either fall into your Arms, or on my Death.


Fla. I thank thee good Astutta. O that the messenger Would be as true to me!


Ast. If we cannot win her to it, it is but a Letter lost,
How do they* that have whole pockets ^u^l of *him
In readiness to borrow money?

Fla. I pray thee peace.


Ast. Why I do not think there is any of 'hem within hearing.


Fla. Thou dalliest with my fears.


Ast. Fear it not M^stris, she is as sure at such a lift --
And so she is come already.

Enter Nanulo, Francisco, like a Peddler Woman with her Box. Nan. Look you Lady,
I told you true, here is the
Party, that has the Knacks and things; come
Open, open, and show all.

Fra Not before you good sit.


Nan. Are you so coy of your toys?


Fra. Your diligence were better somewhere else:
This prying into women's businesses
Is ill sir for your eyesight, and perhaps
May spoil your growth, Good Sir, I crave your absence.

Nan. I must give way. She has a devilish tongue. Exit


Ast. Mistress, she is for our turn I warrant you
I find it by her aptnes to abuse him.

Fra. Come Mistress Bride, -- Nay blush not, pretty one,
To take the name one day before your time.

Fra. I hate the Name, on those accursed terms,
That have prefixed the time. Good Astutta,
Break with her by your selfs; I cannot speak:
My tears forbid me.

Ast. I hope you will not offer it.


Fra. Come Mistress, see. What weep you, pretty one?
What! and the great good turn so near you? ha!
What will she do to morrow night?

Ast. Even cry out right perhaps.


Fra. Perhaps so too; and laugh as fast e're morning,
Come Lady, come, hear me, and see my ware:
It Is from Fabritio, he, that noble Gentleman,
Dos not your heart leap now? Now but suppose
French chains here of five hundred crowns a piece;
A rich Pearl Neck-lace, Sapphire and Ruby Bracelets;
Variety of Jewels, and a Diamond work --

Fra. I hate their price and them, the Sender more.


Ast. Pray peace.


Fla. I cannot: let me go.


Fra. Pray stay sweet Lady,
I do not say Frabritio sent such things,
I said I came from him, that noble Gentleman.

Fla. He is not noble.


Fra. Judge him by his presents,
And see the things he sends.

Fla. I would not hear
A mention of him; much less would I see
The least relation from his hated hands.

Ast. Pray Mistress see 'hem! Open your Box I pray.


Fla. Had she there Lucrece' Knife, or Portias coals,
Or Cleopatra's ashes I could embrace 'em.

Fra. Look you how near I fit you. See what is here A halter a Knif a Vial.
What a choyc^ chain is this! and here is a Knife,
As sharp as that of Lucrece. And, for coals,
Here is a poisonous juice, whose every drop
Would eat through Iron. These Fabritio sends you.

Fla. I do accept them.


Fra. Stay; conditionally
If you refuse another present here.

Fla. I must reject any from him but these.


Ast. What a scorne's this! This Bawd nere scapes alive
Out of these doors. Pray whats' your other pesent?

Fra. Here Lady, look on it pray; examine't well. A Picture,
And take or this or those.

Fla. Ha! look here Astutta;
The lively image of my love Francisco!

Ast. It is exceeding like him! what is the plot troe?


Fla. A thousand kisses shall thy welcome be,
Happy resemblance of my hoplesse love;
As many thanks to you, good, virtuous Woman,
O let me fall and bless the ground that bears thee,
And ask forgiveness for my late rude trespass.

Fra. Recall your self, sweet Lady* tender heart!


Fla. And could Fabritio (I can name him now)
Show me such Kindness, and himself so noble,
To send me this?

Fra. On this condition (as I was to say)
That you embrace it in the memory
Of him your Love, namely his friend Francisco,
And that you ever love, and only him.

Fla Ever and only (though I thank him for it)
He need not have urged that.

Ast. Nor threatened these;
(Your Rope, here, and the rest) had she refused,
And to express their needlesses the better
I pray return them to him with great thanks.

Fra. 'Twas his great care to work me to this Message,


Fla. Let then the charge be mine. Here Is forty duccats*
And could you but convey a Letter for me
To my Francisco, take a hundred more.

Fra. Knew you but my desire to further Lovers
You need not bid so much. Give me the Letter.

Fla. Seal it Astutta.


Fra. Then you know me not
I must be privy unto all I carry,
Where I meet doubts, I never undertook.

Fla. Nay I dare trust you (Read it if you please)*


Fra Indeed you may. To wrong an innocence Reads it.
So sweet as yours were sin inexpiable.

Fla. But will you gi't him Faith? I never swore
Nor urged a body to an oath before.

Fra. It Is given already Flavia. Hence disguise,
More yet? nay all shall off. Do you know me yet?

Fla. O my Francisco!


She swounds. Fra. Cursed be this* idle habit
In which my impious curiosity,
To make a trial of her constancy
Has wounded her so deep with jealousy
Of a mistrust in me, that now she faints
Under the passion; and herhaps may die so,
Flavia! my Love! O --

Ast. Slight what mean you si^?


Fra. By all the bliss that a true Lover wishes --


Ast. Will you hold your peace?


Fra. By all the oaths and practices of Lovers --


Ast. Will you undo all now?


Fra. I was not jealous of thy constancy,
Flavia! my Love, my Life! my Flavia*

Ast. Will you lose all you came for with your clamor?


Fra. Help me; for Love's sake help to make her speak,
Or but look up*

Ast. Would you could old your peace;
Whilst I look down to escape discovery,
She Will come to her self again, and you too; fear not
It Is but a qualme of kindness, this.

Fla. Francisco --


Ast. She comes already.


Fra. Speak my Flavia.


Ast. Pray do you peace. Handle her handsomely,
And then all shall be well I warrant you,
You do not know the danger, noise and nakedness
May pull upon you, should the Rogue
Dwarf overheare you, we were all blown up,
Which to prevent, all hushed while I go down.

Exit. Fra. Be cheard my Love, I came to rescue thee;
And hired this habit and the Pedlers craft;
Prayed for her absence, and her silence too,
And caused a Gondalo wait at the back door
In case I might surprise thee* Pray take comfort.

Fla. You need not bid, nor wish it in these arms,
Who ever praye's for those in Paradise? Bell rings.
Ay me! How soon my fears control my bliss?
I have blasphemed in my security,
And terror threats my downfall into torment.

Enter Astutta. Ast. Out, out alas my Master in all have --


Fra. What shall we do?


Ast. It is too late to ask,
Or now to d'on your Pedlers weeds again:
Gather 'em up and fly into your closet,
Dress him up there* Stay not to look about ye. Exit Fra. Fla.
I Will do my best to keep him back a little.

Enter Guadagni, and Nanulo. Gua None else to speak with me?


Nan. None but the merchantesse to fit my Mistress,
Signior Fabritio sent.

Gua. I thank his care.
I see that all goes well. No cross but one,
That I forgot a writing, which in ^^^^
I am constrained to fetch. Now where is my ^^^l^?

Ast. Above sir, busy with the daintiest things,
That er'e allured a virgin into wedlock*
Out with your purse sir, for you cannot see 'hem,
But they will ravish you to large expense:
Besides sir, 'twill be fit you give her something,
Coming so jumpe as 'twere into the Market.

Gua. I will not see 'em. Put the woman by
Into the Gallery, or somewhere remote,
Quick, quick, dispatch.

Ast. You shall not need to urge it.


Exit. Gua. No, no: my cost is amply shown already:
And will be more, before the Wedding's over.
Without a needless wast in Gawds and Trifles, One ring^
See who is at door. Exit Nan.
A fathers care consists not in expense
That is not qualified with providence.

Enter Nanulo. Nan. Signior Pantaloni, sir sends after you
He and your advocates expect you in have
To bring away the Writing.

Gua. Say I am coming.


Exit. Ast. What have you done with him?


Enter Flavia, and Astuita above. Fla. Our have and fears could not find time
to dress him
But I have locked him up into that press.

Ast. Your Father's coming up to seek a writing,
Pray Love it be not there.

Fla. I am undone then.


Ast. Well hold your peace, look bold and cheerfully,
And be you silent, youth: nor cough, nor stink;
Nor let your fear run forth in streams of urine
To make him think his Aqua vitae spilt.

Gua. Where are you Flavia?


Within. Fla. O me he comes!


Ast. Why speak you not?


Gua. Flavia.


Ast. You were best betray all with your silliness.


Gua. Why Flavia I say?


Ast. Here father, here sir,
You will not I shall answer for you when he is here?
Come, look as nothing were, all will be naught else.
Bear up he comes.

Enter Guadagni above. Gua. It Is here that I would have thee Flavia.
Give me the Key of this press here.

Fla. O Father, Father --


She falls. Gua. What Is the matter? ha!


Ast. Alas poor heart! you know sir, in her infancy,
You beat her once for losing of a Key:
For which she trembles still, being asked in have.
Are you a child still in your fears, and must
Bewed to morrow? Fie, fie upon you,
She thinks she has lost it, but I saw her look it
Together with a writing which you dropped
Out of this press this morning, safe enough
Here in her Cabinet.

Gua. It Is like I let it fall.


Ast. Where is your Key of this? Give mee't, give mee't.
How have and fear perplexes her! I could
Have picked it open.

Gua. Do, or break it open.


She lets the Cabinet fall out of the Window. Ast. Ay me the fruits of
rashness? See, it is fallen
With all her Jewels and your writing too
Into the street. O my unlucky hand!

Gua. Peace giddy headed harlot, watch that none Take it away, while I run to
recover't, Nanulo, Nanulo.


Exit. Ast. Will you be nimble yet to find a way
By the back-dore into the Gondalo.
While I lock him and's man into the street?
I know their have will leave the Keys i'th'dore.
Quickly unpresse him; and take as much gold
As you can carry, i will along w'ye too.
Stay not to think, or thank me for my wit.

Fla. What shall we say?


Ast. Do as you are bidden, and say nothing.


Fra. Lovers shall saint thee; and this day shall be
For ever callenderd to Love and thee.

Exit. Enter a Zaffie, taking up the Cabinet, to him Nicolo in a Zaffies habit.
Gua. Nanulo! The Key to let me forth.


Within. Zaff. St. Mark and fortune make it a good prize.


Nic. Hands off Sir, that is not yours.


Zaff. Nor yours I am sure.


Nic. Half part then brother Zaffi.


Gua. The Key I saw.


Zaff. Sir you are none oth' Zaffi.


Gua Villain slave! come open the door.


Zaff. How came you by this habit?


Nic. Perhaps to try sit how it will become me
When I have a mind to be as very a Knave
(...)ffice as your self, But shall we sl^p
(...), and share, before the dog that owes it
^^^e the bone from us both?

Enter Guadagni, Nanulo. Gua. I fear you can be quicker in my absence.


Nan The fault was in your have sir.


Gua. Took you not up a Cabinet, friends?


Nic. Zaff Not we sir, we saw none.


Gua. O you watch well above there.


Nan. This fellow has it under his coat sir.


Zaff But who shall know it for yours sir?


Nic. May we be bold to ask what marks it has,
Or what is within it?

Gua. I Will have you ear-mark'd Villains for your theft,
Know you not me?

Zaff. I cry your worship mercy, and am glad
I was your instrument to preserve this treasure
From this false counterfeit.

Nic. Fortune has sent my master to relieve me.


Enter Pantaloni Checquino, Prospero. Pan. Signior Guadagni our Council have
thought fit,
For better confirmation of our act,
That it be past here in your Daughters presence
Together with my Son, whom I have sent for,
Why do you seem thus moved?

Gua. An accident has crossed me. Look you sir,
You have authority; Here Is a Counterfeit
(Deserves examination) would have robbed me.

Nic. I saved you sir from being robbed. Hear me aside
Sir -- Nicolo whispers Pant.

Gua. Carry this in; and send away the woman


He gives the Cabinet to Nan. who knocks at door. Nic. Now do you know me I
have done the feat.


Pan. Have treated with the Hangman Nicolo?


Nic. The Carnifex is fitted for your service,
In a most gorgeous hab^t of a Dutchman,
And about five in the evening will be with her.

Nan. Astutta! Madona Flavia! Astutta!


Gua. What Is the matter there?


Pan. The best jest, ha, ha, ha.


Nan You Will open the door?


Gua What Is that?


Pan. It will be mirth to morrow at our feast
To laugh our bellies full.

Nan. I am sure you hear me
Fool me, but not my master: he is here.

Gua. Why stay you there sirrah?


Pan. I let him go^: a merry harmless fellow
I Will answer for him. Hence, away, and shit you.
And quickly send my Son.

Exit Nic. Nan. The door is fast sir, and they will not hear me.


Gua. I fear I am undone. Flavia, Astutta, ko^!
T^s so, it is so, some Robbers are slipped in,
And now make havoc^ of my goods and Daughter.

Pan. It is no dallying Run and fetch a Smith Ex. Nan.
To force the Lock.

Gua. Astutta, Flavia! O this cursed chance
I fear will ruin me and all my hopes. Enter Peddler woman.
How came you hither?

Ped. Sir by good appointment
To bring Bride-laces, Gloves, and curious Dressings
To deck your Daughter on her Brideale-day,
To morrow as I ween, holds it I pray?

Gua. Were you not here before, and in the house?


Ped. If you could put it off sir one day longer
I could so fit her with new fashiond tires
That she should thank me.

Gua: I fear a new, and further secret mischief.


Nanulo above. Nan. Hence let me fall to earth; I may not see
My Masters fury rise out of his ruin.

Gua. How gotst thou thither?


Nan. By the back-dore which I found widely open.
O sir your Daughter --

Gua. Ravished or murderd is she?


Nan. Worse, worse, by far sir, she is conveyed hence
The Neighbors from the windows over the way
Saw her, the Maid, and a young Man take boat.
They guess it was Francisco.

Pan. How, how, how!


Nan. Laden with Caskets sir. Here Is his Deceptio visus,
The ^^^^ed cl^ak, that charmed my honest care; N^^* show*
And here is his juggling Bo^. What toys are these!

the habit, the cor^* etc. Gua. O me accursed wretch.


Enter Nicolo. Nic. O sir, your Son!


Pan. Where is he? speak.


Nic. Sir, no where to be found
In private let me tell you, he slipped forth
At four in the Morning; sir, when you and I
Were you know where. He cast forth doubtful words
Of a vagary he would fetch at Rome.

Pan. We both are wrought upon by hellish Magic.


Gua. Devils are in this plot.


Chec Pros. Think you of Devils?


Pan. Though you sirs, being Lawyers, think there is none
We may both think there are, and fear 'em.

Chec. Forbear such talk; and think upon the ^^irth,
The jest you have in hand against to morrow.

Pan. Sir, use your jerks and quillets at the bar.


Gua. Cast there your petulant wit on misery.


Chec. Sir, you mistake, my counsel is to comfort,
Be not dejected, but seek speedy way
To circumvent the wit has wrought upon you.

Gua. Good sir, your best advise.


Chec. First charge this officer
Here, with this woman; who by'examination
May make discovery --

Ped. I can discover nothing but my ware sir,
Nor part with that for less then ready money.

Pan. Take her to custody.


Zaff. Mistress come with me.


Ped. VVhither? for what?


Zaff. You shall know that hereafter.


Ped. What can I discover?


Pan. Away with her.


Ped. What can I discover?


Exit Zaff. Ped. Chec. Into your house sir now, and secure that;
Come, recollect your selfs, call home the strength
Of your approved judgments, we will assist you.

Pros. You must be soddaine too in this your pursuit;
Advise and do at once, use no delay;
The speediest course is now the safest way.

Exeunt Om. ACT IV. SCENE II.
Fabritio like the glorious Dutchman, Horatio* Piso. Fab. FOund you the Fort,
then, so impregnable?


Hor. Against all force of arms, or brains.


Pi. No way but by the downright composition
Of the two thousand Duccats to be entered.

Fab. Sure it is some noble wench then you imagine,
But my disguise shall put her to the test.

Hor. I Am sure she jeerd me out of my Monsieurship.


Fab. Did she, and all thy fine french qualities?


Pis. And is as like to make a skitter brook
Of you in your Dutch slops. For if she be not,
After all this, a cunning whore, i am cozened.

Hor. She lives at a good rate how ere maintaind.


Pi. The secret way, man, by her commings in
Too common among women for their livings,
I Will not believe her wit and feature are
Allied to honesty.

Fab. Thou art no worshipper of fair women Piso.


Pi. No, If I worship any of 'hem more
Then in the Knee-trick, that is necessary
In their true use let me be ^unuchiz'd.
Look here is your fathers Pimpe again.

Hor. Now Nicolo?


Nic. S^w you my young Master Gentlemen?


Hor. Yes there he stands, transl^ted out of sober
Italian into high Dutch.

Nic. I swear he was past my reading,
Slight, he appears as like the noted Almaine
Late come to town, if he had but his beard --

Fab. How like you this for a beard?


Nic. Most excellent!
But pray take heed your stay spoil not the purpose
Of your disguise.

Fab. Why what news Nicolo?


Nic. Your Father is in busy quest of you.


Fab. Then he dos miss me?


Nic. Pray Phoebus he miss as much of Madness,
He and his virtuous brother old Guadagni,
Who misses too his Daughter. Francisco has her.

Hor. Has he got her off?


Nic. And she has got him on by this time: they
Are silly fools else.

Pi. Hymen be their speed.


Nor. But how I pray thee escaped they?


Nic. First, sir, know
There Is a strange fellow without desires to speak w'yee
I guess he is some Bravo.

Hor. A Bravo speak with me?


Nic. Yes, and inquires here for my Master too,
And Signior Piso, you are all known it seems.

Pi. Come leave your fooling.


Nic. By mine Ears it is true.


Hor. Go call him in, I fear no Knavery.


Pi. Your lodging protects me.


Fab. My disguise me.


Puts on his false beard. Enter Nicolo, Paul. Nic. This is the Gentleman.


Pi. It Is the proud Bra^^es whiske!


Pau. I cry you mercy si^, are you Signior Horatio?
I took you sir this morning for a Monsieur.
I thank you for my Duccatoun.

Hor. What! Is she come about? Has she sent for me?


Pau. Good sir! are you here too? I thank you sir,
You paid me your entrance, but no pa^^ing for.

Pi. Prithee deserve no be^^ing ^ill thou have done
Thy errand. What do come for?

Pau. Sir, to entreat this Gentleman to bring
With him one Signior ^is^, and F^britio --
Beyond my hopes! Good ^ir, are you here too?

Fab. This is a Devil! could he know me else
That nere saw him before; in this disguise?

Pau. Cry mercy ^ir: you would not these should know
Nor shall they (I fear it not) but h^^k you sir.

Nic. What Familiare these ^awd^ are. They Will talk yet
Thus to Lords in private.

Pi. Sure he takes him for the Dutch loggerhead
We saw to day in the Piazz^.

Hor. So would any man: He has hit his shape so right.


Pau. I am sure I rejoice in these Dollors, that you
Give me to day, and are as ^^^^^ine, that
My Mistress wished a better dinner for you
For frighting of the Spaniard with your fireworks.
But, by your strangers it seems you repent
The Marriage offer that you made my Mistres.
Fortune direct you to no worse a wife,
And so I leave you to your choice.

Fab. I have found the error, and will make good use ^^'t.


Hor. Your business then is to that strangers sir --


Pau. Only your self, and briefly from Francisco.


Hor. Francisco! where?


Pau. Where but at our house sir? he and his Bride
Craving your company and those Gentlemen
I named unto you.

Pau. For no disparagement unto their worths, sir,
But private reasons yet unknown to me
Wherein you shall be satisfied at your coming,

Hor. But are they Married?


Pau. I brought the Priest to 'em:
And saw them lawfully coupled, and before
Sufficient witnesses, that saw 'em chamberd,
She was his own Church-sure before I left '^m,
And he has made her Cock-sure, sir by this time,
Or else he is a Bungler.

Hor. Go i will follow thee.
Piso is here.

Pau. But where is that Fabritio?


Pi. We Will find him too. J^g you sir on before:
You are no street companion for us.

Pau. I am gone sir --


Exit. Hor. You have heard all Fabritio; what d^^ think on it?


Fab. Nothing; nor nothing will till I arrive
There at the full knowledge of all together.

Pi. But prithe^ hang thy Ha^gman^ project now,
And bear us company in thine own shape.

Fab. Not for the price of the Novella Piso.
I Will try her to the quick. You Will give me leave
To make prize of her if I can, I crossed not you.

Hor. We wish you safe aboard sir.


Fab. On before then. Exit Hor. Piso.
Now Nicolo; your disguise again oath Zaffi.

Nic. O, it is ready; and I know my quue.


Fab. Who see me, in this strain, seem to outstrip
The bounds of filial duty, let (withal)
Their observation, by my just ends, gather,
It Is not to lose, but to recall a father.

ACT V.
SCENE I.
Victoria, Francisco, Flavia, Astutta, Jacconetta. Vic. NOw Lady, has your
entertainment pleased you
In the Novella's house? is all well yet?

Fla. So well, that now come Father Friends, and all
The friendly Foes that did oppose my bliss
I can maintain my cause in these safe arms
Against all their Frowns and Furies.

Vic. And your Mistress is over, too* I hope sir
The place is not so dangerous as it was.

Fra. Lady your nobleness shown in this great bounty,
Has not alone wiped off my foul suspicion:
But scor'd upon my breast an endless sum
Of thanks; which I, unable to discharge,
Must not presume to live, but as your Creature;
Nor will I further dare to tempt your goodness
In deeper search of what your reason was
(Past all my hopes and wishes) to provide
For me; I will not sum in such a scruple*
For sure, I hold you for a power Divine
(Past all the fictions of the fabulous times
Fashioning out the Gods in earthly forms)
Sent by the highest providence to help me.

Vic. You take too deep a sense of courtesy!
But see, are these your friends?

Enter Paulo, with Horatio, and Piso. Fra. And let me beg
Your suffrage Lady, I may bid them welcome.

Vic. Your Bride and I will both supply you in it.
Neither of these is he they call Fabritio?

Pau. No, but he is sent for; and comes instantly.


Exit Fra. This is the Lady I am bound to serve.


Hor. And I to honor.


Vic. Setting aside your suit sir.


Hor. I cannot promise that.


Vic. And I do wish
I had her double price in ready Duccats,
For what she has done, and the other do besides.

Vic. You still stand in your good conceit of me.


Pi. Yes, and I would so stand to'^, ha --


Vic. You are a merry Gentleman.


Fra. I will not whisper it, Horatio,
The woman that I dealt with for disguise
Was wrought before by this most matchless Lady
To cross the Match twixt Flavia and Fabritio;
And had undone it though I had done nothing,
And ere she would condition with me,
Obliged me, by an oath, (in case we escaped)
To bring her hither to this Ladies house.
I kept that oath, and here you find us welcomed.

Pi. Then thou have done't, would I had still the Duccats
To pledge thee here.

Enter Paulo, whispers with Victoria. Vic. We Will talk of that hereafter.


Pi. What acted you, Tit, in this Comedy?


Ast. The Chambermayde, a kind of putter forwards,
Sir, to the business.

Fra She has done so well,
That, if a Match in Venice may be found
By my best care, i will help her to a Husband,
For she deserves a good one.

Ast. And if he prove not so, I am like to prove
A good one my self, and make him something.

Pi. Thou will, I find it in a villainous cast
Of that eye there.

Hor. And what think you of this?


By Jacconetta. Pi. Even such another, of another hue,
She has a devilish gloat too.

Vic. Gallants, I find you merry, you are more welcome:
My man acquaints me with a present business
Requiring privacy. Please you, with your friends
Go up to the Bride-chamber. There is music.
Wait you respectively.

To Jac. Hor. We Will all observe you Lady.


Exeunt. Pi. But Lady, if you receive the Duccats
Before you come to us, pray bring our shares,
We all connive you know.

Vic. Pray be not jealous,
Follow your Friends, i will follow you straight way. Ex. Pi.
How dreams he of this money? he knows nothing,
An English Factor, say you Borgio?

Pau. Yes Mistress, a brave fellow.


Vic. And is he so well moneyed as to spare
Out of his Masters trust, so great a sum?

Pau. Oh he is a master here himself. They are
Abroad, the royalist Nation of the World.
What rich Venetian Rarity has not
The English Money-masters purchac'd from
Princes and States, to bear home as their triumphs?
And for their pleasures -- but i will say no more;
He thinks I stay too long for him to wait
Without, with so much money.

Vic. Did thou see'^?


Pau. Most brightly shining! He Is now telling it
In the next room! He comes not to tender
The value of it in fine qualities
Like your supposed Monsieur: but in cash!
Cash! cash of Gold! Oh it is a tempting sight;
Able to damn a Noble woman's honor.
What Is your descent? But poor I make no question;
Why, this will set you up and make you noble.

Vic. This way of his might serve to turn the blood
That has but any tincture of good in it
From touching such a bait, yet he thinks now
He spurs me to it. But Bravo I will fit you.
Go call him in, go.

Pau. Now my Blood and Brain,
Be strong and sudden, stay.

Vic. Why stop you Borgio?


Pau. To see him weigh his gold. Oh dainty sight!
He brought his weights in's pocket: just Gentleman
He will be sure you shall not want a grain
Of your full price of sweet damnation.

Vic. He Is doing no such thing.


Pau. No, no, I have it now.


Vic. I pray thee go, thou know not how the thought
Of so much gold, and the conceit of the Maydenhead
Lost in the house to day sets my virginity
On edge now to be going.

Pau. Are you so ready? then I fly.


Enter above, Piso, Horatio. Vic. What ails the fellow troe!


Pi. I must yet have an eye upon this female
To quit my jealousy, or catch her in the nick.

Hor. Here we may see, and hear all undiscovered.


Pi. Watch close, he comes.


Enter Swatzenburg, like a Merchant with a full Bag. Swa. By your leave Lady,
I come not a pure Suitor
(With studied Oratory; nor address a Sonnet,
Or trifling Love-toyes to persuade admittance
By slow degrees into your inmost favor)
But a rich purchacer, that brings, at once,
The golden Sum, and Price of your enjoying.
Here precious Beauty, made by this more precious!
Take your full due, and render readily
The full tuition of my wealthy purchase.

Vic. Now virtue guard me.


Pi. What Is that?


Hor. She invokes virtue.


Swa. Ha! why this delay?
Let not the glorious sight of this amaze you,
Though it be granted, sudden apprehension
Of such bright blessings may transport a soul
Into high raptures, when it is considerd,
The Ornament of youth, the strength of age,
Life's great maintainer, Lady, let not this
At all transmute you. For i will bring supplies
That shall so frequently acquaint you with
Such sights as these, that you shall grow regardlesse
Even of the care to keep them, in respect
Of the delicious pleasure brings them in:
Delay not therefore that high purchac'd pleasure,
That brings this to you, by a Minutes loss
To make it fully yours.

Vic. Sir I have heard you: Enter Paulo behind with pistolls.
And now must let you know, it is not the sight
Of that your glorious sum can take my wonder;
Much less my love or person: my amazement
Is, that a man, that bears his Makers shape,
Endued with reason, to direct and govern
That goodly fortune; and has such treasure given him
(Besides his greater blessings of the mind
By well desposing of it) to advance
This worth in deeds of virtue, should descend
Below the sense of Beasts, to part with that,
Allotted for his livelihood and honor
To wast it, and himself in beastiall Lust.

Swa. How Is this?


Pi. I know not what to make of this wench.
She preaches me thinks:

Vic. Besides sir, were it well examined,
The golden sum you tender is, perhaps,
None of your proper own: I understand
You are another Factor, I presume
In all your Catalogue of Merchandise
You find no warrant to buy Maydenheads.
Is such a thing in all your bills of Lading?
They are no way transportable* though you allow
For fraught and leakage half the worth; and less
Returnable by way of exchange. How can
You take up a virginity in Venice,
And make a London payment of it, on
Sight of your bill, or six or ten days after?

Pi. Good!


Swa. Nay then you dally with me, and I must
Deal plain and briefly with you. Here Is the price,
And either render me my just demand,
Or I shall take for your disgrace an order
Shall spue you forth the City.

Vic. Now I fear
I am ensnared. I have but one way left
To fly from shame, or fall to utter Ruin.

Pi. I begin to suspect her honest.


Swa. Your answer Gentlewoman.


Vic. Gentle sir,
The Law has made me yours. And I have now
No Court but Conscience to relieve me in.

Kneels Swa. What may this mean?


Vic. If the strong passion of a Virgin soul,
Expressed in bitterst tears, move not your pity,
This shall prevent your cruelty.

A Knife Pi. She Will prove honest of my life.


Swa. What mean you Lady?


Vic. Keep at that distance sir, and you shall know:
Come nearer, and I will not live to tell you.

Swa. Pray rise and speak your story: yet I tell you,
I hold it very strange, that so much money
And such a one as I (none of th'unhandsomst)
Should not go down with a young wench, and one
Of the profession you pretend to be of
Before cold Iron! Me thinks most unnatural.
Think better yet before you utter further.

Vic. Indeed I may not.


Swa. Well, well, on then.


Vic. It Is true, I am indeed a mere pretender
To the profession you supposed me of;
A spotless Virgin (by my utmost hopes)
And will remain so till I am a Bride.

Pi. Too honest to be a woman!


Swa. Why took you this deceiving habit then?


Vic. I am about to tell you for your pity,
I am a Roman borne, of good descent;
My father noble (of the Candiani)
How ere decayed in fortune, ere he dyed;
Which drew on my Misfortune: For, being betrothed
Unto a wealthy heir, here, of this City,
Who so journ'd then in Rome, his covetous Father
Rav^shd his faith from me, to give't another;
And called him hastily from Rome to Venice.
I followd him, in hope to cross the Match.
And so regaine him; toward which already,
I have done something.

Pi. Fabritio's wench my life on it.


Swa. What in this habit, as a Curtezan?


Vic. Not without good advise: For, by this means
I draw the eyes of all the youthful Gentry,
Not without hope to gain a sight of him.
My price and port keep back inferior persons.
Nor lose I honor by it: For the strictnes
Of our Italian censure gives a virgin,
That held familiarity with any Man,
By way of Marriage treaty, and then forsaken,
Lost in repute; she is no honest woman
Until that man do vindicate her honor.

Swa. But should he find you here, what were his censure?


Vic. Here he should find what his disloyalty
Had wrought me to; and should restore me firm
On my first basis, or exchange a life
For mine ere we would part.

Swa. This sounds yet well.


Pau. I Will trust thee now. Thou art a noble wench,
Thou had kissed Death by this else. Now i will trust thee.

Exit. Vic. If he were lost by Marriage of another,
I would remove with such a testimony
Of my reserved honor (in despite
Of this my outward carriage, for my ends;
Maugre the stern construction of my country)
That strangers should receive me; and some one
More noble then himself --

Swa. Take you to wife?


Vic. I should not doubt.


Swa. It Is done, and I am he that does it.


Vic. I cannot sir, but kindly take your offer:
But, if my first love fail me, there is one,
A noble German, that commenced his suit
To me this day.

Swa. I am he too Lady -- Look well upon me
That in this shift, reducing of my beard,
With this supply of money came to try you,
I find you noble, and above it, honest.

Pi. This is the German that Fabritio apes.


Hor. And he should come now.


Enter Jacomo to them above. Jac. Gentlemen forbear;
Indeed it is not civil in you to pry beyond
Your hospitable usage, pray forbear.

Hor. It Is timely chidden wench, we will obey thee.


Jac. Besides the Bridegroom, and the Bride expect you.


Pi. O ha they done we come, we come.


Exit. Hor. Pi. Vic. This jealous trial now of yours (how ere
You have expressed strong arguments of love)
Has not augmented you in my affection.

Swa. O say not so sweet Lady, i will redeem it.


Vic. I cannot yet believe you are the Man,
You are so changed from what you seemed to day,
Must the mind alter with the outward habit?

Enter Paulo. Pau. Mistress the German --


Vic. Here he is man, he says.


Pau. I say he is without, and craves to see you.


Vic. How can this be? or who can I believe?


Pau. Good sir depart and make room for your self
Your proper self to enter the Dutch Prince.

Swa. I tell thee I am he, and here already,
I am Swatzenberg.

Pau. Yes in your the other beard sir.
Hans Snortanfart, are you not? well I can but warn you,
If you will needs stand to the taking off
A man's good name from him before his face,
Then take what follows, I will fetch him in
Mistress, you were best be out of sight a while:
Your presence with this stranger may whet up his fury
To cut all our throats else.

Vic. I Will take your council.


Exit. Pau. For sir i will tell you, if you had but seen
How he worried a Spaniard to day, you would
Have been able at your return to make
As many of your Countrymen, as thrive
By serving of the States to laugh in faith.

Swa. I tell thee I am he; 'twas I that chased
The Spaniard hence.

Pau. I tell you yet again
You were best be gone before the He indeed
Come in to chase you after him.

Swa. I Will stand the hazard.


Pau. See his impatience pulls him in already.


Enter Fabritio in the Germans habit. Fab. Where is this Lady? Dos her beauty
fly me?


Pau. She is at hand, but first here is a stranger,
A most strange stranger that says he is you sir.

Swa. Was oder were bistu? Bistu ein Deutscher? Sag mihr in was ort Du gelebst
have?


Fab. Who Is this?


Swa. Ich denke du bist ein heuchler; bistu aber ein Deutscher so anwort mihr
in deutscher sprach.


Fab. Good sir speak in the proper language of
The Nation we are in, though it come brokenly
From you that this good fellow here may understand us.

Swa. Thou son of impudence, and imposture, speak;
What is thy end in this?

Fab. Think what thine own must be, thou son of slander.


Swa. Precious counterfeit!
But I am weaponlesse, and must fetch strength
Of officers to right me.

Exit. Fab. What dos your shame remove you sir?


Pau. What can this Rascal mean?


Swa. I care not honest fellow, where is thy Mistress?
Good Angels guard me.

Enter Victoria. Pau. Dos she fright you sir?


Fab. I ask thee for thy Mistress, the Novella.


Pau. What appears she to you?


Fab. Thou powerful man in Magic, I will tell thee.
Thou Have raised an apparition, that has damned thee
Blacker, then thy black art; nay hell it self.

Pau. Bless us! more madness yet!


Fab. The heavenly spirit, that inspired this form,
(When the unworthy world enjoyd her being,
Which thou have conjured into this lewd habit)
Has, at this instant won the powers above
To sink thee and thy for^erers.

Pau. What may you mean? Here is no forcery,
This woman's Flesh and Blood.

Fab. I would not dare to try to be the Duke.


Pau. You may depart, pray hinder not the house.


Fab. Had thou but seen, as I have, one like her,
And noted the divinity in her looks
(Although in those adulterate incitements
She seems to wear) she would have struck thy soul
With fervent adoration, not base lust.

Pau. I know not what to say to 'him.


Bell rings. Vic. See who rings. Exit Paulo.
What divine creature, sir, was that you mentioned?

Fab. I dare to name her to thee, though thou be
Her incensed Ghost, to work me to despair,
It was Victoria.

Vic. This sounds most strangely! Have you been at Rome sir?


Fab. 'Twas there I saw and loved her.


Vic. Answer me pray sir, why could not this fall
In your discourse to day, when I rel^ted
My Life and Fortune to you? why do you start?
I am no shadow; but suspect you rather,
To be not as you seem, the noble German
That vowed me love, dos that too startle you?
See sir, to prove I am no aerie spirit,
I Will trust your hand (if you be mortal substance)
With so much flesh and blood as may resolve you.

Fab. I find it is she, and having found her thus
She Is lost for ever, and my self no l^sse,
That was the cause of this her desperate fortune.

Vic. What Is that you say? what aile you sir? how is it?
And what moves thy destraction? Borgio, speak.

Enter Paulo. Pau. Horror and shame invades us, all the house
Is round beset with officers. The Magistrates,
Are entering now, for what, or whom they search
I cannot guess, unless this be some Murderer
Slipped in, to draw our lives in question.

Vic. Deal plainly sir, what are you? he is stupefied!


Pau. The Spanyard's with 'hem too that took th'affront
By the supposed Dutchman here to day;
And he that feigned himself to be that Dutchman
Desires their aid against this unknown person.

Enter Pantaloni, Pedro, Guadagni, Swatz. Prospero, Checquino, Zaffi,
Pedler-woman. Gua. This is the house you say.


Ped. And this is the Gentlewoman.


Gua. Give me my Daughter, Harlot.


Vic. Here Is no such creature, here sir, if she be
Your Daughter, this woman directed hither,
She is no Harlot, but an honest Bride;
Lawfully wed and bedded; as may appear
By the strong testimony of diverse friends:
Call them all down.

Exit Paulo. Pant. Unheard Of impudence! Are Bawdes, and Whores
Fit Matchmakers for Magnificoe's Daughters?

Vic. Speak lower, or at home sir, you know not
What we are: Hark you sir -- your last nights trial
Did not enough inform you.

Pant. We shall know more anon;
In The mean time what are you?

Fab. A stranger sir.


Pant. We shall know more of that anon too.


Ped. This is the stranger, that affronted me;
Against whom I crave your Justice.

Pant. You shall know more anon too.


Swat. And this is my Abuser.


Pant. You also shall know more anon.


Gua. You are well met Gentlewoman -- I gave you lost.


Enter Paulo, Francisco, Piso, Horat, Flavia, Astutta, Jacconetta. Ast. What
will you whimper now? will not marriage
Make you bold, that makes so many impudent?
She was not lost sir; nor in danger of losing,
She was but mislayd a little, as your VVriting was to day.

Pi. Well said my chattring Magpy. I will side thee.


Gua. Audacious strumpet that seduces my Daughter.


Pi. You are Mistaken, she did but wait upon her.


Ast. Right sir, and did but duty i will be sworn.


Ped. Nor I, I will be sworn.


Gua. Not, in consenting to the stealth?


Ped. It was my duty sir for the reward,
We all would live you know.

Gua. Will you be gone?


Ped. I hope I am discharged: for look you sir,
I brought you where you find your Daughter safe.

Gua. Begone I say.


Ped. No whit the worse for wearing, as they say.


Gua. Go thrust her out of doors.


Ped. At my own liberty I hope.


Gua. How thou will to be rid of thee.


Ped. May you see your Childrens, Childrens, Childrens, Children.


Exit. Pant. And thou misledst my Son, I ask him of thee.


Pi. You shall know more of that anon sir.


Pant. Out-brav'd and scornd by Strumpets, Bawds, and Bravoes!
Call in the Officers.

Pi. And call the common Hangman if you please,
And end all among your selfs, if your grave wisdoms,
And Lawyers, here, can find one guilty person
We Will all submit our necks to you.

Horatia and Francisco, etc. talk aside with Fabritio and Victoria. Gua. It Is
boldly spoken.


Pi. I will speak but truth.
And you, opposing it, shall wrong the dignity
You bear in the City, to your utter shames.
This Gentleman and your Daughter were contracted,
Your self a willing witness; your Son likewise
Unto a noble virgin (Sir of whom
You shall know more anon)
It pleased diviner providence to take
From eithers chosen mate their earthly fortunes;
Yet each had person, blood, and virtue left
Above the value of a Princes dowry.
Would you so Kick at heaven then, in despite
Of its great Ordinance, as to force your children,
To forfeit both their faiths, thereby to lose
The never-fayling hope of future blessings,
To pull withal a curse on your own heads,
That could no less then ruin your estates,
And render you most wretched in your dotage,
Past help or hope how to relieve your selfs:
Your consciences still groaning underneath
The lashes that your Childrens bastard issue
Should lay upon you? more, you may consider --

Pant. We do consider sir, this place and people
No fit receipt for warrantable business.

Pi. This was no bawdy talk sir, nor have I
Heard worse from any mouth in this free place
Till your arrival here.

Vic. I cannot be so happy.


Aside. Fran. Let her see your face.


Aside. Vic. O my Fabritio --


Aside. Pan. You see the worst of us, I should be loath
Any unwarrantable act should pass among us.

Gua. Thou lookst like one indeed of upright Conscience!


Pau. And for the Marriage sir, it is as lawful
As if your self had given her in St. Marks.
I Will fetch the Priest t'avouch it.

Gua. Fetch that Priest.


Paulo joins in conference with Victoria and Fabritio. Pan. But i will be so
revenged
Upon this instrument, this unknown Trull here --

Hor. Our Ears and Eyes, Fabritio, witness for her.


Fab. You have told me wonders,
Yet with such faith as I shall ever wish
Locked in this heavenly Cabinet I take all.

Pi. You may Fabritio, for as I prize Life;
Honor 'bove that; and above both thy friendship,
My soul is not assured of firmer truth,
Let thy Dutch habit drink off jealousy,
And take her to thee.

Fab. It Is done my Piso.


Vic. And I made happy past my height of hopes.


Kiss. Pant. Good, you shall see how I shall cool those Kisses.


Pau. May I say boldly you are man and wife?


Fab. Vic. We are most faithfully till death;
I Will fetch a Priest shall straight pronounce ye^ so.

Exit. Pant. You say that is a Dutchman sir, that wronged you.


Ped. Right, worthy Signior, that is the man I Challenge.


Pant. You say you are the man confronted Don here.


Swat. Yes, and will still mayntain't, for violence
He offered to that noble virtuous Lady.

Pant. Good! virtuous Lady! Let me join your Friendships.


Ped. Swa. You have done it sir.


Ped. That is the man I challenge.


Swa. The same man I. He has not left the house
Since my abuse; I fear to her much wrong:
For he is some disguised Knave on my life.

Pant. Now you are in the right.


Swa. He could not wear those Clothes and speak no Dutch else.


Pant. Still in the right; i will show you what he is,
And out of him, what she is, whom you call
So virtuous and so noble! and you sir,
That mentioned the Hangman, come all and see
The commendable port this Lady bears.
It seems, sir, you affect this Gentlewoman.

Fab. The best of any living.


Pant. And you him Lady?


Vic. Yes, he is my husband.


Pant. Would that were true in faith. The rogue your man
Said he would fetch a Priest --

Enter Paulo in Friars habit. Pau. No verier Rogue then my self sir.


Pant. Thou art a mad fellow for a Priest indeed;
But such a Priest, such a Marriage,
Put 'em together.

Pau. I do pronounce them lawful man and wife.


Pant. The Bridegroom thanks you, but you Mistress Bride
For the fine trick you put on me last night,
Look now upon your husband,
Who would you speak with fellow?

Enter Nicolo, as the Zaffi. Nic. With Signior Rastrofico here, the Hangman,
I come to call him to State-businesse sir.

Pant. Can this be he? (you said he was a counterfeit)
I saw him ride the Wooden-horse, last day
With less then half this beard, unbeard him sirrah.
I Will bear you out. So rest you Gentlemen
With your so virtuous Lady, and her husband.

Hor. Pi. etc. Fabritio!


Vic. Sir I must crave your pardon, This is he,
My first love that I told you of.

Swa. You have it freely Lady.


Pant. I am abused and couzend.


Vic. I thank you sir for all the harm you did me
In your Revenge -- And hark you, be at peace,
And i will be silent for your last nights work.

Gua. Forbear me, I am off again.


Fran. Good sir,
Stop not the blessing you were about to give us.

Gua. I am off again. The pandare was the Priest,
The Match is no Match, you no more my Children,
But Knave and strumpet.

Pant. I Will not be so couzend.
This is no Priest; and all that is past unlawful

Pi. You will know more anon.


Paulo casts off his Perruk and Beard. Pau. Then cast your eyes on me, who dare
maintain
My Priesthood lawful; it being derived
From the holy Order of St. Augustine?

Vic. Let me not surfeit with excess of joy?
My brother Paulo!

Pau. Thy brother and thy father, virtuous sister.
Be ever subject of my dearest care;
And pardon me, who (jealous of thine honor
Inflamed by the same heart, of the same blood:
For we are all the Relicts of our Parents)
Watched nearely, and pursued thy escape from Rome.
For which I had good warrant, Gentlemen
See there my dispensation with the allowance
Of all the holy brotherhood of my Covent.
My ends were fair, though in this uncouth way
Though (heaven I beg thy pardon) as my care
Was to preserve her life and more her honor;
Fearing her violent and abused spirit,
Might have made wrack of either, or of both,
I once had secret purpose to have taken
Her Life, in case she had forsook her honor;
And with her cut off Candianies Line,
Which now branched here, may touch the worlds end
With fair succession! Be you blessed for ever.
And now, grave sirs, let me entreat your likings,
And cheerful reconcilement to your Children:
That so you may your Childrens, Children see,
Crowned by the prayers of your prosperity.

Gua. I am content.


Pant. And I, but for one scruple
Clear me this point, how had you saved your honor
If the old youth, last night (who shall be namelesse)
Had but mis* spent his time upon your moore here?

Vic. It Is easily done sir, see my loved Fabritio
The Eunuch moore you gave me.

Fab. My boy Jacomo, turned Chambermayd!
Has thy Mistress used thee well?

Vic. Not without much desert.


Jac. She means for your dear sake sir.


Fab. I see, sweet Heart, you have an honest Family.


Vic. Here you see all, and all that came in the house;
(Since it was made mine) in this Convention,
I dare them not; but give them freest leave
To speak the worst they found in the Novella.

Omnes. We all conclude you are noble.


Pau. All Is well accorded then. We all are Friends,
And may Priests travail never to worse ends.

EPILOGUE.
CAuse it is the Custom, By the Poet, Sirs,
I Am sent to crave a Plaudit, and the Spurrs
That prick him on to it, is, his promised Pay
May chance to fail, if you dislike the Play,
But don't if you be wise; for he has vowed
To write far worse if this be not allowed.
FINIS.
THE COURT BEGGAR.

A COMEDY.

Acted at the Cockpit, by his MAJESTY'S Servants, Anno 1632.

WRITTEN By RICHARD BROM.

MART. Hic totus volo rideat Libellus.
LONDON.

Printed for RICHARD MARRIOT, and THO. DRING, and are to be sold at their Shops
in Fleet Street, 1653.

Drammatis Personae.
SIR Andrew Mendicant, an old Knight, turned a projector. Mr. Courtwit, a
Complementer. Mr. Swaynwit, a blunt Country Gentleman. Mr. Citwit, a Citizens
Son that supposes himself a wi^. Mr. Daynty, a supposed Pictured rawer, but a
Pick-pocket. Sir Raphael, an old Knight that talks much and would be thought
wise. Sir Ferdinand, a Knight distracted for love of the Lady Strangelove.
Frederick, in love with Charissa. Gabriel, servant to Mendicant. Doctor of
Physic. Three poor Projectors. A Sowgelder. A Boy. Lady Strangelove, a
humerous widow, that loved to be courted. Philomel her Chambermaide. Charissa,
Mendicants Daughter.
PROLOGUE.
WEe've cause to fear yours, or the Poets frown
For of late day's (he know's not (how) you are grown,
Deeply in love with a new strain of wit
Which he condemns, at least disliketh it,
And solemnly protests you are to blame
If at his hands you do expect the same;
He Will tread his usual way, no gaudy Scene
Shall give instructions, what his plot does mean;
No handsome Love toy shall your time beguile
Forcing your pity to a sigh or smile.
But a slight piece of mirth, yet such were writ
By our great Masters of the Stage and Wit,
Whom you approved: let not your suffrage then
Condemne't in him, and prayse't in other men.
Troth Gentlemen let me advise ye, spare
To vex the Poet full of age and care,
How he might strive to please ye, and beguile
His humerous expectation with a smile,
As if you would be satisfied, although
His Comedy contains no antique show.
Yet you to him your favor may express
As well as unto those whose forwardness
Make's them your Creatures thought, who in a way
To purchase fame give money with their Play,
Yet you sometimes pay dear for it, since they write
Less for your pleasure than their own delight.
Which if our Poet fail in, may he be
A Scene of Mirth in their next Comedye.
THE COURT BEGGAR.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Mendicant, Charissa. Men. YO' have given him then his answer?


Cha. Forced by you,
Heaven knows with my much sorrow. Such a Lover
So in all points deserving of true worth,
And best indowments to make up a Man
That I shall never see -- your pardon sir,
Though you pulld back, by violence, my hand,
In which my heart was freely given to him,
It is not in your power or strength of art
To beat a sigh back, or restrain a tear
Which I must offer to his memory.

Men. Such storms soon wast themselves in absent Lovers
When light of Reason, and good Counsel shall
Break forth and shine upon 'em: and for your part
Daughter, I know it shall. And, presently,
I thus begin to dissipate your errors,
You love this Frederick.

Cha. Love knows I do.


Men. You say he is deserving in all points.


Cha. My love emboldens me to tell you he is.


Men. Charissa, take me with you. Is he not
Deficient in that only absolute point
That must maintain a Lady, an estate?

Cha. Love weighes not that.


Men. What can he show you more
To take you with, then a wild head of hair;
A very Limebush to catch Lady-birds?
A Tissue Doublet; and a Riband shop
Hung in his Hatbands, might set up a Peddler?
Can this maintain a Lady?

Cha. You but look
Upon his outside sir.

Men. I trust you have not
Bin over inwardly acquainted with him.

Cha. Sir, he has Valor, Wit, and Honor, you well know
He Is of a noble Family extracted.

Men. What Is that a year? those parts may be acquired
In winning of a strumpet. But what Joincture
Can he propound to you? or, (in case he dies,
Your Dowry being spent) what personal Estate
Is It like he will leave you, but his Powder glass,
His Comb and Beard-brush, and perhaps a Trunkfull
Of Elegies, Raptures, Madrigalls and Sonnets?
No let him go; discard him: and embrace
The hopes that I have for thee in the hopeful,
Exquisite Cavalier, Courtier and Soldier,
Scholar, (and what not!) brave Sir Ferdinando:
There Is a Man rising in the favor Royal,
And may in thee Charissa, make me happy.

Cha. Sir you have given me liberty of speech;
And may be pleased to let me tell you now,
You aim at your own fortune, not at mine.

Men. I seek no fortune, but for thy advancement:
All that I shall call mine must be thine own.

Cha. I would be playner yet; beseeching you
I be not thought too lose in my obedience.

Men. Speak freely Girl.


Cha. Your aim has bin to raise
You state by Court-suits, begging as some call it,
And for that end you left your Country life,
And Lands too ever since my Mother died,
Who while she lived with best of woman's judgment
Which held you from that course of selling fair
Possessions to enable you with money
To purchase wit at Court. You pardon me?

Men. On, on.


Cha. And for the Exchange of a fair Mansion House
Large fruitful Fields, rich Meadows and sweet pastures
Well cropped with corn and stockd as well with Cattle,
A park well stored with Dear too, and Fishponds in it,
And all this for a lodging in the Strand now --
But do I not offend?

Men. No, no, on still.


Cha. Your own fed Beefes and Muttons, Foul and Poultry
Loaded your long boords then; and you had then
Neighbors could boast your hospitality,
And poor, that for the remnants prayed for you,
Now all concludes upon a two-dishd table.
And whereas then you had a numerous Family
Of Servants and Attendants, out of which
For profit or for pleasure you could call
Your Bayliffe, Groom, your Falconer, or your Huntsman,
Now sir, a Varlet Coachman, and Footboy
Are all your Retinue; and for the Hounds
You kept, that made you sport and Music, now
None but your project Beagles, that smell out
Where such a forfeiture is to be begged;
Where one would purchase a Reprieve, another
A Pardon or a lease of Life Rope-free
For ready money: Then where Goods or Lands
Are found of men that make away themselfes,
And so of fools and madmen; All to set
Your trade of Begging up* and still you beg:
But your own want of favor holds you back
From reaching any profit by it, because
You beg by Mediators tongues, which you
Call Favorites, who reap the crop of all,
And leave you but the Gleanings; some small pittance
To keep alive the itch of begging in you --

Men. She speaks home and within me, to the purpose.


Cha. Still wasting your own fortunes; till at last
You have no hopeful project life to thrive by
But to put me upon this supposed favorite
To beg for you when it is doubtful yet
Whether he will take me with the Dowry, which
Mine Uncle left me, though you add your projects.

Men. The noble Gallant loves thee, Girl, and holds
Thy Person and thy virtues Dowry enough,

Cha. He is a wanton Lover, full of change,
And at this instant singularly devoted
Unto that humorous Lady, the young Widow.

Men: The Lady Strange love?


Cha. She is ambitious
To draw all men's affections to her service,
And then abuses all by scorns or slightings,
And this (they say) has made him almost mad.

Men. He mad! believe it not: his reason is
Married to him better then so. How now!
Have you seen the noble Knight from me?
How did he entertain my Message? ha!
Why speakst thou not? what answer has he sent?

Enter Gabrel. Gab. He Is not Sir to be spoken with or seen
To any purpose, but by his Physicians.

Men. So suddenly and dangerously sick,
Where are my hopes?

Gab. I cannot say how sick
He is; nor can himself give any account
Of his condition: for he is mad sir.

Men. How! mad?


Gab. Stark staring mad; as mad
As you can think a Courtier must be
That is more mad then all the rest.

Men. If this be true I sink, what is supposed
The cause?

Gab. That sir has puzzell'd all the Doctors
In weighing all his several wild affections;
One finds he was ambitious of Court favor,
And guesses he was crossed in some great suite;
Another takes him as he was a Soldier,
And losing cost and travail in the war
Must lose his wits for that. A third collects
He was a Poet that drunk too deep of Helicon,
And turned his brain in clyming of Parnassus:
A fourth considering that he was a Gamster
Long and much favored, and uprais'd by fortune
To mountaynous heaps of Gold, conjectures, that
Some late unlucky hand or chance at play
Has with his money swept his wit away.

Men. Fie, these can be no causes to remove,
Or shake his settled judgment or his temper.

Gab. Then sir a fifth and youngst head among
The learned men (what call you him for a Doctor?
Hay that affects gay clothes and Flanders Laces,
That trim effeminate Gentleman) he
Has known this noble patient to have been
An extreme Amorist, desperately devoted
Unto the service of some threescore Ladies,
And honored every one the most in costly presents,
Banquets and Verses; and thinks the disdain
Of one or all of them has turned his brain.

Cha. I told you sir, the cause before; and named
That humorous Lady for it, whom in heart
I can no less then thank.

Men. Go, get you up.
And stir not from my Chamber on my blessing
Till my return, nor admit any one
Unto a conference with you.

Cha. I obey you.


Exit. Gab. Some of your project searchers wait without sir,
Laden it seems with new intelligences.

Men. They may come in: but as I fear they bring
Me little comfort, I am sure I shall
Afford them none. Now sirs, your business?

Enter 3 Projectors. 1. Pro. We wait upon your honor my good Lord
To crave the knowledge of what good success
Your honor finds in our late suits my Lord.

Men. Why honor? why my Lord?


2. Pro. We style you now.


3. Pro. As all must do hereafter.


1. Pro. Yes, and that
In a short space of time, the world holds no
Proportion else, nor shall it more be said
That money can buy Land; or great Estates
In Lands and Mannor-houses be called Lordships.

1. 2. 3. Or wealth joynd with desert attain to honor.


Gab. So now the Game's afoot. They hunt in full cry.


1. P. My Lord it is most apparent.


Men. How you torture me!


2. P. We Will mak't appear most plainly on our lives.


3. P. And credits too.


Gab. Their Lives and credits, ha, ha, ha.


1. P. That in the space of one whole year our projects
Shall bring in fifty thousand pounds to us,
And hundred thousand to your self; and to
The Coffers Royal for full seven years space
64 Thousand 783 l. 7 s. 9 d ob. q. per annum,
It Is here already cast. Which to make good
We Will venture Lives and Goods.

2. P. Our Wives and Children.


Mend. takes the scroll and peruses it. 3. P. We can engage no more.


Gab. A wondrous strange engagement
Your lives and goods; your wives and children gentlemen!
That Is too deep set, and questions the Kings Mercy:
Me thinks it were enough, for nonperformance
You would submit your bodies to perpetual
Imprisonment at the Kings charge; and leave
Your wives and children to their several Parishes
You are still faithless sir, in all projects.

1. But when you shall perceive the wealthy sons
Daily brought in, and be, continually,
Troubled with the Receipts (if you may be trusted
That have so little faith) when you shall soil
And gall your fingers ends with telling money,
Yet find the lickings of 'em sweet, you will then
Sing other Notes.

2. Mean time entreat my Lord
To put you to some Tellers Clearke to teach you
Ambo-dexterity in telling money.

Gab. Do you hear sir? Can you give me two sixpences
For a shilling -- or any single money?

2. P. Pish. Gab. Cry mercy, you wear none in ready coin,
But all in Bullion locked up in your brave-chests,
And there you have the treasure of the Indies;
Of deeper value, could it be dug out,
Then all the Hollanders have waited for
These 7 years out of the Spanish plate fleets.

3. Pugh. Gab. But put mine eye out (now I dare you to it)
With any single piece of ready money.

1. P. My Lord your man abuses us here strangely
With his old misbeliefe. But still we doubt not
Your honorable good opinion of us.

2. P. You have pervs'd this weighty paper here.


Men. It weighes not all twelve grains.


1. P. No more?
Nay the whole platform of a stately City,
Or a design to conquer a whole Nation,
But do you note the grounds, the Rules and Reasons,
First for the easiness of the several grants.

2. P. Next for performance of our undertakings.


3. P. And then the certainty of the propounded profit^
Both to the King and us.

1. P. Without all grievance unto the subject.


Fab. That Is no little marvel.


1. P. Take 'em into particulars my Lord,
First this for Perrukes. The Monopoly
Of making all the Perrukes male and female,
Through Court and Kingdom.

Gab. There Is a capital project.


2. P. Note the necessity, that they be well made
Of no diseased or infectious stuff, of dead or living,
No verminous or sluttish locks or combings,
But harmless and sound hair, of innocent,
And wholesome people.

Gab. They must then reap none
From Gallowses, nor Hospitalls; from whence
They have had great supplies.

1. P. You have in that
Said very well; For here is a Reformation
Of that abuse intended in these words
Innocent and wholesome.

Gab. How if a man or woman shall desire
To wear a friends hair so departed; as
You his; or your wife yours; may't not be had?

1. P. Or if your friend or Mistress dye so, you
Procure the hair and bring it from the Gallows
To the office, and it may be done accordingly.

Gab. You have in that said very well Sir too.


1. P. Now out of this provision, what an infinite
Profit will rise in the general use of 'em,
And multiplicity that will be worn
By people of all sorts* degrees and ages:
The old to hide their natural baldness, and
The young and middle-ag'd their artificial
Or accidental.

Gab. By the pox or so.


1. P. They shall be brought into that reputation
That none shall be esteemed so sound or wise
As public wearers of them: which to effectuate
It Is requisite that you obtain a Mandat
Unto all Courtiers, that would be thought wise
To wear false hair: because clownes have been noted
To talk like fools or mad men in their own.

Men. No more of that.


1. What say to this my Lord,
Touching new fashions of apparel; suits,
Hats, Boots, Swords, Belts, Ribands, etc.
For every wearer of his first of the fashion
To pay a groat to the King; and every Tradesman
Two pence on every several piece he sells
Of any such new fashion the first year?

Gab. And what may this pride money amount unto Per annum, can you guess?


Men. I will not meddle in it.


2. No my good Lord.


Men. No, nor your Perrukes neither.


3. What say to this my Lord of the Balconyes?


Men. Nor that.


1. This then for sucking out of corns.


Men. Away with it.


2. This then: that on the birth of every Girl
The Father pay a groat; to hearten men
To live soberly and get Soldiers.

Men. Away.


1. This makes amends for all then. A new project
For buylding a new Theater or Playhouse
Upon the Thames on Barges or flat boats
To help the watermen out of the loss
They Have suffered by Sedans; under which project
The subject groans, when for the ease of one
Two abler men must suffer; and not the price,
Or pride of Horseflesh or Coach-hire abated.
This shall bring floods of gain to the watermen
Of which they will give a fourth of every fare
They shall board at the floating Theater,
Or set ashore from thence, the Poets and Actors
Half of their first years profits.

Men. Fie away.


1. This is a weighty one: For massy sums
That may be freely given out of the City,
To have but this assurance, that hereafter
They may ingrosse the getting of their own
Children: by order taken that Cavaliers,
And Courtiers may no more invade,
Or mix with Tradesmens wives: whereby it is thought
So many City Prodigalls have been gotten;
Only the thrifty country Gentlemen
To be excepted: for by them it is guest
So many Citizens grow landed men.

Gab. Were not they gotten by Projectors think you?


3. My Lord your servant jeeres us.


Men. To deal plainly
I do allow't in him --

Gab. Heaven has heard my prayers.


Men. And will hear him or any man oppose
All that is put to me by way of project
To put me by all further hopes in 'em:
For (with hearts grief I speak it) he by whom
I only hoped to climb (alas) is fallen.

1. What out of favor?


Men. No, out of his Reason.


2. The noble Cavalier sir Ferdinando.


3. That late stood candidate for the favor royal,
Is he now fallen besides himself?

Men. Even he.


1. What have you then to do my Lord
In lieu of all your service but beg him?

Men. His greater and his nearer friends at Court
Will prevent me.

2. They shall not, never fear it.


1. Come we will make quick work of this.
My Lord you shall disburse but twenty pieces.

2. Among us three. 3. And we will instantly
Find his estate. 1. And lay you down a way
So plain that you shall say All Is yours,
Before you stir a foot.

Gab. But when he has traveled
Till he has tired himself, he shall return,
And say All Is lost, is it not so Gentlemen?

Men. I will not part with any money sirs.

1. Trust me you do not well to put my Lord
Off of his benefit, by disheartning him
In this small venture. Will you then be pleased
To give us but ten pieces.

Men. Not a penny.


2. Five you shall my Lord,
And stand no longer thus in your own light.

3. Or but a piece a Man.


Men. Not a denier.


1. A dinner then my Lord, but of one piece.


Men. My answers cannot please you. Answer 'em you.


Gab. I wonder how you having stretched your throats
With the loud sounds of thousands, hundred thousands
Can, after all, so faintly whisper forth
One piece; and that as much in vain, as all
The massy sums: for all but brings you nothing,
It shows you Gentlemen of resolute patience;
And would take thankfully I warrant you
An od half crown amongst you: and what say you
To every man a kick on the condition?
What say you to one with the other?

1. This abuse
Shall lose your Master a hundred thousand pound.

Gab. Go coin your bullion brains into the money
And come again. My master was
Your Lord even now, as he was Lord of Beggars.

1. I hope to live to see him beg of us.


Gab. Out hundreds, thousands, ten thousands, hundred, thousands, Millions, ten
Millions, Millions upon Millions
Away, i will stamp your buttocks into coin else. Ex. Projectors.
The Devil ride that hind most of 'em, for
A raw bon'd Jade: Sfoot he has lamed my toes.

Men. I am glad I am so rid of' em, and now
As thou art my Servant and my loving Kinseman --

Gab. To follow you in all things but in Projects.


Men. Look to my House and Daughter, that she start not;
Nor any entrance be allowd to Fredrick
To re-intangle her in his Love. I know
Thy virtue and thy valor can make good
My trust imposed in thee.

Gab. You need not fear sir
But, good sir, no more projects.

Men. I have but one,
On which I Will set my rest. Thoult say it is good.

Gab. Except it be the begging of this Madman
It can be nothing.

Men. It Is the very same:
By which I will advance my house and name.

Exit. Gab. The Beggars best is that he feels no shame:
Sprecious what mean you? Ha'you forgot so soon
Your Fathers strict command, and he scarce gone yet?

Enter Charissa. Cha. Alas he will then meet Fredrick and divert him,
I saw him at the window making this way.

Gab. He gets no entrance to you. I must obey
A master though you can neglect a father.

Cha. Be not so cruel. Thou may live to love,
And need the pity of a friend.

Gab. I pity you,
And will do no more then you know how to ask
For your own good. I understand your cause
And can relieve you if you will yield to council.

Cha. You are my Kinsman; and have bin my friend,
Though you observe my father who, I fear,
Has not a fathers love toward me.

Gab. His love is great and certain,
And all his travel is for your advancement:
But he goes blindfold on unprosperous ways
Led by credulity. Projects! pox of projects
The patron of his projects is (it seems)
Peppered with madness. It Is but Justice on him,
And now i will give you a secret if you will promise
To be ruld by me.

Cha. You shall rule me cosen.


Gab. This Ferdinand, your fathers great Court-godling
Nere sought you for a wife; but to have whor'd you:
(That is the English on it) and to appear
A right great man in the act, he would have made
By hopes and promises your credulous Father
The instrument of your prostitution:
Which to effect, (though still he undertook
His hopeful projects) cunning Lawyer-like
He crossed or lost him still in all, on purpose
That poverty at length might urge him to
Give you to his dispose.

Cha. This was my fear.


Gab. Away: some body comes.


Cha. It Is Fredrick. I must see him.


Gab. You Will never see him more then. Go to your chamber.
A little patience and he shall be yours.

Cha. So dos a heart consume in lingering fire,
When cooling hopes are cast on hot desire.

Exit. Gab. Poor heart I pity her, and will labor for her.


Enter Frederick. Fred. O Gabriel! I am happy in finding thee,
Thy master absent, whom I saw, in have
Now passing toward the Court. Where Is my Charissa?

Gab. You may not see her.


Fred. May not see her sir?


Gab. May not! nay must not: shall not see her.


Fred. You Are very plain with me.


Gab. Her own command
Warrants me speak it sir.

Fred. A villain speaks it.


Draw. Gab. I have a sword speaks other language for me.


Fred. Can she whose thoughts are truth, and written here,
Here in this breast, giving me ample welcome,
Give thee a countermand to bar me from it?
Would thou make her a double hearted monster?
Or like another woman?
Repent the^ of thy trespass yet and live.

Gab. Sir, if you think to fight, talk not too much;
Or, if you needs must talk, then hear as well.

Fred. What would thou say?


Gab. Sir, I have more to say
Then fits this place, since you are apt to quarrel;
And this no ground to bustle on: nor indeed
Where I dare for my honesty and trust
Allow you longer stay. If therefore you
Will walk, I Will wait upon you; and direct you
In a more ready way to find Charissa.

Fred. Is she not here in the house?


Gab. O sir, a man
May come within his arme-reach of his money
In the Exchequer: but he must walk about
To find due order e're he draw it out.

Fred. The fellow's honest, valiant, and discreet,
Full man, in whom those three additions meet.

Gab. Sir, dare you trust me?


Fred. Yes I dare; and why?
Because if thou dare fight, thou dare not lie.

ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Philomel, Court-wit, Swayn-wit, Cit-wit. Phi. HEre in this gallery
Gentlemen you may* at your pleasure,
Until my Lady comes, walk or sit.

Cou. Or lie down if you please.


Ph. If you so, wrong not my Ladies Couch with your
Spurs I pray* take heed you leave not a Rowell there.

Sw. If one should, your Lady has no Lord to call her honor to question, whose
Knighthood it belonged unto.


Phil. You have a good country wit sir.


Sw. My name is Swayne-wit; and for all you twit me with the Country, I am a
Gentleman though.


Ph. I honor you the more sir, for I am a Country Maid my self.


Sw. Thou art a baggage, and a bold one, I am deceived else.
I would be further acquainted with you though. Kiss long.
Have you done now? You will have time enough for
Further and better acquaintance.
Thou art a Jackanapes of the basest tricks that ever I saw, for a halfe-penny.
She Is your choice, is she? Could not you let be though? I have bin acquainted
with thee but two days, and forgi'me for swearing, I have found thee beating
ripe a skore of times at least. Take heed I begin not now, and hand sell your
Ladies house, that is so much talked on, and your Gentlewomans presence here
with a fist about your ears.


Cou. Not for a thousand pound.


Sw. That Is a great deal of money. I could find i'my heart to do it though.


Cou. Slife we are all undone then.


Sw. He sets my teeth on edge to look upon him:
He looks so like a wilding crab, good neither for drink nor sauce.

Ph. Why would you press him then?


Sw. Thou have a verjuice wit.


Ph. For my poor sake forbear sir.


Sw. Let him stand further then, and look of to^ side.


Cit. Well sir, this is no cause nor place to fight in, when --


Sw. What says he?


Ph. Nothing, you hear he whistles the other way.


Sw. The Other way, what backwards?


Ph. What new guest have you brought here Mr. Courtwit, for my Lady to laugh at?


Cou. One for that purpose Phil, you have spoke the man, But what company has my
Patroness, that she is yet busy.


Sw. I that! If she be long busy I will not stay, and she were ten great
Ladies, or one as big as twenty, for all she is your Patroness, must we wait
out of our wits, because Chalivere ran mad for her?


Ph. Have you heard of that sir?


Sw. My Cozen Court-wit's question was who is with her?


Ph. O sweet Mr. Court-wit, when will you bring the fine civil Gentleman, that
maintains himself so gallantly by picture drawing?


Sw. Here Is a new business! Fare ye well, pray tell your Lady I came not from
Pensans to grow here.


Ph. Nay sweet sir stay, there is sir with my Lady none but the grave and witty
talking Knight. Some call him the metrapolitane wit of Court; he that loves
Ladies society so much, and yet has vowed virginity.


Cou. As much as in man lies Phil; He is a perpetual vowed batchellor indeed,
and as constant to his vow as to his fashion in apparel, which is ever the
same, sir Raphael Winter-plum.


Cit. That old witherd piece. I know him.


Sw. Thou will bear up again.


Cit. He has licked up a living with his tongue; makes all great tables his
own; and eats for his talk: He may be conversant with women: for (they say) he
guelt himself beyond Sea for spite one did him; and now preaches chastity to
Ladies, and love to their husbands. He Is a Lay-gospeller among the married
sort, and an especial pedant to the youth of Court.


Cou. Fie, thou speakst too much.


Sw. There Is another humor I could beat thee for with all my heart, thou will
speak outragiously of all men behind their backs, and dare not answer Ba --
to the face of a sheep, O I could pommell thee.


Cit. This is not yet a cause to fight for, when --


Ph. But will not that fine Gentleman Mr. Dainty come, Mr. Court-wit?


Cou. I expect him presently.


Ph. I Will see if their conference be ended, or break it if I can, and hasten
my Lady to you.


Exit. Sw. This wench has a dainty wit.


Cou. She may, living with the prime Lady-wit in town.


Sw. But what Dainty is that she talks on so affectionately?


Cou. Troth a Gentleman that lives at a good rate; very civil in conversation,
keeps good company; yet none of his acquaintance that I am acquainted with
knows his beginning, or his present means.


Sw. A Gentleman borne.


Cou. I know no more but by his port, and fashion, you saw him with me last
night.


Sw. Forgi' me for swearing, Is It he?


Cou. He was at the Play with us too, do you not remember that?


Sw. Yes, that I was at the Play, by sure token and a sad one.


Cit. I Will show you somewhat of him. A Gentleman borne did you ask?


Sw. Now he bears up again.


Cit. He cannot be a Gentleman by birth or place. A fine-handed, and a fine
headed fellow he is; and pretends great skill and practice too in
Picture-drawing, Watch-making, and such like finger-workes; which he says he
uses as a Gentleman's exercise, not as a trade to live upon; when either he does
live on it; or else he has some more secret way, as perhaps pimping or pursing
for ought I know.


Sw. There he is again! Art thou bound in conscience to wrong all men in their
absence, till I beat thee into better manners?


Cou. Hold, hold, I prithee hold.


Cit. Yet still the cause is insufficient, when --


Cou. Here comes the Gentleman.


Enter Dainty. Cit. Is he come? Noble Mr. Dainty -- The welcomst in the World.
I protest I suffered by your absence.


Dai. You do me too much honor Mr. Cit-wit.


Cit. Oh sir, your humble servant.


Sw. Ha, ha. Forgi' me for swearing, what a Spaniell's this?


Dai. Gentlemen you are well found, I was a little stayed by the way upon
receipt of moneys. Have you seen the Lady yet?


Cou. She Is yet a little busy. We shall all instantly take the opportunity
together.


Dai. But Gentlemen; you that have better knowledge of this Lady inform if you
please, why are we summond hither?


Cou. Thou speakst as if thou had guilt upon thee; fear nothing man.


Sw. I that is the thing that I would understand too. And why me of any man?
They say indeed she is a humorous Lady, and loves to busy her self. But what
are we to her? are there not greater men, and Lords enough for her to fool
away the time with, but we must danc^ attendance on her humors?


Cit. I protest Mr. Swayn-wit, I admire your ingenuity.


Sw. You will be meddling still.


Cit. It Is to your question sir, which I will answer.


Sw. I there is another of your cockscombly tricks, to answer any question,
that is asked another man, out with though.


Cit. This Lady sir, this humorous wity Lady is a witsponge, that suckes up wit
from some, and holds as her own, until she squeeze it out on others. She
will make use of ours, or any courser wits; and search 'em out to sift 'em.
She will collect from market-folkes; and hold conferences with the poor
Trades people that cry their wares about the streets, She will rake wit out of
a dunghill Ragwoman.


Swa. So there he is again! dare thou abuse a noble Lady, in her own house
too? I dare not now but beat thee.


Cou. Forbear good cosen.


Cit. Still, still, the cause is naught, when --


Dai. Ods so the Ladies coming I think.


Enter Philomel. Phil. Gentlemen, my Lady cannot yet be rid of the tedious
talking Knight. But she will cast him presently. He is now following her into
this room, pray pass into the next; my Ladies Music room. There you shall
find a collation of good Tobacco and Sack and one to attend you, you know the
fashions of the House Mr. Courtwit.


Cou. Come away Gentlemen.


Exit Gentlemen. Phil. I could even love and look upon that sweet Mr. Dainty
a whole hour methinks.


Enter Strange-love, and Sir Raphael. Stra. Go your ways down Maid, and if
any ask for Sir Raphael here, say that I hope he will have done anon.


Ra. You would be rid of me: but pardon me Madam, I must hold your glass to
you.


Stra. That Is a poor Chamber-mayds office; and ill becomes your gravity Sir
Raphael.


Ra. I Will open then the book to you of your errors.


Str. Now you speak scholler-like, and your self: But have we spent all this
while in by, and idle talk, and have that volume to be opened yet? Pray read
me for the first Lesson for this Mornings Exercise, and my Edification, the
last Chapter of my book of errors as you call it.


Ra. You are a mocker of instruction, and good counsel.


Str. Begins it so? whom is that spoken to?


Ra. I speak to only you; to conjure (if I can) that spirit of scorn out of
you; which you have taken in, and long affected for a humor, your singular own
humor, till it is grown so familiar, so inherent in you, that you have won
the title of the humorous Lady by it; and drawn a scorn upon your self.


Stra. Why then all is paid, and welcome good Sir Raphael.


Ra. I am not gone so; nor is all so paid:
For there is a greater reckoning yet of Raylings,
Reviling, Curses by the many that
You Have scornd and slighted, shot at you in hot vollies.

Str. They hit me not. I am sure I do not feel 'em.


R. You may in time be sensible of their sufferings,
Whom you have violently, and wilfully abused
With scorn and pride; if you call to mind
The cause, bred merely out of humor; cause you would have it so.

Str. You come too near me sir, cause I would have it so?


Ra. Can it be otherwise? Has it not ever bin
Your practice, since your time of widow-hood
To catch all men's affections? It Is indeed
An honor to a Lady to have many suitors;
But to lay bait for 'em only to delude 'em --
Is impiously dishonorable.

Str. Have I done so?


Ra. Yes, and have gloried in it for your humor
To lead men into brakes with foolish fire.

Str. If they will follow it, I cannot help it.


Ra. You might though have prevented the mishaps
Of many, by a fair and free resistance
In the beginnings of their suits of Courtships,
And not to set your self at gaze to draw them on,
And then allure them with assured hopes
Of love and favor till you have wound their follies
Into the reach of your disdain; and then
To torture 'em, or having ta ^e 'em captives
To slave and sell 'em to the worlds derision.

Str. O sir Raphael --


Ra. She feels compunction!
I will pursue it to the quick.

Str. On good Sir Raphael.


Ra. Consider then good Madam, since I know,
And your own conscience knows, that you have made
A secret vow from your late husbands death
Never to marry, how better and more glorious
It would be for your honor to declare
Your constant purpose to a single life,
Then to fall into the transgression
Of robbing men so of their wits and reason,
And all by wilful humor: as this late
Unhappy accident of madness in
The hopeful Knight Sir Ferdinando cries
Lowdly to your disgrace, and the worlds sorrow.

Str. Half the worlds sorrow is mine own
For that sad accident, I would I coold redeem't
With half my health or life. But let me tell you
(Now you have justly chidden me) that you
Have a fault too.

Ra. What is it in your construction?


Str. As I concealed my vow of single living,
And gave men leave to court me, by which means
I won them into hopes, and robbed their wits,
You in declaring to the Court and City
Your vow of chastity and single life,
Yet daily, nightly, howerly frequenting
The company of Ladies, with your sweet,
No less then grave discourse and conversation
Have robbed (nay I may say deflowered) more Ladies
Of chaste and honorable thoughts, then all
The cavalry of Court.

Ra. Who I Madam!


Str. Even you sir Raphael (if unchaste desires
Must be held sinful) I know some of them,
And one (I fear) too well, that have bin subject
Unto the breach of any vow for you,
Yet you to vow a single and chaste life;
And publish your intent!

Ra. It Is with intent,
And a religious purpose to decline,
And divert woman's fond affections from me.

Str. O, but forbidden things are women's longings! You have read, you have read
(sir Raphael) you have read.


Falls on her Couch. La. And traveled too: yet never could discover Such an
example.


Str. Pray sit down by me.


Ra. Good thoughts possess you Madam. I must hence.


Str. I Will not be tedious to you. One word I pray sir?


Ra. Virtue, be thou my armor. Briefly then
Let me entreat you Madam*

Str. Pray refuse not
To sit down by me.

Ra. Sanctity protect me.


Sit. Str. Sir, you are famous, and cried up by all
For your great wisdom, Moral and Divine:
You are the Ipse dixit of the Court
As I have heard you styled by men of learning.
The Court Philosopher --

Ra. Madam to the point.


Str. What is our strength, and what is not our frailty?


Ra. Where is she wandering now? Be playner Madam.


Str. Do not my blushes (which I hope you pardon)
Deliver you a message from my heart?
Which I want words to ^^^^r? O these vows!
These rash and ill-made vows! dos not your judgment
Read something on this face? pray look upon me.

Ra. I am no good interpreter of looks.


Str. I dare not speak, till you have first removed
A weighty scruple, which does much perplexe me.

Ra. You must first speak it Madam.


Str. Whether these vows,
(I mean your own, and mine, for single life)
May safely be dispensed with or absolved,
And we become a lawful pair in Marriage?
Pray sir resolve and bless me in a Match.

Ra. Madam I Will pray for you.


Starts up. Str. You will first kill me
With your disdain, and then you will pray for me!
Is that your Charity?

Ra. I dare not hear you.


Str. Leave me not so.


Ra. Who waits upon my Lady here?


Exit. Str. I had no other way to shift him, would he would make
An errand now to Rome to quit my scruple;
And rid the Court of an officious fool:
Women some times have sent wise men to school.
Is the Knight gone?

Enter Philomel. Ph. And blessing of himself,
As witch craft were in the house.

Str. But where is my favorite Court-wit, has he brought his country Kinsman
and the rest?


Ph. They are all in your wit-office Madam (as you call the Room)
Passing the time among the Pipes and Bottles,
And singing catches. Here you may here 'em Madam.

A catch. Str. Marry, this takes past* all sir Raphaels Lectures,
Go call 'em down. Exit Phi.
This Madam troubles me, 'would he were right again;
Or I quit of the scandal. Enter Court-Swain, and Cit-wit.
O Gentlemen! you are welcome,
And chiefly you that are the only stranger,
I have been so troubled with an overtalking si^, that he
Has wound me into melancholy --

Swa. I wish you mirth Madam. I come not as one of you-fooles to make you any
though -- Offer to go away.


Str. Be not so brief with me, let me entreat you though.


Sw. Forgi'me for swearing do you mock me though?


Str. Mistake me not sweet sir --


Sw. Sweet with a mischief! How sweet am I? I come not as a suitor to your
great Ladyship. I am a Gentleman of two hundred a year though.


Str. Not as a suitor to me sir?


Sw. No you are too great for me. Nor to your Mopsey without, though she be
snout-faire, and has some wit she is too little for me, I understand degree and
quality, respect and difference; and am scholar enough to know my unde and my
quare.


Str. You ga' me his true character. You are a complete Gentleman sir (if I
mistake not) the Kinsman of my favorite here, who has given me an ample
relation of your worth and virtue.


Cou. Yes, Patroness, it is he, who though not thoroughly versed, or conversant
in the Court or City garb, he understands both Men and Manners.


Sw. Prattle for your self sir.


Str. But to the business Gentlemen.


Sw. I that I would feign know if it be any.


Str. You have heard I doubt not of a disastrous blot lately cast upon my
(...)e, out of my own freeness.


Cit. Concerning the Mad-courtier Madam, when it is as likely, that his Tailor
made him mad as you, for not hitting the fashion right in his last rich suit.
But it is most like he fell from a reasonable man, by over-studying himself what
Lord he should be at the next creation, whether of Gleek, or Cribbidge;

In and in, or Hazard.


Sw. Hark how this shotten headed Cocks-combe prates! And how he, that can
endure beating, dares speak any thing, or abuse all men! can not give the
Lady leave to speak though?


Str. Since there is an aspersion laid upon my freeness in giving
entertainment unto persons of great and noble qua^ity, the world deeming it to
be done by me merely for ost^ntation, to cry my own humor up, by drawing them
into Love-knots, and then to slight or scorn them. My resolution is from
henceforth, to exclude those great resorts, and friendly and freely be merry
within our selfs. I have four thousand a year to spend; and will be huswife
good enough to keep in compass. I will not entertain a servant, friend or
guest above your rank or fortunes --


Sw. Why -- (forgi'me for swearing) what do you think of us?


Str. I think you Gentlemen of worth and quality: and therefore welcome, I
think you able to maintain your selfs midle-sis'd Gent.


Cit. I am Midlesex indeed; borne in the City.


Sw. Give the Lady leave to speak though.


Str. I Will give access to none, that the censorious world shall dare to judge
a suitor to me,
Or to find favor further then meat and wine.

Sw. Yes, faith a little money to; and make's your Fiddlers.


Cit. Pray give the Lady leave to speak though.


when Str. Mauger the greatness of my former visitants
I give you my election for the chiefes
Of my familier society.
I may perhaps call in, (at least admit)
People of meaner garb, without (I hope
Your grudge or envy. But they shall be men
Of Science, Art, and Action.

Sw. Of action Madam? who do you mean? the Players?


Str. Why not? I love their quality and them, and mean to have the use of some
of 'em shortly: Besides Musicians (Poets in the first place) and Painters: In
which last mentioned art I hear you are excellent, though all this while so
silent.


Dai. I boast no skill or practice Madam: but I have drawn some pieces that
have been worth my pains in my Rewards.


Str. I must commend their ingenuity for whom you took those pains. But
(where I left) I must make use of wits, of arts, and actions.


Sw. Here in your house Madam, I would be glad to see the Actors, but I saw 'em
at their own too lately: for I lost my purse there, no matter let it go. There
was 15. pound in it tho!


Cit. Sprecious! How now! my Fob has been ^ubd to day of six pieces, and a
dozen shillings at least. Nothing but a bowd groat left as I hope for my
Grannums blessing.


Cou. Sure you have been in some ill company.


Cit. Pox of ill company I say. My watch is gone out of my Pocket too o'th
right side.


Dai. You rose of the wrong side to day it seems, were you in no crowd or
quarrel?


Cit. I never was in a(...) quarrel i'my life. I always run from 'em.


Cou. I dare swear thou do.


Cit. I only stood to day at the Coranto-shop to read the last great news; and
I was hoop'd in I remember by some that seemed to wonder as much as I.


Dai. Then certainly there was a cutpurse amongst 'em.


Cit. I Will go to honest Moll about it presently.


Sw. But first stay and hear my Lady though.


Cou. I Madam you were speaking of the use you would make of Poet, Painter,
Music, Actor and the like.


Str. True favorite for a Masque that I intend to have shortly, you shall
perform the poetical part, your servant Citwit the Musical. And by your
skill and directions the Painters office for the scenes. Dancers and speakers I
have in store.


Sw. I must be something too though, must I not Madam?


Str. Marry and thank you too sir. Enter Philomil.
Now your News.

Phil. Sir Andrew Mendicant desires to see you Madam.


Str. You should have told him I would not be seen by him.


Ph. I told him you were busy. But he says he is to speak with you upon a
weighty business from the Court.


Str. It Is the Court-begger. You know him favorite.
Go not away, I Will bring him in amongst you,
And (as you love me) put some ridiculous projects to him.

Exit. Dai. What Is that sir An^^^w Mendicant? do you know him well?


Cour. Thou ask still a question like a guilty person, with a look
resembling fear upon thy face.


Dai. My countenance is too blame then; not my conscience.


Cit. I Will tell you what he is.


Sw. Still answering others questions?


Cit. He is a Knight that hanckers about the Court, ambitious to make himself
a Lord by begging. His brain is all Projects, and his soul nothing but
Court-suits. He has begun more knavish suits at Court, then ever the Kings
Tailor honestly finished, but never thrived by any: so that now he is almost
fallen from a Palace B^gger to a spittle one. His business to my Lady now can
be nothing but to borrow money to buy a pair of wheels to set some Project a
going to Court for a Monopoly.


Sw. Thou were in have e^ne now to look after the money; but and thy Life lay
on it thou must stay to abuse a man ^ehinde his back, who is a noble Gentleman
thou know, and I have heard, yet (speak in thy conscience) would thou not
be beaten now?


Cou. Forbear, they come.


Enter Strangelove, Mendicant. Str. Sir, since it is requested by those great
ones
Whose power cannot command me in this case
(For it is my charity and not my duty)
I am content that the mad Ferdinand
Shall so journe in my house for his recovery.

Men. It Is thought you were the groundwork of his frensy
The Doctors therefore moved their honors to it
For that your frequent presence may be helpful
Toward his care.

Str. He shall have it th^^
Toward the expiation of the crime
They charge me with. But in case sir Andrew
He should be cured by this means, I should then
Cross you in fortune and your future hopes
Of his estate; which you have begged you say
If he recover not.

Men. I must leave that to fortune Madam.


Str. Will you be pleased sir to take notice of
These Gentlemen my friends. They may be useful Salute
For they have all projective brains I tell you.

Men. Pray of what nature are your Projects Gentlemen?


Cou. Sir my affection leanes much to Poetry, especialy the Drammatick.


Men. Writing of strange Plays?


Cou. I am glad I speak sir, to your understanding. And my project is that no
Plays may be admitted to the Stage, but of their making who Profess or
endeavor to live by the quality: That no Courtiers, Divines, Students at Law,
Lawyers-clearks, Tradesmen or Prentises be allowed to write 'em, nor the Works
of any lay-Poet whatsoever to be received to the Stage, though freely given
unto the Actors, nay though any such Poet should give a sum of money with his
Play, as with an Apprentice, unless the Author do also become bound that it
shall do true and faithful service for a whole Term.


Men. Here Is a trim business toward, and as idle as the Players going to Law
with their Poets.


Cou. I have another sir, to procure a Patent for my self to have the only
privilege to give instructions to all the actors in the City, (especially the
younger sort) the better to enable them to speak their parts emphatically and
to the life.


Men. You were best take heed in time then that you well preserve your own
voice, for fear you do a spoil among 'em in teaching 'em to utter in
unsavory tunes. Do I come hither to be mocked?


Sw. Will you hear mine though? I am a Country Gentleman, young, healthful
and lusty. I hear complaints of barrenness in the City; and of men that
cannot get their wives with child; Get me but a Patent for it I Will undertake by
my self and deputies (provided that the woman be sound and handsome) to make
them multiply, and upon reasonable conditions: we will deal with the rich for
money, and the poor for charity.


Men. This is foolisher then the other. Do you abuse me Gentlemen?


Sw. Is that a wise man's question? you cannot tell th'o.


Cit. We have our projects too Sir.


Men. I would have yours first, you seem a civil and substantial Gentleman.


Dai. In more private if you please Sir.


Men. I like well his reservednesse.


Dai. Sir I am a Picture-drawer Limner, or Painter (if you please) and would
gladly purchase authority, by my self and deputies, for the painting of all
the Kings, and Queenes-head signs for Tavernes, Innes, Ale houses, and all
Houses and Shops of Trade throughout the Kingdom upon this ground that they
draw and hang up their t^yall Images for signs in so hideous manner that men
bless themselves to see it.


Men. I marry this hangs upon some ground. But are you an exquisite workman in
that art si^?


Dai. I am an Artist in that mystery sir, and have drawn some of his Majesty's
Pictures (by copy only but) so to the life, that Gentlemen have kneeled to
'^m for suites, and knight-hoods.


Men. Indeed sir!


Dai. Yes sir, and great Lords I have pictured so powerfully, their own
followers suddenly rushing into the room have started back, and solemnly stood
bare to 'em as they hung of the walls.


Men. Is It possible!


Dai. I drew a stern Judge, and a civil Lawyer so to the life, that after
their corpse were in the Grave, a man durst not look upon their pictures
without a bribe, or double fee in's hand.


Men. I do admire you!


Dai. I have drawn Ladies too, with that alluring beauty, that men have loved
their dead pictures, for their painted looks, more then their living persons
for all their virtues.


Men. Thou boy! in troth you abuse me most merrily Gentlemen.


Go. Str. An excellent fellow: I like him for that fancy more then all the
rest.


Cit. Pray hear my project too sir?


Str. Yes good sir Andrew, you shall not part so abruptly.


Cit. Mine is a good common wealths business, against the common Plague, that
reigns in the City of Pickpockets, and Cut-purses* I my self have bin robbed to
day, and am going to a good member that deals in private for the recoveries of
such goods: One that shall undertake if you will but get a Patent, for a
Cutpurse-hall, or Office, to help all men to their own again, allowing but
the Tithes of their Losses, and freeing the offending parties.


Men. Fie, fie. Here Is tithing indeed.


Cit. Provided that notice be brought to the Office within four and twenty
hours after any such loss.


Men. Enough, enough.


Cit. We may by the same course secure the Counties too, and make the hangman
hang himself.


Men. Let every man be wise enough to look to his purse, and there will be no
Cut-purses, nor need of your patent.


Sw. As wise a man as you may lose his purse though, as I have done my self in a
crow'd.


Men. He puts me in mind of a crowd I was in once to day of company I liked not
-- ha --. For heaven it is gone: And I dare not discover it for being laughed at.


Cou. It seems none of your Projects will pass with you sir Andrew.


Str. Come sir, they are but (as you said) merry with you.


Men. Be you merry with them good Madam, you know the serious work I came
about. In which I suddenly shall presume to give you a re-visite.


Str. Pray do sir Andrew, bring your Madman. My garden Lodgings shall be his
bedlem. Come gentlemen it is Dinnertime.


Cou. We are your waiters Madam.


Exeunt Omnes. ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Philomel, Mendicant, Doctor. Ph. THese are the Lodgings, that my Lady
appointed
For your distracted patient.

Men. Like you 'em Doctor.


Doct. Exceeding well. Excuse me Gentlewoman
That now entreat your absence.

Ph. Willingly. I am not taken with the sight you bring:
For I see mad-folkes enough every day.

Exit. Doct. Here set him down. Unbind him, and unblind him.


Ferdinand brought in a chair bound and hooded, etc. Fer. Am I then taken
prisoner in the North?
Wounded, disarmed and bound? I shall be ransomed
To which of your rebelliously usurped
Castles have you brought me? you sir Presbiter,
That better can pugnare then orare,
And so abjure all duty and allegiance --

Men. He takes you for a Northern Pastor Mr. Doctor.


Doct. No matter what, let him run out his fancy.


Fer. You were best to use me well; and like a soldier
Order will else be taken (though you know none.)

Doct. You shall have all best usage sir.


Fer. And use my horse well too, and let my horse and armor
Be decently preserved and seen forth-comming
At my redemption.

Doct. With all best care sir.


Fer. For I shall soon be sent for, or fetched off
With ruin of your country 'bout your ears.

Doct. You shall have all content the country yields sir.


Fer. I shall have Oat-bread, Ale, and Bag-pipes, shall I?


Doct. If you will be merry sir.


Fer. Merry! why not? come let us have cards; and you and I to cribbidge
For an od hundred pound, I mean not Scotch,
But sterling English pieces, where is your money?
All gone in Ammunition, and charge Military.

Doct. I Will find you money enough.


Fer. O here is a third man, let us then to Gleeke.


Men. Crown Gleeke sir, if you please.


Fer. Crown Gleeke! no more?
You seem to be a thrifty Covenanter
To play but at crown Gleeke, whole piece Gleeke or nothing.

Men. High as you please sir, we will find money enough,
And pay us but our buyings.

Fer. Sir, you must ba^e me Aces. You will play Tib and Tom.


Doct. All in the Cards sir.


Fer. Away with cards. Bring dice, set all at hazard,
And though I lose all, I have yet a project
That at the end of the war, and the great sitting
Shall fetch all in again. But O my Muse!
How dare I so neglect thy inspirations?
Give me Pen, Ink and Paper.

Doct. All Is ready.


Fer. Now will I write, nor will I emulate
Ovids smoth vain, or Petraks buskind style.
Nor Laura, nor Corinna did deserve
To have their prayers written ^n such Verse
As i will bestow on her that I adore.
Listen to me you blessed Intelligences,
And, Phoebus, stay thy course to hear me sing
Her praises, for whose love th'inamor'd Gods
Would leave their proper seats, and in stoine shapes,
Converse with mortals, your soule-ravishing spheres
Send forth your sweetest harmony whilst I sing --
But O she is disdainful; and her scorn
Has blotted all the glory of her praise,
Away, away with all.

Doct. Now sir, do you observe the root of his Disease?


Men. I guess at it, know you the remedy?


Fer. Disease! what is that? who is diseased? who wants a Remedy?
Are you sir a Physician?

Men. This Gentleman is, and brings you remedy, be you patient.


Doct. O you will move him.


Fer. You are a brace of Quacks,
That tie your knowledge unto days and hours
Marked out for good or ill in the Almanac.
Your best Receipts are candy for a cold;
And Carduns Benedictus for an ague,
Could you give life as Aesculapius
Did to unjustly slain Hippolitus,
You could prescribe no remedy for me.
Go study Gallen, and Hippocrates,
And when your rare simplicities have found
Simples to cure the Lunacy of Love,
Compose a potion, and administer't
Unto the Family at Amsterdam.

Doct. I Will Physic you to morrow and allay
The heat of this strong fit, or Leach it out.

Enter sir Raphael. Ra. I have venter'd to this house again, assured
That now the humerous Lady is from home
Forgetting not her Love-trick put upon me
Which she already boasts to my disgrace
For which I may require her Ladyship,
How dos your patient? a sleep! That Is well.

Men. No he is but silent sir, and it is well
That he is so, so long.

Ra. The Lords in honorable regard unto
His health directed me to visit him.

Fer. Who Is that?


Ra. Do you not know me sir?


Fre. You are (I take it) the Ghost of Dionisius
The great tirannicall Court-schole-master.

Ra. Your Friends at Court commend them to you Sir.


Fer. What hither, unto hell? Extend their loves
So far, to find me out? Pray let 'em know
That here is a trobled world in want of Statesmen.
But tell the youths and beauties there, they never
Shall find a happier opportunity
To raise a new Plantation. They Will drive all
Before 'em here. For pride is at a stand;
Fashions are all worn out, and no invention
For new here to be found: all beauty's lost;
Nor have the greatest Ladies here the act
To make so much as their poor Chamberm^yds:
Let 'em come down, as many of the Gallants
As are made weary of their Wives or Mistresses;
And, of those Wives and Mistresses, as many
As can their husbands, or their servants spare:
And what a year of Holy Days, a Jubilee
Shall we have in hell then? Have old Lad!

Ra. What a wild fancie's this!


Doct. Cross it not good sir.


Ra. Pray give me leave to touch it though, a little.


Fer. But above all, find out the Lady Strangelove
That humorous Madam, and tell her from me,
The many Lovers she has sent before her
Into these shades (where we can find no torments
Like those that she inflicted) have prevailed
With the great Queen Proserpina, that she
Shall be in place next to her royal person.

Ra. The Lady Strangelove! you are in her house sir,
Where do you think you are? or who you are?
Pray call your self to mind sir, are not you
The noble Cavalier and hopeful Courtier
The most accomplished Knight sir Ferdinando?

Doct. Forbear sir, you will move him strongly else.


Ra. I have authority for what I do sir,
Can you forget your self sir, or neglect
The bounteous fortunes, that the Court and Kingdom
Have in store for you, both for past Atchievments,
And for the large endowments of court-vertue
Are found still growing in you, studied and practiced
So to the life, as if you were built up
Virtues own Mansion, on her four firm pillars? --

Men. I hope he cannot flatter him into's wits
When it is the way to fool men out of 'em.

Ra. The Wisdom, Justice, Magnanimity,
And temperance of court you are exactly
Framed and composed of, and endued with all
The excelencies that may adorn a man
By Nature, Fortune, Art and Industry!
And all this glorious light to be eclipsed;
And such Divine perfections seem to sleep?

Fer. Pray sir your ear.


Ra. Sir, most attentively.


Fer. What do you think of Salsbury steeple sir,
For a fit hunting spear to encounter with
The whore of Babilion? might I not firke her think you?

Men. Your Doctrine dos not edify sir Raphael.


Fer. Is Orator Demostines grown dumb
Of The sudden? what! no answer? give me a Knife
He is but tongue-tied.

Ra: Guard me Divinity.


Doct. I told you what you would do.


Men. Patience good sir.


Fer. Patience in tortures?


Doct. Help here suddenly!


Enter Servants. Fer. Do you sally forth in troops? Have I no troop?
Give me my horse and arms, and come a hundred.

Doct. We Will arm and horse you, since you are so unruly,
Away with him into his Bedchamber.

Fer. O do you make me then your Knight of the shir^ A tun of Wine for that.
Shoulder your Knight, advance your Knight, bear him out.


Manent Men. sir Rap. Al. A Ferdinand, a Ferdinand, etc.


Men. This now to me is Music, Golden chimes
That rings all in with an assured advantage,
How now Sir Raphael! Frighted?

Ra. In all my disputations all my travailes,
And all conspiracies that have bin had
Aagainst me, never met I an encounter
By man, or spirit that I feared so much,
Yet here is another fury.

Enter Strangelove. Str. By what oppression or tyranny (for Law
I Am sure could never do it) is my house here
Confiscated or usurped, and I become your slave?

Men. How Madam?


Str. Your slave, lay your commands on me, what drudgery do you appoint me to?


Ra. She Is mad too.


Men. Did not your Ladyship give way?


Str. To make my house a hell?
The noise of Bedlem is soft Music to 't.
Could your Projectorship find no house else
To make a madman madder in but mine?
And me as mad as he too with the trouble.

Men. I was no principle in it good Madam.


Exit. Str. Was it your plot then sir Philosophaster,
That so you might under pretext of reading
Philosophy to him, to cure his madness
Make your adresse to me to prosequte
Your Love-suite when I thought I had answered you,
But if you must proceed, overcome me if you can,
Yet let me warn you to take heed withal
You pull not a disease unto you, that may
By your ungoverned have post into
Your grave: for I shall prove a torment to you,
Though you will take no denial, take yet a warning.

Ra. I take it to forsake your house; and never
More to resort where madness reigns. Did I
Make love to you?

Str. Pardon me virtuous sir, it is my love to you that tortures me into this
wild distraction. O sir Raphael.


Ra. Now virtue guide me. I will shun this place
More then I would the Spanish Inquisition.

Str. I shall in time be rid of all such Guests,
And have the liberty of mine own house
With mine own company, and to mine own ends
Where are you Phil? I were but dead if I had not this
wench to fool withal sometimes.

Enter Phil. Phil. Madam.


Str. I must be a little serious with you, shut the door.


Phi. Now am I called into correction,
When she is vexed and wants the company
She likes, then come I into question,
It Is common among Ladies with their women.

Str. Why that down look, as if you meant to fetch
An answer, or excuse out of your Apron-strings
Before you are charged or questioned? what new faul^
Has past of late?

Phi. Do you read any Madam
Upon my face or looks? I never was in love
Much with my face, nor ever hated it. But if I thought
It had upon it, or in it, any trespass
Against your Ladyship (my heart being clear)
These Nails should claw it out.

Tear. Str. Nay be not passionate Phil. I know you cannot
Forget the care I have had of you; nor should you
Distrust me in the promises I have made you,
Bearing your self according to your covenant Phil,
Of which one Article is to laugh with me.

Ph. Go, you are such a Lady, ha, ha, ha.


Str. Now thou comst to me wench: had forgot?


Phi. You said you would be serious.


Str. Do not thou know my seriousness is to laugh in private,
And that thou art bound to stir that humor in me?
There Is but two things more conditioned in thy service;
To do what I bid thee, and tell me the truth
In all things that I ask thee.

Phi. I Madam, you had never known that same else*


Str. Of the clap thou had in the Country e're I took thee,
But have thou faithfully kept thine own e're since?

Phi. Yes most severely Madam on your promise --


Str. Well we will have a husband then to solder up the old crack,
I have already made my choice for you:
Your sweete-heart Cit-wit makes most suite to you,
And has a good Estate, and wit enough
Too for a husband, and a handsome person.

Phi. I find no fault in all that. But he is
So base a coward, that he may be soon
Beaten out of his wit and money.

Str. But if he should prove valiant!


Phi. If he were valiant now I could say something,
But to wait for growing to it were such a loss of time.

Str. What say to Swayn-wit?


Phi. He Is the others extreme. I might fear him but never love him.


Str. What think you of my special favorite Mr. Courtwit?


Phi. As of a Courtier Madam, that has tasted
So much of all waters, that when he has a fountain of his own
He Will be too jealous of it.
And feared that every man will drink of's cup
When perhaps none dares touch it, were I it.

Str. What say to Dainty then the curious Limner?


Phi. I am bound from lying. Madam he is the man.


Str. Well i will take thy cause in hand wench: But yet we are not merry. I am
inclined most jovially to mirth me thinks. Pray Jove some good be toward.
Laugh or i will pinch you, till you do.


Phi. Ha, ha, ha, ha, Madam, ha, ha, ha. O the picture drawer! ha, ha, ha.


Str. I, come, the Picture drawer.


Phi. O, I love drawing and painting, as no Lady better, who for the most part
are of their occupation that profess it. And shall I tell all Madam?


Str. By all means Phil. -- now she is entered.


Phil. I hope I am handsome enough too. For I have heard that Limners or
Picture-drawers, do covet to have the fairest and best featured wives, (or if
not wives, Mistresses) that they can possibly purchase, to draw naked Pictures
by, as of Diana, Venus, Andromeda, Leda, or the like, either virtuous or
lascivious; whom they make to sit or stand naked in all the several postures,
and to lie as many ways to help their art in drawing, who knows how I may
set his fancy a work? and with modesty enough. We were all naked once, and
must be so again. I could sit for the naked Shepherdess, with one Leg over
the the other Knee, picking the Thorn out of her Foot most neatly, to make the
Satyr peep under.


Str. Well thou shall have him.


Boy. Mistress Philomel.


Within. Str. Let in the Boy. Now sir your news?


Boy. The mad Knights Doctor Madam entreats to speak with you.


Str. Now seeks he may assistance in his cure.


Boy. And Mr. Court wit, and the other Gentlemen are below.


Str. Go you and entertain the Gentlemen, while I consult with the Doctor,
let him enter.

Enter Doctor. Now Mr. Doctor! you come to ask my counsel I know for your
impatient Patient. But let me tell you first, the most learned Authors, that I
can turn over; as Dioscorides, Avicen, Galen, and Hyppocrates are much
discrepant in their opinions concerning the remedies for his disease.


Doct. Madam --


Str. Therefore I trust you will pardon my weakness, if my opinion jumps not
altogether with your judgment.


Doc. Madam, my purpose was not --


Str. My purpose is to advise you though, that, if his Frenzy proceed from
love as you conjecture, that you administer of the roots of Hellebore,
destill'd together with Salt peter, and the flowers of blind Netles, I Will give
you the proportions, and the quantity is to take.


Doc. Mistake not me good Madam --


Str. But if his Malady grow out of ambition, and his over weening hopes of
greatness (as I conjecture) then he may take a top of Cedar, or an Oake-apple
is very sovereign with the spirit of Hempseed.


Do. Madam, I seek no counsel in this case, my cunning is --


Str. To let me know, that that part of my house which I allow you is too
little for you.


Do. She Is surely mad.


Str. But you must claim possession of the rest, You are come to warn me out
on it; are you not?


Doc. Mistake not so good Madam.


Str. Or do you call my attendance on his person, by way of a Nurse-keeper? I
can do little service.


Doc. For my part Madam I am sorry we are made the trouble of your house, and
rather wish me out on it then your favor. But if your Ladyship will be pleased
to entertain with patience the little I have to say.


Stra. Come to it quickly then.


Doc. First, let me tell you Madam, as it is manifest
You were the cause of his distraction,
You Are bound in charity to yield such means
(With safety of your honor and estate)
As you may render for his restoration
Which of all the earthly means depends on you
If I know any thing in my profession.

Str. Come to the point, you would have me visit him.


Doc. True Madam: for a sight of you, shall more
Allure his reason to him, then all medicine
Can be prescribed.

Str. By your favor sir, you say
Saving my honor and estate I am bound,
But may I with the safety of my Life,
And limbs and a whole skin dare venture.

Doc. My life of that.


Str. You might more safely lay
Lives of a hundred Patients.

Doc. Now he is calm,
Now shall he see you, but at most secure
And modest distance.

Str. Come for once i will trust you.


Exit. Enter Swayn-wit, and Cit-wit. Sw. Come out into the Garden here; and let
them talk within, I say he shall talk with her; and his belly full, and do
with her too, her belly full, for all thou: an honest discreet Gentleman, and
thou a coward and a cockscombe. Besides he has an art and quality to live upon,
and maintain her Lady-like, when all thy money may be gone. And yet thou
prat'st o'thy two thousand pound at use, when thou and thy money too are but an
ass and's load though.


Cit. Well, you may speak your pleasure. This is no cause to fight for.


Sw. I Will make thee fight, or promise to fight with me, or somebody else before
we part, or cut thee into pieces.


Enter Court-wit. Cou. But tell me seriously do thou love my Ladies woman so
well as to marry her, and suffer the Picturedrawer now to court her privately,
and perhaps to draw and carry her from thee?


Cit. Why he here will have it so you see, and pulled me out.


Sw. It is to do a cure upon thee, coward.


Cit. Coward! pish! a common Name to men in buffe and feather. I scorn to
answer to it.


Sw. Why do thou wear a Sword? only to hurt men's feet that kick thee?


Cou. Nay you are too severe.


Sw. Pray hold your peace. I Will jowle your heads together, and so beat ton with
the other else. Why do thou were a Sword I say?


Cit. To fight when I see cause.


Cou. Now he says something, yet, and may be curable.


Sw. What is a cause to fight for?


Cit. I am not to tell you that sir, It must be found out and given me before I
ought to take notice.


Cou. You may safely say for Religion, King or Country.


Sw. Dare thou fight for Religion? say.


Cit. Who that has any Religion will fight I say?


Sw. I say thou have none. Speak, have thou any?


Cit. Truly, in this wavering world I know not how to answer.


Sw. La you. He Will say he has no King neither, rather then fight.


Cou. Why if he will not fight for him he is no Subject, and no Subject no King.


Cit. I thank you sir, I would have said so.


Sw. O thou would make a special Soldier now!


Cit. Well sir, all are not choice dogs that run, some are taken in to make up
the cry.


Sw. And for thy Country, I dare swear thou would rather run it then fight
for it.


Cit. Run my Country I cannot, for I was borne in the City. I am no clown to
run my Country.


Sw. Dare thou tell me of clowns thou cockney chicken-hearted whelp thou?


Cit. Forbear good sir, there are country Gentlemen as well as clownes, and
for the rank I honor you.


Sw. Sirrah you lie, strike me for that now; or I will beat thee abhominably.


Cou. Up to him man: will thou suffer all?


Cit. I would -- but --


Sw. You lie I say again.


Cit. I think I do, I think I do, and why should I maintain an evil cause?


Sw. The wench thou love and doatest on is a whore.


Cit. Sir, if she be it is not my fault, nor hers: somebody else made her so
then I warrant you. But should another man tell me so!


Sw. What then?


Cit. I would say as much to him as to you. Nor indeed is any man's report of
that a sufficient cause to provoke me unless she her self confessed it, and
then it were no cause at all.


Sw. Here Is a true City wit now.


Cit. I should have wit sir, and am acounted a wit within the walls. I am sure
my Father was Master of his company, and of the wisest company too in the city.


Cou. What company's that?


Cit. The Salters sir. For sal sapit omnia you know.


Sw. Your Father was a cuckold though, and you the Son of a whore.


Cou. Fight now or you will die infamous, was your Mother a whore?


Sw. Deny't and dare, say, was she not?


Cit. Comparatively she might be in respect of some holy woman, the Lady
Ramsey, Mistress Katherine Stubbs and such, ha, ha. Is that a cause?


Cou. What! not to say your Mother was a whore?


Cit. He may say his pleasure, It hurts her not: she is dead and gone.
Besides, at the best she was but a woman, and at the worst she might have her
frailtie^ like other women. And is that a cause for me to fight for the dead,
when we are forbidden to pray for 'em?


Cou But were your Mother living now, what would you say or do?


Cit. Why, I would civilly ask her if she were a whore? If she confessed it,
then he were in the right, and I ought not to fight against him: for my cause
were naught. If she denied it, then he were in an error, and his cause were
naught, and I would not fight, 'twere better he should live to repent his
error.


Sw. Nay, now if I do not kill thee let me be hanged for idleness.


Draw. Cit. Hold I am unprepared.


Sw. I care not -- unless thou swear presently, and without all equivocation
upon this sword --


Cit. Scabberd and all I pray sir, The cover of the book is allowd in courts to
swear upon.


Sw. Well sir, now you shall swear to challenge the next that wrongs you.


sheathes it. Cit. Yes, if the wrong give me sufficient cause.


Cou. Cause again! suppose that fellow within should take your wench from you?
which very likely he has done already: for I left 'em close on a couch together
Kissing and --


Cit. Gi' me the book, i will have her from him, or him from her if he be
without her belly, or Kill him if he be within her.


Sw. It Is well a cause may be found at last though.


Cou. I like a man, whom neither Lie, Kick, Battoune, scandal, Friends, or
Parents, the wrongs of Country, King or Religion can move, that will, yet,
fight for his wench. Thou will be one of the stiff blades of the time I see.


Sw. A wench is a moving cause:


Unseen Above. Str. Help, help, here help -- ha --


Sw. Why do not draw and run in upon 'em?


Cit. After you I will sir.


Sw. A pox upon thee art thou down again?


Cit. No sir, I am drawn you see.


Str. Help, help, a rape, a rape, murder, help!


Draw all Sw. Cou. It Is time to fly then.


Enter Dainty (his sword drawn) and Philomel. Cit. I come my Philomel.


Cou. What Is the matter Phil?


Dai. What cry was that?


Sw. Was it not you that caused it sir?


Phi. Was it not here?


Cit. Was it not you that cried?


Str. Is there help, help, help?


Above. Phi. O it is my Lady in the Madmans chamber. Is her mirth come to this?


Sw. Where, which way?


Phi. Here, here the dore's made fast.


Exe. omnes Pret. Cit. his sword drawn. Doctor looks out above. Flourish his
sword. Sw. I Will break it open.


Doc. Help here, help the Lady; help the Lady.


Cit. We are a coming, you shall have help enough

I warrant, what is the matter? you shall not lack for help --


Fer. Away Medusa. Hence, thou have transformd me. Stone, stone, I am all
stone. Bring mortar and make a bul-wark of me.


Above unseen Cit. O that is the Madman! How madly he talks!


Fer. Hold me not down.


Cit. Stones to make a bul-warke quoth a! If he had but to make a brace of
Demy-culvering bullets, they were thumpers I think.


Fer. Hold me not down, but rear me up, and make me my own statue.


Enter Strangelove, Swain-wit, Court-wit, Dainty. Phil. Str. Was ever such a
practice?


Cou. A mere accident of madness.


Str. I say it was a practice in the Doctor.


Dai. Yet he called out for help.


Str. You had broke up the door first. That was but to color his treachery.


Sw. A new way, and a very learned one I promise you; to cure madness with a
plaster of warm Ladygutts.


Cit. He would have had a mad bout with my Lady it seems. He would have vented
his madness into her. And she could have drawn better then the Leaches.


Cou. If you believe this Madam, though sir Ferdinand be by his madness
excusable in the attempt, you ought to be revenged upon the Doctor.


Sw. Let Us cut him into pieces Madam.


Str. I Will think upon some way to make him a dreadful example to all the
Pandarean Doctors in the Town. Come in Gentlemen, and help me with your
advices.


Cit. You shall want no advise Madam. No strength, Let Us go sir.


He snatcheth Phil. from Dainty, who took her by the arm. Ph. What mean you Mr.
Cit-wit?


Cit. I have sworn. Therefore I say no more, but I have sworn*


Exeunt Omnes. ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Frederick Gabriel. Fre. THou art so honest, that I am ashamed
The vice of Anger blinded so my Reason,
As not to see through thy transparent breast
A true and noble heart; such as becomes
A Kinsman and a friend to her I love;
I can see now, and read thy integrity,
And, by the light of that the inhumane false-hood
Of that Court-monster, that compacted piece
Of Rapine, pride and Lust.

Gab. Yet this is he
That did aspire to be a glorious Courtier.

Fre. Courtier? A mere vain glorious imposture;
Pretending favor, having nothing less.
Witness his want of Merit. Merit only
It is that smoothes the brow of Majesty,
And takes the comfort of those precious beauties
Which shine from grace Divine: and he is a Traitor
(No way to stand a courtier) that to feed
His Lusts, and Riots, works out of his Subjects
The means, by forging grants of the Kings favor.

Gab. What my master has suffered by his forgeries
I know to be the Shipwreck even of all
Except his Daughter, and what his aim at her
Was I think appears to you; And what she might
Have suffered by it we both may guess: only we hope
Her virtue would have bin a guard to her beauty.

Fre. It Is plain he never loved her virtuously
That is fallen mad for another.

Gab. That madness is his fate; which renders him into my masters hands to
restore all again. I, note the Justice of it.


Fre. But as his fortune by the others ruin
Shall be advanced, I shall be more rejected.

Gab. That foul mistrust much misbecomes a Love
Rejected sir? by whom? Charissa's constant to you,
And time will clear his frowns: and put you on
Now, the same confidence you had before;
His wanting fortune raised a storm against you,
Your noble friend Sir Raphael has already
By learned reasons and court-oratory
Prevayl'd for you to visit her: and now
You Are come within the verge o'th 'house, do you shrink?
See, a good Omen, they issue forth to meet you.

Enter Mendicant, sir Raphael, Charissa. Men. I Will hear no more on it sir, and
am much sorry
That so much Lip-labor is spent already
Upon so vain a Subject.
Give me leave then
To wonder at your light inconstancy,
Your want of resolution: yea of judgment.

Gab. He is flown off again.


Ra. Did you not give me leave to send for him;
Who, now is come to tender his affection
Unto your Daughter?

Men. Did not you first promise Ferd* Char. and Gab. aside
To give assurance of fit joincture for her,
Proportionable to her dowry, which
You now are started from?

Ra. I understood not
Nor can yet understand more of her dowry
Then a thousand pound which her Uncle left her,
And answerably to that I will make good her joincture.

Men. O you are short sir,
I mean to make her worth ten thousand more
Out of my estate in the mad Ferdinand.
Another ten thousand to redeem my Land,
Ten thousand more, i will keep in bank for purchase.

Ra. A judgement's fallen upon him: He Is mad too;
Struck lunatique with his o're-weening hopes
Sprung from the others misery.

Men. And so sir, as you came you may depart:
For 'lesse you bring a thousand pound per annum
T'assure upon her, she is no wife for you.

Fre. O sir, you had better left me in that peace
I lately slept in, without any hope
Of seeing her again, then by your summons
To startle me back from a quiet death
To Kill me thus with Tantalizing tortures.

Men. Thank then your learned friend, who failed me in
His undertaking for you, and for her
If walls and locks can hold her, she no more
Shall tantalize you.

Ra. Wherein have I failed sir?


Men. Sir, in assuring joincture to her Dowry.


Ra. Sir to no possible dowry you can give her,
But you propound the estate you have in the Moon;
When shall you take possession, think you, of your
Lordship of Lunacy in the Cynthian Orb?

Men. I shall climb thither sir without the help
Of your Heaven-scaling ladder of Philosophy.

Ra. Nay then sir hear me.


Men. What in private sir?


Fre. Remember, sweet, your vow.


Cha. Most constantly. And let me conjure you by this.


Kiss. Fre. And this --


Cha. That you forget not yours.


Gab. Quick, quick! i will stand before you.


Cha. And time at length will point us out a means
After a short long-seeming separation
To meet and reunite our vows and faiths
With greater strength and fervor.

Men. Ha! i will part you.
Was it for that you whispered, politic sir?
And could thou stand their screene? thou treacher ou^
varlet out of my doors.

Gab. For what offense?


Men. Dare thou expostulate?
Thou death deserving Villain. Hurts him.
And Huswife get you in: you may depart sirs
Has your love blinded you? i will lead you then.

Ra. Madness at height.


Men. Will you along!


Cha. O sir you are unkind.
Love then a wilful father is less blind.

Exit. Ra. Friend, has he hurt thee?


Gab. I am sure I bleed for it.


Ra. Why how now Frederick? despair not man.
He has vexed me; and out of my vexation
Shall spring thy comfort. I will labor for thee,
I Will study nothing more then to beguile
This watchful fury; this Hisperian Dragon.
Say to thy self and boldly she is thine own,
And for thy means, ( Basta) let me alone.

Fre. You are my noble Patron.


Gab. Turned away:
As I was his servingman, I am rewarded;
It Is common with us creatures to served so:
But, as I am no more his servant, I
Am free to vindicate my ^el^e out of
The wrong done to my blood (which is the same
With his,) by him rejected and despised.

Enter Cit-wit. Cit. Sir Andrew Mendicant at home?


Gab. Not to be spoken with at this time sir.


Cit. Pray let him know that the Lady Strangelove
Requires him suddenly to remove his Madman
Out of her house; or she must take a course
Much to his disadvantage.

Gab. In good time sir.


Cit. This is a surly fellow, and though I have sworn
The humor of fighting is scarce warm in me yet,
And she advises him to find a better Doctor for him,
For this has taken a wrong course.

Gab. Say you so sir?


Cit. I Will tell't you as a secret. The Physician thought to have cured his
patient, (who has bin a notable Gamester at In and In) between my Ladies legs.
If I and two or three more (but chiefly my self indeed) had not rescued her,
the Doctor had held the Lady-cow to the Mad-bull.


Gab. May I believe this?


Cit. He thinks I lie now. And should he gi' me the lie, the virtue of my Oath
were questionable.


Gab. Is this upon your knowledge sir?


Cit. True upon my life. So farewell honest friend.


Exit Gab. This may prove sport and business too.


Ra. We will do something suddenly.


Gab. What if you take me into that something too?
I guess it is some stratagem to beguile
The cautious father of his injured daughter.

Ra. This fellow will betray us.


Fre. I will venture
All that I have, my fortune in Charissa
On his fidelity, sir his thoughts are mine.

Ra. Cupid and Mercury favor our design.


Ex. Om. ACT IV. SCENE II.
Enter Court-wit, and Doctor. Cou. YOur judgment (by your favor) Mr. Doctor
Much faild you in that case.

Doc. Your reason yet may plead
Mine innocence, that drew her but to visit him.

Cou. But that drew on his fury; and though reason
May argue much for you, she can hear none,
Nor any understand: The swift affrightment
Upon her strength of passion, struck so deep
A sense into her, that is has deprived her
Of all her proper senses. She is even mad sir.

Doc. Not past my cure; and by a present means
Pray, win her hither to see a madder object
Then is her self, and see how that will work.

Cou. I Will gladly ad my pains unto your skill.


Exit. Doc. Come forth into the air. Conduct him gently.


Enter Frederick with the servants. Fre. Into the air! Set me upon Mount
Lathmos,
Where I may see, and contemplate the beauty
Of my adored Diana; or carry me
Up to Hym^ttus top, Cytheron, Othris or Pindus
Where she affects to walk and take the air;
Or tarry, stay, perhaps she hunts to day
IN the woods of Merathon, or Erymanthus.

Doc. That Is a long journey sir.


Fre. You Are a long bearded fool.


Doc. I thought I had been a Physician. But sir
You shall not need to expose your self to travel,
Your Goddess will descend into this Garden,
Pass but time here a while and she will come to you.

Fre. We will have joviall pastime. Shall we run
At base, or leap frog, or dance naked
To entertain her, or what do you think
Of downright drink and singing?

Doc. That Is best of all.


Fer. Let Us have a mad catch then.


Enter Court-Swaine-Strangelove. Cou. Here Madam may you see the Madmans Revels.


Sw. And after that the Doctors Tragicomedy.


Fer. Are not your wind pipes tuned yet? Sing

A Catch. So now a Dance, I am all air -- Ahaigh -- Ahaigh
I thank thee Mercury that have lent thy wings
Unto my feet. Play me my Country Dance,
Stand all you by. These Lasses and these Swains
Are for my Company.
He Dances a conceited Country Dance, first doing his honors, then as leading
forth his Less. He danceth both man and woman's actions, as if the Dance
consisted of two or three coupl^s, at last as offering to Kiss his Less, he
fancies that they are all vanished, and espies Strangelove.

How now! all vanished, ha!
It is no mervaile that the lesser lights
Become obscured when Cynthia appears,
Let me with Adoration fall before
Thy Deity great Goddess.

Str. Keep him from me.


Sw. You must approach no nearer sir. The Goddess
Is not so confident in her Divinity
As to trust you in reach of her.

Cou. Keep back sir.


Fer. What Hydras, Gorgons, and Chymaeras are you;
Centaures and Harpies that dare interpose
Between my hopes, and my felicity!

Cou. Doctor, away with him.


Doc. Carry him to his Chamber,
And hold him down. His raging fit is on him

Fer. Was Night made to surprise men at Noonday?
Or shall the charms of Heccate take force
To dimne Apolle's brightness? So't must be,
When Gods themselves give way to Destine.

Exiunt with Ferd. Swa. pulls back the Doctor. Sw. They are enough to hold, and
bind him too.
Come you before the Lady.

Doct. What Is her pleasure?


Sw. It Is to do Justice upon thee O Doctor
Stir, or cry out, or give the least resistance,
And I will cut thy head off before judgment.

Doct. What outrage do you intend?


Cou. Outrage! Can you think of an outrage above the horror you offered to this
Lady, To violate her chastity? her honor?


Doct. You cannot say so.


Sw. It Is said, and you are guilty. Proceed to judgment Madam.


Str. I first would hear your censures.


Enter Cit-wit. Cit. And mine among the rest good Madam. I have taken care that
a new Doctor shall be brought. Therefore in the first place my censure is, that
this be presently hanged out of the way.


Cou. That Is too high straind. What think you Madam, if to rectify his
judgment, we picked all the errors of his brain; First, opening the
Pericranion, then take out the cerebrum; wash it in Albo vino, till it be
throughy clens'd; and then --


Sw. Pox of your Albo vino, and his cerebrum taking out, that were a way to
kill him. We must not be guily of the death of a Dogleach, but have him purged
a safer way.


Str. How? Proceed.


Sw. We will fill his belly full of Whey, or Buttermilke, put him naked ^^to a
Hogs-head, then put into the same an hundred broken Urinalls, then close up the
Vessel and roll your Garden with it.


Doct. I trust they cannot mean any such mischief.


Str. Hark ye Gentlemen. Do you hear?


A Guelders horn. Cit. Yes Madam, it is a Sowgelder.


Str. Fetch in that Minister of Justice.


Cit. Who Madam? the Sowgelder?


Sw. We Will make a Doctor guelder of him though, and my Lady be so minded.


Cit. That will be sport indeed.


Exit. Cou. But will you see the execution Madam?


Str. Why not as well as other women have
Seen the dissections of Anotamies,
And executed men ripped up and quartered?
This spectacle will be comicall to those.

Doct. They dare not do the thing they would have me fear.


Sw. Now Doctor you look heavily methinks,
You shall be lighter by two stone presently.

Doct. You will not murder me?


Sw. Stir not; nor make least noise
As you hope ever to be heard again.

Doct. I would I could pray now to any purpose.


Enter Cit-wit, Guelder. Cit. I have brought him. The rarest fellow Madam,
And do you thank your fortune in him Doctor,
For he can sing a charm (he says) shall make
You feel no pain in your libbing or after it:
No Tooth-drawer, or Corne-cutter did ever work
With so little feeling to a Patient.

Str. Sing then, he shall not suffer without a Song.


Song. Sw. What must he be stripped now; or will letting down his breeches be
enough?


Doct. You dare not use this violence upon me
More rude then rage of Prentices.

Cit. Doctor it is decreed.


Doct. You cannot answer it.


Cou. Better by Law then you can the intent Guelder whets his knife and all in
preparation, Linen, Basin, etc.
Of Rape upon the Lady.

Doct. That was not to have been my act, nor was it done.


Sw. When this is done we will talk w' ye, come lay him cross this Table. Hold
each of you a Leg of him, and hold you your peace Dodipoll. And for his arms
let me alone, do you work Guelder.


Doct. Hold, I have a secret to deliver to my Lady.


Sw. You shall be delivered of your secrets presently.


Doct. If I tell her not that shall give her pardon
Then let me suffer. Hear me sweet Madam.

Str. Forbear him, let him down.


Sw. Sweet say? Thou art not i will be sworn.


Str. Well sir your weighty secret now to save your trifles.


Doc. In private I beseech you Madam: for I dare but whisper't.


Str. You shall allow me so much wariness as to have one at least to be my
Guard, and witness.


Doc. This Gentleman then Madam.


Cit. We are shut out of council.


Sw. No matter. I list not be no nearer him: no more would my cozen had he my
nose. But where is Mr. Dainty and your finicall Mistress Phil all this while though?


Cit. No matter, but I have sworn you know. Therefore I say no more, but I have
sworn.


Cou. What a strange tale is this! I cannot believe it.


Str. I do, and did before suspect it: and framed this counterfeit plot upon
you, Doctor, to work out the discovery: would I have seen you guelt dee think?
That would have renderd me more brutish then the women Barbers. Look sir this
is no Guelder, but one of my house Music. (Go, your part is done --

Exit. And for the affright you gave me, Doctor, I am even w' ye.


Sw. The Devil fright him next for a spurging, skitterbrooke. 'Twere good you
would call to burn some perfumes Madam.


Str. But for the secret you have told me i will keep it secret yet, I will
keep you so too; and from your Patient.

Enter Boy. There Is a new Docter come already Madam to the madman.


Str. From sir Andrew Mendicant?


Boy. His servant brought him.


Doc. I pray what Doctor is it?


Str. Engage your self with no desire to know,
But, for the good you find, fit thanks to owe;
So come with me, and come you Gentlemen.

Ex. Omnes ACT IV. SCENE III.
Enter Frederick in a Doctors habit, Gabriel with two swords under his cloak,
Ferdinand upon a Bed bound, and held down by servants. Fer. Heap yet more
Mountains, Mountains upon
Mountains, Pindus on Ossa, Atlas on Olympus,
I Will carry that which carries Heaven, do you
But lay't upon me!

Fre. Forbear you will stifle him,
Take off the needless weight of your rude bodies;
Unbind him and stand off, to give him air.

Ser. Sir though you are a Physician, I am no fool. Take heed what you do.
He Is more then six of us hold when his hot fit's upon him. He would now tear
you to pieces should you let him loose.


Fer. The danger then be mine. Let him sit up. Is not he civil now?


Ser. I, for how long? do you note that Hercules eye there?


Fre. I charge you quit the room.


Ser. It Is but to come again when we are called.


Fre. Be not within the hearing of a call,
Or if you chance to hear me, though I cry
Murder, I charge you come not at me.

Ser. It Is but a Doctor out of the way; and that is no loss while there are so
many, the best cannot live by the worst.


Fre. Keep the door fast. You are much mist abroad sir,
And chiefly by the Ladies, who now want
The Court-ships, Banquets, and the costly presents
In which you wonted to abound to 'em.

Ferd. Ha --


Fre. Nay, nay, sit still sir. They say you are mad;
Mad with conceit of being a favorite
Before your time, that is, before you had merit
More then a tumor of vainglory in you,
And in especial care for your recovery
I am sent to administer unto you: but first
To let you blood.

Dagger. Ferd. Ho! Murder, Murder, Murder.


Fre. Are you so sensible already? do not stir
Nor cry too loud. Dos the mere apprehension
Of blood-letting affright your madness? Then
Reason may come again.

Ferd. The Battle of Musteborough Field was a brave one.


Fre. O do you fly out again?


Ferd. Sings part of the old Song, and acts it madly.


Fre. This is pretty: but back from the purpose.


He sings again. Fre. Will you come to the point sir?


Ferdinand sings again. Fre. We but lose time in this sir: Though it be good
testimony of your memory in an old Song. But do you know me?


Ferd. Not know my Sovereign Lord? Cursed be those
Knees, and hearts that fall not prostrate at his Feet.

Fre. This wild submission no way mittigates
My wrongs, or alters resolution in me
To Cure or Kill you quickly. Do you know me now sir?
Or have you known Charissa? do you start sir? Off his beard and gown.
There Is sign of reason in you then: But be it
By reason or by chance, that you awake
Out of your frantic slumber, to perceive me,
My cause and my Revenge is still the same,
Which I will prosecute according to
My certain wrong, and not your doubtful reason,
Since reasonlesse you laid those wrongs upon me
When you were counted wise, great, valiant, and what not
That cries a Courtier up, and gives him power
To trample on his betters.

Ferd. Who talks this mortal to? I am a spirit.


Fre. Sure I shall find you flesh, and penetrable.


Ferd. I would but live to subdue the Pisidians,
And so to bring the Lydians under tribute --

Fre. You would but live to abuse more credulous fathers
With courtly promises, and golden hopes
For your own lustful ends upon their Daughters.
Think (if you can think now) upon Charissa.
Charissa who was mine, in faith and honor
Till you ignobly (which is damnably)
By a false promise with intent to whore her
Diverted her weak Father from the Match
To my eternal loss. Now whether you
Have wit or no wit to deny't, or stand to it,
Or whether you have one, or ten men's strength,
Or all, or none at all i will fight or Kill you
Yet like a Gentleman, i will call upon you Throw away his dags.
Give me the Swords. They are of equal length
Take you free choice.

Ferd. Pish.


Run back. Fre. I cast that to you then. Hand it, or die a Madman.


Ferd. O, ho, ho, ho. --


Gab. All this sir to a Madam.


Fre. I have a cause to be more mad then he,
And in that cause i will fight.

Gab. He knows not what you tell him.


Fre. I tell't the Devil in him then to divulge it
When I have dispossessed him. I have further
Reason to kill him yet, to cross your Master,
Who has begged his Estate. Now fight or die a Madman.

Ferd. Hold Frederick hold. Thou have indeed awaked
Me to see thee and my self.

Gab. He Is not so mad to fight yet I see that.


Fre. I Am glad you are your self sir, I shall fight
Now upon honorable terms, and could
Suppose before your madness counterfeit.

Ferd. Yet hold. Has Mendicant begged me?


Fre. During your madness. What should hinder him?


Ferd. Put up thy Sword.


Fre. Upon no terms, and you alive.


Ferd. Not to obtain Charissa?


Fre. As you Guest sir.


Ferd. It shall be by means if gold can win
Her Fathers grant.

Fre. That Is most unquestionable.


Ferd. Not that I dare not fight, do I urge this,
But that the other is your safer way.

Fre. Your gold's too light. I will accept of nothing
From you while you dare tell me you dare fight,
Perhaps you doubt of ods, go forth. Nay I
Will lock him out.

Gab. You may: For I dare trust you while I go call the Lady.


Exit. Fre. Now are you pleased, or dare you now to fight sir?


Ferd I neither will nor dare fight in this cause:


Fre. This is a daring Courtier!
How durst you wind your self in so much danger?
And why take madness in you, to be bound,
And grapled with so rudely?

Ferd. Keep my council,
And take Charissa.

Fre. It Is a fair condition.


Ferd. First for the wrong I did thee, noble youth
In my design against Charissa's honor,
It is confessed, repented; and her self
For satisfaction to be given to thee,
I Will fall upon thy Sword else, or be posted,
And Ballated with all disgrace.

Fre. Well yet.


Ferd. And for my show of madness; 'twas put on
For my revenge on this impetuous Lady
To cool these flames (as much of anger as
Desire) with her disdain, and tempting malice
Had raised within me.

Fre. You would have ravished her.


Ferd. I rather thought, she like a cunning Lady
Would have consented to a Madman, who
She might presume could not impeach her honor
By least detection: Monkeyes, Fools, and Madmen,
That cannot blab, or must not be believed
Receave strange favors.

Fre. And on that presumption
You feigned your madness.

Ferd. True.


Fre. But rather then to fail,
With your bawd Doctors help you would have forced her:
And that is the council you would have me keep
On your assurance of Charissa to me*
That your proceeding in your madness here,
May yet find means and opportunity
To exercise your violence.

Ferd. Suppose so.


Fre. Thou art not worth my Killing now.
Justice will mark thee for the Hangmans Office:
Nor, were Charissa in thy gift, were she,
In that, worth mine or any good acceptance,
And for your council, had within there Madam.

Ferd. Frederick --


Fre. The Lady of the house! where are you?
Will you be pleased to hear a secret Madam?
Strangely discovered?

Enter Strangelove, Gabriel; Doctor. Str. I do not slight your act in the
discovery,
But your imposture sir, and beastly practice
Was before whispered to me by your Doctor
To save his Epididamies.

Doct. O your pardon.


Fred. I am disgraced, undone.


Str. It Is in my power
To make you the perpetual shame of Court;
And will assuredly do it, if you comply not
With me to make this injured Gentleman's fortune
In his beloved Charissa.

Ferd. Madam most readily, I have offered it.


Sw. I have forecast the way and means already:
Which we must prosecute with art and speed.
Good ends often times do bad intents succeed.

Ferd. I Will be directed by you.


Fre. Noblest Lady.


Exeunt Omnes. ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Swayn-wit, Court-wit, Cit-wit. Sw. COme Sir, must I take you in hand
again?


Cit. My Lady will convery her Madman to sir Andrew Mendicants it seems.


Sw. Tell me that I know not; and answer my questions.


Cit. She and the Doctor, and the the other Doctor's gone with him too.


Sw. Leave you by flim flams, and speak to the purpose.


Cit. You know I have sworn. Do you not know I have sworn?


Sw. To live and die a beaten Ass; a coward have thou not?


Cou. Prithee forbear him: He Is not worth thy anger.


Sw. Anger! Is every Schoolmasters angry that gives Discipline with correction?


Cit. Would he were at Pensans again.


Sw. Did not thou tell my Lady that I was a coward in my own Country, and
Kicked out of Cornwall?


Cit. Comparatively I think I did in respect of Corinees, that wrastled and
threw Giant after Giant over the cliffs into the Sea.


Sw. Pox of your comparative lies; And did not thou say that he here was
peppered so full of the whats^^ callums, that his spittle would poison a Dog or
a Rat?


Cit. That was comparatively too in respect of a pure Virgin; a chrisome child
or so.


Cou. He never shall move me, I forgive him.


Cit. Merely comparatively I speak it.


Sw. Forgi' me for swearing i will make thee speak^ positively, or beat thee
superlatively before I have done with thee.


Enter Boy. Boy. Gentlemen, my Lady --


Sw. Hold a little. Did thou not say this child here was a Pickpocket? and
that he picked thine of thy money, and thy watch, when he was singing between
thy Legs to day?


Boy. Who I a Pick-pocket?


Flies at him. Cit. Forbear good Lady it was comparatively.


Boy. A pick pocket?


Cou. Forbear and hear him Hercules.


Boy. Lend me a sword i will kill him, and hear him afterward.


Cou. Nay I must hold you then. How was he comparatively your Pick-pocket?


Cit. That is as much as any man I know; That is I accuse nobody; that is all
are as innocent as the child, and he as the innocent unborne. And let that
satisfy you.


Boy. Live. I am satisfied. Now Gentlemen my Lady prays you to follow her to
sir Andrew Mendicants.


Cou. I know the business, It Is about our Revells.


Sw. Suffer a child to beat thee!


Cou. His cause was bad you know.


Sw. Incorrigible coward! Say now; art not thou thy self a pick-pocket, and a
cutpurse? say.


Cit. Comparatively it may be said, I am to a Churchwarden, a Collector for the
poor or such.


Sw. The conclusion is, that if ever I hear thou mentionst my name again in any
sense whatsoever, i will beat thee out of reason.


Cit. In my good wishes, and prayers I may: Heaven forbid else.


Sw. Not in your prayers sir, shall you mention me, you were better never pray.


Cit. Heaven forbid I should then!


Sw. And make thine Oath good on that fly fellow that has taine away thy
wench, or --


Cit. He has not taken her yet.


Cou. You have not seen her or him these two hours; has not my Lady called
too, and she not to be found?


Cit. True, true: and if I be not revenged.


Sw. Do It then now, while thou art hot. She comes, here take, and keep her
while thou art hot and have her.


Enter Philomel and Dainty. Phi. Is she at your dispose sir?


Court takes aside with Dainty. Cit. Your Lady gave you me.


Phi. Or am in her gift?


Cit. You are in my possession, nor shall Lucifer dispossess me of her.


Phi. So valiant on a sudden!


Cit. Have I not cause?


Phi. You Will have me with all faults?


Cit. Yes, and a match forever.


Kiss. Sw. How means she by all faults?


Cit. A word she always uses in waggery.


Cou. By all means take her from him. What! afraid of a coward?


Sw. You must do it or take the share, he should have had a downright beating.
Forgi' me for swearing, he is a veryer coward then the other.


Cou. He will serve the betrer to flesh him. And do but note his tiranicall
rage that is the vanquisher.


Sw. You will on.


Dai. Sir she is mine by promise.


Cit. She Is mine by act and deed sir according to the flesh, let her deny't
and she can.


Dai. That shall be tried by Law.


Cit. By Law of arms and hands it shall, take that, and let her go.


Dai. Bear witness Gentlemen he struck me.


Phi. O pitiful Picture-drawer!


Cit. Will you not draw? I will then.


Draw. Dai. What would you have sir? If she be yours take her.


Cit. That Is not enough, I will make thee fight, what blindness have I lived
in! I would not but be valiant to be Caesar.


Cou. O brave Cit, O brave Cit.


Sw. Why do not draw thou fellow thou?


Dai. She Is his he says; and she denies it not, shall I fight against him for
his own?


Cit. I Will make thee fight, or cut thee into pieces.


Cou. He turns your words over to him.


Cit. Why do thou wear a sword? only to hurt men's feet that Kick thee?


Kick. Cou. Do you observe? Nay thou art too severe.


Cit. Pray hold your peace, i will jowle your heads together and so beat ^on with
the other else.


Sw. Forgi' me for swearing. He Will beat's all anon.


Cit. Why do thou wear a Sword I say?


Dai. Some other time sir, and in fitter place.


Cit. Sirrah you lie, strike me for that, or I will beat thee abominably.


Dai. You see this Gentlemen.


Phi. And I see it too, was ever poor wench so couzend in a man?


Cit. The wench thou love and doat'st on is a whore.


Phi. How Is that?


Cit. No, no, That was not right, your father was a cuckold though, and you the
son of a whore.


Sw. Good, I shall love this fellow.


Dai. I can take all this upon account.


Cit. You count all this is true then. Incorrigible coward! what was the last
vile name you called me Mr. Swain-wit? O I remember, sirrah thou art a
Pickpocket and a Cutpurse; And gi' me my money again, and him his or I will cut
thy throat.


Dai. I am discovered.


Cit. Do you answer nothing, do you de^urr^ upon it?


Dai. Hold sir I pray; Gentlemen so you will grant me pardon, and forbear the
Law i will answer you.


Cou. Sw. Agreed, agreed.


Dai. It is confessed: I am a Cutpurse.


Cit. Comparatively or positively do you speak?
Speak positively, or I will beat thee superlatively.

Sw. Forgi' me for swearing a brave Boy.


Dai. Here is your VVatch, and Money; And here is yours. Now as you are
Gentlemen use no extremity.


Cou. Beyond all expectation!


Sw. All thought.


Cit. Miraculous! O the effects of valor!


Phi. Was ever woman so mistaken of both sides?


Sw. But do thou think thou art valiant for all this though?


Cit. You were best try; or you, or both, or come all three.


Sw. I swear thou shall have it to keep up while thou art up.


Cit. Is this your picture-drawing? are you the Kings Picture-drawer? A neat
denomination for a Cutpurse, that draws the Kings Pictures out of men Pockets.


Cou. Come sir, come in with us.


Dai. Pray use me Kindly Gentlemen.


Cit. Yes, we will use you in your kind sir.


Takes Phil by the hand. Exeunt Omnes. ACT V. SCENE II.
Enter Mendicant, a Letter in his hand. Men. THis is the day of my felicity,
And is the same with that the Poet Sings
Is better then an Age. Come forth Charissa, Enter Charissa.
Now you appear my comfort; and I can
No less then thank thy sweet obedience
That have complied with my directions,
Bride-like and glorious to meet a fortune,
So great as shall beget the present envy
Of all the Virgin Ladies of the Court,
And a posterity, that through all ages,
Shall praise and magnify thy act.

Cha. Your acceptance of my duty sir
Is all that I can glory in.

Men. How are we bound unto this noble Lady*
That sent us our instructions.

Cha. Sure I am. If this be a true Copy.


Men. Let Music in her soft but sweetest notes
Usher their welcome, whilst unto my thoughts Music
The lowdest harmony resounds my triumph. Enter Doctor, and Fred. in Doctors
habit, Strange, Priest, Ferd. in the chair as before borne by servants, Fab. as
one of the servants.
Madam most welcome.

Str. In fewest and the softest words sir Andrew.
(He sleeps) and let him gently be conveyed
Only with those about him to his Chamber.

Men. Charissa, go: be you his conduct, softly, softly.
I see you have brought a Priest Madam.

Ext. Om. Pret. Mend. and Strange. Str. By all best reason,
For when we found he used Charissa's Name,
When he was calm and gentle, calling still
Charissa! where is Charissa? a good space
Before he slept, and being then demanded
What would he with Charissa? He most readily
Replied, Fetch me Charissa and a Priest.
The Doctors in their judgments (unto which
My full opinion assented) might
Foresee, that in removing him, where she
Might be his immediate object, when he wakes,
That fresher flames to instant marriage
Would then arise.

Men. Incomparably judicious Madam.


Str. Yet not without your leave would I attempt it:
Without your leave, knowing your watchful care
Over your Daughter.

Men. And that care of mine
Was (Madam) by your favor
Principal motive to this great effect.

Str. Take all unto your self, I am content.


Men. I Would feign steal in and watch the event of things.


Str. But have you heard sir Andrew the mischance
Of the unfortunate Lover, distracted Frederick?

Men. How! what of him?


Str. H'has made himself away.


Men. Is It possible?


Str. (He has by this time, or the Priest is tonguety'd*)


Men. He has left no estate worth begging, that is the worst of'^.

My joys come flowing no me -- yet I would see.


Str. And hear me good Sir Andrew, for the Love
I bring to ad unto your joys: for I
Foreseeing the event of this nights happiness
Have warned some friends to follow me with Revells
To celebrate the Marriage of your fortunes.
See they are come. Pray entertain 'em sir.

Enter Court. Swayn. Cit-wit, Dainty, Phil. Boy. Men. The Gallants that were to
day so merry with me.


Str. The same: but very harmless.


Cit. All but one sir. Did you not lose your purse to day?


Str. What Is the meaning?


Cou. Sw. We Will tell you Madam.


Men. My purse? (I mist it at my Lady Strangeloves.)


Cit. This Picture-drawer drew it, and has drawn more of the Kings-pictures
then all the Limners in the Town. Restore it sirrah.


Men. I will not take it, 'twas my nelect that lost it, not he that stole it.
This is my day of fortune; it comes home to me; more then I dare receive. O my
joys, let me be able to contain you.


Cit. Have you another purse to lose?


Men. I have a purse; which if I lose, i will blame my self, none else.


Cit. Let him but come so near you as to ask forgiveness for the last, and
if he do not take the next, though it be six fadome deep in your pocket i will
hang for him when his time comes.


Men. I Will watch his fingers for that.


Sit. Cou. Observe good Madam.


Dai. Sir at your feet I beg your pardon.


Men. It needs not, prithee rise.


Dai. Never, till you pronounce that happy word
I pardon thee: or let me have some token
Of sweet assurance that I am forgiven
Which I beseech you -- I beseech you grant.

Men. In sooth thou have it. Heaven pardon thee as I do.


Dai. I have it sir indeed, and as your gift i will keep it, promising before
all these witnesses, i will never venture for another.


Men. Fore me an expert fellow; Pity he should be hanged before we have more
of his breed.


Cit. Did not I tell you sir? And these are but his short arms; i will
undertake, when he makes a long arm, he shall take a purse twelve skore off.


Men. I do not like Thieves handsell though, This may presage some greater
loss at hand.


Sw. Now Gentlemen you know your task, be expeditious in it.


Cou. I have cast the design for it already Madam. My inventions are all flame
and spirit. But you can expect no great matter to be done extempore or in six
minutes.


Sw. What matter is it so we skip up and down? our friend Jack Dainty here, Mr.
Cutpurse dances daintily though.


Str. And Mr. Cit-wit, you have worthily won my woman sir.


Cit. I have her Madam, she is mine.


Str. I Will make her worth a thousand pound to you, besides all she has of her
own.


Cit. Her faults and all Madam, we are agreed of that.


Phi. Suppose this Boy be mine.


Cit. I would he were else, that I might have him under lawful correction, and
the cause of my side: for he beat me not long since.


Boy. And you be my father, and do not make much of me and give me fine things,
i will beat you again so I will; and my mother shall help me.


Cit. Agreed Billy, agreed Philly. Never was man so suddenly, so rich; Nay
never look Gentlemen, she is mine, and he is mine own, I am sure I have got
him now; And all faults are salv'd.


Sw. Her word in waggery is made good in earnest now though.


Str. To your business Gentlemen; if you have a short speech or two, the boy's a
pretty Actor; and his mother can play* her part; women-Actors now grow in
request. Sir Andrew! melancholy?


They consult. Men. I was thinking on the omen of my purse.


Court draws his Tables and retires to Phil, writes and sometimes shows her.
Str. Fear no further mishap sir; it is ominous to fear.


Men. Pray let us go in and see how things proceed.


Str. Pray give me leave to make the first discovery;
Walk down into the Garden, i will come to you;
And here are some would speak with you.
Ex. severally. Enter two Projectors. 1. Into the Garden, good, let us follow
him.

2. It Is not the repulse he gave us in the morning shall quit him of us.

1. No now his superintendent's turned away, we will once more fill his head with
millions.


Exit. Dai. I Will make the Dance, and give you all the footing.


Practice footing. Sw. Stand further off of my Pocket though.


Cit. No matter if we lose any thing, and he within ten miles of us i will make
him answer't.


Dai. I want a fifth man, I would have an od.


Enter Doctor. Doc. The Marriage is performed. The Priest has done his office
--


Sw. Doctor can you dance?


Doc. And sing too, I have forgot much else.


Phi. I Will speak the Speech: Have not I forgot my Actors tone tro? I shall
remember't, I could have acted'em all ore.


Boy: I can speak a Speech too Mother, must I call you Mother now?


Phi. I my Boy, now I dare vouch thee.


Doc. What think you of this tune sir for your dance? Tay dee* dee, etc.


Dai. I Will borow a Violl and take it of you instantly.

Ex. Enter sir Raphael. Pray sir, is sir Andrew Mendicant in the house.


To Court-w. Cou. Umh -- He writes in his tables sometimes scratching his head,
as pumping his Muse.
Is he within sir, can you tell? He Is too busy it seems.
Can you tell me sir I pray, if sir Andrew be within? To Cit-wit as he moved
toward him, Cit-wit Dances looking on his Feet, etc.
Very strange! among what Nation am I arrived?
Here Is one in civil habit sure will answer me,
Sir may I be informed by you? saw you sir Andrew?

The Doctor stretches his Throat in the Tune. Ra. Te precor domine Doctor. He
sings on.
They are no Christians sure.
Sir may I be informed by you? To Swayn. He whistels and Dances Sellingers
round, or the like.
Bless me; the people are bewitched. Enter Dainty.
Do you belong to the house sir? To Dainty, he fidls to him and the 4 dancing
and singing practice about him.
I hope for courtesy here Lady will
you be pleased --

To Phil. she speaks in a vile tone like a Player. Phi. O by no means, we must
speak Charon fair,
O^ he will not waft us over the Stigian Flood,
Then must we have a sop for Cerberus
To stop his yawning Chaps; Let me alone
To be your Convoy to Elysium.

Ra. This is most heathenish of all.


Dainty plays softly and Doctor with him aside. Phi. I Will pass that snarling
triple-headed Cur
Which keeps the pallace-gate of Pluto's Court,
And guide you safe through pitchy Acheron.

Ra. What Woman Monster's this? Sweet young Gentleman, let me ask you a
question.


Boy. Grim death, why rather did thou not approach
My younger days; before I knew thy fears?
Thy pains are multiplied by our years.

Ra. All Lunatic? or Gentlemen, do you want leisure O^ civility to answer me?


Cit. Have you done the speeches Mr. Court wit?


Cou. I have already from the forked top
Of high Parnassus fetched 'em.

Cit. And shall my wife and Billi boy speak 'em?


Cou. As i will instruct you.


Cit. You write admirably I confess; But you have a^ ill tone to instruct in;
I Will read to 'em my self, you give your words no grace.


Doc. You have the tune right, will you instruct the Music men?


Dai. And you all in the Dance imediately.


Sw. But shall we have no silken things, no whim wham^ To Dance in though.


Cit. Perhaps the Bride can furnish us.


Sw. With some of her old Petticotes, can she?


Phi. No, no my Lady has taken care for all.


Dai. Come, come away to practice, and be ready.


Ex^. Ra. Never was I in such a Wilderness. Om. Fidling, Footing, Singing,
Acting, etc.
But my revenge upon Sir Mendicant
Shall answer all my patience, in the Jeere
I mean to put upon him.
I will possess him with a braine-trick, now,
A mere invention of mine own (wherein
Heaven pardon me for lying) shall so nettle him.

Enter Mendicant, and Projecters. Men. Go back and be not seen till I come to
you.


Ex. Pro. Ra. He Is come. Have you heard the news sir Andrew?


Men. What sir Raphael?


Ra. That Ferdinand's restored to's wits.


Men. I am glad on'^.


Ra. Do you take the loss of his estate so mildly
Which might have bin your own?

Men. I hope you think me a Christian sir, but how should he arrive at such a
sudden knowledge of it, if it be so? I will pretend it is true, yes sir, he is
in's wits.


Ra. I thought I had ly'd when I did prophecy:
But sir my Nephew Fredrick --

Men. Has made himself away, I heard of that too.


Ra. (I hope not so) yet there is another accident
Of which you have not heard, may touch you nearer,
And that indeed's my business, you sir, furiously
Wounded your Man to day.

Men. Not dangerously I hope.


Ra. Flatter not so your self; He Is on the point of dying.


Men. How!


Ra. Nor be too much dejected,
His life you may get off for (as 'twas done
In heat of blood) marry sir your estate
(You Will pardon me) is begged; my self has don't,
And therein, begged the Beggar.

Men. Ha!


Ra. Take not too deep a sense of it: For if you will yield
That Frederick yet shall have it with your Daughter,
I will remit the Estate.

Men. O is it so?
Do you move this for a dead man?

Ra. No, he lives.


Men: Do you practice on me? Madam where are


Enter Strange. Ferd. Fred. Charissa. Gabriel behind. Str. Here sir, and am
become your Usher to such guests you?
As you must bid most welcome.

Mend. stands amazed Ra. She here! i am then again confounded.


Str. Nay sir Raphael, I potest we will be friends notwithstanding I have
outstript you in your plot of matching your Nephew Frederick, here to his love
Charissa.


Ra. But is it so? --


Fred. It is, in which I hope sir you are not offended,
Who gave me leave by any opportunity
To take her, I broke no locks nor walls for her.

Cha. I beg your pardon, and your blessing sir.


Ra. And is it so with you sir Ferdinand?


Ferd. It is, and sir in testimony of my recovery, I make demand of my estate:
of which you thought your self possessed.


Men. What hopes am I fallen from? and what misery fallen into; when the little
I have is begged for Manslaughter!


Gab. I quit you of that sir.


Men. How could thou deal so with me?


Gab. To show my gratitude.
You overpaid me for all my former services,
For which I justly thought I ought you this.

Ferd. Nor think your Daughter undervalued sir,
Three thousand pound I give him to augment
Her fortune in him.

Men. Dreams, dreams, All these are waking Dreams.


Ferd. All real truth sir, whither fly you from us?


Men. Am I of all defeated; and by all
Abused and mocked? More room there: let me^ go.

Ferd. You mistake strangely.


Flourish. Str. Hark! the Revellers.


Fer. That come to celebrate your joys, which wilfully
You will not apprehend.

Men. It Is all but show, Let go, and I will do
Something shall ad to your delight imediatly.

Exit. Str. Let him go and wear ou^ his fit by himself.


Flourish. Enter Boy, and Philomel, as Cupid and Venus. Boy. Venus and Cupid, my
Mother and I --
Help me. -- I have it now.
Venus and Cupid; my Mother and I
Help me again* Noe, no, no.
Venus and Cupid; my Mother and I,
Let me alone.
Venus and Cupid my Mother and I.

Fred. There Is an Actor now!


Fre. How doubtful of himself; and yet how perfect he was!


Ra. A self mistrust is a sure step to Knowledge.


Str. Sententious sir Raphel.


Ra. Quarrels are ended Madam.


Ferd. Come hither Cupid.


Phi. From my Italian Mount I did espy
(For what is hidden from a Deity?)
How faintly Hymen did his Office here
Joining two Lovers with the hand of fear;
Putting his Torch out for obscurity;
And made the Chamber (which belongs to me)
His Temple. But from hence let fear remove.
See here, the Champions for the Queen of Love.
Swain.
Courage, sent from Mars; The Court.
Muses kill.
From wise Apollo. And the God, which still
Inspires with subtilty, sly Mercury
Sends this his Dainty.
Agent. Here Is Cit-wit.
Activity
From Doctor.
Jupiter himself; And from her store
Of Spies, the Moon sends This to keep the door.
With Art of Action, now, make good the place,
In right of Love to give the Nuptials Grace.

After they have Danced a while, Enter Projectors, breaks 'em off. Pro. Lay by
your Jolity, forbear your Sport,
And hear a story shall enforce your pity.

Fer. What black Tragedian's this?


Ra. Some Nuntius sent from Hell.


Ga. One of my Masters Minions, a Projector.


Pro. You had a Master: But to all I speak.
Your practices have sunk him from the Comforts
Of all his hopes in fortune, to the Gulf
Of deep despair; from whence he rose inflamed
With wild distraction and fantastic fury.

Fer. He Is mad; is he?


Pro. Mad, and has hanged himself --


Cha. Alas my Father.


La. How! hanged himself?


Pro. All over sir, with draughts of Projects, Suits,
Petitions, Grants, and Pattents, such as were
The Studies and the Labors of his Life,
And so attired he thinks himself well armed
T'incounter all your scorns.

Enter Mendicant attired all in Patents; A Windmill on his head, and the other
Projector. Men. Room here: a Hall for a Monopolist,
You, Commonwealths informers lead me on.
Bring me before the great Assembly. See,
Fathers Conscript, I present all I have
For you to cancel.

Sw. Here Is a brave show, and out-shines our devise.


Men. This is a Patent for the taking of poor John and Barrell-cod alive, and
so to preserve 'em in salt water for the benefit of the Fishmongers.


Cou. There Is salt in this.


Sw. I this has some savor in'^.


Men. This is a fresh one sir, For the catching, preservation, and
transportation of Butter-flies: whereby they may become a native commodity.


Cou. That Is a subtle one.


Men. This is for profits out of all the Common-Cryes in the City, As of --
Oysters -- Codlings -- wood to cleave, Kitching stuff, and the thousand more,
even to the Matches for your Tinder-box, and all Forrainers to pay double; And
a Fee out of the Link-boyes profits. But no cries to escape. It Is for a peace.


Dai. What if some should cry Murder, murder?


Cit. Or Thieves, thieves?


Cou. Or Fire, fire?


Sw. Or women cry out five Loves a penny?


Men. All all should pay. But I submit
My self to your most honorable censure.

Cit. What dos he take us for?


Sw. Powers, Powers; A lower house at least.


Men. And all my patents to be concealed.


Sw. Our Projects would not take with you, we will take yours though.


Dai. He shall dance out of 'em: Music! Play out our Dance, we will dis^obe
you presently.


Cit. Yes, and dismantle his Projectors too.


They all Dance. In the Dance they pull off his Patents; And the Projectors
Clokes, who appear all ragged. At the end of the Dance the Projectors thrust
forth. Fer. An excellent Morrall! The Projects are all canceled, and the
Projectors turned out of doors.


Men. True Gallants, and now I am my self again,
I saw the event of all with good esteem.
And would as well as you a Madman seem,
And now my blessings on your Son and Daughter.

Sw. This Bride, Dame Venus here, cooles all this while though.


Dai. By Mr: Bride-groomes leave, i will stir her blood a little for the good
meaning she had toward me.


Cit. You may do so. He dare's not pick her pocket,
And for her Maidenhead I dare trust him though he should
Dance quite out of sight with her.

Dance. While they Dance the rest confer. Ra. It Is well: And all are friends.


Fer. You have my potestation: and in that,
Madam, my faith before these noble friends.

Str. Upon those honorable terms sir Ferdinando I will be yours.


Cit. Sheel' have him, it seems at last.


Sw. She Is a wise widow by'^: for sure enough, she saw something in his mad
naked fit, when he put her to it, to choose a husband by, wo' not out of her
thought yet.

What is there more to say now Madam?


Str. You question well.


Sw. But to Supper and to bed?


Str. You consider well.


Sw. We have had other pastime enough.


Str. You reason well, Would all were pleased as well
TO absolve that doubt, to those we must appeal.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
Strange. Ladies, your suffrages I chiefly crave
For the humble Poet. It Is in you to save
Him, from the rigorous censure of the rest*
May you give grace as you are with Beauty blessed.
True: He Is no dandling on a Courtly lap,
Yet may obtain a smile, if not a clap.

Ferd. I Am at the Cavaliers. Heroic spirits,
That know both to reward, and atchieve merits,
Do, like the Sunbeams, virtuously dispense
Upon the lowest growths their influence,
As well as on the lofty: our Poet so
By your Phebean favors hopes to grow.

Cit. w. And now you generous spirits of the City
That are no less in money then brain wity,
My self, my Bride, and pretty Bride boy too,
Our Poet for a Boun preferres to you.

Phil. And though you taste of no such Bride-ale Cup,
He hopes y' allow the Match to be clapped up.

Boy. And, if this Play be naught (yes so he said)
That I should gi' ye my Mother for a Maid.

Swa. And why you now? or you? or you? I Will speak enough for you all, you now
would tell the Audients they should not fear to throng hither the next day:
for you will secure their Purses cut-free, and their pockts pick-free. It Is much
for you to do though. And you would say that all your projects are put down, and
you will take up no new: but what shall be (spectators) to please you. And you
Poetic part induces you, t'appologize now for the Poet too, as they have done
already, you to the Ladies, you to the Cavaliers and Gentry; you to the City
friend, and all for the Poet, Poet, Poet, when alls but begging tho. I Will speak
to 'em all, and to my Country folks too if here be any o'em: and yet not beg
for the Poet though, why should we? has not he money for his doings? and the best
price too? because we would have the best: And if it be not, why so? The Poet
has showed his wit and we our manners. But to stand beg, beg for reputation for
one that has no countenance to carry it, and must have money is such a Pastime!
-- If it were for one of the great and curious Poets that give these Plays as
the Prologue said, and money too, to have 'em acted; For them, indeed, we are
bound to ply for an applause. Because they look for nothing else, and scorn to
beg for themselves. But then you will say those Plays are not given to you; you
pay as much for your seats at them as at these, though you sit nere the
merrier, nor rise the wiser, they are so above common understanding; and though
you see for your love you will judge for your money, why so for that too, you
may. But take heed you displease not the Ladies though who are their partial
judges, being bribed by flattering verses to commend their Plays; for whose
fair cause, and by their powerful voices to be cried up wits of Court, the
right worshipful Poets boast to have made those enterludes, when for ought you
know they bought 'em of Universitie Scholars though, and only show their own
wits in owning other men's; and that but as they are like neither. As thus, do
you like that Song? yes* I made it. Is that Scene or that Jest good? Yes, It Was
mine; and then if all be good 'twas all mine. There Is wit in that now. But this
small Poet vents none but his own, and his by whose care and directions this
Stage is governed, who has for many years both in his fathers days, and since
directed Poets to write and Players to speak, till he traind up these youths
here to what they are now. I some of 'em from before they were able to say a
grace of two lines long to have more parts in their pates then would fill so
many Dryfats. And to be serious with you, if after all this, by the venomous
practice of some, who study nothing more then his destruction, he should fail
us, both Poets and Players would be at loss in Reputation. But this is from
our Poet again, who tells you plainly all the helps he has or desires; And let me
tell you he has made pretty merry Jigges that have pleased a many. As (le'me see)
the Antipodes, and (oh I shall never forget) Tom Hoyden of Tanton Deans. He Will
bring him hither very shortly in a new Motion, and in a new pair of slops and
new nether stocks as brisk as a Body-lowse in a new Pasture.

Mean while, if you like this, or not, why so?
You may be pleas' to clap at parting though.

FINIS.
THE CITY WIT, OR, The Woman wears the BREECHES.

A COMEDY.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Richard Marriot, and Thomas Dring, and are to be
sold at their Shops in Fleet Street, 1653.

The Prologue.
Quot quot adestis, salvete, salvetote Gentlemen,
YOu see I come unarmed among you, sine Virga aut Ferula, without Rod or
Ferular, which are the Pedants weapons. Id est, that is to say, I come not
hither to be an Instructor to any of you, that were Aquilam volare docere, aut
Delphinum natare, to teach the Ape, well learned as my self. Nor came I to
instruct the Comedians. That were for me to be Asinus inter simias, the fool
of the Company: I dare not undertake them. I am no Paedagogus nor Hypodidascalus
here. I approach not hither ad erudiendum, nec ad Corrigendum. Nay I have given
my Scholars leave to play, to get a Vacuum for my self to day, to Act a
particle here in a Play; an Actor being wanting that could bear it with port
and state enough. A Pedant is not easily imitated. Therefore in person, I for
your delight have left my School to tread the Stage. Pray Jove the terror of
my brow spoil not your mirth, for you cannot forget the fury of a Tutor, when
you have layne under the blazing Comet of his wrath, with quaeso Praeceptor te
precor da -- etc. But, let fear pass, nothing but mirth's intended.

But I had forgot my self, A Prologue should be in Ryhme, etc. therefore I
will begin again.

Kind Gentlemen, and men of gentle kind,
There is in that a figure, as you will find,
Because weeltake your ears as 'twere in Ropes,
I Will nothing speak but figures, strayns and tropes.
Quot quot adestis Salvete salvetote.
The Schoolmaster that never yet besought ye,
Is now become a suitor, that you will sit,
And exercise your Judgment with your wit,
On this our Comedy, which in bold Phrase,
The Author says has past with good applause
In former times. For it was written, when
It bore just Judgment, and the seal of Ben.
Some in this round may have both seen't, and heard,
Ere I, that bear its title, wore a Beard.
My suit is therefore that you will not look,
To find more in the Title then the Book.
My part the Pedant, though it seem a Column
Is but a Page, compared to the whole volume.
What bulk have I to bear a Scene to pass,
But by your favors multiplying Glass.
In nova fert Animus, then I Will do my best
To gain your Plaudite among the rest.
So with the salutation I first brought ye,
Quot quot adestis, salvete salvetote.
Dramatis Personae.
CRasy, a young Citizen, falling into decay. Jeremy, his Apprentice. Sarpego, a
Pedant. Sneakup, Crasyes Father in Law. Pyannet, Sneakup's Wife. Ticket two
Courtiers. Rufflit two Courtiers. Lady Ticket. Josina, Crasyes Wife.
Linsy-Wolsey, a thrifty Citizen. Toby, son to Sneakup. Bridget, Iosina's
Maid. Crack, a Boy that sings. two keeping Women.
Isabell Jone

The City Wit. OR, The woman wears the Breeches.
ACT. I.
Scene I.
A Dinner carried over the Stage in covered Dishes. Exeunt. Enter Crasy,
Jeremy. SEt forth that Table Jer.

A Table set forth with empty Mony-bags, Bills, Bonds, and Books of accounts,
etc. Jer. Will you not go in and dine, Sir?


Cra. No: I am of other diet to day.


Jer. The whole company expects you.


Cra. May they sit merry with their cheer,
while I feed on this hard meat. And wait
you within: I shall not change a trencher.

Ier. Alas my good Master.


Exit. Cra. Here are the nests, but all the He takes up the bags.
Birds are flown.
How easy a thing it is to be undone,
When credulous Man will trust his 'state to others!
Am I drawn dry? Not so much as the Lees left?
Nothing but empty Cask? have I no refuge
To fly to now? Yes, here, about a groats worth He takes up the bills and papers.
Of paper it was once. Would I had now
Greens groats-worth of wit for it. But 'twill serve
To light tobacco-pipes. Here (let me see)
Here is three hundred pound, two hundred here.
And here one hundred, and two hundred here;
Fifty; fifty; fifty; and one hundred here,
And here one hundred and fifty. Besides
A many parcells of small debts, which make
Two hundred more. I shall not live to tell it,
But put it up, and take it by the weight. He puts the Bills and Bonds into a
Bag.
O me! how heavy it is! And, doubtless, so 'twould be
At some man's heart. It troubles me a little. Enter Jeremy.
Now what news?

He takes up a scroll. Jer. My mistress, and your Mother Sir,
Entreats you to come to dinner.

Cra. These they are; My debts,
That strike me through. This bag will never pay
Any of these.

Jer. Sir, shall I say you will come?


Cra. How well it were, if any of my Creditors
Could once but dream that this were current money!

Jer. What shall I say?


Cra. Even what thou will, good Jeremy.


Jer. Alas you know, this dinner was appointed
A friendly meeting for most of your Creditors,
And many of your Debtors.

Cra. But I hope
Few of the last appear.

Jer. None but some priviledg'd Courtiers, that dare
Put in at all men's Tables. They Are all set,
Your Creditors on one side, and your Debtors
On the other; and do only stay for you.

Cra. To feed on; do they? Go. I will not come.


Jer. I fear, Sir, you will overthrow the good
That was intended you. You know this meeting
Was for the Creditors to give longer day,
As they should find your Debtors to acknowledge
The sums they owe you. Sir I should be sorry
To see you sinck, or forced to hide your head,
That looked as high, as any in the City.

Cra. Prithee go in. And if they seem to stay,
Pray 'em fall too; tell 'em I take this time
Only to order my Accounts, and that as soon
As they are full, and fit to talk, I Will come:
Good Jeremie go.

Jer. In Troth I pity him --


Exit weeping. Cra. A right good Boy thou art. I think on thee:
What must I do now? All I have is lost,
And what I have not, sought to be forced from me,
I must take nimble hold upon Occasion,
Or lie for ever in the Bankrupt ditch,
Where no man lends a hand to draw one out*
I will leap over it, or fall bravely in it,
Scorning the Bridge of Baseness, Composition,
Which does infect a City like the Plague,
And teach men Knavery, that were never born to it:
Whereby the Rope-deserving Rascal gains
Purple and Furrs, Trappings and golden Chains.
Base Composition, baser far then Want,
Then Beggary, Imprisonment, Slavery:
I scorn thee, though thou love a Tradesman dearly
And make a Chandler Lord of thousands yearly.
I will have other aid. How now! Again?

Enter Jeremy: Jer. O, Sir, you are undone.


Cra. Have thou no news, Jeremie?


Jer. Alas your Mother Sir --


Cra. Why what of her?
Is there a Plate lost, or a 'Postle-spoon
A China Dish broke, or an ancient Glass,
And stained with Wine her Damasque table-cloath?
Or is the Salt fallen toward her? What Is the matter?

Jer. Her mischievous tongue has over-thrown the good
Was meant to you.

Cra. What Good, good Jeremie?


Jer. Your Creditors were on a resolution
To do you good, and madly she opposed it,
And with a vehement voice proclaims you a Beggar;
Says, you have undone her Daughter; that no good
Is fit to be done for you: And such a storm
Of wicked breath --

Cra. She Is drunk; Is she not, Jeremie?


Jer. No Sir, it is nothing but her old disease,
The Tongue-ague, whose fit is now got up
To such a height, the Devil cannot lay it.
The learned Schoolmaster, Mr. Sarpego
Has conjured it by all his parts of speech,
His Tropes and Figures; and cannot be heard
In The furious Tempest. All your Creditors
Are gone in Rage; will take their course, they say.
Some of your Debtors stay, I think, to laugh at her.

Enter Sarpego. Sar. Now deafeness seize me. I disclaim my hearing. I defy my
audituall part. I renounce mine ears. Mistress Pyannet, a desperate Palsy is on
thy lips, and an everlasting Fever on thy Tongue?


Cra. What raging Rout has rent thy rest;
What Scold has scutch'd thy skonce:

Sar. I Will breath it to thy bolder breast,
That askst me for the nonce.
You understand or know, that here has been a Feast made, to take up a
ponderous difference between Master Sneakup your Father in Law, and your self
Mr. Crasy; and between most of your Creditors and Debitors. Food has been
eaten; Wine drunck; Talk past; Breath spent; Labor lost: For why? Mistress
Pyannet your Mother in Law, Mr. Sneakups Wife (though she will be called by
none but her own name) that woman of an eternal Tongue; that Creature of an
everlasting noise; whose perpetual talk is able to deafen a Miller; whose
discourse is more tedious then a Justices Charge; She, that will out-scold ten
carted Bawds, even when she is sober; and out-chat fifteen Midwives, though
fourteen of them be half drunk: this Shee-thing has burst all. Demosthenes
himself would give her over. Therefore hopeless Sarpego is silent.


Enter Pyannet, Sneakup, Sir Andrew Ticket, Rufflit, La. Ticket, Josina,
Linsy-Wolsy. Py. O, are you here Sir! You have spun a fair thread. Here Is much
ado, and little help. We can make bolt nor shaft, find neither head nor foot in
your business. My daughter and I may both curse the time, that ever we saw the
eyes of thee.


Cra. Sir, you have the civil virtue of Patience in you. Dear Sir hear me.


Py. He says he hears thee, and is ashamed to see thee. Have not undone our
Daughter* spent her Portion; deceived our hopes; wasted thy fortunes; undone
thy credit; proved Bankrupt?


Cra. All was but my kind heart in trusting, in trusting, Father.


Pi. Kind heart! What should Citizens do with kind hearts; or trusting in any
thing but God, and ready money?


Cra. What would you, dear Father, that I should do now?


Py. Marry depart in peace Sir. Vanish in silence Sir. I Will take my Daughter
home Sir. She shall not beg with you Sir. No marry shall thou not; no, 'deed
Duck shall thou not.


Cra. Be yet but pleased to answer me, good Sir. May not an honest man --


Py. Honest man! Who the Devil wished thee to be an honest man? Here Is my
worshipful Husband, Mr. Sneakup, that from a Grasier is come to be a Justice
of Peace: And, what, as an honest man? He grew to be able to give nine hundred
pound with my daughter; and, what, by honesty? Mr. Sneakup and I are come up
to live in the City, and here we have lain these three years; and what? for
honesty? Honesty! What should the City do with honesty; when it is enough to
undo a whole Corporation? Why are your Wares gumm'd; your Shops dark; your
Prizes writ in strange Characters? what, for honesty? Honesty? why is hard wax
called Merchants wax; and is said seldom or never to be ripped off, but it
plucks the skin of a Lordship with it? what! for honesty? Now (mortified my
Concupiscence!) Do thou think, that our Neighbor, Master Linsy-Wolsie here,
from the son of a Tripe-wife, and a Rope-maker, could aspire to be an
Aldermans Deputy; to be Worshipful Mr. Linsie-Wolsie; Venerable Mr.
Linsie-wolsie; to wear Satin sleeves, and whip Beggars? And, what? By
honesty? Have we bought an Office, here, for our towardly and gracious son and
heir here, young Mr. Sneakup --


Tob. Yes forsooth Mother.


Py. And made him a Courtier, in hope of his honesty? Nay, (once for all) Did
we marry our Daughter, here, to thee; racked our Purses to pay Portion; left
Country housekeeping to save charges, in hope either of thine, or her honesty?
No, we looked, that thy Warehouse should have eaten up Castles, and that for
thy narrow Walk in a Jewellers shop, a whole Country should not have sufficed
thee.


Cra. If my uncunning Disposition be my only vice, then Father --


Py. Nay, and thou have been married three years to my Daughter, and have not
got her with Child yet! How do answer that? For a woman to be married to a
fruitful Fool, there is some bearing with him yet. (I know it by my self) but
a dry barren Fool! How do thou satisfy that?


Cra. It may be defect in your Daughter, as probable as in me.


Py. O impudent varlet! Defect in my Daughter? O horrible indignity! Defect in
my Daughter? Nay, it is well known, before ever thou saw her, there was no
defect in my Daughter.


Cra. Well: If to be honest, be to be a fool, my utmost Ambition is a Coxcomb.
Sir, I crave your farewell.


Py. Marry Sir, and have it with all his heart. My Husband is a man of few
words, and has committed his tongue to me: And I hope I shall use it to his
Worship. Fare you well Sir.


Tic. Thanks for your cheer and full bounty of Entertainment, good Mr. Sneakup.


Py. He rather thanks you for your patience, and kind visitation, good Sir
Andrew Ticket. Yes indeed forsooth does he.


La. Tic. I take my leave Sir, too.


Sneak. Good Madame --


Py. Uds so! there is a trick! you must talk, must you? And your Wife in
presence, must you? As if I could not have said, good Madame. Good Madame! Do
you see how it becomes you?


La. Tic. Good Mistress Sneakup*


Py. Good Madame, I beseech your Ladyship to excuse our deficiency of
Entertainment. Though ou^ power be not to our wish, yet we wish that our Power
were to your Worth, which merrits better service --


La. Tic. Pardon me.


Py. Then our rudeness --


La. Tic. You wrong your self.


Py. Can tender, or possibly express by --


La. Tic. I beseech you forsooth --


Py. Our best labor, or utmost devoire. Yes I protest sweet Madame. I beseech
you, as you pass by in Coach sometimes, vouchsafe to see me; and, if I come to
Court, I will presume to visit your Ladyship, and your worthy Knight, Good Sir
Andrew! And I pray you Madame, how does your Monckey, your Parrot, and
Parraquitoes? I pray commend me to 'em, and to all your little ones. Fare you
well, sweet Creature.


Exit. Ruff. We Will leave you to take private farewell of your Wife, Mr. Crasie.


Tob. We Will meet you at your Horse, brother.


Exeunt omnes, praeter Crasy, Josina. Jos. Loved, my dear heart, my sweetest,
my very being, will you needs take your journey? I shall fall before your
return into a Consumption. If you die but conceive what your departure will
bring upon me, I know (my sweet) nay I do know -- but go your ways; strike my
finger into mine eye: It Is not the first true tear a married woman has shed.


Cra. Why you hear the noise of that woman of Sound, your Mother. I must
travel down, or not keep up. Yet --


Jos. Nay, go I beseech you; you shall never say, I undid you. Go I pray: But
never look to see me my own woman again. How long will you stay forth?


Cra. A fortnight at the least; and a month at the most.


Jos. Well, a fortnight at the least. Never woman took a more heavy departure.
Kiss me. Farewell. Kiss me again. I pray does your Horse amble, or trot? Do
not ride post as you come home, I pray. Kiss me once more. Farewell.

Exit Cra. Hay hoe! How I do gape.


Enter Bridget, Jeremy. Bri. What Is a clock Bridget.


Jos. Past three forsooth.


Jos. It Is past sleeping time then, Bridget.


Bri. Nothing is past to those, that have a mind and means.


Jos. That's true and tried. Go lay my Pillow Bridget. Exit Brid.
Lord, what a thing a woman is in her Husbands absence!
Wast thou ever in love, Jeremy?

Jer. Who I forsooth? No forsooth.


Jos. I forsooth, and no forsooth? then I perceive you are forsooth. But I
advise you to take head, how you level your Affection toward me: I am your
Mistress; And I hope you never heard of any Apprentice was so bold with his
Mistress.


Jer. No indeed forsooth. I should be sorry there should be any such.


Jos. Nay, be not sorry neither Jeremy. Is thy Master gone? Look. A pretty
youth, this same Jeremy! And is come of a good Race. I have heard my Mother
say, his Father was a Ferretter --


Enter Jeremy. Jer. He is gone forsooth.


Jos. Come hither Jeremy. Do thou see this Handkerchief?


Jer. Yes forsooth.


Jos. I vowed this Handkerchief should never touch any bodies face, but such a
one, as I would entreat to lie with me.


Jer. Indeed forsooth!


Jos. Come hither Jeremy. There Is a spot o'thy Cheek, let me wipe it off.


Jer. O Lord forsooth. I Will go wash it.


Exit Jos. Jos. Heaven made this Boy of a very honest Appetite, sober
Ignorance, and modest Understanding. My old Grandmothers Latin is verified
upon him; Ars non habet Inimicum praeter Ignorantem. Ignorance is woman's
greatest Enemy. Who Is within? Bridget.


Enter Bridget. Bri. Here forsooth.


Jos. Go your ways to Mistress Parmisan, the Cheesmongers Wife in old
Fishstreet, and commend me to her; and entreat her to pray Mistress
Collifloore the Hearb-woman in the Old Change, that she will desire Mistress
Piccadell in Bow-lane, in any hand to beseech the good old dry Nurse mother, Et
cetera, she knows where, to provide me an honest, handsome, secret young man;
that can write, and read written hand. Take your errand with you; that can
write and read written hand.


Bri. I warrant you forsooth.


Exit. Jos. So, now will I meditate, take a nap, and dream out a few fancies.


ACT I. Seen II.
Enter Crasy, booted. Ticket, Rufflit, Tobias Sarpego, Linsy woolsy: Tic. WE
take our leaves Mr. Crasy, and wish good Journey to you.


Ruff. Farewell good Mr. Crasy.


Tob. Adiue Brother.


Sar. Iterum iterumque vale.


Lin. Heartily Godbuy, good Mr. Crasy.


Cra. Nay but Gentlemen: A little of your patience you all know your own Debts,
and my almost impudent necessiries, satisfy me, that J may discharge others.
Will you suffer me to sink under my Freenes? shall my goodness, and ready
Piety undo me? Sir Andrew Ticket, you are a professed Courtier, and should have
a ^ender sense of honor. This is your day of payment for two hundred pound.


Tic. Blood of Bacchus, it is true, it is my day, what then? Do take me for a
Citizen, that thou think I Will keep my day? No, thou'st find that I am a
Courtier, let my day keep me and 'twill. But do hear? Come to the Court. J
will not say what I will do for thee. But come to the Court. I ow the two
hundred pounds: I Will not deny't, if thou ask seven years hence for it, farewell.
I say no more, but come to the Court, and see if I will know thee.


Cra. O, Sir, now you are in favor, you will know no body.


Tic. True: it is just. Why should we, when we are in favor know any body; when,
if we be in disgrace, no body will know us? Farewell honest Tradesman.


Exit. Sar. That is Synonima for a fool. An ironicall Epithet, upon my
Facunditie.


Cra. O Master Sarpego! I know you will satisfy your own driblet of ten pound,
I lent you out of my Purse.


Sar. Diogenes Laertius on a certain time, demanding of Cornelius Tacitus an
Areopagit of Syracusa; what was the most Commodious and expeditest method to
kill the Itch, answered --


Cra. Answer me my monyes I beseech you.


Sar. Peremptorily, Careo Supinis; I want money. I confess, some driblets are
in the Debet. But, me thinks, that you being a Man of Wit, Brain, Forecast and
Forehead, should not be so easy, (I will not say foolish, for that were a
figure) as to lend a Philosopher money, that cries, when he is naked, Omnia mea
mecum porto. Well Sir, J shall ever live to wish, that your own Lantern may
be your direction; and that, where ever you travel, the Cornu copia of
Abundance may accompany you. Yes sure shall I. Vive valeque.


Exit. Tob. Why look you Brother, It was thought, that I had a tender
Pericranion; or, in direct Phrase, that I was an unthristy fool. Signior no:
you shall now find, that I cannot only keep mine own, but other men's. It is
rightly said, He that is poor in Appetite, may quickly be rich in Purse. Desire
little; covet little; no not your own: And you shall have enough.


Cra. Enough?


Tob. Yes Brother, little enough. I confess I am your Debtor for the loan of
some hundred Marks. Now you have need: who has not? you have need to have it. I
have need to pay it. Here Is need of all hands. But Brother, you shall be no
looser by me. Purchase Wit; Get wit (look you) wit. And Brother, if you come to
the Court, now my Mother and my Father have bought me an Office there, so you
will bring my Sister with you, I will make the best show of you that I can. It
may chance to set you up again, Brother; it is many an honest man's fortune, to
rise by a good Wife. Farewell sweet Brother. Prithee grow rich again; and
wear good Clothes, that we may keep our Acquaintance still. Farewell, dear
Brother. Exit.


Cra. Mr. Rufflit --


Ruff. What, does thy fist gape for money from me?


Cra. I hope it is not the fashion, for a Gallant of fashion, to break for so
small a Portion as the sum of an hundred Angels.


Ruff. For a Gallant of fashion to break, for a Gallant of fashion? Do thou
know what a Gallant of fashion is? I Will tell thee. It is a thing that but once
in three Months has money in his Purse; A creature made up of Promise and
Protestation: A thing that fowls other men's Napkins: towseth other Men's
Sheets, flatters all he fears, contemns all he needs not, sterves all that
serve him, and undoes all that trust him. Do ask me money, as I am a Gallant
of fashion, I do thee Courtesy, I beat thee not.


Cra. I lent it you on your single word.


Ruff. It Is pity but thou should loose thy Freedom for it: you Tradesmen
have a good Order in your City, Not to lend a Gentleman money without a
Citizen bound with him: But you forsooth scorn Orders! By this light, it is
pity thou loosest not thy Freedom for it. Well, when I am flush, thou shall
feel from me, Farewell. Prithee learn to have some wit. A handsome straight
young fellow, grown into a pretty Bear, with a proper bodyed Woman to his
Wife, and cannot bear a Brain! Farewell. Do hear? Be ruled by me, Get
money, do, Get money and keep it; would thrive? Be rather a knave then a
Fool. How much do say I ow thee?


Cra. Fifty pound.


Ruff. Thou art in my Debt. I have given the Counsel worth threeskore,
Dog-cheap, well I Will rent the odd money.

Exit.
Lin. Strange mad fellows these same, Mr. Crasie, me thinks to deal withal.


Cra. You are right Mr. Linsie wolsie* I would my Genius had directed me, to
deal always with such honest neighbourly men as your self. I hope you will
not deny me a Courtesy.


Lins. Not I, I protest, what is it?


Cra. You took once a Jewel of me, which you sold for thirty pound, for which
I have your Bond for sixty, at your day of marriage. If you will now, because I
want present money, give me but twenty pound, I Will acquit you.


Lin. My good friend Mr. Crasie, I have no tricks and Jerks to come over you,
as the witty Gentleman had ere while: But I know a plain bargain is a plain
bargain: and wit is never good till it be bought. If twenty pound will
pleasure you, upon good security I will procure it you. A hundred if you
please, do you mark Mr. Crasie? On good security. Otherwise you must pardon me,
Mr. Crasie. I am a poor Tradesman Mr. Crasie, keep both a Linen and a VVollen
Drapers shop, Mr. Crasie, according to my name, Mr. Crasie, and would be loath
to lend my money, Mr. Crasie, to be laughed at among my Neighbors, Mr. Crasie,
as you are Mr. Crasie. And so fare you well, Mr. Crasie.


Exit. Cra. Is this the end of unsuspicious Freeness?
Are open hands of Cheerful Piety,
A helpful bounty, and most easy Goodness,
Re^arded thus?
Is, to be honest, termed to be a fool?
Respect it Heaven. Bear up still merry heart.
Droop not: But scorn the worlds unjust despising.
Who through Goodness sinks, his falls his Rising.
Enter Jeremy. O Master, Master, upon my knowledge, my Mistres is forced since
your departure to be


Cra. What Jeremy?


Ier. Honest Sir. Get up your Debts as fast as you can abroad: For on my
understanding (which great Jove knows is but little) she will take up more
then your due at home easily.


Cra. Boy. Did never observe at the Court gate, that the Lord was no sooner
off from his Horseback but the Lackey got up into the Saddle and rode home?


Jer. Yes Sir, it is common.


Cra. I scorn not my Betters Fortune. And what is not my sin, shall never be
my shame.


Jer. In Troth I was feign to make my self an Ass, or else I had been tempted
to have been a knave.


Cra. Boy, thou art now my Prentice. From hence be free. Poverty shall serve it
self. Yet do one thing for me.


Jer. If it be in the power of my poor Sconce.


Car. If ever it be in thy possible ability, wrong all Men, use thy wit, to
abuse all things, that have but sense of wrong: For without mercy, all men
have injured thy mistrustles Master, Milk'd my thoughts from my heart, and
money from my Purse, and, last, laughed at my Credulity. Cheat, chosen, live by
thy Wits: It Is most manly, therefore most noble. Horses get their living by
their Backs, Oxen by their necks, Swine and Women by their Flesh, Only man by
his Brain. In brief be a knave and prosper: For honesty has beggerd me.


Ier. Farewell Master. And if I put tricks upon some of them, let the end of
the Comedy demonstrate.


Exit. Cra. I am resolved I will revenge. I never provoked my brain yet. But
now if I clap not fire in the tails of some of these Samsons Foxes -- seems my
defect of Fortune want of wit? Noe.

The sense of our slight sports confessed shall have,
That any may be rich, will be a knave.

ACT. II.
Scene I.
Sarpego, Tobias. A Purse Sar. EGregious and most great of Expectation, my
right dignified and truly Cice^onian Pupil, now that I have brought you into
the Amoene fields with my ready thankfulness for the loan of this ten pound,
I commit you to the grace of Court.


Tob. I shall expect that money shortly. Care to send it; For I purchased my
place at a racked recompense.


Sar. Your Sarpego is no slipperie Companion. You know I am to marry, and this
money shall provide me Complements.

Sis bonus o faelixque tuis. I pede fausto.
Exit Tob. Enter Crasy like a lame Soldier. Cra. Beloved of Phoebus, Minion of
the Muses, dear Water Bayley of Helicon, let it not be distasteful to thy
Divine ears, to receive the humble Petition of a poor Creature, made
miserable by the policy of Providence. That thy rare and absolute Mu^^ficence
might supply what fortune had l^st defective: I kiss thy learned toes.


Sar. I tell thee, by the Axioms of the Peripateticall Aristotle, thou art a
Monster. My reward shall be therefore like thy self, monstrously lame. This is
a figure in Eloquution called Apoxegesis.


Cra. I am not fed with Figures Sir.


Sar. You are an idle vagabond, and lie in wait for the blood of the learned.
Labor, and live.


Cra. Right eloquent and well-phrased Sir, my education has been liberal. I
sometimes fed my flock on horned Parnassus: But my wants forced me to my Sword.


He shows his blade half way. Sar. You did peradventure sip on the top of
Science, Primoribus labijs, or so, but did not convert it in Succum and
sanguinem.


Cra. That I may ever remain a true man -- Extend.

He draws. The Sun, Moon and the seven Planets are my invoked witnesses, I
should be grieved, that necessity should make me grow violent on so adored,
adorned Grammatical Disciplinary -- Be gracious in Contribution -- Sir --


Sar. J will give thee an infinite treasure. Sis integer vitae, scelerisque
purus. Vale poor Rogue.


Cra. Sir, this Sword can bite -- But, J know you had rather give it freely out
of your own Proclivitie.


Sar. Yes I protest, as I am Erudite. Here dreadful Mavortian, the poor price
of a Dinner.


Car. If I might in modesty importune the poor price of a Supper too.


Sar. I do speak it in the Optative Mood, I do wish it lay in the model of my
Fortune to give harbor to your shaken state, yet receive this with appeased
clutch.


Cra. If I might not seem audacious even to impudence, I poor Freshman in
Literature, would implore of your well-salted, and best seasoned virtue, some
larger allowance to supply my defects of Raiment, Books, and other necessaries:
which magnificence shall ever entitle you, my most bounteous Macaenas. Be
induced to it Sir.


Flourish Sword over him. Sar: Yes, yes, yes, that you may know how dear you
are to me; Know this is more then usual largess -- for non omnibus dormio --
There Is a Figure too.


Cra. O yes Sir, I understand this Figure too very well. Now dear Mecenas, let
me implore a Purse to enclose these Monyes in -- Nay if you impart not with a
cheerful forhead, Sir


Sword again. Sar. Vae misero mihi! sweet Purse adieu. Iterum iterumque vale.


Cra. May you be importuned to do it, Sir.


Sword. Sar. You shall have it instantly. I will only deprome, or take out a
little stuffing first.


Cra. It Is no matter. As it is, As it is, good Sir, as it is. Jle accept it as
it is. Most fragrant-phrased Master, suffer thy self ^o be entreated. Do --


Sword. Sar. You have most powerfully persuaded: Take it.


Cra. Most exorbitantly bounteous Mecenas, you have given me all this, have you
not?


Sar. Yes, yes, and you have taken all that, have you not?


Cra. Yes, yes, but as your gift. Jove bless thy brows, and make clear thy
Phisnomy. Vale. Your learned Worship stincks.


Sar. Now Barbarism, Incongruity, and false Orthography shame thee; The curse
of Priscian take thee. All the parts of speech defy thee. All the
Interjections of sorrow, as Heu hei* of Shunning, as Apage; of Disdaining, as
Hem vah; of Scorning, as Hui; of Exclaiming, as Proh Deum atque hominum fidem
take thee. My dear Pupils lendings have thou lewdly licked away: And
sorrowful Sarpego is licked dry. There Is a figure left yet! But o thou
Castalion Traitor, Pick-purse of Parnassus, and Hangman of Helicon: Dives
thirst in thy Throat; Ixions wheel on thy back; Tantalus hunger in thy guts;
and Sisyphus stone in thy Bladder.


Crasie falls back. Exit. Cra. O fearful curse! Well; I hay given my first
pinch, and a little scratched my Goat-bearded Grammarian, that Broke jests on
my uncunning easiness. But he with the rest shall feel, that modest Simplicity
is not always a defect of wit, but will: What my willing honesty has seemed
to loose, my affected deceits shall recover. I Will rid 'em one after another,
like Guts, till they shall stink worse then Jews.

And they shall find with most ashamed eyes,
The honest Breast lives only rich and wise.

Exit. ACT. II. Scene 2.
Josina, Bridget. JOs. Bridget.


Bri. Here forsooth.


Jos. Bridget, I say.


Bri. Here, Lady.


Jos. That Is comfortably spoken! Nay blush not:
We women can never have too much given us. And
Madame* Josina would sound well.

Bri. Yes indeed, Madame Josina Crasie.


Jos. No; not Crasie; hang Crasie: Crasie is my Husbands name. I wonder why
Women must be called by their Husbands names, I.


Bri. O, they must forsooth.


Ios. And why not men by their Wives?


Bri. Marry forsooth, because that Men, when they marry, become but half men:
And the other half goes to their Wives. And therefore she is called Woman;
where before she was called but Maid.


Ios. Is a married Man but half a Man? what is his other half then?


Bri. Truly, oftentimes, Beast. Which part the wife gives to boot, in exchange
of her name. One knocks.


Ios. Hark, some body knocks; go see. What should any body knock at my Garden
door for? I do not use to be visited in my Garden.


Bri. Yonder Is a Gentleman craves admittance to converse with you.


Ios. I Will converse with no Gentleman. What have I to do with Gentlemen?


Bri. A fair-spoken, comely, modest Gentleman he is.


Ios. Is he so? I Will speak with no modest Gentleman* You were best be his Bawd.
But are you sure he is a true Gentleman? does he wear clean Linen, and lack
Money?


Bri. Here he comes forsooth.


Enter Crasy, like a Physician. Ios. He is very confident, and forward, me
thinks.


Cra. Exquisite; very Elixir of Beauty, vouchsafe to receive the tender of my
Faith to you; which I protest is zealously devoted to your particular service.


Ios. You may speak louder Sir: for I assure you, my Maid is very thick of
hearing, and exceeding weak sighted.


Cra. Then, Lady, let it be spoken in bold phrase, I love you.


Ios. I thank you Sir. How should I style you, pray?


Cra. My name is Pulse-feel: A poor Doctor of Physic, that wears three-pile
velvet in his Cap; has paid a quarters rent of his house aforehand; and as
meanly as he stands here, was made Doctor beyond the Seas. I vow (as I am right
Worshipful) the taking of my Degree cost me twelve French crowns, and five and
thirty pound of salt Butter in upper Germany. I can make your beauty, and
preserve it; Rectify your Body, and maintain it; perfume your skin; tinct your
hair; enliven your Eye; Heighten your Appetite. As for Gellies, Dentifrices,
Diets, Mineral Fucusses, Pomatums, Fumes, Italian Masks to sleep in, either to
moysten, or dry the Superficies of your face; paugh, Gallen was a Goose, and
Paracelsus a Patch to Doctor Pulse-feel* Make me then happy, dear sweeting, in
your private ^avours: The which I vow with as much secrefie, constancy and
Resolution, to preserve, as you, with Bounty, sweetness and Freenes shall
impart.


Jos. I protest you speak very far within me; I respect you most
affectionatly.


Cra. Then I Will attend you at your Chamber: where the best pleasure, youth,
Cupid can minister shall entertain you.


Ios. Entertain me with pleasure? what pleasure I pray you?


Cra. Nothing but kiss you Lady, and so forth.


Ios. Well, for kissing and so forth, I care not; But look for no dishonesty at
my hands, I charge you.


Cra. I will be provident.


Ios. And honest, I beseech you: And secret, and resolute, I advise you.


Cra. Good.


Ios. And very chaste I command you. But a kiss, and so forth.


Cra. I understand you. This be my pledge of faith.


Kiss. Ios. And this of mine. -- The thought of me rest with you. And hear
you Doctor; I prithee procure me some young Fellow, that can write: For I am so
troubled with Letters, that I neither read nor answer --


Cra. Rely upon me. I can fit you rarely. I know a well qualified fellow, that
danceth rarely, plays on diverse Instruments, and withal is close.


Ios. I marry, Close! Pray let me have him. Kiss and adieu.


Exit. Cra. I will maintain it. He only, that knows it, permits, and procures
it, is truly a Cuckold. Some fellow would be divorced now. Crasie, speak; wilt
be divorced? why, what and I were? why then thou art an Ass, Crasie. Why Sir?
why Sir! why prithee tell me, what would thy Divorce hurt her? It would but
give her more liberty. She should have bounteous Customers; Gallants, that
would hoist her tires, bestow deep on her. And she should be paid for it. You
speak somewhat to the matter Sir. Nay Crasie, believe it, though she be not a
very modest woman for a Wife, thou may force her to be a reasonable private
wench for a Whore. Say you so? Birlady, and I Will take your Counsel. It Is a
pretty Drabb. I know not where to compass such another? troth Sir, I Will follow
your advice.

And, if my hopes prove not extremely ill,
I Will keep her flesh chaste, though against her will.

Enter Crack singing. Crac. He took her by the middle so small
And laid her on the Plain:
And when he had his will on her,
He took her up again.
And what was she then the worse for wearing?
Can you tell Mr. Doctor?

Cras. What art thou?


Crac: One Sir (I dare tell you in private) that can conduct you to a more
lovely Creature, then her you last courted.


Cras. A young Pimpe, a very sucking-pig Pimpe! What an Age is this, when
children play at such great game! So young, so forward!


Crac. Sings. The young and the old mun to it, mun to it,
The young and the old mun to it;
The young ones will learn to do it, to do it,
And the Oldforget not to do it.

Cras. This Infant piece of Impudence ama^es me. Prithee what art thou? or whom
do thou serve, or broke for.


Crac. As delicate a piece of Woman-flesh as ever Mortal laid lip to. O she is
all Venus! And, to come close to you, she wants a Physician. You are one I
take it: I am a fool else.


Cras. I am caught? This habit will betray me. What is she, I say.


Crac. Sings. O she is, she is a matchless piece,
Though all the world may woo her;
Nor golden shower, nor golden fleece,
Is price enough to do her.

Cras. For what wants she a Physician?


Crac. For what you please, when you come to her. Sir, upon my life, she is
free from any Disease, but the Counterfeits. Will you know all Sir? she wants a
wi^e man's counsel to assist her in getting a Husband. I take hold of you for
that wise man, she relyes upon my Election. Will you go Sir? It Is in an
exceeding civil house; a precise one, indeed. Know you not Mr. Linsey Woolsey?


Cras. Not at his house?


Crac. Pardon me Sir. At his very house. All the wise wenches in the Town will
thwack to such Sanctuaries, when the times are troublesome, and Troopers trace
the streets in terror.


Cras. Prithee, what call'st thy Mistres?


Crac. There she lies Sir, by the name of Mistress Tryman; a rich young
Cornish Widow; though she was borne in Clearken-well; and was never half a
days Journey from Bride well in her life. Her Father was a Pinn-maker -- Sings.

Along along, where the Gallants throng
By twenties, away the Widow to carry:
But let them tarry: For she will carry
Twenty, before that one she will Marry.
Will you along Sir?


Cras. It Is but a weak engagement: yet I Will go;
Needless are fears, where Fortunes are so low.

Exeunt* ACT II. Scene II.
Enter Ticket and Rufflit. Tic. A Widow! what is she? or of whence?


Ruff. A lusty young wench, they say: A Cornish Girl; able to wrestle down
stronger Chines then any of ours.


Tic. But how is she purs'd, Jack? Is she strong that way?


Ruff. Pretty well for a younger Brother; worth 7 or 8 thousand pound.


Tic. How man!


Ruff. You are a married man, and cannot Rival me* I would not else be so open
to you.


Tic. I swear I Will help thee all I can. How did find her out?


Ruff. I have intelligence, that never fails me, she came to town neither but
very lately; and lodged at Mr. Wolseys.


Tic. Who, Linsy wolsie, the Hermaphroditicall Draper! That Is a precious
No^t-headed Rascal. He Will go near to aim at her himself.


Ruff. Like enough. He may aim at her: But she will be hit by none but a
Gentleman, that I hear (...) Oh she has a fierce Ambition to a Ladyship,
though her late Husband was a Tanner.


Tic. A Tanner, well Jack, cake heed how thou ventur^st on her to make her a
Gentlewoman: She will kill ^hee at her Husbands occupation before thou wile be
able to make her Hide gentle. Thou w^^^ find a tough piece of Curriers work on
her. Look who here is.


Enter Toby, and Linsey wolsie. Lin. Truly* Mr. Toby Sneakup, me thinks I find
an alteration in my self already.


Tob. Nay, I told you; would you but give your Mind to it, you would be a
Gentleman quickly.


Tic. How Is this? let us stand aside a^^tle.


Ruff. Sure, he is about to turn himself into a Gentleman to win to the
Widow!


Tic. And what a Tutor he has picked out to instruct him!


Lin. Me thinks I love the name of a Gentleman a great deal better then I did.


Tob. But could you find in your heart to lend a Gentleman a score of Angels,
Mr. Wolsey, on his word?


Lin. Uhm -- I is not gone so far upon me yet.


Tob. Oh, but it m^st though, I know it. A Citizen can never be a Gentleman,
till he has lent all, or almost all his money to Gentlemen. What a while it was
ere the rich Joyners son was a Gentleman? when I my self was a Gentleman
first, my money did so burn in my Pockets, that it cost me all that ever I had,
or could borrow, or steal from my Mother.


Lin. But Mr. Toby, a man may be a Country Gentleman, and keep his money, may
he not?


Tob. You see Sir, This Widow is removed from the Country into the City, to
avoid the multiplicity of Country Gentlemen that were here ^uitors. Nay you
must be a City Gallant; or a Courtier.


Lin. I see no Courtiers, but are more apt to borrow, then to ^end.


Tob. I, those that were born, or bred Courtiers I grant you, But to come to it
at your years --


Lin. I can the sooner learn. Your Courtier Sir, I pray.


Tob. I Will tell you in a breife character was taught me. Speak nothing that you
mean, perform nothing that you promise, pay nothing that you owe, flatter all
above you, scorn all beneath you, deprave all in private, praise all in
public; keep no truth in your mouth, no faith in your heart; no health in
your bones, no freindship in your mind, no modesty in your eyes, no Religion in
your conscience; but especially, no Money in your Purse.


Lin. O that Article spoils all.


Tob. If you do, take heed of spending it on any thing but Panders, Puncks, and
Fiddlers; for that were most unfashionable.


Lin. I thank you Sir, for your Courtly and Gentlemanlike instructions, and
wish you grace to follow them: I have seen too fearful an example lately in my
neighbor Crasy, whose steps I list not trace; nor lend my Money to be laughed
at among my Neighbors. Fare you well Sir. --


Tob. Ha ha ha.


Ruff. Mr. Wolsie! Well met. How does your fair Guest at home, Mrs. Tryman?


Ticket talks aside with Toby. Lin. How should he come to the knowledge of her?
Some of these Gallants will snatch her up, if I prevent not speedily.


Ruff. Why speak you not Mr. Wolsie? How does the Widow?


Lin. Truly not well Sir. Whether it be weariness of her journey, change of
air, or diet, or what I know not; something has distemperd her.


Ruff. Or Love, perhaps of you Mr. Wolsie.


Lin. Me? Alas, I look like no such Gentleman.


Ruff. You may in a short time.

They two go aside. Hark hither Mr. Wolsie.


Tic. We overheard you man: And I guest as much before.


Tob. It Is very true Sir, she is worth nine thousand pound: But marry she will
not'but a Gentleman: And I think I have beat him off o'th condition, I have put
him off of that scent for ever, with a false character, Heaven and the Court
forgive me.


Tic. Thou have in troth Boy: And on purpose to have her thy self, I perceive
it.


Tob. He does not. He Is an Ass.


Tic. Well, if I were a Bachelor, I should envy thy wit, and thy fortune. Is
she very handsome?


Tob. So so: You shall see we will make a shift with her.


Ruff. Mr. Wolsie, I would you had her with all my heart; you shall not want my
good word and best wishes.


Lin. Do you speak this in earnest Sir, or as you are a Courtier:


Ruff. In earnest I, and as I am a Gentleman.


Lin. Then in earnest, and as I am an honest man, I do not believe you. Mr.
Toby Sneakup has told me what Gentlemen and Courtiers are, too lately.


Ruff. Mr. Sneakup* well met.


Tob. Good Mr. Rufflit.


Enter Crack singing. Now fair Mayds lay down my B^d,
And draw the Curtains round:
Tell the World that I am dead,
And who has given the wound,
Ah me poor Soul!
Alack for love I dye,
Then to the Sexton hie,
And cause the Bell to towle.
Crac. O here he is! Mr. Wolsie, indeed my Master Wolsie, if ever you will see
my Mistres your Sweetheart alive, you must go home presently.


Lin. My Sweetheart!


Crac. I think she is; and that in death she will be so. I speak by what she
says, and others think.


Tob. It Is the Widows Boy,


Lin. Is she sicker then she was.


Crac. O she is even speechless, and calls for you exceedingly. I fetched a
Doctor to her, and he can do her no good. Master Sarpego has made her Will and
all.


Lin. Has she given me any thing?


Crac. Quickly go and see Sir, you will come too late else, I am going to get
the Bell to towle for her.


Lin. Fare ye well Gentlemen.


Tob. Tic. Ruff. Nay, we will along with you.


Crac. Sing.

Exeunt. Did never truer heart
Out of the World depart,
Or cause the Bell to towle.

Exit. ACT. III.
Scene I.
Enter in the Tryman, attended by Isabell, Jone, Crasy, with an Vrinall. Isa.
LOok up Mistres.

Jo. Take a good heart, the worst is past, fear not.


Try. Ah, ah, ah.


Isa. Reach the Bottle again of Doctor Stephens water.


Cra. No no, apply more warm clothes to her stomach, there the matter lies
which sends this distemperature into her brain. Be of good cheer Gentlewoman.


Try. Is Mr Wolsie there?


Isa. Nothing but Mr. Wolsie ever in her mouth.


Jo. Pray Sir, how do you like her? I am much afraid of her.


Cras. Let me see, to night it will be full Moon. And she escape the turning of
the next Tide, I will give her a gentle Vomit in the morning, that shall ease
her stomach of this conflux of venomous humors, and make her able to sit a
hunting Nag within this sennight.


Jo. A rare man sure. And, I warrant, well seen in a Woman*


Try. Uh, uh, uh, uh.


Cough and spit. Cras. Well said, spit out gently, strain not your self too
hard.


Try. Agh -- fagh.


Cras. It Is very well done. La'you. Her color begins to come. I Will lay all my
skill to a mess of Tewksbury Mustard, she sneezes thrice within these three
hours --


Enter Linsy-wolsie. Lin. Good Sir want nothing, that your skill shall approve
necessary in this time of need. Good Wives and kind Neighbors, I thank you
for your cares.


Try. Is Mr. Wolsie there?


Isa. She does nothing but call for you Sir, pray speak to her.


Try. Where Is Mr. Wolsie.


Lin. Here Lady. How do you?


Try. Then I am even well me thinks -- agh -- agh --


Lin. She Is very far gone I fear, how do you find her disease Sir?


Cras. Dangerous enough Sir. For she is sicker in mind then in body. For I
find most plainly the effects of a deep melancholy, fallen through her
distemperature of passion upon her Liver; much disordering, and withal wasting
the vitals, leaving scarce matter for Physic to work on. So that her mind
receiving the first hurt, must receive the first cure.


Try. Agh agh ah -- pagh fagh --


Cough up in a Basin Cras. So so: Strain not your self too hard. No hurt; so
so.

Here Is melancholy and choler both in plenty.


Jo. He speaks with great reason, me thinks, and to the purpose, I would I
understood him.


Cras. Do you not know* Sir, any that has offended her by open injury, or
unkindnesse?


Lin. Alas Sir, no such thing could happen since her coming hither.


Cras. Then, on my life, it is Love that afflicts her.


Try. Oh oh uh oh --


Cras. I have touched her to the quick. I have found her disease, and that you
may prove the abler Doctor in this extremity.


Lin. Who I? Alas I believe no such matter.


Try. Mr. Wolsie, Mr. Wolsie.


Cras. Here he is Lady. Pray speak your mind to him. Must I pull you to her?
Here he is. What do you say to him? Pray speak.


Try. Oh no, no no no --


Cras. She has something troubles her that concerns only you. Pray take her
by the hand, do as I entreat you. Lady we will go, and leave you in private
awhile, if you please.


Try. Pray do. O but do not, pray do not.


Cras. Do you perceive nothing in this passion of hers?

How does she feel your hand?


Lin. O, she does so quiddle it, shake it, and gripe it!


Cras. You are then the man Sir, the happy man. For she shall recover suddenly.


Lin. Who I? Alack a day.


Try. What will you have me dye intestate. Is not my Will made, as I directed?


Io. Where are you Mr. Sarpego, with the Will.


Enter Sarpego, Ticket, Rufflit, Toby. Sar. Ad manum. Sweet Buds of Generosity,
forbear you may Admirare, at the abundance here specified: But not find a
Legacy bequeathed among you


A Will. Tic. We expect nothing.


Ruff. I only wish your health, Lady; and that it may, or might have been my
happiness to sue to you for Love; as I do now to the highest power for Life.


Tob. Would I were married to her, as she is; and twere but for an hour, I
cared not. Had my mother been but acquainted with her, before she fell sick,
here had been a match!


Sar. O Dij immortales! A rich Widow shall have Suitors on her Deathbed.


Try. Good Sir, It is too late to speak of these things. I only crave and wish
your prayers in your absence: This place can yield no pleasure to you I know.
Mr. Wolsey, pray your hand again: I could be even content to live me thinks,
if I had but such a man as you to my Huh, uh, uh, uh. --


To Ruff. She Coughes. Cras. By your leave. Pray by your leave. Help Women.
Bear up her Body a little. Bow it forwards. So, speak to her, Sr. Good Lady
drink of this Cordyal.


She drinckes. Lin. How do you now forsooth?


Cras. What now she is drinking -- Now speak Sir, you or no man must do her
good.


Lin. How do you forsooth?


Cras. Well said Sir, speak cheerfully to her.


Lin. How dee do? how dee do, Mistress Tryman How is it now, ha?


Tic. Very comfortably spoken!


Ruff. I, was it not?


Lin. Alas she cannot speak. I Will call my Neighbor Mistres Sneakup. If any
body can make her speak, it is she.


Tob. I Will call my Mother for you. She will make her speak, if she have but a
word left in her belly -- Mass here she comes.


Enter Pyannet and Iosina. Py. How comes it Mr. Wolsey, that you have a
Gentlewoman sick in your house, and not send for me? Let me feel her hand.
Alas she is shrewdly distempered. When had she a stool Sir, Prithee
Daughter step home to my Closet, and bring the Vial of -- my own Water, which
stands next to my blew Velvet Cabinet.


Ios. That Is my Doctor was with me to day


Exit. Py. She Is a young Gentlewoman; may have many Children yet, let me note
her eyes: I find nothing there. When did you see her water Mr. Doctor?


Cras. What Devil sent this fury among us?


Py. In troth I beshrew you, Mr. Wolsey, you sent not for me, but I hope I come
not too late. Pluck up a Women's heart, you shall find a good Neighbor of me.


Try. I will thank you in my Will. I shall not live to thank you otherwise.


Py. Alas talk not of your will. You shall have time enough to think of that
many years hence.


Cras. I tell her so, Lady, yet she calls for it still.


Try. Pray let me see it, that I may sign it. Vh Vh --


Py. Lord how my Daughter stays. Good Sir Andrew Ticket! worthy Mr. Rufflit!
My Son Tobias is highly honored in your noble Acquaintance, and Courtly
conversation.


Tic. We rather hold our selves dignified, in being his indear'd Companions.


Tob. I assure you Mother, we are the three of the Court.


Py. I most entirely thank you for him. And I do beseech you make your selves
no strangers to my poor house. We are alone; can give but light
entertainment, my Daughter and I; since my Son Crasies misfortune drove him
from us --

Enter Iosina with a Vial. O welcome Daughter -- I beseech you noble Sirs
estrange not your selves to us, your Servants.


Cra. Pox o'your Complement.


Py. Give me the Vial Daughter. Take up the Lady. Taste of this. It is a
Composition of mine own distilling.


Try-drinks. Try. Uh, uh, uh, umh --


Py. Well done. Nay it will make you break wind, I tell you.


Ticket and Rufflit Court I^sina. Tic. By the service I owe you sweet Mistres,
it is unfeigned. My Wife desires to see you.


Ruff. As I can best witness; And fears you enjoy not the liberty of a
Woman, since your Husbands departure. Your Brother having promised too, to
conduct you to Court.


To. It is confessed, and I will do it.


Tic. Where the best entertainment a poor Ladies chamber can afford, shall
expect you.


Ios I shall embrace it.


Cras. Sfoot, it is time to part you -- Mistres, I beseech your help, joined with
your virtuous Mothers.


He pulls her aside. Ios. You forget the young man, that can Dance Write, and
keep Counsel.


Cras. I forget you not Lady. But I wish you to beware of these Courtiers, till
I tell you what they are:


Ruff. I Will be hanged if this Doctor be not of her smock Counsel.


Py. How is it now, good heart?


Try. Much enlightened, I thank Heaven and you. Now, pray, read Sir my Will.


Sar. In Dei nomine. Amen.


Tic. O let us hear the Will.


Sar. I Jane Tryman of Knockers hole, in the County of Cornwall, Widow, Sick
in Body, but whole in Mind, and of perfect memory, do make my last Will and
Testament, in Manner and Form following.


Cras. As for the Manner and Form it is no matter. To the Legacies, briefly.


Sar. Hum hum. Imprimis, A Dole of Bread to be given to the Poor of this
Parish -- five pound.


Try. Stay. This I entreat of you Mr. Wolsey, that whether I live or dye, this
Dole may be given to morrow. It was the Charge of my Mother to see it done;
Saying, it was better to take the Prayers of the Poor with me, then leave them
to be sent after.


Lin. It shall be done: and you, I hope, shall see it.


Sar. To Mr. Sarpego, the Writer hereof, A Mourning Gown, and forty pound, to
Preach at the Funeral.


Lin. How! forty pound?


Sar. Di boni! No. It Is forty shillings. Item to my Nephew, Sir Marmaduke
Trevaugh an of St. Minever, one thousand pound in Gold. Item to my Nephew Mr.
Francis Trepton, one thousand pound in Gold. Item to my Kinsman, Sir Stephen
Leggleden, I do forgive two thousand pound, for which his Lands are Mortgaged
to me. Item to his Daughter, my God-daughter Jane Leggleden, five hundred pound
in money; my best Basin and Ewer; two silver Flaggon Pots, and three silver and
gilt standing Cups. Item to the poor of the Parish of Knockers-hole, ten
pound, and forty pound toward the reparation of their Church. Item to Mr.
Linsey wolsey the Ring, which was my Wedding Ring, and fifty other Rings, with
several stones in my Trunck, in his house, valued at two hundred and fifty
pounds. Item to all his servants, and to the Women that attended me in my
sickness, five pound a piece.


Jone. Now the Lord receive her to his mercy.


Isa My Legacy will save her life; for never any body dyed yet, that bequeathed
me any thing.


Sar. Item, to my Page Jeffery Crack forty pound. And all my other Servants ten
pound a piece. Item to my Niece Barbara Tredrite five hundred pound; my second
Basin and Ewer, a dozen of silver Dishes, and four dozen of silver Spoones.
Lastly, all the rest of my Lands, Jewels, Plate, Money, Debts, Movables and
Unmoveables, to my dear and loving Brother, Sir Gregory Flamsted, whom I make
my full Executor. In cujus rei testimonium, etc. This is the brief of it.


Try. It Is well. Only add to it -- Vh -- A Gold Chain also in my Trunk to this
virtuous Gentlewoman. And another Chain, that is there of Pearl, to her
Daughter. To this learned Doctor twenty pound. And to the Gentlemen which have
visited me, for them and their friends an hundred pound to be spent in a
Banckquet.


Sar. Hoc nihil refert. I must write all over again then.


Try. Do so then. And make your forty shillings five pound.


Sar. Gratias vel ingentes ago. It shall be done --


Exit. Try. Now Mr. Wolsie, and your virtuous Neighbor here, I entreat, that
when I have signed this Will, that you keep it til my Brother comes to Town.
This Doctor shall direct you in all. And that he may be the better able so to
do, I desire you all that I may a while be private with him.


Omnes. With all our hearts.


Exeunt omnes praeter Crasy, Tryman. Try. Are they all gone?

Now Mr. Doctor, what think you of the sick Widow?

Has she done her part hitherto?


Cras. Beyond my expectation! Better then I for a Doctor.


Try. You are right. And I am even the same for a Widow as you for a Doctor. Do
not I know you? Yes good Mr. Crasy. I dare trust you, because you must trust
me. Therefore know, that I the rich Widow am no better, then a Lady that must
live by what I bear about me. The vulgar translation you know, but let them
speak their pleasure, I have no Lands, and since I am borne, must be kept, I
may make the best of my own, and if one member maintain the whole body,
what is that to any one?


Cras. I collected as much by your young Whiskin that brought me hither.


Try. It was by my direction that he did so. And, by my Instructions, he has
had an Eye upon you in all your disguises ever since your pretended ^ourney out
of Town. Nay startle not, nor muse at my acquaintance with you: I have had you
in my Purlews, before you were a Freeman: And will hereafter give you certain
tokens of it. In the mean time, if you comply with me, you can be no loofer by
it. I am grown weary of my old course; and would feign, by wiser, do my self
good, before Age or Diseases make it too late.


Cra. I will work close and friendly with thee. Therefore say, this rich
Cockscombe is thine own. O here comes your Pigg-wiggen.


Try. He is of Counsel, and one of us. He is indeed my Brother, and has been
one of the true blew Boys of the Hospital; one of the sweet singers to the
City Funerals with a two penny loaf under his arm.


Crac. Well: He never sung to the wheel in Saint Brides Nunnery yonder.


Try. Nay Jeff, be not angry; thou have sung to the Organs I know, till fearing
their downfall, thou betookst thy self into my more certain service. All
friends, good Jeff.


Cras. Yes, yes, we must all agree, and be linckt in Covenant together.


Crac. By Indenture Tripartite, and't please you, like Subtle, Doll, and Face.


Cras. Witty Jeff. I cannot see which can be spared from the rest, least the
whole trade break.


Crack sings. Then let us be friends, and most freindly agree.
The Pimp and the Punck and the Doctor are three,
That cannot but thrive, when united they be.
The Pimp brings in custom, the Punck she gets treasure,
Of which the Physician is sure of his measure,
For work that she makes him in sale of her pleasure.
For which, when she fails by diseases or pain,
The Doctor new Vamps and upsets her again.
Cras. Thou art a brave Lad, and in the high way of preferment.


Crac. Not the high Holborne way, I hope Sir.


Cras. And for you Damsel, as I said before, say to your self, the Match is
yours.


Try. I mean to say, and know it shortly. Some three days hence all may be
completed. Now draw the Curtains; and follow your affairs, while I put on my
sick Face again. Vh, uh, uh.


They put in the Bed, and withdraw all. Exeunt. ACT. III. Scene II.
Enter Sarpego. Sar. NOw could I Accost that Catlinarian Traitor, that defeated
me of my ten pound, I have a precogitated Oration should make him suspend
himself. But Abiit, evasit, erupit. Or if the rich Widow would have dyed,
there had been a supply. But she is nearer a Nuptial, then a Funeral: And
hopeless Sarpego, that should wed, has not to furnish him to his intent, Vae
mihi misero nec Aurum, nec Argent -- tum! Here comes my Beatitude.


Enter Bridget. Bri. O, are you here Sir? I was to seek you. My old Mistress
would speak with you instantly.


Sar. My Legitimate Spouse, when is our day of conjunction?


Bri. Our day of conjunction? Mary faugh Goodman Fiste. Our day of conjunction?


Sar. Did you not once vow you did love me?


Bri. Did not you once swear you had money?


Sar. Hic jacet, I am now but a dead man.


Enter Pyannet, Sneakup, Crasie -- like a Court-Messenger. Py. O where is Mr.
Sarpego? Fortunate Mr. Sarpego? Venerable Mr. Sarpego? O Sir, you are made.
Never think under right worshipful. Imagine nothing beneath Damasque Gowns,
Velvet Jackets, Satin Sleeves, Silk Nightcaps, two Pages and a Footcloth.


Sar. The Son of Phoebus rectify your Brain-pan.


Sne. Indeed, and't shall please your Worship, it is --


Py. It is! What is it? You will be speaking, will you? And your Wife in
presence, will you? you show your bringing up. Master Sarpego, bless the time
that ever you knew the Progeny of the Sneakups: my worshipful Son and Heir
apparent has preferred you to be the young Prince his Tutor. Here Is Mr.
Holywater, a Gentleman; of place, a Courtier; of Office, is sent for you.


Cras. Right fortunately-learned Sir. So passionately does his Grace approve
the Language, Literature, and Haviour of your sometimes Pupil, Master Tobias
Sneakup.


Sar. Umh.


Cras. That I was, with all expedition, commanded to entreat your instant
Attendance.


Sar. Umh Umh --


Cras. It Is even so Sir; You are like to possess a Princes ear; you may be in
place, where you may scorn your foes; countenance your friends; cherish virtue,
control vice, and despise fortune: Yes sure shall you Sir. And (which I had
almost forgot) your old Pupil entreats you to send him by me the ten pound he
lent you: An od ten pound, that he may be furnished with the more seemly
Complements to conduct you to his Grace.


Sar. Quid nunc?


Py. Whist Mr. Sarpego. Let not your poverty be read in your face. Here Is ten
pieces. Bear it as your own payment: You talk of ten pound for my Son, Sir.


Sar. O, an od driblet. Here, Friend, I use not to carry Silver: Convey it in
Gold.


Bri. I hope, dear Love, you will not forget your affection to me now.


Sar. Poor Maid, I will prefer thee to scratch my head; make my Bed; wash my
Shirt, pick my toes, and evacuate my Chamberpot. I will instantly procure me
attire, fitting my fortune, and attend the Grace of Court --


Exit. Bri. Now am I but a dead woman.


Cras. I am much grieved for it. It was your sons much laboring, that Mr.
Crasie was sent for, to sell his Grace some Jewels: But since his fortunes are
so sunk that he hides his head, I can but lament his loss.


Py. Shall I tell you Sir, (pray you husband stand aside;) My Son-in-Law Crasie
is not now worth -- his very wife. We hoped he would have proved a crafty
Merchant, and he proved an honest man, a Beggar (if I chance to speak above
your capacity, I pray tell me of it) And as I said, when I perceived he began
to melt, and that every stranger abused him; I, having some wit, fell too, and
most cozened him my self. I looked for my daughters good: And so betwixt us,
found the trick to get, or steal from him two Jewels of good deep value,
being indeed the main of his rest of Fortune. Now Sir, I come to you.


Cras. I, now you come to the point.


Py. Right Sir: For there is no woman, though she use never so many by-words,
but yet in the end she will come to the point. Now Sir, I having these Jewels,
will send them by my husband. A poor easy weak man, as you see; but very
obedient in truth --


Cras. By your husband.


Py. Yes, do you mark? By my husband. But now note my wit: His Grace knows not
Crasie: My husband, habited like a Citizen, shall take the name of Crasie upon
him; offer his Jewels to the Prince; you shall present them; praise them and
raise them: His Grace pays; my husband returns; and we will share. Do you
approve?


Cras. Nay admire.


Py. Away then. No Complement among good wits; but away. Come your ways hither,
good man; Put off your hat; Make a leg; Look simply. Why so! Pish, never tell
me: He will make a rare Citizen. I have Jewels for you to carry to the Prince.


Exit. Cras. Sneak. Yes forsooth, I Will carry them.


Py. La! you are so quick! I have charged you not to shoot your bolt, before
you understand your mark. And you shall carry them like a Citizen; call your
self Crasie; sell them at my price; and now cast no further. You see the limits
of your understanding. Now Sir, how will you bear your self to his Grace? How
behave your self at Court?


Sneak. I hope I am not too wise to learn.


Py. Why, that was well spoken. Modest mistrust is the first step to knowledge.
Remember that sentence. Now mark. I will instruct you: When you come at the
Court gate, you may neither knock nor piss. Do you mark? You go through the
Hall covered; through the great Chamber covered; through the Presence bare;
through the Lobby covered; through the Privy Chamber bare; through the Privy
Lobby covered; to the Prince bare.


Sneak. I Will do it I warrant you. Let me see. At the Court gate neither knock
nor make water. May not a man break wind?


Py. Umh, yes: but (like the Exchequer payment) somewhat abated.


Sneak. Through the great Chamber bare.


Py. Covered.


Sneak. Covered? Well: Through the Presence covered.


Py. Bare.


Sneak. Bare? I will put all dowe in my Table Book, and con it by the way.


Py. Well thought on. Something he has in him like my husband! But now you come
before the brow of Royalty. Now for your carriage there Sir: Suppose me the
Prince. Come in, and present. Here sits the Prince. There enters the Jeweller.
Make your honors. Let me see you do it handsomely.


Sneak. Yes, now I come in; make my three legs -- And then --


Py. Kneel.


Sneak. Yes; and say --


Py. What?


Sneak. Nay, that I know not.


Py. An't please your Grace, I have certain Jewels to present to your liking.


Sneak. An't please your Grace, I have certain Jewels to present to your liking.


Py. Is this Crasie, that had wont to serve me with Jewels? It is that honest
man, so please your Highness. That Is for M. Holywater, the by-flatterer to
speak. You are a Cuekoldly Knave, Sirrah, and have often abused me with false
and deceitful stones.


Sneak. My stones are right, so please your Excellence.


Py. Why that was well, Very well. I perceive there is a certain infection
taken with lying with a woman that has a good wit. I find it by my husband.
Come, I Will disguise you, and away to Court instantly.


Sneak. Truly wife, I fear J shall be discovered among the Gallants presently.


Py. No, no, A fool is never discovered among madmen.


Exeunt. ACT. III. Scene III.
Enter Tryman, Crasy. Crasy in his Court habit. Cras. WEll Dol, (that thou
say is thy name) though J had forgotten thee, J protest. About London-wall
was it (say thou?) Well, J cannot but highly commend thy wisdom in this, that
so well have mended thy election; from being a fountain of aches, bald brows,
and broad plasters, thus to remember thy Creation.


Try. I did consider, and I think rightly, what I was; and that men that loved
my use, loved it but to loath me: Therefore I changed my self into this shape
of a demure, innocent Country Widow, that had scarce beauty enough to be
tempted, but not wit enough to be naught; and quite forsook the path I trod in,
and betook me to this private course of cozenage.


Cras. But all my wonder is at the means, how thou gott'st into this house and
reputation. And to be held a woman of such an estate.


Try. That shall be made plain to you hereafter.

Enter Crack. Now Brother Geffrey, where left you M Wolsie?


Crack. Among the Mercers, so troubled, as if all the Satin in Cheapside were
not enough to make you a wedding Gown. He is overjoyed that his happy day is
at hand; and I overheard him invite one special friend to his Nuptials. He
cannot contain himself. On a sudden he fell a singing, O she is a dainty
Widow. O are you come Sir, in your new shape? Dos not that beard fit you
handsomely? Thank my acquaintance with the Players.


Cras. I think thou art acquainted any way, to set out knavery.


Crac. If you can perform your part as well, it is well. Hark, I hear him
coming.


Enter Linsie VVoolsie. Lin. Where are you sweet Widow? Look you, Look you:
How do you like these patterns?


Try. Sir, here is a Gentleman has a Letter to you: He tells me it imports the
making, or the undoing of his dearest friend.


Lin. From whom, I pray you?


Lin. reads. Cra. Your sometimes neighbor Sir, M: Crasy.


Try. It shall take effect, doubt not.


Cra. He scratches his head, though.


Try. He had as liefe part with his blood as his money.


Lin. M. Crasy writes to me for thirty pound; the value of a Ring I had of him.
I grant I am to pay threescore at my day of Marriage. But we are all mortal.
And who knows whether I shall live till to morrow.


Cras. If not, Sir, your Bond is due to night: For it is equally payable at
your hour of death.


Lin. O, but such payments never trouble a man. What the eye sees not --


Try. Are you in Bonds, M. Woolsie, for your day of Marriage?


Lin. Only for this sixty pound. It Is for that Ring you wear, and I gave you
upon our Contract. It Is worth thirty pound ready money.


Try. Then when you are married, you may say you paid the rest for your wife.
Pray Sir make even such reckonings before you wed. It will show nobly in you
toward your poor Creditor, and be a special argument of your love to me, your
wife. Pray discharge it, I shall not think you love me else.

Hark you Sir, if you will take thirty pound in full payment, and give me in
my Bond, here is your money. It Is your best course. Alas, I am an unlikely
fellow for wedlock. What woman, think you, would bestow her self upon me, a
stale Batchellor, unhandsome and poor -- not worth above six or seven thousand
pound? Do; take thirty pound.


aside. Cras. If you please to be friend Mr. Crasy but which thirty pound, I Will
set it received upon the Bond. Here it is. And he shall demand no more till it
be due.


Try. Pray Sir pay it all, and take in your Bond. You shall be married within
these two days; to morrow, if you please: What use will your money yield you
for a night? Pray pay it. In truth I Will pay it else. It Is but threescore pound.


Lin. Say thou so, Sweetheart. Come Sir. Come in and tell your money --


Exit. Cras. And thank you too, good M. Linsie VVolsie, that knew so well, a
bargain was a bargain, and would not part with your money to be laughed at
among your neighbors. I would heartily now, if I could intend it. But I must
purse your money, and then about my Court affairs. This wench I am infinitely
beholden to. She remembers some old courtesy that I have forgotten. Perhaps I
pidled with her when I was Prentice.


Exit. ACT. III. Scene IV.
Enter Sarpego, in gorgeous Apparel. Sar. THis is the Presence. I am much
amazed, or stupefied, that Mr. Tobias Sneakup, my quondam Pupil, attends not
my Conduct! Ha! So instant was his Grace, his importunity to enjoy me, that
although I purchased the loan of Clothes, yet I had not vacation, nor indeed
variety to shift my shirt. And now I come to Court, I feel certain little
Cattle of infamous generation about me, that do most inseparably haunt me. Now
if (when the Prince surveyes me) any of them being strangers here, should peep
to behold strange sights, and his Grace perceive them, what should I answer? --


Crasie at the hangings. Cras. O, my glorified Pedant in his most natural
strut!


Sar. I will say it was by influence of the heavens; or, to appear the more
perfect Courtier at the first dash, I will say, that though my outside were
glorious, yet of purpose I left my inside lousy.

Enter Sneakup like a Citizen. Sed, O Dii! Quem video? nonne Mr. Sneakup?


Cra. See my worshipful Father-in-Law! Now the Woodcocks shoot into the glade.


Sneak. Pray ye peace, you must not know me.


Sar. O monstrum horrendum! May not you and I know one another?


Sneak. Pray go home, and ask my wife.


Enter Crasy in haste. Cras. Mr. Crasie. Is not one Mr. Crasie here?


Sneak. Yes Sir. Here is Mr. Crasie for a need Sir.


Cras. Well done: Be bold Sir. Let not your dissimulation be read in your eyes.
You know me; give me the Jewels.


Sneak. Yes Sir.


Cras. Let me alone to present them to his Grace, and praise them, before you
are called.


Sneak. Will you do so Sir?


Cras. Yes; For you know I must not seem to indeare them before your face: For
that would smell rank of correspondency.


Sneak. You say right Sir.


Cras. But betwixt us both we will make a shift to cheat him. Stay you here. I
will return instantly. O Mr. Sarpego! Your Pupil will come and conduct you
presently.

Thus sometimes, by deceit, deceit is known:
It Is honest craft, by wit to get ones own. --

Exit. Enter Ticket, Rufflit, Toby. To. My Quondam Pedagogue!


Sar. My Nuper Alumnus! Come, present me to the Grace of Greatness. I am ready;
behold I am approached according to thy entreats, to approve thy praise, and
mine own perfection. Set on: His Grace shall see that we can speak true Latin,
and construe L^dovicus vives: Go, set on.


Tob. I cry you mercy Sir. Upon my troth, I took you for Mr. Sarpego, my
learned Tutor. He is very like him; Is he not Gentlemen? But now I come to my
self again, I remember this was never his walk, nor these his clothes.


Sar. Sent you not a Nuntius, or a Messenger for me, intimating, that it was
his Grace his instant desire, to entertain me as his Instructor?


Tic. Alas, he has over-studied himself! You were best let blood in time Sir.


Sar. Sent I not you, by the same messenger, your ten pound?


Tob. My ten pound? Ha, ha ha: I would laugh i faith, if you could bob me off
with such payment.


Ruff. Sure Sir, you use some Dormitaries. Best shave your head, and 'noint it
with Oil of Roses.


Tob. Father! Father!


Sneak. Pray peace son. The plot will be discovered else.


Tob. The plot? what plot?


Sneak. The Jewels are sent in, What, I am Mr. Crasie now, you know. I shall
be sent for in to his Grace instantly.


Tob. Midsummer Moon! Midsummer Moon!


Sneak. In very truth son, hit as 'twill, I say we are beholding to Mr.
Holywater.


Tob. Heaven not bless me, if I understand not the Baboons mumpings better
then your speech. You are more dark then Delphos. What Holywater?


Sneak. Why the Gentleman, you know, you sent to bring M. Crasie to serve his
Grace with Jewels.


Tob. Father, Heaven pardon me: For sure I have a great desire to call you
Cockscomb. I sent no man; nor is there any so styled as Holywater about the
Court.


Tic. Do you not want sleep sir?


Ruff. Or have you not seen a spirit sir?


Tic. Or have you not over-mus'd, or over-thought your self, as we doubt Mr.
Sarpego, here, has done?


Tob. Or has not my mother over-beaten you, father? You may tell me.


Sneak. Son, I am not so very a fool, but I perceive I am made a stark Ass.
Oh son, thy father is cozened; and thy mother will beat me indeed, unless
your charity conceal me in the Court here, till her fury be over.


Ticket. He shall stay at my Wives Chamber.


Rufflit. And there instruct us in the passages of this cozenage.


Tob. Do not weep father. My Lady Ticket will appease all.


Ruff. Adieu Mr. Sarpego. Lure your brains back again.


Exeunt. Sar. Sic transit gloria Mundi. The learned is Cony-caught; and the
lover of Helicon is laughed at. The last sixpence of my fortune is spent; and
I will go cry in private.


Exit. ACT. IIII.
Scene I.
Enter Crasy like a Dancer. Cras. NOw, whilst my politic Mother-in-Law is in
expectation of her great adventure, and my worshipful Father-in-Law stinks at
Court for fear of her; I in this last disguise will pursue my new affairs.
Methinks these Jewels smile on me now more cheerfully then when they were
mine own before. First to my honest Punk.


Crack meets Crasie at the door. Crac. Who would you speak with Sir?


Cras. With thy sister. Do thou not know me Jeffrey. Where is she? Look
better on me.


Cras. O, is it you Sir? Hang me if I knew you in this habit; though I was set
here on purpose to watch for you.


Cras. What Is the matter Jeffrey?


Crac. Sir she is fallen into a new fit of Melancholy. Some new project she has
in her noddle. But she desires you to work upon this, [ he gives him a paper.]
I dare not be seen to talk with any body. -- Exit.


Cras. What new device is this? [ he reads.] Since I last saw you, your
Mother-in-Law, Mrs. Sneakup, has earnestly dealt with me to make me a Bride for
her son Tobias. If there may be any thing wrought out of it to benefit you, I
will suddenly take occasion to break with the Fool Wolsie; of whom I am
heartily weary; and after, be wholly disposed by you. Sure this wench studies
nothing but my profit. Well: I have thought already to make the best of her.
Now to my new Mistress. This is the house, and here is her maid.


Enter Bridget. Bri. Would you speak with any here Sir?


Cras. With your Mistress, (I take it) Mristresse Crasie.


Bri. May not I deliver your mind unto her Sir?


Cras. My business is of weight and secrecy: yet you may tell her, here is the
Gentleman that her Doctor sent her.


Bri. O she expects him most impatiently -- Pray enter Sir. She Is ready for
you, there before you Sir --

Exit Crasie. A business of mine own makes me wait here.
I think I saw my learned Love make this way.
But he (alas) though small in fleshly growth,
By reason of his high preferment is
Now grown too great for me.
Enter Sarpego musing. It Is he; I know his stature,
Though not his clothes, the Ensigns of his greatness,
In which how big he seems, though but a sprawler!
So clothes can make men greater, but not taller.
He Is deep in study; I dare not interrupt him.

Sar. I have adventured, though with trembling feet,
Unto this Mansion, to exonerate,
At least extenuate my suspirations
For my dear loss. The Lady of this place.
Who had an equal venture, and has suffered
In the same Fate with me, may ease my sorrow.
Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris.
I of my wrongs, and she of hers shall clamor.
But ecce noster ubi esset Amor.

Bri. Most worshipful Sir, welcome from Court, If your poor Handmaid may
presume to say so.


Sar: Where is your Mistress? I mean your grand Matrona, Mrs. Sneakup.


Bri. In the first place let me beseech you Sir,

Vouchsafe your answer to a longing Maid,

That can be comforted in nothing more,

Then the good news of your prosperity;

Of which I hope a part at least to be,

Preferred by your late promise to your service.


Sar. I will now breath a most strong and Poetical execration

Against the Universe. [ Bri.] Sir I beseech you --


Sar. From henceforth Erit Fluvius Deucalionis
The world shall flow with dunces; Regnabitque, and it shall rain
Dogmata Polla Sophon, Dogs and Polecats, and so forth.

Bri. His Court advancement makes him mad, I fear.


Sar. From hence let learning be abomination
Among the Plebeians, till their ignorance
Shall lead them blind into the Lake of Lethe.

Bri. What pity it is that honor and high places
Should make men lose their wits, sometimes their heads!

Sar. May Peasantry and Idiotism trample
Upon the heads of Art and Knowledge, till
The world be shuffled in the pristine Chaos.

Bri. Dear Sir, though you are highly dignified,
Forget not the preferment, that you promised me,
To scratch your head; to make your bed; to wash
Your shirt; to pick your toes, and to evacuate
Your Chamberpot.

Sar. Elephantem ex Musca facit. She takes me for a Mountain, that am but a
Molehill.
But when she reads my poverty again,
And that these Garments must return to th'Gambrels,
Her scorn will be impetuous.

Enter Josina, Crasie. Jo. Go find another room maid for your talk,
Mr. Sarpego, my mother calls for you.

Sar. Has she received Aliquid novi, news from Court?


Jo. She has now received a Letter. Pray be gone,
I have more serious business of mine own. Ex. Sar. Brid.
You are the Creature then that my dear
Doctor has sent me, that can dance, read, write, and be secret. I shall use
you all in all. And I prithee how fa^es my Physician?

Cra. I can confirm that he is yours protestedly. And to morrow night --


Jo. Peace: Here comes my mother.

Enter Pyannet reading a Letter* I can my Cinquepace friend. But I prithee
teach me some tricks. Who would care for a female, that moves after the plain
pace? No: Give me the woman of tricks. Teach me some tricks I prithee.


Cra. Ha! Tricks of twenty: Your Traverses, Slidings, Falling back, Jumps,
Closings, Openings, Shorts, Turns, Pacings, Gracings -- As for -- Corantoes,
Levoltoes, Jigs, Measures, Pavins, Brawls, Galliards, or Ca^aries* I speak it
not swellingly, but I subscribe to no man.


Jos. It Is a rare fellow!


Py. Am I then cheated? my wit begins to be out of countenance. O the Plague
that hangs over her head that has a fool to her husband, as thou and I have
daughter.


Jo. How now sweet mother? What ill news changes your face thus?


Py. O dear daughter, my Lady Ticket writes here, that the fool, thy father,
is cheated of two rich Jewels, that thou and I stole from the Idiot thy
husband Crasie.


Cra. O that Crasy was ever a silly fellow.


Py. A very Citizen, a very Citizen. How should I call you Sir?.


Jo. One Mr. Footwell, Mother; who teaches Gentlewomen to do all things
Courtly, to dance Courtly, to love their husbands Courtly --


Cra. Your name is Mrs. Pyannet, I take it.


Py. Pyannet Sneakup, Sir.


Cra. Your husband is cozened at Court, I take it.


Py. So my Lady Ticket writes, Sir.


Cra. That Lady Ticket is a cunning creature. I have been inward with her; And
such are my private Intelligences, that if equal courtesy might recompense, I
could unshale a plot is upon you.


Py. Recompense? Sir command me, command my daughter, my maid, my house, only
tell it I beseech you.


Jo. I pray see wherein we may be grateful. I pray speak.


Cra. So it is, I am a decayed Gentleman, quite out of repair; fallen for want
of means to the use of my feet: Nor have I hope to see better light, but only
that Love and Fortune have put upon me a right wealthy widow. She lies at a
near neighbors house here; and here I hover about her: but for want of some
good friends countenance, some means for clothes and fit housing, she holds
off from consummating our Marriage. Now Lady --


Py. I apprehend you Sir. Bring her to me; lodge her with me; I Will call you
Cosen I. Is she very rich? At a near neighbors, said you, -- Not she at Mr.
Wolsies, is it?


Cra. The very same.


Py. (By'r Lady a match for my Esquir'd son and heir. Bear a brain dancer,
or I may chance to show you a cross caper.) Sir, bring your Widow. Swear to
your self my house is yours. Now the plot, or I burst.


Cra. Why then will I disclose who cozened you; by what means you are injured,
and how you may be revenged, only you shall vow to conceal the
secret-revealer, else you lose the benefit of further Intelligence.


Py. Stand off daughter: I will not trust mine own flesh with a secret; for in
truth I have found it frail. Now speak, I beseech you.


Cra. Sure, precious Mistress, very absolute creatures have had Cockscombs to
their husbands.


Py. Nay that is indubitable, I know it by my self.


Cra Marry to be made Cuckqueane by such a Cockscombe, to have her Jewels
prig'd away, to bestow on a Court Mistress; to have a trick put upon her, as
you have, 'twould move (I must confess) a woman that were not part a
Philosopher, and had a strong wit as you have. Why did you not feel the
deceit? your husbands unworthiness, having no means to enjoy this Court-Lady
but by gifts; and having no course for gifts, but from you, procures some
Pander to perform a famed message. Your hope of game puts the weighty trust
upon the counterfeit fool your husband; his simplicity seems cozened, whilst
this Lady excuses all, and keeps all: So that your own Jewels purchase your
own horns; nay, and you were not withal laughed at for your purchase, 'twere
scarce enough to run mad for.


Py. It Is most plain: I will have such a revenge, as never woman had.


Enter Ticket. Tic. Good Mrs. Pyannet, bear't as well as you may: Your loss is
heavy, yet under the strength of your constant wisdom -- I faith my wife was
so careful lest you should take too deep sense of it, that she importuned my
own presence to comfort you: For sure I know --


Py. You are a Wittally Cuckold I know. I commend thy wives modesty yet: She
will not do it before thy face, but will send thee out of an errand yet.


Tic. What mean you? you amaze me.


Py. Nay, I look you should seem ignorant: What, to take sense or notice of
your horn, as long as it winds you into profit, were most uncourtly. Well, you
hear not me rage nor rave: marry I will slit the Drabs nose, crop off her
ears, scratch out her eyes --


Tic. Bless us!


Py. Tear off her hair, pluck out her throat, that is all. Come along Sir.


Io. Now they are gone, I prithee M. Footwell stay a little, I will fetch thee
some Letters to read for me, which I have not opened yet, because I durst trust
no body. --


Exit. Py. Tic. Exit. Cras. These Letters must necessarily come from my Brace
of Courtiers, Sir Ticket, and Monsieur Rufflit, which I will read clean
contrary, as if they slighted her, and answer them acrosse from her meaning, as
if she slighted them: And so letting my self down into their inwards on both
sides, what they can get, or what my wife has, will I pump into mine own purse.


Enter Josina with two Letters. Jo. Now dear M. Footwell, as ever you pitied
the use of a poor Gentlewoman, that would feign use her ^eauty, whilst there is
some pleasure in it, read and an^wer these Letters with commanding eloquence;
force them to affect me.


Cra. Ha, ha, ha: Will you not be offended, if I read them truly?


Jo. No: I prithee what is it?


Cra. Stay, it seems you have written to them.


Jo. Yes: but I cannot read the answer. Prithee that is it?


Cra. Faith you will be angry.


Jo. Nay, and you love me, what is it?


Cra. Sir Andrew here, he says, it is not your broad ^im'd hat, your tiffeny
dress, Spanish ruff, and sil^er bodkin can make him disloyal to his wives
bed. Rufflit here, he writes that you have a gross body, a ^ll eye, a low
forehead, a black tooth, a fat hand, ^^d a most lean purse. I there is it: And
you could but ^^ve, and you had but to send --


Jo. A lean purse!


Cra. I, the lean purse. There Is the Devil: Were (...)u as bald as Time, as
stiffly wrinkled as frozen ^^w'd Lands, more dry then a Fever, more lean then
death; had you engrossed deformity, yet if you had but to give --


Jo. Why Footwell, though my husband be but a Bankrupt Knave --


Cra. Nay faith, rather a fool, Mistress.


Jo. Well, fool let him be then; yet I have a Mother will not see me want for
necessary ends: And I hope I had the wit to cozen my husband of somewhat
against a rainy day. Look you Sir, I kept these for a friend in a corner.


Cra. Nay, but I would not wish you to send them now: What, relieve the base
wants of prating Skipjacks to pay for your damnation?


Jo. Nay that's sure, I will not give them:


Cra. And yet, i faith, what can a Gentlewoman give too much for her pleasure?
Can there be a more heavy disgrace blown abroad upon any Lady, then that she
has not at the least two servants, since many Lovers are the only noble
approvement of beauty?


Io. I Will send them both, that's sure.


Cra. But both of them to Mr. Rufflit: Oh, he is an absolute spirit! He has an
English face, a French tongue, a Spanish heart, an Irish hand, a Welsh Leg, a
Scotch beard, and a Dutch buttock.


Jo. O J: J am wholly his, J will send all to him.


Cra. O but Sir Andrew, he is a Courtly Lover: He can kiss you courtly, handle
you Courtly, lie with you Courtly.


Jo. O yes: he shall have one. J prithee praise me to them both, and commend to
each of them one of these Jewels, not that I do so much care for the use of
them, yet because I would not be wondered at like an Owl among my neighbors,
for living honest in my husbands absence. I prithee work effectually for me,
sweet M. Footwell.


Exit. Enter Rufflit, spying her going out. Ruf. Mrs. Crasie: Hist Mrs. Crasie.


Cra. Peace Sir, forbear: As you would hope, do not pursue a woman when she
is out of the humor. O, untimely importunity is most distasteful. There are
certain seasons to take the coldest Appetite, when she is pinning a Ruff,
playing with a Monkey, hearing a wanton Song, or half drunk.


Ruf. O hat are you Sir?


Cra. A private Messenger to you Sir, from the Gentlewoman you pursue. This is
your hand, is it not?


Ruf. Yes:


Cra. You may keep your Letter.


Ruf. But what says my utmost hope, the end of my ambition?


Cra. Only that you are poor, a Gallant of a very wanting fortune.


Ruf. The more honor for her to redeem me.


Cra. Alas, I think her means are but weak, her husbands sinking has brought
her low.


Ruf. Her husband! Alas poor fly; only made to be sucked and forsaken. His
wife has the lifeblood of her fortunes in her, and I Will be her cupping-glasse.


Cra. I wonder his wife could nourish so unbelieving a conscience!


Ruf. Conscience! All things rob one another: Churches poule the People,
Princes pill the Church; Minions draw from Princes, Mistresses suck Minions;
and the Pox undoes Mistresses; Physicians plague their Patients; Orators their
Clients; Courtiers their Suitors, and the Devil all. The water robs the earth,
earth choakes the water: fire burns air, air still consumes the fire.

Since Elements themselves do rob each other,
And Phoebe for her light does rob her Brother,
What is it in man, one man to rob another?

Cra. You have spoken most edifyingly sir, but for you, of whom I understand
Crasy merits the best Offices; for you to corrupt his Wife, and with a covetous
sinning expect use for the loan of your Loins!


Ruff. Death man, they are my Exchecquer, my Rent: Why I have no possession but
my Estate tail. And at for Crasy, he has no wit; he was created a fool, to
have Knaves work upon him: a fellow made to have some pity, and all wrong; he
had ever an open Purse, and now an empty. He made it a common hole, every
Gallant had his fingers in it. Every man loved his Fortune, squeezed it, and
when it was unjuic'd, farewell kind heart. I confess I owe him a good turn: I Will
pay't his Wife. He kept her always exquisitely neat; temptingly gallant, and
as a protested Cuckold should do, about his degree and means sumptuously proud.
Her Eye artificially spirited, her Cheek surphuled, her Teeth blanched, her Lip
painted, her Neck carkanetted, and her Breast barred almost to her Belly. And
shall a piece, thus put out to sale, stand unattempted, as not worth the
purchase.


Cra. Yes Sir, if you could compass her; as sure she may be corrupted: for she
is very covetous.


Ruff. If I could but make show of a Gift, or present one --


Cra Only not to appear of so needy a Fortune -- Why if you chance to possess
her.


Ruff. Pish, tweare all mine again, and all that she had besides. And troth, I
think she is wealthy.


Cra. Wealthy! look you Sir, Here are two of her Jewels, I fetched from an Ant
of hers, where they lay hid from her Husband. These are not worth the pursuit.


Ruff. Nay, it is an easy Female: He, that has her, has all. What should I send?
A Gift would do it. Let me think. It Is but a gross-bodyed Wench, with a blackish
hair neither.


Cra. Oh the better. Your lean No-bodies with yellow Manes have most commonly
rotten teeth and wicked breaths. No, your full plump Woman is your only Venus.


Ruff. A hundred golden pieces I am entrusted withal by my elder Brother, to
purchase a piece of Injustice. If I should send them --


Cra. Oh Sir, these both were yours, and they too. She pretends this strain,
but only to explore your strength of means, and to try how far you dare engage
them for her enjoying.


Ruff. I will send them, win her, use her, suck her Purse, recover my own, gain
hers, and laugh at the poor Cuckhold her Husband. Commend with th^se my life's
blood, and Souls service to my Mistress* Farewell --


Exit. Enter Ticket. Cra. Sir Andrew Ticket, I take it.


Tic. The same, Sir. Is Mrs. Crasie within? I cannot keep pace with her Mother.
O, when jealousy is once set a going, it runs on high speed. But let her make
have to arrive at Court, while I land on her Daughter in the City. Is she
privately idle?

Crasie spits at Ticket. What do thou mean by that?


Cra. My Vow's discharged, and her Revenge is done. I am no Pandar, Sir, and
yet I am of Counsel with Smock secrets, Buttock business Sir.

Are you so stale a Courtier, and know not the necessity of Gifts?


Tic. Is that the matter I am rejected by her?


Cra. Why? would it not provoke any Woman to be called fool, and foule-face?


Tic. I never called her so, by the Soul of my Affection, not I.


Cra. No; Do you not intimate she is a fool, when you hope to enjoy her
without a Gift? And foul, when your neglect of cost says she deserves none.


Tic. Before Heaven I was a silly Ass, now I think on it, to send a Sonnet
without some rich present.


Cra. Why Sir? A man must do as he would be done to. Do you, or any man use to
be made Cuckhold for nothing?


Tic. I should have sent a Gift. What, if I enjoy her, she may requite it.


Cra. May; Nay can; nay will. Look you Sir, here is Gold. Here are Jewels. They
are hers; they may be yours. I would not seem a Pandar to you though; for you
have a Wife Sir.


Tic. Pish, who cares to drink out of a River? What I can command out of duty
has but a dull relish. Had not Danae been kept in her brass Tower, she had
never tempted a Gods piercing. I must send, though it be but to show the
ability of my Fortune, and the desert of her Beauty.


Cra. And then to send but a trifle would disgrace both.


Tic. Hold, convey this Carckanet unto her; it is of value, and let her read by
this, how much I seek her.


Cra. And how dear you hold her. Sir, I can speak; but I use to take nothing
for my pains.


Tic. Yes, receive this little -- Nay, I prithee.


Cra. Only not to appear Uncourtly, or uncivil. I protest I abhor Pandarisme;
only as a second, or so. As you have beheld two Horses knubbing one another; Ka
me, Ka thee, an old kind of Courtship.


Tic. I prithee return instantly my success: You shall find me at the Ordinary;
come and Dine with me.


Cra. I have procured a private Stable for my Horse: And therefore I my self
would be loath to stand at Livery.


Cra. Do compare common Stables for Horses, and public Ordinaries for
Gallants together.


Cra. Troth yes sir, for as in Stables, here a goodly Gelding of twenty Pounds
price, and there a raw-backd Jade of four Nobles by him. So at Ordinaries,
here a worthy Fellow of means and virtue, and there a Cheating Shifter of wants
and cosenage. Here a Knight, there a Beggar; Here a Gallant, there a Gull: Here
a Courtier, there a Coxcomb; Here a Justice of Peace, and there an Esquire of
low Degree. Or, in direct Phrase, a Pandar.


Tic. Such a one as thou art.


Cra. Umh, Virtue goes often wetshod, and is forced to be cobled up with base
means, to hold out water and cold necessity. You command me no further sir.


Tic. No honest Knave, farewell --

Exit Crasy. Now Mr. Crasy, will I button up your Cap with a Court-brooch.

You demand Debts, do you? I Will pay you none. Oh it was a notable dull Flat-Cap.
He would invite Courtiers; stand bare, say grace, make legs, kiss his hand,
serve us in perfumed linen, and lend us money upon our words, or bare words.
Were It not a sin to let such a fool pass unsuckt? No, Fortune dressed him only
for us to feed on, and I Will fall to.


Exit. ACT. IV. Scene 11.
La. Ticket. Sneakup. Toby. Page. La. Tic. BE comforted Mr. Sneakup; Remember
you are in my Chamber. Bear the heart of a Husband, who scorns to tremble at
the face of his Wife? Do not fear sir.


Tob. Stand firm Father, do not sinck before the face of a Lady.


La. I have sent my own Husband to satisfy her, and I hope he will do it
thoroughly. Be your self therefore; all the Pleasures the Palace can afford,
shall strive to mitigate your fears.


Sneak. Have you any Pleasures in the Court, can make a man forget he has a
Wife?


To. Sir we have pleasures will make a man forget any thing, even himself;
therefore necessarily his wife, who is but part of himself.


La. T. Boy, sing your song of the Court delights.


They sit: Sneakups head in the Ladies lap. The Page sings -- Enter Pyannet
with a Truncheon. Sarpego. Py. Are you lulled in your delights? No pillow for
your Goatish, head, but her Ladyships lap?


Sneak. O dear! O wife! I did not know you were so nigh truly.


Py. You are ignorant still, I know: But I will make thy bones suffer as well
as my brows. Thou Cullion* could not thine own Cellar serve thee, but thou
must be sneaking into Court Butteries?


Sneak. Oh, oh, oh --


Sar. Vae misero.


To. Hold dear mother.


La. T. Sweet Mrs. Pyannet hold.


Py. Art thou there, daughter of an Intelligencer, and strumpet to a Bearward?


La. T. Now Beauty bless me, was not thy mother a notorious Tripe-wife, and
thy father a professed Harefinder? Gip you Flirt.


Py. How now Madam Tiffany! Will none but my Cock serve to tread you? Give me
my Jewels thou Harlot.


To. Mother -- Pray Mother --


Py. Bestow steeping thy skin in perfumes to kill the stink of thy paintings,
and rotten inwards to catch Cockscombs.


To. Dear mother.


Py. But thou shall not cozen, and Cucquean me*


To. Sweet mother --


Sar. Lupus in fabula. The Devill's in the woman's tongue.


Py. A whip on her; rotten eggs and kennell dirt on her silken Whoreship.


Sar. Nil tam difficile. Nothing can lay her.


La. T. Nay, let the Country Gentlewoman be mad and rave on; she knows I
know my Country Gentlewoman had a Bastard before she was married.


Py. Did um so? The Country Gentlewoman was more chaste in a Bastard, then the
Court Madam in her barrenness. You understand me; you have no Green-sicknesse
there, yet (I hope) you have few Christ'nings; you have tricks for that, have
you?


To. Nay mother --


Py. You have your Kickshaws, your Players Marchpaines; all show and no meat.


Sar. Nulli penetrabilis Astro. She Will hear no reason.


La. T. Go to; you know how in private you commended your Horse-keeper to me.


Py. Well: And did not thou in as much privacy counsel me to contemn my
husband, and use an Italian trick that thou would teach me?


Sar. Quid faciendum? Best stop their mouths?


La. T. Out you bawble; you trifle; you burden smock'd sweaty sluttery, that
could love a fellow that wore worsted stockins footed, and fed in Cooks shops.


Sar. Jaculis and Arcu. Thunder and Lightning.


Py. Ods my precious -- *


Sneak. Nay dear, sweet wife --


Py. How Is this --


To. Honey Mother --


Py. Take this, and take all. Why goody Complexion, thou Rammy Nastinesse, thou
know wherefore thy Gentlewoman left thee; did she not swear that she --


To. For modesties sake --


Py. Had rather be at the opening of a dead old man, then stand dressing thy
head in a morning. Remember the Page that wore thy picture, and the song which
thou had in the praise of the male Baboon.


Sar. Tacete parvuli: You have said too much.


To. Indeed mother you will be sorry, when you know how much you mistake; some
crafty fellow has put a trick upon you.


Sneak. Me-thinkes sweet wife you should rather condole our loss with me.


Py. Hold you your peace; do not you prate.


Sar. Read te Harpocratem: The man is wise enough.


To. It Is true; misfortune has wrought the Jewels from my father.


Sneak. Indeed wife, truly, truly, I am Conycatch'd --


To. But for my father, or this Ladies wronging you, as I am your son, I assure
you I have been an eyewitness of all fair respect toward you.


Py. Is it even so?


To. Mother, as I respect your blessing it is perfect truth.


Py. I humbly beseech you sweet Madam, that my earnest and hearty sorrow may
procure remission for my inconsiderate and causeless Invectives. Let my
confession seem satisfactory, and my contrition win indulgency to my forgetful
delinquency. I pray you let us kiss and be friends.


La. T. Alas sweet friend, you and I have been inward a great while, and for us
to fall out, and bare one another secrets --


Py. Well, 'twas mine error, not malice; but as for the procurer of it, if I
pay not him in his own Coin -- Mr. Footwell! I Will show you a trick of twenty.
Come son, I have a wife for thee.


To. A Wife! a Wife, Mother! O where is she?


Py. I, my boy, a Wife --


To. O ho.


Py. And such a one as thou shall bless me for procuring. Courteously farewell,
sweet Madam: Where Is my Fool? Come, leave the Court sirrah, and man your own
wife into the City --


Exeunt omnes. ACT. IIII. Scene III.
Josina, Crasy. Jo BUt I prithee satisfy me: What return they? Received they
my Jewels?


Cra. Yes, they proved acceptive,


Jo. And what said they? Can they affect?


Cra. Can they be damned? Before I will undergo again such a business -- fore
Heaven I do as little differ from a Pander! only I have nothing for my pains,
or else --


Jo. Thou shall have. Are thy news happy?


Cra. Are your own wishes happy?


Jo. Hold, spend this ten pound for me, Footwel.


Cra. Will you make me a Bawd. What a Bawd? And yet in troth, what would not a
man be for your sake, that have such wit and such bounty!

I cannot refuse, but suffer your Virtue to be exercised upon me.


Jos. Now, prithee speak; what is their answer?


Cra. Why, I Will tell you, they are both your own.


Jos. Both Footwell: I prithee how?


Cra. Why, no more but this; they are both yours; only you know, but one hand
in a Glove at once. But I had so much to do with one of them; such a coil to
draw him to it --


Jos. Which, I prithee? Sir Andrew?


Cras. Even he: He says, he understands that you affect a Mountebanck. Sure,
your Doctor is but some base bragging Rascal.


Jo. Do you think so?


Cras. How should Sir Andrew know else that he is come to embrace you to night?


Jo. Does he know that too?


Cra. Yes marry does he, which the worthy Knight takes so contemptuously,
suffering so base a Rival, that he vows, unless you beat him, bastinado him
soundly when he comes, he will loath you most constantly.


Jo. Enough, if I do not make him an Example to all the bawdy Quacks in the
Kingdom; say there is no virtue in Cudgels, and Bed^^aves. I Will charm him for
opening any more secrets of mine, I Will warrant him. And so write to Sir Andrew.


Cra. Welsaid Mistress, be resolute. I mean to help you my self.


Jo. I Will cast about for weapons (...) --


Exit. Cra. Yes, I will write to Sir Andr^w (...) that, which he shall have
small cause to thank me for. I will write for him to come in the habit of this
Doctor. My^


ACT. IV. Scene IV.
Linsie Wolsie, Crack with a Lute, etc. Lin. She Is gone, she is gone: Was ever
man so cheated? Threescore pound for a Ring; and the Ring gone too, for which I
paid it: A months diet and lodging, besides the charge of Physic and
attendance. Five pound in dole bread, would have served my house a twelve
month. I am undone; broke, Bankrupt: But thou Rogue shall smart for all, now I
have caught thee,


Crac. Mercy, dear Sir, mercy.


Lin. Were you making up your pack to be gone too?


Crac. Nothing but my own Sir, my Lute, and a few Musick-books.


Lin. You and your Mistress have made sweet Music of me: Therefore sirrah
quickly -- Are the Beadles gone for?


Servant within. Yes Sir* Lin. Therefore quickly, I say, as you were an Acter
in the Cosenage, bring her to light, or --


Crac. She Is light enough her self: But a very Innocent I, Sir. She has
cozened me of half a years service, wrought me off of my legs, strained my
back, cracked my voice, done me to my utter undoing; and can you think I knew
of her running away?


Lin. I Will make you sing another song sirrah: Are the Beadles come?


Crac. Any song Sir, or as many as you please.


He sings a song. Lin. Pretty I confess. But that is not the song must do it;
nor can any song please me at this time. Are the Beadles come?


Serve. within. Yes Sir, they are here. Crac. Dear Sir, let 'em forbear a
little. And if I cannot please you with a song, commit me to their fury.


Lin. It Is but to trifle time: yet sing before you suffer. Worse then the other
this; you shall sing in another place, to the whip, to the whip, Sir? Bring in
the Beadles, and away with him to Bridewell.


He sings another song. Crac. Yet once more, good Sir, try me this last time,
and but promise me, if I can sing a song that you shall like, to forgive and
free me.


Lin. Sing a song that I shall like, and I will free thee.


Crack sings again. Then shall a present course be found
For M. Wolsies threescore pound;
And his Ring,
And the thing
That has given him the slip --
Lin. I marry, that I like well.


Crac. Then I have 'scap'd the whip.


Lin. Think you so Sir?


Crac. Yes: For you like the song well, you say, and I am free; I hope you will
make good your noble City word, Sir.


Lin. City words use not to pass for songs Sir* Make you good the words of
your song, Sir, and I shall make my word good Sir: Come away Beadles.


Crac. O stay Sir, I beseech you, and let your Justice fall on the right
shoulders. I Will confess all.


Lin. O will you so Sir?


Crack. It Is most true Sir, that the Gentlewoman; whom I called Mistress, is a
most cunning whore, and a notorious cheat.


Lin. These are good words indeed!


Crac. She came to your house with four men in Liveries; they were all but
hired Pandars.


Lin. Yes, and diverse Trunks of supposed Treasure, which I find to be Baggs
of Nails, and other old Iron, and all the Rings and Stones she boasted in her
Will are but Curtain Rings, and Brickebats.


Crac. Your own covetousness cozened you Sir: But if I now bring you not where
you shall see how she is since bestowed, and that you find not hearty cause
to rejoice that you were cozened of her, let me be whipped to death, Sir.


Lin. Well, come along Sir: But I will have a Guard upon you.


Crac. What Guard you please Sir, so my poor skin may escape the Lash-guards.
--


Exeunt omnes. ACT. V.
Crasy, Tryman, Pyannet, Toby. Try. O thou Varlet, thou unconscionable
Unbeliever, ungodly Miscreant! Have thou cozened my easy Credulity? And
would have undone and married me, like a Cony-catching companion, as thou
art? Did not thou tell me, thou had moderate means of life, friends of
fashion, and civil^ reputation? And now this virtuous, religious Gentlewoman
tells me, thou art an arrant Skipjack.


Py. Nay, and has not a hole to put thy head in, but upon my courtesy.


Try. But I thank this Matrons worship, her pity will not permit my easy
Nature to suffer under thy Cosenage: But bestows her generous Son and Heir
here upon me. --


Py. A Gentleman of another sphere, another ^anck then you are Sirrah; that
shall have three hundred year in Esse, and five in Posse.


Try. That is acquainted with young Lords; has had the honor to make a Hunting
match.


To. I, and a challenge to ride the wild Goose ^hase.


Try. That has made Ladies Posies for Cheese trenchers.


To. And played with Countesses at Shuttle-cock.


Try. And to this Elegant Spirit and choice hope am I, and my Fortunes
contracted.


Cras. How! contracted.


Try. Yes Sir, contracted. Look you, I dare seal it before your face.


Kiss. Cra. Are you so.


To. She is mine sir, mine sir. Do you mark, I dare likewise seal it sir.


Kiss. Cra. Is there honesty in this dealing?


Py. Yes sir, Is there not profit in this dealing?


Cra. It Is very well. If there be no Law upon words, Oaths and Pre-contracts,
and Witness. If a man may spend a hundred Angels upon a Widow; have her affied
before Witness, and then have his Nose wiped of her. Why, It Is very well.


Tryman takes Pyannet and Toby aside. Try. Intruth dear heart, and sweet
Mother in expectation, to speak equally, there have some words of course past
betwixt us, which may seem to impart some Engagement. Surely I have been too
liberal of some speech of advantage. Truly it would not be amiss, (considering
his Expense and Interest) to fall to some slight Composition. Some hundred
Pounds would make the poor Knave do any thing.


To. Mother, let us be wise. Let Us be wise Mother; fetch a hundred pieces
presently: That even upon his first consent, he may be satisfied and silenced.


Try. For if he chance but to be delayed till he ask Counsel, then --


Py. Mum. A word to the wise. --


Exit. Cra. Nay, I hope as long as I am a Subject, I shall have Law: I doubt
not but I shall have Law.


Try. Come Sir, you shall not deservedly exclaim of my neglecting you.

For our sometimes Love, I have procured you a hundred Pounds.


Cra. To disclaim my right in you, I Will take it. Here Is my hand, I Will take it.


To. Pox, how my Mother stays.


Cra. Scorn my Poverty! Come, where is it? Because I have not the Muck of the
World. Come, the money.


Enter Pyannet. Py. Here sir, upon this consideration, that you disclaim and
renounce all interest --


Cra. Yes most freely.


Py. In this Gentlewoman; and do vow, never to pretend future claim to her.


Cra. I do, marry. --


To. Nay, no marries sir, you have received the money. You shall make no more
marries here. Come my betrothed Spouse, bid a Fice for him, Say black's thine
Eye who dares. Mother I Will be married to night, and to bed presently.


Py. This night, Son; it is very late.


To. never to late to be wise. I hope I am your Son; and must bear a Brain.


Py. Indeed, he that deals with Woman, must take occasion by the fore Lock.
Away --


Exit. Cra. Why! I am weary of money now: I have gotten more in a weeks
Cosenage, then in all my days of Honesty. What an easy cool thing it is to
be a rich Knave! Gramercy Punck. A witty VVench is an excellent help at a dead
lift. But in despite of the Justice that provoked me, my Conscience a little
turns at these brain-tricks. But they have all been ungrateful; ungrateful!
It Is a sin that should have no mercy: it is the Plague-spot; who has it should not
live.

If holy wisdom from the thundering Cloud
Had given more Laws then ten, this had ensued:
Avoid, O man, man's Shame, Ingratitude.
For my poor Lot, I could have sweetly slept
In quiet want, with resolute content,
Had not defect of wit, uncurteous scorn
Been thrust upon me. Now they all shall feel,
When honest men revenge, their whips are steel.
My Courtiers are the next that I must exercise upon. This night my wife
expects the embraces of one of them at least, if this hasty Marriage call her
not from her Chamber. But she being a right woman may prevent that with a
fained sickness, or so. Let me remember, J wrote to Rufflit to come like her
Doctor Pulsefeele, to minister to her. This will jump right with a counterfeit
sickness: It may, perhaps, break a Urinall about his Coxcomb.

Music. How now! O perceive this great Wedding goes forward.


Music. Torches. Sarpego. Toby and Tryman. Sneakup and La. Ticket, Pyannet.
Josina in night attire. Bridget. They pass as to the Wedding with Rosemary.
Crasy whispers Josina. She takes leave of her Mother, seeming to complain of
being sick; and so returns with Bridget. Then enter Rufflit like a Doctor.

Cra. So, this falls out pat. She is no sooner gone Sick to her Chamber, but
here comes her Physician, to cover and recover her in a trice.


Ruf. Hist, Footwell, Footwell.


Cra. Seignor Rufflit; J am a fool if J took you not for a Physician.


Ruf. She wrote to me, that J should come in this habit.


Cra. Right Sir, to avoid suspect: For which cause she has counterfeited
herself sick, and lies longing and languishing till you minister to her.


Ruf. And am J come pat? am J come in the nick?


Cra. Your Fortune sings in the right Cliff, sir, a wench as tender as a City
Pullet.


Ruf. But not so rotten.


Cra. Oh sir, health it self; a very Restorative. Will you in? The way lies
open before you.


Ruf. Hold Footwell, tell that till J return -- from branching the most meritted
Cuckold Crasy. Poor Snake, that I must force thee to cast thy Skin. And he were
not a Citizen J could pity him: He is undone for ever. Methinks J see him all
ready make earnest suite, to wear a red Cap, and a blew Gown; comely to carry
a Staff-torch before my Lord Mayor upon Alhalloune night. Watch Footwell, J
mount. --


gives him money. Exit. Cras. But now, if the agitation of my Brains should
work through my Brows. If my Wives pitiful hand should fall to composition
with my Doctors Pate, and my deceit be discovered before the Bastinado had
given charge to his Shoulders, were not my Forehead in apparent danger. It Is
done in three minutes. Death, my Courtier has a sanguine Complexion: He is like
a Cock sparrow, Chit, Chit, and away. Heart of man! And I should be blown up in
mine own Mine now! Ha.


Ruf. within* Hold Mrs. Crasy. Dear Bridget. Help Footwell.


Cra. Ho the hubbub's raised, and my feare's vanished.


Enter Josina, and Bridget beating Rufflit: Crasy takes Bridgets Cudgel, and
lays on. Jos. Out you Pispot-caster.


Bri. You Suppository.


Jos. You Glister-pipe, think to dishonest me?


Ruf. Hold, dear Lady -- I am --


Jos. A stinking saucy Rascal thou art, take this remembrance.


Exit. Cra. Hold, sweet Mistress.


Ruf. Oh I thank you good Mr. Footwell.


Cra. Oh, it is not so much worth verily.


Ruff. Oh, but it is sir.

He^ draws his Sword from under his Gown. Crasy closes with, and disarmes him.
Rogue. Rogue.

Nay prithee sweet Rascal, Pox on you, I did not mean to hurt you, my honest
Vagabond, tell me, tell me: Come, who was it put this Trick upon me. Thou art a
precious Villain: Come, whose devise was it? Whose plot. At whose Suit was I
Cudgel'd? Who made me feign my self a Physician, till I must be forced to go
to the Surgeon? And dare'st tell me?


Cra. Nay, then I will tell you. Dare! why it was your Friend and Rival, Sir
Andrew Ticket.


Ruff. Ticket.


Cra. Even he sir. His Gold hired me to gull you. And this brain procured your
beating. Yes faith sir, Envy, bribes, and wit have wrong upon you.


Ruff. Well, if I revenge not --


Cra. But how sir.


Ruff. I, before Heaven, that is well thought on. Give me but the means, and I
will not only forgive, but reward thee richly.


Cras. Come faith, because I would have both your Shoulders, go in one Livery,
I must disclose. Why sir, Knavery is restorative to me, as Spiders to Monkeys.
The poison of wit ^eeds me.

Enter Ticket. Boy with a Torch. Look you sir, he is come. Stand close, take
this Cudgel, grasp it strongly, stretch your Sinews lustily; And when you see
him hang by the middle in a Rope, let your Fist fall thick, and your Cudgel
nimbly.


Ruf. And soundly. My ambitious blows shall strive which shall go foremost.


Cras. Good sir.


Ruf. draw him up but half way.


Cra. So sir, I must up to receive. --


Exit. Ruf. Do so: I shall be so revenged now! He had been better have been
taken in Bed with another man's Wife, then have prevented me thus.


Tic. Vanish Sirrah with the Light. This I am sure is the Window which her
Letters called me to.


Ruf. I would you would begin once, that I might be at work. I do not love to
stand idle in the Cold thus.


Tic. Hist, Footwell, Footwell.


Crasy above: Here sir, here. O I watched to do you a good turn. Will you mount
sir?


Tic. I will mount, remount, and surmount. I wonder that there is not a solemn
Statute made, that no Citizen should marry a handsome Woman; Or if he did, not
to lie with her. For and twere not for Gallants help, they would beget nothing
but Fools.


Crasy lets down a Rope. Cra. Right sir, right sir. Take the Rope, and fasten
it about your middle sir.


Tic. Why, that is Crasy; a very Coxcomb.


Cra. An Ass, an Ass.


Tic. A mere Citizen. Were It not a shame his wife should be honest? Or is it not
pity that my own man should wholly enjoy a rare excellent proper woman* when a
whole Corporation scarce affords two of them.


Cra. Most true sir. Now mount sir. I pluck courageously. Pray Hercules my
strength fail me not.


Ruf. Up sir, up sir.


Rufflit cudgels him. Tic. Pox, and pain! Hold Doctor.


Ruf. Save you sir.


Tic. I am most sensible of your Salutation. Pluck Footwell.


Cra. Alas the Cord sticks-sir; I Will call some help sir.


Crasy comes down. Tic. Death and Devils!


Ruf. Fists and Cudgels.


Tic. Heart, Lungs, Lights.


Ruf. Arms, Shoulders, Sides.


Tic. Help, help, help.


Enter Crasy. Cra. Passion of Heaven Doctor: I Will Doctor you away.


Exit Rufflit Tic. Redeem me dear Footwell


Tra. Yes sir I come for the same purpose. Alas sir, me thinks I even feel
your blows. Are you not sore ^ie?


Tick. Sore? Could thou not pluck?


Cra. Sure I was Planet-struck; the rope stuck in a slit Sir.


Tic. A Pox of the ^lit, say I.


Cra. Know you this mad Doctor? Or do you owe any Doctor any thing?


Tic. I know him not; nor do I owe any Doctor any thing; I only owe my
Barber-Surgeon for a dyetdrink.


Cra. Speedily make up your face Sir, here comes company: M. Rufflit!


Ent. Rufflit in his own shape. He hugs and shakes him. Ruf. Honest Footwel*
how do? Sir Andrew! Heartily how is it? --


Tic. As heartily as thou will; but not so hard I prithee.


Ruf. Why what is the matter?


Tic. I bruised my side even now against a forms edge.


Ruf. Parma^^ty, Sir, is very good, or the fresh skin of a flead Cat?


Tic. Flead Cat?


Ruf. The fly-blowes of a dead dog, made into oil, and spread upon the kell of
a meazell hog.


Music. Cra. Hark Gentlemen, the Wedding comes, forget old bruises, and put on
sense of the lightest color: for this house to night vows to run giddy with
mirth and laughter.


Enter Lights: Sarpego, Toby, Tryman, La. Ticket, Pyannet, Snerkup. Ruf. Joy,
health, love and children to this happy union.


Tic. Unbruis'd bones, and smooth foreheads to you both.


Py. What shall no device, no mirth solemnize my sons match? Go Sneakup, call
down our daughter.

Exit Sneakup. In despite of sickness, mirth and joy shall make this night
healthful.


Try. O mother, cold sobriety and modest melancholy becomes the face of the
Matron; unedifying gawdes are Profane vanities. Mirth is the fat of fools,
only virtue is the nourishment of purity and unsinning sincerity.


Py. By the leave of your wisdom daughter, we will take the wall of your
preciseness: for Mr. Sarpego has told me of a learned subject for a Ballet,
which we shall see acted presently.


Try. What is it, some Heathenish Play?


Sar. No certes, but a very religious Dialogue, full of nothing, but moral
conceits betwixt Lady Luxury, a Prodigal and a Fool.


Try. But who should act and personate these?


Sar. Why in that lies the nobility of the device; it should be done after the
fashion of Italy by our selves, only the plot premeditated to what our aim must
tend: Marry the Speeches must be extempore. Mrs. Bride would I have to play
Dame Luxury, and Mr. Footwell here the Prodigal.


Py. And my husband the Fool.


Enter Sneakup, Josina and Bridget. Sneak. I, and't please you wife.


Sar. I Will play the Inductor, and then we are all fitted.


Try. I pray you what is Lady Luxury? A woman regenerative.


Tob. A Whore, wife:


Sar. In sincerity not much better then a Curtezan; a kind of open Creature.


Try. And do you think me fit to represent an open Creature? Saving your
modesties, a Whore. Can I play the Strumpet, think ye?


Jos. Trust me Sister, as long as it is done in private, in ones own House, and
for some few selected Gentlemen's pleasure; Methinks the part is not altogether
the displeasingst.


Try. Modesty defend me! you think it is nothing to play the Strumpet.


Sar. Why surely religious Lady, it can be no disgrace to you to figure out the
part: For she that cannot play the Strumpet if she would, can claim no great
honor to be chaste.


Bri. How gravely and sententiously he speaks.


Tob. Wife, it shall be so: It is my first Injunction; you shall do it, or
disobey me. You must play it.


Try. What, the Whore sir?


Tob. I, in jest: What hurt is it? And Mother, you shall excuse my Father for
this once: For since my wife plays the Whore, I Will play the Fool my self.
Though, I know, you had rather see him do it, you shall see for a need, I can
make shift to perform it as well as he; as naturally, and to the Life.


Sar. Exceeding well thought on, I pray you, Lady, approve of it.


Py. Let learning direct, I am not to prescribe to the Muses.


To. Come sweet heart, let us in and tire us, and be ready to enter presently.


Sar. I fausto pede -- Ex. Tob. Try.
Now for the Prodigal.

Cra. O doubt not, Mr. Sarpego: For know Sir, I am but a poor serving creature,
that lives upon expectation; Oh Sir my end must be husks. Fear not my
discharge of the Prodigal --


Exit. Sar. Nil nisi Carmina desunt.
To entertain ye, while we attire our selves.
We want but now some Music, or a Song,
But think you have it. Sit: we will not be long. --

Exit. Py. Seat you Gallants* Sit, sweet Sir Andrew, Madam* and the rest, and
we will imagine Music, as M. Sarpego bids us.

Enter Linsle Wolsie, and Crack with his Lute. How now! By what misrule comes
he to trouble us?


Lin. By your leave, Gallants, I have brought you Music.


Py. You Sir, I know your purpose, and it is prevented; you come after the
Marriage to forbid the banes. Ha ha ha -- you are short, M. Wolsie, you are
short.


Lin. Good Mrs. Sneakup you are wide. I come to wish joy to the match, and to
tell you I rejoice, that I mist a Bridegrooms part.


Py. How Is that?


Lin. You see I wear no Willow, and am merry* All Is true you told me, boy?


Crac. Yes by my detestation to Bridewell Sir.


Lin. Sing boy that song, If I have any grief, it shall be all vented in a
Hymeneall Song.


Tic. I have not known him in this humor.


Ruf. Sure it is a merry madness for the loss of the widow,


Py. Since you come friendly, you are welcome, M. Wolsie. Pray sit with us, and
hear your Hymeneall Song.


Crack sings. Jo Hymen, Jo Hymen, Jo Hymen Py. This begins well.
Was wont to be still the old song
At high Nuptial Feasts
Where the merry merry guests
With joy and good wishes did throng:
But to this new Wedding new notes do I bring,
To rail at thee Hymen, while sadly I sing.
Fie o Hymen, fie o Hymen, fie o Hymen,
What hands, and what hearts do thou knit?
A Widow that is pr^re,
And a very very Whore,
To an Heir that wants nothing but wit*
Yet thus far, O Hymen, thy answer is made,
When his ^^^ns are spent, they may live by her trade.
Py. He sings Hymen and Hymen; but me-thinkes the song is scandalous to the
Marriage.


Lin. Excuse me Lady, though I was cozened of the Bride, I have no such malice;
it is a song that the boy could sing by chance, and made by a couple that were
lately married in Crooked-Lane.


Py. O, is it so Sir? I knew not what to make of it.


Flourish. Enter Sarpego, the Prolocutor. Tic. Let us attend I pray; the
Prologue enters.


Sar. Right Country Dame, and Courtly Lady,
Look for sense as s^all as may be;
But, if wit deceive your thinkings,
Know our Muse disdaines base shrinkings.
Hold a while your Verdicts bridle,
Judge not yet our Project idle,
Till at length the close may show it,
If we act the part of Poet.
Enter Tryman and Toby. She loosely dressed like a Curtezan, a bowl of wine in
her hand. He in a fools Cap and Coat. Speak Lechery and Folly, Luxury I would
say;
I need not prompt them, they know what they should say.

Try. Out you base Rascal, you muddy Slave; thou have married me, and I will
drink a health to thy Cuckoldmaker. --


She drinks it off. To. Sfoot I am afraid she will play the whore better then I
shall act the fool.


Try. Thou under-hearted, dull-blooded Pantaloon* thou whose utmost honor is
to be made so good ^ thing as a Cuckold; thou son of a Copyholder* and the
Pudding-pye woman's daughter, do tho^ think, dare thou but imagine, that I
shall ever vouchsafe to love to do any thing, but laugh at thee? Hence you
Poultroon; thy voice sounds not so far as thy breath stinks -- Kicks him*


To. Nay but, nay but do you hear wife? I do not very well like this;
methinks you play too much in earnest.


Try. In earnest? Why Goodman Fool, you Cock^* comb, you Ninnihammer, you
Clotpold Country Gentleman, thou dirty greediness. --


Py. Why how now daughter? Are you well? Me* thinks you over-do it too much.


Try. Thou dream'st my good husband, that thou have married the rich widow, ha
ha ha --


Sar. Now enters Prodigality.


Enter Crasy in his own habit, all hung with Chains, Jewels, Bags of Money,
etc. Cra. When the troth is, dear brother, you have married the rank whore. Ha
ha ha.


To. Sir! -- who, brother Crasy?


Jo. Sweet husband!


Py. Dear son!


Tic. Ruff. Precious friend!


Lin. Neighbor Crasie!


Sar. Dij boni! Domine Crasie!


Cra. And how do you wife? When comes your Doctor Pulsfeel? But a kiss and so
forth? And would not one of these free Gallants, these proper youths have
served the turn? I pray pardon mine incivility, Mother; I was bold to retain
mine own Jewels. Have you not forgot your singles and your doubles, your
fallings back, and your turnings up wife?


Jo. Why in faith, dear heart, do think me so simple, that I did not know thee
all the while? Alas man, I did but counterfeit, as you did, to maintain the
jest; kiss me sweet duck -- only to maintain the jest in faith.


Cra. Yes, yes, yes, we are Friends. I heartily thank these kind Gentlemen for
their loves to you, yes says, heartily: I am better by it five hundred at
least. Be not you jealous Madame, they had nothing for it; not a bit by this
Light.


Ruff. Death of my Fortune! that was my Gold.


Tic. Plague of a Villain, that was my Jewel.


Cra. True Gentlemen; and your bounty likewise lies in this Bag.


La. T. Sir, we sent these things to your Wife.


Cra. I thank you for it; we have but one Capacity in the Law, you know: What Is
hers must be mine. I know thou would have it so sweetheart. I am only sorry
Gentlemen, that you were so well favourdly beaten. That the Fool Citizen, the
Ass Citizen, the Cuckold Citizen should procure such a sound swaddling to your
wise, valiant and substantial Shoulders. Is It not a sore matter? But rest,
Salves and warm Oils may in time recover it.

How do you kind Mother? Gentlemen, if any of you want Money Gentlemen, here
stands a City-wit that has it. I have it, if you want any; speak, I have it,
and will keep it. How does your Costard Sir? A Pox o'th Slit, Sir. Beloved of
Phoebus, Minion of the Muses; dear water bailey of Helicon, be not proud of
your Preferment, though you are his Highness tutor. Mother, J take the
restoring of my rich Jewels very kindly. O my kind Brother, you have got the
rich Widow; and you have borne a brain Mother. Your hundred pound, brother,
was most thristily and opportunely bestowed. J could have procured her to you at
an easier rate, Mother. J am only sorry for you Mr. Wolsy, that you had her
not: Because you very honorably releast me of your Bond before it was due; and
are in shrewd danger to be laughed at among your Neighbors.

How does good Mr. Crasy, the Princes Jeweller? Mother, did not my Father look
too wise for a Citizen? How do honest Punck? I am as much beholden to thee,
as to the rest of them.


Py. My son and my heir is utterly undone.


To. O! I am quite cast away.


Cra. O no, you shall be no loser by me; you shall be a gainer by me Brother:
Get wit Brother (mark you) wit. Good faith I pity the poor Citizen, he has
no wit; a handsome young fellow, with a pretty beard, and a proper bodied woman
to his wife, and cannot bear a brain!


Try. Why do hear, modestly mumping Motherin-Law, with thy French-hood,
gold-chain, and flaggon-bracelets, advance thy snout. If the fool thy son, the
Idiot my husband here, have but as much brains as a Battledore, he may make a
fair revenue of me: Has he not a place at Court? Can he not lodge me there,
and prove weak-sighted, thick of hearing, sleepie after dinner, and snort when
others entertain and Court me? Can he not survey the hangings, read Cupids
Conybery, the Park of pleasure, Christian Love Letters, or some other Pamphlet,
or feign some errand into the Town, whilst his brows are turning into gold?


Py. O impudence beyond woman's apprehension! Son Crasie, we have all wronged
thee, thou know it; thou have revenged it, we feel it; only do not undo my
heir, save him, bring him but off of this match with any loss.


Cra. Why mother, is your son grown such a saucy Knave, as he thinks scorn to
be a Cuckold? I cannot clear him; in truth I cannot: He has paid for her
deeply, and it is pity they should be parted, yes faith is it.


Py. Woman, we do pray thee, we do beseech thee, even upon our knees -- have
pity on the house of the Sneakups: quit my son, relinquish thy right, make
frustrate this marriage, and look thee, before these able witnesses, we
heartily forgive all, and forget: And withal, freely bestow this chain upon
thee --


Py. and Tob. kneel. Pulls off her chain and gives it. Try. I do receive it.


To. She does receive it, bear witness all, she does receive it.


Try. Marry on this condition --


To. No I Will no more marries nor conditions, you have received it.


Py. I, you must make frustrate the Marriage; for look you, you have received
it.


Try. I will, and freely do; only the condition I would have made, is this,
That if you intend longer to be Master of your husband, now that you have seen
how well it became me, you will henceforward do as I do -- Look you, wear
breeches.


Pulls the coats up, and shows the breeches. Py. O horrible!


To. How! do you wear breeches?


Try. Yes Sir, breeches; and as good lining and stuffing in them, I hope, as
yours have, though they be of Satin.


To. I Will feel that: Sfoot mother this is a man. Come and feel else.


Try. A young one Sir.

Puts off his head-dress. See Master your poor servant Jeremy, if he has
performed his part, desires to be admitted into the Livery of wit, and to wear
this chain as his ensign of Freedom.

Omnes Jeremy!


To. Jeremy! O Jeremy! thou were ever too hard for --


Try. Except at spoonmeat, Sir.


Jo. Jeremy!


Try. Yes, Mistress: Indeed forsooth.


Cra. Well, give me thy hand: I will love thee as long as there is swiftness
in meditation, smoothness in flattery, or constancy in malice.


Py. And for the cure that he has wrought on me,
I will applaud his wit; and bless the light
It gave me to discover my foul error:
Which by his demonstration showed so monstrous,
That I must loath my self, till I be purged.
Sir, by your fair forgiveness, which I kneel for --

Sneak. Heaven make me thankful: Wife I have no words
To show how I rejoice: Rise, let me kiss thee --

Sar. Tempora mutantur. The towne's ours again.
Only, to fill the Scene with joy, may we
Conjoyn sweet maid, in the Catastrophe.

Bri. Would you that have taught Greek, and whip't great boys, come back to
your Horn-book, and let down your Gascoines to me, that would, if I had you,
be more tyrannous then any Pedant that ever reigned since the days of
Dionysius: Besides here is my choice, with my Master and Mistresses leave,
Jeremies brother.


Cra. But is he seriously thy brother?


Try. Yes, and no more a Pimp Sir, then I am a Wench.


Cra. Well, Mr. Sarpego, I Will help you to a fitter match, and Crack I will give
thee something with her: Take the security of my hand.


Crac. I only desire to be secure from this man's fury, and so consequently from
Bridewell.


Cra. He shall have nothing to say to thee.


Lin. I will have nothing to say to man, woman, or child, while I live again.


Sar. Fortuna nihil aufert sapienti: Fools and Fiddlers are her Favorites.


Cra. Let us make this a merry night.

Think of no losses. Sirs, you shall have none;
My honest care being but to keep mine own.
What, by my slights, I got more then my due,
I timely will restore again to you.
Omnes, Thanks kind Mr. Crasy, thanks.


Sar. Gratias vel ingentes Domine Crasy.


Epilogue.
NOw let me Scholastikewise
For us all Epiloguise:
If these slender Scenes of Wit
Are received, as they were writ,
For your mirth, and no offense;
Let your Grace quit our suspense
With applaus'd Catastrophe.
I am short, w'yee (as you see)
There a Figure, which pray note ye,
Sic valete valetote.
Gratias Reddo Cuicunque.
Valetote ^terumque.
FINIS.
THE DAMOISELLE, OR THE NEW ORDINARY.

A COMEDY.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Richard Marriot, and Thomas Dring, and are to be
sold at their Shops in Fleet Street, 1653.

Prologue.
OUR Playmaker (for yet he will not be called
Author, or Poet) nor beg to be installd
^ir Lawreat) has sent me out t'invite
^our fancies to a full and clean delight:
And bids me tell you, That though he be none
Of those, whose towering Muses scale the Throne
Of Kings, yet his familiar mirth's as good,
When it is by you approved and understood.
As if h' had writ strong lines, and had the fate,
Of other Fools for meddling with the State.
Readers and Audients make good Plays or Books,
It Is appetite makes Dishes, it is not Cooks.
But let me tell you, though you have the power,
To kill or save; They Are Tyrants that devour,
And Princes that preserve: He does not aim,
So much at praise, as pardon; nor does claim
Laurel, but Money; Bays will buy no Sack,
And Honor fills no belly, clothes no back.
And therefore you may see his maine intent
Is his own welfare, and your merriment.
Then often come, 'twill make us and him the wetter,
We Will drown the faults of this, in one that is better.
Dramatis Personae.
Vermin, an old Usurer. Dryground, an old decayed Knight. Sir Amphilus, a
Cornish Knight. Bumpsey, an old Justice. Brookeall, a Gentleman, undone by
Vermin. Valentine, Drygrounds Son. Wat, Vermins Son. Freindly, a Templer. Two
Gallants
Oliver, Ambrose,
Trebasco. Sir Amphilus his Footman. Attorney. Mrs. Magdalen, Bumpseys Wife.
Jane, his Daughter. Alice, Vermins Daughter. Frances, a young Gentlewoman.
Phillis, a poor Wench. Elianor. Lawyers. Sergeants. Servants. Rabble.
The Scene LONDON.

THE DAMOISELLE, OR, The New Ordinary.
ACT. I.
Scene I.
Vermin, Dryground. Ver. YOU have your Money; full a thousand pound,
Sir Humfrey Dryground.

Dry. And you have my Mortgage.


Ver. All well and good; all well and good. But, now,
Sir Humfrey Dryground, let me counsel you.
You have already spent a fair Estate;
A goodly, great estate: I do not taunt,
Nor tax you for it.

Dry. Because its pumpt into
The purses of such wretches as thy self.

Ver. But give me leave, now, fairly to admonish
You, to a care, how you do part with this.
You spirited men call Money Dirt and Mud.
I say it is the Eele.

Dry. And you the Mud
That foster it.

Ver. It is an Eele, I say,
In such sleek hands, as yours; from whence it glides --

Dry. Into the Mud, oft-times, from whence it came.


Ver. I know you do conceive me. Therefore, Sir,
(As I before was saying) Hold it fast.

Dry. According to the Ballad.


He sings. Youth keep thy Money fast,
And tie it in thy Purse:
For that must be thine only Friend,
For better and for worse.
Ver. So so, I see it going already.


Dry. I, to thy comfort. This is the Usurers Scripture;
And all that they pretend Salvation by:
To give good admonition with their Money;
Though, in their hearts they wish the quick subversion
Of all they deal with. This is all they plead
Against the curses of oppressed souls:
Did not I warn you? Did not I say, take heed?
And so, and so forth. I must thank you Sir.

Ver You say, you will make a venture of this Money.


Dry. Yes Mr. Vermin, in a Project, that --


Ver. Out upon Projects. Fie fie, out out out.


Dry. I Am confident shall set me out of debt,
With you and all the World; and reap, again,
All, that I formerly have sown, with profit.

Ver. Sown! There Is a word! Prodigal wast is sowing.
We shall call Shipwreck, shortly, sowing too.
Hark you Sir Humfrey Dryground, may not I
Be privy to your Project? Will you tell me,
If I guess on it?

Dry. That I will in sooth.


Ver. Is 't not to dreine the Goodwins? To be Lord
Of all the Treasure, buried in the Sands there?
And have a Million yearly, from the Merchants
To clear the passage.

Dry. You have had your blow.
No Sir, my Project is in the behalf
Of the poor Gentleman, you overthrew.
By the strong hand of Law, Bribes, and oppression;
Brookall: Do you know him Sir? whose state you sucked
That wrought him to a poverty that cries
Your sinful Covetise up to the height;
And renders you the Monster of our time,
For avarice and cruelty.

Ver. No more of that.


Dry. You should do well to add a sum, like this
To his releife: To wave the bitter curse
That will in time fall on you and your house.

Ver. O ho! I now remember, you have reason.
That Brookall had a Sister, whom you vitiated
In your wild heat of blood, and then denied
Her promised Marriage; turned her off with Child
A dozen years since, and since that, never heard of*
Ha! Is It not so? Pray, did you know her Sir?

Dry. I wish I could redeem that ruthful fault,
By all expiatory means: But thy
Inhumane cruelty is inexpiable:
Unless (it comes from Heaven into my heart
To move thee to it) thou take a speedy course
To give him threefold restitution.
I Will put thee in the way. He has a Son,
A hopeful Youth, a Student in the Law,
If his poor Fathers want of means have not
Declined his course: Give him thy only Daughter,
And make his Fathers own Inheritance
(By thee unrighteously usurpt) her Dowry;
And pray a blessing may go with it: And then
Thou may regaine a Christian reputation,
Till age shall lead thee to a quiet Grave.
Come, is 't a match? Will you bestow your Daughter
On Brookalls Son, and make your way to Heaven by it?

Ver. You have your Money.


Dry. And thou have Adders ears
To all such Counsels.

Ver. If you break your day
I shall think of your counsel.

Dry. Farewell Vermin.


Exit. Ver. And farewell Dryground.
This parcel of thy Land, I Will keep from wetting: The Mortgage.
It Is not in thee to turn an Acre of it
Into pure Liquor, for a twelve months day.
And break that day thy payment, and the Sun
Sets not more sure, then all this Land is mine.
My Daughter! ha! Cannot be in thought of man
To dream of such a Match? A wretch, a Beggar?
Within there! Where*s my Girl? What Ally? Ally?

Enter Alice. Ali. Here Sir --


Vir. My blessing, and good morn: Now hear me Girl.


Ali. Now for a Speech --


Ver. The care of Children's such a startle-braine,
That had I more then one, I should run Wild-cat,
(Then one I mean, to care for) that is thy self,
My sober discreet Daughter. Note my care,
Pil'd up for thee in massy sums of wealth;
Too weighty for thy weak consideration
To guess from whence it came, or how together
So laid in mountainous heaps.

Ali. It is indeed
As strange to me, as are the stony wonders
On Salsbury Plain to others. But my duty
Persuades me it was your thrift, and that great blessing
That gives increase to honest Industry,
Drawn on it by your prayers and upright life,
That wrought these heaps together.

Ver. O, Ally Ally,
It Is well if thine with all thy Huswifry
Can keep 'em so. I thank thee for thy judgment
And charitable thoughts. But --

Ali. You had other ways.


Ver. I say, thou art the only Child I care for.
Thy Brother (though I loath to call him so)
Is, now, an utter stranger to my blood;
Not to be named but with my curse, a Wolf
That tears my very bowels out.

Ali. Your Money.


Ver. A riotous Reprobate, that has consumed
His last, already, of my means and blessing.

Ali. But he yet may be turned Sir.


Ver. Out oth' Compter!
May he be so, do think? Could I but dream
His Creditors, that have him fast, could be
So idly merciful, or that his youthful Ghing
Could stretch, to get him out, I Will lay, my self,
An Action on him weightier, then the strength
Of all their poor abilities could lift:
His Jacks, his Toms, his Nams, Nolls, Gills, and Nuns,
The roaring fry of his Blade-brandishing mates
Should not release his Carcass: If they did,
I Would force him to a trial for his life,
For the two hundred Pieces that he pilfred.
Out of my Counting House. He shall up.

Ali. I will not forfeit my obedience Sir,
To urge against your Justice, only I crave
Your leave to grieve, that I have such a Brother.

Ver. Thou shall defy the name of Brother in him,
My only, only Child; and but in one command
Obey me further, all my estate is thine,
It Is that I called thee for.

Ali. I do not crave
More, then your daily blessing; but desire
To know what you will impose upon my duty.

Ver. Thou shall, and style thy self a Lady by it.


Ali. Now Love defend me from the man I fear.


Ver. This day I Will match thee to a matchless Knight.


Ali. The Western Kight Sir, that was here last Term?


Ver. Even he, this day he comes to Town.


Ali. Would I
Were out on it first. A matchless Knight Aside.
Indeed, and shall be matchless still for me.

Ver. I like those blushes well: I read his welcome
Upon her cheeks.

Ali. Sir, I have heard, he has
But little Land.

Ver. But he has Money Girl
Enough to buy the best Knights Land, that is
A selling Knight, in the West part of England.

Ali. He Is well in years.


Ver. A lusty Bachelor of two and fifty,
With, O, the husbandry that's in him.

Ali. How came he by his Knighthood? Cost it nothing?


Ver. No: He was one oth' Cobbe-Knights in the throng,
When they were dubd in Clusters.

Enter Servant. Ser. Sir, the Knight,
That you expect this day, is come to Town.
His man has brought's Portmantue.

Ver. Fetch the Man.
The welcomst man alive is come to Town.
Ally, my Girl, my Daughter, Lady Bride!
What title shall I give thee? Now bestirr you,
I know his thrift, he has rid hard to day
To save his Dinner Enter Wat disguised like a Country Serving man.
Welcome honest friend.
And how does the right worshipful Sir Amphilus?

Wat. My Master is in health Sir, praised be Go --
A little weary, or so, as I am of my carriage,
Which I must not lay down, but in the hands
Of your own Worship.

Ver. It Is of weight and locked: I guess the worth,
And warrant him the safety under these Keys.
But where is thy Master?

Wat. At his Inn in Holborne
Telling a little with the Host, till I
Bring word from you.

Ver. No, I will run to him
My self: you shall stay here* his Chamber
Fitted against he comes, Ally, bestirr you,
And think no pains your trouble on this day,
To morrows Sun shall light your Wedding way.

Exit. Ali. Unless some unexpected Fate relieve me,
I shall be hurried to my endless ruin.

Wat. You are sad, me thinks, young Mistress, I can tell you,
My Master, when he comes, will make you merry.

Ali. How? As he is a Fool?


Wat. No: But as he has
The soul of mirth and Music at command;
Money, the all-rejoycing spirit; that
He Will make you merry with: Nor that alone,
But Dignity, which Women prise 'bove money,
You are a Lady by it: Mark that. And if
He has a weakness, which you reckon folly;
It lays you open way to Sovereignty;
The thing which is of most esteem. You Will be
His Lady Regent; rule all his, and him.

Ali. This Fellow talks not like a Serving-man:
A forty shilling wages Creature, but
Some disguised spokes-man. What may be the trick o'nt?

Wat. You cannot, in the estate you are, imagine
What it is to be a Wife to such a man.

Ali. No more then you perceive the pains you loose
In fooling for him thus. But spare your breath,
And take this brief taste of his Entertainment.
First know, that J do know the man you speak of,
To be a covetous Miser; old and foolish.
Not worth in my estimation the worst Meal
That ever he himself paid three pence for.

Wat. Who do you mean? Sir Amphilus my Knight.


Ali. Yes Squire, J know him and his qualities;
The ways he got his Wealth by, casual Matches;
Of forty, fifty, and sometimes a hundred
For one. When bounteous Fortune (seldom failing
Men of his Brain) cast all into his mouth,
The Gudgeon gap*d for. And how slight a thing
It is, for such base Worldlings to be rich?
That study nothing but to scrape and save.
That have no Faith, but in their ready money,
Nor love to Worldly pleasures above those
Poor Cobblers use.

Wat. Cheap Whores, and Duck-hunting:
There*s his delight indeed.

Ali. J hate to think of of such a Dunghill Scarab.
A water-Dog Knight!

Wat. But Wedlock, to his age, will bring him home
To choicer pleasures, and abandon such.

Ali. His Age is fit for nothing, but to rock
Another Child; and to rejoice through Spectacles,
At the strong Guess he has, it is his own.

Wat. You slight him strangely yet: but when you see
Him, and his weighty reasons to confute you. --

Ali. J will nor weigh, nor see him, or his reasons.
And if thou ow'st him so much Service, tell him;
Go back and tell him strait: save him the end
Of his intended Journey. For to come
Hither, will be to drive me hence. And tell
My Father, ere he shall enforce me, take him;
I Will fly into the Arms of one he hates.

Wat. Are you in earnest?


Ali. Yes, by all my hopes.


Wat. These are the arms that must receive thee then.
Nay, be not frighted Sister; look, it is J.

Off his Beard, etc. Ali. Beshrew me but J am. How got you hither?
Could not the Compter hold you?

Wat. So it seems,
My Virtue was not to be so obscured.
Noble Sir Humphrey Dryground, Sister, was
My franck Infranchiser. O, J have wonders
To tell thee Sister. Thou must go with me.
But first, lend me some money. Borrow some;
(And let it be a good Sum) of my Father,
Now in his absence. Come, supply, supply
My Pockets and thine own. For we must hence.
Thou Art made for ever, Sister. Quick, dispatch.

Ali. What Is the meaning of all this?


Wat. Twill be too long to tell it here.
The Rascal fool, to whom my Father gives thee,
Is come to Town: And should he now surprise thee,
Here in my Fathers power, thy strength might fail thee.
Be therefore at a sure Guard. O, Sir Humphrey,
How are my Sister and my self bound to thee,
That plottest this escape. Dispatch good Ally,
And hear thee rest by the way.

Ali. Why? Wither? What Is the matter?


Wat. Say thou will have that Coxcomb, I Will but kill thee,
And leave the here: And all my care is over.

Ali. I Will sooner dye then have him.


Wat. Why do you not shun him then? O, sweet Sir Humphrey,
Is thy care slighted thus, in my delivery?
In my disguise? In sending out my Father
On Tom-fooles Errant? While a Coach is sent
To the back-doore here; All to save my Sister,
My thanklesse Sister here, from worse then Rape.

Ali Why, whither would you have me?


Wat. But hard-by.
But till the Wilde-fire of my Fathers Passion
Shall be run out. Slid, J had eene forgot.
Bear money with us, Sister; pretty store.
Who knows occasions? Let him keep in pawn
My rich Portmantue for it.

Ali. There Is some good stuff in it.


Wat. More then hee*ll thank me for. We Will talk in the Coach
In, in, and furnish; and so through the Garden,
And, whirre, we are gone. If we should be prevented;
By this good steel, if J but hear one knock,
Jle make sure work o*thee. J can but trusse for*t.
There Is a fair end on's both. And what will he
Do with his money then? Look how thou standst.
Jf you respect your Father, or the Dog-Master,
To be your Husband, better then me, then take
You your own course: Mine shall be known next Sessions.

Ali. Better then you, don't you respect your Father Better then me?


Wat. No, if J do, let me be hanged for nothing:
And that would anger any man I think.
'Slid, thou and J had one Mother, (which
We both take after) so had not he and we.
And he takes after no body, that J know.
He loves a stranger better then is own Child:
And that man's money, better then that man,
The Devil 'bove all J think. Thou do not know
What Coals we stand on.

Ali. Who shall look toth'house?


Wat. Wilt loose thy self with keeping that? Is that All now? Away, away.


Ali. You Are a precious Brother.


Exeunt. ACT. I. Scene II.
Bumpsey, Dryground, Valentine, Magdalen, Jane. Bum. ALL this needs not Sir
Humphrey.


Dry. Do but hear patiently, and do your pleasure.
J go not about to stop your course, Mr. Bumpsey.

Bum. Nor J yours, Sir Humphrey; Nor your Sons here; Nor his Wifes there:
Only this Gentlewoman, in mine own right J may be bold withal, while you
depart my house, if you may be entreated, so. Is not this right? Is not this
plain?


Mag. Yet hear his Worship speak, good Bump.


Bum. Good Whirly, what can his Worship speak? Or your wisdom twatle for him,
in this Cause; that J do not understand already? Has not his Son wedded our
Daughter? How directly, or indirectly, who meddles with his match? Nay more,
has he not bedded her? How, directly or indirectly, who meddles with that
either? Let him have and hold, possess ( Hmh.) and enjoy; do his worst, and
make his best of her, though she be an Heir, J will not sue him out of her:
No, J protest; were it Ante Copulam, as it is post, J would not cross em. Is
not this right and plain enough.


Dry. But good Mr. Bumpsey, Brother Bumpsey, I would call you --


Bum. Keep your Brothers and your Goods to your self, Sir, J have no need of
'em.
You are a Knight, and a man ot Worship --

Val. He will speak all himself.


Bum. J am a plain Fellow, and out of debt.


Mag. J, let him run on.


Bum. J sought none of your Alliance, J --


Val. Has he the speed to run beyond himself?


Ja. Yes, and bring himself about, J warrant you.


Bum. Nor to be joined with houses of great sound,
Whose noise grows from their hollow emptiness.
J could have matched my Daughter here, that was,
But now a Barronettesse in Reversion,
To a substantial Heir of two fair Lordships.

Dry. Perhaps no Gentleman.


Bum. Yet honorable, Land-Lordship's real honor,
Though in a Tradesman Son: when your fair Titles
Are but the shadows of your Ancestry;
And you walk in'em, when your Land is gone:
Like the pale Ghosts of dead Nobility.
Ha! Is It not so? Is not this right and plain?

Dry. Yes like the privilege you use in your own house here.


Bum. Nay I come up to you now Sir Humfry Dryground;
Up in a point of Chivalry. You are a Knight,
A Baronet to boot: Your son is like
T'inherit that dear paid-for title, but
(You Will give me leave to use my plainness)

Dry. Freely.


Bum. Your son (I say) is Heir to your bought honor.
Which may hereafter Ladifie my Daughter:
But where*s the Land you once were Lord of? Ha!
The goodly Cornfields, Medows, Woods, and Pastures,
That must maintain the House, the Gowns, the Coach,
With all by complements of Horses, Hawks, and Hounds.

Val. Now he is in.


Bum. Where be the Parks, the Warrens, Herds, and Flocks?
Besides the Gardens, Orchards, Walks, and Fish Ponds?

Dry. For that hear me.


Bum. Ods pity, give me leave,
You, that had all these once, in three fair Lordships,
To be wrought on, and tonyed out of all,
But a small pittance of Trois Cents per Annum,
By Providence intayld upon the Heir,
(Or thad had wasted too) which now maintains you,
In a proportion of Smoke, and Sack,
To wash your mouth with after, where you live
Confined in Milford Lane, or Fullers Rents,
Or who knows where, it skills not --

Dry. Must I hear this too.


Mag. Now he has almost done.


Bum. Can you (I say) think your good husbandry
A lawful Precedent for your Gamesome son
To make my Daughter happy in a Marriage,
Though he had twice my Fortunes?

Ja. Now he is coming:
Bear but with this; and if he offer not
More then you would request, I Will lose your love.

Bum. But here is the substance often, you have my Daughter,
Your Son, sir, has my Daughter, that must have,
And shall, my whole Estate at my Decease;
(No Law exacts it sooner) This Estate
You safely may suppose ten thousand pounds,
Which J have got by thrifty Industry.
Only one thousand, J confess, my Wife
Improved my Fortune with, Here Is the just sum.
J give her* leave to give it to her Daughter:
She may endow her Husband with it. So,
Is not this plain? Now note me further, sir;
What J have left is my own; and you, sir, may
Which what is theirs take hence your Son and Daughter,
Till you shall hear old Bumpsey is deceast.
Then let him come, and challenge all -- that is left;
Mean time J know my course.

Ja. Now chop in with him, Mother, you know how apt
He is to cross you in these Moods.

Val. Dear, worthy, honored, sir,


Bum. sh^t, sh't, sh't; Woman come you with me.


Mag. J Bump. Let us go our way, and let them take theirs agods name.


Val. Pray hear me, sir.


Mag. At this time, sir, he shall not.


Bum. Shall not! He shall sure: Ods pity! shall not: Are you pleased to speak,
sir.


Val. not to offend --


Bum. Not to a Fiddlestick. Shall not! Can you speak or not?
If not, pray yell me so.

Val. J married, sir, your Daughter.


Bum. You may thank her Mother for it, not me.
Well, will you speak?

Val. J married her in a firm hope to win
Your Love and favor.

Bum. Well.


Val. Which, since I have not yet; and time must work it,
I would make this my suit.

Bum. Would I could hear it once.


Val. That you would take
With re-acceptance of this thousand pound
Your Daughter and me into your Family.

Bum. And why the thousand pound; doe's't burn your Fingers?
Give us but meat and lodging for^t: My Father,
Out of his little left Estate will give us
A hundred yearly for other necessaries.

Bump. With all my heart.


Val. And as you find my regular life deserve
Your future favor, so extend your bounty,
When Age shall call upon you to dispose
Of all your fair Possessions.

Bum. Humh! A pretty od speech this! I would I knew The meaning on^t.


Val. I mean, Sir, as I speak; that till you find
Strong probability in me to manage
A good estate, you trust me not with any.

Bum. Ha! Is it so? Then J come to a point with you.


Mag. Mark him now, Sir Humfrey.


Bum. You look, Sir, in my Daughters right, to have,
After my death, my whole Estate, by showing
Me, in my life time, your good husbandry, by husbanding of nothing:
Y' have taken off half my purpose; for J meant
To have kept it in my power, whether to leave her
Any, or nothing: And, perhaps (do you hear)
By an odd course, that J was thinking on
To ha* made all nothing ere J died: But now
Half of that power I Will put into your hands,
I Will try what you can do with something.

Mag. Half? What mean you half?


Bum. Even half of all J have.


Mag. J hope you will not deal so.


Bum. And as he deals with that, I Will use the rest.


Mag. Pray be advised.


Bum. Never by you against this:
I Will give him instantly the free possession
Of half J have: Now mark; if you increase,
Or keep that half, then, doubtless, J shall do,
As well with the other for you: If you diminish
Or waste it all, i will do the like with my part.

Mag. Husband.


Bum. I Will do it: Together we will live:
And I Will along with you in your own course,
And, as you play your game, you win or lose all:
Thrive and i will thrive: Spend you, and J will spend:
Save, and Jle save; scatter, and I Will scatter.

Mag. You will not be mad.


Bum. I Will do it: Let him throw Money
Into the Thames, make Ducks and Drakes with Pieces,
I Will do the like: till he has made a match
Or no match of my Daughter: There Is the point
And the whole substance on it.

Dry. Will you do so?


Bum. Will I? It Is done. I Will make him a good husband,
Or be no husband for him: And so see
What Is mine, out of the danger of his waste,
And have some sport too for my Money: Ha!
I love to do these things.

Mag. Nay, but in one thing, Bump. let me advise you.


Bump. In nothing `gainst this course, good whirly: no,
It Is so set down. I know I shall be counted
An odd old humorous Cockscombe for it by some:
But the truth is, I love to do these things:
And so God gi ye joy.

Dry. I Will take my leave Sir.


Bum. Not so I hope, Sir Humfry.


Dry. I have business,
And go well satisfied with this agreement:
And, Val. take briefly this my Charge: You are now
A Husband, be a good one: You Have my blessing.
But (hark you) do you remember against the evening?

Val. All Sir, all: I have spread my Nets already.


Dry. Sir, fare you well.


Bum. At your pleasure Sir.


Dry. I Will shortly visit you.


Bum. At your own good time Sir- Exit Drygr.
These shall stay here, I Will blindfold them with Money,
And by a new way try, if they can grope
The right way into the World. Come your way.

ACT. II.
Scene I.
Oliver. Ambrose. Ol. ANd why this Gullery to me, good Ambrose?


Am. J swear J am serious, and you may may believe it.


Ol. What, that there can be in the World an Ass
(Were thou a fool to credit it) that would keep
A House, by way of public Ordinary,
For fashionable Guests, and curious stomachs;
The daintiest Pallats, with rich Wine and Cheer;
And all for nothing, but alls paid and welcome?

Am. Vall Dryground told it me, whose truth deserves
So well my credit, that, prove you it false,
I Will pay all Ord'naries and Tavern reckonings
You shall be at this twel'moneth.

Ol. J have heard
Of all the Mockeries, the Ape, the Ram, the Horns,
The Goat, and such tame Monsters, whom poor wits
Have sent wise Tradesmen to, as to a Knight,
A Lord, or foreign Prince; to be his Mercer,
His Tailor, Semster, Millener, or Barber:
When those, that have been mocked, still sent their Neighbors,
Till half the City have be fool-found. Ha!
Is It not some such poor trick?

Am. Here comes my Author.


Enter Valentine. Ol. O Mr. Bridegroom, that stole the wealthy match!
How got you loose so soon? J thought you had been
tied up by the Loins, like a Monkey to the Bed-post,
for a fortnight at the least. How does old Bumpsey, that
Freecost Drunkard, thy mad Father-in-Law, take thy
stolen Marriage? I am sure he knows on it.

Val. He found's abed last night in the nick, as we say.
But we are peec'd this morning.

Am. Then he wrangled it out, of himself. J know his singular humor.


Ol. What has he gi'n thee?


Val. Half, of all he has.


Am. How?


Val. On this Condition, that, if J save
That half until he dies, the rest is mine too.

Ol. What if thou spendst thy half?


Val. Heel spend the the other; and the same way, he swears.


Ol. He Will nere keep Covenant.


Val. He tell you how he runs at waste already,
This morning the French Tailor brought a Gown home,
Of the fashion, for my Wife. He bought one
Straight, ready made, for his old Gentlewoman,
That never wore so rich in all her life.

Am. O brave old woman! How will she carry it?


Val. I spoke but of a Coach, and he bespoke one.


Ol. Wonder upon wonder! Nam was telling one Before thou came.


Val. What the new Ordnary?


Ol. Do know the man that keeps it?


Val. They call him Osbright.
A brave old Blade. He was the President
Of the Can-quarrelling Fraternity,
Now called the Roaring Brotherhood, thirty years since,
But now grown wondrous civil, free, and hospitable,
Having had something fallen to him, as it seems.

Ol. That Osbright has been dead these many years.


Val. It was given out so: But he lived beyond Sea.


Ol. There*s some strange plot in it.


Val. O thou pollitick Noll.


Ol. Judge thy self, Val, what can the mystery be?
He tells me there is no Gaming, so no Cheating;
Nor any other by-way of expense,
By Bawdry, or so, for privy profit.

Val. Such a suspicion were a sin. But now
I will unfold the Riddle to you. This feasting
Has been but for three days, and for great persons,
That are invited, and to be prepared
To venture for a prize. This very night
There will be some great Rifling for some Jewel,
Or other rare Commodity, they say.
I cannot nam't: it is twenty pound a man.

Ol. Is not that gaming prithee?


Val. That's to come:
But, hitherto, nor Dice, nor Cards* nor Wench,
Is seen in the house, but his own, only Daughter.

Ol. O! has he Daughter there? Mark that Nam.
No gaming say thou? Ods me, and they play not
At the old Game of old there, I dare --

Val. I dare be sworn thou do 'em wrong.


Ol. She Is too ftale, is she?
It Is above twenty years since he went over,
And was reported dead (they say) soon after,
In France, I take it: But, then, it seems, he lived,
And got this Damsel there? Is she French borne?

Val. Yes, she was born and bred there: And can speak
English but brokenly. But, for French behavior,
She Is a most complete Damoiselle, and able
To give instructions to our Courtliest Dames.

Ol. She must be seen.


Am. But see who here comes first.


Enter Vermin* Servant. Ver. Thou have undone me Villain.


Ser. Out alas!
I was as ignorant of the deceit,
As your own innocent worship ever was
Of cozening any man of Land or Living.

Ver. Was ever man so cursed in his Children!


Val. It Is the wretch Vermin.


Ol. What makes he here, trow, in the Temple Walks?


Val. What should he do elsewhere, when Law's his Lechery.
The Devils itch dry up his marrow for it.
He undid a worthy Gentleman I know.

Ol. I, Brookall, thrusting him out of his Land.


Am. He Is fitted with an Heir for it; one that can
Justly inherit nothing but the Gallows.

Ol. Where Is Brookalls son? He had a hopeful one;
And, at sixteen, a Student here in the Temple.

Val. Alas his Fathers fall has ruined him.

Mere want of maint'nance forced him to service;
In which he is lately traveled into France.

Ver. Go back to the Recorders: Fetch the Warrant,
I Will search the City and the Suburbs for her.

Exit Servant. Amp. But Vermin has a daughter may prove good,


Val. A good one like enough: I Will lay a wager
He Is poching among the trees here, for a Broker;
To match his daughter to a landed husband.
This is their walk.

Ol. Let Us try if we can fit him.


Val. Thou Wilt nere endure his breath, it stinkes of brimstone.


Ol. I Will take the wind of him: You are well met, Sir.
They say you have a daughter you would match, Sir.

Ver. It may be I have; it may be not; How then?
What Is that to you?

Ol. Pray be not angry Sir.
The worst of us has land, and may deserve her.

Ver. Pray let me ask you first, if you be not
The knaves consederates that stole her from me?

Val. Is she stolen from you Sir? In troth I am glad on it.


Amp. It Is the first news we heard on it.


Ol. Though J assure you
We heard none ill to day: But very good,
As that of the New Ordinary. --

Amp. Then the good success
This Gentleman had lately with a wife --

Val. And lastly, this you tell us; which, but that
It comes from your own mouth, were even too good
For our belief, methinks.

Ol. Pray, is it true Sir?
That your daughter's gone, lost, or stolen, as you say?

Amp. May we report it after you, good Sir?


Ver. What are you? I would know.


Val. Gentlemen, Sir,
That cannot but rejoice at your affliction.
And therefore blameless, that desire to hear it.

Ver. Cannot this place* where Law is chiefly studied,
Relieve me with so much, as may revenge
Me on these scorners? How my Slave stays too!
Yet I may find a time.

Exit. All. Ha ha ha. --


Ol. Look, look, what thing is this? --


Enter Amphilus, Trebasco. Amb. Trebasco, Skip-kennel.


Tree.....


Amp. It speaks, methinks.


Ol. Yes, and its shadow answers it in Cornish*


Val. I know him; it is the wi^e Western Knight, that should
Have married Vermines daughter.

Amp. Skipkennell, you shall turn Footman, now, Skipkennell.
I Will nere keep horse more --

Tree. You must be Footman then your self Sir.


Amp. No nor Mare neither.


Tree. You need not Sir, now you be determined to marry, and live here in the
City altogether. And truly, Sir, she could never have dyed better, nor been
taken from you (as they say) in a better time* so near her journeys end.


Amb. His Mare's dead it seems.


Amp. Was it well done of her, do think, to die to day upon the way, when
she had been i'my purse to morrow in Smithfield: Poor fool, I think she dyed
for grief I would have sold her.


Tree. 'Twas unlucky to refuse Reynold Pengutlings money for her.


Amp. Would I had taken't now: and she had not dyed mine own, 'twould nere have
grieved me.


Tree. Pray hear it Sir, as they say -- We are all mortal you know, and her
time was come, we must think.


Amp. And't had not been the first loss that ere I had in my life, I could have
born it.


Tree. And grace og (as they say) it shall not be the last.


Amp. I would thou could ascertain me that; but mischiefs are taild to one
another, and I must grieve as well for the what is to come, as the departed.


Ol. We will have a bout with him: Who is departed, Sir?


Amp. My Mare, my Mare Sir: 'Twas the prettiest Tit -- But she is gone --


Ol. How, is she gone Sir?


Tree. You will not talk to 'em.


Val. How is she gone, I pray Sir?


Tree. Sir, as it were, because she could go no further.


Val. Good angry man give us leave to talk with thy Master.


Ol. Good Sir a little more of your Mare.


Tree. I would you had her all to do you good Sir: she lies but a quarter of a
mile beyond Brainford.


Val. Did you leave skin and shoes, and all behind Sir?


Tree. Shoes all behind* I thought how wise you were: Come away Master* No,
while she lived, she never wore but two behind Si^.


Ol. Gramercy honest fellow, thou have wit in thy anger.


Amp. Sirrah, answer not the Gentleman so snappishly.


Tree. How can I choose, when they do nothing but make a fool of your Worship
before your Worships face, and your Worship perceives it not.


Val. Good Sir, fall from your man to your beast again.


Tree. There again, another main mock: He would have him fall from a man to a
beast.


Amp. Give me the shoon; let 'em go I say, I will have 'em.


Tree. Pray take 'em then, he will never be wiser.


Amp. These were her shoon Gentlemen, I Will keep 'em for her sake, that little
Tit, my little poor Gonhelly, that would have carried me on this little iron
from Pensans to S. Columb on a day. And that is a way would try a stumbler you will
say, if you know it.


Val. It Is enough, I know you Sir Amphilus, and have fooled enough with you.
Adieu; my business calls me. Gentlemen, will you meet me to night at the
Ordinary* --


Exit. Ol. Yes, and perhaps, be there before you too. Come Ambrose --


Exeunt. Amp. Od Gentlemen, methinks


Tree. Why did you talk with 'em? What had you to make with 'em?


Amp. True, we have other matters to think on: Your first course Trebasco,
after we come to our lodging, shall be to Turnbull-street, to the Cobbler*


Tree. Your Dog-tutor.


Amp. Yes, and see how my whelp proves, I put to him last Term.


Tree. Yes, Sir.


Amp. And know of him what Gamesters came to the Ponds now adays, and what
good dogs.


Tree. Yes Sir.


Amp. And ask him -- Do thou hear? If he have not done away his own dog yet,
Blackswan with the white foot? If I can but purchase him, and my own whelp
prove right, I will be Duke of the Ducking-pond.


Tree. Never misdoubt, your whelp's right I warrant you; for why, he could lap
before he could well go: And at ten weeks old he could piss under leg.


Amp. He was a fine forward Puppy, true enough: But and that be a sign of
short life, and he should peak away after my Mare now -- Here, prithee take her
shoon again: What should I keep 'em for? They put me too much in mind of
mortality, do 'em away, make money of 'em, and I Will convert it into a Dog-Collar
--


Enter Vermin. Servant. Tree. I Will try the Market with 'em.


Ver. the frumping Jacks are gone. --


Amp. See my Aldermanicall Father-in-Law! How do you do Sir? I am come. I keep
my day you see before I am a Cittiner among you. How does my best beloved I
pray, your daughter? You do not speak methinks.


Ver. Ask you for my daughter? Let me ask you first what was your plot to put
me in this fright, to make me trudge to your Inn, whilst knave your man here --
Is not this he?


Ser. I doubt Sir he was taller.


Ver. Having first left a bag of Trumpery with me, stones, and old iron, steals
away the baggage.


Amp. This is abomination! What Inn? and what old iron? I came at no Inn to
day, nor touch old Iron, but that with sorrow enough, my poor Mares shoes, she
left me at her sad decease to Brainford. I had rather have lost the best part of
five Mark J wusse: From whence I came by water, landed here at the Temple, to
leave a Letter to a kinsmans chamber, now right as sure as can be. Say Trebasco.


Tree. He tells you true.


Amp. But is your daughter gone?


Ver. Gone, gone.


Amp. All ill go with her: Did not I say I should hear of more mischief, and
that one was ever tail'd to another?


Tree. You said so indeed: but if she had been tail'd to your Mare, I should
have seen her sure, when I stripped her.


Ver. This is the day of my affliction,
This day I Will cross out of my Almanac
For ever having any thing to do on it.

Amp. Why then, you will not seek her out to day
Although methinks the day might serve as well
To find her, as to lose her, if luck serve.

Ser. What else did you intend Sir by the warrant?
Best lose no time Sir.
No, no, we will go.

Enter Brookeall. Broo. First take my execration with thee, Monster.


Ver. Hell vomits all her malice this day on me.


Broo. Hell sends by me this commendation to thee,
That thou have there a most deserved Possession,
That gapes to entertain thee.

Amp. Who Is this, a Conjure^ that knows hell so?


Ser. No, but a certain Spirit, that my Master
Conjured out of his Land.

Amp. If you can conjure,
Here Is money to be got Sir, but to tell us
What may be now betid of this man's daughter?

Broo. Himself, and his Posterity must all
Sink unavoydably to hell.

Amp. You are most deeply read! May not a Son-in-Law --


Ver. Why talk you to that Rayler?


Amp. Pray Sir, may not
A Son-in-Law escape in your opinion?

Broo. No Sir: it was by Law he made the purchase.
And by his Son-in-Law, or out-lawed, down he must:
If he set ventrous foot, as his Inheritor,
Upon the mould, was got by his oppression.

Amp. Pretty mad reason methinks; where is that Land?


Ver. Sirrah, I Will tame thy tongue*


Broo. No, wretch, thou can not,
Nor fly out of the reach of my fell curses,
That freedom (being all that thou have left me)
Thou can not rob me of.

Ver. I shall find means
Then to confine it, and your self in Bed lame:

Broo. Thou can not be so just sure, to exchange
Thine own inheritance for mine.

Amp. Have you made
A purchase there too, Father-Law that should be?

Ver. How am I tortured! I will fly this place.


Enter Phillis, a box in her hand. Phil. Nay prithee stay a little, good old
man,
Give something to my box.

Ver. Out on thee Baggage.


Phil. A little something, prithee; but a tester.


Ver. Out, out.


Phil. Thou look like a good Penny-father,
A little of thy money would so thrive here,
'Twould grow, by that I were ready for a husband,
Up to a pretty portion. Pray thee now --

Ver. What can thou be?


Phil. Insooth a Gentlewoman, but a By-blow,
My Father is a Knight, but must be namelesse.

Ver. Can Knights get Beggars?


Phil. Why not? when such as thou get Knights.
Nay, prithee, prithee now gi' me a tester.
I never ask less: My mother's a poor Gentlewoman,
And has no means, but what comes through my fingers.
And this is all my work: Come, wring it out.
Oh how I love a hard-bound Money-master,
Whose countenance shows how loath he is to part with it!
It comes so sweetly from him, when it comes:
Nay, when? I pray thee when? Pish, make an end.

Amp. It is the prettiest merry Beggar.


Ver. Huswife I Will have you whipped.


Phil. I, when I beg in the streets.
I have allowance here* as well as any
Brokers, Projectors, Common Bail, or Bankrupts,
Pandars; and Cheaters of all sorts, that mix here
Among men of honor, worship, lands and money.

Amp. O rare Beggar-wench!


Lawyers and others pass over the Stage as conferring by two and two. Phil. I
come not hither to entrap or cozen.
My work lies plain before me as my way.
With, will you give me? Praythee, hard old man.

Ver. Away, away.


Phil. What though thou come to deal
For this man's Land, or sell another right,
Or else to match thy daughter, if thou have one
To this young Gentleman -- Thou will give me something.

Ver. The Devil haunts me.


Amp. She makes a youth of me.


Phil. Yet I prithee make not
Thy money such an Idol, as to think
Thou shall dishonor't, or impair this bargain,
That match, or whatsoever thou have in traffic,
By parting with a silly silver sixpence.
Shall not i'fecks la, shall not; I Will strike luck to it,
Thy match shall thrive the better. Look, I have got
Here, four and sixpence, Prithee make it a Crown,
Twill nere be mist in thy dear daughters Dowry,
If (as I said) thou have one.

Ver. Hellish baggage!


Phil. He Will gi't me by and by. I prithee find
Thy money out the while. Come out with it man:

Ver. Pull her away,
I fly thee, as I would the Devil that sent thee:

Amp. Yes, let us away, it is time, she begs of me now.


Phil. The Devil is not surer to o're-take thee. --


Exeunt omnes preter Brookeall. Broo. Good child I thank thee: Thou have
somewhat eased
My pensive heart by his vexation:
She spoke as Divination had inspit'd her
With knowledge of my wrongs; and his oppression,
To take my part: Take thou a blessing for it
Who ere thou art, whilst I recalculate
The miseries of a distressed man,
Cast out of all. Unhappy chance of Law!
More false and merciless then Dice or Strumpets;
That have into thy Hydra-throated mawe
Gulp'd up my lives supportance; left me nothing;
Not means for one days sustenance, for breath
To cry thy cruelty before my death.
That Law, once called sacred, and ordained
For safety and relief to innocence,
Should live to be accursed in her succession,
And now be styled Supportresse of oppression;
Ruin of Families, past the bloody rage
Of Rape or Murder: All the crying sins
Negotiating for Hell in her wild practice.

Enter Attorney. At. A man I hope for my purpose, and save me a going to the
Church for one: Will you make an Oath Sir?


Broo. An Oath? for what?


At. For two shillings; and it* be half a Crown, my Client shall not stand
w'ye; the Judge is at leisure, and the other of our Bail is there already.
Come, go along.


Broo. I guess you some Attorney: Do you know me?


At. No, nor any man we employ in these cases.


Broo. He takes me for a common Bail; a Knight o'th Post,
Thou art a villain, and crop-ear'd I doubt not:
What, dare thou say, thou see upon me, that --

At. I cry you mercy: I must up (I see)
To the old Synagogue, there I shall be fitted --

Exit. Broo. Can I appear so wretched? or can grief
So soil the face of poverty, which is virtue,
To make it seem that Monster Perjury?
Rather let sorrow end me all at once,
Then virtue be misconstrued in my looks,
Which I will hide from such interpretation.

He lies on his face. Enter Friendly. Friend. Alas he is sore afflicted, and my
news,
I fear, will strike him dead; yet I must speak.
Sir, give not misery that advantage on you,
To make your self the less, by shrinking under
The buffe^ings of fortune.

Broo. I desired you
To seek my son. Have you found him at his Chamber?
Or has not want of fatherly supplies
(Which heaven knows I am robbed of) thrust him out
Of Commons, to the Common World for succor?
Where is he, have you found him?

Fren. No, not him.
But I have found what may be comfort to you,
If you receive it like a man of courage.

Broo. He Is dead then, farewell my tender boy*


Fren. Indeed, Sir, he is not dead.


Broo. Phew --


Fren. Pray, sir, hear me.


Broo. You Will tell me, man nere dies; But changes Life,
And happily for a better. He is happiest
That goes the right way soonest: Nature sent us
All naked hither; and all the Goods we had
We only took on Credit with the World.
And that the best of men are but mere borrowers:
Though some take longer day. Sir, J know all
Your Arguments of Consolation --

Fren. Indeed he is not dead; but lives --


Broo. In Heaven.
J am the surer on it; for that he lived
Not to learn Law enough, to -- hush. No more.

Fren. Substantially he lives in flesh, as we do*


Broo. Speak that again.


Fren. A Gentleman of the next Chamber told me so.
Only, sir, this; if you can brook his absence
Without fear, or mistrust; then he is well.

Broo. How thou playest with me!


Fren. He Is gone to travel, sir. Here comes the Gentleman.


Enter Valentine. Val. J am sure he does not know me. If he could,
J were as sure this Charity would be rejected.
So much J know his Spirit. Is your name Brookeall, sir?

Brook. My losses, wrongs, and sorrows, speak my name.


Val. You had a Son late of this house.


Broo. And do not you infer by that he*s dead?
Good, do not mock me, sir.

Val. If this be gold,
He lives and sent it to you; forty pieces?

Broo. Pray, sir, from whence, or where might he atchieve
So great a Sum? Not in this World, J fear.
A handsome possibility he had once,
Could J have kept it for him.

Val. He Is in a way,
Now to a hopeful fortune. A Noble Gentleman,
Late gone to travel, taken with good affection
Toward your Son, has taken hin to his care:
And like a Father, not a Master, keeps him.
From whose free bounty he received this means.

Broo. Do you think the Boy did well to send it me then:
When it was intended for his Masters honor,
To fly in Silks and Feathers? It Is not Servant like
To wave a Masters meaning so.

Val. J had a Letter too;
Though most unhappily mislay'd.

Broo. What from my Boy?


Val. In his own hand.


Broo. Ha! -- but mislay'd, you say. Ha, ha, ha, --
What is the Gentleman? Or whither traveled?

Val. That Is all J crave excuse for.


Broo. Keep your money.
If you can render me my Son, I Will thank you.

Val. You speak not like a Father: wanting means
Your self for his advancement, would you bar him
The bounty of another full ability?

Broo. J speak more like a Father, then a Beggar:
Although no Beggar poorer. And I fear,
J am no Father: for J would not give
My Son to gain a Province, nor except
This Coin to save my life: If he (...)
Let me look nearer (...)

Fren. J (...)
He will accept the Money. Poverty
Was nere so coy else.

Broo. J cannot remember,
J ever saw this face: But J have seen
(Many years since) one, that it so resemble^,
As J could spit defiance on it --

Val. What mean you?


Broo. And charge thee with the Murder of my Son


Val. Pray, sir, collect your self.


Broo. Your name is Valentine.


Val. Right, sir.


Broo. Sir Humphrey Drygrounds Son:


Val. Most true.


Broo. Even so thy Father looked, when, at like years
He was my Rival: For young man, I tell thee
Thou had a virtuous, well deserving Mother.
He won her without loss of my known Friend-ship:
But, since her death, you cannot but have heard,
He ba^ely wronged my Sister, and, in her,
Me, and my Family: Whor'd her, and cast her off,
On the appointed Marriage day.

Val. O, sir.


Broo. You cannot but have heard on it. Nay, it seems,
My Boy has charged thee with it, before his years
Could warrant his ability in Combat.
And so is fallen; Or thou, not daring stand
Trial in such a cause, by treachery
Have cut him off; And come to make thy peace:
Presuming on my Poverty, with money.
Worse then the base Attorneys Project this!

Val. This is mere madness. In an Act so foul,
As your wild Fancy gathers this to be;
Who could escape the Law?

Broo. The Law; Ha, ha, ha.
Talk not to me of Law, Law's not my Friend.
Law is a Fatal to me, as your house.
I have enough of Law; pray stand you off.
Will you, sir, furnish me, but with a Sword;
And bring me to fit ground to end this difference?
Will you do so, and like a Gentleman?

Val. What shall J do for pity? -- Now J have it.


Broo. Talk not to me of Law.


He fenceth. Val. Pray hear me, sir.


Broo. Now sir, your will before your end. Be brief.


Val. You know me for a Gentleman, though an Enemy.
(I must speak in his phrase) and by that honor
A Gentleman should keep sacred, two hours hence
I Will meet you in this place --

Broo. Pray stand you off -- to Friendly.


Val. From whence wee*ll walk --


Broo. Silent, as nothing were --


Val. As nothing were betwixt us -- to some other Fit ground, (as you
propounded) where we will end the difference.


Broo. By the Sword, no otherwise.
No whinnelling satisfaction.

Val. You shall see, sir.


Broo. Go set thy house in order. Here I Will meet thee,


Exit. ACT. III.
Scene I.
Francis -- Wat. Fra. I Shall repent me, sir, that ere I yielded,
In that fair Noble way, if you express
Your self in this regardlesse of my honor.

Wat. J like a Whore, withal my heart, that talks
So like an honest woman.

Fra. Can you expect
A Chaste and constant Wife of her, Whom you
Have wrought to Lewdness before Marriage?
Or may J not as well deserve as well in bringing
A Maidenhead into your Marriage Bed,
As a polluted Body?

Wat. Here Is a coil,
For a poor bit aforehand! Is it so?
'Heart, if a man bespeak a Tavern Feast
For next day Dinner; and give earnest for it
To half the value, (as my Faith and Troth
J think, is somewhat toward your Marriage payment
To be to morrow) Will not the Hostess give him
A Modicum over night to stay his stomach?
Your Father comes: Jle whisper yet more reason.

Enter Dryground disguised. Alice. Dry. Now pretty Mr. Alice, you see the end
I had upon you: All the scope thereof
Tending to your contentment. Are you pleased?

Ali. So well, that could I but shake off the fear
(Which is most dangerous) of a Fathers curse,
I durst prouounce; nay, boast my happiness,
To be above my Virgin hopes, or wishes.

Dry. Let your fear vanish then: And, if this night,
The happiness you are ambitious of,
Together with your Fathers leave and blessing
Crown not your Bed, let all the Infamy
Due to all perjured Wretches, that have wronged
Beauty and Chastity be branded here.

Ali. The fair respect I have, sir, to your Noblesse;
For what you have already shown me, bars
Mine ears against protestation. I dare trust you.

Dry. As I have trusted you with my whole project,
My discreet Alice, further then I dare trust
My Instrument your Brother; though he thinks
He understands it all. Yonder he is,
Profoundly Love-struck too, J make no doubt.

Fry. Fie! Can you be so lewd? Is that your reason?


Wat. Yes; can the Parish Parson give you better?


Fra. His Parish Bull's as civil.


Wat. Well no more.
I Will talk with your Father about it.

Fra. J with your Sister, and to better purpose.


Dry. Now Wat, what think you of my course, and habit?


Wat. As J love mischief, and desire to live by it;
It is the daintiest course. -- O, brave sir Humphrey,
How I am taken with your Shape! Old Osbright,
The Father of the Swindgers; so much talked on
Could nere have borne it up so. Nor his Daughter,
That was French born indeed, could ere have clipped,
And Frenchified our English better, then
She counterfeits to Coxcombes that do Court her:
With her fine Fee-fees, and her Laisse-moys;
Her Prea-awayes; Intrat a you make a me blusha.
O, J am tickled with it.

Dry. A, ha, my Lad.


Wat. slid J could dote upon you. Had J been
Your Son now, how I could have honored you!
Though I had kept a Precept by t, I care not.

Dry. Notable Reprobate.


Wat. The Devil sure
Ought me a mischief, when he enabled that
Old Wretch, my Father to beget me. Oh,
It Is in my bones; I seele it in my Youth:
I know from whence the Pocks is now descended.
The Gout begets it. There Is no Usurers Son,
But's born with an hereditary spice on it.

Dry. Had J raked Limbo, as J did the Compter,
I were not better fitted with a Copesmate.

Wat. 'slight, I could ask you blessing.


Dry. And I think,
That courtesy you have seldom done your Father.

Wat. Nere since I grew to any understanding:
Nor (as I know) before, but whipped and held to it.

Dry. Well Wat. You see how far I have trusted you,
To have the second hand in our great work;
Our Project here. Though you must seem my Servant,
You are like to have the better share, if you agree.
Upon the Match, and make your self my Son.
How like you your new Mistress, sir, my Daughter;
The Maidenhead here, the new Ordinary --
The Damoyselle, or what you please to call her?
What is it a Match Wat? Condescendeth she?

Wat. No man shall be her Husband, but my self;
Who ere she lies withal, before or after.
That she has roundly promised. But she balkes,
And Boggles with me in a less request.

Dry. She shall deny thee nothing. What is it Wat?


Wat. You may command her duty, if you please.


Dry. What is it man?


Wat. 'Troth, sir, but one nights knowledge
Of her aforehand. One word of your mouth,
I know would do it, sir.

Dry. O Devilish Rascal,
That can imagine this a Fathers Office*
Patience good Wat.

Wat. But that I am afeard
My Father would be pleased with it, Il'd take home
My Sister else, and presently.

Dry. In Maids about your work. And hear you Franck
Discharge the Butchers, and the Chandlers Bills.
They wait below. The Baker and the Brewer,
I have made even with.

Fra. And the Vintner too.


Dry. The Bottle-man too, and Tobacco Merchant.
Do as I bid you, go. Now Wat Observe me:
As an ingenious Critic would observe
The first Scene of a Cemedy, for fear
He lose the Plot.

Wat. I do observe you, sir.


Dry. I have, you know, released from your thralldome.
Upon condition you should steal your Sister,
To be at my dispose. You have performed it:

Wat. Honestly, sir.


Dry. Yes* honestly, as you say.
And though it be for her own absolute good;
Yet was your Act so grateful to me, that
I promised you my Daughter.

VVat. Right sir, on.


Dry. I shall be brief: you know my Fortune, VVat
Are sunk, and you have heard, I make no doubt,
Amongst other of my follies, of a Child
I got on Brookealls sister, on the by, Wat.

Wat. And this is she, I love a bastard naturally,
Ah thy are bouncing spirits: Now I love her
More then I did Sir.

Dry. You come fairly on.
But now, my poverty affords no portion.
Now, Wat, to raise a portion!

Wat. J, now, now.


Dry. Now I come to it, Wat: J took this house,
And in this habit here, turned pimping Host,
To make the most of her, and find a Husband
To take her with all faults.

Wat. That Is I, that is I Sir: this has music in it.


Dry. You will be secret Wat.


Wat. No dumb Bawd like me.


Dry. Nay in a plot of villainy I dare trust thee.


Wat. In troth you cannot think how much I love it;
How I am tickled with it! Good Sir, on.

Dry. This I have designed to put her off
(I mean her Maidenhead) at such a rate
Shall purchase Land.

Wat. How, good Sir Humphrey, how?


Dry. She shall be rifled for.


Wat. How! Rifled Sir?


Dry. Yes, rifled Wat; the most at three fair throws,
With three fair Dice, must win and wear her, Wat.
You Will take her with all faults?

Wat. Can you suspect me?
It is the rarest invention, if the Gamesters
Be stiff and strait, that ever was projected!
What is it a man?

Dry. But twenty Pieces, boy.


Wat. I vow too little, less their number help us.
How many Gamsters have you?

Dry. A full hundred.


Wat. Two thousand pound! A merry portion,
And worth as many Maiden-heads in the sport
A man shall find in spending it? Methinks
I feel my self even flying with it already.

Dry. What art thou thinking, Wat?


Wat. That here may grow
A danger Sir, the Gamesters being so many.

Dry. Why, there is but one must use her.


Wat. Phew, for that
I were indifferent, if 'twere all or more
(As it is possible a wench might bear it)
If they come single, and in civil sort,
Allow her breathing-whiles --

Dry. Here Is a ripe Rascal!


Wat. But my doubt is, that such a multitude
May fly into combustion, blow up all
The business and our hopes.

Dry. Now your doubt
Reflects upon my Judgment: did thou note
How quietly those Gallants here to day
Parted with their gold?

Wat. Yes, very gallantly.


Dry. They shall agree as well for the Commodity,
As I have cast it, VVat; so well my boy,
That no distaste shall be or taken, or given,
Anon you will see.

VVat. She knows not on it you say,


Dry* Nor shall she VVat, till at the push I charge her
To be obedient in the undertaking.

VVat. And that is a sweet obedience: I could kneel
Before my wretched Sire in such commands.

Enter Francis. Dry. Anon I Will make it all plain to you. How now Frank?


Fran. There are two Gentlemen in the next room,
That by all means would speak with you: I have had
The foulest coil with one of 'em, that persuades
Himself you keep a Bawdy House, by somewhat
He gathered Evesdropping, by your discourse here,
While the other held me talking; who is civil,
And loves me with a modest fair affection.

Dry. Where is his sister, Alice?


Fran. Unseen I wrrrant you.


Dry. Then let them enter. Whip into your disguise Wat -- Exit Fran.
And be at call.

VVat. Presto, Anon, anon Sir.


Ex. VVat Stands aside. Dry. Did they Eavesdrop me? I will
Eavesdrop too. --

Enter Oliver, Ambrose. Ol. Did not I tell thee't was a Bawdy House?


Am. I cannot think so yet: there is some other
Trick in it; the Maid you see is very modest.

Ol. That is the trick on it man, she must seem so.
Her Father deals for her.

Am. Fie! Can there be such Fathers?


Ol. Yes, and such Mothers too: The Towne's too full of 'em.
Come, she is a Juggling whore I warrant thee,
For all her Fee-fees, and her Laisse-moys.
Pox of her counterfeit Gibbrish I Will make her speak
In plainer English, ere I have done with her.

Dry. I have enough. You are welcome Gentlemen.


Ol. He looks like such a Blade. Are you the Master here Sir?


Dry. I am the man that is much rejoiced to see
Such sparkling Spirits underneath this Roof,
Where all you find is yours. Sirrah Varlet.

Ol. Each syllable he speaks bewrays him.


Dry. Varlet I say.


Wat. Here Sir.


Enter Wat with Wine. Dry. Give me the Complement. Gallants,
Wilt please you taste your welcome in a Cup,
The spirit of whose never dying Liquor,
Speaks ore the brim in this high Language to you.
Full six and thirty times has Luna wan'd
The strength she got in six and thirty growths
From Phoebus virtuous beams, into this Juice,
To make it Nectar for Phoebean wits.
It Is this inspires their brains with fire Divine,
By which to write high strains; and herein lurks,
The gift, One has to bounce up his own works.

Ol. Your meaning is good Sack, and three years old.
To put you by your Beverage and your Bombast,
I will nor drink, nor talk of other thing,
But the choice thing of things, your Daughter Sir.

Dry. Thou shall not woo my Daughter, nor no man for thy sake, Sing.
Unlasse thou come until her by her Daddy naked.
Her Mammy's gone to Heaven Sir. And I pray,
Let Fathers poor breed Daughters as they may.

Ol. Your care, no doubt, is great what will it hold?
The Rifling Sir, I mean. Is your number full?
May not a man put in Sir for a chance?

Dry. What do you mean Sir?


Ol. May not we
Come in adventurers? Here are twenty pieces.

Dry. I find you have overheard me. Call my Daughter. Exit Wat.
Now I Will disclose a secret to you. But Gentlemen,
As you love wit and mirth, censure me mildly.
I am a Gentleman decayed in Fortune.

Ol. And can thou be so base to sell thy Child
To Lust and Impudence?

Dry. Be not too rash.
My Child's as dear in my respect, as you
Were ever to your Father.

Am. Devil thou lie --


Draw. Ol. Nay, hold, good Ambrose; you even now were angry
With me, that did oppose your fair Construction
Of this good Gentleman and his virtuous Daughter.

Am. My ignorance wronged us both.


Ol. Good modest Ambrose,
What do you think of this discovery?

Dry. You had discovered more, if his impatience
Had not prevented me: But now I am dumb to you
In all, but this. If you will be pleased to sup here,
I shall afford you welcome. I have business.

Exit. Ol. What can we make of this?


Am. I know what to do.
If City Justice, grave Authority
Protect it not, I Will surely spoil the sport.

Ol Can thou be so malicious, that, but now
Did love this Wench so dearly, as to run her
Into the hazard of Correction?
Stay: Here she comes, and the Pimp whiskin with her. Enter Wat. Fran.
Do thou take him in hand. I Will handle her.
Now Madam, twenty pound a man! Nay do not
Coy it too much? Your provident Father left us,
To make our selves more known to you; as your price
Is known to us already: Look upon us.

Fra. Pre ye Sir, have you been ever in France?


Ol. In France? No surely, nor in Doctors hands
Since I was Plac^et high. Why ask you Lady?

Fra. For, if you could speak Fransh, I could the better
Find what you say. I can no understand
What it is you mean by price. What is that Price,
If it be no Welsh Gentleman?

Ol. I mean
The price of three throws for your Maydenhead,
It Is twenty pieces. If I win it (Hark you)
What will you give me out of your gross sum
To take it neatly off; and like an Operator,
Put you to no pain?

Fra. Parle Francoy Monsieur, Je vou pry.


Ol. Thou art a handsome Hyppocrite: And this
Cunning becomes thee well. I Will kiss thee for it.

Fra. Fee fee Monsieur. O fee! it is no good fashion,
For the young Man and Maid to no ting but kiss!

Ol. It Is not so good indeed; nothing but kiss.
A little of tone with the other will do well.

Fra. Fee fee, you no understand. That Gentleman,
Speaks he no Fransh?

Ol. Yes yes. He speaks no French.


Fra. He Monsieur vou mocque de Moy.


Ol. Owie par ma foy.


Fra. Ha Monsieur vou parle francoy. Je su^' bien aisie.


Ol. Easy! Yes yes, I think you would be easy
To one that knew but how to manage you,
For all the boast of your Virginity.

Fra. Excuse me Sir, I can no understand.

Ol. Me thinks you should. Come prithee leave this fooling,
I know you can good English, if you list.

Fra. Indeed I can. But, in my best, and all
I cannot understand you Sir, nor frame
An answer to your rudeness. When you know me
Better, you will speak in better phrase, and then
It Is like you may find better language from me:
Till when, pray give me leave to leave you Sir.

Ol. Nay hark you Lady, hark you (still more mystical!)
Nay since you can speak English, I must talk w'ye.

Fra. So you will be civil.


Ol. Civil I swear, and private.


They go aside. Am. Does she not know on it, say thou?


Wat. No Sir, no:
Not the least inckling of it: The old man
Carries it so discreetly.

Am. Bless me Heaven?
Discreetly say thou. To betray his Child,
To sale of her Virginity.

Wat. Yes, discreetly.
She dreams of no such business; such intent:
No more then the Cud-chewing Heifer knows
The Butcher, that must knock her down i faith.
O, twill be bravely carried! I my self
Knew nothing till this hour: though I saw
Money put in his hand by diverse Gallants:
Men of great place and worship; which I gather
Are to be of the Riflers.

Amb. Prithee who?


Wat. All must be namelesse. There are Lords among 'em.
And some of civil Coat, that love to draw
New stakes at the old Game, as well as they;
Truckle-breech'd Justices, and bustling Lawyers,
That thrust in with their Motions; Muffled Citizens;
Old Money-Masters some, that seek the Purchase:
And Merchant Venturers that bid for the
Foreign Commodity, as fair, as any.

Amb. Was ever such an outrage! Hark thee fellow --


They aside. Fra. Sir, I have heard you with that patience
(And with no better) as the troubled Pilot
Endures a Tempest, or contrary winds:
Who, finding nerethelesse his Tackling sure,
His Vessel tight, and Sea-room round about him,
Plays with the waves, and vies his confidence
Above the blasts of Fortune, till he winns
His way, through all her threatenings, to his Port.
You may apply this.

Ol. And you may be plainer.
Is there not such a project for your Maiden head?

Fra. It deserves no answer.
But to be rid of you, together with
The Devil, that inflamed you to that question;
Know, that knew I of such a plot or project;
Or, that I had a Father (as injuriously
You have suggested) could be so inhumane,
To prostitute my spotless Virgin honor
To Lust for Salary, I would as sure prevent it,
As there is force in poison, Cord, or Steel,
At price of both our lives. Sir, I have say --

Exit. Ol. This Wench amazes me. Could I believe now
There could be truth in Woman, I could love her.

Amb. Well, I Will make one: Meet me there two hours hence,
And fetch my twenty Pieces.

Wat. I will not fail you. In the Temple Walks --


Exit. Amb. Where, if I fit you not --


Ol. Nam! What discovery?


Amb. A villainy enough to blow the house up.


Ol. And I have found (I think) a virtue, that
Might save a City: But let us hence. We may
Conferr our notes together by the way.

Exeunt. ACT. III. Scene II.
Bumpsey, Magdalen, Jane, all in brave Clothes. Bum. NAy, nay, I know he is
flown out, and I
Am prettily provided for like flight:
And if I do not pitch as high, and souse
As deep, as he, while there is Game to fly at --
Five hundred Pieces he took out you say?

Ja. And said he would venter't at the Ordinary.


Bum. That's he, that's he! Why this is excellent.


Mag. This was your folly Bump. He was content
To have walked moneylesse you saw, but you
Would force him. At a word you did la' Bump.

Bum. I force him, ha?


Mag. I, at a word, you put it in his head,
And put the Sword into the Madmans hand,
As one would say.

Bum. Good Mrs. At-a-word.
Let not your fine French Frippery, which I bought,
Turned oth' Tailors hands (as one would say)
Huffle you up to Sovereignty: Nor your Coach,
Which I have but bespoak, whirle you away,
Before it is finished) from obedience,

Mag. Good lack fine Gentleman, that wears the Purchase
Of a Pawned forfeiture. Must I not speak trow?

Bum. Excellent Magdalen!


Mag. Sir, J will speak; and be allowed to speak.


Bum. And speak allowed too; will you Magdalen?


Mag. J, at a word; Since you have put me to it,
J will uphold the Fashion; Learn, and practice
Behavior and carriage above my'parrell.
J at a word, J will la, that J will.

Bum. This is most excellent! My old Beast is
Infected with the Fashions; Fashion-sick!
Pray Ma-dame take your course, uphold your Fashion:
And learn and practice Carriage to your Clothes:
I will maintain my humor, though all split by it.

Enter Servant. Ser. Mr. Vermin desires to speak with you.


Bum. I faith I will Ma-dame. --


Exit with Servant. Ja. My Husband, Mother,
Reports of a rare Creature come to Town,
Of a French breed; a Damoysell, that professes
The teaching of Court-carriage and behavior:
The rar'st he says --

Mag. Can she teach the elder sort?


Ja. All ages from six years to sixty six.
Unless they be indocible he says.

Mag. Indocible! What Is that?


Ja. Stiff in the hammes, I think.


Mag. Nay, then we will to her.
I can yet bow my Haunches; come and go
With them, as nimbly as the barren Do.
My Gimboles don't complain for want of Oil yet.
We Will have this Madame; and we will be Madames
Ourselves, or it shall cost us each a Crown
A month the teaching. In a Month we may,
Practicing but one hour in a day,
Be Madames, may we not?

Ja. Yes, if we give our minds to it; and but steal
Fit times to practice.

Mag. We Will find Lecture times:
Or bau^k St. Antlius for it the while. But mum.

Enter Bumpsey, Vermin. Bum. Do you wonder at my bravery? Look you here:
This is my Wife; and this my Daughter, sir.
You have lost yours, you say: Perhaps for want
Of Hu^ty-^usties, and of Gorgets gay.
Ha! is it not so?

Ver. The World's turned prodigal.
You do not well to mock me, when I come
For comfort and advise.

Bum. Shall I be plain w'ye;
My best advise is, since your Daughters gone,
To turn your Son after her. He lies not in
For much above a hundred pound. Pay it,
And let him take his course: If he be not
Got loose already. Then (observe my Counsel)
Spend you the rest of your Estate your self;
And save your Heirs the sin. It is the course
I have in hand, and mean to follow it.
You like it not (it seems) but thus it is,
When men advise for nothing. Had your Lawyer
Now for his fee, given Counsel, might have damned you:
You would have thought it worth your Gold, and followed it.
Will you go with me to an Ordinary?
Venture five hundred or a thousand Pieces,
To begin a new World with.

Ver. Mrs. Bumpsey, I take it you are she.


Mag. An old Ape has an old eye.
He knows me through all my cuts and slashes.

Ver. How long I pray, has my good friend your Husband
Been thus distracted?

Mag. But when I am perfect
In the quaint Courtly carriages, that belong
Unto this habit: in which, I confess,
I am yet but raw; how will you know me then?

Ver. She is as mad as he.


Bum. How Lady-like she talks!


Mag. Or, now my black Bag's on, I hold a penny
You do not know me. Bogh-who am I now?

Ver. Most unrecoverably mad! young Gentlewoman:
Nay, I entreat your favor for an answer?
As you can pity a wronged man's distress.
Give me what light you can of my lost Daughter.
You have been inward always, and partook
The nearest of her Counsels. Tell me fairly
I do beseech you in this gentle way.
Though I profess I have a strong presumption
Against your Husband, and his young Associates
I met to day; and bore their mocks and taunts:
On which I have good ground for a strickt course
To force 'em to examination.
Yet I entreat you see.

Ja. The World is turned
Quite upside down: Else I should wonder
How you could make requests, that have got all
You have (too much) by Rapine and Oppression.

Ver. Do you upbraid me?


Bum. What Is the matter Jane?


Ja. The Fox here learns to sing.


Mag. I Will fox him out oth' hole if he sing here.
Will no Prey serve you but new married wives, Fox?

Ver. Why do you abuse me thus?


Ja. I heard you, sir, with too much patience,
Abuse my Husband with your foul Suspicion.
Who is as clear, I know, from wronging you,
As your own Son.

Ver. Your mocks are monstrous.
Were not he fast enough, I would resolve
No other friend had robbed me.

Mag. Is your son a friend? At a word, he is like you.


Enter Sir Amphilus, Servant. Amp. J pray, if my man ask for me, send him to
me, by your Masters leave. By your leave Sir, I made bold to follow a
Father-in-Law of mine that should have been, into your house here, with much
ado to find it. Any good news Sir yet? Have you heard of her? J cry these
Ladies mercy; though you may take me for a Clown, J must not forget I am a
Knight, and give you the courtesy of my lips --


Bum. In the name of Peasantry, what Knight art thou,
If not the Knight of the Plough-share?

Mag. A fine spoken, and a well-bred man, at a word: He called us Ladies. To
see what Apparel can do! How long might I have trudged about in my old coats
before J had been a Lady? And then he would do us the courtesy to kiss us:
Sure, sure, as courtesy makes a Knight, so clothes makes a Lady.


Amp. It seems she is lost then. All ill go with her.


Bum. What old youth can this be?


Amp. Your warrant, perhaps, may find her though.
And J tell you what.
J have sent my man to lay the Ducking Ponds for her.

Bum. Do you think she would drown her self?


Amp. Who knows what toy might take her? Is she not a woman, as other flesh
and blood is? I had another occasion to one that belongs to the Ponds. I tell
you as a Friend, I had not ^ent else: Come Fatherin-Law that should have been;
hang sorrow. You have had but one Loss to day. I have had two. I Will gi't you in
Rhyme.

My Mare and my Mistress I lost on a day,
The One of 'em dyed, and the other ran away.

Ja. You are acquainted among the Poets it seems, sir?


Amp. Truly but one that is a Gamster amongst us at the ducking Pond; a Cobbler,
but the neatest Fellow at Poetry, that ever was handicrafts-man; and no
Scholar, to enable him by learning, to borrow of the Ancients: Yet he is a
Translator too. And he makes the sweetest Posies for Privie-houses.


Ja. Ha, ha, ha.


Bum. What a youth's this for a Knight!


Enter Trebasco. Amp. I Will tell ye Ladies -- O Trebasco. Good news at last I
hope.


Tree. J can never find you any where, but jeered and laughed at, and are
fooled, (as I have often told you) to your Worships face, and your Worship
perceives it not.


Amp. To the point, man. How does my Whelp? He is grown a tall Dog by this J
hope: resolve me quickly.


Tree* Why, to put you out of your pain; your Whelp's grown a tall Dog.


Amp. Good


Ja. You said you would tell us, sir: What will you tell us?


Tree. And a handsome Dog.


Amp. Good again.


Ja. What a Dog-trick's is this?


Tree. And h'as learnt, besides the main Game, all the rare tricks and qualities
his Tutor could teach.


Amp. Excellent.


Ja. Will you not tell us, sir, about your Poet?


Amp. Hang him, my Dogs worth 'em all, in ready money.


Mag. I pray, sir.


Amp. I will not give his ears for the swolnst headfull of wit among 'em.
Are not his Ears finely curled Trebasco? Like his Dam Flapses.

Tres Yes, and his Coat all over, sir, they told me.


Amp. Told thee! Did thou not see him? My heart misgives me.


Tree. See him? No indeed, sir; but J pray bear it as well as you may:
And set not your heart too much upon transportable things.

Amp. Ha!


Tree. The Dog is gone, sir.


Amp. How!


Tree. Stolen from School, sir; and sold to a great Monsieur,
And Shipped away four days ago.

Amp. O my heart will break:


J. a Do not faint Knight; Cheer up your heart with your Muse.


Amp. My vein is yet too dull; But I will offer at it.
Three Losses I have had; gone, past all help
My Mare, my Mistress, And (which grieves me most of all) my whelp.

Ia. That line is long enough to reach him.


Amp. I would it were else. -- o --


Bum. Od's pity. Look you, sir, your Son-in-Law, that should have been, is in
much passion too. But you will be ruled by me, you say. And if J lead you not to
comfort, never trust Neighbors counsel while you live. Is not this plain
enough? My own case at this time is as dangerous as yours.


Ver. That Is all that comforts me.


Bum. Neighbourly said. I thank you. Come, Sir, will you join with your
Father-in-Law that should have been, and me in a Cup of Wine to order a design.


Tree. There Is a reckoning toward.


Bum. It shall cost you nothing.


Am. To the next Tavern then. Ladies adieu.
To part with such as you to some are crosses.
Yet I Will not put you down among my Losses.

Exeunt. Mag. Daughter while they are gone, let us fall on our project.


Ja: For Courtly carriage and behavior.


Mag. J long to see this French young schoolmistress.
The Damasin do you call her?

Ja. The Damoiselle, I Will wait on you. --


Exit. ACT. IIII.
Scene I.
A Rabble of rude Fellows pulling in Wat after them, Valentine, Oliver,
Ambrose, Phillis. Wat. YOU Rogues, Slaves, Villains, will you murder me?


Rab. To the Pump with him: To the Pump, to the Pump.


Val. Prithee beat off the Curs.


Rab. No, to the Thames, the Thames.


Phil. Why do you use the man so? Is he not a Christian
Or is he not Christened enough think you, that you would dip him?

Ol. Pray Gentlemen forbear: It is thought fit,
Upon request made by a Noble Friend,
Favoring his Person, not his quality;
That for this time the Pandar be dismis'd.
So all depart in peace.

Enter Rabble. Rab. Away, away, lets go then.
1. A Noble Friend! Pox of his Noble Friendship.
He has spoiled our sport. O! how we would a sous'd him?

Ol. Now, Mr. Hackney-man, if you have so much grace*
Render due thanks.

Wat. J thank you Gentlemen.


Phil. I thank you for him too.


Ol. On both your Knees; unless you hold it better
To kneel yet to the Pump: which you had done,
My most officious Pimp, had not his pity
Prevayl'd against our Justice.

Val. So, arise; enough, enough.


Amb. Troth it is a shame he should get off so easily;
Let him be yet but duck'd, or showed the way
Over the Garden Wall into the Thames.

Val. Good Ambrose, be not so severe; who knows
What need we may of him? We are all
Flesh and blood Ambrose.

Phil. Thou art a Wag I warrant thee.


Amb. Are not you married?


Val. Mass, it was so late, I had almost forgotten it.


Amb. No, it is so late you have not yet forgot
Some Office he has done you in his way.

Ol. Did ever pimp for him? Protest by what thou fea^'st most.


VVat. No, as I hope to escape this Gentleman's fury.


Amb. Go, get the hence, insufferable Villain.
I could even kick thee into twenty pieces, He kicks Wat.
And send thee to thy Master, for my stake
Soon, at his Rifling.
Think whilst thou liv'st what it is to be a Pandar. --
A Pandar, -- Pandar -- there is for your remembrance.

He kicks him. Val. Enough.


Amb. This touch, and I have done -- *


Val. Away


Phil. Pray let him go, I Will school him for it.


Exeunt Wat Phillis. Val. This may work good upon the Rascal, if he
Have but humanity, although no grace.

Ol. We have discovered the great Rifling Val.
We know the Jewel now; the rich Comodity.

Val. And think you have done wondrous wisely; do you not?
To sneak before me thither. I know all
You have discovered; and how far you are
Mistaken in the old man and his Daughter.
All shall be plain to you soon. Walk off a little.

Ol. We'll leave you till anon we meet at the Ordinary.


Exit. Ol. Amb. Enter Vermin -- Amphilus Bumpsey. Amp. I protest, Gentlemen, I
have not drowned sorrow
With so much merry*go-down, these three half years.

Bump. As with your part of three half pintes of Sack.
We had no more amongst us.

Amp. How much was that a piece think you?


Ver. It was enough to show his Prodigality.
In over-wastfull Cost. You were not wont
To be a Boordsend-King; a pay-all in a Tavern.

Bum. But now I love to do these things.


Amp. Now if you could be drawn to the ducking-Pond,
To join your Groat sometimes with me; or twopence*
There were a Recreation indeed:
That Peerlesse Princely sport, that undoes no man:
Though cheating there; and rooking be as free
As there is square play at the Ordinaries.

Bum. Well the point is: My swaggering Son-in-Law,
Appointed to be here among the Trees.
My Daughter told me so. Walk here-about.
If he can give light of your light, he would chide.
Well try what may be done. I Will but step up
Into Ram-Alley-Sanctuary, to Debtor,
That prays and watches there for a Protection;
And presently return to you: --

Exit. Amp. Let it be so; slid the old angry man! Enter Brookeall.
He Will cross us if he see us walk this way.

Exit Amp. Vermin. Broo. These walks afford to miserable man,
Undone by Suits, leave, yet, to sit, or go,
Though in a ragged one; and look upon
The Giants, that over-threw him: Though they strut Lawyers and others pass
over the Stage.
And are swollen bigger by his emptiness.
It Was here, that we appointed, further meeting.
The two hours respited are almost run:
And he engaged his honor in such terms,
As I presume he will come. Honor! From whence
Can he derive that Princely attribute,
Whose Father has descended to a Villainy?
His house was Noble though: and this young man
Had a right virtuous Mother, whom I loved,
Entirely loved: and was in Competition
For marriage with her; when high Providence
Allotted her to him; who since her Death,
Defamed my Sister, and disgraced our house.
My quarrel is not good against his Son
For that: But for my Boy! His doubtful talk
Of him distracts me. Enter Vermin, and Amphilus.
See the Vermin,
That has devoured me living, His Aspect
Adds to my Passion such a bitterness,
That turns me all to gal^. I must avoid him,

Exit. Amb. In Troth Father-in-Law that should have been, or that
May be yet (come, who knows what luck we may have*
Though the dancing Planets have cut cross Capers over
Out heads.) I like this old fellows humor of chearing up
The heart well! And would I were lost too, after my Mare,
My Dog and your Daughter: If this warm Sack has not
Kindled a desire in me to play the good fellow, so it might
Be of free cost, to drown these dry remembrances. Enter Valentine.
See, one of the jeerers. Is this he, that stole the marriage?

Ver. Yes, and perhaps my Daughter too. His Father's gone
Now, and I know not how to question him.

Amp. Let me alone to question him. Did you see this Gentleman's
Daughter, sir, my Wife, that should have been?

Val. Since when, sir.


Amp. Since she was stolen away, sir. It were good
You would let us have her again; and quickly too,
Ere she be worse for wearing, as we say.

Val. Old Brookall is not come yet.


Amp. Will you answer me?


Val. You are a busy fool.


Amp. I am satisfied. He knows nothing.


Val. You lie, Sir.


Amp. I think I do. You know nothing of her I mean, Sir.


Val. You lie again, Sir.


Amp. I think I do again, Sir. Pray be not so terrible;
Examine him your self, if it please you.

Enter Brookall: Broo. Were his eyes Basiliskes; or did he bear
Upon his hellish Countenance the faces
Of all the Furies (that no doubt attend him)
I Will shun no place for him. Are they acquainted?
O most prodigious!

Ver. What do you know, Sir, of my Daughter, I beseech you?


Val. That she has a wretch, a miserable Caitiff Unto her Father.


Broo. How is that? --


aside. Val. A villain that has scraped up by oppression
Law-strife and Perjury, a Dowry for her,
So mixed with curses, that it would consume
An Earls Estate to match with it and her.
And leave him cursed in his Posterity.

Amp. How blessed was J to miss her!


Broo. Can he speak thus to him?


aside. Ver. Dare thou confront me thus?


Val. Dare thou yet keep a Groat of thine extorted Wealth,
And see what Judgments fall one thee already?
Can all thy Gold redeem thy good opinion,
To thine own Son? And though thou would no give
(In case he wanted it) to save his life,
A Hangmans Fee, much less a Judges thanks,
Or price of a Lords Letter to reprieve him;
Yet may this Son survive thee; and hourly he
Unto thy last hour, thine Affliction be.

Amp. O happy condition of a Bachelor!


Broo. I like this well in the young man* --


aside. Ver. How can you say you know this?


Val. Prithee how cannot be otherwise?
Had thou a virtuous Child (as here and there,
Some Mothers win a soul) it would be taken
Dead or alive from thee* unto thy grief too,
To escape the curse might come with a Child's part
Of thine ill-got estate: that is thy Daughters case.

Ver. Oh --


Brro. Brave young fellow!


Val. But show me where an evil Offspring has not
Survived to spurn the dust of such a Father;
And lewdly wast in one or two descents
(Unto their own destruction) what was purchased
At price of souls departed?

Ver. Will you vouchsafe to leave me?


Amp. Pretty odd Doctrine, this!


Val. I have not done w' ye yet.
What corrupt Lawyer, or usurious Citizen,
Oppressing Landlord, or unrighteous Judge,
But leaves the World with horror? and their wealth,
(By rapine forced from the oppressed Poor)
To Heirs, that (having turned their Sires to the Devil)
Turn Idiots, Lunaticks, Prodigals, or Strumpets?
All wanting either wit, or will, to save
Their fatal Portions from the Gulf of Law.
Pride, Riot, Surfets, Dice, and Luxury,
Till Beggary, or diseases turns them after?

Ver. Have you done yet?


Val. A word or two for use; and so an end.


Broo. Not so: It must be amplified a little further.


Ver. Torment and death! Is he come? Let me go*


Amp. Nay pray Sir hear them; though you profit not;
I may perhaps. Methinks it edifies.

Broo. You said, and you said well; His tainted wealth,
Got by corruption, kept by niggardise,
Must fly as ill, through Luxury and Riot:
I add, that they who get it so, shall leave it,
To run at the like waste, through their succession
Even to the Worlds end: it is not one age,
Though spent in prayers, can expiate the wrong
Such an estate was gotten by, though the estate
Be, to a doyt, spent with it: But it shall
Fly like a fatal scourge, through hand to hand;
Through Age to Age, frighted by Orphans cries,
And Widows tears, the groans and Lamentations,
Of oppressed Prisoners, mingled with the curses
Of hunger-bitten Laborers, whose very sweat
Thou robst them of: this charming noise is up
Of many sad, some mad afflicted wretches,
Whose marrow thou have sucked; and from whose bowels,
The nourishment was crushd that fed thee, and
That ravenous Wolf, thy conscience.

Ver. I shall trounce you:


Enter Bumpsey. Bum. What Is here? Worrying of Vermin?


Broo. This noise, I say, of hideous cries and curses*
That follows thine estate, will not be laid
In thy dear life time; nor in theirs, the strangers,
That must be cursed with the division
Of it, when thou art gone: But, still, it shall
Pursue, to all succeeding times, all those,
That entertain least parcels of thy money,
When they shall find at best, it can but buy
Disgrace, diseases, overthrows at Law,
And such dear punishments; until, at last,
All hands, affrighted with the touch of it,
Shall let it fall to earth; where it shall sink
And run into a vein of Ore, shall reach --
To Hell. And they, that shall, hereafter, dig it,
Hundreds of Ages hence, must all compound
With the grand Lord o'th Soil, the Devil, for it.

Amp. So they make hot Purchases!


Broo. Now Sir, you may instruct the Usurer, to make use
Of all he has heard, while I avoid his sight;
Heaven knows I am sick on it: you forget me Sir.

Val. Fear not: I will not fail you.


Bum. No: I Will deliver him the use of all.


Ver. Oh the variety of my vexation --


Bum. And all is this (as I advised before.)
Spend all your self, and save your Heirs the sin;
The shame, the sorrows, and the punishments,
That are joynt-heritable with your wealth:
As very learnedly has been related.
And there is the point, and the whole substance on it.

Ver. Bestow your Substance so Sir, if you like it.


Bump. Sir, my condition runs another way.
To the same end perhaps; following my Leader, here.

Amp. Your Son in Law? Trust me, a most fine man:
And, if his life be answerable to his Doctrine,
It Is like heel lead you to a fair end of all.
Doubtless he is a fine young Man indeed.
A proper teacher and an edifying.

Bump. Come Sir, lead on, I hear you are provided
Five hundred thick for this free nights adventure.

Val. I am Sir, here it is.


Bump. I am so too Sir.
And here it is: And here it is, and here and there, and here it is.

Amp. O brave old man.


Bump. I Will make one w'ye at your new Ordinary,
They say it is excellent.

Val. For rarity and plenty,
There Is no such Pension in all this City.

Amp. And all for nothing?


Val. For less then kiss your Hostess.


Amp. And is there delicate Wine too? I must thither.


Val. The flower of France, and quintessence of Spain
Flow like a Spring-tyde through the House.

Amp. O rare!
And all for nothing?

Bump. Hang nothing. Be it as twill,
I am for any thing; and as well provided,
As you, or any the best Gamester there.

Ver. Sir.


Bum. I love to do these things. But first, pray tell me
Can you tell tale or tidings of his Daughter here?

Val. Not of his Daughter: But I heard his Son
Was freed, this day, from Prison.

Ver. How, how, how?


Enter Brookall, Phillis: Bro^. Yonder he is, still* busy.


Phil. I Will among 'em. Walk you back a little,
And, get I any money, I Will lend thee some.

Val. I Will tell you how. Some friend has paid his debt,
The Action is dischargd; and he is releas*d.

Ver. You practice my abuse. It Is not in man,
To do me such a mischeife.

Amp. Away Girl.


Phil. Thou art as hard, as this dry crust, here, was,
But he is better minded now, I hope:
Now, old man I am sure thou art for me,
Thou cursedst me before, but now thou will
Bless me, I hope, and not without a Cross
Of a fair Silver Sixpence.

Ver. Hence you Harlot.


Phil. Nay look you, if I could afford it, think you
I Would make two words w'ye: it is but a sixpenny matter
Between us; why will you be so hard: it is but
So little less left among all thy Children;
And I Will bate it them in their prayers for thee,
Though I be at the trouble, my self, to do it.

Val. Troth, she begs prettily. I must give her something.
Here Wench.

Bum. What is it, J will see it.


Phil. It Is a good Shilling, and a vie; will you see it Sir?


Bam. Look you, it is covered.


Phil Gentlemen, will you come in? will you vie it?


Amp. No we deny it.


Phil. You may revye it then, if you please. They come not in to bind it.


Val. Will you come in again Sir?


Bum. Sir, after you, and't be to my last sixpence.
I will keep Covenant w'ye.

Val. A shilling more on that.


Bum. Done Sir: there it is.


Phil. Why, these are Lads of bounty! Have you any mind yet Gentlemen?


Ver. What, to be Bankrupts?


Phil. Troth, thou would fear as much, should thou but break
Thy Porredge Pipkin.

Val. Prithee what is thy name?


Phil. Nell, my Mother calls me. J nere knew Sire, nor Godsire.


Val. Nell?


Phil. Yes: And it is as bonny a Beggars name, as ever came from beyond Trent.


Val. This Girl, methinks, howere necessitated
Into this course, declares she has a spirit
Of no gross air: And J dare think her Blood,
Although, perhaps, of some unlawful mixture,
Derived from Noble veins. One may perceive
Much in her Language, in her Looks, and Gesture,
That pleads, methinks, a duty above pity,
To take her from this way, wherein she wanders
So far from the intent of her Creation.

Bump. Your meaning is, you would buy her out of her Calling.
Is it not so?

Val. Ten Pieces J would give
Toward a new one for her.

Bump. Here Is ten more
To bind you quite from begging. Can you afford it?
If yes, accept it. And let us see your back.

Phil. J make no Curtsies, nor send thanks that way.
No, I Will be forwards in them. May my thanks and prayers
Multiply years and blessings on your heads.
And when J beg again, may Beadles take
Advantage on my back, and lash the skin off,
So Heaven be ever with you --

Val. Stay. Who would not have given this Money? Gentlemen,
Do not move you to give a packing penny?

Phil. Nor move you them for me. J should, now, fear
One of their ill-got pence, here mingled, would
Corrupt and overthrow my righteous Fortune.

Exit Phil. Amp. O villainous Vixen.


Ver. Each minute of this day augments my torment,
Yet I have coold it with some patience;
Attending Sir your answer.

Val. For your son.


Ver. J have no Son. J ask you for my Daughter.


Val. Be this your penance for your misbeleife,
Hye you to the Compter: if you find not there
Your son; meet me an hour hence at my Fathers,
I Will tell you news of him; and he perhaps
May tell you of his Sister. This deserves
A fee. Your absence pays it me. Go quickly,
We have some business: And your stay will but
Make the Scene tedious.

Ver. Weel go. Will It please you?


Amp. Yes: we will off in Rhyme. There is no doubt,
Jf Wat be not in the Compter, he is out.

Exit Ver. Amp. Bump. Now, what is the next vagary?


Val. Only this Sir,
You have played at small Game with me. Now there is
A greater trial of my Love and Bounty,
Instantly to be made. A Gentleman,
(J stay too long) an intimate Freind's arrested,
But for two hundred pound on execution:
Will you join Charity to fetch him off?

Bump. J would 't had been thine own case two days since.
One of your fine Companions, some poor Shark?
Ha, is it not so?

Val. Will you be pleased to see him?


Bump. J am half sick of this Condition*
J do begin, not altogether, now,
To love these things so well methinks. Humh ha!

Val. Nay, if you go not cheerfully --


Bump. Yes: J go.


Exeunt amb^. ACT. IV. Scene II.
Brookall, Phillis. Broo. GOod Child, thy tale is pitiful; yet it sorts
So with the fell condition of my Fortune,
That J crave more of it.

Phil. J came not to
Discourse of sorrow, but to bring you comfort:
Will you yet have a Crown?

Broo. J prithee keep
Thy Money Child; and forwards with thy story.
Thou saydst thy Mother was a Gentlewoman.

Phil. Jle give you reason. Since J can remember,
She never did a wrong, though suffered much;
Nor the least unjust thing* No, though her poverty
And care of me have pinched her very bowels,
She knew not how to seek another good,
So much as by request. She never durst borrow,
For fear to come so near the danger of
A promise-breach: And, for base ends, to lie
She holds it sacrilege. I faith she jerk'd
That humor out of me; for J was given
(I tell you as a Friend) a little to it.
It came sure by the Father* God forgive him.

Broo. Thou saydst, thou thoughtst, thy Father was a Knight.
How think thou he could lie then, to abuse
A Virgin of that goodness, as it seems
She, that by him became thy Mother, was.

Phil. The Devil, sure, was powerful with him, then.
Nor do you hear me say, all Gentlefolkes
Are of one mind. Alas they could not live
One by another then.

Broo. Peace, stay a little:
How came thy Mother to decline her spirit
So low, as thus to suffer thee to beg*

Phil. Virtue goes often wet-shod, and is feign
To coble it self up to hold out water
And cold necessity: But sure, the quality
Came to me by the Fathers side too: For
It Is a more commendable, and Courtly practice
To beg, then steal. He was perhaps, a Courtier.
J rather would be robbed of all J have,
Then steal one farthing.

Broo. Thou say thy Mother never would reveal
To thee, or any one, her Birth, or Fortune.
Answer me, prithee, how do thou collect
The had such a Father? Or that he has thus
Wrong*d thy poor Mother, by not marrying her?

Phil. Now you come to me indeed old man: How now,
What do you weep?

Broo. The sharpness of the Air
Strikes on mine eyes a little. Prithee say.

Phil. J first, as fain would know the hidden cause
That works this aptness in me, to discover
My Mother and my self to you, J know not
How to look off of you. I ^aith you weep.
I have heard some talk of natural instinct,
But know not what it is. Pray can you tell me?
Or any like reason, why J should
Thus dote, and hang about you? Or tell me this,
Have you not been of better Fortune? Are not you
Some decayed Knight? Be not ashamed, but tell me.
They cannot all be rich, there are so many.

Broo. Oh my heart!


Phil. Yea, are your Conscience struck?
Have at you for a father then: And yet
Methinks you are more old in goodness, then
To be, so late, so wicked, as to wrong
A woman of her sweetness. Yet I Will try you.
Here is a long-kept Paper. This is all
That ere I gathered of my Mothers wrong,
And of my Fathers cruelty, and condition.
It seems this was his hand, and ruthful farewell,
He turned her off withal. See, if you know it.
More then a thousand times I have observed her
Weep over that Paper; ever careful, though,
Her tears might not deface it. If by chance,
As when those tears prevented had her sight,
Some soft ones did on that hard Sentence light,
Her Lips took off the Trespass of her Eye;
And her hot Sighs restored the Paper dry.
Broo. This comes so near a Miracle; that my faith
fear is staggering. How got'st, thou this paper?
Phil. I stole it from my Mother, (and in Troth
(...)s all that ere I stole) because she should not
Weep out her eyes upon it. I do not love,
(...)hough I am a beggar, to lead blind folks.
(...)o you not find there, that he is a Knight,
(...)ough he subscribes no name? He tells her there,
(...)d tauntingly, he knowess she is more sorry
(...) the lost Ladyship he promised her*
Then for her Maidenhead. Let me hear you read it.

Broo. Mine eyes, are now, too full indeed; I cannot.


Phil. Are you the man then, whom I must ask blessing?
If you be, speak. I Will have you to my Mother,
Though, I dare swear, she had rather dye, then you,
Or any of your Race, or hers, should see her,
Whilst she has breath. Yet I will undertake
To prattle you both good friends.
And you shall have my Mammy,
And she shall have her Nell (that is J.)
The man shall have his Mare again,
And all shall be well. How do you?

Broo. Prithee forbear me good wench but a little*


Enter Valentine. Val. I have kept my time you see; and shall not fail^
In any Circumstance. Here are two Swords,
Pray take your choice. I have bespoke a Boat
Shall land us over the water, where you please;
Though, I Protest, I yet would beg your Love,
Next to my Natural Fathers.

Broo. This I fear*d.
And charged the plain way. But't shall not serve.

Val. You took my part of late, against old Vermin^


Broo. Prithee who would not? This is another case


Val. Why, if there be no remedy, pray accept
Your forty pounds. The money, Sir, may stead you
For your escape, when you have taken my Life.

Broo. Your money 'wou'ld hang me, Sir. Your life not worth it.


Val. It Is your own money; sent you by your So^


Broo. How know I that? Or that I have a Son
By thee unmurther'd.

Val. I told you of a Letter I had mislaid:
Look you. Do you know his hand?

Broo. If it be not,
Much changed, and lately, here is that will match.

Val. Was ever given Gold so weighed, and tried?
What Lawyer, Nay, what Judge would be so scrupulous?
No want corrupts good Conscience: Nor excess
Allaies in bad, the thirst of Cov'tousness.

Phil. What do you think, Sir?


Val. I think you beg again, and would be whipped.


Phil. I fecks, I do not beg; but came to offer
This grieved old man some of my infinite fortune
Found in your lucky money: Lucky indeed;
For I have found a Father by it. I vow
I think my Father. Is It not a fine old man?
I shall know more anon.

Val. Her money, sure,
Has made her Mad: How do you find it, Sir?

Broo. My wonder now, is, how thou can be Son
Of such a Father! Thou art honest sure.
Here is your Sword, I will accept the money.

Val. Then I shall live, and so may want the money.
Will you forbear it for a day or two?

Broo. Your Sword again.
Now, I profess to you, I have present need on it,
And am as strict, Sir, for my right, as I
Before was to decline it.

Val. Pray, Sir, take it;
And give me leave to beg your charitable
Construction of my Father.

Broo. How is that?


Val. Did you but know the care, the cost, and travel
He has been at a thousand ways, to find
Your injured Sister, to make good his fault,
If possibly he might --

Broo. O fie, O fie!


Val. Till all Opinion gave her dead; and then
The means he has sought to do you Offices
Against your knowledge. For he knew your Spirit
Would not except of his benevolence. --

Broo. Read that, and guess whose deed it is. Stand off Girl.


Phil. Yes forsooth Father, I shall learn in time,
I Will call him Father till he finds me another.
J know he could not shed those tears for nothing.

Val. But does she live, to whom this was directed?


Broo. Speak low* is that your Fathers hand?


Val. It is.


Broo. Along with me then. Girl, lead you the way.


Phil. Anan forsooth Father*


Broo. Show us to your Mother.


Phil. Shall he go too? What will the Neighbors think?
There Is none but Beggars all about us. Ods so,
There'll be a show indeed.

Val. No matter. Will you go?


Phil. Sir, they will hale you to pieces.


Val. Will you deny me?


Phil. How shall I answer'^ to my Mother? She
Never saw man, nor has been seen by man,
That J k(...)n my life.

Val. N(...)tter: Will you on?


Broo. I Will save thee blameless.


Phil. Troth I Will venture. --


Exeunt Oes. ACT. V.
Scene I.
Frances, Magdalen, Jane, Alice. Wine on a Table. Fra. TRes bien venue Madames.
You are very welcome.

Mag. Good lack! And is it you, Mrs. Alice? Is It possible? Are you come to
learn Carriage too? I will make bold with the other Glass of Wine. At a word, J
like your French Carriage the better, that it allows elder Women to drink
Wine.


Ali. They have no other drink, except water. And Maids are* allowed but that.


Ja. And young wives (they say) wine with their water.


Mag. Mingle your Glass, then, Daughter. This for me. Your father has so
fought you Mrs. Alice.


Ja. My Father has mist us too, by this time*


Mag. But neither of 'em can dream French enough, to direct 'em hither, J
warrant you. And does she learn the Carriages very well, Madamsilly?


Fra. Madamoyselle, si vous plaist.


Mag. What do ye cal't? I shall never hit it. *How do you find your Scholar?


Fra. O, she is very good. She learn very well.


Mag. But how much carriage has she learnt? Hark you Mrs. Alice. Have you not
learnt to carry a man? Has not a good Husband stolen you hither?

J can think waggi^hly I tell you: And an old Ape has an old eye. Go to.


Ali. No such matter, Mrs. Bumpsey.


Fra: What is that you say?


Mag. I ask you how much carriage she has learnt?


Fra. She come but dis day; And she carry both the hands already.


Mag. How say by that. Is It possible? Can she carry both her hands in one day?


Fra. Yes, and before to morrow, she shall carry the foot as well.


Mag. It seems, then, you teach handling before footing in your French way.


Fra. You may learn dat of de leetle Shild. De leetle Shild you see will handle
de ting, before it can set one foot to de ground. Come, let me see you make a
Reverance.


Mag. Reverance! What Is that?


Fra. It Is dat you call a Curtsie. Let me see you make Curtsie.


Mag. Look you hear then.


Fra. O fee, fee -- dat is de gross english Douck, for de swagbuttock'd-wife of
de Pesant.


Mag. How like you this then? There Is a Reverence I warrant you.


Fra. Fee, dat is worse. See how you carry de hands like de Comedien dat act de
shangling.


Mag. Shall I ever hit on it troe? I must take the other Glass.


Ali. Take heed she does not take too much.


Ja. I hope she will not. But there is no crossing her.


Fra. Let me see your hands.


Mag. There they be. They have been a little too familiar with Sea-coale
fires, and much other course houswifry, which J shall utterly abhor, and wash
off, when J have learnt to carry them Courtly.

But shall J ever do it, think you?


Fra. Yes, yes, and all your other parts and members.


Mag. I may win my Husband to love me Courtly then.


Fra. To love, and lie with you Courtly.


Mag. That Is but seldom, I doubt.


Fra. You shall know all de ways to win his Love,
Or any man's, to multiply your honor. --

Mag. J will so multiply then.


Fra. Not only in your looks, your smiles and sweet Caresses*
(Besides the help of Painting) that adorn
The face: But with the motion of each Lineament,
Of the whole frame of your well ordered body.
An Eye, a Lip, a finger shall not move;
A Toe trip unregarded. But your Geat
And your whole graceful Presence shall attract,
(Beyond affection) admiration:
As I Will artifice you.

Mag. I Will be a Nymph. Diana and her Dearlings* dear, dear, dear, etc. sing.
But may I paint, say you?

Fra. O most allowably; nay, commendably.


Mag. The Other Glass for that.


Fra. Then for the Art of dressing, setting forrh
Head Face, Neck, Breast,; with which I will inspire you.
To cover, or discover any part --
Unto de best advantage.

Mag. That is to say,
To hide shame, or show all: that is her meaning.

Fra. You shall have no defect perceived, no grace concealed.


Mag. I am for the naked Neck and Shoulders, then.
For (I tell you Mistress) I have a white Skin,
And a round straight Neck: smooth and plump Shoulders,
Free from French Flea-bits, and never a wrinckle
Neare'em, though I say it.

Fra. 'Thas been suggested by invective men,
Women, to justisie themselves that way,
Began that Fashion. As one the other side,
The fashion of men's Brow-looks was perhaps
Devised out of necessity, to hide
All il-grac'd forehead; Or besprinckled with
The outward Symptoms of some inward grief.
As, formerly the Saffron-steeped Linen,
By some great man found useful against Vermin,
Was ta*ne up for a fashionable wearing.
Some Lord that was no Niggard of his Beauty,
Might bring up narrow brims to publish it.
Another, to obscure his, or perhaps
To hide defects thereof, might bring up broad ones.
As questionless, the straight, neat timber'd Leg,
First wore the Troncks, and long Silk-ho^e: As likely
The Baker-knees, or some strange shamble shanks,
Begat the Ancle-breeches.

Mag. Sur^ the men
Took that conceit from us. What woman shewe^
A Leg* that is not a good one? --

She shows a swadled leg. Fra. These among men, are followed for the fashions,
That were invented for the better grace.
(As our Attires) to set off Limb, or face.

Mag. Good lack! What knowledge comes from foreign parts?


Enter Dryground, VVat. Dry. I prithee Wat, have patience for an hour.


Wat. Not for a minute, Sir, I Will not be kicked,
And called base Pandar for your baseness.

Dry. Nay, look you Wat.


Wat. And had almost been pumped,
And made a sport for Watermen in the Thames.

Dry. But Hear me, Wat.


Wat. I Will hear my Father sooner. (Give me hence
My Sister) were he a ravenous Beast, a Wolf,
J would obey him rather then trudge a foot
Further in your base way. Heart J am hip-shot.

Dry. Now, would his Bodies pains convert his Soul,
Twere a good work.

Wat. J am in desperate fear
Of The Mourning of the Chine too with the kicks*
And hunches they o're-laid me with. O base!
Without resistance. Give me hence my Sister.

Dry. But how was it my fault?


Wat. Was It not your project?


Ja. What may this mean*


Ali. No harm J warrant you.


Wat. Nay, it shall out. Your base inhumane Project,
To sell your Daughters Maidenhead. (J care not
Who hears me, J.) And cunningly to make me
Your Hackney-jade to fetch your Chapmen in.

Mag. Where are we now?


Ja. What did my Husband mean to wish us hither?


Wat. Baseness! J cannot call it bad enough.


Dry. You were as forward in it as my self,
And wooed me you might have her without all faults.

Wat. Mine eyes are opened now.


Dry. But J believe,
They were almost beaten out first.

Wat. And J vow
Ere J will marry so, I Will take a Beggar,
And join in trade with her, though I get nothing
But -- My name is Vermin already, J
Thank a good Father for it.

Dry. A Beggar-wenches breed would propagate
Your name most numerously.

Wat. Much better then your Sale-ware, and more lasting.
J think J saw her to day must be the woman,
Good Madame Polcat, the trim Schoole-mistriss.
I Will make bold with your Scholar. What! you have more.
I Will carry her and her Virginity
Unto some fitter place of Execution.

Ali. You brought me hither, Sir, and here I Will stay.


Wat. What! in a Bawdy House?


Mag. O dear! and is it so? What are we then?
Is this your boun fashion? Is this the carriage of the
Body, that you would teach us? What, to be
Whores? We could learn that at home, and
there were need, without your teaching,

Ja. Mother; what do you mean?


Ali. Mrs Bumpsey; pray fear no harm.


Mag. O good lack! what will become of us? where
are we now, Jane?
Betrayed! betrayed! Our honors are betrayed. O my
poor Bump. how will thou take this at my hands,
though J carry them never so Courtly?

Dry. 'Sfoot, she is in her Mawdlin fit: All her wine showers out in tears.


Mag. Oh, oh, oh, --


She falls Dry. Pray have her in. Look carefully to her,


Mag. Oh, oh, oh, --


Dry. Take the Bottle with ye.


Mag. I, I, I.


Dry. In all to the next Room. --


Exeunt Fra. Jane leading out Magdalen. Wat. Sir, she shall with me. I Will leave
her where J found her.


Dry. Sir, no such matter.


Wat. 'Sfoot, Gentlewoman, must I kick you out o* doors?


Dry. No, nor depart your self, but by Authority.
J am provided for you. Friends come in. Enter two Sergeants.
And do your Office.

Ser. We arrest you, Sir; Nay, we shall rule you*


Wat. Ha, ha, ha. Why, this is well, and very hospitably done.
Would any man but an old Bawd have done this?

Dry. Sir, J mistrusted your Apostasy.
Since you revolt, J must recall my money;
Or lay you where J found you, as you threatened your Sister here.

Wat. Baser, and baser still. Are you a Knight?
A Knight, a Post-Knight. A Postillion,
That rides a fore-horse, o*re the Ears in dirt,
Three fingers thick, is not so base. You Varlets,
Do you arrest folks in a bawdy house?

Ser. We do not find it so; Or, if it be,
The place may be as honest as our Office.
Will you walk, Sir?

Wat. Stay; Let me consider,
If now my Father (as some in like cases
Have done) would take a fine submission.
I could affoard to kneel and whine, methinks,
Rather then back to my old Ward again.
Twill nere be handsome though.

Enter Valentine. Val. The business Gentlemen.


Wat. My lucky friend.
Sir, you relieved me lately. Could you now
But add another Favor, it might teach
One, that nere learnt to pray, to pray for you.
Do you not know me, Sir? It Was I you saved
Out of the Temple Sudds.

Val. Have thou been shaved since?


Wat. No, Sir, I was disguised.


Val. Disguised!


Wat. Disguised in villainy, which I recant.


Val. Who knows but he may prove an honest man?
Pray, Sir, a word.

Ser. We do not use to wait dry-fisted; nor dry throated.


Wat. I would you were as wet all over, as I was like to have been: Or, as you
are Catchpoles, I would you had been but in those hands I escaped from.


Dry. You have prevailed, Sir.


Val. Sergeants you shall not out of the House. Here Is for half an hours
attendance. Go into that Room with your Prisoner. You shall have Wine, and
Smoke too.
Be of good cheer friend* if thou can be honest,
I can relieve thee: fear not.

Wat. Sir, get my Father but to say as much,
And you shall be Co-heire with me. I vow you shall have half.

Exeunt Wat, Sergeants Val. VVee'll talk anon. The Youth appears converted.


Dry. There was no other means to work it by,
But that I used; to urged him past his Nature.
He was so free in's Villainy, that I
Giving the Spurs, ran him beyond his speed;
Quite off his Legs, and glad to be led home.

Val. His Father comes on fairly: I have followed
All your Instructions concerning him,
And my fantastic Father-'Law. Both whom
Are hard at hand, with the wise western Knight.
He too's content to go to the best Ordinary,
While it is best cheap he says. Where are the women?

Dry. Your Mother-'Law, after she had got
As much French Carriage, as might serve to furnish
A petty Court; is fallen into a fit,
To overthrow it all again.

Val. The better.
But is the house clear, Sir, of all your Riflers?

Dry. As I could wish; And well satisfied.
For, when they understood the honest end,
My Project aimed at; which, by an Oration
Well charged with virtuous Sentences, I forced
Into the nobler Breasts: they all recanted
The barbarous purpose; and as freely left
Their money for that Charitable use,
To which I pre-intended it. The rest
Purs'd theirs again. But yet I have collected
In this odd uncouth way, five hundred Pounds,
That was laid down at stake for a Virginity,
To make an honest stock for Franck.

Val. It Is good.
I may fetch in my Guests in the mean time
You maybe pleased, Sir, to peruse this Baper.

Exit. Dry. How now! what is here? How might he come by this?
It is the scorn I sent my injured Love;
My abused Elynor: The hand, that threw
Her from me. O, that at the price of it
I could receive her.

Enter Oliver. Ambrose. Ol. Sir, by your leave,
We come to sup w'yee. Does your Rifling hold?

Amb. What, you are off of the hooks, methinks.


Ol. If there be no such thing, tell us the Riddle?


Dry. You shall know all, and briefly. Franck, come in. Enter Franck.
Now Gentlemen --

Ol. Let us salute her first. --

Salute, then whisper.
Dry. She does not taste of sin. Fair Chastity
Sits crowned upon her Brow, with an aspect,
May beat down. Lust to Hell, from whence it rose.

Fra. You profess Nobly, sir.


Ol. I vow, and do not lie to you: If I find
Your Father so inhumane, you against it:
VVee'll be your Rescue, if forty able swordmen
Which we have, at the signal of a finger,
Planted in readiness, can fetch you off:
Do you approve?

Fran. Yes, and admire your goodness.


Ol. Now we are for you, sir:


Dry. Then hear the story; which your late Impatience would not permit.


Amb. You speak not now
In that high Phrase, or tone, as you Enter Valentine. Bumpsey, Vermin,
Amphilus, Brookall, Elynor, Phillis.
did then. Val. Stand here, unseene;
and hear attentively.

Dry. I am a Gentleman, that by foul misdeed
(Heaven, Heaven I ask thee pardon) once did wrong
To an unfortunate Family, by rejecting,
After affiance, and her love abus*d,
A Gentlewoman --

Ol. You got with child, and then denied her Marriage.


Dry. It Was so.


Ely. Ay me!


Val. No passion, gentle Soul.


Phil. If this should prove my Father now! --


Ol. Well Sir, your Gentlewoman!


Dry. She, on the discontent, (poor hapless Soul)
Now foureteen Winters since though sadly burdened,
Fled, and no more is heard of: at the first
My wildness took no sense of this dear Loss;
But drew me through the ways of careless pleasure,
By riotous expense, that mine estate
And Credit ran at waste, and was nigh spent,
Until my trespass cried against my Conscience
To render satisfaction: but in vain
We offer to the dead. My Genius therefore
Prompts me to grateful deeds unto her Blood.

Amb. What can this come to?


Dry. She had a Brother, that lost his estate By Law --


Br. Means he not me?


Dry. To a Corrupt Oppressor --


Ver. Ha! How Is that?


Dry. Was stripped out of the very Coat he wore,
Had nothing left him, but a Son --

Ol. What Is all this to your Daughter?


Dry. Even all that may be; (see) His Sonne's my Daughter. Discover Fran^.
Now do you find my project Gentlemen?
It has at Charge of three days Housekeeping
Put hal^e a thousand pounds in's purse; Besides
A fair pull for his Fathers Land again:
For he has, by a lawful Churchman, married
The Daughter of his Fathers Adversary.

Ol. Why, here are wonders!


Amb. Bravely, nobly done


Dry. Come Mrs. Alice; and justify your Act.


Enter Alice Ver. My Daughter, ha!


Amp. My sweetheart, hoe!


Fr^. Your haes and hoes can not draw her from me,
Thee is my Wife.

Ver. By what witchcraft?


Dry. By stronger Charms, then your Art can dissolve* You know me now, Sir --
And my Project, do you not?


Discovers himself. Ol. Amb. Sir Humfrey Dryground.


Ver. I am struck dum with wonder.


Elin. O it is he, it is he.


Val. Alas she swounes, Sir cheer you up this Lady,
While I appease the rest. A word with you Sir.

Amp. I will not be appeased.


Dry. My love! my Elynor!


Bump. So, cheer her up Sir Humfry. To her again Sir Humfry; your Son and
mine in Law has told me all your story, and reconciled your Brother Brookall to
you before your interview. I know all, the full point and the whole substance;
the flat and plain of the business; and now I love these things again. How
now Sir Amphilus? Drowned in Melancholy?


Amp. No: But and I were at the Duckingpond, I know what I know. But when I
drown my self, I Will give you leave to hang me.


Ali. Your pardon, and your blessing; I beseech you.


Ver. Hence.


Exit Valentine. Broo. Was this thy Journey into France my Boy?
High Providence has made it good. But tell me,
Was Love your chief Instructor to this Marriage?

Fran. Indeed it was equal in her and me.


Ali. Pray Sir your blessing.


Ver. Away.


Broo. Turn this way for a blessing then my Daughter,


Bump. Shall I tell you Neighbor? Law has no relief for you; And Conscience
and you have a long time been strangers* Could you be friends and embrace
Conscience now, all would be well. And there is the substance. Is it plain?


Ver. Conscience! do you know where she is?


Enter Val. Wat. Magdalen, Jane. Val. Heeres one has brought her in his true
Conversion.


Wat. Sir, If you can forgive, and can obey you* --
I now can better kneel* then speak

He weep^ Val. Do you note those tears, Sir? Had you lost your Daughter,
My Father had in this made you amends,
In finding you a Son. His Art converted him.

Ver. Sure, all is but Apparition, or a dream.


Bump. Ha! Think you so? It Is your own flesh and blood: And by your leave and
liking* may prove as honest a Man, as his Father. Is not this plain now?
Forgive and bless ^m all over, and so Kiss 'em too* They are your Children*


Mag. O my dear Bump! Art thou there? Thou may kiss, and forgive me all
over too, for any harm, or dishonesty; though the place be as they say-at a
word, Bump. Thou may believe me, I came but to learn Carriage of the Body,
nor to carry no bodies body, but my own body, Bump. No truly, truly Bump. o
-- o -- that ever I did that.


Bump. Peace, peace: All Is well. At least I know your Disease.


Mag. Think me not drunk, good Bump, a little fashion-sick, or so.


Amp. Fashion-sick! a fine civil word. To be drunk, is fashion-sick.


Ver. I am awaked out of the Lethargy
Of Avarice: Blessed may our Friendship be.

Dry. I will not sleep, before the holy Priest
Has done the Office. Blessing on my Girl.
Val, Thou have made me young again: the best
Occurrents in this Project have been thine.
Thy Accidents exceeded my design.

Val. They do not yet cease here: For see, the strife
Betwixt these long continued Adversaries
Perfectly reconciled; and both have given
The young and hopeful married pair their Blessings.

Amp. To which I have given my Consent most freely.
For it was Nolens volens as they say.

Val. They are beholden to you. Mr. Vermin
Restores unto the Son the Fathers Land,
For Dowry with his Daughter: And is taken
So with the good you wrought upon his Son,
The Convertite here; that if he stand firm
Till the determination of your Mortgage,
He ^ cancel it, and send it Gratis to you.

Wat. That Is sure enough. But Sir, the other business.


Dry. What Is that?


Val. The most to be admired of all;
He loves my Sister here; and has done long:
But, now, that he perceaves her worth (being yours)
And, since you promised him your Daughter too,
He makes it his fair suit.

Dry. I Will talk with his Father.
And Wat stand you but firm, and live reformed,
Winning my Daughters love, you shall have mine.

Phil. That Fortune is not blind, that showed me way
To Father, Friends, and Husband in one day.

Dry. This binds us all into a Brotherhood.


Bro. And with a Brothers Love I now salute you.


Dry. So may we with a general embrace,
Create the Heart of Friendship, not the Face.
Come Gentlemen, your Ordinary stays,
Twill prove good fare (I hope) though no rich Feast;
And acceptable to each welcome Guest.

Epilogue.
NO way ambitious yet of vulgar praise,
The writer of these Scenes desires to know,
By your fair leave, though he assume no Bays,
Whether he pulled fair for a ^^afe or no.
If yes, then let your hands assistant be,
T'incourage him to climb Apollo's tree.
FINIS.
Courteous Reader,
These Books following are printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at
his Shop at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Various Histories, with curious Discourses in Humane Learning, etc.
1. DE Bello, Belgico, The History of the Low-Country-Warrs, written in Latin
by Famianus Strada, in English by Sir Robert Stapylton; illustrated with diverse
figures, newly printed, in Folio.

2. The History of the Banished Virgin, a Romance, translated by I. H. Esquire,
in Fol.

3. The History of Polexander, a Romance, Englished by William Brown Gent.
Printed for T. W. and are to be sold by Humphrey Moseley, in Fol.

4. The use of Passions, written by ^. F. Senalt, and put into English by Henry
Earl of Monmouth, in 8o.

5. Letters between the Lord George Digby, and Sir Kenelm Digby Knight,
concerning Religion, newly printed in 8o.

6. Judicious and Select Essaies, and Observations, written by the Renowned and
learned Knight, Sir Walter Raleigh, with his Apology for his Voyage to Guiana,
in 8o. newly Printed.

7. Unheard Of Curiosities concerning the Talismanicall Sculpture of the
Persians, the Horoscope of the Patriarchs and the Judgment of the Stars, by
James Gaffarel; Englished by Edm. Chilmead, Chapter Ch Oxon, newly printed in 8o.

8. The Complete Horseman, and Expert Farrier, in two Books, by Thomas de Gray
Esquire, newly printed with Additions, in 4o.

9. Mr. James Howels History of Lewis the Thirteenth, King of France with the
life of his Cardinal de Richelieu, in Fol.

10. Mr. Howels Epistolae Ho-Elianae, Familiar Letters, Domestic and Foreign,
in six Sections, partly Historical, Political, Philosophical, the first
Volume with Additions, in 8o.

11. Mr. Howels New volume of Familiar Letters, partly Historical, Political,
Philosophical, the second Volume with many Additions, in 8o.

12. Mr. Howels Third Volume of Additional Letters of a fresher date, never
before published, in 8o.

13. Mr. Howels Dodona's Grove, or the Vocal Forest, the first part, in 12o
with many Additions.

14. Mr. Howels Dodona's Grove, or the Vocal Forest, the second part, in 8o
never printed before.

15. Mr. Howels Englands Tears for the present wars.

16. Mr. Howel of the Pre-eminence and Pedigree of Parliament, in 12o.

17. Mr Howels Instructions and Directions for Foreign Travels, in 12o with
diverse Additions for Traveling into Turkey, and the Levant parts.

18. Mr. Howels Vote, or a Poem Royal presented to his Majesty, in 4o.

19. Mr. Howels Angli^ Suspiria and lachrymae, in 12o.

20. Policy unveiled, or Maxims of State, done into English by the Translator
of Gusinan, in 4o.

21. The History of the Inquisition, composed by the R. F. Paul Servi^a, the
compiler of the History of the* Council of Trent, in 4o translated out of
Italian.

22. Biathanato's, a Paradox of self-homicide, by Dr Jo. Done, Dean of St
Paul's London, in 4o.

23. Marquis Virgilio Malvezzi's Romulus and Tarquin, Englished by Hen. Earl of
Monmouth, in 12o

24. Marquis Virgilio Malvezzi's David persecuted, Englished by To. Ashley.
Gent. in 12o.

25. Marquis Virgilio Malvezzi, of the success and chief events of the Monarchy
of Spain, in the year 1639* of the revolt of the Catalonians from the King of
Spain, Englished by Rob. Gentilis Gen^. in 12o.

26. Marquis Virgilio Malvezzi's considerations on the lives of Alci^iades, and
Coriolanus, Two famous Roman Commanders Englished by Rob. Gentilis Gent. in 12o
newly printed.

27. Gracious privileges granted by the King of Spain to our English Merchants,
in 4o.

28. The History of Life and Death, or the prolongation of Life, written by
Francis Lord Verulam, Viscount St. Albans in 12o*

29. The Antipathy between the French and the Spanyard, an ingenious
translation out of Spanish, in 12o.

30. Mr. Birds grounds of Grammar, in 8o

31. Mr. Bulwers Philocophus, or the Deaf and Dumb man's friend, in 12o.

32. Mr Bulwers Pathomyotomia, or the Dissection of the significative Muscles
of the Affections of the Mind, in 12o.

33. An Itinerary containing a voyage made through Italy in the years 1646,
1647. illustrated with diverse Figures of Antiquity, never before published, by
John Raymond, Gent in 12o

34. A Discovery of Subterraneal Treasure, viz of all manner of Mines and
Minerals, from the Gold, to the Coal, with plain Directions and Rules for the
finding of them in all Kingdoms, and Countries, written by Gabriel Plat.
Printed for I. E. and are to be sold by Humphrey Moseley, newly printed. 1653.

Several Sermons, with other excellent Tracts in Divinity, written by some
most eminent and learned Bishops, and Orthodox Divines.
35 A Manual of private Devotions and Meditations for every day in the week,
by the right reverend Father in God, Lancelot Andrews late Lord Bishop of
Winchester, in 24o. newly printed.

36. A Manual of Directions for the Sick, with many sweet Meditations and
Devotions, by the right reverend Father in God, Lancelot Andrews, late Lord
Bishop of Winchester, in 24o, newly printed.

37. Ten Sermons upon several occasions, preached at St Paul's Cross, and
elsewhere, by the right reverend Father in God, Arthur Lake, late Lord Bishop of
Bath and Wells, in 4o.

38. Six Sermons upon several occasions, preached at Court before the Kings
Majesty, and elsewhere, by that late learned and reverend Divine, John Done,
Dr. in Divinity, and Dean of St. Paul's London, in 4o.

39 A Key to the Key of Scripture, or an exposition with notes upon the Epistle
to the Romans, the three first chapters, by William Sclater, Dr. in Divinity
and Minister of the word of God at Pitmister in Somersetshire, in 4o.

40. Precious promises and privileges of the faithful, written by Richard
Sibbs, Dr in Divinity, late Master of Katharine Hall in Cambridge, and Preacher
of Grayes Inn London, in 12o.

41. Sarah and Hagar, or the sixteenth Chapter of Genesis opened in nineteen
Sermons, being the first legitimate Essay of the pious labors of that learned,
Orthodox, and indefatigable Preacher of the Gospel, Mr. Josias Shute. B. D.
and above 33 years Rector of St Mary Woolnoth in Lombardstreet, in Folio.

42. Christ's Tears with his love and affection toward Jerusalem, delivered in
sundry Sermons upon Luke 19. v. 41, 42. by Richard Maden, B. D. Preacher of the
Word of God, late of Magdalen College in Camb. in 4o.

43. Ten Sermons preached upon several Sundays; and Saints days, by Peter
Hausted Mr. in Arts, and Curate at Vppingham in Rutland, in 4o.

44. Eighteen Sermons preached upon the Incarnation and Nativity of our blessed
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, wherein the greatest mysteries of God lines are
unfolded, to the capacity of the Weakest Christian, by John Dawson Oxon. in 4o.

45. The History of the Defenders of the Faith, discoursing the state of
Religion in England during the Reign of King Henry 8. Edward 6. Queen Mary, and
Queen Elizabeth. by C. L. in 4o.

46. Christian Divinity, written by Edmund Reeve. Batchelour in Divinity, in 4o.

47. The Communion-Book Catechism expounded by Edmund Reeve Batchelour in
Divinity, in 4o.

48. The true and absolute Bishop, wherein is showed how Christ is our only
Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, by Nicholas Darton, Master in Arts, in 4o.

49. A description of the Newborn Christian, or a lively pattern of the Saint
militant, child of God, wri^ten by Nicholas Hunt, Mast^r in Arts, in 4o

50. Divine Meditations upon the 91. Psalm, and on The History of Agag King of
Amalek with an Essay of Friendship written by an honorable person, in 12o.

51. An Historical Anatomy of Christian Melancholy, by Edmund Gregory. Oxon.
in 8o.

52. Lazarus his Rest, a Sermon preached at the Funeral of that pious,
learned, and Orthodox Divine, Mr. Ephraim Vdall, by Thomas Reeve, Batchelour in
Divinity, in 4o.

53. The Survey of Man, in a Sermon as it was delivered by Mr. John Bishop at
his Fathers funeral, in 4o* Printed 1652.

Choice Poems, with excellent Translatiors, and incomparable Comedies and
Tragedies, written by several ingenious Authors.
54* COmedies and Tragedies written by Francis Beaumont, and John Fletcher,
never printed before, and now published by the Authors Original Copies,
containing 34 plays, and a Masque, in Fol.

55. Epigrammata Thomae Mori Angli, in 16o.

56. Fragmenta Aurea, A Collection of the incomparable Pieces, written by Sr.
John Suckling Knight. in 8o.

57. All Juvenals 16 Satyrs translated by Sr, Robert Stapylton wherein is
contained a survey of the manners and actions of mankind, with Annotations, in
8o

58. Musaeus on the loves of Hero and Leander, with Leanders letter to Hero,
and her answer, taken out of Ovid, with Annotations by Sir Rob. Stapylton, in
8o.

59. Poems, etc. written by Mr. Edward Waller of Beconsfield Esquire in 8o

60. Pastor Fid^, the faithful Shepherd, a Pastoral, newly translated out of
the Original, by Mr. Rich. Fanshaw, Esquire in 4o.

61. Poems, with a discovery of the Civil Wars of Rome by, Mr. Richard
Fanshaw, Esquire in 4o.

62. Aurora, Ismenia, and the Prince, with Oronta the Cyprian Virgin,
translated by Thomas Stanly Esquire the 2d Edition corrected and amended, in 8o.

63. Europa, Cupid crucified, Venus Vigils, with Annotations, by Thomas Stanly,
Esquire in 8o.

64. Medea, a Tragedy written in Latin by Lucius Annaeus Seneca, Englished by
Mr. Edward Sherburn Esquire with Annotations, in 8o.

65. Seneca's answer to Lucilius his Quaere, why good men suffer misfortunes,
seeing there is a Divine providence, translated into English verse by Mr Edward
Sherburn Esquire in 8o.

66. Poems of Mr John Milton, with a Masque presented at Ludl^w Castle before
the Earl of Bridgewater, then president of Wales, in 8o.

67. Poems, etc. with a Masque called The Triumph of Beauty, by James Shirley,
Gent. in 8o.

68. Divine Poems, written by Francis Quarles, in 8o.

69. The Odes of Casimire, translated by Mr. George Hills of Newark, in 12o.

70. Steps to the Temple, Sacred Poems with the Delights of the Muses* upon
several occasions, by Richard Crashaw of Cambridge, in 12o.

71. The Mistress, or several Copies of Love verses written by Mr. Abraham
Cowley, in 8o.

72. Arnal^e and Lucenda, or the melancholy Knight, a Poem translated by L.
Laurence, in 4o.

73. The Sophister, a Comedy in 4o. by Dr. S.

74. The Woman-hater, or, the Hungry Courtier, a Comedy written by Francis
Beaumont, and John Fletcher, Gent. in 4o.

75. The Tragedy of Thierry King of France, and his brother Theodoret, written
by Francis Beaumont, and John Fletcher, Gent. in 4o.

76. The Elder Brother, a Comedy written by Fran. Beaumont, and John Fletcher,
Gent. in 4o.

77. The Scornful Lady, a Comedy written by Francis Beaumont, and John
Fletcher, Gent. in 4o.

78. Cupids Revenge, a Tragedy written by Francis Beaumont, and John Fletcher,
Gent. in 4o.

79. Monsieur Thomas, a Comedy written by Francis Beaumont, and John Fletcher,
Gent. in 4o.

80. The two noble Kinsmen, a Comedy written by Francis Beaumont, and John
Fletcher, Gent. in 4o.

81. The Tragedy of Albovine King of the Lombards, written by William Davenant,
in 4o.

82. The Just Italian, written by William Davenant, i^ 4o.

83. The Cruel Brother, a Tragedy written by William Davenant, in 4o.

84. The Unfortunate Lovers, a Tragedy written by William Davenant, in 4o.

85. Love and Honor, a Comedy written by William Davenant, in 4o.

86. Madagascar, with other Poems, written by William Davenant, in 12o.

87. The Country Captain, and the Variety, two Comedies written by a Person
of Honor, in 12o.

88. The Contention for Honor and Riches, a Masque written by James Shirley,
Gent. in 4o.

89. The Triumph of Peace, a Masque presented by the four honorable Houses of
Inns of Court before the King, and Queens Majesty at Whitehall, 1633, written
by James Shirley, Gent. in 4o.

90. The Duchess of Malfy, a Tragedy written by John Webster, Gent. in 4o.

91. Poems written by Mr. William Shakespeare, Gent. in 8o.

92. The Cid, a Tragi-Comedy, translated out of French by Joseph Rut^er, Gent.
in 12o.

93. Allarum to Poets by I. L. in 4o.

94. Fragmenta Poetica, or Miscellanies of Poetical Musings, by Nich. Murford,
Gent. in 12o.

95. Hymnus Tobaci Authore Raphaele Thorio, in 8o.

96. Hymnus Tobaci, a Poem in Honor of Tobacco, heroically composed by Raphael
Thorius, made English by Peter Hausted, Mr. of Arts Camb. newly printed in 8o.

97. The Sophy, a Tragedy written by Mr. John Denham Esquire.

98. Coopers Hill, a Poem written by Mr. John Denham Esquire. The second Edition in
4o. with Additions.

99. Poems, with a Masque, by Thomas Carew Esquire, Gentleman of the Privy
Chamber to his late Majesty, revived and enlarged with Additions. in 8o.

100. Comedies and Tragedies, with other excellent Poems, by Mr. William
Cartwright, late Student of Christ-Church in Oxford, and Proctor of the
University. The Airs and Songs set by Mr. Henry Laws servant to his late
Majesty in his public and private Music, newly printed in 8o.

101. Clarastella, with other occasional Poems, Elegies, Epigrams and Satyrs,
written by R. Heath, Esquire. in 12o.

102. Olor Iscanus, a Collection of some select Poems, and Translations,
written by Mr. Henry Vaughan Silurist, newly printed in 8o.

103. The Academy of Complements, wherein Ladies, Gentlewomen, Scholars, and
Strangers may accommodate their Courtly practice, with Gentile Ceremonies,
Complementall, Amorous, high Expressions, and Forms of speaking, or writing of
Letters, most in fashion, with Additions of many witty Poems, and pleasant new
Songs, newly printed.

Books newly printed this present year for Humphrey Moseley.
104. THe Psalms of David from the new Translation of the Bible, turned into
Me^re, to be sung after the old Tunes used in the Churches, by the Right
Reverend Father in God, Henry King Bishop of Chichester, in 12o.

105. The Life of the most Learned Father Paul, Author of the History of the
Council of Trent* translated out of Italian by a person of Quality, in 8o.

106. Choice Music for three Voices, and a Thorough Base, composed by Mr.
Henry, and Mr. William Laws, brothers, and servants to his late Majesty; with
diverse Elegies set in Music by several Friends upon the death of Mr. William
Laws, in 4o.

107. Artificial Arithmetic, containing the Quintessence of the Golden Rule,
the true valuation of all Annuities, also to find the distance at one station;
an Art never till now published; useful for Gunners, Seamen, and Surveyors, by
Rob. Jager, Gent. in 8o.

108. Cassandra, the famed Romance, the three first Books written originally in
French, and now elegantly rendered into English by the right honorable the Lord
George Digby, in 8o.

109. The History of Philoxipes and Policrite, taken out of Artamene, or the
Grand Cyrus; made English by an honorable Person, in 8o.

110. The History of Don Fenise, a new Romance, written in Spanish by Francisco
de las-Coveras, treating the Several effects of Love, and Fortune, Englished
by a Person of Honor, in 8o.

111. La Stratonica, or the unfortunate Queen, a new Romance, written in
Italian, and now Englished by I. B. Gent. in 4o.

112. Ibrahim, or the Illustrious Bassa, an Excellent new Romance, the Whole
Work in four parts, written in French by Mounsier de Scudery, and now Englished
by Henry Cogan. Gent. in Fol.

113. Cassandra, the famed Romance, the whole Work in five parts, written
originally in French, and now Elegantly rendered into English by a Person of
quality, in Fol.

114. Cleopatra, a new Romance, written in French by the Famed Author of
Cassandra, and now Englished by a Genesis of the Inner Temple

115. The Wild-Goose-Chase, a Comedy written by Fran. Beaumont and I. Fletcher,
Gent.

116. The Widow, a Comedy written by Ben. Johnson, John Fletcher, and Thomas
Midleton.

117. The Sovereignty of the British Seas, written by that learned Knight Sir
John Boroughes Keeper of the Records in the Tower.

Books printed this Term for Humphrey Moseley.
118. Poems and translations, the Complete Works of Thomas Stanley Esquire, in
8o. 1653.

119. Herodian of Alexandria his Imperial History of twenty Roman Caesar's and
Emperors of his time, first written in Greek, now converted into an Heroic
Poem by C. B. Stapleton in 4o. 1653.

120. Grammatica Burlesa, or a new English Grammar, made plain and easy for
Teacher and Scholar, composed by Edward Burles Mr. of Arts and Schoolmaster at
East-Acton in Midlesex* in 12o. 1653.

121. Sions Prospect in its first view, presented in a Summary of Divine
truths, consenting with the faith professed by the Church of England, confirmed
from Scripture and Reason, composed by Mr. To. Mossom Minister.

122. Quaestio Quodlibetica, or a discourse whether it be lawful to take Use
for Money, by R. F. Knight in 12o. 1653.

123. Historical Relations of the United Provinces of Flanders, written in
Italian by Cardinal Bentivoglio, and now rendered into English by the Right
Honorable Henry Earl of Monmouth, in Fol. 1653.

124. Choice Novels and Amorous Tales, written by the most refined wits of
Italy, newly translated into English by a Person of Quality, in 8o. 1653.

125* Nissena, an excellent new Romance, written Orignally in Italian, and now
Englished by an Honorable Person, in 8o. 1653.

126. The Changeling, written by Thomas Middleton and W. Rowley, Gent. in 4o.
1653.

127. Paradoxes, Problems, Characters etc. by Dr. Done D. of St. Paul's, to
which is added a Book of Epigrams, written in Latin by the same Author;
translated by Jasper Main D. D.

128. Ignatius his Conclave a Satyr written by Dr. Don^^ Dean of St Paul's.

129. Essays in Divinity by Dr. Done D. of St. Paul's, before he entered into
holy Orders.

These Books I have now in the Press, ready to come forth.

130. Six new Plays, viz. The BROTHERS. The SISTERS. The DOUBTFUL HEIR. The
IMPOSTURE. The CARDINAL. The COURT SECRET.
By James Shirley, Gent. in 8o. Being all that ever the Author made for the
Private house in Blackfriars.

131. The Sinners Tears in Meditations and Prayers, by Thomas Fettiplace of
Peterhouse Cam^. in 12o.

132. The Natural and experimental History of Winds written in Latin by the
right Honorable Francis Lord Verulam Viscount St. Alban, translated into
English by an admirer of the learned Author* in 12o.

133. The Card of Courtship, or the Language of Love, fitted to the Humors of
all Degrees, Sexes, and Conditions, in 12o. 1653.

134. Rena^us des Cartes's Excellent Compendium of Music with Necessary and
Judicious Animadversion^ Thereupon by a Person of Honor, Illustrated with
diverse figures. 1653.

135. Natural and divine Contemplations of the Passions and facultyes of the
soul of man in three book^, written by Nicholas, Mosley Esquire

These Books I do purpose to Print very Speedily.
136. THe History of the Wars of the Emperor Justinian with the Persians,
Go^hs* and Vandalls, written in Greek by Procopius of Caesarea, in ^ight books,
translated into English by Sir* Henry Holtcraft, Knight.

137. The History of the Kingdom of N^ples, with a large and exact Description
of the Situation, Quality, and nature of the Country* the Manners and
Conditions of the People, with the famous Antiquityes, and the worthy men* that
have lived therein, etc. Composed by the most Elaborate care of Sampson
Lennard, Esquier.

138. Poemata Graeca and (...)na, a Gulielmo* Cartwright, e C. C. Oxon.

139. Le Ch^min Abrege, or a Discourse for the attaining of Sciences in a short
time, with the Statutes of the Academy of the Cardinal Richelieu, translated
out of French.

140. The Secretary in Fashion, or a Compendious and refined way of Expression
in all manner of Letters, composed in French by P. Sr. de la S^rre augmented
with instructions how to write Letters, moreover a Collection of 26 Choice
moral Letters, written by the most refined wits of this age, also the
Complements of the French tongue, newly* translated into English by a Person of
Quality.


