15. Of February, 1644.
Ordered by the Commons in Parliament that this Ordinance be forthwith printed
and published

Hen. Elsynge. Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

THE Sacred and Sovereign Church-Remedie: OR, The Primitive and Apostolical
way of composing Ecclesiastical Differences, and establishing the Churches of
Christ.

Wherein the authority and utility of lawful Councels and Synods is asserted
and vindicated, and diverse of the sad-Controversies of the times modestly
debated; First preached in the Parish Church of great Yarmouth, and now
published for a preservative against the poison of Anti-Synodall suggestions,
and a preparative to the receiving of what mercy God shall please to convey
unto his Church in this Kingdom, through the hands of the present reverend
Assembly of Divines.

Conciliorum in Ecclesia saluberrima authoritas.

August. Epist. 128. Quad^a multis queritur, facilius invenitur.

Whittak. contra Bellarm. Quest. 5. cap. 6. By John Brinsley.

LONDON, Printed by Moses Bell for Edward Brewster, and are to be sold at his
shop on Ludgate hill, at the sign of the Bible, near Fleet-bridge. 1645.

Viris tam Eruditione quam Pietate conspicuis, GULIELMO TWISSO S. T. D.
Prolocutori ac Praesidi dignissimo, reliquoque Theologorum choro in Synodali
conventu, Doctrinae Sanitati, cultus P^ritati, politiae Eutaxiae, Ecclesiaque
Paci seri^ and sedulo operam navantibus.

Hasce Conciliorum Synodorumque vindicias, caeterasque de deplorandis quibusdam
praesentis aevi controversus candidas ac amicabiles disceptationes, quales,
quales, D. D. D.

Joannes Brinsleius.

I Have perused diligently this Treatise, called, The Sacred and Sovereign
Church-Remedie, and finding it penned with much strength, candor, and modesty,
and desiring some healing plaster for our sad Divisions, affix this
Approbation, and Imprimatur.

Ia. Cranford.
Ian. 16. 1644.
THE SACRED AND SOVEREIGN Church-Remedie.
ACTS 16. VERSE 4. 5. And as they went through the Cities, they delivered them
the decrees for to keep, that were ordained by the Apostles and Elders which
were at Jerusalem.

And so were the Churches established in the faith, and increased in number
daily.


Romans 15 4.
WHatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning (says
S. Paul) for our instruction, our direction; for the informing of our
judgments, for the regulating of our practice. And surely of such use is this
portion of Scripture which I have now singled forth; wherein we have set forth
unto us The Sovereign Church-Remedy, or the Primitive and Apostolical may of
composing Ecclesiastical differences, and settling and establishing the divided
distracted Churches of Christ, viz. by delivering to them the Synodicall
Decrees of a venerable Council to keep. So run the words of the Text, As they
went through the Cities, they delivered them the decrees, etc.

And who were they that delivered these decrees? what decrees did they deliver?
to whom did they deliver them? to what end did they deliver them? what was the
success and fruit of this delivery? Let these five serve for the parts of the
Text; all which I shall (God willing) pass over by way of Explication,
Observation, Application, with as much brevity and perspicuity as possibly I
can. Let your Attentions, your ears, and hearts go along with me, and that
without either prejudice, or partiality. It shall be much against my will if in
handling this subject I offer any violence to the Text, do any in^urie to the
truth, any dis-service to the Church, or yet give any just offense to any whose
faces are Sion-wards.

Part 1.
Begin with the first, of which not much. The Messengers, who they were that
undertook, and made deliverie of these decrees to the Churches; viz Paul, and
Silas. So much we may learn from the Acts 15. 40. 41.
last verse but one of the Chapter foregoing. Paul chose Silas and departed,
etc. going through Syria and Cilicia (as the last words have it) confirming the
Churches, confirming them in the faith by their Doctrine; withal having a
special regard to their unity and Peace. This the Apostle every where shows
himself very studious of, and Romans 1. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 3. 2 Cor. 12. 2 These. 3. 16.
solicitous for, earnestly wishing it. Grace and Peace, it is his constant
salutation to the Churches. Now the Lord of peace himself give you pe^ce
always by all means, it is his farewell to his Thessalonians. In both meaning
not only (though principally) inward, but also outward 2 Cor. 13. 11. 1 These.
5. 13.
peace, seriously exhorting to it, finally brethren be of one mind, live in
peace, 2 Cor. 13. Be at peace among your selves, 1 These. 5. 13. Being ze^lous
for their peace, he is as jealous of their divisions; receiving the
intelligence of them not without great regreet and sorrow. 1 Cor. 1. 11.
So much he intimates to his Corinthians, It has been declared 1 Cor. 11. 18.
to me of you, my brethren, that there are divisions among you, 1 Cor. 11. I,
Church-divisions, when you come together in the Church, I hear there are
divisions among you ((...), schisms.) This Paul takes notice of, not without
a sad resentment, which he expresses by taxing Verse. 17.
and reproving them. In this I praise you not (says he in the verse foregoing)
(...). There is a meiosis in the word; less said, more intended. I praise you
not, i. e. I blame you, dispraise you. Reproving them, he charge this upon
them as an ill symptom, 1 Cor. 3. 3.
an argument and evidence of their carnality. Whereas there are amongst you
envyings and strifes, and divisions ((...), factions, as the margin reads it)
are ye not carnal? i. e. in a greater measure such, having more flesh then
spirit, more corruption then grace; charging these divisions home upon them
which gave way to them, he charge them more home upon those who were the
Authors and fomenters of them, wishing them to be taken notice of and avoided,
as men infamous and dangerous. Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which
Romans 15. 47.
cause divisions contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid
them. I, to be cut off. I would they were even cut off that trouble you, Gal.
5. 12.
says he to the Galathians, speaking of the false apostles, who by introducing
Circumcision, and pressing it as a necessary Ordinance, had troubled the
consciences of weak Christians, and disquieted the peace of the Church: These
he wishes that they were cut off, that the Church were freed of them one way
or other. So truly zealous was this blessed Apostle of the Churches peace, and
so jealous of their divisions, that he was willing and ready to do any thing
which lay in his power to procure the one and to heal the other. Upon this
ground it was that he circumcised Timothy Acts 16. 3.
in the verse before the Text. This he did, not that he put any religion in, or
apprehended any necessity of that then dying Ceremony, Ad foverdam charitatem,
non ad pietatis exercitium* Calv. ad loc.
but only to comply with the Jews, so far as safely he might, in a thing then
merely indifferent. He circumcised him (says the third verse) because of the
Jews, viz. that he might take that scandal out of their way, and so maintain
the peace and unity of the Church. And upon the same ground it is, that here in
the Text, passing through the Cities he delivered these decrees to the Churches,
viz. that he might heal those breaches, and make up those rents which some
differences in opinion had made amongst them.

Obser.
Behold here an excellent pattern (as for all Christians in general, so more
specially) for the Ministers of the Gospel, teaching them to make this one
part of their work, to procure the Churches peace. As to maintain truth, so
peace. God has put them together [love the Truth and Peace] let not any dare
to put them asunder, Zach. 8. 19.
especially the Ministers of the Gospel, who are Ministers, as of Truth, so of
Peace. Let them make it their joint work, as to Isai. 52. 7.
defend and vindicate the one, so to preserve and procure the other; taking heed
of being any ways accessory to the making or continuing of breaches, the
breeding or feeding of divisions. A greater dis-service cannot be done to a
besieged City, then to make a breach in the walls of it. Such is the condition
of the poor Church of God (as at all times, so) at this day, a besieged City;
far be it from the watchmen to make, or to be any ways accessory to the
making of breaches in the walls of it; far be it from them to sow the tares of
divisions in this field, which where they take rooting, prove like ill weeds to
good corn, hindering the growth of Religion, sucking out the very heart and life
of Ordinances. Paul writing to his Corinthians, he charge this upon them,
that they came together not for the better but for the w^rse, 2 Cor. 11. 17.
public Ordinances did them no good, they were (...) 11. 17, 18.
never the better, rather worse for partaking in them. And whence was this? the
next verse yields this as one reason of it, For first of all when you come
together in the Church, I hear there are divisions amongst you; where there
are divisions, schisms, factions that have taken rooting in a Church; if let
alone, they will even blast the most sacred Ordinances of God, rendering them
in a great measure ineffectuall.

Oh that the sad experience of the times were not too clear, too full an
evidence for this truth! whence is it that public Ordinances are by many so
slighted, neglected, if not contemned? The Sacrament of the Lords Supper so
little regarded? people can be well content to live without it, feel no want
of it, care not whether they partake in it or no. The Word how powerfully
soever dispensed in the ministry of it, yet it finds not that power, that
welcome in the hearts of people which heretofore it has done: certainly for
this we are in a great measure beholding to the divisions of the times, which
having bespoke and taken up the heads and hearts of people, and busying them
with controversies and disputes (of some of which we may say* as Paul does,
touching 1 Timothy 1. 4.
those fables and genealogies, which he forewarneth Timothy of, viz. that they
minister questions rather then edifying) they have left little room for
matters of greater concernment. So as hereby the work of the ministry is not
a little disadvantaged and hindered.

Apply. general.
Great cause then have we to be wary how we have any hand in sowing any of
these pernicious seeds: where the field is clear, it must be our care to keep
it so,: where it is foiled, it must be our endeavor to clear it; contributing
every of us what we may to the healing of these breaches, where they are made:
parting with much of our own, I, what ever is our own, our own wills, our
own Liberties, our own profits, our own credit and reputation; I, if need
were, our own lives, for the effecting of this cure: Readily embracing all
opportunities, wisely improving all advantages which God shall put into our
hands, for the quieting, settling, establishing of the Churches. So do Paul and
Silas here in the Text, having the Synodicall decrees in their hands, in all
places where they come they deliver them; so applying that remedy which
providence had provided for the healing and composing those differences which
were then broken in upon the Churches, to the disquieting of their peace, and
endangering of their state. Here is a pattern for all of us of the Ministry.

Particular,
And in particular here is a warrant for me for taking up this portion of
Scripture at the present. What sad divisions both in Judgment and Affections
are broke in upon the Church of God in this Kingdom, as well as upon the state
at this day, I shall not need to tell you. We feel of them, and the whole
Christian world rings of them. As it is in the natural, so we find in this
Political and Mystical body. Anima sequitur temper amentum corporis. The
soul follows the temperature of the body; and the Church the temper of the
state. This Dyscrasi^, like a feverish distemper, it is to be felt more or
less in every member of this body* Touch where we will, we shall find the
Churches pulse beating very unequally. We in this remote angle, this toe (as I
may say) of the Kingdom, however (blessed be God) we are not sensible of such
paroxismes, do not feel of it so much as some other parts do, yet can we not
say, we are free.

Now in this case I cannot but look upon it as a duty, in imitation of the
Apostle here, to take every opportunity to contribute what I am able to the
staying, and if it might be, to the quieting, and quelling of these
differences, at least in this place. This being the mark whereat I aim, and
that with a single eye, let me now in the name and fear of God advance,
passing to the second particular, wherein we meet with the plaster which this
skillful surgeon applies to this sore; the remedy which this wise Physician
ministers to this malady, viz. a receipt of Synodicall Decrees; so it
follows.

Part. 2.
And as they went throrow the Cities, they delivered them the Decrees which
were ordained of the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem.

Here is the Quid. What it was that Paul here makes deliverie of: viz*
Decrees: Decrsees made by the Apostles and Elders: Decrees made by the Apostles
and Elders at Jerusalem. And who were these Apostles and Elders? what were
these Decrees? why made at Jerusalem? upon these three I shall insist
severally.

Quest. 1.
1. Who were these Apostles and Elders? A. For the former, I shall not need to
spend time or words about it. There were not so many of that highest form of
Extraordinary Ministers, but that they may be, and are well known, both who
they were, and what they were.

Quest. But who or what were these Elders? here we shall meet with some scruple.

Rhem. Ann^t. in Act. 15. 2.
Answ. Elders, (...), Presbyters, i. e. say the Rhemists, Priests. So they
render it in tho second verse of the Chapter foregoing, [to the Apostles and
Priests] a word, say they, ecchoing and answering to the Original both in
sound and sense. But leaving them with their affected title, savouring too
strong of Judaism; the word properly signifies (as they themselves (with what
reason I know not) in all other places where it is used in that fifteenth
Chapter, Aunciens, French.
as also here in the Text, render it) Ancients; a French word, which our
English renders, Elders.

The word in Scripture is used two ways; properly, improperly; either for
Elders in age, or by office. Elders in age, Ancients; Rebuke 1 Timothy 5. 1.
not an Elder, says the Apostle to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. meaning an Elder in age,
as the Antithesis in the latter part of the verse explains it; Rebuke not an
Elder, but entreat him as a father, and the younger men as brethren.

Elders in office are of two sorts; Civil, Ecclesiastical. Civil, temporal
Rulers and Governors amongst the Jews: Thus in the book Exodus 4 29. 24. 1.
Acts 4. 5.
of Exodus we often read of the Elders of Israel, etc. and so in the fourth of
the Acts we read of an Assembly of Rulers and Elders, etc. i. e. lay Elders,
civil Elders, whom for distinction sake we find sometimes called (...), the
elders of the people. Letting Matthew. 21. 23.
them pass.

Cartwright in Annot. super Act. 15. v. 6.
Ecclesiastical Elders, Church Officers set over the flock (the Church) to
teach it, to govern it. Of these our reverend Cartwright (as many others) make
two kinds; some Teaching and Governing, others only Governing; grounding his
distinction upon that known place in Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. 17. out of which he
resolves the Question now propounded, who were these Elders which were joined
with the Apostles? why, either both these, or else only the latter, viz. the
governing Elders; considering (says he) that Bishops (which were the preaching
Elders) were supplied by the Apostles.

To this last clause of his I cannot subscribe. Certainly besides the Apostles
here were other preaching Elders, Pastors, and Teachers, who must not be
excluded out of this word Elders. F^r the former; whether there were two such
distinct kinds of Elders at that time; and whether both of them are to be
understood by the word here in the Text, I will not peremptorilydetermine. My
purpose being to wave and decline (as much as may be) all collateral
controversies and disputes, which I do not meet with full in the Text. Let this
be sufficient, Church Officers they were; Ecclesiastical Elders. Such were the
Apostles themselves (though in an higher form, having in their function
something extraordinary) and such were the other Ministers of the Church, to
whom was committed the charge of the flock to feed and rule it. Both Elders:
so Saint Peter calls himself and them, both in one verse, 1 Pet. 5. 1. The
Elders which are among you I exhort, 1 Pet. 5. 1.
who am also an Elder, etc. Feed the flock of God, taking the oversight
thereof. And these Elders we here find meeting together in this Synod, this
Council, this Assembly (call it as you will.)

Obser.
And who so fit to meet upon such an occasion as persons of that Quality? Who
so fit to debate, determine, state, regulate Church Affairs, as
Church Officers, persons devoted, and set apart to the service of the Church?
Such were the Members of this first Synod, (which without question was intended
for a pattern to all succeeding Ages, so Sciamus hic fo^m^n and ordinem in.
^^gendis Synodis divinitus praescrib, Calv. in Acts* 15. ^. Concilio^um quis
sit usus and legitima forma, Are^ in Act. cap. 15* in Analys. Act. 15. 6. Calv.
ibid.
all Expositours, till some few within the last fifty years have looked upon
it*) Apostles and Elders; such Church Officers as the times then afforded. To
them Saint Luke in the Chapter foregoing refers the negotiating and handling of
this Synodicall consutation* They were they which convened. So you have it,
verse. 6. The Apostles and Elders came together to consider of this matter. The
Apostles and Elders. Non d^ci^ ^^ca^ tota^ Eccl^sia^ (says Calvin upon it.)
The Evangelist does not say the whole Church met together, but the Apostles and
Elders. And by them was the business debated, decided, determined. So you have
it expressly in the Text. They delivered them the Decrees which were ordained of
the Apostles and Elders; nor of the whole Church, but of the Church Officers in
the name of God convened together.

And who so fit to deal in business of that nature, as persons of that
Quality? Who so sit to consult, debate, determine Church-differences, and so to
settle the affairs of the Church, as Church Officers? viz. The Elders which
rule well, (as the Apostle speaks) specially they Rhem. Annot. in Act. 15. 6.
which labor in the Word and Doctrine? Those Texts alleged by the Rhemists in
their Annotations upon the place last cited, how ever they are by them drawn
beyond the staple, and pressed beyond their intention, yet are they not wholly
to be slighted; there being enough in them to bear out this cause, and to give
some Reason for it. Under the Law the Ordinance was express. Hard, and
difficult Controversies were to be determined by the Priests, etc. Deu. 17. 8.
Deuteronomy. 17. 8. If there arise a matter too hard for thee, etc. Thou shall come to
the Priests, the Levites: i. e. Priests of the Leviticall^ stock. A like word
was that which came to the Prophet Haggai from the Lord, Hag. 2. 11.
Haggai 2. Thus says the Lord of hosts; Ask now the Priests concerning the
Law, saying, etc. To the same purpose is that known place of the Prophet
Malachie, Chap. 1* v. 7. The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, and (...)
Montan.
they shall seek the Law at his mouth. Custodient, requirent; so the Original
has it. They shall keep, and they shall seek; or as our Translation renders
it, They should keep, they should seek. This is Gods Ordinance, that the
Priests lips should be a Promptuarium, a Cellar, a Buttery, a Pantery, a
Storehouse of all kind of learning and knowledge: What ever it is oftimes De
Facto, De Jure thus it should be. And in that respect:

R. 1.
First, They should be the most fit to be employed in businesses of this
nature, in Church-differences, Church Affairs; being such as do Calvin Act. 1^.
6.
Doctrina and judicio pollere; (to use Calvin's words) Excel and go beyond the
ordinary sort of people in Divine learning, and solid Judgment: Such they
either are, or ought to be: Their lips should preserve knowledge.

R. 2.
Secondly, This is more proper for them (Church Officers) then any others; and
that in respect of their Office. Upon this ground did the Church at Antioch
here refer their differences to the Apostles and Elders. And upon this ground
did they undertake the hearing and determining of them. This they did, Non
tantum ex Charitate, Calv. ibid.
sedex Officio; not merely out of Charity, but out of Duty; in as much as this
properly appertained to their Office. Ratione Officii (says Calvin) bujus
causae legitimi erant Judices. In regard of their Office they were the proper
Judges in this cause. And so must Church Officers in all succeeding ages of the
Church be allowed to be in Ecclesiastical matters, Church-differences, or
affairs, Judges, not chief, and principal, (for that is the Word it self,) but
Ministerial; Job. 33. 23.
Interpreters of the Law, declaring the mind and meaning of God in it; and so
determining controversies, and ordering all things according to the rule of the
Word.

Applic.
See here then a warrant for that course which the State of this Kingdom has
pitched upon, in gathering together a select company, though not of Apostles,
yet of Elders, such as the present condition of the Church affords, to consult
about the affairs of the Church; to examine and decide the unhappy differences
which disquiet, and endanger the State of it, and to regulate and order it in
all things according to the Word. Let not this be looked upon by any as a new,
or yet humane Invention. Sure I am for the substance of it, it is not so. As
for some circumstances, if there be not that formality in them which were to be
desired, the present necessity must plead an excuse for that defect. But for
the substance of it, it is no other then a Divine Ordinance, warranted and
presidented by this first pattern, this first Synodicall Assembly of the
Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem.

Object.
I know, against this diverse things have been, and will be objected. In this
first Council here were Apostles as well as Elders; and not only they, but
others, even the whole Church met together. But it is not so in our Synods, our
Assemblies.

Object. 1. Here were Apostles, men divinely and immediately inspired; men of
infallible spirits, upon whose Judgments the Church might safely rely, and to
whose determinations others might safely subscribe. But we have none such,
neither has the Church had in any age since their time.

Answ. To this I shall have occasion (God willing) to answer more fully in the
sequel of the Text. For the present, only know we, that though the Church
has no Apostles, nor Prophets, yet it has Pastors and Teachers, such as do
succeed the Apostles, though not in their Chair, yet in their Doctrine, and
ordinary Ministry; Elders, to whom God has committed the chief care and
oversight of 1 Pet. 2. 5.
the Church to feed and govern it.

Act. 20. 28. 29.
Besides, as for the Apostles, how ever they were Members, and chief Members of
this Council, yet are we not to look upon them as sitting there in the
capacity of Apostles, as men immediately inspired; but as assembling together
with the rest of the Elders to debate, and determine the controversies
presented to them in a Synodicall way. But of this (God willing) more hereafter.

Object. 2. For the latter Branch of the Objection: viz. That the Council at
Jerusalem did not consist only of Apostles and Act. 15. 2.
Elders, Ecclesiastical persons, but of others. For this the 2. verse. of the
15. Chap. seems to express; where it is said, That the Church at Antioch
determined to send Paul and Barnabas, and certain [others of them.]

Aretius ad locum.

Alios ex part adversa Cerinthi and Judaizantium.

Corn. a Lap. ibid.


Ans. But who were these others? Aretius, not without good probability,
conceives them to be some of the opposite party, whom they sent together with
the Apostles, that they might have a fair hearing and proceeding. So much (me
thinks) the former part of the Verse, compared with the latter, seems to
impart: When Paul and Barnabas (says the Text) had had no small dissension
[with them,] (viz. those false teachers,) the Church determined that Paul and
Barnabas, and certain [other of them] should go up to Jerusalem. Where (...),
[with them] and [of them] seem to relate the one to the other. Certainly some
of them were there present in that Act. 25. 10.
Council; to whom else speaks the Apostle Saint Peter in the tenth verse of
that Chapter, Now therefore why tempt ye God, etc? And these (as I take it)
were those (...), those some others there spoken of.

Answ. 2. But let it be granted that there were some other sent, some from
amongst themselves, yet whom shall we conceive them to be? Certainly some of
their Elders delegated and commissionated 2 Cor. 24.
by the Church for that service; Messengers of the Church, as the Apostle
phraseth it, speaking of some (whether Barnabas or Silas, or Luke, it is
variously and uncertainly conjectured) who were employed from the Church of
Jerusalem to the Church at Corinth, he calls them (...), Apostles,
Ambassadors, Messengers of the Churches. And surely such must these (certain
others) be.

Object.
But it will be replied, in this Council here were not only Ecclesiastical
Elders and Officers, delegates of the Churches, but here is a whole Church,
even the whole Church of Jerusalem; so it seems by the 23. verse. of that 15.
chap. where Messengers are chosen, and sent away from the Council by the whole
Church; It pleased the Apostles A^^. 15. 23.
and Elders, with the whole Church, to send chosen men of their own company to
Antioch.

Answ. For answer to this, what is there meant by the Church, is uncertain,
whether the whole multitude of believers belonging to the Church at Jerusalem,
or only Tota Ecclesia loci, i. e. Cle^us to^us Ecclesiae ^lli serviens. Jun.
Animad. in Bell. Contr. 4. de Council. c. 15. n* 19. Vid. M. Rutherford.
the Officers of the Church, or else that Synodicall body of Apostles and
Elders. For the latter of these, and against the former it is argued not
without some probability the whole Church of Jerusalem it cannot be.

First, that Church being so numerous, all the members of it could not possibly
meet at one Synod.

*2. But secondly suppose such a possibility, yet what authority had the Church
of Jerusalem to send such binding decrees to any other Churches? Par in parem
non habet potestatem; one Church has no power over another. The Church at
Jerusalem had no more power over the Church at Antioch, then the Church at
Antioch had over the Church at Jerusalem. And therefore it is probably
concluded, that by the Church there must rather be meant that Synodicall
Assembly, (a representative Church) then the whole multitude ofbelievers.

But it is said expressly, the multitude was there; so it is said, verse. 12.
All the multitude kept silence, and gave audience to Paul and Barnabas.

A. To this it is answered, that (...) (...), the multitude there we are to
understand not the whole multitude of believers, but of the Apostles and Elders
met together Synodically from diverse Churches, being in number many, so Master
M. Rutherford^ due right of Presbytery. page 365, 366. Multitudinis nomine
intell^ge, non totam Ecclesiam, sed tot^m* Apostolor^m, and Seniorum coetum.
Beza ad Loc. Similiter Piscator. Schol. 161. Iun. Animad. in Bell. Cont. 4. de
Council. c. 15. Sect. 19.
Beza and diverse other Expositors conceive of it, referring the^e words to the
sixth verse. of the chap. Certainly, as for the whole multitude of believers (as
I said) they were at that time too numerous to convene at such a meeting*

Ob. But it is replied, though not all, yet some, and many of them might be
there present, though not the whole Church, yet a good part of it, so the word
[Church] is used Synecdochically in verse. 3. Verse. 3.
of that chap. where it is said, that Paul and Barnabas were brought on their
way by the Church.

Answ. In answer to this take these four things.

Fir^, whether de facto they were so or no, is uncertain: the evidence brought
for it is not demonstrative.

Secondly, suppose some of them were there present, which for my own part (I
confess) I am not unwilling to grant, the word (...), multitude, seeming to me
to import so much, by comparing it with Act. 2. 6. where the same word is used,
(...), The multitude came togeth^r, etc. (In which sense also I acknowledge the
word Church in the place forenamed seems most genuinely to be understood, as
appears by comparing it with verse. 4. of the chap. where the Church is
distinguished from the Apostles and Elders.) Yet was it only de facto, not de
jure; by permission, not commission; they were not called thither, nor by any
law required to be there; their presence there was only accidental, by reason
of their vicinity and nearness, dwelling in the City where the Synod did sit,
otherwise the Church at Antioch, and some other of the Churches had as much
both right and reason to have been there, as they; being as nearly, Fieri
quidem potest, ut co^am plebe habita fuerit disputatio, sed ne ad t^actandam
causam ^ulgus prom^scue fuisse admissum quisp^am puta^e^. Call. in c. 5. v. 6.
Object.
or more nearly concerned in the business there agitated then they.

Thirdly, admitting them to be there present, as spectators and hearers, yet
can it not be proved that they were admitted any ways to join in the debate
or discussion of the matters in controversy, the sixth verse. of the chap.
appropriates this to the Apostles and Elders.

Fourthly, However (in the fourth place) they had no power of voting or
determining, that was peculiar to the Apostles and Elders: so you have it in
the Text, which tells us, that the Decrees which were here delivered, were
(...) ordained by the Apostles and Elders, not by the multitude, not by the
whole Church.

But why then are the Synodicall Letters written in their name, if they had no
voice in making the Decrees? so the tenor of them Answ. Ap^st^li and ^e^iores
^^at^es. v. l. Verse. 22. P^ophetae, ^um Proprie, tum Metaphori^e. Corn. a Lap.
Prophe^^ at Ant^och. Rutherfords Due Right. p. 400. Doctores ^n ^^clesia (...)
m^^a^a. Beza ad ^oc. vid. Act. 15. 33.
runs, The Apostles, and Elders, and Brethren send greeting, etc. verse. 23.

To this it is answered. First, who or what these Brethren were is uncertain,
the vulgar Latin, (which all the Romish Interpreters follow) by taking away
the copula, makes them all one with the Elders; The Apostles, and Elders,
Brethren: but that may not be allowed, the original making them distinct,
(...) and Brethren, passing by that, by the words immediately foregoing it
should seem that Judas called Barsabas, and Sylas were two of these Brethren,
so they are there called, chief men ((...) prime, leading men) among the
Brethren. Now what they were you may learn from the 32. verse. of the chap.
viz. Prophets, (Judas and Silas being Prophets) First, Doctores Ecclesiae,
Teachers of the Church, (of which sort they had then many, as you may see verse.
35.) whether of the Church at Antioch, or at Jerusalem) is not agreed: but
Prophets they were, persons in office, such were they, and probably such were
the rest of the Brethren there mentioned.

2. But (secondly) suppose it, that by Brethren there we are to understand
persons out of office, yet can it not be concluded thence, that they had their
votes in this Ass^mbly: only, (as Calvin conjectures with good probability)
they assenting and subscribing to what the Council had done, the Apostles and
Elders make use of their concurrence, in commending the result of their
consultations to the rest of the Churches. Certainly, more then this cannot be
made of it, for otherwise what power had the Brethren, (suppose the whole
Church of Jerusalem) to make Decrees for, and impose laws upon other of the
Churches?

Q. But yet, why then should the Messengers be sent, and the Letters written in
their names? surely it cannot be, but that they should have a place and vote in
that Council, in whose names the Certissim^m est illos fuisse convocates,
quorum nomine sententia lat^ fuit, and ^^^erae scriptae.

D. Ame^. Bell. Ener. de. Council. c. 2*


Synodicall Letters were written, so our late reverend and learned professor
at Fran^ker concludes it.

M. Ruth. p. 379. ibid.
A. To this (...) is answered by the present reverend and learned professor at
St. And^ewe^, that St. P^ul in some of his Epistles joyneth others with himself
in the Inscriptions or Salutations: as for instance, the first Epistle to the
Corinthians runs in Paul's name* and S^^thene*s; 1 Cor. 1. 1.
Paul called to be an Apostle, etc. and So^thenes our ^^^ther. The second 2
Cor. 1. 1. Col. 1* ^. 1. These. ^. 1. 2 These. ^. 1.
Epistle, as also tha^ to the Col^ssians; in Paul's name and Timothies, Paul an
Apostle etc. and Timothy our brother. The two Epistles to the Thessalonians
run, Paul and Sylvanus and Tymoth^us to the Church of the Thessal^nians. Thus
are others joined with him, as partners in the Inscriptions, though the
Epistles were none of theirs, but Paul's. As for them, they were none of them
immediately in^^ired* as Paul was, and consequently could be no collateral
writers, having any hand in inditing and penning those Epistles; but only their
names joined with his, as being approvers of the doctrines and exhortations
there delivered, that thereby the more respect might be procured thereunto.
From whence our learned Doctor Solater observes well, that Dr. Sclater, in 1
These. 1. 1.
It is lawful to use (h^mana subsidla) humane help for the advantage of the
truth. Instancing in this particular case we have now in hand; The Apostles,
and Elders, and Brethren, (says he) go jointly in the decrees at Jerusalem,
that by universal consent Gods people night be more swayed to obedience: the
concurrence of the Brethren is made use of in commending those decrees to the
Churches, which yet they had no hands in debating and determining.

Object. Why, but it is yet objected, whether it was so or no here Re^ula juris.
de facto; yet de jure it ought to be so: Quod omnes, ab omnibus* that which
concerns all, ought to be handled and concluded by all: It is the usual plea
for Popular Government (i. e. No-Covernment) in Congregationall Churches.

Answ. To this we answer, that this Argument (whatever force is in it in some
other cases) in this case it pleads for an impossibility: for all to meet
together in a Provincial, much more in a National, much more in an
Oecumenicall and general Council or Synod, is a thing altogether impossible:
and therefore of necessity some are to be selected and chosen for all. I shall
not need to tell you how it is in our Parliamentary Assemblies; the things
there handled, they are of general and universal concernment, property and
liberty, etc. not the meanest person but is interested* in them, yet in as much
as the whole Kingdom cannot meet together, the trust is committed to a few,
who are to consult and determine in the name of the rest: furely, of necessity
so it must be in the Church, because all cannot meet in a Synodicall way,
therefore some persons of trust are to be selected and employed about that
service: for which who can be conceived so fit as those, who by their office
are overseers to the flock, Nicem^n prim^^^ per Constantin^m* Constantino
pol^tanu^^ pri ^um per Theodosim Jun.

Chalce donense per Martianum. vid Praefat. Council.


set over them by God to feed, and to govern them?

Quest. But what then? are all others wholly excluded from having any thing to
do in such Assemblies? what say we first to the Christian Magistrate?

Answ. To him we willingly allow what God has given him, an intere^t, a
potestative interest, an interest of power, and that both in the convening and
confirming of such Assemblies.

1. In convening, that the Churches may meet in this way by his authority,
under his wing, by his allowance, under his protection; thus were the ancient
general Counsels called by the authority of the Supreme Impe at^res ^rebr^
adfue^^^t, nec ^ol^m praesente serant, verum etium rebus jam con^l^sis ^am
Episcopi^ subscripse unt. P. Mart. Loc. Com in ^. 49. 23.
Magistrate, the Christian Emperors; some of them graced and honored with
their personal presence and subscriptions: and thus in topicall Counsels, (as
they call them) particular, Classical, Provincial, National Synods, (where
it may be had) the concurrence of the Christian Magistrate is still to be
looked at and desired: who being by God appointed to be Custos and vindex
u^riusque tabulae, the keeper and protector of both Tables, and a father* (as
to the State, so) to the Church, (Kings shall be thy nursing fathers,) ought
consequently, virtute officij, to comply with all ways and means which may
procure the peace and welfare of the one, as of the other.

2. As in convening, so in confirming; this did those Christian Emperors to
those general Counsels, and this honor we willingly give to the Civil
Magistrate, that he should be under Christ (whose Vicegerent he is) the Alpha
and Omega, the beginning and ending, the first and the last, in these
Ecclesiastical meetings: which being congregated by his authority, by the same
authority ought to be ratified and confirmed; that so the greater obligation
may be laid upon all sorts of persons for the observing of those decrees which
are so ordained, herein also the Magistrates concurrence is to be desired, in
as much as he is by vert^e of his office, the Minister of God unto his people
Romans 13. 4.
for good, and that not only their natural good, to preserve their lives; or
their civil good, to maintain their estates and liberties; or moral good, to
restrain them from vice, and encourage them to virtue; but also their
Ecclesiastical and spiritual good, to maintain their Religion, the true
worship and service of the true God. Thus then the Magistrate is not excluded.

Quest. But then it seems the rest of the people are.

Answ. Not so neither: to them I shall freely allow whatever they may justly
challenge, if not more, willing rather to yield a scruple to them, then take a
grain from them. As

First, an interest in the election and delegation of persons to be betrusted
with that service.

Secondly, a liberty to communicate their doubts and desires in ways fitting
and convenient.

Thirdly, a liberty of presence to some, (as conveniencie will permit) that
they may be hearers and witnesses of the proceedings.

Fourthly, a liberty of speech unto such as shall be after a special manner
interested in the businesses agitated.

Fifthly, and lastly, the consent and concurrence of such persons or Churches,
as may procure respect unto the truth, may be desired and made use of.

All these (for my own part) I am not unwilling to grant, and methinks (if my
eyes deceive me not) I see them all laid forth before me in this pattern which
I have now in hand* this first Council at Jerusalem. Where

Chap. 15.
First, Paul and Barnabas* and whoever were sent with them, were sent by the
Ch^^ch, [They] determined that Paul and Barnabas etc. should go up to
Hier^salem* (...) viz. the Church, as the next Verse. xplaines.

Secondly, sending the persons, they send their cause with them, Corpus cum
causa, they determined they should go up about this question* Verse. 2. viz.
touching Circumcision, whether necessary or no.

Thirdly, here was the (...), the multitude, a convenient number of the people,
to hear, and see, and bear witness of their proceedings, Verse. 12.

Fourthly, here was the opposite party, who had a liberty to declare their
judgments, and to plead for themselves, as I have already cleared it from the
2. and 10. Verses of that Chapter, and may appear further by that heat of
disputation which was in the Council, Verse. 7.

Fifthly and lastly, here was the consent and concurrence of the brethren and
the whole Church of Jerusalem taken in, and made use of to procure the more
respect to the decrees of the Council, with the rest of the Churches, Verse.
22, 23.

In all these we find a popular concurrence and influence with and upon this
Council: but now what was beyond this; as the defining and determining of the
differences, and ord^ring of decrees* that was the Apostles and Elders; so you
have it expressed in the Text, They delivered them the decrees for to keep,
that were ordained of the Apostles and Elders.

And thus you see who were the proper members of this first Council or Synod,
which I have insisted a little the longer upon, (as to lay a good foundation
for such superstructures as shall afterward be built upon it, so) to show you
the groundlesnesse of that Odium, which by some unreasonable men is cast, not
only upon the present Assembly in this Kingdom, but upon all Church*
Assemblies of like nature, viz. because they consist chiefly and mostly of
Ecclesi^sticall persons, Compassionate Sa^ar^^an.
Divines, (as they scornfully term them) Pastors and Teachers, such Church
officers, as the present state of the Church affords* herein what new thing do
they see? what more then is to be seen in this first Council, where the
members of the Counsel were Apostles and Elders?

Non a Petre ut Papa Oecumenico, non a Ja^^bo, etc. Beza in Text.
Observe. By them were these decrees ordained, viz. by a joint consent, not by
any one of them, not by Peter, not by James, nor by any one other: from whence
it may be rightly concluded against* that Antichristian usurpation of the Pope,
who takes upon him to make binding decrees for the Churches, alone. This is
more then his pretended Predecessor St. Peter would d. But that I pass by.

2. Come we now to the second branch of this second particular, viz. What were
these decrees which were ordained by the ^postles and Elders, and here
delivered by P^^^l to the Churches? For answer, will you know the particulars?
uead the 20. or 29. Verse. of the Chapter foregoing, there you shall find a
summary of them, viz. that they should abstain from meat offered to Jdols,
from blood, from things strangled, and from fornication; The three former of
them things in their own nature indifferent: The latter (fornic^tion) esteemed
little more Concubinatus* cujus tantam con^uetudinem fecera^tgentes, ut
propemod^m instar legis fo^e^* Calv. ad Loc. Non est fl^gi^^um (mihi creed)
ad^lescentul^^r, s^ortari. ^er* Adelph. Luke 2. 1. Act. 17. 7.
(as it seems) in those times, (at least) amongst some of the Gentiles; who
account it, if a sin, yet a very voniall one; these the Council by a joint
consent interdicts and prohibits and these prohibitions the Evangelist here
calls by the name of Decrees, (...)

Edi^ta, D^^^eta, the same word we find used in the second of Luke Verse. 1.
There ^e^t out a decree from Caesar Augustus, (...) And so again, in 17. Act.
Verse. 7. where Jason and the rest of the brethren are accused that they did
contrary to the Decrees of Caesar, (...). Thus were the ^ivill decrees of
Princes and States then called, and by the same name the Evanglist here calls
the Eccle^^ssticall de^erminations of this Synodicall Assembly, (...) Decrees.

Observe. (...) Where (to pass over things as briefly as I may) take we noticer
(in the first place) of the misconception and mistaking of some, who look upon
this first Council, only as a pattern of one Sister Church giving advice and
counsel to another; were there no other argument to discover the nakedness of
this evasion, this one word in the Text alone were sufficient; where the
Evangelist speaking of the results of their consultations, calls them not
Counsels, not br^^^erly advices, but (...), Decrees: Decrees are more then
Counsels, and surely such were the determinations of this first Syn d, more
then bare counsels; here were constitutions and decrees, (...) Decrees which
were ordained,] and these decrees they are imposed upon the Churches, not only
propo^^^ded and commended to them* but imposed upon them: not only propounded
by way of advice, but Chap. 15. 28.
imposed by way of injunction, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us* to
lay ((...), to impose) no greater burdens, etc.] certainly here was more then
the advice of a sister ch^^ch: what had a sister church to do to make decrees,
and impose injunctions upon a sister church? the church at (...) upon the
Church at Antioch, being in respect of any a^t^oritative power every way ^^uall
to h^^ self? To ^et that pass,

Obser. 2. In the second place. See here what power a lawful Council or Synod
being by lawful authority in the Name of Christ convened and met together,
have in matters of Ecclesiastical concernment, viz. A power not only to
consult, and debate, and advise; but to determine Ecclesiastical differences,
and to ordain decrees which may be binding to the Churches. Such power the
Apostles and Elders being here at the motion of, and by delegation from the
Churches met together, assume unto themselves. They came together to consider
of this matter, verse. 6. chap. 15. and having considered of the Church
differences, they determine them; determining them, they draw up Ordinances and
Decrees concerning them, which are here by the Apostles delivered to the
Churches to keep.

Obser. True (it may be said) they might do it, but so may not any other
Council or Synod in any succeeding age of the Church. And why not? why, they
were extraordinary persons, endued with an extraordinary and inf^^lible Spirit,
by which they were guided and directed in the whole procedure of this
business. And consequently might do that which is not to be drawn into
president by any after them, who are not assisted with the same Spirit. They
were Apostles, having an Apostolical authority, and so might ordain Decrees,
and make Laws for the Churches, which for any others after them to attempt were
no less then high and unwar^antable presumption.

Answ. Here is the maine and principal evasion whereby all the Arguments taken
from this first pattern of Synodicall Assemblies are supposed to be eluded and
made void. Give me leave to close with it as brie^ly (and yet as fully) as I
can. In way of answer averring the contrary to this confident supposition, viz.
That the Apostles, however they were extraordinary persons, and in penning of
sacred Scriptures were assisted and directed by an immediate Spirit, yet in
this business they did not proceed by virtue of any Apostolical authority, as
men immediately inspi^ed, but only as Pas^ours and Teachers assis^ed by the
di^^ction of an ordinary spirit. That it was so, the evidence is clean, and I
think ^ndeniable.

Argument 1
For first, wherefore else should Paul have made this ^ourney from A^^ioch to
Hier^^s^^em? Paul as an Apostle, he was able to have decided and st^ted all
these controversies alone as well as all the Apostles with him; all being
guided by one and the same Spirit. So as, had he herein made use of his
Apostolical authority, he should not have needed to have gone to confer with
any other of the Apostles about it. This course we see he had before declined
in a matter of far greater consequence then this, viz. upon his first receiving
of the Gospel, having received it by divine revelation, and immediate
inspiration, he did not address himself to the Apostles, or any other for the
instructing and confirming of him in that doctrine. So he ^els his Gala^^i^us;
1. Gal. 16. 17. When it pleased God to reveal his Son in me, etc. I conferred
not with flesh and blood. i. e. not with his own Rat one sua humana; Paraeus.
Cum quoquam mortalium, Calv. Beza ad loc.
carnal reason (so Paraeus) or rather (as Calvin and Beza) not with any
mortal man whatever; Neither went I up to Jerusalem to them who were Apostles
before me. True it was, after some time he went up thither once and again, as
you may see Chap. 1. verse. 18. Chap. 2. v. 1. First three years after, then
fourteen yeerer after, and both times he had communication and conferen^e with
the Apostles; But as for any instructions from them, or confirmation by them,
o^ any other, as he sought it not, so neither did he find it. (...), in
conference Gal. 2. 6.
(s^ith he) they added nothing unto me, v. 6. Certainly then had Paul stood upon
his Apostolical spirit, as he needed not; so he would not have gone up to
Jerusalem to hold a conference with other Ap^stles about this business, being
of far lesser concernment then the maine do^trine of the Cospell. Argum. 2.


2. Suppose he did ^ondescend beneath himself for the satisfaction of the weak
brethren, and for the stopping of the mouths of opposites, to hold a
conference with the Apostles about this business, so to take in their
concurrence and mutual consent; yet why should the Elders be joined unto them?
That they we^e joined with them in the whole procedure of this business, both
in the consultation and determination, is most apparent from the sixth verse of
the Chapter foregoing, and from the words of the Text. In both these they were
ioyn^ actors with the Apostles, joint commissioners. Now in c^se the Apostles
had proceeded, as men immediately inspired, what need had they to have made use
of their concurrence? Or what could the Elders any ways contribute to them? If
the Apostle^ themselves could in conference add nothing unto Paul, much less
could the Elders add any thing to the Apostles.

Argum. 3.
3. But (thirdly) Suppose that as Paul required the concurrence of the other
Apostles, so the Apostles required the concurrence of other Elders still for
the more sul^ satisfaction of all parties; yet (...) they proceed after tha^
manner, by way of discussion, and disputation? That this was their way, the
seventh Chap. 15. 7.
verse of the foregoing Chapter makes it clear. When there had been much
disputing.] Here was not only (...), but (...), ^^lta disceptatio, a great and
earnest disputation. The points propounded were controverted and agitated pre
and con, on both sides, to blot out the truth. Now what needed this, had the
Apostles been immediately inspired? Immediate inspirations are like the
sunbeams, which are not brought unto the eye by any such crooked and winding
rays as they are sometimes painted, but by direct lines. Thus are immediate
inspirations brought unto the mind. The word of the Lord came unto the
Prophets, and so it came unto the Apostles* ^ P^^. 1. 21.
who being immediately inspired, spoke as they were moved ((...), carried on) by
the holy Ghost, and that without any such consultations with themselves, or
others.

Put these three together, we shall need no other evidence to clear this
truth, that the Apostles in this Council did not sit and act in the capacity
of Apostles as extraordinary Ministers of the Church, neither did they proceed
in this business as immediately inspired.

Object. No (you may say?) why, their words seem to make it plain, expressly
averring so much, that what herein they concluded and agreeed upon, it was by
the direction and instigation of the Spirit. So run the letters of the
Council. It seemed good Chap. 15. 28.
to the holy Ghost and to us.] i. e. to the Spirit suggesting, to them
consenting: To the Spirit as the master, to them as the scholars, subscribing
V* sum est Spir^tui sancto and nobis, i. e. nobis ex instinct ^ spiritus
sancti. Hend. Pis^at. Corn. a Lap.
to their masters Dictates. Or, To the holy Ghost and to (...) i. e. to us being
assisted and guided by the instinct and suggestion of the holy Ghost.

Answ. That the Apostles were thus assisted and guided must not be denied. But
what kind of instinct or suggestion was this? was it mediate or immediate?
ordinary, or extraordinary? Here is the knot of the controversy. Papists
generally contend for the latter, supposing Corn. a Lap. Lo^in.
it to make something for the infallibity of their Counsels, which they look
upon as directed by the same unerring Spirit. But this (whoever be the Patrons
of it) our reverend and learned Cartwright in his answer to the Rhemists (who
were of the same opinion) censureth for a fond im^gination. It seems (says
he to them) M. Cart. Annot. in Rhem. ad loc.
that ye understand not what is meant by those words of the Council. [It
pleased the holy Ghost and us.] The meaning is no^ (says he) as you fondly
immagine, that they were immediately (...) God.] This he avers (as you see)
with great confidence: And this he makes good by an argument (which as yet
has not, neither do I think ever will be soundly and satisfactorily
answered) taken from the words themselves, which say as much of the Elders as
of the Apostles, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us.] But this will
not, cannot be said of the Elders, that they were immediately inspired; much
less of the people, whose presence and consent he conceives them to have made
use of.

M. Rutherf* Due right of Presbyteries, p. 360. Ma^th. 28. v. last.
An immediate inspiring spirit then it was not. What then? Why, an ordinary
Synodicall spirit (as the learned professor of Scotland calls it;) even the
same spirit which is promised to all the faithful Ministers of the Church to
the end of the world; [Loe I am with you always to the end of the world;]
Especially being so convened and met together in the Name of* Christ: Where two
or three Mat. 18. 20.
are met together in my name (in my authority) there am I in the midst amongst
them, Mat. 18. A promise which (though not only, yet) primarily and properly
is to be understood of such Ecclesiastical meetings of Church Officers
assembled together to consult about the affairs of the Church* Christ
promises to be in the midst amongst them, both assisting and ratifying. Thus
was he present with this first Council* And thus is he at this day present
with all Assemblies of like nature, meeting and proceeding after the same
manner that they did.

Quest. But what then? may all, or any other Assemblies, Synods, Co^^cels in
succeeding ages presume to take up their words, and say the same of their
decrees, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us? Here is an argument which
is looked upon by many, as not only Militant, but Triumphant.

Bellarm. de Concil^is, (...) 50. Rhem. (...) lo^.
Answ. In answer hereunto I list not to lend an care to what our adversaries of
Rome earnestly contend for. This first Council (say Bellarmine and the
Rhemists) has given this form of speech to all other Councels lawfully
called, and confirmed, viz. by the Pope) to say the like; It has pleased the
Holy Ghost and us.] Letting that pass which cannot be made good, unless it be
understood of that holy History of the Council of Treat.
Ghost which the story tells us was carried from Rome to Trent in a Clo^^^og.
For my own part, I shall return to this Objection, or Question, this threefold
Answer.

1. De facto it must be acknowledged that the Councels of old, some, many of
them have made use of a form of speech not unlike to this. The ancient Father
Cyprian, with some other of the Cyprian Epist. 54. ad Co^nel.
Fathers of an African Council, making report unto Cornelius then Bishop of
Rome what the Council had agreed upon, they use these Verba n^n nun^ solum,
sed ^l m usitata in Conc^l^is. Pamel. Annot. in Cyp.
words, Placuit nobis, sancto Spiritu suggerente. It has seemed good to us by
the suggestion of the Holy Ghost* Whereupon Pamelius notes, that this was no new
thing, but a form of speech anciently and commonly used in Councels: This they
have said. And

2. De debito. This all Councels and Synods should be able to say; Decreeing
nothing but what they may be able to say of, as the Apostles and Elders do
here of their determinations, I^ seems good Mr. Rutherford. Due right of
Presbyteries pa^. 1. p. 372.
to the Holy Ghost and to us; to him our Master, to us his Scholars. Herein
this first should be a pattern to all succeeding Councels and Synods, showing
them, not what de jure they may do, but what de debito they should do, viz.
so to proceed, as they may say, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us.

3. De Licito; this they with holy reverence may say, when they Cap. 15. v. 7,
1. verse. 9. 14, 15, 16, 17.
proceed as the Apostles and Elders here did, viz. by the Direction of the Word.
So did the Apostles themselves here proceed, grounding and bottoming their
Decrees upon Scripture, seconded with some Dr. Fulk An. not in Rhem. Act. 15.
28.
evidences from Heaven. And thus did that African Council proceed. Cyprian with
the Fathers of Africa (says our judicial Fulk) did declare unto Cornelius
Bishop of Rome upon what authority of Scriptures M. Cartwright Annot. ibid.
their determination was grounded, etc. And hereupon it was (says our Reverend
Cartwright) that the Apostles said, that it pleased the Holy Ghost, viz. the
Holy Ghost speaking in the Scriptures: Scriptures (we know) they are no other
but the breath of the Holy Ghost, endited by him. And hence it is, that the one
is sometimes put for the Gal. 3. 8. Heb. 9. 7. The Holy Ghost ^^there set down,
for that Christ had not taught this, but the Council uttered them grounded on
the Law, in Cartwright ex Oecumenio ad (...).
other. Scripture sometimes put for the Holy Ghost. The Scripture foreseeing
(says S. Paul) i. e. the Holy Ghost the Author of them. And the Holy Ghost
sometimes put for the Scripture* Wherefore, as the Holy Ghost says, To day if
you will hear his voice, etc. says the Apostle citing that of the Psalm,
which was endited by the Holy Ghost. And thus in the Text, It has seemed good
to the Holy Ghost* and to us.] viz. to the Holy Ghost speaking to us in the
Scripture. So the Greek Scholiast (cited by M. Cartwright) expounds the place*
Now then, what ever lawful Council or Synod met together in the Name of
Christ shall proceed after the same manner, as the Apostles here did* making
the Word their rule and direction, grounding their determinations and decrees
thereupon, either upon the express letter of it, or upon just and necessary
consequences, and inferences drawn from it, however they may for reverence sake
to that first Council (which in some respects) is not to be patterned by any
succeeding Synod, viz. in respect of the persons of the Apostles there present,
men of an extraordinary function, and assisted at this time (no question)
though not with an immediate, yet with a more then ordinary measure of an
ordinary spirit, proportionable to that highest place, which they then occupied
in the Church and in that Council (decline the form of words by them Lorin ad
loc. M. Ca^twright ibid.

This Council has not given this form of speech here used to all other
Councels, how lawfully soever called and confirmed, except their determination
may be warranted as this was, by the Holy Scriptures.

D. Fulk Annot. in loc.


used, (as Mr. Cartwright observes, that the African Council upon that ground
(as he conceives) did) yet without either Blasphemy or Presumption, it is
conceived that they may to the same effect say of their decrees, that they are
the mind of the Holy Ghost, as well as their mind; for which this pattern
may be their Warrant.

And thus I have (as I hope) sufficiently cl^ered this scruple, as also
answered this objection touching the extraordinary quality, and immediate
assistance of the Apostles in this first Council. So as this beaten Muse being
now stopped, and this trite evasion put by, what remains but that the
conclusion should stand firm? viz. That a lawful council or Synod being met,
as the Apostles and Elders in this first Council were, and proceeding after
the same manner as they did, may determine Church-differences, and ordain
Decrees for the Churches ^o keep.

Quest. But how far reaches this Synodicall Power? and in what cases may
they make such Decrees?

Answ. In answer hereunto I shall purposely decline (as much as may be) all
collateral controversies, as viz. whether such Synods be invested with a power
of Jurisdiction, reaching to the censuring of persons erroneous, or scandalons.
I will not go from what the Text directly leads me to. The Decrees here
delivered by Paul and Silas to the Churches, we shall find them directly
concerning two things, Doctrine and Practice; Doctrine, whether circumcision
was then necessary, or no. Practice, whether they should then eat things
offered to Idols, or no, etc. Both these the Council here states and
determines.

First* declaring the erroneousnesse and dangerousnesse of that opinion, which
some would have obtruded upon the Churches under their name, viz. touching
circumcision, disclaiming it as none of ^. 15. v. 24. 28. Verse. 29.
theirs: This they do explicitly verse. 24. implicitly verse. 28. Then
interdicting and prohibiting them the use of some things which then were, or
were accounted indifferent unto them, verse. 29. These two the sentence of the
Council here directly reaches, (not to speak what it does obliquely, how it
also reaches the persons of those who had been the broachers of that new
Doctrine, whom it passes a sharp censure upon, viz. declaring and pronouncing
them to be Troublers of the Church, and subverters of souls, verse. 24.) And
these two the sentence of lawful Counsels, and Synods may reach, they being
invested with a double power; the one Dogmaticall, the other Directive; (not to
speak of that corrective power, the power of censures, which if it be not
Formally, yet Vertu^lly and Eminently it must be conceived to be in such
Counsels.)

1. They have a Dogmaticall or Doctrinall power in declaring of Doctrinall
Truths or Errors. This power (I think) will be yielded them at all
intelligent hands; even by those who in other cases are most tender and jealous
of allowing them any power of Jurisdiction: And it is no more then what the
example of the Church at Antioch leads us to, who in a Doctrinall point of
difference which could not be satisfactorily determined amongst themselves,
they refer it to the concurrent judgment of other Churches met together in a
Synodicall way; wherein (finding it agreeable to Scripture and Reason) they
acquiesce, and rest satisfied. A pattern for the Churches in all succeeding
ages, showing them what they are to do in like cases. But to let this pass as
a truth confessed by all who are not more wedded to their own private fancies
and wills, then either to Scripture or Reason.

2. The second branch of this Synodicall power is Directive in matters of
Practice. Such a power we find the Council here exercising upon the Churches;
regulating them as touching their practice: And surely this may lawful Synods
do, lay out the Churches way for them, order them in matters Ecclesiastical,
ordaining Decrees touching what they are to do, or not to do; which Decrees
may be imposed upon the Churches.

Quest. But what then? Has such a Council or Synod an absolute Legislative
power to make Laws, and impose what burdens they please upon the Church?

Answ. Not so: The power of a Council or Synod is not Magisterial^, but
Minist^riall; Not absolute but limited. Many limitations may be assigned,
whereby this power is determined, and bounded. I will touch only upon two.

1. They may do nothing against any law of Christ, who is the only Lawgiver
of his Church. Here is no room for non obstante's, Christ's Laws being
unrepealable, unalterable, they may not be so much as tempered with by any
particular persons, nor yet by any combinations Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Reu. 22. 18*
of Men or Angels.

2. They may ordain nothing but what they have a warrant from the word for. A
warrant either explicit, or implicit, either a particular or general warrant;
either a particular warrant in express terms, or atleast a general warrant
clearly held forth under those general 1 Cor. 14. 40. verse. 26.
rules of Order, Decency, Edification.

Such w^^e the decrees which the Council here ordained. They imposed nothing
upon the Churches, but what they had a warrant from the word for. Either an
express and particular warrant. This they had for the prohibiting of
for^^^^tion, which being taken literally and properly (as I conceive (by M.
Bezis leave) that here it must) is expre^ly condemned in the word. Or else a
general warrant. This they had for all the rest, the prohibiting of the eating
of Idolothytes, things offered to Idols, of blood, of things strangled; the two
latter branches of the Caremoniall Law, all of them at that time in their own
nature indifferent; But the use of them was at the present become scandalous,
and offensive to the weak brethren, and so tending rather to destruction, then
to edification. Hereupon, though 2 Cor. 10. 8*
they had no express word of Scripture for it, yet proceeding upon that
general ground, they prohibit the use of them for that time, though otherwise
in themselves indifferent.

By the same rules are other Councels and Synods to proceed. And consequently
ought not to impose any thing upon the Church, but what they conceive to be
necessary. So did the Council here. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to
us ^o lay upon you no greater burden then verse. 18*
these necess^rie things. The things by them here imposed were all necess^rie.
Necessary either simply and absolutely by an intrin^^call necessity,
necessary at all times. Of this kind was the abstaining from fornication or
respectively, by an ^^t^ixsecall or accidental necessity, necessary pro (...)
for the present time. Such were these other things here prohibited, though in
themselves, in their own nature indifferent, yet in ^^spect of the s^andall
then occasioned by the use of them, they were for the time necessary to be
declined, and abstained from. And surely such should the Decrees and
Constitutions of all Councels and Synods be, viz. touching things necessary,
necessary to be observed or avoided. Necessary (as I say) either simply in
themselves, in their own nature, at all times; or necessary in respect of the
present state and condition, necessary for the time: which things in their
own nature indifferent may be; as the words of the Council here make it
plain, which speaking of things in themselves indifferent, yet calls them
necessary.

Quest. What then? does the authority of the Council or Synod change the
nature of the things, of indifferent making them necessary? This our
Adversaries of Rome contend for. It is their Gloss upon the twentieth verse of
this fifteenth Chapter. See here (say they) the Rhem. Annot. in Act. 25. 20.
great Authority of Gods Church, and Counsels which may command for ever, or
for a time, such things as be fit for the state of times and nations without
any express Scripture at all, and so by commandment make things necessary
which were before indifferent. And this many of our divines have unwarilie, and
unsuspectedly swallowed. Our learned and judicious Dr. Fulk Annot. ad L^c.
Doctor Fulk, that Malleus haereticorum, in his Annotation upon that gloss of
the Rhemists, sticks not to grant them what therein they desire; in matters of
indifferency (says he) we yield to your observation. And it has been
(specially of late times) a received maxim, that authority coming upon
things in their own nature indifferent changes the nature of them, and makes
them of indifferent necessary.

A. But to this we cannot subscribe. Certainly the Church has no such power to
change or alter the nature of things, either to make things necessary
indifferent, or things indifferent necessary, which in Mr. Cartwright Annot.
^^id.
M. Cartwrights judgment is all one. The reason which he gives for it, is
convincing. To give the Church any such power, were to give it a power over and
above the scriptures, in as much as the indifferency of things is founded upon
the Scriptures, from whence they have their middle and indifferent nature.

Quest. But was it not so in this first Council? did not they by imposing of
these things upon the Churches make them necessary which were before
indifferent?

Ans. I answer, No, they were necessary before they imposed them.

Q How can that be? What, necessary, and indifferent both?

Ans. Yes; indifferent in themselves, but necessary in respect of the p^esent
occasion. And herupon it was that the Council imposed them* because they
apprehended them so to be. Mark it. These things were not therefore
necessary, because they imposed them; but, because they were for the time
necessary, therefore they imposed them. As for the things themselves, the
nature of them was not changed, nor altered by their command coming upon them.
As they were indifferent before, so they remained indifferent still, viz.
indifferent in themselves, and in respect of conscience: only made necessary
by accident, in regard of the present occasion, for the avoiding of scandal,
and for the procuring and preserving of the Peace and Unity of the Church*

And thus have I as briefly, as plainly, as fully as I could, endeavored to
clear up unto you this much controverted point touching the power of lawful
Councels and Synods in ordaining Decrees which may be imposed upon the
Churches. That which remains is the application, wherein I shall be as brief
as I may.

Applic.
Is there such a power in lawful Councels and Synods? then take we heed every
of us how we oppose or resist this power. We know what the Apostle says of
Civil power, the power of Magistracy, and I think I may say the same of
Eclesiasticall power, the power of Councels, and Synods lawfully convened,
lawfully proceeding, and lawfully confirmed, whosoever resists the power,
resists the Ordinance of Romans 13. 2.
God. Theordinance of God. So it has been looked upon in all ages of the
Church hitherto; And sure I am, it is not yet written with a sunbe^me by the
finger of God himself, that it is not so. Take we heed then Theom. p. last. I
wish Mr. I. G. in his OEOMAXTA had consulted with his own principle about this.
how we oppose* how we resist this way, lest in so doing we run unawares into a
OEOMAXIA, at least run the hazard of fighting against God.

To bring the Application home to the present times, I shall not need to tell
it you that this is the way that the State of this Kingdom have at this day
pitched upon, for the composing of Ecclesiastical diffecences, and for the
reforming and establishing of the Church of God amongst us, viz. to call
together an Assembly of this nature, wherein they have for substance, (and I
think for circumstance, so far as the present state of the times would permit,)
endeavored to follow this Primitive pattern: let me only persuade with you to
take heed of admitting, entertaining any prejudicial thoughts against this
way: such thoughts there have been, and daily are let fall by some ill advised
tongues and pens (no question) secretly set a work by Satan, (as Peter was to
dissuade his master from going up to Jerusalem) if it might be, to suffocate
the Churches hopes in Marth. 16. 23*
the womb, or to stifle them in the birth; take we heed how we take them up,
how we give any lodging to them; far be it from every of us, who profess our
selves the loyal subjects of Jesus Christ Psalm. 2. 3.
to harbor such a rebellious resolution, as that of those in the Psalm, Let us
break their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us; Nay, (Brethren)
first let us see what these bonds, what these cords will he, Zach. 11. 7.
before we offer any such intentionall violence to them; possibly, they may be
such bonds as will have beauty for their companion; bonds like bracelets; which
by binding may also adorn and enrich the Spouse of Christ, no other then the
bonds of Jesus Christ himself, wherewith to be bound is the truest liberty:
possibly they may be such cords, as you shall find made all of Scripture
threads, all of Gods own spinning, only twisted and put together by men; and
shall we resolve aforehand to break these bonds and cast away these cords?

Object. I know what is at the tongues end of some already, what will presently
be replied: To submit our selves to any such binding power, or to any decrees
made by such a power, what were it, but to betray and forfeit our christian
liberty? It is the known plea which the Anabaptists take up against civil
power; and it is made use of by many against this Ecclesiastical power. For
Answer.

Answ. Christian liberty? and might not the Christians at Antioch and elsewhere
have taken up the same plea, had they apprehended any weight in it, or reason
for it, when the Decrees here spoken of were tendered to them by Paul and Sylas
to keep? what, betray their christian liberty, by subjecting themselves to the
ordinances of men? But we hear no such words from them, neither let there be
any such thoughts amongst us; for which I am sure there is no just ground:
Synodicall, Ecclesiastical power (as well as civil) is not incompatible with
christian liberty, they may both well stand together.

That will soon appear, if we do but rightly understand what christian liberty
is: mistake it not, it is not a license for christians to think, and speak, and
pen, and act what they list, as some by their practice in these licentious
times seem to conceive of it; nor yet an exemption from the yoke of any lawful
authority, whether civil or Ecclesiastical; nor yet a license for every
particular person, or combinations of persons, to set up the worship of God, in
what way, and after what manner seems good unto them; but a liberty purchased
by Christ for christians, whereby their consciences are set free; here is the
proper seat of this liberty; not the outward but the inward man, not the hand
or tongue, but the conscience, which is hereby set free, as from the rigor and
curse of the moral law, and from the obligation of the ceremonial law, so
generally from all obligations and bonds, save only such as God himself shall
impose upon it: this is christian liberty. Now this liberty is no ways
infringed, either by any civil or Ecclesiastical power, in as much as neither
of them claymeth any Jurisdiction or power over the conscience, either to bind
or absolve it. As for the Decrees of Counsels and Synods, (to hold to them)
they do not properly and immediately, as coming from them, reach the
conscience: it is but a mistake (to make the most charitable construction of
it*) which is charged upon Assemblies of this nature; that they I. G. Theom^k.
p. 45.
command all men's judgments and consciences to bow down at the feet of their
determinations: What Protestant Council or Synod ever yet claymed such a
jurisdiction? true it is, the matter of their Decrees may reach the conscience,
being such things as are commanded or forbidden in the Word; now conscience is
bound to observe and obey, but not by virtue of any humane Decree, but of the
divine Law; which has laid that obligation upon conscience. As for other
things which are in their own nature indifferent, neither commanded nor
prohibited in the Word, but only made necessary for a time, in respect of some
present occasion, these may be imposed; but how? what, upon conscience, as
things necessary in themselves? No. Ecclesiastical Decrees, (as I said before)
they do not change the nature of things, but impose them, and leave them as
they find them; finding them to be necessary in themselves, (made so by the
Word, they now impose them as necessary; finding them to be indifferent in
themselves, (left so by the word) they now impose them as indifferent; only
made necessary for the time. In the mean time no ways touching the
conscience, further then as the Word binds it.

To instance in these Decrees which the Text points at; here are Decrees
ordained for the Churches to keep, obligatory Decrees, but no ways binding
conscience further then the Law of God bound it. The Council Decrees they
should abstain from fornication, now this they were bound to before, by an
express and particular Law of God: The Council Decrees, they should abstain
from eating things sacrificed to Idols, etc. and these they were now bound to
by a general Law, the Law of charity, which required they should (as much as
might be) avoid what was scandalous and offensive to the weak brethren, and
apply themselves to such ways and courses, as might procure and maintain the
peace and unity of the Churches, thus were they bound, yet without any
impeachment to their christian liberty: for in the former of these their
Christian liberty had no place, it being a thing simply necessary to abstain
from fornication; in the latter their Christian liberty was still preserved and
maintained entire and whole, in as much as these things were not imposed upon
cons^ience, as things necessary in themselves; only the outward use and
exercise of that liberty was for a time limited or restrained, which (moral
necessity so requiring) questionless without any wrong or injury may be done,
either by a man's self, or others in authority, civil or Ecclesiastical.

Where (by the way, before I pass any further) let me only give a touch upon
an error, then which I do not know any that these luxuriant times have put
forth of more dangerous consequence, viz. That things indifferent, when
commanded, should become unlawful; such rocks the shifting of the wind of late
has carried men upon: not long since the tenet was; Things indifferent, when
commanded, become necessary: now on the other hand, Things indifferent, when
commanded, become unlawful, extremes both, like Scylla and Charybdis; it is
not easy to say whether of the two the more dangerous. I have given a caveat
touching the one already, let me now do as much* for the other: That authority
by commanding things indifferent should make them unlawful, how can this be?
if so, sure the ground and reason of this unlawfullnesse, must be either in the
authority commanding, or in the thing commanded, or in the person obeying: now
for the former of these, the authority being lawful cannot leave such a taint
upon things, that by touching of them, meddling with them, it should make them
of lawful unlawful. As for the second, the things themselves they are not
changed, the nature of them is not altered; if Tit. 1. 15.
they were indifferent before, they are indifferent still, viz. in reference to
conscience. As for the third, the persons obeying being pure, all things are
pure to them. How then can it be, that by passing through the hands of
authority, things should contract such a malign quality, that of indifferent
they should become unlawful? for my own part I must profess, that amongst all
the monstrous and misshapen conceptions which these brooding teeming times have
hatched and brought forth, I do not know any more prodigious then this.
Certainly the Primitive times were never acquainted with such a Doctrine. The
Decrees pointed* at in the Text, they were mostly about things in their own
nature indifferent; yet the Council imposes them, prohibiting the Churches
for a time the use of things otherwise lawful. Now (surely) had they
apprehended that their imposition would have changed the nature of things, so
as to make them of indifferent unlawful, they would never have had any hand in
commanding, nor yet the Churches in obeying. But I forbear to reason any
further against that, for which, I suppose, scarce a shadow of reason can be
given: I rather pass on to some other Objections and Allegations, which
finding them to be but bladders full of wind, I shall only prick them, (...)
leave them to evaporate of themselves.

Object. 2. In the second place it is alleged that this binding power being
allowed to any such Synodicall Decrees, it may prove prejudicial to the
Church, and to the Truth; a thing which experience makes good. The Councels
which we read of in the new Testament, wherein there was a concurrence of the
Civil and Ecclesiastical Mat. 2^. 59. 66. Acts 4 5, 6.
power, did they not give sentence against Christ himself, against his
Apostles, against their way and Doctrine? Of latter times how prejudicial have
many Councels been to the Church in condemning the truth, in countenancing and
confirming of errors? Instance but in that one Council of Trent, then* which
never was there any undertaking more threatening to the Church, more pernicious
to the truth.

Answ. We answer: It is true, thus it has been, and thus it may be; but what
of this? Things the more excellent in their use they are, the more dangerous
they may be in their miscarriage: Great Ordnance in a Fort or Castle, being
well managed and plied against the enemy, they are the strength and security of
a City; but being turned against it, they batter it down: Even of such use are
Councels and their Decrees, Ecclesiastical Ordinances, to the Church; now who
will think Forts and Bulwarks fit to be slighted, and all their Ordnance to be
dismounted, because possibly they may prove disadvantageous.

Object. 3. But it will be further urged, Experience has found Councels of
this nature to be often prejudicial, seldom advantageous to the Church;
witness that (now trite and threadbare) testimony of that ancient* Father J.
G. The^mak. p. 44. Dura G^eg. Nazi^nzeni querimonia, Calv. in Act. 15. 2. Ait
se nullius Synodi bonum exitum vidisse, and ^al^rum occasiones hoc mod^ n^n ^
^am (...) qu^m (...) fuiss^ ^^eg* (...) Naz. ad Pr^copium, Epist. 42.
Greg. Nazianzen, that Dur^ quaerimonia, (as Calvin truly calls it) that
har^h and rigorous complaint of his, wherein he professes, that for his part,
he never saw a good end, or desirable success of any Council, or that they
procured any decrease, but rather an increase of evils to the Church.

Answ. To this home charge set on by a single testimony, take answer briefly:

Care^t successibus, opto, Quisquis ab ^ventu ^em judicat.
1. To judge of things by the success and event oft-times proves but an
unrighteous judgment. Hopeful undertakings, though never so wisely projected,
and well intended, may yet possibly miscarry: Useful Institutions, not only
humane, but divine, may at sometimes prove unsuccessefull an^ ineffectuall: And
so may it possibly Con^il. Nicen. habit. Anno 330. Greg. Nazian floruit. Anno
371.
fall out with the most promising Synods or councels. But where is the fault?
what in the undertaking, in the institution it self? Not so, but in the
persons perverting, or opposing it. So says our learned and judicious Dr.
Whitaker, concerning that first and great Conscii. nobls* sumus invicem post.
Ni^eni conventus Synodum, nihil a^^ud quam fidem scribi: dum in verbis pugna
est, dum de novitatibus quaestio est, dum de ambiguis ^ccasio est, dum de
autho^ibus* querela est, dum de studiis certamen est, d^m in consensu
difficultas est, dum alter alteri Anathema esse c^pit, prope jam ^emo
Christiest. H^lar. ad Constant. Imperat. H^ Nicenam Synodum secutae sunt
tempestates, non Synodi quidem, sed hominum improborum vitio. Whitaker contra
Duraeum de Conciliis* Inge^nuit t^tus Orbis, and Arrianum se esse miratus est.
Hieron. adversus Lucifer.
Council of Nice, held a little before Nazianzens days, of all Councels the
most famous since the Apostles times, yet (as Hilary complains) it did not
find that success which was desired and hoped for. The evils of the Church
were not decreased, but rather increased by it: sad storms and tempests
followed upon it. But whence was this? Non Synodi quidem, etc. The fault was
not in the Synod, but in wicked and perverse men opposing and making head
against it: Even as it is with the Gospel it self, where it comes it has
ordinarily a Sword attending upon it, (I come not to send peace, but a sword,
Mat. 10. 34.) But what is the cause of this? Not the Gospel, which is in it
self the Gospel of peace; but those rebellious ones who will not submit to the
Gospel.

2. As for this testimony of Nazianzen, the learned cannot but wonder that such
a passage should fall from such a pen. I cannot but N^n p^ssum non ^^rari (...)
enum de C^^ciliis ^am inique judicasse, and acerbe scripsisse. Whitaker con^ra
C^mpianum de Con^i^^is.
wonder (says our worthy Whitaker) that that Father should judge so
perversely, and write so bitterly concerning Councels. But herein he was alone.
As for the rest of the Fathers, we shall find them clean of another mind,
judging and speaking as honorably of Counc^^^ and Synods, as Nazianzene did
coursely; concluding them to be not only useful, but in some cases necessary.
That of Augustine is well August. E^. 128. and alibi passim.
known, Concilioru ^ in Ecclesia saluberrima authoritas; The Authority of
Councels is most wholesome for the Church, says he, speaking of General
Counsels: And Cyprian says as much or more of Topicall particular Synods:
Necesse habuinius, etc. We held it necessary (says he) to gather and celebrate
a Council of many Priests (or Ministers) assembling together: So as against
this one singular testimony of this single Father we may well oppose the
dissenting judgment of all the rest.

Necesse habuimus convenientibus in unum plurimis sacerdotibus, cogere and
celebrare Concilium. Cyprian, lib. 2. ep. 1.
3. Suppose that Father in his time never saw any good end of Synods? What
shall we thence conclude against them? Upon the very same ground might the
promoters of this charge as well conclude against our Parliamentary Assemblies
in this Kingdom. Touching which, for our parts, many of us here present may
say as Nazianzen does there of Councels, that in our time we have not seen a
desirable success of them; they have not answered our hopes and expectations,
but most an end have left us in statu quo prius, in the same, if not in a worse
condition then they found us; and yet I hope neither they, nor any other who
are true-hearted to their Country, will dare to speak a word, or entertain a
thought against the use, utility, and necessity of them.

4. Suppose that Nazianzen might say that he had not seen any good success of
Counsels in his times. Shall we therefore say the like of all other Counsels?
What say we to this first Council held by the Apostles and Elders at
Jerusalem? had not this a good end? Let the Text inform us what was the
success of it. And so were the Churches established, etc.] What say we to many
other Councels in after ages? instance in those 4. first general Councels, so
universally received and approved of by the Church. However the immediate
success of some of them did not answer expectation for the settling of Peace
and Truth in the Church, yet shall we say, that the Churches of God in after
ages are not beholding to them? Councels and Synods in this are sometimes like
unto Comets (let not any pervert or abuse the comparison) which have not their
effect till some years after their appearing. I remember what the Apostle says
of Parents, they do (or ought to do) lay 2 Cor. ^2. 14.
up for their children. And this have the fathers of those Councels done, laid
up for posterity, laid up many precious truths, which have been useful to the
Church of God in all succeeding ages. Ungrateful should we be, should we not
acknowledge our selves beholding to them, and many other Councels and Synods
since those times. Not to go far back. What think we of those Synods or
convocations (call them as you please) in this Kingdom, wherein the Articles of
our Religion were drawn up and agreed upon, and by Law established? What think
we of the late Synod at Dort? or of the later Assembly in New England, to which
that Plantation (under God) owes not a little of her present subsistence?

Not to multiply words. Certainly such is the utility, such is the necessity,
if not of General Councels, yet of Topicall, Particular, National,
Provincial Synods, that the Church in this declined condition cannot well
subsist without them. And therefore let all take heed how they go about to
prejudicate either themselves or others against this Sovereign Church-Remedie.
Which what is it, but as if one should endeavor to loath a sick man of his
potion before it come at him? Then which, what greater dis-service and injury
can possibly be offered and done both to Physician, and Patient?

I know there are yet some other Arrows let fly at th^se Synodicall
Assemblies; but I find them such, as light as well upon this first Council at
Jerusalem, as upon those which have or shall succeed it, and in that respect
the less to be regarded. As viz.

Theo^ak. p. 33 (...). Hom.
Object. 1. That they are prejudicial to men's gifts, and parts, and industry,
conjuring them all into a Synodicall circle (as one unhappily expresses it)
suffering them only to dance there.

Answ. And might not the Churches to whom Paul here makes delivery of these
Synodicall Decrees, have taken up the same exception against this Council at
Jerusalem? to which (as it is alleged) some of them were not called so much
as to show their judgments.

Object. 2. Not unlike is that other; that Assemblies of this nature Theomak.
p. 47
are commonly swayed and carried by a few. It is usual (says the same
Author*) that in such Councels, some one or few of predominant parts, or
authority amongst them, sway and s^eere all the proceedings, and act the
judgments and affections of the rest, though conscientious and learned to a
degree. So that upon the matter and just account, the resolutions of Councels
and Synods themselves, are but the fruits and puttings forth of the learning
and judgment of a very few men.

Answ. And was it not so in this first Council at Jerusalem? were there not
here some leading men amongst them? Is not that Act. 15. 22.
the very Epithe^^ which the holy Ghost gives unto Judas and Silas? that they
were (...), chief men (or leading men, as the word properly signifies)
amongst the brethren, at whom no question the rest had a special eye. And were
no^ the Apostles, Peter, and James, and Paul, such as by whose predominant
parts and authority the proceedings of that Council were mainly swayed and
steered? And yet for all that was that a free and orderly Council. And so may
others after it be. But I will say no more in this cause: neither was I willing
to have said so much. Only taking notice of a dangerous design set on foot by
some, and driven on by others, for the prepossessing and forestalling the minds
and hearts of the people with prejudicate opinions against the determinations
of the present Assembly in this Kingdom, what ever they may be, and thereby to
blast all the hopes which the Church of God may conceive from thence; I could
not but think it my duty to say what I have done, that it might serve both as
an Antidote and Preparative unto you of this place, to preserve you from the
danger of this infection, and to prepare you for the receiving and entertaining
of such messages as God shall send unto us by the hands of those whom at the
present by his providence he has set a work as his Instruments for the
finding out and revealing of his mind and will unto his people.

Come we in a word or two to the third and last branch of this viz. the place
where this Council was held, and these Decrees ordained; viz. at Jerusalem.

Quest. And why there rather then elsewhere?

Answ. Take a reason or two.

1. To let pass the convenience of the place, which being the metropolis, the
chief City of that Kingdom (as London is of this) was most commodious for such
a meeting, whither persons from all parts were wont to resort.

2. In the secound place, (as it was the chief City, so it was the chief
Church, being the first Church; The first. 1. For time; the first place where
the Apostles after the Ascension of Christ gathered and constituted a Church.
2. the first for number, the number of believers belonging to that Church being
very great (as I shall have occasion (God willing) to show you anon). 3. the
first for Honor and dignity, highly accounted of by all other of the
Churches. In some sense a Mother Church. So the rest of the Churches (many of
Calvin in Act. 15. v. 2.
them) looked upon it. Non secus ac Matrem colebant, (says Calvin.) They
respected and honored that Church as a M ther-Church. And so indeed she was:
1. In as much as the Gospel first went out Psalm. 110. 2.
from thence. So it was foretold, The Lord shall send the Rod (or Scepter) of
thy strength out of Sion, Psalm 110. It is spoken of Christ. Now what is the
Rod (or Scepter) of Christ? why, his word, which is called the Scepter of his
strength, because it is the powerful instrument whereby Christ brings, and
keeps the world in subjection to himself. Now this Rod, this Scepter was to go
out of Sion, out of Jerusalem. So the Isai. 2. 3. Micah 4. 2.
Prophets both Esaias and Micah explain both the one and the other, The law shall
go forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem: Isa. 2. Micah 4.
Thus it was foretold, and thus it came to pass. Behold the accomplishment of
these prophecies at the day of Pentecost, Acts 2.
when the Apostles being filled with the Holy Ghost preached the Gospel at once
to all nations, to some almost of every nation. By which means the Gospel
was conveyed through the world. Like ^x co font Evangelium quasi per rivos
deduct^m suerat. Calv. ^b. M. Ba^^s trial of Seperat. p. 261.
water (it is Calvin's similitude) which is conveyed from one fountain through
many channels, and conduit-pipes to diverse places. Thus did the Word of the
Lord go forth from Jerusalem. And in that respect a mother Church. 2. A mother
Church out of whose loins (as I may say) many other Churches were issued,
having their Original from thence, being but as so many slips and off-se^s*
from that first Root. In which respect the Church of Jerusalem is called by
some Ecelesiae Surcularis; being like a Tree full of young shootes, and
branches, many of which are in time transplanted elsewhere. So was it with that
Church; many of the members thereof were in time translated to other parts, by
which means the Gospel was dispersed, and the Churches increased. And hereupon
it was that the rest of the Churches gave so much honor to that Church, being
(as you see) a mother Church. 3. Again a mother Church, as breeding of
Churches, so feeding them, like a natural mother ready upon all occasions to
draw forth her breasts to give them suck. Ready to contribute her best counsels
and advices for their instruction and edification. Bu^ this was not all.

3. In the third and last place, here was the greatest number of Apostles and
Elders ordinarily to be met with. For besides those which kept an ordinary
constant residence and incumbencie there, (of which there were not a few, for
that Church being great, her officers were many) here was a kind of general
Rendezvous, where both Apostles, and others upon occasion were wont to meet. As
for Apostles, how many were here present at this time it is not certain. Would
we give an ear to that old counterfeit Clemens, he would tell Clem. Constable. l.
b. 6. cap. 12.
us that all the twelve, how ever dispersed through the world, yet at this time
by a divine instinct they were brought together, that they might join in this
Council to plead the cause of Christianity against Jud^i^^n^. But this Legend
our very Adversaries Vide Corn. a Lapid. in Act. 15.
of Rome (though otherwise ready enough to hearken to such Traditions* and
willing to own and make use of that forged A^^ho^r) are ashamed o^* and for
this passage (amongst others) of the book also. And well they may; In as much
as one of the twelve by name (...) the brother of John (as themelves take
notice of it) was before this dead, being put to death by Herod, as you may see
it, Act. 12. All of them then could not be there. Not Act. 12 2. Corn. a Lap.
ibid.

Lorin. ibid.


to hearken to the conjectures of others who will tell us of Peter, James, and
John b^ing there. The story here makes mention only of the two former,
(besides Paul, and Barnaba^, the one an Apostle, the other an Evangelist.) What
Elders were here present, we find it alike uncertain* but certainly, as the
qu^litie so the number of (...) was very considerable*

Quest. Why, but how many soever they were, it s^emeth by the Text that they
were all of the Church of Jerusalem.

Answ. Not so* This will ^^ver be proved, neither does the Text make any thing
for it, but rather against it* Mark the words, Mr. Rutherford. Due right of
Pr^sb^teri^^ p. 402.
They delivered there the D^^r^es which were ordained of the Ap^stles and
Elders which (...) at (...) (...), [In] Jerus^l^m. Not the Ap^stles and Elders
[of] Hierusal^^. So the phrase of Scripture elsewhere ru^s, where it speaks
of the officers of such a place. The elders of (...) The Angel of the Church of
(...) Act 20. 17. Rev. 2. 1, 8, 12, 18.
(...) Rev. 2. But here, the Apostles and (...) in, (or at) (...) these who were
assembled together there at that time.

Object* Why, but it in replied, J^^es challenges these Decrees to be their*
Act. 21. 25. (...) the Gentiles [we] have written Act. 21. 25.
and concluded,] says he, speaking to Paul concerning these Decrees,

Answ. We answer, this James speaks not exclusively, as excluding others,
whether persons or Churches, who had any hand in that business: certainly, as
for Paul, whom he speaks it to, he had as maine a stroke in the debating and
determining thereof as James Act. 15. 12.
himself, and Barnabas the like, besides many other Elders and Prophets, and
that not only of the Church of Jerusalem and Antioch, but (as is very probable)
of other Churches elsewhere, who were all interested in the making of these
Decrees.

True it is, a perfect list and Catalogue we have not, either of the several
persons which were sent, or of the several Churches sending their delegates
and messengers unto this Council, only Jerusalem and Vid. M. Ruth. ibid. p.
401.
Antioch are named: but in all likelihood there were others as well as they;
two reasons are alleged for the ground of this conjecture.

1. Other Churches were concerned, and interested in this business, as well as
Antioch, viz. the Churches in Syria and Cilicia, who were troubled with this
doctrine, and had their souls perverted as well as Antioch.

2. The letters of the council are directed to them as well as unto Act. 15.
23* ^4.
Antioch, and binding decrees sent unto them: both these you may see in the 23.
and 24. Verses of that 15. Chapter.

Now from hence we reason: First, de jure, that of right these Churches ought
to have sent their delegates and messengers about this business as well as the
Church of Antioch, according to the forenamed Maxim, Quod omnes concernit,
etc. That which concerns all, ought to be handled of all, which is true,
being rightly understood, viz. suo modo et grad^, every one according to their
place and order. Secondly, de facto it seems that they did so, in as much as
the Council directs Chap. 15. Verse. 23.
their Letters alike unto them by names, as unto the brethren which are of the
Gentiles in Antioch, which seems to import, that all of them joined in the
referring of this question and cause to the determination of that Council; and
so accordingly it was, not by the Apostles and Elders of Jerusalem only, but
by the Apostles and Elders in or at Jerusalem, viz. assembled there at that
time: but it was my promise, not to insist upon this; and therefore having only
cle^red that scruple, I shall now dismiss it, and with it the second
particular in the Text: viz. What Paul and Sylas here made delivery of

3. Pass we now to the third, viz. to whom these decrees were delivered: the
Text answers it, As they went through the cities they delivered the Decrees
unto them.] Unto them? what, to the whole cities? Not so: but to the churches
in those Cities: so the next Verse makes it out, And so were the churches
established.

Observe. Cities and churches in phrase of Scripture are sometimes put the one
for the other, in that 14. of the Acts, Verse. 23. it is said, Act. 14. 23.
that Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders in every church, (...), church by
church; In the 1 Tit. Verse. 5. it is said, that Paul left Titus in Tit. 1. 5.
Creet to ordain Elders in every city, (...), city by city, so as these two,
in every church, and in every city, are (...), phrases adequate and
equipollent, used indifferently the one for the other: As they went through the
cities they delivered the decrees unto them, i. e. to the churches in those
cities.

Reas. The phrase will not be unfruitful, cities and churches put one for the
other; how so? what, were they always of the same l^titude and extent? was
every whole city a church, so as all that dwelt within the one, were also
members of the other? Not so: sometimes indeed it so happened, that (if not the
universality, yet) the generality of a city embraced the Gospel in an outward
profession of it: thus we read of Samaria, that when Philip came and preached
the Gospel to them, the people with one accord (says the Act. 8. 6.
story) gave heed unto those things which he spoke, Act. 8. so as it is most
likely, that the whole city in a manner received the Gospel, even as before
the whole City had given heed to Simon Mag^s, and were carried away with his
sorceries and enchantments, (they gave heed to him Verse. 10.
from the least to the greatest, Verse. 10.) So now they were generally brought
to embrace and profess the faith: so much may be collected from the 12. Verse.
where it is said, when they believed Philip, viz. those which had been seduced
by Simon, even the whole city, which Verse. 12. Verse. 14.
is further confirmed from the 14* Verse. where it is said, that the Apostles, at
Jerusalem beard that Samaria had received the Word, importing, that the Word
had a general (if not an universal) entertainment in that City. Now in this
case, (which let it be observed) a whole City was taken in, and associated into
a Church: thus we read of Samaria there: When they believed they were baptized
both Verse. 12,
men and women, Verse. 12. The generality of the people were all joined to the
Church. However* some of them were unworthy, and afterward upon discovery were
ejected and cast out again, as you Verse. 21.
may see it in Simon Magus, in the sequel of the Chapter. And thus in like
cases it may and ought to be, when the generality of a people in such a town,
such a city, do embrace the Gospel, professing faith and obedience, to believe
on Christ, and to submit to his government. In this case the whole multitude,
not only may, but ought to be received into Church-society. However some may be
unworthy, who, upon the manifestation thereof, may and ought to be cast out
again by the censures of the Church duly exercised.

But this case was not very ordinary with the Apostles. Commonly the City and
the Church were two distinct things, the one far larger then the other; the
City an ample (...) the Church a small handful con^eined in it; a peculiar
society selected out of the multitude. Col. 4. 5.
Paul writing to his Colossians, wills them to walk wisely toward th^se
which were without, Col. 4. And who were they? Why, generally all In^idells and
unbelievers, who though they were within the City, yet were without the Church;
within the w^lls of the one, but with out the pale of the other; interested in
the imm^niti^s and liberties of the one, not so in the privileges of the
other; having civil commerce with the members of the Church, but no
Church Communion.

Quest. Why then are Cities and Churches put one for the other?

Answ. Take it in a word, because the whole company of Christians, of
professors, within such bounds and limits, viz. within the City and the
adjacent territories were wont to be framed into one Christian society or
Church.

Observe. So many Cities, so many Churches, and no more; so much this phrase
imports, and it will not be amiss (my brethren) for us to take special notice
of it, l^st in going about to multiply Churches, to Ezekiel. 1. 16.
erect and set up Churches in Churches, (like Ezekiels wheels, one within
another,) and those not uniforme in their motions, as these were, but in this
rather like the wheels of a clock which move diverse and contrary ways,) we
trespass and transgress not only against the phrase of Scripture; but against
the primitive and Apostolical practice in^inuated unto us in that phrase.
Look (I beseech you) through the whole new Testament, and see where you find
mention made of Act. 16. 9. 2 Cor. 8. 1. Gal. 1. 2.
any more Churches in a Town or City then one: true, we read frequently of the
Churches of Judea, and the Churches of Asia, Macedonia, Galatia, etc. many
Churches in one Kingdom, in one Province, but no where of the Churches of
Philippi, of Corinth, of Samaria, or yet of Jerusalem. But still the Church.

Ques^. Why, but may there not then be more Congregations in a City then one?

Answ. Surely yes, (and I heartily wish that it were so in this place) where
the number of a people professing the Gospel is so increased, as that they
cannot assemble together in one place, now it is not only lawful and
expedient, but even necessary, that they should be divided into several
Congregations. Thus (for my own part) I cannot but think that it was in some of
the Cities forenamed, at least in Jerusalem, where the number of believers (as
the Act. 2. 41. Act. 4 4. Calv. P^scat. ad Loc.
story tells us) was in a little time so exceedingly increased, first to three
thousand, Act. 2. not long after to five thousand, Act. 4, which five thousand,
however Calvin and some others look upon it as the total ^o^m^e, the whole
number of believers taking in the former three thousand; yet many (I think the
most) other Expositors conceive of it rather as a new addition, five thousand
added to the former three thousand: thus amongst the Ancients, Jero^e,
Augustine, Vide Cornel. a Lap. ad Loc.
Chry ^o^tome, Lycanus, Beda; amongst N^^^ericks, Cornelius a Lapide, Aretius,
which last Author gives a double reason why he conceives it should be so, (to
me both very probable.) For first, in reckoning of the former three thousand
the Evangelist did not take in the hundred and twenty, the first fruits of the
Church, spoken of in the first Chapter, but only set down the new addition
which was Act. 1. 15.
made; so here in setting down the five thousand he may seem to have no
reference to either of the former numbers, but to show what a new increase and
accession there was. And secondly, hereby not only the increase of the Church
is set forth, but also the increase of the efficacy of the Word, which grew
stronger and stronger, fetching in first three thousand, then five thousand,
which five thousand (as it is further noted by some) are there said to be men;
the number A Lap. ibid.
of the men was about five thousand, (...), numerus vi^^r^^. If so, what then
shall we conceive the number of the women, (not to speak of children) who in
devotion have been ordinarily Famineus sexus prae viris magis solet esse
dev^tus. idem.
observed not to come short, but rather to go far beyond the other Sex. To go
on, after this we yet read of new additions, Act. 5. it is said, that
Believers were the more added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and ^^men: In
so much that in a short time the number of them Act. 5. 14.
was grown very great: so much that speech of James and the Elders of Act. 21.
Verse. 20.
Jerusalem unto Paul imports, Act. 21. where speaking of the believing Jews,
who joined themselves to the Church of Jerusalem: Thou see brother (say they)
how many thousand Jews there are which believe, Myrias continet december millia.
etc. The word in the original is (...); and it properly signisieth how many
ten thousands? and so we find it translated elsewhere, Act. 19. Where the
conjuring books which were burnt are estimated, the total is computed to be
about fifty thousand pieces Act. 19. 19.
of silver, Verse. 19. (...), five Myriads, five times ten thousand, so in the
14. Verse. of the Epistle of Jude, we read of ten thousand Jud. verse. 14.
of Saints, (...). Whether the word should be so strictly taken in this place
of the Acts, I will not contend: but certainly, take it how we will, it imports
an exceeding great number, well nigh innumerable: so I find the word in two
places translated, Luke 12. 1.
Luke 12. 1. it is said, that there were gathered together an innumerable Heb.
12. 22,
multitude of people; the word is the same, (...). So again, Heb. 12. 22. we
read of an innumerable company of Angels, (...). And such was the number of
the believing Jews which had joined themselves to the Church of Jerusalem,
almost an innumerable company, so as they could not possibly meet all together
in one place to partake of the Ordinances. To me it is no question, they had
several Congregations.

Quest, But were not these then several Churches?

Answ. No. Several Congregations, but one Church; the Church of Jerusalem,
even as it is in a great City: there may be several Societies and companies,
according to several trades and mysteries; and those so many petty
corporations, who may have their several Halls, and their several meetings,
and yet all making up but one Incorporation, to which they are all subordinate
because all under one and the same Government and Governors: even thus may it
be in the Church, (and in the Primitive state of it, I conceive so it was.) In
one City, and the adjacent territories there may be many Congregations, and yet
but one Church, inasmuch as they may be united by the Vid. in Baals trial of
the grounds tending to separation. p. 296.
same Laws, have communion in the same Ordinances, and be linked together under
the same spiritual Guides and Officers. Surely in all probability thus it was,
at least in some of the Proto-Primitive Churches. And why not now?

But (not to wade too far into this collateral Controversy, from which I
have bound my self before) however, certainly to multiply Churches in one
Town, one City; especially to set up Churches in Churches, the one extracted
out of the other, this has no President, no warrant, no maintenance, no
countenance from any phrase of Scripture, or practice of the Apostolical times.

Object. No? it will be said; What say we then to the Jewish Church? Did not
the Apostles set up Churches in that Church, and those extracted out of it?

Answ. To this shadow of an Argument it is soon answered. Here was not one
Church set up in another, but many set up upon the ruins of one: so as the
setting up of the one was the pulling down of the other. Even as the Apostle
says of the two Covenants, old and new, The first was taken away, that the
second might be established, Heb. 10. Heb. 10. 9.
So was it with these two Churches: that legal, this Evangelicall. As for the
Jewish Church, it was now like the Jewish legal covenant, which Heb. 8 v. last.
the Apostle speaks of, Heb. 8. calling it (...), Antiquatum quid, and
senes^ens, a thing which was Antiquated, and wax^^ old* (...), nigh to
vanishing, ready to disappeare, and come to nothing; so as here was only a new
edifice to be erected upon those ruins, a new Church to be set up in an
Evangelicall way, where that Legal Church had been. Now I confess, had we to
deal with rigid downright Separatists, who look upon our Churches as no true
Churches of Christ, but Antichristian Synagogues, fit to be dissolved and
pulled down, saying of them in the Edomites language, Raze them, raze them,
even to the foundation thereof; Psalm. 147. 7.
then might this Argument have some color of strength in it. But otherwise
where our Churches are acknowledged as true Churches, in this case to set up a
Church in a Church and to extract the one out of the other, (I say it again,
and I wish it may be taken notice of) it is a thing which Scripture will give
no warrant, no president for.

Quest. But suppose a Church be defective, or corrupted; in this case what
shall we do?

Answ. Not presently think of pulling it down, and setting up another, 1 Cor.
11.
(Was it not the very case of the Church of Corinth? and yet we do not read of
any that went about to set up a Church in that Church, under pretense of
walking in a purer way) but rather endeavor by all means to purge and reform
it. This will we do by our houses, if they be foul, we will sweep them; if
decayed and impaired, though it be in some of the principals, we will not
presently think of pulling them down, and building others out of their timbers
and materials, but repair them. And thus did King Jehoash for 2 King. 12. 14.
the house of his God, the Temple: finding it ruinous, he gave order (not to
pull it down and build a new one, but) to repair it. O that we would all of us
entertain such thoughts concerning the Church or Churches of God in this
Kingdom! It is a thought which God has already put into the heart of the state
of this Kingdom; and what progress and procedure is already made in the work,
I shall not need to tell you. I hope, time ere long will declare it. Herein
then let all our hearts close and comply with theirs; every one in our places
doing what we may to further so pious an undertaking; in the mean time taking
heed of adventuring upon new ways, which we have neither precept nor president
in Scripture for. What way of gathering and setting up of Churches the
Scripture holds forth unto us, you may see by what has been already said.
Those which embraced the faith within such a circuit, within the bounds of a
City, and the adjacent Territories, they were all framed together into one
Christian society or Church. And hence is it, that Cities and Churches in
phrase of Scripture are (as you see) put the one for the other, as elsewhere,
so here in the Text, As they went through the [Cities] they delivered unto
[them], etc.

Quest. Delivered them] But what Cities, what Churches were these?

Answ. The Text lays it down in indefinite words, carrying Indefinitum
aequ^polle^ universali.
with them the force of an universal, viz. what ever Cities they passed through,
where there were any Churches they delivered these Decrees unto them.

Quest. Here a scruple may arise. Why should the Apostles here deliver these
Decrees alike unto all the Churches where they came, when as all of them did
not appear at this Council? As for Jerusalem and Antioch, and the Churches
of Syria and Cilicia, these Decrees were proper for them, in as much as they
had referred both the Question and cause to the determination of that Council,
and had their Agents there to deal for them. But so had not some other of the
Churches. How then could these Decrees be obligatory, and and binding unto
them, which they had no hand in making of, or ^ss^^ting to?

Answ. To this it is answered, that though these Decrees were not binding to
them formally, yet Morally and Vertually they were. As for Jerusalem and
Antioch, and such other Churches as concurred with them in this Appeal, they
were bound formally by an Ecclesiastical bond or tie: Even as those which put
a business to Arbitration, they are formally bound to stand to what their
Arbitrators shall agree upon, so it be not against Law and Reason. Besides the
bond of Equity, they have also a Civil, Formal Obligation, under which they
lie: So was it with those Churches which had referred Vid. Mr. Rutherfords Due
Right of Presbyteries, p. 400
their cause to this Council, and had sent their Delegates thither, they were
now bound by a double bond, not only that general Moral bond of Equity and
Right, but by a Formal, Ecclesiastical bond to submit to the Determinations
of that Council, so far as they they were agreeable to the Word. But now for
other Churches, though they did not lie under such a double obligation, yet
under a single one they did. Though they were not so formally bound as the
other, yet vertually they were, and morally, in regard of the Equity and Reason
of those Decrees. It is Dr. Ames his determination touching Counsels, and
their Decrees. Tantum valet Decretum D. Ames Bellarm. Ene^vat. de Council. c. 3.
concilii quantum valet ejus ratio. A Decree of a Council carries so much
weight with it, as there is Reason in it. Now these Decrees here agreed upon in
this Council, they were all Rational Decrees, agreeable to Scripture and
sound Reason: And being such, they were in this respect obligatory to the rest
of the Churches, even to those who did not appear at that Council: And upon
this ground it was that the Apostle here makes delivery of them wheresoever he
came. As they went through the Cities they delivered the Decrees unto them.]

Quest. But yet it may be said again, Wherefore deliver them to all? Possibly,
and probably some of the Churches were not interested, and concerned in these
differences: And if they were, yet why might they not be left to their
Christian liberty, to do as they saw convenient in these indifferent things?
Why might they not rather be left every one to their own way in these matters
of lesser difference?

Answ. No, this the Council thought not convenient; they make an Order against
it; and in prosecution of that Order the Apostle here wherever he comes
makes delivery of these Decrees. And wherefore this? why, that he might by
this means bring all the Churches to Unity and Uniformity; Unity in judgment
and affection, and Uniformity in practice; that they might all be of one heart,
and of one way.

Oserrv.
Observe. An useful observation which meeting me so full in the way, I may not
baulk it. Unity and Uniformity among the Churches is a thing to be earnestly
desired and endeavored. This was a thing which this blessed Apostle set much
by. His requests to, and prayers for the Romans 15. 5, 6.
Churches are well known. Now the God of patience and consolation grant you to
be like minded, etc. that ye may with one mind and one mouth ^ Cor. 1. 10.
glorify God; it is his prayer for his Romans, Romans 15. Now I beseech you,
Brethren, by the name of the Lord Jesus Christ that ye all speak the same
thing, and there be no divisions, or schisms among you, but that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment; it is
his first request which he makes to his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1. And as 2 Cor.
13. 11.
it is the first, so it is the last, his Alpha and Omega. Finally, brethren,
farewell, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, etc
Phil. 1. 27.
it is his farewell to the same Church, 2 Cor. 13. Only let your conversation
Phil. 2. 1, 2.
be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ, etc. that ye stand fast in ^ne spirit
and one mind. It his charge to his Philippians, Phil. 1. If there be any
consolation in Christ, etc. Fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, etc. So
he prosecuteth the same charge with most patheticall enforcements in the
chapter following. Thus did Paul stand affected toward the Unity of the
Churches to whom he writes.

And as to their Unity, so to their Uniformity; hereupon it was, that what he
ordered in one Church, he willed that it should be observed by all. Thus in
that 1 Cor. 7. having answered and stated certain doubts and questions
propounded to him by his Corinthians, as viz. touching single life and
marriage, the co-habitation of persons 1. Cor. 7. 17.
unequally yoaked, Believers and Infidels, etc. he tells them that the Orders
and Directions which he sent unto them were no other then what he gave in
common to all the rest of the Churches. And so ordain I in all Churches, verse.
17. Thus again chapter 16. taking order touching the time and manner of making
collection for the poor 1 Cor. 16. 1.
Saints, he prescribes one Order for all the Churches. Now concerning
collection for the Saints, as I have given order to the Churches of Galatia,
even so do ye, verse. 1. And upon the same ground it was, that having the
Decrees of the Council at Jerusalem in his hands, he makes delivery Act. 15.
23*
of them where ever he comes; not only to the Churches to whom they were by
name directed, but to all other Churches. As they passed through the Cities,
they delivered the Decrees to them.

Applicat.
And was Paul so active, so forward in this business? let not any of us be
backward with it, much less averse against it. Certainly Unity and Uniformity
are a matter of greater concernment to the Churches then commonly they are
taken to be, making much both for their safety and beauty.

1. For their safety. It is not for nothing that Paul writing to his
Philippians in the place forenamed puts these two together; Phil. 1. 27, 28.
That ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together for the
faith of the Gospel; And in nothing terrified by your adversaries.] were it so
that the Churches were of one mind, and would (...), strive together for the
Gospel, going out as one man against the common enemy, as the tribes of Israel
are said to have gathered together Judge. 20. 1. Cant. 6. 4.
against Benjamin, Judge. 20. then would they be terrible as an Army with
banners: so as they should not need to fear the Adversary. Their Unity under
God would be a special means of their safety. Whereas their divisions are
like breaches in a common bank, letting in a Sea of evils upon them: or like
the breaking of the ranks in an army, which is the next way to let in the
enemy, and so to rout the whole body. Unity in judgment and affections (the
one of which much depends upon the other, for where judgments are divided,
though it ought not to be so, yet such is the corruption in the Heart of man,
which is like unto tinder ready to take fire by the least spark that falls
into it, there will ordinarily be some alienation in affections) makes much
for the Churches security.

2. And so does Uniformity make much for the beauty of it. Even as in a City
where the buildings are uniforme, much of one height and one fashion, it is a
graceful prospect. So is it in the Churches. To see them not only worshipping
the same God, but worshipping him after the same manner; all worshipping before
one 2 Chro. 32. 1^
Altvr, as Hezekiah commanded all Judah and Jerusalem to do. And that not
only enjoining the same Ordinances for substance, but as much as may be, the
same administrations for circumstance; certainly there is a beauty in this
uniformity. It was not for nothing that the ten bases in the temple, the
supporters to the great lavatorie, the 1 Kings* 7. 37*
molten Sea, were all alike; all of them had one measure, and one casting, and
one size. This made them the more comely. And so is it with the Ordinances of
God, when they are (as it were) cast into the same mould, dispensed after the
same manner, it adds an external grace and beauty to them.

To these two I might yet add two more, and I shall not need to go far to seek
for them. I find them both in the close of the Text. This makes much for the
establishment and augmentation of the Churches.

3. For their establishment. And so were the Churches established] viz. by and
through the means of that unity and uniformity, which were procured by the
making and delivering of these Decrees.

4. For their augmentation and increase. So were the Churches increased.] A
fruit (says Chrysostom, cited by Lorinus upon the Text) of Paul's
condescension and compliance in circumcizing Timothy, of which you read in the
verses foregoing. This did he for the preserving of unity and concord, to which
end also he delivered these Decrees. And behold the issue and fruit of both.
And so were the Churches increased.] Concordia res parvae -- Things small in
their beginnings by concord and agreement rise oft-times to an envied height.
So it is with States, and so it is with Churches.

Applic.
And is it so? why then let not any of us be backward or unwilling with what
may be so advantageous to the Churches of God in these Kingdoms. Surely it is
not without reason that other Churches have had such an eye hereupon. The
Churches in France, Low Countries, elsewhere, none more then the Churches in
New England, where we may see all the Churches within one and the same
jurisdiction precisely put into the same posture, the same way, as for Doctrine
and Worship, so for Discipline and Government. O let it be the joint desire and
endeavor of us, and of all the Lords people amongst us, that it may be so with
the Churches of God in this, and (if it may be) in the neighbor Kingdoms.

Motive 1.
To set on this motion, let me take up and make use of a double motive. The
former taken from the promise of God. Gods promises are or ought to be our
Directions and Encouragements, showing us both what we are to seek, and what
success we may expect in seeking. Now this is one thing (amongst many) which
God has promised to his people, to his Churches under the Gospel (a branch of
the New Covenant) that he will give them one heart, and one way. So Jer. 32: 39.
you have it, Jer. 32. 39. I will give them one Heart and one Way; i. e. (as the
Geneva Gloss explains it) one Consent and one Religion; or Unity and
Uniformity. Unity in Judgments and Affections; [I will give them one Heart.]
Uniformity in Worship, and (happily) in Discipline, [I will give them one way.]
This promise, for my own part, I look upon as not yet having had the full
accomplishment. Certainly both these will God do for his Church, and that not
only in the triumphant state of it in Heaven (where there is and ever shall be
a perfect Unity and a perfect Uniformity. No difference in Judgment, no jar in
Affections; there Luther and Zwinglius agree well enough; no difference in
worship or practice. All worship the same God after the same manner. Nothing
but a perfect harmony) but Ren. 15.
also in the militant or rather triumphant state of it upon earth. Such a state
(I verily believe) there shall be, when the Church shall triumph over her
conquered enemies, G^g and Magog. And then shall there be a blessed harmony
amongst the people of God themselves. Then shall the wolf dwell with the
lamb, and the leopard lie Isa. 11. ^.
down with the kid, etc. Christians though naturally of different tempers and
dispositions, yet their spirits shall close together. There shall be no more
such differences as now there are. They shall think and speak one and the same
thing; there shall be but one lip; and they shall walk in the same way. As for
those odious and opprobrious nicknames which have been, and yet are, not
without some unkind and unchristian heat cast in the faces one of another by
such as profess the Name of Christ, they shall then be taken away and
forgotten. There shall be no more mention of those differing and distinguishing
titles, whereby the several opinions or ways of the Churches are notified and
signified unto us; as of Lutheran, Calvinian, Diocesan, Presbyterian,
Classical, Congregationall, Independent, etc. Certainly there is a grave a
digging for all these, wherein they shall be buried in everlasting
forgetfulness, never to rise again, which shall be after the destruction of
Antichrist. Then shall there be a sweet and heavenly consort and harmony
amongst those who have overcome the beast: They shall (then) Rev. 15. 3.
all sing (the same song) even the song of Moses, and song of the Lamb, as you
have it, Rev. 15. 3. O blessed times! which methinks all the Lords people
should look at (in some measure) as Abraham is Joh. 8. 56.
said to have done at the day of Christ, the day of his Incarnation, John 8.
with desire and exultation; or as the creatures are said to look at the time
when the sons of God shall be manifested (which some refer to the times I am
now speaking of) with an (...), an earnest expectation and looking out for,
earnestly desiring and Romans 8. 19.
longing to see what we believe; that (if it be the will of God) we may yet reap
some of the first fruits of the accomplishment of this promise even in our
days. Hereunto let all of us be stirred up to contribute, as our prayers, so
our joint endeavors for the effecting of this great work, this blessed unity
and uniformity amongst the Churches, particularly and specially among the
Churches of God in this and the neighbor Kingdoms.

Motive 2.
To which (let this be a second motive) we are bound by a special engagement,
viz. by the late solemn National Vow and Covenant, wherein (amongst other
things) we have promised this for one, viz. to endeavor the bringing of all
the Churches in the three Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in
Religion, confession of faith, form of Church Government, etc. This is our
Vow, a solemn Vow, from the obligation whereof no power under Heaven can
absolve and discharge us. In the fear of God then remember our Vow, and set
our selves to pay it. In the mean time taking heed of adventuring upon any
such ways or courses, as may at least seem cross and contrary hereunto.
Amongst which I shall earnestly desire that this may be seriously and fully
considered by all conscientious Christians amongst us; whether in this interim
of time, whilst that one way is seeking out, which being most agreeable to the
Rules of the Word, may be also most expedient to the present state of these
Kingdoms, whether (I say in this conjuncture of time) to set up new Churches in
new ways, and those such as we are (at least probably) persuaded will not be
embraced by any of the three Kingdoms. Whether this can be conceived to be a
proper way and means to compass that end, and to bring about that design.
Whether ways of Division and Separation can be thought to tend and lead to
this desired Conjunction and Uniformity. Every of us, in the presence of God,
before whom we now stand, put this case to our selves, and let Conscience pass
a free and impartial verdict upon it; which if it pass against it (as surely
if it proceed according to the evidence of Reason, it must) then take we heed
not only how we join in such ways, but how we give any countenance to them,
lest we should seem to be accessory to so great an evil, as the breach and
violation of so solenme a vow and covenant.

Object. But it will be said, Suppose a way to be the way of God, may it not
then be set up, maugre all such pre-ingagements?

Answ. To this let me answer these three things:

1. This is but a supposition (as touching any particular way) not grounded
upon apparent evidence; at the best a doubtful and questionable truth, not
^ranted nor yet pleaded.

2. But secondly, suppose this supposed way to be [a] way of God, yet does it
not thereupon follow that it should be [the] way of God, the way so laid out
for all the Churches, as that they should all be found to walk precisely in
the same path, so as not to vary a hairs breadth from it. I remember it is an
observation of our late pious and reverend Doctor Preston touching the ways of
God, that Dr. Preston New Covenant. p. 203.
as there is a length and a straitness, so also there is a latitude, a breadth
in them. So it is in respect of particular persons. The way to some man (says
he) is broader then to others, and to the same man in some places broader, in
some narrower. One man may do that which another may not do; and the same man
may do that at some time, and in some place, which in others he may not do.
And why may it not be so with Churches? Or why should the common Church Way be
thought straiter then a private path? For my own part, I must freely profess
(if it be an error, yet it is a charitable one) I cannot but conceive and
apprehend such a latitude in the way of Church Government, as that several
Churches may have several ways in diverse circumstances differing the one from
the other, and yet each be a way of God; in as much as each of them in
substantials may be conformed to the same express and particular rules of the
Word, and in circumstantials to those general rules of Order, De^ency, and
Edification, which oft-times in the application and use of them differ and vary
according to the difference of times and places, and conditions of persons, and
such other circumstances. So as a way may be a way of God, and yet not so the
way as that it must of necessity be set up in all the Churches.

And herein I do not go alone. Mr. Calvin, I am sure, will bear me company, who
in molding and setting up that form of government in the Church at Geneva, was
far from any thoughts of binding all the Churches to follow that president, and
to conform themselves to that pattern. He did not dream that that was the
pattern in the mount. No, herein he professes to leave what he took, a liberty
to the Churches to mold themselves into such ways as may be most expedient for
them. His words are not unknown, writing Scimus enim unicuique Ecclesiae
libe^um* esse politiae formam instituere sibi aptam, and utilem; Quia Dominus
nihil certi praescripse^it. Calv. in 1 Cor. 11. 2.
upon 1 Cor. 11. 2. Scimus enim unicuique Ecclesiae liberum esse, etc. We know
(says he) that there is a liberty left to every Church to set up such a form
of Policy, or Government, as may be most apt and profitable for it self,
(viz. in respect of Circumstantials.) And he alleges this reason for it:
Quia Dominus nibil certi praescripserit; Because our Lord and Master Christ
has not punctually and precisely prescribed any such form as all the Churches
should be obliged to. This was his judgment after a long search to find out
what was revealed in this particular, and Iwish it were received amongst the
Churches. I know no one principle that would conduce more to a happy and
blessed pacification then this. Whereas on the other hand, the stamping of a
Jus divinum, a Divine Right upon any one form, so as to make it in omnibus a
standard for all other Churches; I cannot but look upon it as a ground or
occasion of an everlasting parallel never to be decided and taken up, till
Elias (as the ^ews say) or the Mar. 17. 11.
Joh. 4 25.
Messiah (as the woman of Samaria has it) shall come, who will tell us all
things.

3. But thirdly, suppose this way to be the way of God, yet I beseech you let
it be enquired whether this way and manner of setting it up be the way of God
or no. At such a time, whilst authority is at work, using the best and most
hopeful endeavors for the discovering and finding out what way is most
agreeable to the Rules of Scripture, and most expedient for the state of the
three Kingdoms, with a full purpose to set it up in a regular and orderly way
in this interim for private persons to anticipate and forestall those religious
intentions, by setting up a supposed way of God without, if not against the
autho^ity of the Christian Magistrate, and that to the present disquietment of
the Churches peace, the indangering of her future subsistence, and the eminent
hazard of betraying both Church and State into the hands of the common enemy;
whether this (I say) be the way of God or no, I propound it to the serious and
sad consideration of all those who are conscientiously wise. And so leaving
this third maine particular with them, I shall now pass on to the fourth.

Part 4.
4. The fourth maine particular in the Text (wherein I will be as brief as
possibly I may, hasting toward the conclusion of the Text) is the immediate
end wherefore Paul and Silas here make delivery of these Decrees, viz. (...),
to keep. They delivered them the Decrees for to keep.] To keep, not only in
memory, nor yet only upon record, but to observe them, to submit and yield
obedience to them.

Here is the general end of all Decrees, all Laws and Constitutions, whether
Divine or Humane, Political or Ecclesiastical; they are all made to be kept.
We have to deal with the latter, Ecclesiastical Observe.
Decrees and Constitutions, which (being such as these here in the Text, they)
both may and ought to be kept. It is that which Paul praises 1 Cor. 11. 2.
his Corinthians for, 1 Corinthians. 11. Now I praise you, Brethren, that ye
remember in all things (or as the Geneva reads it according to the (...).
Original, * all my things) and keep the Ordinances as I delivered them to
you.] The Ordim^^es, (...); the Traditions. So Paul calls the Directions and
Advices which he delivered to the Churches, whether by mouth, or by pen, or by
hand; by mouth or word in his 2 These. 2. 15.
preaching; by pen or writing in his Epistles; by hand, as here in the Text he
delivered the Decrees of the Council with his own hand to the Churches. And
these Ordinances, these Traditions of his the Church of Corinth kept.

Quest. But what Ordinances, what Traditions were these? D. S^later S^hol. in 1
Cor. 11. 2.


Answ. To this it may be answered, Paul's tradictions which he delivered to the
Churches, were of two sorts, dogmaticall or rituall: dogmaticall concerning
faith and good works; of these speaks the Apostle in that 2 These. 2. 15. Now
therefore brethren stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye have been
taught, whether by Word or by Epistle.] Rituall, 2 These. 2. 15*
concerning rites and orders, civil or religious, which again are
distinguished into two sorts, some perpetual, others temporary, the former to
be observed at all times in all places, such are those orders which he
delivers to the Church of Corinth, touching the administration 1 Cor. 11, 23.
of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 23. I have received of the
Lord that which also I delivered unto you.] The latter to be observed only for
a time, such were these decrees which here in the Calviu ad Text.
Text he makes delivery of to the Churches, they were ordinances to be observed
but for a time, not for ever; for (as Calvin well observes) Paul himself
afterward, when the ground and reason of these injunctions was ceased, he set
the Churches at liberty from the observation of them, as you may see 1 Cor. 10.
25. where he gives his Corinthians a general license touching meats,
Whatsoever is sold in the shambles that 1 Cor. 10. 25*
eat, asking no question for conscience sake.]

Thus you see what Paul's traditions were, and in these you may see what
Ecclesiastical Decrees may be, viz. counsels and constitutions both
dogmaticall and rituall, concerning faith and good works, concerning rites and
orders to be observed in the Churches. Now all these (being such as Paul's
traditions were,) they are to be kept. As for the two former, I suppose there
will be no difference about them: Dogmaticall doctrines and perpetual orders
having the Word for their express and clear warrant, (as they ought to have,)
they challenge an absolute obedience. The Question will be all about these last
sort of Traditiones ad Ordinem et Pol^tiam pertinentes. Call* Quae ad (...)
exter^an^, e^ decorum in caet. bus Ecclesiasticis observandum spectarunt. Bez.
S^lait. Par. ad Loc.
Decrees, Rituall ordinances or orders of temporary observation, whether these,
being imposed, should be kept or no.

Now to this case the Text comes home. Such were the Decrees (as I have shown
you) which were here delivered; and yet we see them here delivered to the
Churches to keep; and even such were these Ordinances, these Traditions, which
Paul speaks of to his Corinthians, I praise you that you keep the
Ordinances,] viz. those rituall Ordinances, those Orders which he had
prescribed them to observe in their Church-meetings, so the place is
universally understood by all Expositors that I meet with: and these Orders
that Church generally had observed: however in some particulars they (at least
1 Cor. 11. v. 3, 4, 5. etc.
some of them) affected an unapprovable and undecent singularity, viz. the men
prayed and prophesied with their heads covered, whilst the women sat by with
their heads and faces uncovered, unvailed, for which the Apostle reproves them
in the verses following: yet generally they had a respect to all the orders
prescribed by him, they remembered all his things, (his orders) and kept all his
ordinances, and that with a special observance, so much the Word in the
original (as Beza notes upon it) imports, (...), i. e. summo studio
observatis, they observed them very studiously, and heedfully, and that not
only for matter, but for manner and form, as the next clause expresses it:
(...), as I delivered them,] this did they.

And surely (beloved) where we meet with the like ordinances, the Vid Par. ad
Loc.
like Ecclesiastical Decrees and Constitutions, commended to uswith at least a
general warrant from the Word, withal handed unto us by lawful authority,
here we ought to yield a like obedience. So much those general Texts being
rightly understood will extort from us, submit your selves to every ordinance
of man for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2. ye 1 Pet. 2. 13. Romans 13. 5.
must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but for conscience sake, Romans 13.
Both which places however properly relating to civil, yet by way of parity
they may also be extended to Ecclesiastical authority, (especially when backed
with civil) which now must be submitted to, and that for conscience sake,
though not for conscience of the thing commanded, yet of the power commanding:
the thing it self may be indifferent, and yet our obedience necessary, viz. in
regard of the general command, and therefore says the Apostle there, (...),
you must of necessity be subject. To like purpose also is that Text to the
Hebrews, (however too rigidly pressed by Romanists to enforce or countenance a
blind obedience,) Heb. 13. Obey them that are over you in the Lord, ((...),
Ductoribus, your Leaders, your Heb. 13. 17.
Rulers,) And submit your selves,] which is meant properly of Ecclesiastical
Guides and Governors, who are to be hearkened to and obeyed in what they
require from God and for God.

Applicat.
And with such an obedience let not any of us be unwilling. We know not (my
brethren) how soon some Decrees of the same nature with those in the Text, may
be brought unto us, agreed upon and recommended by a double Council, the one
Ecclesiastical, the other civil. Now take we heed how we take up reosolutions
aforehand, whether of opposing or not obeying. Certainly, however quiet and
conscientious not obeying both may and ought to find a very favorable and
indulgent interpretation; yet presumptuous disobeying justly subjects a man to
the highest of censures. Express for this purpose is that Judicial Law,
(which has a great deal of Morality couched in it) Deuteronomy. 17. The man that
will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto Deuteronomy. 17. 12.
the Priest, or to the Judge, even that man shall dye, and thou shall put away
the evil from Israel,] Take we heed then how we entertain any thoughts that
way, but rather prepare our ears and hearts to hearken Psalm. 85. 8.
and hear what the Lord God will say to us; what message he will send by the
hands of those his servants, who have been so long a time enquiring after his
pleasure, which being made known unto us, resolve (in what we may) to submit
and obey. So did the Churches here, to whom Paul and Sylas delivered these
Decrees, they delivered them to be kept by them, and so they were. For, as it
follows in the next words; And so were the Churches established, viz. upon
the delivering and observing of these Decrees.

Quest. But what then, are we to show the like respect to all Ecclesiastical
Decrees now, as the Churches did to these?

Answ. I answer, (as before) where they are like unto these, pious and
profitable Ordinances, grounded upon the Word immediately or mediately, not
imposed upon conscience, not enjoying any thing as necessary, not obtruding any
thing as a part or means of worship, but what the Word has made so: now they
challenge a like respect as these Decrees did.

Quest. But what then, must we yield a blind obedience, submitting without
discussing? So it seems the Churches here did.

Answ. Neither so, nor so: as for the Churches, they indeed received these
Decrees, and kept them accordingly as they were delivered. But to imagine, that
either the Apostle in delivering, or they in receiving, required or yielded a
blind obedience, is foully injurious to both. Surely, if Paul's Doctrine might
be examined as it was by the Bereans, and they highly commended for it much
more might these Act. 17. 11.
Decrees be scanned by the Churches, to whom they were brought, they being not
the immediate issues of an extraordinary inspiration, as the other was, (as I
have already shown you;) and so may it, and ought it to be with all Decrees of
the like nature. To think of yielding a blind obedience to them, were as great
a wrong and injury to them, as to our selves: Decrees, (being such as they
ought to be,) they ever bring light with them, whereby they may be discerned
and discovered to be as they are. And by this light Christians both may and
ought to judge of them, viz. judicio discretionis, (so it be done modestly and
humbly) bringing them to the Touchstone, to the Rule, the rule of the Word,
and the rule of rectified and sanctified Reason, Isa. 8. 20.
This is the old way, and it is an everlasting way. To the Law an to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no
light in them.] Shall we find any Decrees of men to be uche not agreeable to
the Word, to the particular or general rules of it, but Act. 5. 29.
* Viz. When they command or forbid us any thing contrary to the word of God,
Genev. Gl. ad loc.
clearly contrary to it? now the case is ruled; It is better and safer to obey
God, then men. Better now modestly and quietly not to obey men, then
presumptuously and knowingly to disobey God. But finding them to be such as are
not contrary to this word, but consonant thereunto, now look upon our pattern,
and do likewise; As they went through the Cities they delivered them the
Decrees for to keep; which accordingly they did; So much appears (as I told
you) from the event and success of this undertaking, which is the fifth and
last particular in the Text, to which I now hasten.

VERSE 5. And so were the Churches established in the faith and increased in
number daily.


SEE here the success of this first Council, so managed, so prosecuted Oserv.
as you have heard* Successelesse it was not. All Counsels then are not so. If
any of them at any time prove so, let it not be imputed to the Ordinance, but
to some accidental, personal miscarriage. Otherwise the Ordinance it self is
very promising, very useful and hopeful, very profitable and advantageous to
the Church: So was this first Council, this Pattern of Counsels, the success
and event whereof (as the Text informs us) was double. Hereupon there accrued
unto the Churches a double blessing: The one of Confirmation, the other of
Augmentation. Confirmation, they were established in the faith: Augmentation,
they were increased in number daily. Upon these two I shall look two ways;
first, severally and simply, then jointly and relatively, viz. as they both
stand in a joint reference to that first particle in the verse; [So] So were*
the Churches established, and so were the Churches increased, etc. A word of
each: Beginning with the former, the Churches Confirmation.

And so were the Churches established in the faith] They were established, and
they were established in the faith; so I break them in two.

1. They were established, (...), confirmabontur, they were confirmed, settled.
Settling presupposes an unsetling. And surely such was the state of these
Churches before Paul brought these Decrees unto them, they were unsettled,
shaken.

Observe.
Behold the proper fruit of Divisions and Dissensions; where they take place,
they unsettle, they shake; unsettle a State, unsettle a Church, shake both.
This David found true by experience in his Kingdom. Heal the breaches
thereof, for it shakes, Psalm. 60. Both Church and State were unsettled by
reason of those Civil broils, those homebred divisions Psalm. 60. 2.
in his Kingdom. And I shall not need to tell you that we have found the like
in this Kingdom. Was ever State, was ever Church more unsettled then ours at
this day? And whence is this? why, this have our homebred divisions,
dissensions done. To hold to the Text; the unsetling of the Church. This will
Divisions do, Divisions in judgment; I, and those sometimes slight ones.
Such were at least some of those which had broke in upon these Churches;
slight differences, one would think, whether they should eat such or such
meats, blood, things strangled, etc. yet even these had an influence upon the
Churches, for the unsetling of them.

Appl. Let not slight differences then be slighted of us, much less
pertinaciously and obstinately maintained by us. But do what we may all of us
for the healing, for the composing even of them. So long as these continue, and
break forth, there is little hope of the Churches establishment, which is a
thing that all the Lords people ought seriously both to desire and endeavor,
let that be a second Observation.

Obser. 2.
Church-establishment is a thing much to be desired and sought after. It is the
Lords promise to his Church under the Gospel, Is. 2. repeated Mic. 4. The
mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top of the Isa. 2. 2.
Mi^. 4. 1.
Mountains. A blessing much to be desired for all particular Churches, that
they may be established, settled in a quiet and steady way, put into a solid and
constant frame and temper (as the word in the Text signifies.) Such a frame
and temper I shall not need to tell you what a blessing it is in the natural
body, it is no less in the mystical.

Reas. Not to use many Arguments and Reasons about it; I find one insinuated
in the text: Church-confirmation makes much for Church-augmentation. Mark the
connection of these two together; So were the Churches established and
increased. The latter depends much upon the former, Church-encrease upon
Church-establishment: where Church^s are divided, distracted, unsettled, there
can be nothing more prejudicial to the gr^wth of them, and of religion in
them. Their union, settlement, establishment makes much for the increase of
both.

Applic. And does it so? Then let every of us be put in mind to seek this
great blessing for the Church or Churches wherein we live: Taking heed of being
any ways accessory to the unsetling hereof; whether by hatching or brooding
any new opinions, or setting up any new ways, which have not clear light and
warrant from the word. In these cases let that of the Apostle take place with
us; Have thou Romans 14. 22.
faith? have it to thy self. Have thou a strong apprehension and firm
persuasion touching something which is not so fully and clearly revealed in
Scripture, as that others may see it? have this faith to thy self; enjoy thine
own opinion and conscience, but let it not break forth to the offense and
scandal of others, much less to the trouble and disquietment of the Church,
the settlement whereof ought to be exceeding precious in our eyes. And so let
it be. Every of us seek it. Seek it Isa. 62. 6, 7.
by Prayer: Ye that are the Lords Remembrancers keep not silence, give him no
rest, until he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.
Seek it by all holy endeavors, every one in our places, private persons in
theirs, and public persons in theirs, all of us willingly embracing, and
carefully improving what ever advantages or opportunities God shall put into
any of our hands, for the effecting, the furthering of so great, so good a
work. So does the Apostle here in the Text: He receives the Decrees from the
Council; and receiving them, delivers them wherever he comes. And what
was his aim therein? why, that the Churches might be settled, might be
established.

Quest. But what establishment was it that Paul here principally 1 Timothy 1. 19.
3. 9. 4. 1.
eyed and looked at? A. The next word resolves it, (...); So were the Churches
established in Faith.] i. e. in the Doctrine of Faith, the true Religion of
God: So the word is frequently used in Scripture, Faith Cujus unicum
fundamentum est fides, Calv. ad loc.
put for the whole Religion of God: Calvin gives a reason for it, viz. because
Faith in Christ is the foundation and groundwork of all. And this it was that
Paul's eye was here mainly upon; not so much the settling of an external Order
in the Churches. This indeed he endeavored, but (as Calvin says of it) this
was but veluti parergon, and acc^ss^^ium, Calv. ibid.
a thing which he undertook by the by, as being conducible and subservient to
his maine design, which was the Establishment of the Churches in the Faith.

Observe.
As for External Order indeed, it is a thing of great concernment to the
Churches, without which they will never be thoroughly established. Thence is it
the Prophet Esaias puts these two together, Isa. 9. 7. Isa. 9. 7.
To Order and to establish, speaking of the Church: But the Kingdom (...).
of God is above it. Regnum Dei externo ordine altius est, ac praestantius. The
Kingdom of God (says Calvin) which con^isteth in the doctrine and practice o
Faith and Holiness,) it is a thing of a more transcendent and excellent
nature, then external Order is Superioregradu loca^ur religio, and pietas. (So
he goes on,) Religion and true piety are to be looked on as things in a higher
sphere, to be far preferred before Order and Discipline.

Reason. And great Reason they should be so, in as much as the one makes only
for the been esse* the other for the esse: the one for the well-being, the
other for the being of the Church. There may be a Church, (an Ecclesiastical
Church, I, and an Integrall one too) without Order, but not without Faith, the
Doctrine and Profession of the Ecclesia per fidem haber suum statum
essentialem; and per combinationem, Integralem. D. Ames. Med. Theol. l. 1. c.
33.
Faith, wherein lies the Essential State of a Church. Not to dwell upon it.

Applic. Learn we hence how to look upon these two, faith and order, viz. upon
the one as the Mistress, the other as the handmaid; so they are, and so let
us account of them; giving to each that respect which is due unto them: not
preferring the handmaid before the Mistrisse, not standing so much upon Order,
as that in the mean time we should seem to neglect the faith. True it is, both
are to be stood upon, and contended for, but not with a like heat. As for the
faith; we have an express warrant for that, That ye contend earnestly for the
Jud. v. 3.
faith, Jud. 3. I do not find the like for Order. However take heed, lest our
over-eager contestations about the one, which is but the accessory, prove
prejudicial and detrimentall to the other, which is the Principal. Let our
first and maine care be for the faith: so was Paul's here in the Text, he
delivers these Decrees for the regulating of the Churches in these external
observances: wherefore? why, that they might be established in the faith: this
was the pearl in his eye, the main thing which he aimed at. The other was only
in order, in a way of subserviency unto this.

Applic.
A pattern in special to the Ministers of the Gospel, showing them what
should be their maine design in the course of their Ministry, viz. to
propagate the faith, to set up the true Religion of God, true piety, and
godliness, faith and holiness in the hearts and lives of their people. As for
matters of order, having just occasion, they may and ought to deal with them,
that so they may approve themselves faithful Stewards, 1 Cor. 4. 1, 2. Act.
20. 27.
not detayning any part of the truth, not s^unning to declare unto their people
the whole Council of God, (as Paul says of himself, Act. 20.) But their maine
and principal work should be the establishing of the Churches in the faith:
this is the maine end of our Ministry, so says Paul of his Apostleship, Romans
1. 5. We have received grace and Apostleship, Romans 1. 5*
(i. e. the grace or gift of Apostleship) for obedience to the faith among all
Nations; i. e. that by his Ministry the Gentiles might be brought to embrace
the faith, the Doctrine of the Gospel. The best service that the Ministers of
Christ can do for their Lord and Master: hereby is his name exalted, hereby is
his Scepter and Kingdom advanced, hereby is he set upon the Throne. It is a
mistake, (but too common in the times) to think that the Kingdom of Christ
should consist either wholly or chiefly in the External Polity and Government
of the Church. No. our Savior himself, Lack. 17. teaches the Pharisees to
entertain higher thoughts and more sublime conceptions, touching I ^k. 17. v.
20, 21.
his Kingdom, telling them first, that the Kingdom of God comes not with
observation, verse. 20. i. e. (says Beza) it a ut observari possit, so as it
may be observed and taken notice of by any outward garb that it has; or (as
others) it does not consist in external observation. Verse. 21. Vid. Bez. ad
Loc.
Then, that it is aliquid intus, The Kingdom of God is within you, i. e. (as it
is commonly expounded) in your hearts and souls, which exposition whether it be
proper for that place or no, I will not now contend. But this I am sure to be a
truth; the Kingdom of God and of Christ is chiefly spiritual and inward, a
Government exercised in the hearts and souls of men, where Christ sets up
his throne, his scepter, ruling there by his word and spirit, subduing
rebellious lusts, bringing them under, and keeping them under, bringing every
thought into obedience, to the obedience of faith. As for the external Order
and Discipline of the Church, if it do belong properly to the Kingly Office of
Christ, yet it is one of the least parts of it. So let Ministers.

And so let the people look upon is, not spending all, or the chief of their
time, about matters of Church Government, Discipline, studying this*
discoursing of nothing but this, as if this were the Cardinal business, the
maine hinge, upon which all Religion turned; nor yet so overzealously affecting
this, that for want of what herein they would have, they should renounce
Church Communion, and distaste all other the Ordinances of God, even those
soul-saving Ordinances, wherein the Doctrine of faith is held forth with power
and efficacy, Word and Sacraments. No, let your maine care (my brethren) be for
the faith, the Gospel of life and salvation, that you may, established in
that, growing 2 Pet. v. last.
up in that, Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, (says St. Peter) in the speculative and experimental knowledge 1 Pet.
5. 9.
of Jesus Christ. This is the knowledge which must and will establish you; be ye
therefore established in it; that you may be (as the same Apostle exhorts)
(...), steadfast in the faith, not like children, (a^ St. Paul pr^sseth i^ upon
his Ephesians) tossed to and fro, and Ephesians. 4. 14.
carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by the slight of men, and cunning
craftiness of them which lie in wait to deceive. Thus is it with multitudes
of well meaning souls at this day, who, being unstable, ungrounded in the
faith, are carried away, some with the Anabaptist, others with the Antinomian,
a third with the F^^ilist, etc. That it may not be so with us, labor we to be
confirmed and established in the faith which we have received, growing up in it.

Observe. This we are to do at all times, but specially then, when God affords
us more special means of growth and establishment, when God (as it were)
soliciteth us hereunto by the labors and endeavors of his servants. It is an
observation hinted to me by Master Calvin upon the Calv. ad Loc.
words, upon Paul and Silas coming to the Churches, and bestowing their labors
upon them, Now were they established in the faith: where means of confirmation
are wanting, there weakness and unsetlednesse are the more pardonable, rather
to be pittyed then censured; but where God does send his servants, able and
faithful instruments, who do put forth themselves in the use of all possible
endeavors, for the settling and establishing of a people in the faith, here God
expects from them growth and increase answerable.

Applic. Take this truth home to your selves, and make Application of it as you
shall see occasion* I shall (...) to the second particular, the second fruit of
the Apostles ind^avo^^s, and that is the Churches Augmentation.

And so were the Churches increased in number daily.] In (...) it may be
understood two ways, with reference either to Persons (...) Churches, the
number of persons was increased, or the number of Churches was increased.

Observe.
Each a good hearing, so is the latter. To hear that the number of Churches is
increased* But understand it rightly, viz. If this increase be by way of
addition, not of division, the latter is of sad consequence. To hear of
Churches multiplied after the same manner as the leaves and Mar. 14. 19.
fishes in the Gospel are said to have been (...) frangendum* multiplied by
breaking, by dividing; one Church broken into many, and that through Schisms
and Divisions, this is a sad multiplication. The Lord keep his Churches from
such increases, True it is, where a Church is grown over numerous* or some of
the members of it are upon occasion Baals Trial of the ground of Separation.
p. 261.
to be transplanted* in this case Ed^^^r^ Co^^ni^m* to (...) forth a Colonie, a
Congregation, one or more to plant elsewhere, (as probably it was in the Church
of Jerusalem) it may be both war^antable and necessary. But to multiply
Churches by breakings, by divisions, this (I say) is a sad multiplication. But
having only touched this, I leave it, leave it to the Donatist and Separatist,
the first and last Authors of it.

The Text (as I conceive) confines me to the former, They were increased in
number] i. e. the Churches already planted and constituted, they were increased
in number of members, in number of persons joining themselves to their
Communion: So the original carries it* (...)* Exuberabant, (says Beza;)
Abundabant, says the vulgar; they abounded in number, like a tree which
puts forth young shootes, and branches abundantly. So was it with the
Churches now, even as it was with the Church of Jerusalem before, the Church of
the believing Jews, to which God made daily new additions, and those (some
Act. 2. last. Act. 6. 7.
of them) wonderful ones, The Lord added to the Church daily such a^ should be
saved, Act. 2. The number of the Disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly,
Acts 6. So was it now with the Churches of the Gentiles: Upon Paul's coming to
them they also were multiplied and increased in number daily.

Observe. A good and a blessed hearing, to hear of such a m^ltiplication, such
an increase. It was the first blessing which God pronounced Genesis 1. 2^.
upon mankind, Cres^ite and (...) Increase and multiply* a barren womb in it
self is a curse, a fruitful one a blessing; and so is it with a barren and a
fruitful Church. Where God gives to a Church (as the Prophet threatens that
he would do to Israel,) a miscarrying or H^^. 9. 14.
barren*^ombe, and dry breasts, so as there is no increase, this is a sad and
omino^^ judgment: whereas (on the other hand) to see the Churches fruitful,
like the Sheep in the Ganticles, whereof every one is said Cant. 4. 2.
to bear twins, and none to be barren amongst them, all bringing forth children
unto God, increasing in number daily; it is one of the greatest blessings that
Earth can receive from Heaven.

Applic.
Applic. And is it so? why then let all of us do what in us lies to further
this increase: taking heed of being any occasions of bl^dering it, whether by
our scandalls or divisions; both which often times cause the Churches womb to
miscarry, by bringing an evil report upon the good ways of God, discouraging
others from adventuring upon them, who, it may be, had some eye toward them.
Taking heed of this, of being any ways accessory to the Churches barrenness,
do what we may to further her increase, every one in our places, Minister^
(...) ^or* 4* 1^. ^ Per. 1. 23.
in their places endeavoring as spiritual fathers to beget sons and d^ughters
unto God, by the incorruptible seed of the Word, that so we may every of us be
able to say at that great day, as the Prophet I^^iah once did, Behold, Lord,
here am I, and the children whom them have given me. Isa. ^. 1^.
Magistrates in their places, showing themselves nursing fathers and nursing
Isa. 49. 23. Genesis 30. 3.
mothers to the Church, so as upon their k^^es the Churches may bear children,
(as Rachel once said of her self and her maid Bilhah, Genesis 30.) Parents and
Masters of families in their places, endeavoring to bring up their children
and servants in the knowledge and fear of God, that so they may be true living
members of the Church, not only like wooden legs or arms tied on to the body,
having only an outward visible communion with the Church, but like natural
members, they may be knit both to the head and body by joints and ligaments,
Col. 2. 19.
so as the Church may be increased with the increase of God. Private persons in
their places, not only joining themselves to the true Churches of God, bnt
endeavoring what in them lies, to win and gain others, specially by their
holy and exemplary conversation Mat. 5. ^.
and demeanor, Let your light so shine before men, that they seeing your good
works, may glorify your heavenly father. Glorify him, as by other ways* so
by coming in and putting themselves under his government; to which purpose
there is scarce any one means more effectually availeable, then for Christians
to thrive and grow in grace. So much Master Calvin collects out of the Text
from the connection of these two together; Innuit quatenus side pr^ficiunt qui
primi sunt vocati, plures ad Christum adducere. C^l. ad Loc.
the Churches were established in the faith* and increased in number daily.] The
growth and proficiency of those which were first called to the faith in these
Churches was a special means to bring in others.

Old members in a Church (it is a comparison which Ca^on gives me the hint of)
they are like old stands in a Coppice, or like old Vines or P^^tars, or the
like trees, which being once thoroughly rooted themselves, they put forth many
imps and young shootes from their roots* So was it here in these Churches. The
first members of chose Churches being rooted and established in the faith; the
Churches were daily Calv. ibid.
increased in number* A^ s^ propagi^e fides latius ad alios serperet, (says my
Author) As if their faith being spread abroad had been a means to propagate
itself unto others* so it often comes to pass. It is that which Paul tells
his C^rinthi^ns, concerning their forwardness in works of charity and mercy.
Your zeal (says he) has 2 Cor. 9. ^.
provoked ver^ many. And so is it with faith and holiness. To be zealous in
profession, and cons^ientious in practice* it is a most effectual incitement
to provoke, to draw, to win others* and in this way let all private Christians
be active and forward, that so they may do what in them lies, to help forward
this blessed Augmentation and Increase of the Churches.

And thus have I looked upon these two fruits of the Apostles endeavors
severally, and simply. It remains now that we put them together, considering
them jointly and relatively, as they stand in joint reference to that first
particle in the Text. [So] were the Churches established; and [So] were the
Churches increased.

So] What, merely by the delivery of these Decrees? Was this the proper and
immediate cause of the Churches confirmation and multiplication?

Answ. Not so: The Decrees here delivered were not matters of Faith, but of
Order, and consequently not apt to produce such noble effects as these were, to
work such an establishment, such an increase, being but Decrees touching
meats. Now (as the Apostle says) The Heb. 13* 9.
heart must be established with grace, not with meats: The proper and
immediate isntrumental cause of both these was Paul's preaching of the Gospel
to the Churches.

Quest. What influence then had these Decrees hereupon?

Answ. I answer, they were, though not properly Causa efficiens* yet removens
and promovens; though not the immediate Efficient cause of both these, yet the
promoting and furthering cause, facilitating the work, and making way for it,
and that by removing obstacles and impediments, and putting the Churches into
such a posture, such a state* as they might be fit to be wrought upon by the
preaching of the Word. Even as it is with Physic, however it self be not
Nutritive, yet by removing obstructions, it puts the body into such a state
and temper, as it may be apt to receive nourishment from such means as shall
be applied unto it, proper for that purpose. Even so was it here. The Churches
being distempered, and out of course by reason of some jarres and differences,
which (no question) much obstructed and hindered the course of the Gospel, the
Apostle by applying and ministering of this Sovereign Remedy, a Recipe of
Synodicall Decrees, he put them into such a temper, as that his Ministry might
take place with them, both for their confirmation and increase.

Observe.
And of such use Ecclesiastical Decrees may be, and often are; though they be
not meat, yet they may be medicine: making much for the propagation of the
Gospel; and that especially by composing Church*differences, which otherwise
would be a maine obstruction and hinderance to it. Of this latter we have had
but too much experience. How is the course of the Gospel at the present
impedited, and interrupted by these sad divisions which are broke in amongst
us? O that we might but have the like proof of the former, of the Sovereign
virtue of this Church-Remedy, for the healing of these breaches, and the
composing of these differences, as the Churches here had! Then might we hope
and expect the like success, that the Churches amongst us also should be
established and increased. Otherwise it is but in vain to flatter our selves.
In an ordinary course this is the last Remedy. Where this availes not there is
little hope. Where a College of Physicians cannot master a disease, it is
commonly accounted desperate. And therefore take we heed how we slight, much
more oppose this way.

Applic.
Take but this word of counsel, and I have done. In other matters I presume we
would not be unwilling to be ordered by counsel, especially by the counsel of
a Council. (In the multitude of Counselors there Prove. 11. 14.
is safety:) As in Military affairs by a Council of war; in Maritime
occasions by a Council of Seamen; in a Law case by a Bench of Lawyers; in a
case of sickness by a College of Physicians. And why then shall we so far
lean unto our own understandings in matters of Ecclesiastical concernment,
(matters of Order) as not to hearken to the consultations and determinations of
a Religious and judicious Assembly? Of all ways (for my own part) I must
profess, I know none so likely to heal our breaches, to compose our
differences as this, and consequently to procure the Churches establishment.
Without Counsel Prove. 15. 2^.
purposes are disappointed, but in the multitude of Counselors they are
established (says the wise man.) Thus were the Churches established here, viz.
by the counsel of a C^^^cell. This was the Apostolical way for the settling,
establishing of unsettled, divided, distracted Churches. Take we heed then (I
say) how we slight, much more oppose this way. What were this but (as it is
said of Adultery) peccatum contra remedium, (...) against the Remedy? And let
me add, the marst office that can possibly be done to the Church. For if this
be the way to settle and establish it, (I beseech you mark it, and take it home
with you) surely then all other opposite and contrary ways must needs be
distractive and destructive, tending to nothing but unsettlement and confusion.

A (...) which I might make a further improvement of, by giving (...) a just
charge against all those who endeavor what they can, in open or secret ways,
to obstruct this way, by ca^ting in need^esse and groundles doubts and scruples
into it, and unjust (...) and asp^sions Compassionate Samaritan. Theotnak.
upon it, seeking thereby so far to distaste and disrelli^^ it with the
people, so to prejudicate them against the results not only of the present,
but of all future Councels and Assemblies of this na^^re, (though never so
regular) that whatever advices shall be propounded by them, be they never so
wholesome, never so safe, never so sovereign, never so sacred, yet they shall
be rejected eo nomine, because they come through their hands. Which, what is
it, but (as I said before) as if one should assay to loath a sick man of the
medicine which should save his life, only because it is prescribed by such a
Physician, or prepared by such an Apothecary? But my aim hitherto has been
rather to inform you, then to inveigh against others. And therefore having now
done what I projected and propounded when I first took the Text in hand, I
shall commend it and you unto the God of Romans 16. 25. 1. Pet. 5. 10, 11.
all grace, who is of power to make you perfect, establish, strengthens settle
you; To him be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 7. lin. 29. for confutation, read consultation. p. 12. l. 35. f. First,
^. i* c. p. 16. l. 18. f. ordering r. ordaining. l. ult. r. do. p. ^ de* l* 13.
for Obset. (...) Obj^ct. p. 20. l. 6, f. blot r. bolt.


