A Potent vindication for Book-making: or An Emblem of these Distracted times.
WHen nights black mantle had excluded and folded up fair Phoebus bright
luster in our Horizon, and exposed the borrowed splendour of horned Cynthia, and
the twinkling Tapers to our view. And when silent sleep had captivated the
senses of many in the Cradle of Oblivion; solitary Morpheus presented to my
sight a pleasant Forest, where I was no sooner entered, but such a company of
harmonious echoes sounded in my ears from the winged quire, which so ravished
my senses, that I began to imitate their heavenly Tunes; and the first which
most pleased me, was the Golden strains of the Finch: And after I had observed
some of her ravishing harmony, I was delighted with the melodious tunes of the
Nightingall, Linnot, and other birds of rare quality, and could so follow their
strains, that the heavenly Phoenix, the aspiring Lark, and other celestial
birds, took notice of my skill. Yet some angry Wasps and malicious Hornets began
to buz about my ears, and sought to sting, but had no power at all to hurt
me. And though the King of beasts, and others of good and gentle nature, were
delighted with our harmonious noise, and heavenly music; yet the politic
Cat, crafty Fox, and greedy Wolf, began to grumble, as envying my happiness,
and seemed more malicious then the poisonous Serpents and deaf Adders, that
lay under my feet, ready to sting me: for they persuaded the puissant Lion, and
his grave Counselors, that I was an an idle fellow to leave my employment at
home, and come learn to sing of birds abroad: (for they did not consider that
this was in the night, when I had finished my work) Upon which report their
King did quire forsake me, and his faithful friends seemed to be displeased
with me. But I having a love in my work, would not leave off till I became a
perfect quirrester: and then (with Morphous) I laid me down in bed, and
sweetly slept till Aurora withdrew nights sable Curtain, and began to usher
in the light some day, and then I understood the meaning thereof to be thus,
When the night of ignorance and self-conceit had excluded from my understanding
the splendour of many learned famous writers, I having received into my soul
diverse good motions from the holy Spirit of God, intimated by the God of
dreams, wandered in the Forest of my own imagination and by my own capacity
thought to imitate the golden strains of Sylvesters heavenly harmony, on Du
Bartas weekly days. And having extracted from thence many heavenly lessons, I
inserted them into my fantastic notions. And not satisfied therewith, I took
from melodious Philomell, I mean our Book of Common Prayer, (in my conceit
not unfitly by me called the Nightingall, because some say it was used to be
sung in the time of Popery, but sung in a more harmonious manner now in the day
of the Gospel) many Divine lessons: for however others are, I was, and still
am, so ravished with her variety of sh(...) and heavenly eiaculations, that I
became bold to garnish my Annua^^ World therewith. And from the admirable
Meditations and Prayers of Doctor Featly, Mr. Austin and others, I made it so
complete with heavenly matter, that the (...)nix of our time for our soul
ravishing. Divinity, who is raro avis in terris, but still Holds-worth, took
notice thereof, and subscribed my certificate. And not only he, but the
aspiring Lark, our Laureat Poet Mr. Francis Quarles, whose sententious and
unparaleld verses seem to penetrate the heavens, approved my labors, as well
as the Satyricall and Prophetical Poet, Captain George Wither, the Saint-like
Poet Master John Vicars, the prime Astrologian of our time, Mr. John Booker,
and that ancient Writer Mr. Henry Peacham. And because I should not drown my
Loving Labors in the Sea of Oblivion, the Water Poet lent me his assistance
over the waters of contempt and disdain to the Cape of good Hope, where my
little Pinnace lies at Anchor, till a gentle gale of prosperous wind drive her
to the desired haven of Content: Yet I observed some angry Wasps and fell
Hornets to buz about my ears, but durst not show their stings for fear I
should make them odious in the sight of all people: I mean, neither Anabaptist,
Brownist, nor any of your new inspired Doctors, durst lift pen on paper against
my Annual world, or Sacred Poems, though they treat of holy days, and are
ampli^ed with the expression of many heathen Poets: for I have the approbation
not only of ^elestiall Birds, but the very beasts of the Wood listened to my
tunes; I mean not only men that were learned, as Preachers and Writers, but
honest Merchants, and men of solid judgment approved my labors. And first, my
late honored Master, whom I compare to the Lion, not to signify that he was
King of men, but as he was sometime the Kings Majesty's Lieutenant, and Senior
Aldermen of this famous City a long time; and for justice and mercy, according
to my pattern, not unlike the Lion, of whom I may truly say without flattery,
That to my knowledge never any Praetor governed this famous City, or his
House, with more justice and clemency, then he did. And so like the courageous
Lion, who though he is stern to his foes, yet he is gentle and kind to his
friends: for it is reported that Androdus, a Roman slave, for pulling a thorn
out of a Lions foot, was releived a long time by the same Lion in his Den, with
such provision as he could make, till he was weary of that dreadful lodging:
And then the same slave returning to his Master, for an offense being cast into
the Den of the same Lion, to be devoured, the merciful beast knowing his old
acquaintance, in stead of tearing or assaulting him, came and fawned on him.
And to show that my Master did approve of my works, when they were done,
plainly appeared, (though it is true before out of his love toward me, he
would not have me trouble my unlearned brain with such high mysteries) as by
his willingness to do me good so long as he lived, so by two notes made a
little before his death, wherein he bequeathed me a competent portion which he
left his Executors to dispose of as they shall think fit. And as he, so most
of the Aldermen his brethren, as well as his own and my Ladies kindred, did
approve of the same, as appears by this Certificate following.

WE whose names are subscribed, at the humble and earnest entreaty of Edward
Brown, late servant to Sir James Cambell, Knight and Alderman of Lodnon,
deceased, certify and declare, that we have perused two Books of his
composing, the one entitled an Annual World and Sacred Poems, and the other,
a Rare pattern of Justice and Mercy, with a Meteor and a Star; and thereof
judge, that he did not these Books with any intent to dishonor his said
Master, but only to obtain his Masters favor upon his honest endeavors,
wherefore we do commend his expense of spare time in such divine matters, and
approve of his good meaning in publishing his masters charitable Legacies;
which is, as he says, only for his Masters honor, and to induce others of
like worth to do such judicious, noble, and pious actions.

All which we testify under our hands the fifteenth day of August, Anno Dom.
1642. As appears on the next page. Knights and Aldermen of London.
Geo. Whitmore. Nic. Rainton. Morris Abbot. Edmond Wright. John Cordel. Tho.
Soame. Jacob Garrad. John Woollastone George Clarke.
Ri. Holdsworth, S. T. D.
Aldermen, Esquires and Gentlemen.
Gilbert Harrison. Tho. Adams. Abra, Reynardson. Robert Bateman. Clement Moss.
Robert Michel. Thomas Wiseman. William Williams. John Walter.


HEre is above the number of a complete Jury of eminent men to testify a
truth, and therefore needs no more; yet such as did peremptorily refuse to
subscribe this Certificate, I affirm and declare, that they are as
unchariatble and malicious, as they are proud and covetous. For others, that
say, My Books are useless, having in them light with darkness, holy things
and vain, unprofitable things mixed, which are altogether inconsistent, and
blame me for expending my precious time in dishonouring God by Booke-making;
because I am not called thereunto. I will prove they are beside their Text, and
would feign seem to be more wise in Religion then they are, like many others
of their garb, who place their religion in idle and impertinent questions, and
have little or no regard to true devotion which is the life of religion: for
some who under the mask of religion, detain letchery, pride and covetousnes. I
advise them to view their own deformity, before they tax the infirmities of
those of better worth then themselves: For those that say my Books are Non
sense, I believe they have No-sense to do better. Those that say, I have played
the fool in writing my own fancy, and expending my time and money so vainly
in printing Books; let them understand, that the Fool is ofttimes the wisest
man in the play, because he makes more fools then himself laugh, and all that
is well spent, is not ill lost. Those that say, I scold and rail in my
pamphlets, know not well what they speak: for I have write nothing a but the
truth; and that they say, must not be spoke, much less writ at all times. But
this is a pitiful age, when truth to convince the folly of men, must be
smothered, and not suffered to be spoke or writ, though by fools: for Archers
coat must be pulled off, if he say lawne sleeves are durty, and do not Laud them
for whiteness when they are cole black. And last of all, for those, who in a
close, secret, and dissembling manner, seek to cast some of their envious
poison of detraction and malice into my friends ears, and seem to say as they
did to my late Master, that I seek his and their dishonor by Book-making, and
therefore not worthy to be harbored in an obscure chamber upon my own bedding,
as I have been this eight years and upwards, I neither care nor fear as
appears by this letter following,

Sir, I understand that you and your friends made good sport of me and my
Disaster, wherefore to make your mirth complete, I give you my Paradox, and
would entreat you, if you have found where the nest of wasps are, you spoke of,
to tell them from me, that I challenge not only them, but all manner of envious
creatures, such as your Hornets, Snakes, Scorpions, Dragons, especially deaf
Adders, to shoot out their poison, and advance their stings against me; for I
am persuaded God has anointed me with such a saving Antidote, and armed me
with such puissant strength, that I shall be able to pull out their stings and
repel their venom. For I know that the sight of a Basilisk shall not confound
me, the terror of the Griffin shall not dismay me, the cruel Crocodile shall
not affright me, the deceitful Hiena shall not beguile me, nor the enchanting
Sirens shall not allure me: no, nor all the devils in hell, or men on earth
shall be able to hinder me in the way that God has set my feet to walk in,
because he has now taken from my heart a slavish fear, and would not suffer me
neither day nor night, to take my rest, till I had performed this work, which I
am sure he has called me unto: For it is lawful for any to write, though not
to preach. The reason is plain, because a man in a pulpit may imagine he has
a Spirit of Revelation, which he has not, and therefore sometime in an absurd
ecstasy of zeal may vociferate and babble he knows not what himself, except
he be a man of rare parts, that has premeditated and set his words well in
order before. But if a man write, that truly shows his mind: for he has laid
his words in the balance of his reason and understanding, and will not be
ashamed of his work, except he be a Dunce or a Coward. And therefore I
neirher fear the roaring Lion, the ravening Bear, the stately Elephant, the
cruel Boar, the puissant V^icorne, the courageous Horse, the angry Leopard,
the fierce Tiger, the devouring Wolf, the snarling Dog, the polirique Cat,
the crafty Fox, or the strong Ox, shall be able to hurt me, my Books or my
Paradox: for I have armor of proof, that their fangs nor talons cannot tear.
I have skillful courage to avoid their policy, and defeat their strength. And
I have a sword as Sharp as a raizor, that where Haire-is, it shall so neatly
shave those that offer to abuse me, that they shall appear like bald Friars;
and if they will not then be ruled, it shall cut off their heads, and make them
little better then Devils. I have likewise hot fiery pellets, which well
discharged out of my piece, shall make their heads ache, and their bellies
Wamble. And I have such a Polax, which will Peck, Pierce and Hough the
strongest armor of the best Smiths forging. And this I write, to Warn them to
take heed how they offer to stir: for besides this my Militia, which is void
of Malitia, I have Commission of Array, to train, muster, and Marshall my
forces against all opposites; who, as angry whelps, respecting no persons,
will so Touze and trample upon them, that though they were arraied in Silk,
Satin, or Cloth of Gold, they shall appear as ragged Beggars. And yet I have
not told you all my Ammunition: for I have likewise a Bur to cast on my enemies
tongues, and stick in their throats, that they shall not be able to speak. I
have a hard knotty stick, with which I will so Bast them, that the Print
thereof shall remain a long time after. I have sharp vinegar to wash their
rotten teeth, that they shall not dare to grin: And I have as Smart a
Satyricall scourge, as the best Carter, which shall pull the skin from their
bones, and breed Pain in their whole man: that though they may now seem as
Bright as Angels, they shall then appear as loathsome as Lepers; And though
one may now seem like a Burgess, when I have unmasked him, he shall then
appear like. A. Tailor: For I am confident to convince all that shall abuse me
for Book-making, and make them in such a Case, as they were never in since they
came from Holme, I mean since they came from their Owen true Protestant
Religion in England, to the hypocritical society of Amsterdam, Geneva,
Scotland, etc. Thus have I passed over the Wells of danger, to Good-wins safe
harbor, without license from Sedge-week. Commending this to your serious
consideration I rest,

Yours in all Christian observance, ED. BROWN

IF any Say, that by the Penning of these expression, I mean particular
persons, and therefore will not Brook them, but fret and fume, whinper and
Pymper, let them in a patient temper show me wherein they are offended, and it
shall be ordered for their satisfaction, and all the world, That their answer
with my reply shall be forthwith printed and published.

Per. Cl^r. Dulm. Ignor.
NOw courteous Reader, pray consider, how could I better vindicate my
B^okemaking, and so free my self from falling into these po(...)t calumniators
paws, then by printing these my confused notions, which I am confident they
dare not, answer for by private writings they might slily have fought
r^vengem^nt to my great damage; but in a public way they will not offer to
ab^se me, ^est they be too notorious. Therefore leaving them, I will declare
how my works and these distracted times agree together: For I may not unfitly
compare my Books to the true Protestant Religion, and my self to the
Imperious Clergy, and hypocritical professors; for as my mind is almost
distracted by disastrous l(...)es on the one fide, and a malignant party on the
other, yet my books stand unblameable in the midst, though they may seem to
have some blemishes in f^^cy, yet similies and illustrations (though fabulous)
in signification, makes the matter more pleasant and delightful: So these
times are distracted by Popery and Armi^ianisme, who have lost much of the
Churches glory, on the one side, and Anabaptists, Brownists and Sectaries, as a
malignant party on the other, yet the true Protestant Religion stands still
upright in the midst, though she may seem to have spots in outward worship; In
the signification thereof to a devout heart, makes her more beautiful and
amiable. For further illustration hereof, as it is apparent, that our
Prelaticall Clergy sought to erect an Arminian Hierarchy, if not Papisticall
Idolatry, in these thtee Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, by
imposing useless ceremonies by their Canonical Oath, etc. by their 2s. and
9d. Tithe, by their insulting pride in Spiritual Courts, by their Lordly
habits of Satin, Silk and Velvet, far different from Christ and his
Apostles humility, etc. So it is conspicuous likewise, that these Presbyter^an
Doctors do now assume to themselves such a Spirit of Revelation, that
whatsoever they foment against Church and State, must be taken for pure
Divinity, though it be faction, rebellion and schism. Thus for a trifling
ceremony, wherewith every Christian Church in the world differs in one kind or
other, those affirm and declare, that there can be no reformation without
resisting and opposing supreme authority. And this they maintain with a strong
hand, and grow very proud and imperio^s; and what their haughty ins^lence will
arise unto, it is not yet kn^wn; but it is to be feared, confusion both of this
flourishing Church and Commonweal. For they are not ashamed to affirm, That
Reformation cannot be established without blood; and therefore to put out the
light of our eyes and stop the breath of our nostrills, the supreme head of
these three Kingdoms, our gracious Sovereign whose virtues are unparaleld, and
learning excellently admirable seek to stop all passages of peace and
reconciliation between him and his people, and will not suffer a little paper
to be printed in his own Press, or any others that speak truth, but admit,
or at least suffer ly^ng and scandalous Pamphlets against his person,
government, and royal proceedings; and under pretense of fighting against
Prince Robert, Cavaliers and Papists, they seek to destroy all inge^ious
spirits and learned men, What shall we say to these things? Is there not enough
noble and innocent blood on both sides shed already? Are these people
blood-thirsty? Are they insatiable? pray judge. What would they do if all
power were in their own hands? Are these things equal? Did we ever read or
hear, that that Religion can be good which is established by blood? Truly, I
doubt the doctrine as much as the practice of those who are esteemed great
Professors, Saints, and Prophets of the time, God grant they may profess
less, but do more: for what needs war, when both King and Parliament
affirm and declare, That they endeavor to maintain the true Protestant
Religion, the ^afety and honor of the Kings sacred perton crown and dignity,
the rights and privileges of Parliament, and liberty of the Subject? But now I
am in a great strait, for some say, even to my face, that writing against
hypocrites, I write against the Parliament; but God knows my heart is free from
that scandal: for I honor every worthy member thereof, and with the rotten
limbs were cut off that disturb the Church and State: And on the other side, in
speaking against Bishops, I speak against the King, which is likewise clear
to the contrary: for I wish, that my life (for his sake) might end this
quarrel. Are not these the last times, when a man's enemies are those of the
same house, as Christ prophesied? What shall I do? I would fain leave, but
cannot my mind is as a vessel filled with new Wine, and it must have vent: for
my words may be milconstrued, my writings cannot justly be condemned by
indiffrent men, therefore seeing our Poetical Captains Satyr has lost his
scourge, and our laureat Poets will have no bitterness in their sweet
expressions. God, who opened the mouth of the dumb Ass, and makes infants to
speak to his praise, has stirred up my unlearned quill to do all these
works to his glory, good or others, and comfort of my own foul. I will not
fear to declare not only mine, but the opinion of all godly, zealous learned
men in the world that the Church of England as it has been governed and
established by Act of Parliament these fourscore years and upwards, was the
most true Catholic Christian religion in the world, both in purity of doctrine
and decent orderly ceremonies, and therefore could wish that all private
Conventicles, and close Meetings against King and Parliament, were diss^lved,
that there might be a free debate according to ancient custom, that both King
and Parliament (laying aside all by-respects) would join together, and
endeavor to root out all Papisticall Idolatry, and Arminian pride in
(...)opacy, all schismatic faction and apparent hypocrisy in those who are
esteemed Puritans, and speedily settle such a Protestant religion, that England
may again retain its former splend of, and not as now it is a hissing and a
byword to other nations, even an Aceldama of Christian blood; but none can
bring this to pas^e, but God only. And therefore for conclusion of all my
printed labor, except it be to answer my malignant party, I will, and so all
good people should, both day and night pray God to send peace in our days that
the light of the Gospel may still shine amongst us in burning and shining
lamps, that the voice of the Turtle may still continue to be heard in our
streets from able and zealous Divines that the King and all people may unite
their forces together, for composing of our differences, for the healing of our
distractions, for the making up of the many breaches in Church and State, and
for the establishment of the foundation thereof on the word of God, that so
being as a house built on such a rock though the wind of foreign invasion
blow, the rain of civil dissension fall, and the floods of internal malice
roar, and lift up their voice, yet the house that is built upon Christ, the
corner stone thereof shall stand, and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it.

Amen. So be it.
FINIS.

