SIR JAMES CAMBELS Clarks DISASTER, BY MAKING BOOKS, Showing that lying and
scandalous pamphlets against King and Parliament are in great estimation, but
Books of learning and Religion little regarded.

Exemplified In a Compendious Letter To John Philpond in Suffolk.

LONDON, Printed in the Climacterian year, 1642.

Sir James Cambels Clerks DISASTER.
Loving brother.
I Am glad to hear of your welfare, and do not a little rejoice, that your
letter has given me a happy opportunity to unload the burden of my distracted
mind, In that you desire to hear of my trade and employment, But for what
reason you desire to know this I will not now inquire, for whether it be, that
you hear of a place you think I may be capable of at Ipswich near you (If I
were destitute) or whether it be out of your kind respects toward me to
rejoice with me in my happiness as fellow servants ^ught to do, or for what
cause soever else, It is not material, for you know that our late Master, Sir
James Cambell brought me up to no Manual trade, But what Gods Providence, his
goodness and my endeavors led me into, and that was to be his Clarke as he
was a Justice of Peace, which you know was a happy design, and proved very
beneficial, for surely I think it was God who put that motion into my mind,
and gave strength to my weak abilities to perform whatsoever I took in hand
against potent oppositions. And I do likewise humbly acknowledge. It was my
Masters goodness to accept of my endeavors, and my Ladies kindness to
solicit and alure him, who of himelfe was willing to do me good even to the
day of his death, as it is well known. But my Booke-making whihc I learned of
my self, against the counsel, and advise of my friends, proved as unhappy,
and much more prejudicial then my Clarkeship was advantageous. Yet this use I
will make of it. That God knowing the promptitude of my nature to Pride,
Covetousnes, and self conceit, to exercise my humility, patience, and
con^entation, insted of credit and profit, which I expected by my labors, sent
me contempt, and disdain from them whom I looked for favor and respect; and
so many losses, That I know not how to numerate them. For first I lost Precious
time which some said I might have spent much better. Secondly, I lost my Love
who is l^tely married to another, But whether he was so Eager to have her for
money, beauty or virtuous qualities he knows best, and you may guess. And
last of all which grieves me most of all, is the loss of mon^y. For my Time,
notwithstanding their sayings, I might have spent much worse then in such
labourious and pious actions, tending to the glory of God, good of my
Neighbors, joy and comfort of my own heart; And my Love may be as well lost as
found for ought I know. But money as the times are now is a matter of great
consequence, and very hard to come by when it is departed from us. Therefore I
hope you will not blame me, If I complain that I have lost at the least 20 l.
out of my own stock in being at the sole charge to print my Annual World,
sacred Poems Star, Meteor, and Pattern of Justice and mercy. Secondly, I
believe if I had surceased from printing Books my Master would have bequeathed
me 200. l. As appears by a note found near his will made in September 1641.
And last of all I know not what I have lost out of my friends good will, for
since I have printed, and published my Pattern of Justice and mercy with my
Meteor and Star, some look upon me very strangly. But yet I hope that the
worshipful ex^cutors as they are Judiciously charitable, and nobly gener^us,
so they will go forward as they have begun in the execution of this famous
Testament, with such an unanimous cherefulnesse that they need neither care nor
fear though their actions were as apparent as the Snn-beams conspicuous in the
view of all, which would be a rare quality in the Executors of dead men's wills,
And as they have made use of my endeavors in the most troublesome business,
so they will not utterly cast me out of their favor till the overplus of Sir
James his estate be disbursed, notwithstanding, that malicious detractor (you
know whom I mean) has his name entered into their tripartite Indenture of
Covenants as their cashier on purpose to defeat me. But I have of late given
him such a bitter pill, which I hope will so clarify his tu^bulent humor that
he shall not be able to wrong me. Therefore ^etting him alone To teach his Cat
speak better language then her Master. You may cease to wonder that these
things have distracted my mind, when you do seriously consider that there is
a universal madness over the whole World, caused almost for as frivolous
occasions as my Booke-making. For some are so severe against Popery that they
seek to overthrow all good order and decency, esteeming the house of God no
better then a barn or stable, so that insted of sincere devotion they endeavor
to set up abominable Profaneness; o hers again do so magnify ceremonies,
and outward worship, that they would if they could put down all preaching the
word of God, and insted of good sound Doctrine uphold formality, superstition,
and Idolatry. And those are the things that makes Nation to arise against
Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom now in these our days upon whom the ends
of the World are come; for you shall hardly find two in one house of one
mind, for either the Father is against the Son or the Son against the Father,
Brother against brother or Servant against Servant, and all against Supreme
authority both in the Church and state, And what ever others think to be the
reason of these distractions, my weak judgment is, that it is chiefly for
our pride and self conceit, though I will not exclude other sins; for we are
so glutted with the heavenly Manna of Divine Doctrine, that now every boy or
ignorant tradesman, that can read his hornebooke or wr^te a scribbling
character, assumes to himself a spirit of Revelation far greater then the
Apostles of our blessed Savior, not that I do disapprove any man woman or
child, even the meanest capacities, to read, and search the Scripture, for I
acknowledge my self to be no Scholar, Therefore let them be warned by me to
take heed how they meddle with things above their capacities, lest they receive
a worser punishment then I have for Booke-making: But yet let them learn of me
to honor learning, and men of rare parts as they are men, though in religion
Papists, Jews, or Turks, and much more if they bear the profession of the
true Protestant Religion; and not for the infirmities of some few to vilify
the persons, and despise the holy functions of many grave excellent learned
men, whose shoe latchet they are unworthy to unloose: As it is now too common
among us. And which is worst of all they are upheld, and maintained by a
factious company, that you may better, and with less danger speak treason,
and whisper rebellion against the sacred person of the Kings Majesty, and his
regal authority, then against such who instead of sound Doctrine, for their
own applause, to ingratiate themselves into the good opinion of a confused
multitude, preach sedition, and facti^n, and under pretense of long prayers
delude simple people, and I fear in time will devour Widows houses, If their
spreading grouth be not timely cropped by authority, for they are already very
stately and imperious, And it is to be feared these things will breed confusion
both in Church and Commonwealth* but I hope when the head shall be united to
the body, and when there shall be a right understanding between our Gracious
Sovereign, and his Two houses of Parliament, there will be a through
reformation of all things: And that such a blessed Union may speedily be
accomplished, let you and I and all people pray God to divert those judgments
from us which our sins have deserved, and continue his mercies to us
especially the free preaching of the Gospel by able and sincere dispensors of
the same, That pure learning may spring up in every Congregation as a Crystal
River, and saving knowledge like a mighty stream to make glad and refresh all
barren places in this Island, that so righteousness may flourish in our days,
and peace so long as the Sun and Moon endures. But this has almost put me
quite out of my intended discourse, which was to show you my unfortunate
success by Booke-making, for I like that over adventurous son of Sol, and
Clymene have almost set the frame of Heaven in a combustion, and stated the Sun
Moon and Stars upon such improper objects as may cause amasement to the
beholders; Therefore I acknowledge my self worthily punished for my
Miscrosmus, I mean my Books which I compared to a little World seems to be at
the period as was fo^e prophesyed by the truth it self of this Vast universe,
Mark 13. 24. and 25. verse, for my Sun is darkened, and my Moon gives but
little light, my Star is fallen from the Heaven wherein it was fixed, and the
powers of my Heavenly meditations are shaken and esteemed of little worth; in
plainer terms thus. You may perceive my Annual World I compared to the
Sun: And because it is composed of brief Meditations upon those days, that
commemorate the meritorious actions of our Bl^ssed Savior, the lives and
deaths of his Virgin Mother, and eminent Disciples, according to the
celebration thereof set down in the book of Common Prayer, which some esteem
the English mass book, Therefore says an new upstart Pharisaicall sect, It
is papisticall and to be cast away as an Idol. Secondly, my Sacred poems I
compared to the Moon, and because it is illustrated with the help of some
learned Authors, this Hypocritical socieity, say it is light with darkness,
holy things and vain unprofitable things mixed which are altogether
inconsistent, And this dead fly has made all my books of ointment unsavory,
for these kind of people deride, and contemn all learning that is not
according to their humors, and had rather Sleep in the Church two or three
hours to hear an extemporary nonsensitive vain babbling prayer, such as many
of their holy brethrens are, whose vain Tautologies and Hyperbolicall terms,
both public and private, would make a profane man laugh, but a religious man
weep, then continue one hour in joint prayer with the Congregation by a well
composed form intermingled with reading Chapters, and singing of Psalms,
which me thinks is a heavenly harmony; But these folk would have all things
done in spirit, yet their actions show that they are mere flesh, except it be
in gadding to Sermons to be reputed holy, for observe who are more proud and
stately, who more deceitful and covetous, and who more incontinent and
malicious then this my malignant party, who to magnify their own worth, to
ingratiate themselves into great men's favor for popular applause, and to
uphold and to boulster their pride, covetousness and base lacivious meetings
in private Conventicles, care not how they disparage the industrious labors of
others, which they are not able with all their pretended sanctity to mend. But
I hope these hypocritical R^und-heads (of late so called) but under that
term I would not involve honest judicious round dealing men, such who walk
within compass of their own circumference, whose actions as lines are drawn
from the Word of God their center, but such who are wise in their own
conceit, whose minds like footeballs or bubbles of Soap in the Air, are
thrown and tossed too and fro with every wind of Doctrine, such who under
pretense of Religion deride and contemn all good order in Church and
Commonwealth, and do so labor to overthrow the known Monarchical, and
Hierarchicall state of the Kingdom that they have almost brought up an
Anarchicall government, shall shortly receive a just reward for their demerits
as well as those that labor to bring up a tyrannical Jurisdiction in the
established government, which they likewise do now endeavor to uphold, and
would attain unto if all power were in their own hands; and I fear worse.
But letting them pass in the third place you may consider how my Star is
fallen from the Heaven wherein it was fixed, for like foolish Iearus, I have
attempted with the waxen wings of a vain hope and (as you may think) an
unadvised pride to ascend, and fix my self in a bright firmament of favor am
cast down into an O^^an of contempt and disdain, according to these Verses.

In these my Books of fruitless prose and rhyme,
You may behold a picture of this time
Wherein we live, for first from low degree
My Masters favor had exalted me,
But my aspiring mind did higher fly
To things above my reach presumptuously,
For craft and cunning was in sharp'nd bright
Who for my labor paid me fell despite,
Therefore pray cease to wonder that my fall
Is now so low, for I assure thee all,
That think by pride, self-love, and vain conceit,
To make themselves most famous and most great,
Shall be defeated in their enterprise
As it is apparent in all peoples eyes,
By Strafford, Bishops and Gentility
Whose falls as low as they aspired high.
And I my self have had a woeful fall,
In Credit, profit, yea and Books and all.
Fourthly and lastly, because I did too boldly frame a flaming Meteor, I feared
some tempestuous accident to fall upon me according to the malignant aspect of
some fiery spirits: And therefore lest some sharp witted Orator should by
eloquent ^hethorique such as Lawiers use, or that flattering Sycophant, should
by colloguing insinuation, or some spiritual minded body should in
Hiprocriticall sincerity oversway my judicious loving friends good opinion of
me and of my endeavors, I did lately join all my labors of love together in
one volume with marginall notes, and annotations, and offered them to the
press, because I am unwilling to be condemned by a partial jury such as those
three above specified. But no executioner I mean a Stationer or Printer had
the heart to undertake the work, and in excuse thereof told me, That such a
book as that of thirty or forty sheets of paper is not like to sell in this age
were the matter never so good, but if it had been a lying and scandalus
pamphlet of a sheet of paper that could produce a Scripture text, or some
reviling terms against Monarchy, and Hierarchy to uphold an Anarchy, they
would have embraced my profer, for it is like such would have proved vendable
ware, if I could obtain an Order or a Vote upon it: Therefore I am enforced to
keep those my labors by me for 30 or 40. l. is more money now then I can well
spare upon such a dead commodity. Thus have I briefly declared my disaster by
making books, yet I hope this last book of Justice and mercy will by such
time this Kingdom is in a settled peace, cause all the rest of my works to
cast forth a little glimmering light to the praise and Glory of God, good of my
Neighbor, and joy and comfort of my own soul at the hour of death in the
day of judgment, and all the days of my life. Now for my Trade and Employment
as I have continued with my Lady 18 years and upwards, so I do intend (God
willing) to remain with her one or two years longer at the least except I be
by force expulsed, and then you shall hear my mournful lamentation, in the
mean time I thank you for your ^inde remembrance of me, in retribution
whereof, I commend my due respects unto you and will never cease to be

London 7. October. 1642. Your Assured Friend and Christian Brother Edward Brown.

FINIS.

