A true and exact RELATION OF Two great VICTORIES obtained in the KINGDOM of
IRELAND, by the Protestant Party, against the Rebels: THE FIRST, By the most
valiant Soldier, Collonell Mac-Adams, and his Regiment, against a great Body
of the Rebels, near Dingley Castle, where they fell upon the Rebels, stormed
their Works, and took the Castle, routing the whole Body, and pursued them to
the Mountains. THE SECOND, By the said Colonel, against another Body of the
Rebels near Bonrattey, where he marched up against them with 700. men,
displaying his Yellow Colors, and immediately routed 1500. of the Enemy, taking
all their Arms and Ammunition, Bagg and Baggage. By John Brown, Gent. living
in Ireland, in the County of CORK.

Printed for general satisfaction of the Kingdom of England, 1647.

A true and perfect RELATION OF The victorious proceedings of the Protestant
Forces in the Kingdom OF IRELAND.
SIR,
HAving received a Letter from you, dated the 15. of March, 1646. intimating
your earnest desire to me, for the imparting of such passages and Occurrents,
which shall (at any time) happen within this distressed and most disconsolited
Kingdom.

Therefore, to satisfy your expectation, and to acquaint you with the state
and condition of this Nation, I shall desire you to perufe these ensuing lines,
viz.

The Rebels are very strong, having great bodies abroad, making several
inroades upon the Protestants quarters; yet not altogether so often, as
formerly, by reason of the gallant motion, and happy success of the most
valiant and renowned Gentleman, Colonel Mac-Adams, who having a Commission
from the Parliament of England, to prosecute the Design again the Irish
Rebels in Ireland, and to further and advance the Cause of the Protestants,
jointly resolved with his whole Regiment (consisting of seven hundred Foot) to
try strange adventures abroad, and to change their Winter Garrisons.

And thereupon took shipping at Kingsayle, and set to Sea, being conducted by
diverse of the Parliament ships; and after few days sail, they landed at a
place called Dingle, a strong place in poffession of the Rebels, and very well
fortified, and immediately fell upon the Works, scaled them, and forced their
passage into the town, putting many of the Rebels to the sword, and caused the
rest to fly, leaving all their arms and ammunition behind them, and great
store of money, and other rich booty, and after a hot skirmish, and bloody
conflict, became Masters of the Castle, taking diverse prisoners; but this
renowned Colonel, being too ventrous, received a dangerous shot from the Castle.

Then the said Colonel Mac-Adams with his stout Regiment, marched some 5 miles
up into the Country, pursuing the Enemy beating them to the Hills and
Mountains, insomuch, that at the last, great Bodies began to draw down, which
caused the Colonel and his Regiment to retreat down toward the Seacoast, and
in their way fired the Garrison of Dingle, and the Castle; this being done,
they betook themselves to their shipping, and so sailed up the stately River of
Limbricke, and being within two or three leagues of Bonrattie, the Soldiers
began to prepare themselves for shore, and at the last rived there in safety.
The aforesaid Colonel having landed his Regiment, drew them up in Battalia,
and there made a gallant speech unto them, concerning their present Design
against the Earl of Thomand, and hie party, boing in number about fifteen
hundred: the Colonel had no sooner ended his Oration, but the Soldiers set up
such a Halli-looe, that caused all the Irish thereabouts, to leave their own
houses, and betake themselves to their Boggs and Woods.

The Earl of Thomend were sore amazed to see such a gallant Fleet at Sea, and
so brave a Body on Land, that immediately he retired to Sixe-mile Budge, where
he drew up in a Body, with a resolution to give our Forces battle.

But seeing them come on with such a magnanimous courage, and our yellow
Colors in the Van, they immediately threw down their Arms, and betook
themselves to the Mountains, leaving all their provision, Bagg and Baggage
behind them.

Thus it has pleased God to crown this small party of the protestants with
Victory, giving them tryumphant success in all their enterprises: For (indeed)
the Colonel were very perfect in the knowledge of the country, exceeding expert
in the Discipline; and most wise and vigilant in all his actions. Thus (for the
present) I shall conclude, remaining

Your most affectionate friend, John Brown.

A true Relation of the gallant entertainment of his Excellency the Lord Lisle,
at the City of Cork in Ireland.
THE right Honorable the Lord Inchiqueen having received intelligence of the
safe landing of his Excellency the L. Lisle in that Kingdom, made great
preparations for the entertainment of his Excellency, and appointed the most
eminent place in the City for his quarters.

His Lordship advanced out of the City with diverse Troops of Horse to meet his
Excellency being accompanied with a galtant train of Chivalry; and being met,
they gave other a friendly greeting, and so marched into the City: the
Musquetters were placed on each side the street, giving a volley as his
Excellency passed along: the Canoniers were all in readiness, welcoming his
Excellency to the City, with a gallane Echo from the Castle and Forts.

His Excellency has given great satisfaction since his coming thither to the
Officers and Soldiers, both for Recruits and Money from the Parliament of
England, and has now taken the Field, and is advancing toward the Rebels
quarters, being in number between six and seven thousand, Horse and Foot. God
grant them a prosperous voyage, and victorious success against their Enemies.

FINIS.

