Rules for Kings, AND Good Counsel for Subjects: Being a collection of
certain places of holy Scripture, directing the one to Govern, and the other
to obey.

Most necessary for all men that are desirous to square their actions according
to the Rule of God's Law.

Whereunto is added a Prayer for the KING In these times of Contradictions.

classical scene with two people

LONDON, Printed, for T. Paibody, and E. Dobson, and are to be sold in
Queens-head-Alley in Pater noster-row, 1642.

To the Reader.
IN a time when humane learning, and the discipline and precepts of men are so
much despised, as in these our days; I thought it not labor lost to spend some
minutes in collecting a few Texts of Scripture, which may be supposed the men
of this age have either never read, or totally forgotten. To which short
sentence, I have added none of mine own, lest to the Zealots it should appear
Apocryphal, or my self seem to arrogate the wisdom of the son of Sirach. But
according to the times, with as little learning and discretion as may be, I
have in a very disorderly order patch them up under several heads; The first
two being of commands, that we should reverence our Prince, which I hope will
be obeyed, though he were a Tyrant. For the third, that the King loves
Judgment: Those that think he fulfils not the Scripture in that, let them
fulfill it themselves in praying for him, which if done in faith no doubt they
shall obtain that blessing, and (according to the two next points) will follow
Gods care of his anointed and a punishment on his advarsaries: that we may
receive him again with triumph and thanksgiving. Lastly, if it be acknowledged
to be an office Jure Divine, (by all good Christians I am sure it is) the last
point, an exhortation to obedience will not be unseasonable, concluding with a
Prayer, that under him we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all
godliness and honesty, and that we may so do: God of his Mercy grant us for
his son Christ Jesus sake our Savior and Redeemer.

Thine E. B.

Rules for Kings, and good Counsel for Subjects.
Speak not evil of the King.
ACts 23.5. Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people.

Eccles. 10.20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, for a bird of the
air shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall carry the matter.

Prove. 30.32. If thou have thought evil of the King, Iay thine hand upon thy
mouth.

Jude 8. These filthy dreamers despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities.

V. 10. But these speak evil of those things which they know not, but what
they know naturally.

V. 11. Not unto them, for they shall perish in the gainsaying of Core.

2 Pet. 2.9. The Lord knows how to reserve the unjust to the day of Judgment
to be punished.

V. 10. But chiefly them that despise government, presumptions are they, self
willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities.

V. 12. But these are natural bruit beasts, made to be taken and destroyed,
speak evil of the things that they understand not, and shall utterly perish
in their own corruption.

V. 13. And shall receive the reward of righteousness.

2 Samuel 19.21. Shall not Shemei be put to death for this, because he cursed the
Lords anointed.

1 King. 2.9. Now therefore hold him not guiltless, for thou art a wise man,
and know what thou ought to do unto him, but his hoare head bring thou
down to the grave with blood.

Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not revile the Judges, not curse the Ruler of thy
people.

Exalt not thy self against the King.
ECcles. 8.3. Be not hasty to go out of his sight: stand not in an evil thing
for he does whatsoever pleases him.

V. 4. Where the word of a King is, there is power; and who may say unto him
what do thou?

Prove. 16.14. The wrath of a King is as messengers of death; but a wise man
will pacify it.

Chap. 19.12. The Kings wrath is as the roaring of a Lion, but his favor is as
dew upon the grass.

V. 10. Delight is not seemly for a fool, much less for a servant to have
rule over Princes.

Cha. 17.26. To punish the Just is not good, not to strick Princes for equity.

Cha. 25.6. Put not forth thy self in the presence of the King, and stand not
in the place of great men.

V. 7. For better is it that it be said unto thee, come up hither, than that
thou should be put lower in the presence of the Prince who^ thine eyes have
seen.

Cha. 30.31. Against a King there is no rising up.

V. 32. If thou have done foolishly in lifting up thy self, lay thine hand
upon thy mouth.

Cha. 20.2. The fear of a King is as the roaring of a Lion, who so provokes
him to anger, sins against his own soul.

The King loves Judgment.
Prove. 16.10. A Divine sentence is in the lips of the King, his mouth
transgresses not in Judgment.

V. 12. It is an abomination to Kings to commit wickedness, for the throne is
established by righteousness.

V. 13. Righteous lips are the delight of Kings, and they love him that
speaks right.

Cha. 20 8. A King that sits in the throne of judgment scatters away all
evil with his eyes

V. 20. A wise King scatters the wicked, and brings the wheel over them.

V. 28. Mercy and truth, preserve the King, and his throne is upholden by mercy.

Cha. 22.11. He that loves pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips, the
King shall be his friend.

V. 29. See thou a man diligent in his business? he shall stand before
Kings, he shall not stand before mean men.

Cha. 29 4. The King by judgment established the land.

V. 14. The King that faithfully judges the poor, his throne shall be
established for ever.

Romans 13.3. Rulers are not a terror to good works but to the evil, will thou
then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shall have
praise of the same.

V. 4. For he is the Minister of God to thee for good, but if thou do that
which is evil, be afraid: For he bears not the sword in vain, ^or he is the
Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil.

Psa. 72 4. The King shall judge the poor of the people, he shall save the
children of the needy, and shall break in pieces the oppressor.

1 Pet. 2.14. He is sent for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise
of them that do well.

Gods care of his Anointed.
Psalm 105.15. Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. 2 Samuel
22.49. It is God that brings me forth from mine enemies, thou have delivered
me from the violent man.

V. 51. He is the tower of Salvation for his King, and shows mercy to his
Anointed.

Psa. 18.50. Great deliverance gives he to his King, and shows mercy to his
anointed.

Psa. 28.8. The Lord is his strength, he is the saving strength of his anointed.

Psa 20.6. Now know that the Lord saves his anointed, he will hear him from
his holy heaven, with the saving strength of his right hand.

Psa. 21.3. Thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness, thou set a
crown of pure gold upon his head.

V. 5. Honor and Majesty have thou laid upon him.

V. 6. For thou have made him blessed for ever, thou have made him exceeding
glad with thy countenance.

Psalm. 61.6. Thou will prolong the Kings life, and his years, as many
generations.

V. 7. He shall abide before God for ever.

The punishment of his Adversaries.
1 Samuel 11.12. And the people said unto Samuel, who is he that said, shall Saul
reign over us? bring the men that we may put them to death.

Jos. 1.18. Whosoever he be that does rebel against thy commandment, and will
not hearken unto thy words in all things that thou command him, he shall be
put to death.

Psa. 45.5. Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the Kings enemies, whereby
the people fall under thee.

Psa. 89.23. I will beat down his foes before his face, and plague them that
hate him.

Psa. 132 18. His enemies will I cloth with shame, but upon himself shall his
crown flourish.

His Triumph and Thanksgiving.
Psalm. 144.1. Blessed be the Lord my strength, which teaches my hands to war
and my fingers to fight.

V. 2. My goodness and my fortress, my high tower and my deliverer, my shield
and he in whom I trust, who subdued my people under me.

V. 10. It is he that gives salvation to Kings, who delivers David his
servant from the hurtful sword.

Psa. 21.2. Thou have given him his hearts desire, and have not witholden the
request of his lips.

1 Samuel 2.10. The adversaries of the Lord shall be broken to pieces, out of
heaven shall be thunder upon them: The Lord shall judge the ends of the earth,
and he shall give strength unto his K. and exalt the horn of his Anointed

2 Samuel 22.40. Thou have guided me with strength to battle, them that rose up
against me, have thou subdued under me. V. 44. Thou have delivered me from the
strivings of my people. V. 47. The Lord lives and blessed be my rock, and
exalted be the God of the rock of my salvation. V. 48. It is God that avengeth
me, and that brings down the people under me. V. 49. Thou also have lifted me
up on high, above them that rose up against me, thou have delivered me from the
violent man,

V. 50. Therefore will I give thanks to theee, O Lord, among the heather and
will sing praises unto thy Name.

Exhortation to Odedience.
1 PEt. 2.13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be to the King as Supreme.

V. 14. O* unto Governors, as unto them as are sent by him.

V. 17. Fear God, honor the King.

Tit. 3.1. Put them in mind to be subject unto the higher powers, to obey
Magistrates, to be ready to every good work.

Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers: for there is no
power but of God, the powers that be are ordained of God.

V. 2. Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God:
and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.

V. 5. Wherefore ye must needs be subject not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake.

V. 6. For this cause pay you tribut also, for they are Gods Ministers
attending continually upon this very thing.

V. 7. Render therefore to all their dues, tribut to whom tribut is due, custom
to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor.

Mark. 12.17. Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the
things that are Gods.

Eccles. 8.2. I counsel thee to keep the Kings command, and that in regard of
the oath of God.

Pray for the King.
1 Timothy 2.1. I exhort therefore that first of all supplications, prayers,
intercessions and giving of thanks be made for all men.

V. 2. For Kings and all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty.

V. 3. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior.

A Prayer for the King.
GIve the King thy Judgments, O God, and thy righteousness unto the Kings
son, Psalm 72.1.4. That he may judge the poor of the people, and save the
children of the needy, and break in pieces the oppressor, Prove. 25.5. Take away
the wicked, O God, from before the King, that his throne may be established in
righteousness, Psalm. 89.44. But, O Lord, how have thou made his glory to
cease, and cast his throne down to the ground, Prove. 28.2. Even for the
transgression of our land, many are the Princes thereof. It is for our manifold
sins and offenses, O God, that Psalm. 89.38. thou have cast off and abhorred,
that thou have been wroth with thine anointed, V. 42. Thou have set up the
right hand of his adversaries: thou have made all his enemies to rejoice: Lam.
3.14. He has been a derision to all his people, and their song all the day.
Ezekiel. 7.27. o God, thou have caused the King to mourn, and the Prince have thou
clothed with desolation, and the hands of the people of the land are troubled;
2 Samuel 3.39. He is now weak o Lord, though anointed King and these men the
sons of Zerviah, be too hard for him, thou, o Lord, shall reward the doers of
evil according to their wickedness: Eze. 11.2. These o Lord, are the men that
devise mischief, and give wicked council in this City. Eccles. 10.7. O God we
have seen servants upon horses, and I rinces walking as servants upon the
earth: Lam. 5.8. Servants have ruled over us, o Lord, and there is none that
does deliver us out of their hand: Cha. 4.20. The anointed of thee, o Lord,
has been taken in their pits, of whom we said, under his shadow we shall live
among the heathen, Chro. 21.17. Even we it is that have sinned, and done evil
indeed, but as for thine anointed what has he done? Lot thine hand we pray
thee, o Lord our God, be on us, but not on thine anointed that he should be
plagued, 2 Samuel 18 3. for he is worth ten thousand of us: Psalm. 89.46. Lord,
how long will thou hide thy self for ever? shall thy wrath burn like fire? V.
50. Remember Lord, the reproach of thy servant, how he does bear in his bosom
the reproach of all the mighty people: V. 51. Wherewith thine enemies have
reproached, o Lord, wherewith they have reproached the footsteps of thine
anointed. 2 Samuel 20.21. If there be any son of Bichri that shall lift up his
hand against the King, Deliver him, o Lord, and let the people cut off his
head, that the trumpet may sound a retreat of peace in our land: Numb. 16.32.
Thou that did cause the earth to swallow up the congregation of Korah, V.
35. and cons^medst with sire those 250 Princes of the Assembly, that were
famous in the Congrega^ion, for rebelling against Moses, V. 5. Protect and
defend him, o Lord, whom thou have chosen from the outrage of his people, and
cause him to come near unto thee, Chap. 17.10 and let his rod bud and blossom
to be kept for a taken, against those Rebels that rise up against him, 1 Samuel
24.8. and let them stoup with their face to the earth, and bow themselves
before thine anointed: V 10. Let their eyes spare him, o Lord, and let not
them put forth their hand against our Lord the King, for he is thine
anointed: V. 5. Let their hearts (mite them, yea do thou smite those, o Lord,
that shall cut off his skirt, or d^vest him of his Royal roab and authority.
Chap. 26 9. And let none that stretch forth their hands against thine anointed
be guiltless. Judges 17.6. Let us not see such days, o God, as when there was
no King in Israel, lest every man do that which is right in his own eyes: V. 5.
and make himself Gods, and consecrate his sons for his priests, or take to
himself Priests without consecration. O Lord God, put an end to these days of
trouble and confusion, and thou having given us a just King, not in thine
anger, but in thy mercy, give us joy of our King, and Psalm 63.11. let the
King rejoice in thee, o God, and let the mouth of those that speak lies be
stopped, V. 9. and those that seek his soul to destroy it, let them go into
the lower parts of the earth; Verse. 10. and let them fall by the sword, and be
a portion for Foxes: Psalm. 18.47 ^^de thou, o God, his avenger, and subdue the
people under him. Isaiah 45.1. Thou, o Lord God that did annoint Cyrus, whose
hand thou did strengthen to subdue Nations before him, before whom thou did
open the two leaved gates; Verse ^. before whom thou did go, to make the
crooked places straight, and to break in pieces the gates of brass: V. 3. To
whom thou gave the hidden riches of secret places, V. 4 that did call him
by his name, though he knew thee not; Verse 5. That did gird him, though thou
were unkown unto him; preserve thou thy servant our gracious King, and 2 Samuel
22.40. gird him, o Lord, with strength in battle th^^ those that rise against
him, may be subdued under him, Ver. 44. and deliver him, o God* from the
strivings of his people: Let the servants of our Lord the King be no longer a
reproach and a byword, let them not be called evil counselors and enemies to
the state that endeavor to do him service: Proverbs 19.6 But let many entreat
the favor of our good Prince, Chap. 16.15. and in the light of the Kings
countenance, let there be life, and let his favor be as a cloud of the latter
rain. Ester 6.7. And for the man whom the King delights to honor, V. 9. let
him be clothed in Royal apparel, and let him be brought on horseback through
the City, and proclaimed before him, thus shall it be done to the man whom the
King delights to honor; and we beseech thee, o God, Isaiah 33.17. Let our
eyes see the King in his beauty, and Psalm. 28.8. be thou his strength, o Lord,
and the wholesome defense of his anointed: Psalm 21.1. Let the King joy in
thy strength, o Lord, and in thy salvation, let him greatly rejoice, Verse 2.
Give him his hearts desire, and withold not the request of his lips, V. 7. Let
the King trust in thee, o Lord, and through the mercy of thou, the most
highest, let him not be moved; V. 5. Let his glory be great in thy salvation;
Psalm 89.26. Let him cry unto thee, thou art his Father, his God and the Rock
of his Salvation. Psalm 61.6. O prolong thou the Kings life, and his years as
many generations: V. 7. Let him abide before thee, o God, for ever: O prepare
mercy and truth, which may preserve him: 2 Samuel 18.32. And let the enemies of
our Lord the King, and all that rise up against him, be as was that young man
Absalom. Chap. 7.29. Therefore now Lord let it please thee to bless the houses
of thine anointed, that it may continue for ever before thee: For thou, o Lord
God have spoken it, and with thy blessing, let the house of thy servant be
blessed for ever: And this for the merits of Jesus Christ our only Savior and
Redeemer.

Amen.
FINIS.

