A LETTER Sent from Major-generall Brown, TO HIS EXCELLENCY The Earl of ESSEX.
CONTAINING, A true Relation of a great Victory obtained against the Kings
forces near Abingdon, upon Saturday last, Janu. 11. 1644. Where Sir Henry Gage
Governor of Oxford, and diverse others, of note and quality were slain.

Januar. 14. 1644.
IT is his Excellencies pleasure that this Letter be forthwith printed and
published.

Jo. Baldwin Secretary to his Excellency.



LONDON, Printed for John Thomas. 1644.

May it please your Excellency,
I Hold my self bound to give your Excellency an account of the enemies late
attempt upon this garrison. A great party of horse and foot from all their
garrisons (with the assistance of Wallingford forces) under the command of Pr.
Rupert fell upon us this morning early on Culham side, with intent to storm
us. They gained a bridge (where I kept a Centry) about half a mile from us,
and presently set the Country to cut it down, to prevent our pursuit of them
in case they should be forced back, making use of plankes for their own
retreat upon the alarm; and to prevent the cutting down of the bridge, (which I
had notice of) I drew forth to fight with them, first sending out Scouts on the
other side of the Town, and securing our works,) and because the caseway was
long and narrow, I was forced to send some of my men into the meades, who
cheerfully marched through the water, and so flanked the enemy on both sides.
The enemy fought it stoutly, and plied us with their Ordnance, which they
brought along with them, and found ( I bless God) no less courage in ours, as
the issue proved. The dispute lasted almost four hours; at length we gained
the bridge ere they had quite broke it down, and forced them to the hedges and
banks adjacent, which proved of singular advantage to them; but those places
proved too hot for them, and they allowed us to beat them out of the field,
notwithstanding the disadvantages we fought upon. Had it been propper or
secure, in respect of the garrison, we had followed them; but they hasted away
with three Carts laden with dead men, besides many thrown into the River, and
others carried on their horse backs. Their design (I now understand) was, if
they could not storm us, then (by pulling up the bridge) to prevent our
hindering them to fortify the Lady Careys house and the Church in Culham, which
would have proved of evil consequence to us; but they were prevented.

We lost of note, only Major Bradbury, a very gallant man, who was slain
upon the bridge, and seven or eight common Soldiers, at most; and had some
wounded: Captain Melvin and Captain Butterfield are wounded, but without
danger, of whom I must say, and of your Excellencies Foot (whom I kept for our
reserve) they behaved themselves with singular courage.

Prince Maurice was also in person here, with Sir Henry Gage Governor, and most
of the Gentry of Oxford, to see the event. Sir Henry Gage was here slain, and
many others of note whom I know not yet.

At the same precise time in the morning the enemies Horse from Farringdon fell
on our Horse quarters; they found our men in more ready posture then they
expected: the alarm was presently taken at all the quarters, being very near
together; and they came together, beat the enemy out of the Town, chased them
within a mile of Farringdon, and in pursuit slew, wounded, and took prisoners
almost all, without any loss at all. Major Farmor, Major to Prince Charles
regiment was slain, and his Lieutenant, with many others. Five of this regiment
we took were Irish by their own confession, whom I presently caused to be
hanged in the Marketplace, according to an Ordinance of Parliament. Captain
Blunden in Colonel Martins regiment deserves much for his courage in that
service.

Your Excellencies humble servant, RICHARD BROWN.
Abingdon, Ian. 11. 1644. For his Excellency the Lord General, Earl of Essex,
these, London.

