Scripture-Redemption freed from Men's Restrictions: Being An ANSWER TO A Book
lately published by Mr. William Troughton (who styles himself a Minister of the
Gospel at Onlep in Leichestershire) ENTITLED, Scripture-Redemption restrained
and limited: As also the substance of several Conferences and Disputes had in
England, Wales, and Scotland, With Mr. Heath, Mr. Bartley, Mr. Powel, Mr. Sam.
Rutherford, and Mr. James Wood, Two Rectors of the University of S. Andrews,
and many others, About the death of our most dear Redeemer, and the
Controversies which are the constant concomitants of it.

Together with a brief Reply to Mr. Troughton's railing accusations in his
Introduction.

By J. Brown, sometimes of Oriel Coll. in Oxford, afterward a Priest of the
Church of England, and Vicar of Tenbury in Worcestershire; but now through
mercy a Preacher of the faith which once he destroyed.

YE are my witnesses, and my servant whom I have chosen, that ye MAY know and
believe me.

Isai. 43. 10. London, Printed by J. C. for Will: Larnar, at the sign of the
Blackmoor near Fleet-bridge, 1653.

To all those precious souls who receive the Gospel, and follow the Lord Jesus
in the way of righteousness, to whose view this small Treatise shall by
providence be presented, Increase of all spiritual riches from the Father of
mercies, are unfeignedly desired.
IT is no new thing (blessed souls) for the God and men of this world to call
the sweet, saving, and most soul refreshing doctrines of the Gospel Master
Trough. p. 1.
Heretical opinions: and the way of God (even that way of Worship which Christ
and his Apostles walked in) Heresy; that so, by raising foul (though false)
reports against the Truths of the true and eternal God, they and their false
Merchandise (corrupt Doctrines, I mean) may seem fair in the eyes of their
followers. Let it not then seem strange to you, neither be discouraged, if it
be so in our generation: but as our God has imparted to you a great measure of
the knowledge of his love in the Lord Jesus, let it be your care, I beseech you
by the mercies of God, to walk worthy of the Lords love in all well pleasing,
and abounding in every good work; that you may shine as lights in this world,
and (in the world to come) as the sun in the kingdom of our Father, for ever
and ever. You have known and believed the love of God to your souls; you know
and are assured by the Scriptures, that Christ died for you; when other poor
creatures going about to prove it by their qualifications (a most inconstant
and crooked rule) are (oft-times at least) very uncertain whether Christ died
for them; and so through the instability of their sad minds, either hurried
away by dangerous presumption, or hurled into deep despair, and other
soul-distracting distempers. Their condition I much commiserate, having my self
been somewhat buffeted by Satan under it: for at best, they are frequently
tossed to and fro by doubts and fears, whether ever God gave his Son to lay
down his life for them, and so are kept from the enjoyment of that abiding
consolation which you partake of, by believing what is plainly written in the
Word of Truth, and rejecting the dark consequences and deductions of men. Oh
pity those that are ignorant of that truth which you are acquainted with,
endeavor to impart it to them; but despise them not, in that you know Christ
died for them. Be not weary of well doing. The Lord is at hand: and if you
persist in holiness, he will requite your short pains with everlasting
pleasures, and your work in the day of grace with an eternal and exceeding
weight of glory.

And now (brethren) I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which
is able to build you up, to make you wise unto salvation, to make you perfect,
and thoroughly furnished to every good work; desiring the Lord of glory to
preserve you blamless in body, soul, and spirit, till he appears the second
time without sin unto salvation; that you may be presented faul^lest before the
throne of his glory with exceeding joy, and be made partakers and possessors of
that rich and glorious Crown, and those precious promises which now by says
and patience we inherit: in which most blessed state, I trust on the Lords day
to meet you; and in the mean space, whilst the Lord holds my soul in life
here, shall remain,

Your faithful servant and brother (though unworthy) in the way and work of
Christ, J. Brown.

To all the people in the world who shall peruse this plain Discourse,
especially such as setting their faces toward Sion, have their souls sadned
through the uncertainty that is in them, about Christ's dying for them; the
Author sincerely wishes those cordial consolations which which flow from the
knowledge and acknowledgment of the Truth in this point, according to the
Scriptures.
KNowing by sad experience what a miserable condition they are in, who are
ignorant of the love of God; and how cheerfully they are drawn out to serve
him, who know and are assured that he gave his Son to be a Propitiation for
them; I have here presented to each impartial Reader a familiar Discourse
concerning the death of our Redeemer; wherein I shall, by the help of Jehovah,
prove,

1. That Jesus Christ did die for all and every man.

2. How far this extends to all, or what he has done for all men dying for
them: and this I shall do by the express Word of the Lord, as it is ministered
to us by his own Spirit, without sophistical Syllogisms, dark Deductions,
Consequences, and Inferences, (the only proofs of those who assert the
contrary.)

3. I shall also, by the assistance of the Lord, produce the reasons which I
have found in the Scripture, confirming this truth.

4. I shall (as I have met with them) answer the Objections brought against it.

5. I shall make some Application of the whole; wherein I shall take
opportunity to show the soundness and profitableness of this Doctrine, the sad
consequences and absurdities of the contrary, and endeavor to discover some
reasons why so few receive it, and why there is so great opposition made
against it. I confess they lie deep; but the Lord in time will help us to a
more full manifestation.

The occasion of my undertaking of this work, was partly from a nameless Paper
received from some Parish Ministers living about Bishops Castle in Shrop-shire;
to which because I knew not to whom to write, I was not careful to return any
Reply. But especially from the reading of ten printed Arguments set out by one
M. Troughton, (though sucked from others) together with several Conferences had
providentially with many learned men (as they are accounted) in England and
Scotland, about the death of Christ, and the controversies which are the
constant concomitants of it. My resolution is to be plain, without Rhetorical
flourishes, and the wisdom which man teaches. The glory of God is that which I
chiefly aim at, (my conscience bearing me witness) and next that, the comfort
of doubting, and convincing of obdurate spirits. I would entreat the Reader to
survey this Work twice, before he censure once; to try what is here laid down
by the Word of God, and hold fast what is good: for that blessing thou find
in it, let Jehovah have the glory; which I again assure thee is the earnest
desire of him who is

A servant of Jesus Christ, and his Saints in him, and of all his
fellow creatures as he may in the Lord, J. B.

The Answer TO Mr. Troughton's Introduction.
WHat the wonder-working Jehovah has spoken of old by his Servants the
Prophets is in these our days fulfilled: He does his work, his strange work,
and brings to pass his act, Isa. 28. 21.
his strange act. The wisdom of the wisemen does perish, and the undering of
the prudent is hid. It is a mavelous work, and a wonder to see, Isa. 29. 14.
how they who teach the precepts of the Lord by the precepts of men, are taken
in their own craftiness, and have their wisdom taken from them, or turned
into foolishness; To behold how they that darken counsel by words without
knowledge, who speak wickedly for God and talk deceitfully for him, Job 38. 2,
13, 7.
are snared in their Philosophy and vain deceits* in their Sophisticated
Syllogismes and Arguments, which they produce against the truth of the eternal
God, whilst they seem to take part with it.

A strange and eminent manifestation of the hand of God against such, was
lately in a most evident manner seen, against one Mr. William Troughton a
Minister of the Gospel (as he styles himself) at Onlep in Leichestershire; who
has put forth a small treatise entitled SCRIPTVRE-REDEMPTION RESTRAINED and
LIMITED. I confess when I first cast mine eye upon this title, I was amazed
with admiration, that any should so forget themselves as to restrain and limit
the redemption that the Scripture holds forth; that any should set bounds unto
(or imprison) such a soul-satisfying, soul-sanctifying, soul-saving doctrine as
is Scripture-Redemption. O you that call your selves the Ministers of the
Gospel! Is the Spirit of the Lord straitened? are these his doings? Did the
Spirit of the Lord ever say that Christ dyed not for all, or that he dyed but
for some? is there any Scripture from the beginning of Genesis to the end of
the Revelation that speaks thus? yet if we should grant that Christ laid down
his life only for a few, and bought only his Saints: I say, if this were
Scripture-Redemption (as it is not) Mr. Troughton has restrained and limited
it. Scripture-Redemption be it what it will, is by him confined and restrained;
insomuch that I could scarcely be persuaded in my spirit, but that it was
rather the error of the Press, then of his pen, or at least that it was rather
a slip of his pen, then the error of his mind; but when I considered (in the
reading of his book) with what virulency of spirit he opposed such as suffer
Scripture-Redemption to have its due liberty, and how vigorously he bends his
hand and head (at least) to make good his purpose, even turning aside the texts
of Scripture which say plainly Christ dyed for all, for every man, etc. to make
way for his dark consequences and logical conclusions, I ceased to wonder at
the presupmtuous folly which therein palpably appeared, and admired the just
and signal severity of God against such as in this illustrious Sunshine of
Gospel Light, oppose his ways, accuse his Saints, and bring up an evil report
upon that good will of God, which he has by Men and Angels manifested in all
ages toward mankind. I have seen in darker days, that men have ushered in
their fond conceits and Saint-reviling Pamphlets, with glorious names and
soul-blinding inscriptions; but God so took away his wisdom, that he could not
give his book a Title that might in the least palliate the perverseness of his
opinion. The times of ignorance God winked at; but if after full and fair
warning, by the bright appearance of eternal truth, men will not beware, he
will leave them to themselves, to foam out their own shame, and (as that of
Jannes and Jambres) so shall their folly be made manifest to all men. Oh where
was the wisdom of that poor creature who restrained and limited
Scripture-Redemption? The desire of my soul is, that he may see the error of
his way, and repent of his daring presumption. As the name of his Book savours
of ignorance, so his Introduction to it is filled with malice; as the judicious
Reader may perceive by those black calumnies and aspersions cast upon my self
and others Cap. Ever. Sam. Oats Benj. Morley Mr. Prior Will. Kendal Re.
F^ilding, etc.
. As far as they relate to me, I do willingly bear them, and freely forgive (my
Lord and Master suffered more for my sake) but for that they entrench upon the
truth of God, and reflect upon some precious Saints, I shall endeavor the
removal of them, yet freely acknowledging that truth which he upbraids us with,
and showing where he misreports us and misrepresents our words to the world.

In the first place, Mr. Troug. in his Introduct. page 1.
he accuses us for accounting the dipping or sprinkling of Infants an
Antichristian Idol: It Is true, and we have good reason so to judge, when men
have set it up as a part of Gods worship, without a command from Jesus Christ;
who would certainly have spoken something of it, if it had been of God, For he
was faithful as a Son, Heb. 3. 6. and kept not back any of his Fathers counsel
from the sons of men. But whereas he says we exclude all Infants from the
Covenant of grace, its utterly false; for its by the grace of God in Christ
that they live; and we know that to little Infants belongs the Kingdom of
Heaven; And that they who become not as little children, cannot enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew 18. 30. But that they are members of the visible
Church we deny, and so does Master Troughton too, in the third page of his
Epistle to the Reader; where he has these very words, Visible title to, and
interest in the Covenant of grace (consisting in a serious profession of the
Christian faith, accompanied with a suitable conversation) is that which
constitutes a member of the Visible Church of Christ. If any spiritual soul
ever look on Mr. Troughtons book, I desire they would take notice of this
passage, and see how he condemns us for that which he himself allows and
ownes; and indeed it is the purest position of truth drawn up by himself, which
I have seen in all his book. But that being true (as indeed it is) how can
infants be visible Church Members? what profession of the Faith of Christ can
they make, and what good or evil can they do? so that you see Mr. Troughton
contradicts himself (which is a usual thing, as you shall perceive in the
prosecution of this work.) But fearing lest he should retract his
acknowledgment of the truth (to which he is sometimes very a verse, through the
darkness that is in him) when he perceives it will make to his disadvantage,
and stick to that grand error that Infants are visible Church Members; I shall
only add this; 1. That they who were such in the Apostles days gladly
received the word, and were baptized, Act. 2. 41. 2. That to every
Churchmember every ordinance of Christ does belong, as breaking of Bread, Act.
2. 42. preaching of the word, Col. 3. 16. reproof, Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. judging
of points of difference among brethren, 1 Cor. 6. 4. etc. I wonder why Mr.
Troughton does not preach to them, break bread with them, reprove them, and set
them to judge at least in the things of this life, which are the smallest
matters! For we would gladly know who dares add to, diminish from, or alter,
the practice of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, in the constituting of the
Church of God, or hinder any of his members of their privilege?

Secondly, He says (but he says falsely) that we hold none to be Saints,
Disciples, or Believers, but such as are grown persons, and rebaptiz'd. Here he
misrepresents our expressions. For first, we are not so silly as to lay down
such negative propositions: we say indeed, that as in the days of Christ, they
that did repent and believe the Gospel, were baptized and added to the Church;
so we are sure they who thus walk now, are visible Saints, Church Members and
Disciples, in that they follow the precepts and practice of Christ and his
Apostles; we account them sheep of Christ, or Christians, who continue in the
word of Christ, and keep the Ordinances as they were delivered to the Churches
by the Son of God, when they may so enjoy them; and that they who neglect and
despise them when they so may be had, and practice Baby-sprinkling, are
disobedient to Christ, and followers of the Pope. In a word, they which
faithfully follow that light which God lays before them; are the beloved of
his soul, and precious in his sight. As for his term rebaptize, we neither
know nor do we practice any such thing, neither can he prove his accusation
against us; except he can prove that the sprinkling of Babes in the face with a
little water, be the Ordinance of Baptism appointed for us by the Lord Jesus
in his word of truth; and then we shall own it, and Mr. Troughton also in it.

Thirdly, He accuses us for baptizing believers into this Faith, that Christ
died for all, etc. To which I answer, If the Scriptures say Christ dyed for
all, I hope Mr. Troughton has no just cause to find fault with us for
believing it, except he can prove it to be a crime to believe as the Scripture
says; which kind of beleiving Christ has made a precious promise to, Joh. 7.
38, 39. And whereas he taxes us for not joining with others, which he calls in
derision Anabaptists; I wish Mr. Troughton not to speak evil of what he knows
not; Mr. Jessey, Mr. Kiffin, Mr. Patience, so far as they practice
Gospel Ordinances, do as closely follow Jesus Christ, as Mr. Troughton and
others in their Baby-sprinkling do Antichrist: In a word, we are to join with
the Lord Jesus the head of the body, not with men, nor follow them further then
they follow Christ.

Fourthly, He accuses us, saying, that we own such as Christ's Disciples, who
are baptized into our opinion be they never so ignorant and vain, etc. This is
a mere scandal: for first, we baptize none but such as in some good measure
know their miserable state by sin, the love of God by a Savior; etc. And as
for such as walk in a vain conversation, they are cast off, if they refuse to
hear the Church. And whereas he says, we unchurch all that differ from us
though never so spiritual, heavenly, experienced Christians; I say, first, as
before, that they that walk up to the light which God allows them are his
Congregation. 2. That they who have the word of God, and follow Christ and his
Apostles in Gospel-obedience, are the Church of Christ, his Disciples and
experienced Christians, according to the Scripture computation, see Joh. 8. 31.

To the fifth Accusation (where he says, we refuse to hear the ablest and most
approved Ministers of the Gospel, except it be to cavil against them) I answer,
It is not so; for those that are approved Ministers of the Gospel (I mean such
as yield obedience to to Jesus Christ in his commands, and follow him in life
and doctrine) we freely hear. But we do not judge them who reject the counsel
of God, and teach otherwise then Christ and his Apostles taught, able and
approved Ministers of the Gospel; though they talk long and loud, yea though
they could speak with the tongue of Angels. As for Tithe-takers,
Baby-sprinklers, and Parish-Ministers, their practice declares them to be at
least in some things Popish Levitical Priests, acting contrary to the precepts
and practice of Jesus Christ, and so Antichristian. By the word cavil, I judge
he means reason out of the Scriptures, and in this we desire to do as we would
be done by; for we never deliver any Doctrine publicly, but we are willing
publicly to give an account of what we declare to them. And for the
serviceableness of those (whom Mr. Troughton counts) able Ministers, to the
state; I shall at present be silent, only adding, that most of us whom Mr.
Troughton traduceth in the margin of his book, have adventured our lives in the
service of the Commonwealth, and shall again, when thereunto called.

Sixthly, He accuses us, as overthrowers of Magistracy, and for accounting the
Parish Priests Antichristian persecutors, when they call for the civil power to
punish such as would publicly dispute their Doctrine and Ministry (he calls
it the keeping of order and peace in the Congregation, whilst they are about
the worship of God, and to prevent cumbustions, etc.) I answer, This is a mere
fiction; they are sure the Magistrates most faithful friends, who desire them
to wait on that office which God has called them to; and they are enemies to
the civil powers, who call to them to do that which is not appertaining to
their duty. Now we desire the Magistrate as a Magistrate, to exercise his power
in its proper place: as for example, if any had been at Odeby, or are elsewhere
stickers, or breakers of the peace by any means, God has ordained the powers
that are, for the punishment of such evil doers. But if any do desire to reason
out of the Scriptures about the worship of the most high God; they that call to
the Magistrate to punish such, or by the civil Sword to stop their mouths, are
Antichristian persecutors, yea Tyrants over the consciences of their fellow
creatures; and those Magistrates who shall (at the request of such Tyrants)
exercise their Authority against such as seek to find out the truth by
disputing, with the false Ministry (if they take not heed betimes) will be
overthrown by the might of the Lord, as they have been before them, who were
acted by the Popish, Prelatical, and Classical Clergy, and executed their
designs. Sure it was not evil in Christ and his Apostles, to dispute with the
Doctors and learned men in the Temple and Synagouges, to hear them and ask them
Questions. And I doubt not but many of our Magistrates are so wise, as not to
judge it a contempt of Authority to discuss things wherein we differ in matters
of Religion: if they shall, how differs our condition from what it was under
the Bishops? If I, or any of those Teachers whom Mr. Trough. opposes and
reproacheth as Anabaptists, should call to the Arm of flesh to hinder any sober
man from asking us a question about our doctrine (even in the midst of an
exercise) we should act contrary to our Lord Christ, for he never did so; and
let Mr. Troug. or the learned Doctor in this Island, try and see whether we
shall be troubled at his so doing. But its the property of false Teachers to
shun disputes, for falsehood has need of Corners.

Seventhly, He accuses us for suffering ignorant men (as he calls them) to
teach and baptize, etc. and for accounting these the faithful Ministers of
Christ.

This is very untrue, for there are none admitted into any congregation that I
know, (amongst those whom Mr. Through. professes himself to oppose) as members
(much less as Teachers) but such as give a faithful account of the principles
of the doctrine of Christ (the orderly walking in which, Mr. Trough. and many
of his tribe call heresy.) But I perceive he is much troubled because some of
his neighbors, who are husbandmen or tradesmen, do sometimes preach the Gospel;
and blots the margin of his book with the infamy which he thinks to cast on
them. Why may not husbandmen preach as well as an Excise-mans Clark, etc. However
they know, and can prove by the Scriptures, that Christ is their Redeemer, and
that is more then Mr. Trough. can do, by all his qualifications and consequences.

Eighthly, He accuses us for holding that there is no true and lawful Minister
of Christ in England, etc.

Here first he belyes us, for we say with the Scriptures, that Christ is to the
end of the world with all those who observe and teach others to observe what he
has commanded, Mat. 28. ult. and whosoever abides in the doctrine of Christ,
the same has both the Father and the Son, 2 John verse. 9.

2. He mistakes us, for we only say that the Ministers of the Church of
England (alias Parish Priests) are not the Ministers of Christ gifted or called
according to the Rule of the New Testament, for they take tithes, sprinkle
babes, preach before they are baptized, stand praying in the Synagogues, etc.
which Christ never required, but rather prohibited; and cry down the baptism of
believers, separation in worship, etc. as heretical; though both of them by
practice and precept from Jesus Christ.

3. He contradicts himself (as in his usual manner) for in his former
accusation, he says, we hold them (whom he calls ignorant) to be Christ's
faithful Ministers (and indeed he is not far from truth.) And here he says, we
hold there is no true Ministry according to the rule of the New Testament. What
he would say truly, is this, we hold there are none so excellently qualified
and furnished as the Apostles were, for the work of the Lord in the
ministration of Gospel Light; if there be, let us know where they are.

Ninthly, He says, We publish our corrupt doctrines and opinions in the places
where the Saints abide, and invade the Pulpit, etc.

It seems then we are willing to be tried by the light of truth, and are not
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, which Mr. Trough. calls corrupt doctrines,
etc. (I wish him to be more wary in his words.) If to affirm that Christ dyed
for all, and that believers are the only capable subjects of Baptism, be
corrupt opinions, then we promote corrupt opinions; but if this be the counsel
of God, and the words of the Holy Ghost, Mr. Trough. railes not on us, but the
living God, whose service we desire to profess and abide in. But if I declared
any corrupt doctrine at Mount-sorrel and Odeby, why did not Mr. Trough. show
wherein, as I desired him, being then present? And as for invading the Pulpit,
he might have left that out, for when at the request of some in Mountsorrel I
stood up to declare the Gospel (hearing that he who was expected that day could
not come, as Mr. Trough. knows) I came down and gave Mr. Trough. the Pulpit,
upon his promise, that he would afterward grant me there a conference; which
promise of his he most shamefully brake, and would not stay to give an account
of any thing that he had spoken.

Tenthly, He charge us with usual disturbing the faithful Ministers of
Christ, by putting on our hats in time of prayer* etc. and by procuring some of
the common soldiery to guard us with their swords, etc.

In answer to which, I have told Mr. Trough. both by word and writing, that if
he can prove himself a Minister of Christ according to the rule of the New
Testament, and that mixed multitude a society of Saints, or that ever Christ or
his Apostles did pray in the Synagogues before and after Sermon. I shall
acknowledge a fault, and give public satisfaction; if not, I shall persist in
so doing, till he or some other that finds fault with me can do it. And
whereas he says, I brought some of the Common soldiery, etc. There Is not a
tittle of truth in it, indeed there were many civil gentlemen there out of
Captain Glyns and Captains Johnsons Troops (being then quartered at
Leicester) and when some of them were reviled and stricken, they did neither
revile nor strike again; and it may easily be proved that if they had not been
there, we had had more fists about our ears then our own.

The eleventh charge he brings against us, is, That we daringly challenge the
Ministers of Christ to dispute, etc. will observe no order. etc.

This is a thing that we know not: for my part, I never challenged any Minister
of Christ to dispute, but once as I remember, and that was when I was a
Parish Priest and Minister of Antichrist (as many now are) and the Lord in
mercy made that man an instrument to reveal to me the principles of the
doctrine of Christ; and the beginings of that blessed Gospel Light, which I now
through grace walk in. I could wish that all the Parish-Ministers would seek to
dispute with those they count Heretics (I mean such as walk in obedience to
the commands of Christ) till they sped no worse then I did. But it seems we
dare dispute, so does not Mr. Trough. nor his brethren the Parish-Ministers;
and for order, we shall observe any that the Scripture approves of, only
Popish formalities we are utterly against.

In the twelth place, he complains, That we quarrel with them for praying
before and after Sermon.

To this I have given satisfaction in my answer to his tenth charge.

In his thirteenth are many gross slanders together, for (whereas Mr. Trough.
charge us with an absolute denial of original sin) we teach that Adams
offense in the garden was the first sin, and that we being all in his loins
who sinned, became subject to corruption; yea judgment came thereby on all men
to condemnation. And as for Gods absolute decree (which he most falsely says we
scoff at) we hold that God has from the beginning chosen to salvation such as
obey the truth through the Spirit, and of old ordained to condemnation ungodly
men turning the grace of God into wantonness; even all such as by the goodness
of God are not led to repentance. What he means by free will, I know not; But
we hold that God has given to his creatures, out of the riches of his free
mercy, ability and liberty, one time or, other to perform whatsoever he
requires them to believe and do. And whereas he says, we preach for falling
away (to use Mr. Trough. own terms) it is most untrue, for we preach for
holding fast by Jesus Christ, and warn, admonish, and beseech the Saints to
take heed lest any of them fall from the grace of God, or by an evil heart of
unbelief depart from him, Heb. 12. 15.

To the fourteenth (where he taxes us for bringing the Saints into bondage, by
dissuading them from frequenting the Parish-assemblies and exercises;)

I answer. Most of those whom he in derision calls our followers, have heard
him and other Parish-preachers, till they were weary of their soul-distracting
and self-contradicting doctrines. Neither is it we, but the Lord who commands
both us and them, to come out from Babel, to be separate, and to avoid, and
turn away from them that cause divisions contrary to the doctrine delivered by
Christ and his Apostles; not to receive to house, nor bid such God speed, (yea
and though he were an Apostle or an Angel from heaven) to hold such accursed as
bring any other Gospel or doctrine, then what has been preached by the Lord
Jesus. And such I am sure are our tithe-taking, mercenary Parish-Ministers, who
teach men to sprinkle babes, and to believe that Christ dyed not for all, etc.
Gospel and Doctrine, which never came out of the mouth of our blessed Redeemer;
yet we will hear you, if you will but give a reason of what you say to
dissatisfied spirits; otherwise we should bring our selves into bondage, if you
will neither answer us nor let us go. Blessed be our God, we can hear Christ
and his Apostles preach, search the Scriptures, prove their doctrine, and
receive satisfaction, and they are not offended at us.

The fifteenth Article of Mr. Troughtons charge against us, is a mere cavil and
groundless surmise upon his own mistake, for he using some vilifying and
contemptful language to one that had been a soldier and commander in the
States service, after long silence and bearing his imperious checks, the party
told him he had showed his face in the defense of his Country, where Mr.
Trough. durst not appear. But if ever I find Mr. Trough. charging an enemy for
his Nations just liberty, I shall assure him of all submissive satisfaction.
But upon this he charge us of giving out threatening language. And by this you
may see the weight of Mr. Troughtons complaints.

His sixteenth accusation is a gross falsity: For, he says, that we are ready
to make insurrection upon them, when they fight against our opinions with
Scripture-weapons, and that some of us have beaten some of their hearers; which
till Mr. Trough. prove, and bring the offender to condign punishment, I shall
only say this, that The religion of that man who bridleth not his tongue, is
but vain, Jam. 1. 26.

The contrary to Mr. Trough. 17 accusation is true, for whereas he says, our
design is to pull down the powerful Ministry of Christ) our desires and
endeavors are and shall be by the Lords assistance, to set it up, even such
Ministers as are obedient to every command of Christ, keep the ordinances as
they were delivered by him, and are enabled by the Spirit of God through the
Scriptures to preach the Gospel, without stealing the word from their
neighbors, and scraping and scribbling their Sermons out of Popish Postillers,
ancient Fathers, (as they call them) and commentators; but as for all national,
parochial tithe-taking, hireling, baby-sprinkling-Ministers, we know they are
plants which our heavenly Father has not planted, and will be rooted up. The
Lord is mercy by his word, root them up out of the dunghill of their errors,
that they may be rooted and built up in Jesus Christ.

In the last place, Mr. Trough. accuses us for holding the truth in love,
though he alter our expressions; For it is true, we do deny, that any can
infallibly prove that Christ dyed for him or her in particular, but by the
testimony of the Spirit of God in the Scriptures: if they can let them bring
forth their witnesses. I am sure that's an infallible evidence, being the
witness of God; and all other spirits, qualifications, and witnesses are
fallible, false, without foundation, and are built upon the bottomless pit. And
we do affirm that they who can and do by the Scriptures prove that Christ dyed
for them, are built upon a sure foundation (even the Doctrine of the prophets
and Apostles.) They may by such a Testimony, if profane, come to be convinced
and converted, if of a sadned spirit, to be comforted: some come thus to be
delivered out of the bondage of sin, others out of the bands of sorrow. It puts
a check to the presumptuous sinner, and lifts up the head of the despairing
soul; and though Cain, Pharaoh, Judas, and millions of men deny the Lord that
bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction yet that no whit
abateth the comfort of the Saints, who know and believe the love that the
Father has to them. I'ts but a fleeting inconstant comfort for a man to believ
that which he has no assurance of, to believe that Christ dyed for him before
he know it beyond the reach of doubting; for of necessity it must be, that he
believes he knows not what. When we say that men cannot certainly and
comfortably conclude that Christ dyed for them, but by the word of the living
God, (which says Christ dyed for all) and for want of this proof, are in any
kind of bondage and trepidation of spirit, we do it not to upbraid them, but
in love and tenderness of soul to free and refresh them; and therefore Mr.
Trough. did very ill (as I judge) to bring in this as a crime against us: but
hatred for goodwill is the portion of such as follow Christ. And withal you
may see the spirits of men, how they seek a knot in a rush, any thing to make
the persons of men odious. Surely they that show their teeth against those that
love them, would (if they had power) bite, yea devour such as they hate, and
count enemies for telling them the truth. And if Mr. Trough. did not hate us,
he would never cry out so to the Magistrates, and bring railing accusations
against us, and shun conference with us, but would endeavor to debate soberly
the points in difference, render a reason of his hope, and hear ours. But I
leave this to the Lord, and the impartial readers consideration* because I
hasten to the work, only I shall add a saying of Solomon's, He that is first in
his own cause seems just, but his neighbor comes and searches him, Prove.
18. 17.

Page 41. (through a mistake called page 40.) lin. 7. for Justification read
Sanctification. The literal or figural faults I desire the Readers to pass by
or correct with their pens.

SCRIPTURE-REDEMPTION freed from Restraint.
I Have heard and read some Conferences and Controversies concerning the death
of Christ and the effects of it: but remaining dis-satisfied in part with what
men have said and written on both sides, I have put forth this to public view,
that so they who have any thing to say for or against what I have held forth,
may publish also their approbation or dislike, in order to the investigation of
the clear and soul-establishing truth in this point. For my part, I am
satisfied that we shall be judged at the last day by the Word that Christ has
spoken, which some call the Letter of the Scriptures, and which I say are able
to make us wise to salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15. and not according to the Comments
and Glosses which men have put upon them. I know also, that Christ died for our
sins, according to be Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15. 3. and therefore, by the conduct
of that Spirit which gave them to us, shall begin to prove by these, That
Christ died, or tasted death, for all and every man; and after, give my Reasons
why I so judge. Yet before I come to lay down these. I shall show you how I
hold this point, and what Christ dying has done for every man.

The first Scripture which I shall present to your consideration, is Isai. 53.
6. All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way:
and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. Now indeed, if there be
any that have not gone astray, or any that have not turned to their own way,
then Christ bare not their iniquity: But if the contrary be true, and all men,
yea all mankind, have gone out of the way, it will undoubtedly follow, that
the burden of their iniquity was laid on Jesus Christ.

A second text of Scripture is Joh. 1. 29. Behold the Lamb of God, which takes
(or bears) away the sin of the world. By iniquity of us all, and sin of the
world, in these two texts mentioned, I understand the sins against the first
Testament, sins of ignorance, sins committed before conversion, or before we
knew good or evil, the one or first offense of Adam, which some call Original
Sin; as I shall in this ensuing Discourse by the Lords assistance endeavor to
make plain to each impartial and humble soul.

Another text for the proof of this, is Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him should not
perish, but have eternal life. Compare this with Acts 10. 34.

A fourth plain and positive proof of this truth, is Joh. 6. 51. latter part:
And the bread that I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of
the world. Suitable to this, is that, 1 John 4. 9.

The next place of Scripture to be considered, is 2 Cor. 5. 14. 15. The love of
Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then
were all dead; and that he died for all, that they which live should not
henceforth live unto themselves, but to him that died for them* and rose again.
Where it is evident, that the great love of Jesus Christ constrained the
Apostle to judge two things, viz. that All were dead, and that he died for all.

The Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 2. 5. 6. says thus: There is one God, and one
Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom
for all, to be testified in due time.

The seventh place of Scripture plainly proving the truth of this glad tidings,
is Tit. 2. 11. For the grace of God that brings salvation to all men, has
appeared.

A clear proof of this we have also, Heb. 2. 9. later part: That he by the
grace of God should taste death for every man, or every one.

In the ninth place, you have an evident testimony to this truth, 1 John 2. 2.
Who is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins
of the whole world.

The tenth and last positive proof of this great love of God in Christ, lies in
two texts, viz. Joh. 10. 15. I lay down my life for the sheep: and 2. Pet. 2.
1. But there were false prophets among the people, as there shall be false
teachers among you, who shall privily bring in damnable heresies, even denying
the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction.

And thus (in stead of fallible Arguments which men make by misunderstanding
the Scriptures) I have produced ten positive Proofs which we find written in
the Word of Truth, in express terms declaring that Christ died, laid down his
life, tasted death for, and bought all and every man, the world, the whole
world, the sheep, and those that deny him, and shall be destroyed. And whether
you that read these things will believe Mr. Troughton's ten Arguments, or the
express Word of the eternal God, choose ye.

But perchance some may say, Though these Scriptures say that Christ died for
all, etc. yet they mean otherwise.

I answer, first, by a Querie, Whether we shall be judged by the Word as it
speaks, or as men say it means?

Secondly, if the Word in this means otherwise then it speaks, we make God like
the worst of men; which God forbid: and withal, men are to blame for reading it
to us otherwise then it means.

Object. But all and every man do not always signify every individual.

Answ. Although the words all and every man do not everywhere intend every
individual, yet in many places it does: and that it so signifies when the death
of Christ is treated of, I shall hereafter (by the assistance of Jehovah) prove
by undeniable Reasons.

Secondly, although all and every, and the word world are sometimes taken for a
part of the whole; yet the whole world is never taken but for all sinners; as 1 John 2. 2. and 1 John 5. 19.

But how comes it to pass, ( may some say) if this be so clear a truth, that so
many godly learned men are of another opinion, and maintain that Christ did not
die for all?

Answ. Letting alone their godliness and learning, I answer, That they who hold
the truth in righteousness, are, and ever were, the smaller number.

Secondly, some have taken up their judgments on trust, without searching the
Scriptures: others have searched them partially, to maintain an opinion before
taken up from others. And some few searching seriously and sincerely, have been
mistaken, in that they have not rightly divided the word of truth, neither
distinguished betwixt the first and second man, the first and second Testament;
the offense of Adam, and our actual sins; the first and second death: but
affirm, that by Adam's one offense the second death came on him and all
mankind: they divide not betwixt life and life, justification and
justification, sanctification and sanctification; nor have they opened the
nature of Election, Redemption, Reconciliation, and Salvation, according to the
Scriptures.

I shall therefore, by the help of God, endeavor (as briefly as possibly I
can) to discover what death came through Adam's offense) and to handle these
Scripture-terms, Election, Redemption, etc. so as that men may come clearly to
see the foundation of that darkness, ignorance and error that has been
amongst the sons of men about the death of Christ: for most men following the
steps of their fellow creatures, have jogged on in the common road of
Tradition; not weighing well what the Word of Truth speaks, concerning these
most weighty matters.

And that I may the more profitably clear up these things, and make the way to
them the more plain, I shall desire the Reader to consider what by all is
acknowledged who truly confess the Deity, That there is a twofold
manifestation of the love of God to and amongst men; the one universal, and the
other particular or special, (answerable to his general and special presence
and providence:) the former is called the good will of God. Suitable to this, is
that, Luke 2. 14. Good will toward men; and that, Psalm. 145. 9. The Lord is
good to all, etc. not willing that any should perish. 2 Pet. 3. 9. The other is
that love by which he is said to delight and take pleasure in some; as Prove.
11. 20. The upright in their way are his delight; and Psalm. 147. 11. The Lord
takes pleasure in them that fear him, and such as hope in mercy. The first is
called the good will, or his love of good will; the later his delight, or love
of delight. The former is every way free, and every man and woman (as the
Scripture and experience shows) are partakers of it: the latter is conditional;
and only they that fear the Lord have interest in it. According to the former,
there is Election, Creation, Redemption, Reconciliation, Justification,
Sanctification, Vocation, and Salvation, of and to every man and woman:
according to the latter, only of and to a part of the sons and daughters of
Adam. And let me desire the Reader to forbear rash censures and prejudice, till
he has considerately perused and pondered what I shall here present concerning
these things.

But before I come to treat of these precious words, I shall endeavor,
according to that light and strength which the Lord has lent to me, to remove
one grand obstruction which does hinder many from understanding how Christ died
for all; and that is that conceit and received opinion, that for the first
offense God condemned Adam and all his posterity to the second death, which is
the lake of fire and brimstone. For the doing whereof, I shall lay before you
the principal proofs that men produce for their judgment in this point:
Secondly, their mis-interpretations of those proofs, contrary to Scripture and
sound Reason. Thirdly what the Word of the eternal God says concerning the sin
of Adam in eating, and the punishment that was inflicted for eating the
forbidden fruit.

The first testimony they bring forth, M. James Wood.
is Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. You has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and
sins, wherein in time past ye walked, according to the course of this world,
according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now works in
the children of disobedience: among whom also we all had our conversation in
time past, in the lusts of our flesh fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of
the mind; and were by nature children of wrath even as others. From whence
some conclude (as formerly I have done) that Adam and all his posterity,
through his eating of the forbidden tree, were condemned to the second death.
M. James Wood.
And to confirm this their conclusion, they say that by Nature is meant
nativity or birth, and by wrath the second death; not considering that wrath is
often taken for the anger of God denounced and inflicted here against sin and
sinners; as Psalm. 78. 49. and so it is used above forty times in Scripture: or
that nature is never taken for nativity: neither is it mentioned as a thing
that is evil, vile, or sinful of it self, but a help to the doing of things
contained in the Law, Romans 2. 14. a teacher of good things, 1 Cor. 11. 14. I
confess, men do corrupt and abuse Nature, sin against it, and transgress her
laws: so they do the Word of God, 2 Cor. 2. 17. yet the Word of God is not
therefore evil, because it is corrupted by men. And truly if Nature had been
so vile a wicked thing as some say, Christ would never have taken our natures
upon him.

Take briefly what I judge the Scriptures hold forth clearly for the opening of
this text, which in the least props not up their opinion.

By wrath, I understand Gods anger or displeasure against sin: so Heb. 3. 11.
And by nature, I understand partly the substance or the matter of which God
has made us, and the members of which are written in his book; which, though
through Adam's sin they are subject to corruption, death, or perishing in the
grave; yet they are not vile and wicked in themselves: for even the matter and
form of them (being from God by way of creation and appointment) are good.

But principally, by nature the Scriptures hold forth the light which God has
placed in man, as it is clear from Romans 1. 26. they did things against nature;
and Romans 2. 14. when they do by nature the things contained in the Law; that
is, by that light or law which is written in their hearts.

And withal, considering that the text now under consideration speaks of some
dead in trespasses and sins, wherein they had walked, following the devil, and
fulfilling their lusts; we may conclude, that by nature is not meant birth:
neither can it comprehend all mankind, forasmuch as infants have not so
walked. But this may be evidently seen in the text, that whilst Paul, or the
Ephesians, or any others walked in sins, followed the course and counsel of the
devil, fulfilled the desires of the flesh and of the mind, they were dead in
trespasses and sins, children of disobedience, and by nature children of wrath
even as others. Nature (or the light set up in their hearts by the Lord) did
accuse them, and present to their understandings the anger and displeasure of
God, and speak wrath to them, even as it did and still does to others: so that
as the Law works wrath (Romans 4. 15.) to them that transgress it; so nature
works wrath to those that do things against her, and makes their consciences
to accuse them, Romans 2. 15, 16. yea does not your own experience tell you that
when you do evil, there is a light within that discovers it into you, yea that
chides and checks you, yea that terrifies you, and flasheth wrath in your
faces? this is nature: and when you find it is thus with you, Know that ye are
by nature children of wrath.

Thus you see how the first text which they produce to prove that all men were
condemned to the second death for Adam's sin (called the one offense) speaks no
such thing.

The second text which I have heard alleged for their opinion, M. James Wood.
is, Romans 6. 23. For the wages of sin is death: whence I and others have
concluded (but very absurdly) That for Adams one offense he and all his
posterity were adjudg'd to the second death. But consider what is written in
the 16 verse, As ye have yielded your members servants to unrighteousness; and
in the 21 verse, What fruit had ye of those things whereof ye are now ashamed?
for the end of those things is death; and then let any sober soul, that is not
wise above what is written, judge whether the Apostle does in the least mind
the Romans of Adam's offense, or whether he does not wholly treat of the sin
done in their own bodies, and thence conclude that the wages of sin is death;
and implies, that if they had gone on in such sins, they should have had
eternal death their wages.

Object. But if it be yet objected, that the wages of any sin is death;

Answ. I grant it: But the wages of any sin is not every kind of death; for by
Adam's offense comes the first death, or mortality over all, (for Adam by his
offense becoming mortal, could not beget an immortal creature; for he begat a
son in his own likeness, Genesis 5. 3. mortal, mutable, and the sins which men
commit against that gracious God (who gives life, and breath, and all things
(through his Son) not confessed and forsaken, bring the second death.

So you see also how this text of eternal truth (wrested of men, and forced to
speak what they would have it) does not prove what they affirm ( viz.) That
Adam and all mankind were for his own offense condemned to the lake of fire and
brimstone, which is the second death; but speaks wholly of that which we
usually call actual sins.

The third and last text which has been alleged for this conceit, M. James
Wood.
is Romans 5. 18. As by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one came the free gift upon all
men to the justification of life.

Whence they conclude (as I have done in the days of ignorance) That Adam and
all his sons and daughters that ever were, are, or shall be, for the eating of
the forbidden fruit, were condemned to the lake of fire etc. but very falsely,
as you shall soon see: for, 1. If condemnation here be to the second death, and
justification of life, endless glory, as they say it is, then none shall be
damned at the appearing of Jesus Christ: for the text says, As by the offense
of one etc. condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one* etc. life.

But to avoid this, they have devised this shift, That though all men in the
former part of the verse signifies the whole lump of mankind, M. Powel M. Wood,
and others.
yet all in the latter part of the verse intends only some of them.

But how they found out this witty speculation, I do not know; for-the words
are plain, and clear as the Sun in the brightest noonday, As by the offense of
one, All men to condemnation; even so, etc. all men to the justification of
life; I judge therefore that the ground of their mistake is the same which once
was the cause of mine, in this point, even the want of skill rightly to divide
the word of truth, and to distinguish between Justification by blood, and
justification through faith; and betwixt the life that now is, and that which
is to come (as I shall plainly demonstrate, when I come to treat of
justification according to the Scriptures, and as I have before promised.) In
the mean space I confess I cannot but admire how I was, and some yet are, so
besotted as to say that All in one part of the text is shorter then in the
other, when the Spirit of God says even so etc. Surely to make that odd (I
mean longer or shorter) which God has made even; to add to, or diminish from
his word, is dangerous presumption. What I understand by this Scripture, I
shall therefore briefly lay before you, thus: As by Adams offense all men were
condemned to dye, so by Jesus Christ (being justified from that offense) they
do all live, and shall rise again from the grave: and this agrees with other
Scriptures; Col. 1. 17. By him all things consist; compared with 1 John 4. 9. 1
Cor. 15. 21, 22. For since by man [came] death, by man [came] the resurrection
of the dead: for as in Adam all dye, even so by Christ shall all be made alive.
Romans 5. 19. As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners; so by the
obedience of one shall many be made righteous: by which I understand, that many
(even all mankind) were made sinners by the imputation of Adams sin; and by
Christ's obedience (even to death on the Cross, Phil. 2. 8.) many (even all
mankind) were made righteous, ( i. e. cleared and acquitted from that which
was imputed to them in Adam) and this shall be testified in due time, when all
men shall rise again from the dust, freed from their sin, and stand before the
Lord, to give an account for the things done in their own bodies. I do believe,
that if we had not had a Ransom, the whole lump of mankind had perished for
ever in the first death: But there is not one text of Scripture that speaks any
thing of punishment in the second death for Adam's fault: men may endeavor to
prove such a thing by dark consequences; but there can be found no plain text
or sound reason for it: for first of all, God did not threaten it, Genesis 2. 17.
speaking thus: In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die; or,
dying thou shall die.

Secondly, God when he came to give sentence upon disobedient Adam, makes no
mention of it, (certainly he pronounced that judgment which he threatened) Genesis
3. 17. to the 19. only thus: Because thou have hearkened to the voice of thy
wife, and have eaten, etc. dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return. When a
Judge shall condemn a man to be burnt in the hand for some offense, if the
standers by shall go away and report that he condemned him to be burnt at a
stake to ashes, it would be both bold and ridiculous, yea perhaps punishable:
and if so to mis-report the judgment of a man that must die, how much more to
mis-interpret or mis-represent the Sentence of a righteous and immortal God?

Thirdly, we read, Romans 14. 12. Every man shall give an account of himself to
God; and 2 Cor. 5. 10. All must appear before the judgment seat of Christ, and
receive according to the things done in their own body, according to what they
have done, whether good or bad. Read and consider Joh. 5. 29. 1 Pet. 1. 17.
Rev. 20. 12, 13.

Fourthly, the Lord has sworn that the child shall not die for the iniquity
of the father, Jer. 31. 29. 30. Ezekiel. 18. 4. In the resurrection we all believe
that infants, even dying a day old, shall have their part; who cannot be said
by any sober spirit to have any sin to answer for, but what was through Adam
imputed to them: and if they shall then die the second time, or second death,
for that sin, then the Lords oath is in vain, which God forbid: I had rather
believe the Lords oath, then man's vain words; yea, let God be true, and every
man a liar, who by their ignorance hold forth as if God does condemn infants
twice for Adam's sin: first, to the grave; then, to the second death.

Fifthly, from the second death there is no redemption or deliverance: see Luke
16. 26. Between us and you there is a great gulf fixed so that they who would
pass from hence to you, cannot; neither can they pass to us, that would come
from thence: which quite crosses that fond opinion of some, who think that at
the day of judgment men shall come out of the place of torments, to stand in
the presence of God to receive their doom. I know that hell, i. e. the grave,
shall then give up her dead, and the dead shall rise and stand before the
throne; but it is not said they shall come out of the second death to be judged.

Sixthly if Adam and all his posterity were for the first offense (by some
called Original sin) condemned to the second death, then, to redeem him from
it, Christ must die the second death, or by his death prevent something that
Adam brought upon himself and his posterity. The one he could not; the other he
did not: and I challenge the whole world to prove either of them by Scripture;
though I know there be that boldly affirm such things, M. Powel
viz. That Christ, to save the world endured the torments which the damned
shall for ever endure in hell.

Lastly, the Scripture does nowhere make mention of any other death for eating
of the prohibited tree, but the first death; and therefore the second death
comes not for that transgression. That which is written, is for our learning;
but men not content with this, have sought out many Arguments to prove their
judgments, and so have clouded up the truth from themselves and others, and
have affirmed that Adam was a spiritual man, his paradise spiritual, his state
spiritual and a state of salvation, the tree spiritual, and many such unwritten
things, contrary to the Scriptures, which affirm that the first man was
natural, or earthly, 1 Cor. 15. 46, 47. and that there is no salvation in any
other but Christ. Acts 4. 14. who was not promised when Adam fell; with many
other places directly opposing their fancies. However, some that would fain be
wise above what is written, have raised so much dust and darkness, that they
cannot see how it is possible that Christ should die for all men, seeing all
receive not spiritual life and eternal salvation (by his death) which they
think Adam lost: And indeed, I see not how they can, until they see what Adam
was, (a natural man) and what he lost, (a precious pleasant garden) and whither
he was condemned, ( viz. to the dust.) And if they would but open their eyes to
see these things, they might easily discern the truth of the other, although
spiritual life and eternal glory be not enjoyed by all Adam's posterity.

And for the further clearing up of this, I proceed (by the help of God, to
show you, as before resolved, what the Word of Truth holds forth concerning
Election, Creation, etc. under a twofold consideration; Universal, and Special.
(Cast not away these things because strange, but prove them whether they be
true.)

I begin first with Election, which is God's loving, regarding, or setting his
heart upon lost mankind, and ordaining or appointing them to serve him; and
such as serve him, to be saved: and is General, or Particular.

General, thus:

When Angels and Men were fallen from their first estate, he chose neither the
disobedient Angels, in whom folly was found, nor any other creature; but he set
his heart upon man, Job 7. 17. and Psalm. 144. 3. What is man, that thou take
knowledge of him; or the son of man, that thou make account of him? Now what
account did he make of man? Why thus: he so regarded that poor lost creature,
that he chose or appointed him to live in this world, to stand in his sight,
and serve him: but withal mark this, that the affection he bare to him, and the
account he made of him, was by and through Christ (the Lamb slain from the
foundation of the world) in (or by) whom he chose man to be holy and without
blame before him in love.

If any shall say, that that is spoken of the Apostle Paul, and the Saints at
Ephesus;

I grant it: but withal, I would willingly know whether he has chosen,
appointed or ordained any man to be unholy, and blameable etc. or whether there
be a middle choice or appointment of God? If there be, show it. Sure I think
there is no man that has not parted with his Reason that will so far dishonor
him that gave it to him as to say that God has foreordained, chosen, or
appointed any to be unholy or unclean, as they were men and women; only when
they reject his counsel, he gives them up to their own hearts lusts, and leaves
them many times to themselves, having waited long to be gracious, yea upon some
a very long time.

But some have I heard affirm most confidently, Ma. Butler of Col Berye's
Regim. Mr. Rutherford.
that God did appoint men to be disobedient: that as he appointed some to the
means of salvation, so he appointed others to the means of damnation, which is
sin: and that all the unbelief and disobedience of men is committed by the
decree and appointment of God, as well as foreknown to him.

To whom I answer: Surely these are some of those hard speeches and ungodly
words spoken of, Jude verse. 15. which God will one day come to convince men of,
and punish for, if they repent not.

For, first, I querie, Whether unbelief and disobedience be simply sins? If
they be, then God has appointed, decreed, and ordained men to that which is
simply sin. Oh horrid blasphemy, and impudent impiety!

Secondly, it will follow* that men shall be damned for doing of that which God
has appointed them to do.

Or else, thirdly, they must with the Ranters say, that nothing is sin or evil.

Or lastly, they must hold that none shall be damned: for he that does the will
of God, must enter into the kingdom of heaven. Now all conclude, that they who
believe and obey, do the will of God: and if such as refuse and rebel do the
will of God also, (as these men say) then they shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven. This is fine doctrine for Ranters, Atheists, and all ungodly men.

But ( say some) the appointment, decree, or ordination of God, are twofold;
Preceptive, and Permissive: it is not the preceptive decree of God that men
should sin, but it is his permissive decree.

Although the distinction be groundless, yet I answer,

First, we are not speaking about what God does permit or suffer wicked men to
do, but what he foreordain'd or appointed them to do.

Secondly, A permissive decree, appointment, or ordination, is neither
Grammatical nor Rhetorical sense.

Thirdly, If by permitting, you mean that God suffers men to live, or does not
destroy men whilst they are committing sin. I grant it; and that such as
Shimei, Ahab, the Sabeans, Judas, etc. men of Belial, which despising the
Spirit of grace, have followed the Devil, are justly by Jehovah left to be
carried captive by him at his will, so that they do the will of their Father
the Prince of darkness I also grant it: But does it therefore follow, that he
did thus appoint or ordain them to such wicked actions, as if a man having
several employments, and many servants, should choose some for this service, and
others for that? If any shall affirm that God did appoint, ordain, or choose
some to obey, and some to disobey, I utterly deny it.

Object. But is it not so said, 1 Pet. 2. 8. That they were appointed to be
disobedient?

Answ. No; Neither can any humble, spiritual, or rational man gather up such a
thing from that precious text of truth; which says thus, That Christ is a
stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense to such as stumble at the word being
disobedient, whereunto also they were appointed. Now I would know whether they
were appointed to be obedient or disobedient? to the word, or to disobedience?
I see clearly in the text, that they were appointed, set, or put to the word,
and they stumbled at it, being disobedient; and for this they were
discommended: whenas rather had they been appointed or chosen to be
disobedient, they ought to be commended for doing that to which they were
chosen. Godly Tindal, in his Translation of the Bible, comes nearer the
Original thus, Being disobedient to that whereon they were set, or, whereto
they were put: They were set upon, and put to Christ and the word, as to the
rock of Ages* and teacher of truth; but they stumbled at Christ and the word,
Being imperswasible to what they were even put, says the Original.

Object. Mr. Prideaux.
But some will say, that God foreknew all the wickednesses that ever were, are,
or shall be.

Answ. I grant it: but will any be so void of reason as to say, therefore he
appointed it, and chose out or ordained one man to Adultery, another to
Murder? etc. for be it from any sober spirit thus to imagine. Christ foreknew
(and so did the Father) that Judas would betray Jesus; does it follow that God
appointed Judas hereunto? is it not said, Ioh. 13. 2. That the Devil put in the
heart of Judas to betray Jesus? and that Judas by transgression fell, Acts 1.
25. Surely it could not be a transgression, if God chose or foreappointed him
to do it, except you will say that God preordain'd men to transgress and do
wickedly.

Object. Mr. Rutherford.
But it is said, Acts 4. 27, 28. If a truth, Lord, against thy Child Jesus
both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of Israel, were
gathered together, for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined
before to be done.

First, I ask, What was it that the hand and counsel of the Lord determined to
be done or brought to pass? That the Jews and Gentiles should betray and
murder Christ, say some. But if there be no Scripture that says so, we must
not believe men's sayings, and expositions: for as touching the treason you
heard before, Ioh. 13. 2. and as touching the Murder, read I beseech you Ioh.
8. from 39. to 44. Ye seek to kill me, says Christ, etc. verse. 40. Ye are of
your father the devil, he was a murderer from the beginning etc. Therefore, say
I, that which the hand and counsel of the Lord determined, was the redemption
and salvation of mankind, the revelation of his will: see Ioh. 3. 16, 17. 1
Ioh. 4. 9. and 14. Ioh. 3. 34. the 12. 49. and 50. chap. and 18. 37. with many
others.

But Secondly, I answer, This in Act. 4. 27, 28, 26. is clearly expounded in
Act. 2. 23. where the holy Ghost holds forth Gods counsel and their sin in a
most plain manner: First, his Love, in delivering or giving his son; Secondly,
their Sin in that they took him, and with wicked hands crucified and slew him.

Object. But were not these things prophesied of?

Answ. This is the same with the former; I shall only add this, that the
foretelling of men's wicked actings is nowhere called the decreeing of them; M.
Prideaux.
it shows that God, who foreknowes all things, foreknew them: and if any shall
say that his foreknowledg and decree is all one they make God the full, perfect
and absolute Author of sin; for he fully, and perfectly, and absolutely
foreknew all the sins that ever were, are, or shall be committed by the sons of
men. To say therefore that he predetermin'd them, is not only ignorantly to
confound his foreknowledge and decrees, but presumptuously to belch out high
blasphemy against the highest Mercy, Justice, and Majesty.

Object. Mr. Rutherford.
But yet, say some, did not he bid Shimei curse David?

Answ. That does not say that God did decree or fore-appoint him to it: so
David says, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul, 1 Samuel 27. 1. This was
his infirmity.

2. Shimei it seems, was a man of a perverse spirit, 2 Samuel 19. 19. and the
Lord left him to himself: so he is said to harden Pharaohs heart; and men have
often ascribed that to God as bidding, which he did not hinder men from doing:
which is a very sad state, when Ephraim, or any soul, is let alone, and for sin
forsaken.

3. David being sensible of his great sins, saw a chastisement from God by
Shimei's malicious tongue; and that which was of punishment or correction for
sin, either to Shimei cursing, or David cursed, was from God: but if you read 2 Samuel 24. 1. and compare it with 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. you may see the more clearly
how to open such texts.

Lastly, I answer, If we shall understand this place otherwise then of Gods
giving up the perverse man to the perverseness of his own counsel, we must say
that it is Gods preceptive decree that men should curse; which the Objector
would seem to shun, and yet content to have granted, although it be contrary to
his own distinction. But if still any shall argue that God did decree his
cursing, by permitting of it, I say he did no otherwise permit it then David
did, in not cutting him off; and that is far from decreeing it.

Object. Mr. Resbury.
One objection more I shall answer, which is this: Some say that God cannot be
denied to be the Author of sin in every sense, because it is said, Amos 3. 6.
Shall there be evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? and Isa. 45.
7. I form the light and create darkness. I make peace and create evil: I the
Lord do all these things.

Answ. He that will read Ier. 18. 8. chap. 21. 10. and 28. 8. with many other
places, may easily see that the Evil that God brings on a City is War,
Famine, Pestilence, etc. But if wicked men could bring God to be the Decreer,
Commander, and actor of sin, they were then safe enough; but all such will be
found liars in the day of the Lord Jesus. These Objections are the Pillars of
Atheism and Ranterism: and if such as say that Christ never dyed for all, and
that he decreed the disobedience of the creatures, follow their principles up
to the height, they will in time either be reconciled to such, or die in
despair.

These things (being seriously considered by humble hearts) will let them see
that God never ordained, appointed, or chose men to unbelief and disobedience,
nor ever left them to themselves (which they call permitting of sin) till their
perverse hearts resisted his Spirit, and departed from him; but leaving or
passing by the fallen Angels, he set his heart upon lost man, he chose or
appointed that creature to live in the world, to serve him in holiness and
righteousness: and this is that which I call the general election, appointment,
or pre-ordination of God, through and in Christ, to live here, to the means of
grace, to do well etc.

But, will some say, General election is a contradiction, Election being a
taking a part out of the whole.

Answ. Election is so indeed; and that which I affirm in this point, is the
same; for out of the whole of what was fallen, he chose a part ( viz) Mankind,
to stand before him: as when a heap of Gold and a heap of silver is before a
man, and he having power or liberty to make his choice, takes one of the heaps,
chooses all the gold or the silver as he pleases; so it was the pleasure of
Jehovah (Angels and men being fallen, and both before him) to regard or set his
heart upon, or choose poor undone man.

But I beseech you to consider, that I never said that he chose or appointed
all men (as men) to eternal life: for there is a special election (as well as a
special salvation) of such as believe. That there is a special election or
appointment of some to eternal life, is agreed on by all; and that this
election was from the foundation of the world, is denied by none that own the
Gospel: and that this election or appointment to eternal happiness is of such
men and women who believe and obey him, following that holy rule and light
which he has given them, is as true; for no rational man is so absurd, as to
say that he chose any others amongst grown persons to everlasting glory.

Yet some affirm, that he chose to salvation a certain number of persons,
personally considered only as creatures.

Of whom I would first demand, Whether Election be not according to the
foreknowledge of God, suitable to Romans 8. 29. Whom he did foreknow, them he did
predestinate; and that in 1 Pet. 1. 2. Elect according to the foreknowledge of
God. If it be (as without controversy it is) then I affirm that God foreknew
their obedience as well as their persons; or else you maim and bound the
infinite and unlimited Foreknowledge of the most High, to whom not only all
his own, but all our works were known from the beginning.

But the great question is, Whether the creatures obedience foreknown, did move
God to give him eternal life?

To which I answer, First, that eternal life is the gift of God, Romans 6: last

Secondly, That election to eternal life is only according to the purpose and
counsel of his own will; and what that is, the Scriptures do evidently Manifest
(viz.) that the purpose and will of God before the world began, was to make
Christ the Author of eternal salvation to those that obey him; that such as
believe should not perish, but have eternal life, Joh. 3. 15, 16. and 6. 40.
that such as do well, and by patient continuing in well-doing seek for glory,
honor, and immortality, should have eternal life: read Joh. 5. 29. with Romans
2. 7.

Thirdly, Election to eternal life is through sanctification of the Spirit and
belief of the truth, 2 These. 2. 13. He has chosen to himself the man that is
godly, Psalm. 4. though not for being Godly, yet it was his pleasure to choose
such.

Object. But they are Godly and believe, by virtue of their election preceding.

I grant it, understanding it of choosing or appointing all men to live here,
and to live to him, as I have before showed; for had there not been such an
election by the free unsought-for mercy of Jehovah, no man had ever believed,
no nor had life or breath. Still therefore it will be our wisdom to divide a
right the word of truth, and to distinguish between election before calling,
and election after caling; the former, of all mankind, to live here, to hear
the call of God, and answer it, (both which privileges were lost through
disobedience) the latter, of such as live to him (whilst they live here) to
eternal bliss. Election before calling every one will grant: of the other the
Scripture speaks, Mat. 20. 19. and 22. 14. many are called, but few are chosen,
see Rev. 17. 14.

Object. But if any say, The order of words prove nothing,

Answ. Search the Scriptures, and you shall see exemplary testimonies to
confirm this: consider Act. 9. 15. After Paul was called and come in, the Lord
says to Ananias, Go thy ways; for he is a chosen vessel to me, etc. he does
say he was: and compare this with the same Apostles saying, Romans 16. 7. Salute
Andronicus and Junia my Kinsman, who are of note among the Apostles, who also
were in Christ before me. Now every soul that knows any thing, knows that there
is no election out of Christ; and it is a man's being in Christ, that entitles
him to that eternal life which God has given to his Son, to give to whom he
will (and he will give it to such as hear his voice and follow him) so that it
is plain to me, and many thousands more, that there was before time an election
or appointment of all men to the means of grace, and also of such as in time do
believe through the Spirit, to everlasting glory.

Object. But faith is the gift of God; and men cannot believe, except God give
Faith.

Answ. In this poor souls lie sadly in the dark; because their Teachers have
not rightly divided the word of truth to them.

That I may therefore show you how faith is the gift of God. I must desire you
to consider that faith is taken chiefly two ways in the Scripture.

First, For the doctrine of Christ, the Gospel; so it is taken Jud. 3. ver.
Contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints: so it is taken,
Gal. 1. 23. so also Gal. 3. 23. Before faith came, we were kept under the Law,
shut up unto the Faith that was afterward to be revealed, Romans 10. 8. the
Apostle speaking of the Gospel, says, This is the word of Faith. So it is
taken, Ephesians. 2. 8. By grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of your
selves; it is the gift of God; not of works, etc. As if he had said, Our
salvation is not by the Law of works: but by the Gospel, which is the gift of
God; and is called the Gospel of our salvation, Ephesians. 1. 13. and salvation. Act.
28. 28. God has given three great gifts to men: Christ, Faith, and Life; and
these three are as fully and freely the Gifts of God, one as the other; only
by faith, so taken as a gift, I understand the truth or Gospel of God.

Secondly, Faith is taken for the duty of believing; as Heb. 11. throughout;
Romans 10. 17. Jam. 3. 2. with many other places; and it imports the act of the
creature enabled by the Lord to believe.

Obj. Is it not said, To you it is given on the behalf of Christ not only to
believe, but also to suffer for his sake?

Answ. I know God does give or grant men to believe and suffer: he gives the
power or ability to believe or suffer, or else it were impossible that men
should do either: all our sufficiency is of God; he gives the object of Faith,
Christ, or the Word of Truth; and he gives power or ability to believe this
truth. But to say that God gives the duty or act of faith, is not common sense;
for that were all one as to say that God believes and obeys: for he that acts a
thing, is said to do it; and he that acts faith, is the believer: He works in
his creatures to will and to do; and then it is their duty to work out their
salvation with fear, etc. (not with fear lest God should fail them, but) lest
they should come short, etc.

For the fuller discovery of this, consider seriously what is said, Isai. 43.
9, 10. Let all the nations be gathered together, let all the people be
assembled; who amongst them can declare this, and show us former things? let
them bring for their witnesses, that they may be justified; or let them hear,
and say, It is truth. Ye are my witnesses, says the Lord, and my servant whom
I have chosen; that ye MAY know and believe me, and understand that I am he.
Before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me.

Whence I see, first, when men hear truth, they may and must acknowledge it.
Secondly, that all Nations may know and believe God, and that there is none but
he, etc. Thirdly, that all people are and shall be witnesses against
themselves, and Christ is and shall be witness that they MAY know and believe
God: and indeed, nothing hinders men from doing these things, but self-will,
the Devil, and false Teachers, who say that God has not given all men ability
and understanding to know and believe God; and people are very glad of such
doctrine, that they may lie in their sins, and yet lay the fault upon God, and
say that he does not give them power to do what he requires of them; and if he
would give them more grace, then they would do better: and so blessing
themseves in their hearts, go on in their wickedness, hoping to find an excuse
in the last day, that God was wanting to them, contrary to Isa. 5. 4. where the
Lord enquires, What could have been done more to his Vineyard which he had not
done for it? to which Mr. Troughton and the rest which hold such principles,
might reply, that God might have done more, for he might have brought forth
good grapes for them, or force them to bring forth good grapes, by an
unresistable power; which he never did, nor ever will, though poor ignorant
creatures have so taught and believed, contrary to Romans 1. 19, 20. and chap. 2.
15, 16. where it is clear that God has furnished every man with so much means
for the knowledge and obeying of him, as will leave them without excuse; which
is granted by all.

Object. But, say they, though it may leave them without excuse, yet it may not
be sufficient to salvation.

Answ. This is most unbeseeming the mouth of a sober man: for if the means of
grace extended by the Lord to men, be sufficient for the glorifying of him, it
is not too little for the glorifying of them.

Again, those means which men afford their servants for the doing of their
work, will not leave them without excuse, if not sufficient to effect that
which is expected from them through those means: and will men still make God an
austere master, reaping where he did not sow? God forbid! He was called a
wicked and slethful servant, Mat. 25. 26, 27. that taxed the most High with
such dealings. And the hard speeches of men who say that God expects more from
men then he gives them ability to do, and that he will punish them with eternal
damnation to whom he gives not means sufficient to salvation, will one day be
rewarded as that servant was, Matthew. 25. 28, 30. if they repent not. Shall not
the judge of all the earth do right? Genesis 18. 25. I beseech the Reader to weigh
well that which the Spirit of God speaks, Job 34. 23. for he will not lay upon
man more then right, that should enter into judgment with God. Surely if all
men shall be left without excuse, it shall be by having sufficient means for
the doing of that which God expected from them in their generation, and for not
doing whereof they shall be damned. Read Matthew. 25. 45 46. and 2 These. 1. 8.
chap. 2. 10. 11, 12. But if they had not what was sufficient for enabling them
to know God, and believe the truth unto salvation; they will have an excuse (
viz.) that now they must be damned, but it is because God gave them not
sufficient means to know him, and believe his truth, that so they might be
saved: but let God be true, and every man a liar; all such mouths shall be
stopped, and God shall be clear when he judges, Psalm. 51. 4.

Object. But all have not the truth held forth to them, may some say.

Answ. First, Though all men have not the same measure of light or truth
manifested to them, or in the same manner; yet they have so much light of truth
as God has appointed them to follow; for not following which, they shall be
condemned, Joh. 3. 19.

Secondly, let us consider, that by light which I here speak of, I understand
the law written in the heart, which when men do evil, speaks truth to them,
telling them it is evil, and accuses them for it, and again discovers unto
them the goodness of God: yea, when they do well, it assures their hearts of
it, praises them for it, and in this speaks truth: which light or law if men
believed, shunning that which it shows to be evil, and practicing that which
it declares to be good (they having no other teachings from God here) their
consciences would excuse them in the day when God shall judge the secrets, of
all men by Jesus Christ, Romans 2. 16.

Thirdly, That every man shall be judged according to what they have, and not
according to what they have not.

Object. But God is not bound to give to every man sufficient means of grace.

Answ. First, He has done it already; the works were finished from the
foundation of the world; yet such as believe not, shall never enter into his
rest. Read and consider Heb. 4. 2, 3.

Secondly, He has bound it by an oath, that he desires not the death of a
sinner, Ezekiel. 33. 11. Thus you see how true the Lord my strength is; and he
never did nor will require any more of his poor creatures, but what he of his
own mercy and goodness has given them ability to perform.

Object. How comes it to pass then that all do not walk up to that light which
God has manifested to them, believing and obeying the truth? and how comes it
to pass that some do believe and obey, and others do not?

Answ. To the first part of the objection, all will agree, that it is because
they follow the counsel of the Devil and false Doctors, the Pleasures, profits,
and promotions of the world, which choke the seed: they seek the honor that
comes from men, etc. Joh 5. 44. and love the praise of men more then the
praise of God: they are not the sheep of Christ, for such hear his voice, Joh.
10. 26, 27. Let him that reads consider who are Christ's sheep, and then he
will see the reason why men believe not; it is not because they are not
elected, but because they hearken not to the words of the Lord.

Secondly, some are ruled by the counsel of God; they receive the word into an
honest and good heart; for faith comes by hearing and hearkening to the truth:
he calls, and some come; he invites, and some haste to the feast; whilst
others frame excuses: God sets light before them, as he does before others, and
they rejoice in it: he presents life and death, persuading them to choose life,
Deuteronomy. 30. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. and some by the Lords persuasions, do choose life:
and all praise, glory, and honor, is due to his glorious Majesty* for his
gracious calls, his loving invitations and sweet persuasions; for he might have
left us without all these means: they who come, do but their duty, and no
thanks is due to men for doing their duty; it is God that furnishes them with
understanding, means, power, and opportunity; yea he calls them to it by the
light, which makes all things manifest, and shows to man his duty; and what it
is that is most suitable to him who is goodness it self.

Thus you have heard concerning the Election or Ordination of God; that he
chose or appointed fallen man, and not the Angels, to serve him; and how he, of
his own free mercy in Christ, chose or pre-ordain'd such as faithfully serve
him, to life eternal through Christ; though there be many who would bear the
world in hand that we deny Election and Reprobation, because we are not so
senseless as to say that God from all eternity chose a certain number to life,
without reference to any obedience to his will, and appointed the rest to sin,
and so to damnation, as some say; or at least, as others hold, left the
greatest part of men to be damned in the second death, because of Adams eating
the forbidden fruit, without any real tender of mercy through Christ:
Expressions, which an holy heart, not deluby corrupt doctrine, will abhor to
meditate. Surely the Lord will do nothing, but he reveals his secrets to his
servants the Prophets, Amos 3. 7. And if God has revealed any such thing that
has appointed men to disobedience and unbelief, left them without any mercy
through a crucified Christ (and yet without excuse) I would entreat those that
find it to show it to us: but in the mean space, I beseech you consider what
has been evinced to you; that God has appointed all men to serve, honor, and
obey him, as throughout the whole book of God is revealed to us, and which I
shall endeavor further to discover to you in the next word, Creation.

Concerning which also, as of the former, I shall treat,

First, generally;

Secondly, particularly.

As touching that which I call general Creation, we are to consider who is the
Author of it, and by whom. The Scripture will give answer thereunto, thus:

First, That God created all men.

Secondly, That this was through Christ.

For the first, we see what the Apostle says, He that made all things is God.
See also Act. 17. 24. And that this was through Christ, is clear, Ephesians. 3. 9.
God who created all things by Jesus, etc. By whom all things consist, Col. 1.
17.

Object. M. Wood.
But not as a mediator, says one.

Answ. 1. How to distinguish between Christ and the Mediator, the Scriptures
never yet taught us; for he by whom all subsist, is the Mediator.

2. For the fuller explication of this, consider seriously, Acts 17. 26, 27.
where you shall find who created all things, by whom, to what end, thus: And
has made of one blood ( or blood of one) all Nations of men, to dwell on the
face of the whole earth; and has determined the time before appointed, and the
bounds of their habitations, that they should seek him, etc. where many things
are considerable:

First, That one blood (or, blood of one) there spoken of, I think none will
deny to be the blood of Jesus Christ, the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world; by whose death we have life, John 6. 51. Through him we live, move, and
have our being. By that blood Adam had his life granted him, after he had
transgressed the command of God: by the same, do all Nations of men consist.
And I think that none will gainesay this, that Adam had his life continued
through a crucified Christ or Lamb slain, etc.

Secondly, See the end why God created or made all Nations by, through, or of
one blood (or blood of one) not that they should be disobedient, or to damn any
(as some say) but, that they should seek him; which does further illustrate
what I lately wrote concerning Gods choosing of mankind when they were all lost
in one to serve him; so in this case, when mankind might have been banished
for ever to the dust, he found a ransom to keep him from going down to the
pit, and by that ransom granted life to Adam and all his posterity, 1 John 4.
9. But as there is a special election of such as obey to eternal Salvation; so
is there a special creation in Christ of such as seek him; of which I come next
to speak.

This you may read in many places of Scripture, where mention is made of the
new creature, the new man, etc. especially 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in
Christ, he is a new creature, etc. Now the depth of this point lies in this, to
find how a man comes to be a new creature.

Some hold, that a man is merely passive in this work, as he was in the
universal creation; and some say that there are others who teach that man makes
himself a new creature: if there be any such, I am sure that they are both in
extremes, and far from the truth of God. That which I have found true in the
Scripture, and by experience, is this, That God (having appointed or chosen,
and created or made man to seek or serve him, when his creatures become able to
understand the difference between good and evil, and to be cheered in the doing
of one, and checked in the committing of the other) comes to instruct and teach
them; even when they are dead in sins and trespasses, stretches forth his
hands to them, inviteth them, beseeches them, and shows them his love;
convinces them of sin by the light of the Lord manifest in the heart, or by
his word: and they who learn of the Father, lay to heart his love, consider
their misery, see the filthiness of sin, follow the light, hearken to his
voice, and so receive his Son. To these (who were his offspring before in the
first or general creation) does he grant power to become the children of God,
even to such as believe on his name, John 1. 12. and so become the workmanship
of God, created unto Christ Jesus in good works, they are begotten and borne
again by the Gospel, that immortal seed of the word, which lives and abides
for ever. They that hear his voice and hearken to it, do live, and then Christ
gives them life: Hear, and your soul shall live, Isa. 55. 2. Such as receive
the truth in the love of it, ( the seed into an honest and good heart) become
thereby quickened, and in time to be born again of water and the Spirit, and so
are ingraffed into Christ, or added to the Church, old things (errors in
judgment and life) pass away; all things become new, they being conformed to
Christ the new Man in all obedience.

And thus the new Creature is formed, and the new Creation framed, and fitly
compact, to be an habitation of God through the Spirit.

I confess that these things, to a carnal heart, and a poor deluded soul, will
seem strange: yet do but consider whether this work of special creation (in
which only some share) has not always been thus carried on: first, the Lord
called, and spoke, presented light to the soul, by which he discovered his
love, and man's enmity: his purity, and the creatures iniquity; his goodness,
and sins sinfulness; yet still some turned away the ear, pulled away the
shoulder, despised his reproof, set at naught his counsel, vexed his holy
Spirit, believed not his report, but delighted in sin, and so remained dead in
sins and trespasses: but such as hearkened and heard, rejoiced in the light,
considered the word, and entertained it, though before carnal (and so not
discerning spiritual things) became thereby spiritual, as the Apostle Paul
clearly demonstrates, Gal. 3.

And whereas some have a fond conceit, that a man must be spiritual before he
can receive the word, it is a gross mistake: for there was never yet a spiritual
man, but before he received the teachings of the Lord was carnal; and by
receiving the instructions of the Almighty, became spiritual.

But their mistake is grounded upon a worse foundation, even their low thoughts
of the Scriptures; and they reason to this effect: The word (say such) may be
preached a thousand times, Mr. Tro.
but except God come by the power of his Spirit to overpower our hearts, we
cannot receive his words; not considering that the word is Spirit and life,
John 6. 63. and the power of God to salvation to them that believe, Romans 1. 16.

Secondly, Upon a conceit they have, that a man is like a stock or a stone, in
and under the work of the new creation: not considering that although God in
the first creation did the work wholly and absolutely himself, yet in the
second or new creation, he comes to a creature that he has furnished with
abilities to do what he requires; and then gives it his commands according to
that ability; requires them to hear, know, and receive his truth: and they that
obey him in these things, live; they are quickened, and so the new creation is
begun.

Object. If any ask why all do not receive the truth,

I answer, They resist the Spirit of God, Act. 7. 51.

But lest I should leave this obscure, I desire the reader to weigh these
things:

First, That the new creation has not it is compleatness at once.

Secondly, That the Lord does ever so begin the work and every part of it, that
what is by us to be done, he leaves very plain and easy before us.

First, It is not at once completed: for first, the Lord commands to hear,
Isa. 55. 3. Secondly, to seek, verse. 6. Thirdly, to know, Act. 2. 36. Job 5.
ult. Fourthly, to believe, 1 John 3. 23. Fifthly, to repent, Act. 17. 30.
Sixthly, to be baptized, Act. 2. 38. and so they are planted into Christ, Gal.
3. 27. Romans 6. 3, 4. Added to the Church, Act. 2. 41. ( which is Christ's body,
Ephesians. 1. 22. 23.) To the Apostles fellowship. Act. 2. 42. Thus souls are joined
to the Lord.

And this word or doctrine which was from the beginning, remaining in them,
they remain in the Son and in the Father, 1 John 2. 24. and abiding in the
doctrine of Christ, they have both the Father and the Son, Joh. 2 Ep. v. 6.

He does not first command men to enter into Church Fellowship, as the Papists,
Prelates, Presbyterians, and some others do: for the first thing that these
practice, is, to put all those that are born in their Church (as they call it)
into Church Membership, as soon as they are born and sprinkled with water in
the face, though they be but a day old. Neither does he command men and women
first of all to be baptized, nay he does not expect men to repent, till they
are warned by his light or word discovering sin to them; nor to believe, before
they know what; nor to know, any more then he declares: but, first hear, then
know, after that, believe, repent, and be baptized; and by this they come out
from Babel, are separated and distinguished from the world, and made manifest
to be professors of truth, and members of the body of Christ (for men are not
fitted for Church Membership, according to the primitive pattern and
Scripture-account, till they are baptiz^^ consider Acts 2. 41, 42. neither are
they fit to be buried with Christ in baptism, till they repent ( i. e.) turn
to God from errors in judgment and practice, yea are dead to them; neither
will men ever do this rightly, till they believe that which is written in the
law and in the prophets, apply it to their own souls, and cast themselves upon
God for life and salvation through Christ alone. Neither can they ever thus
believe, till they know by an infallable testimony what God has done for them
by Christ: and till men come to search the Scriptures, and hear the Spirit
there speaking to their souls, and give up themselves to that eternal truth and
perfect teaching of the Spirit, which only is for our learning, they will never
know that certainly.

Qu. What shall they do that have not the Scriptures?

I answer, as Christ did to Peter in another case, yet much like this, Joh. 21.
22. What is that to thee? follow thou Christ in the light that is given thee:
he knows what he laid down, and what to require, and how to reward every man
according to his works. Thus, as by the steps of Jacobs ladder, men ascend to
the Lord, attain to the measure of the stature of Christ, come to have
fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Jesus, and to walk with God; who
(as I hinted but even now) does begin the work and every part of the work of
the new creation, leaving man to do nothing but what he has enabled him to do,
and so without all excuse in case of neglect: yet many do neglect their duty
which God has left them to do; which, together with the committing of that
which God has declared to be evil, is counted sin, and shall be the only
cause of men's condemnation in the last day. Read Mat. 25. 45. and 2 These. 1. 8,
9.

Does God command men to hear? (which is the first duty required of us in order
to the new creation) he gives ears, Psalm. 94. 9. (Neither does he call upon
little Infants to hear, Deuteronomy. 11. 2. to 8.) Does he command men to see,
consider, and understand? he gives eyes, heart, and understanding.

Obj. But is it not said, Deuteronomy. 29. 4. that God had not give them eyes to see,
a heart to perceive, and ears to hear, unto this day?

It is so said, and it is true as it is written; only men consider not where
the sound and force of that saying is: for most place it in these words [ the
Lord has not given] and I find by the Scriptures that it is to be placed in
these words, Unto this day; for once they did see the Lords wonders, and sang
his praises, as you may prove, Deuteronomy. 11. 5 6 7, 8. compared with Exodus 15. and
Psalm. 106. 12. But they forgot his works, and God withdrew his light; they
rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit; so he turned to be their enemy, Isa. 63.
10. they once knew and understood that it was the Lord that delivered them; but
for their rebellion he forsook them, and continued not that light with them: Ye
have seen the wonders that God did before their eyes, etc. Deuteronomy. 29. 2, 3. Yet
the Lord has not given you an heart to perceive, etc. UNTO THIS DAY, v. 4. And
indeed, God has nowhere promised that he will continue Light and understanding
to a people that still disobey him; The Lord is with us, while we are with him:
if we forsake him, he will forsake us, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. There have been many in
our age, who neglecting to follow the light which they saw, have been left in
darkness; and though God did once give them a heart to perceive, and eyes to
see, etc. yet he has not given these to them UNTO THIS DAY.

By this you may perceive that God is not wanting on his part to carry on the
new or special creation, but men are wanting to do their duty: when the Lord
calls them from sin, they refuse to come, and delight still in their carnal
state, till the Lord forsakes them, and will no longer wait on them, nor suffer
his Spirit to strive with them.

You may also see that the Reason why there are no more new creatures, is this,
they hearken not to the teachings of him that gave them their being in the
general creation, but reject the counsel of God against themselves, as the
Scribes and Pharisees did, Mat. 21. 31. Luke 7. 30.

And by this, Lastly, you may see, that creation is General and special:
General, of all men by Jesus Christ; special, of such as receive the word and
obey it, in Jesus Christ. In the former, is nothing required of the creature;
in the latter, so much is justly expected as the Lord enables him to do.

Obj. But is it not said, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man receives (or
comprehends) not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness
unto him; neither can he knew them, because they are spiritually discerned?

Answ. For the better understanding of the mind of God in this place, we must
first consider what is meant here by the things of the Spirit of God; which the
Apostle shows us in the 9 and 10 verses to be those things which God has
prepared for them that love him, even the spiritual treasures of grace and
glory which shall be brought to the Saints at the revelation of Jesus Christ, 1
Pet. 7. 13.

Secondly, What is meant by the natural man; which also the same Apostle
explains, in the 15 chapter of this same Epistle, verse. 44 45 46. There is a
natural body, and there is a spiritual body; as it is written, The first Adam
was made a living soul, the last Adam was made a quickening spirit: Howbeit that
it is not first that be spiritual, but that which is natural etc. Adam, or man,
as man by general creation, is this natural man (beware then lest you affirm
that Adam was created a spiritual man.)

Thirdly, What God has prepared; and that is a Kingdom, Matthew. 25. 34. A
place or mansion, John 14. 3. A city, Heb. 11. 16. an inheritance undefiled, 1
Pet. 1. 4, etc.

Fourthly, Who they are that love him; such as keep his commandments, Joh. 14.
21. ( i. e.) such as observe all Christ's commands, and his commands only, in
the worship of God.

And from all these things I conclude, that Adam, with all his knowledge before
his fall, and all his posterity, as they are living souls, do not, neither can
they, perceive with the eye, or contain in their understandings the nature,
glory, and excellency of that Kingdom, Mansion, City, and inheritance which is
prepared for such as obey God.

Nay, there are many precious Saints in our generation, that apprehend little
or nothing of them. The Corinthians were very ignorant of these; insomuch that
there were some among them said there was no Resurrection. Paul prays for the
Ephesians, that they might know this, Ephesians. 1. 18, 19, 20. Nay, Paul himself did
not fully apprehend or receive it, Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14. But there is a time
when this natural man shall be raised up a spiritual man, 1 Cor. 15. 43. and
then shall we know as we are known, and see him as he is, 1 John 3. 2. Tell the
most of men of the reign of Christ, the restitution of all things, the Kingdom
of the Saints, the paradise of God, the Tree of life, the new heavens and
earth, the new Jerusalem, with its height, breadth, length, and glory, etc. they
will either turn it to a hidden mystery and an empty Allegory, or look on it
as a foolish carnal conceit; though God by his Spirit in the word has revealed
these things to us for our comfort.

Secondly, I answer, that by the things of the Spirit are not here intended the
duties of faith and repentance; for these have been and still are received by
natural men, who by the receiving of them become spiritual; for unnatural men
are far from them, and enemies to them: a natural man may hear the word, and
come to believe and obey, and yet not perceive the Kingdom and City which God
has prepared.

Thirdly, Neither by the natural man is here meant simply a wicked man, except
you will say that every natural man is a wicked man; which God forbid: for
Adam, even as he was created by Jehovah, was a natural man, as has been
proved. Again, if it should be imagined that it is impossible to hear, know and
believe the word, which is spirit and life, Joh. 6. 63. then men will conclude,
that God commands things impossible (which is also most absurd) for he commands
both, Job 5. and last. Mark 1. 9. Rev. 2. 7. He that has an ear, let him hear,
etc. And I would further desire any sober spirited man to consider whether it
shall be reckoned to any man as his sin, that he did not perceive that which
was impossible for him to perceive?

Lastly, you may see that the scope of the Apostle is to prove the Corinthians:
for though he had in the power of the Spirit declared to them the riches of the
grace and glory of God, the Resurrection of the dead, and the eternal
Judgment; yet they were gone but very little above their natural light in
these things; were but babes in Christ, and in some respect carnal, and so
could not perceive the things which God had prepared for them, although by the
Spirit manifested in the Gospel; and to that purpose writes Epistles to them,
to raise them higher in spiritual light and learning, that being by the truth
in Christ become more spiritual, they might receive and comprehend the great
things which God had prepared for such as love him.

Thus, after some little digression, I come to conclude this point of Creation,
which is general (through one blood, even of the Lamb slain from the foundation
of the world) or special, of such as believe on his name, and so receive
privilege to become the Children of God by adoption, or the new creation as
before showed.

I come now to treat of redemption or buying again, which is also general or
special: general, of all lost mankind, by the pouring out of the blood of the
Lamb slain from the beginning; or special, of such as believe on him who was
slain for them. For the unfolding of the truth of this point, I entreat the
Reader to consider, First, from what state, with what price, and to what end,
Christ bought or redeemed all mankind.

For the first, they are redeemed from the suffering that came by Adams sin, I
mean, the first death, as I have before showed; so that that punishment did not
presently seize upon all mankind and send them to the grave, in one who had
sinned; neither shall it for ever keep any one of Adams posterity under its
power; but all do live by Jesus Christ here, and see the goodness of the Lord,
and all shall live hereafter (I mean, rise from the dust) and see his glory:
only here is the difference; they who saw his goodness here, yet did not
embrace it, shall see his glory hereafter, but shall not enjoy it: and this
will be a never-dying worm to their accusing consciences (not that they were
not redeemed, but) that they despised the riches of his grace, when they might
have had it, but would not; and now are shut out of glory, when they would have
it, but cannot.

Secondly, Mr. Wood.
Consider, the price by which we were ransomed, bought, or redeemed, Mr. J. T.
is only the blood of Christ (though some, through over-hastiness affirm the
contrary) and by this there was a reconciliation made for the whole race of
Adam, thus far, that whereas they were all reputed offenders in one, and justly
out of favor, the Lord for the sake of Christ was at one with them in
reference to that sin of the world which the Lamb of God took away; by whom God
was so appeased, that fury is not in him, Isa. 27. 4. except men set the
thorns and briars against him, etc. verse. 5. according with that, 2 Cor. 5.
19. God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself.

Objection But, say some, that is meant of the Elect only.

Its true, if you mean of mankind (in opposition to the fallen Angels) chosen,
appointed, and ordained to live here and seek God; which is the first
acceptance of Election. But if you mean of the Elect ( i. e.) such as were
chosen to eternal life, then it seems these were once out of favor, or else
what need a reconciliation? Though it be granted to be of the Elect, yet it
does not follow that it is of the Elect only: for if God will judge men
according to their works, and not punish the child for the father, (as he has
sworn he will not) then surely he is reconciled to more then (such as you call)
the Elect, in reference to the first sin, or one offense of Adam.

See how incongruous it is to say that this is meant only of the Elect, or
such as shall be eternally saved! First, in it self: for if God be reconciled
to them (in respect to Adams offense) then some shall (not only in the first
death, but also in the second death) be sufferers for that one offense; and how
contrary that is to all the revealed will, yea Oath of God, I have already
showed. Secondly, all rational and unbyassed men that fear God, know that the
world in Scripture Phrase is opposite to the Lords chosen ones, as John 15. 19.
John 17. 9. Thirdly, It is inconsistent with the Tenants of Mr. Tro. and others
with him; for they say the Lord chose a certain number of men to everlasting
life, without reference to any faith and obedience; from which Election they
could never fall: and if so, what need of reconciliation? therefore it must
needs be of some that were not in favor: for it is very improper to say, that
God was in Christ reconciling the beloved of his soul to himself, which never
did nor ever could lose his favor.

But this will be more plain, when we consider into what state mankind was
bought and brought by the blood of Christ; and that is, not to eternal life,
for he did not buy all men or any man, that by the pouring out of his blood
only (without faith and repentance) they or any one of them being come to years
of discretion should be saved; for if redemption and reconciliation had been
such, and so fully absolute as to this what need the Apostle have besought the
Corinthians so earnestly that they would be reconciled to God? 2 Cor. 5. 20.
And if some men shall be saved in glory, only and alone because Christ dyed
for them, then those many melting invitations, tender intreatings, with all the
exhortations, admonitions, reprehensions, instructions and other teachings of
the Lord, might have been spared: But therefore I hold that men (even all men)
were delivered, redeemed, or bought out of the hands of their enemies, that
they might live through Christ here in this world. Secondly, that they might
live to him that dyed for them and rose again, 2 Cor. 5. 15. i. e. through him
believe, Joh. 1. 7. and serve God in holiness and righteousness before, etc.
Thirdly, That they who for naught had sold themselves to death and the devil,
might rise again from the dead.

In a word, as God through Christ chose or appointed all men to serve him, and
by Christ created or made all Nations of men to seek him, as the Scriptures
say; so by the blood of his Son he bought again or redeemed lost mankind. And
if it be true, that all men without a Christ were once dead, and now living by
him, are bound in duty to live to him; it is as true, that he dyed for, or
bought all. And that these things are true, you may clearly see, if you read
and seriously consider 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. where the Apostle being proving that
all were dead (a thing it seems somewhat strange to the Corinthians) does it
thus; If one dyed for all, they were all dead: And that he dyed for all, that
they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but to him that
dyed for them and rose again. It seems that they only are bound to live to
Christ, for whom he dyed and rose again. That all are bound to live to him,
none dare deny; that all men shall be raised by Jesus at the last day is true,
as I have before showed.

And that Christ bought or redeemed all men, See John 10. 15. and 2 Pet. 2. 1.
Now none will deny that he bought the sheep, that is, such as confess him, hear
his voice, and follow him: and Peter says, There shall be false teachers, etc.
denying the Lord that bought them: so that he bought them also who deny him,
and are destroyed.

Object. Mr. Wood Mr. J. T.
But the Lord that bought them is not the Lord Jesus, say some.

Answ. They that shall say so, and teach men to say so, are in this some of
those false teachers, who deny the only Lord, even our Lord Jesus Christ.

If they shall say it is the Father,

Answ. Christ and his Father are one: show another Lord.

Object. But, says the Objector, The price wherewith they were bought, was
some other price then the blood of Christ.

Answ. 1. When he shall show me what that other price is with which false
teachers are bought, I shall believe him, and not before; for it is not expressed
in Scripture.

2. He may as well say that the Saints at Corinth were not redeemed or bought
by the blood of Christ, because its not mentioned. 1 Cor. 6. 20. and 7. 23.

Object. Mr. Wood
But the word in the Original signifies to buy without a price, or acquire men
into the Profession of Gods service.

I Answer, first, This is utterly false; and though it be not always meant to
buy or acquire with blood, yet whatsoever men purchase, buy, or acquire, they
lay out study labor industry, health, friends, strength, money, or some other
means or price, by which they get or compass their desires.

Object But is it not said, Come, buy, etc. without money and without price?
Isa. 55. 1.

Answ. First we cannot buy spiritual things with money, or silver, as some
Translations render it. But,

Secondly. He that comes to the Lord to obtain any mercy, if he come without
the blood of Christ upon his soul, be sure he will acquire or get none.

And whereas it has been said, that Christ does acquire men into the
profession of his service. I demand whether he does acquire them to serve him,
or profess his service really or seemingly? If really, then it is the same that
I say; Christ did really buy men, that they might really serve him: and because
some serve Satan and others serve God in hypocrisy, they shall together have
their portion with their Father and Master the Devil in the lake of fire. If
seemingly, then Christ by their doctrine acquires or gets men to be Hypocrites:
for seeming service, or the profession of service which is not real, is all
one, and both abhorred Hypocrisy. The Lord in mercy yet grant men space to
repent of these their hard sayings.

Object. Its true, say some, that Christ dyed for all, and bought all in a
sense; but dyed not for all alike.

I Answer, The question is not in what sense Christ dyed for all, or bought
all; but whether the thing be true: and if he dyed for all in any sense (as you
call it) it is true that he ransomeed all.

But say others, All were bought by Christ to live by him, and shall rise by
him; But not as a Mediator.

These poor cavils and senseless shifts are not worth answering: I shall only
say this to them, That when the Objectors can prove what they say by the
Scriptures ( viz.) that Christ dyed two ways, I shall heed their sayings: in
the mean space such expressions are so far from the form of sound words, that I
fear they flow rather from a critical then conscientious spirit, that seeks
truth in the love of it.

I have showed you what the Scriptures say, and how according to them Christ
dyed for all, so that all live by him, and ought to live to him: I desire not
to be wise above what is written.

I come next to speak in few words of Redemption in a stricter acceptance, and
to show how some are in a special manner freed, ransomed, delivered, or
redeemed by Jesus Christ, and to that purpose shall first lay down some
Scriptures, and to come to the clear understanding of this point. Cast your eye
then upon Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of our sins; and upon 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Forasmuch as ye know that
ye were not redeemed with corruptible things (as silver and gold) from your
vain conversations received by tradition from your Fathers; but with the
precious blood of Christ etc.

The great question here to be resolved, is this; How the Saints come to be
redeemed from their vain conversation, and to have remission of their sins?

For answer unto this, I beseech you that read to remember what I have in part
declared already, that there was an offense (though committed but by one) in
which all the world was reputed guilty before God, so far, as that, if Adam for
that offense had at the instant of his committing it gone to the grave, the
whole race of mankind had perished in him; to take away which, the Lamb
without spot offered up himself to God, so that that sin imputed to all (and so
called the sin of the world and iniqnity of us all) was by the pouring out of
the blood of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, taken away and
remitted; so that none shall now dye eternally for it: and herein appeared the
free love of God, who by the blood of his Son washed away sin, no creature
seeking of it.

But every individual man and woman, when they come to years, and know good and
evil, do themselves commit many sins, and walk in a vain conversation by
tradition, etc. and how they come to be redeemed, or delivered from this by the
blood of Christ, I shall by Scripture and experience briefly make manifest.

First, God sends Christ or the light to them, with manifestations of his grace
and goodness, to lead or persuade them to turn from their sins to God; declares
to them the sufferings of his Son for their sins: and they who seriously
consider these manifestations of mercy, believe, and lay to heart the kindness
of God (though before Prisoners to sin and Satan) are loosed, delivered, or
redeemed from their sins and vain conversions, as the Apostle plainly proves,
Acts 10. 43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his name
whosoever believes on him shall receive remission of sins. So that through the
application of the blood of the Lamb to their souls by believing, they come to
be delivered and have redemption from these sins of theirs, and this redemption
or pardon of sin is in time, and conditional upon faith and repentance.

I shall endeavor further to illustrate this, by a familiar similitude thus;
Suppose the servant of some mighty Emperor or General should commit an heinous
offense, to both the high displeasure and dishonor of his master, and (now
conceiving in his heart that his Lord was full purposed to punish him with
exquisite and exemplary torments) should secretly depart to his masters
greatest enemy, and with him, with a heart full of envy, wrath, and devilish
despite, contrive the destruction of him whom he had lately disobeyed: in the
mean time, this mighty man (having no such thoughts as his wicked servant
imagined) hearing that another potent person, for some horrid crime, had
condemned his run-agate servant to dye, gives his only Son to suffer death, to
preserve his live; who yet still (not knowing his Lords love) with a perverse
and enraged heart, carries on the design of his masters ruin: but in the
midst of his malice and fear, having certain intelligence of the transcendent
kindness of one whom he had so highly incensed, and of his own willingness to
receive him even as a Son, if he would return to him, presently his soul begins
to melt, hatred lets go the hold it had upon his heart, and admiring such
unexpected and undeserved love, his bands of wickedness full off, the rage,
rancour, and wicked resolutions which possessed him, are all cast out; the
snare is broken, and he is delivered, not only from that death which his
Masters Son quitted him of, by dying for him, But also by applying and
considering his Lords love, of those bloody sins and designs against his
Master, and begins to think of returning to him, who had done such great things
for him. Thus stands the case betwixt God and man: when Adam had sinned, he ran
away from his Maker (and what spirit he was of toward him, you may perceive by
his Answers to him, Genesis 3.) who yet had thoughts of love and peace toward
him, and gave his only Son to ransom him from the pit; of which ransom or
redemption all his posterity, being in his loins, are partakers: but they have
all (as I may say, one by one) departed from their God, and rebelled against
him that redeemed them, and continue long ignorant of the loving kindness of
the Lord: at length, the Lord by his teachings (as himself pleases) makes
known his goodness and riches of grace; and as many as believe or lay to heart
what he has done for their souls, how he gave the Son of his love to dye (yea
to destroy the power of death) for them, that they might live by him, and
through him rise from the grave, and that they have this redemption or
deliverance through the blood of Jesus shed for them, and have clear evidence
of this by the Spirit in the Scripture of truth, they begin to loath and leave
their sins; the love of God known, casts out their base fear; his mercy
manifested, destroys their malice, pride, lust, covetousness, etc. cuts in
sunder all the cords of vanity in which they were held, carries them quite out
of their prison wherein their souls were pent up; though sin tugs hard, yet at
last it is fain to remit its hold; and though before they hugged sin as a
friend, they now let it go as an enemy; and so in the end, through the applying
of that blood which was shed for them, they are redeemed out of the hand of the
enemy; and by the application of the blood of Christ, they receive remission of
THEIR sins, as they before had by the effusion of it the remission and
redemption from Adams sin, which, as I before hinted, was absolute, unsought
for, free, and universal. This is conditional and especial.

And if any shall demand,

Why all have not this redemption.

I answer, Because they believe not, they lay not the blood of Christ to heart;
if they did, it were impossible that they should be so carried away with lust,
pride, ignorance, lying, swearing, cheating, drunkenness, gaming, covetousness,
formality, lukewarness, ildeness, and all manner of disobedience: for if men
did consider the grace of God, if they knew the gift of God, and his kindness
which toward man appeared, and thoughts of peace he harbors even toward them
that are in rebellion against him; yea, how he was Reconciled to them who yet
are enemies; they, even they, would harbor sweet thoughts of God, no longer
look upon him as an enemy; But throwing away the weapons of wickedness (their
sins) would consider him as the chief of friends, and so be reconciled to him,
as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 5. 20. and of which the prophet Isaiah speaks,
Chapter 27. 5. This reconciliation also is special and proper to believers.

Thus have I, as briefly as I could (and more briefly then the matter indeed
will well allow) spoken of redemption and reconciliation; how general, and how
special.

I come in the next place, by Jehovahs help, to treat of Justification, which
is also universal and special; The one is by the effusion or pouring out of the
blood of Christ; the other by the application of it: of the one, mention is
made, Romans 5. 9. Being now justified by his blood, etc. and thus God is said to
Justify the ungodly Romans 4. 5. but that this may be the better understood, we
must consider that there is a twofold sin or offense: That which some call
original, which the Scriptures call one offense, or offense of one, even Adam,
and the^e innumerable transgressions which every man and woman commit. From the
former only I find that all are justified, by the pouring out of the blood of
the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world: from the latter none is or
shall be, but through the applying of that blood by believing: The former of
these is absolutely free; suitable to this is, Romans 3. 24. without any condtion;
and is universal, as you may see, Romans 5. 18. The latter is also free on Gods
part, but upon condition of believing, on ours, as you may find Act. 13. 39.

For the further clearing of this thing. I desire the reader with me to reveiw
that lately-recited text, Romans 5. 18. and I shall lay it down according to the
Original: Therefore as by one offense (or sin) condemnation came upon all men;
even so by one, justification to life came upon all men.

But having handled this point partly before, upon another occasion, I shall
only reminde the reader that these tex^s hold forth this clearly to us, that as
sin came upon (or was imputed to) all men by Adam; so righteousness came upon
(or was imputed to) all men by Christ: and as for that sin all men were
condemned to dye; so from that death all shall through Christ be made alive:
and this is agreeable to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15. 22. and all divine justice
and reason; for had not Christ justified mankind from that offense. Adam and
all his posterity had been banished from God for ever, as you may plainly
perceive by that which is written, 2 Samuel 14. 14. I would gladly know, whether
any man has life here, or can rise from the grave, but by Christ by whom are
all things; or whether we could by any means enjoy these, if we were not
justified from that which deprived us of it, and so quitted from that prison
the grave, which without a Christ dying and rising again, would have kept Adam,
and in him all his posterity, under its power; but the day shall come, when all
that sleep in the dust shall rise, and shall give an account before the Lord
(not of Adams sin, but) of the things done in their own bodies: so that it
seems that when every creature shall stand before the Judge of the world they
shall not be looked upon as unrighteous persons, because Adam did offend. If
any affirm they shall, let them prove it by the Scriptures, and I shall
willingly assent to them: In the mean space, I propound this to my self and
others, that either men shall at the day of judgment be damned for Adams sin,
or they shall not; if they shall, then God has somwhere revealed it in his
word (for he will do nothing, but he reveals his secrets to his servants the
Prophets) if they shall not, then they shall be considered righteous, and
justified from it; which is clearly suitable to Romans 5. 19. As by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the Obedience of one shall many be
made righteous. And this is that which I understand by the justification of all
men, even Gods acquitting of them from Adams sin, (and the suffering which came
by it) at the day of judgment; then which, nothing is more clear to me (and
thousands more) in all the holy Scriptures, and agreeable to all the revealed
will of God in this case, declaring that every soul shall bear his own burden,
and dye for his own offense.

But now a word or two of special justification, and so I shall conclude this
point.

That which I call special Justification, or the Justification of some
particular persons, is, when God is pleased to look upon his poor creatures
which through believing in Jesus Christ turn from sin to serve him, as
righteous in his Son: which I desire further to explain, thus: God having in
the purpose of his own will, freely justified mankind from that sin of Adam,
and granted them to live in this world, they all commit many grievous offenses
against that loving God that gave them life, breath, and all things, by lying,
swearing, drunkenness theft murder, adultery, fornication, pride, ambition,
coveteousness, idleness, cozening, envy, by evil thoughts and evil words from
which the law of Moses is too weak to justify them; for let poor creatures
annoyed, imcumbred, and compassed about with these sins, read the Law of Moses,
or offer up sacrifices according to that Law, yet that will not drive sin out
of the soul: but t^^ blood of Christ applied by faith, the blood of Christ
sprinkled upon the conscience, will purge out sin. When a poor soul does know
and believe that Jesus Christ shed his blood for him or her, they begin to hate
iniquity, and abhor every sin; and at length, through faith ( i. e.) the
constant application of the blood of Christ to their hearts, they who formerly
were servants of sin, and free from righteousness, become quit, justified,
freed from sin, and servants of righteousness: for with the heart man believes
unto righteousness, Romans 10. 10. so that by believing they become justified
(righteous, and cleared) from those sins from which they could not be justified
by the Law of Moses, as that before I hinted from the mouth of the Apostle
Paul, Acts 13. 39. So that which I find in the Scripture, concerning this is*
that though God has freely through the pouring out of the Lambs blood taken
away the sin of the world (I understand Adams sin) yet none ever did or can get
free or justified from the sins which they themselves have committed in their
own bodies, but through believing or laying to heart the goodness, kindness,
grace, mercy, or love of God, which toward man appeared in Christ Jesus before
the world began; and in some measure of light or other, has been, is, or shall
be manifest to all men. Of this justification by faith, the Scriptures of truth
speak much; as Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God;
from whence I gather, that (though God be at peace with us in relation to the
first transgression) yet no man can have peace with him in their own souls in
reference to those many sins that themselves have committed but by believing or
laying hold of his strength, as you may see, if you will but considerately
weigh Isa. 27. 4, 5. Of this Justification (which believers only are sharers
in,) mention is also made in many other places; as Gal. 2. 16, 3. 8. and 24,
etc. As for justification by works, as the Papists plead for it, the Scriptures
own no such thing: only as they serve to justify our says before men, showing
it to be such a faith as works by love, and is agreeable to the word of the
Lord.

The next in order to be spoken of, is Justification: in treating of i^, I
shall first, with the aid of God, show you by the Scriptures how all are
sanctified, and then how only some are sanctified by the blood of Jesus.

First, there is a sanctification of all men, and that is by the blood of the
Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, poured out, or shed for them. For
the full discovery of this, I would desire the reader to consider, what
sanctification is according to the Scripture, and he shall find that it is
either a cleansing, purging, or a separating something to an holy use, and this
is either by blood, or by the word of truth or Spirit of God. A word or two of
the former of these: when all mankind were polluted and unclean through the
offense of one, and in him banished from the presence of God, and condemned to
the dust, our dear Redeemer by his blood freely purged away that spot or
filthiness, (which would have kept men out of the presence of God for ever)
that so all men and women are through him separated or sanctified to serve the
living God: and for proof hereof, search the Scriptures, and see Heb. 13. 12.
Wherefore Jesus also that he might sanctify the people with his own blood,
suffered without the gate. And if any shall say that the text proves not that
he sanctified all men with his blood,

Answ. first, There are none excluded.

Secondly, His suffering without the gate, argues that his blood was shed to
sanctify both Jews and Gentiles, which are all the people that the Scripture
makes mention of.

Thirdly, If Christ had not by his blood sanctified whole mankind from the
filth of Adams fault, they had never had life or liberty to serve God.

And if any shall say, that God has not through his Son given all men liberty
to serve him: then it seems that they who shall be damned perish, because God
would not give them liberty, or leave to obey him; or else because Adam did eat
the forbidden fruit; either of which is absurd, yea horrid to a knowing
spiritual heart.

But more clearly is the evidence given by the same Apostle, Heb. 10. 29. Of
how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden under foot the Son of God, and counted the blood of the Covenant,
wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done dispite to the
Spirit of grace! Whence, without violent wresting of the Scripture (a thing
that many use, to serve their turns) we may clearly conclude, that they who
trample under foot the Son of God, and do despite to the Spirit of grace, and
count the blood of the Covenant as an unclean or unholy thing, were sanctified
by that blood which they so lightly regard. Now all will grant, that they who
prize Christ, obey the teachings of the Spirit, and highly esteem the blood of
the Son of God, were sanctified by it: and the Scripture here evidently
testifies, as before mentioned, that others, even the worst of men (as I may so
say) were likewise sanctified; who then is excluded? or are there any more
sorts of men and women, but such as obey the Spirit, and such as resist it? Is
it not most evident that all were sanctified by the blood of Christ? even they
that trod it under foot, and flight it, and despise the Spirit of grace, and
Son of God? I am not ignorant of the many poor shifts which I and others have
had to evade the truth of God so plainly revealed in this precious place of
Scripture; but I judge they are not worth the taking notice of.

Object. But some may enquire happily, What is my end, in endeavoring to prove
that ungodly men, who tread under foot the Son of God, etc, were sanctified,
justified, reconciled, and redeemed by his blood?

Answ. That when I meet with such, I may declare unto them the righteousness,
kindeness, and goodwill of God, convince them of their ingratitude; persuade
them to love Christ, and believe on him; to leave their evil, learn to do
well; demanding of them how they can have the heart to live so wickedly, and
abuse the mercy of God in Jesus Christ, by whose blood they were justified from
that one offense, and sanctified or set apart to serve God? how they can be so
unkind to their Savior, and to tread him under foot that bought and sanctified
them with his dearest heart-blood? That in case they refuse, they be left
without excuse, so as they shall not be able to say in the last day, Lord, when
did we hear of thy love, or that thou did redeem and sanctify us by thy
blood? and so it being manifest that their destruction is of themselves, the
Lord may be clear when he judges.

And whereas it may be demanded, How it comes to pass that all serve not God in
holiness?

I answer, first, negatively; It is not because God did appoint them to
unholiness and disobedience, as some blasphemously say; but because they resist
the holy Spirit, or the teachings of truth, or light of Christ, showing good
and evil; excusing them in doing the of one, and accusing them for the other:
for they who receive the instructions of the holy God, and turn at his reproof,
shall have his Spirit poured out to them: Prove. 1. 23. Turn you at my reproof,
I will pour my Spirit unto you, I will make known my words unto you; and so the
Lord giving out his word and Spirit, and they receiving it, become partakers of
that special or peculiar sanctification of which I made mention but even now;
of which a word or two in the last place.

When the posterity of Adam, once sanctified, as I have showed you, by blood,
or set apart to serve Jehovah (which privilege had all lost in one) come to
know good and evil, to receive vain thoughts to lodge in their hearts, and so
vain words proceed from their lips; and vain traditions from their Teachers and
fellow creatures, with all which their minds and consciences, yea their lives
and conversations become defiled; and as many of these as ^^ke notice of the
goodness of God, entertain the true light, that lights every man that comes
into the world; embrace the counsel of God, apply the blood of the Lamb,
believe on the Lord Jesus, and take heed to their ways according to his word,
these are led to repentance (or a change) come to see the sinfulness of sin,
turn from it, have their consciences purged from dead works, and their ways
cleansed; so that at length they come to be holy in heart, and all manner of
conversation, and so are partakers of that special sanctification which I am
here treating of ( viz.) by the Word and Spirit.

For the declaring of this more fully, I shall lay down this Querie;

What is the reason that men dye in their sins, and are not purged from their
filthiness?

If I should as many do, say, that it was Gods appointment, he so ordained it,
or that God did not show them his light of truth, or that he did not do this
really, or that he did not give them ability to receive it as it was
manifested, and so follow it, or else for that he gave not his Son to dye for
them; neither was it his will that they should repent and be sanctified, but
that they should dye in disobedience, and so be damned. Sure If I should say
thus, all good men would abhor me for such speeches (and well they might:) yet
these are the tenants and sayings of those men, against whose opinions I have
appeared: and surely I judge, that as a man said to Joab in another case, I may
positively conclude in this, that themselves would set themselves against me, if
I should go about and preach that God did appoint men to disobedience and to
sin, and not willing that all should come to repentance but that some men (even
as they are men) should despise the riches of his grace and perish. These hard
speeches I have heard some men to utter.

Others are more moderate, that God did only leave men to themselves.

Whereto I say, first, that God never left any man in that state whereunto Adam
brought them; for he brought them to the earth, and was not able to show them
any means of grace, or so much as a resurrection from the grave; but God left
not any man there, but afforded them such manifestations of his love, as will
leave all inexcuseable before God.

Secondly, I Answer, That God did never, nor ever will forsake any poor
creature, till they reject him, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. But more of this elsewhere:
only I add this, that when men have and still do refuse God he leaves them,
and will have nothing to do with them.

This may suffice for evidence to this truth, that it is not because God would
have it so, that men are still polluted in their conversations, and
unsanctified in their lives; But, as you shall hear in the next place, it is
because they believe not: Joh. 8. 24. I said therefore unto you, that you shall
dye in your sins; for if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your
sins.

Secondly, Because they will not be purged, Ezekiel. 24. 13. Because I have purged
thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness
any more, till I have made my fury to rest upon thee.

Thirdly, Because they receive not the word into their hearts, neither take
heed to their ways according to it, Psalm. 119. 9, and 11.

And if any shall allege that when God comes to sanctify a soul, he will do
it by an unresistible power:

I answer, There Is neither promise or example of such a thing; and they who so
affirm, make themselves wise above what is written. It Is true, there are many
works which the Lord does absolutely of himself, without calling for the
creatures duty in any respects, as in the Creation, Redemption, and Salvation
of mankind from that misery that Adam brought them; so as in and under that
free, universal, and unlimitted consideration which I have spoken of: so when
God will destroy his enemies none shall deliver out of his hands; he will work
and none can let it, Isa. 43. 13. and there are many works which he will bring
to pass conditionally; as the redemption justification, sanctification, etc. of
creatures from their own sins; and these he will effect upon receiving and
believing the truth, as I have also showed you in the treating of these things
under that special consideration, which I have presented to you; and as you
have heard from. Act. 10. 34. Acts 13. 39. and many other places; in which you
may see that the Lords work, and the duty or endeavor of his creatures (by him
furnished with ability to do what he requires) must, and ever did go together:
God purifies the heart by faith: see Act. 15. 9. God it is that purifies, the
creatures duty is to believe. The Lord does and will ever work, according to
the counsel of his own will, which also he has revealed in his word: and he
has sanctified us from the first offense by his Sons blood (which otherwise
would have caused our eternal banishment from the Lord;) yet will not sanctify
us from our vain courses, but through belief of the truth, which cleanses the
souls that receive it in the love of it: for when a poor creature, who long
has served sin and Satan, comes to know the love of God in Christ, and believe
it, his heart is so purified, and his conversation cleansed, that he cannot
endure sin, but hates every false way, denies ungodliness and worldly lusts,
and lives soberly righteously, and godly, in this present world.

And thus having treated of Sanctification also under a twofold consideration,
I shall (by the gracious assistance of God) next speak something of Vocation;
which is the call of God, or God's calling of his poor creatures to believe in
the light which he gives them, and leave off their sins: it is his inviting or
persuading men to do well, the stretching out of his hands, as it were, to
beseech men to come to him ( i. e.) to conform to his light or revealed will.
And this is Universal: for as he chose, or appointed, created, delivered,
justified, and sanctified mankind, to seek and serve him; so he calls all
men everywhere to know him, obey him, and glorify him, according to that power
or ability that he has given them, or the light or commands which he holds
forth to them. He calls the Stubborn and rebellious, Isa. 65. 2. the
refusers, Prove. 1. 24. them that perish, and put from them the word of God, and
eternal life, Act. 13. 41, 46. such as spend money for that which is not bread,
and their labor for that which satisfies not; who thirst after unprofitable
things: Isa. 55. 1. Ho^ every one that thirsts, come; and the Spirit and the
Bride say, Come; and let him that hears, say, come; and he that is a thirst
come; and whosoever will, let him come, and take of the water of life freely,
Rev. 22. 27.

And if any shall say that the people who are here called upon, are such as
thirst after Christ and his righteousness.

I Answer that it is a gross mistake (though by most looked upon as clear truth)
for had they thirsted after Christ, who is the true bread, and his
righteousness, which fills and satisfies the souls of such as seek him, they
had never been so reproved: Isa. 55. 2. Why will ye spend your money for that
which is not bread, and your labor for that which satisfies not? But do not
we see daily some thirst after blood and revenge, some after honor, some the
praise of men, others through luxuriant pleasure melt even as to water the very
sinews of their strength, and some for gain, gold, and profit, adventure
estate, fame, health, and life, yea body and soul, that they may compass their
end? yet riches profit not in the day of wrath, Prove. 11. 4. Who then is
excluded from the call of God, and to whom has not his light shined? To come
to some instances: when Adam (and all mankind being yet in him) was fallen
from God, it pleased Jehovah to call him, to preach the Gospel, that is,
declare his goodness to him, all his posterity, being yet in his loins (for I
think every fober man will acknowledge that we were as much in Adam when he
was restored, as when he fell; and were as much partakers of his mercies from
God, as we were of his sin) consider the words of David, Psalm. 90. 3. Thou
turnest man to destruction, again thou say, Come again ye children of men.
And from that very day wherein the Lord was graciously pleased to seek out and
call back all mankind lost and fled from him in one, to this hour, he has
called and cried out aloud in manifestations of love, one way or other, to
every man and woman. See his gracious call to Cain, Genesis 4. 7. If thou do
well, shall thou not be accepted? By Henoch, Noah, and others, his glory and
righteousness was revealed and preached to the old world. In the Ark, there was
neither man nor woman, but was experimentally acquainted with the love and will
of God; and that Cain, Cham, or any others declined the way and truth of God,
was not because the Lord called them not, or left himself without witness
toward them, but because they came not, neither received that testimony of his
love which he gave to them.

And if any shall say, that many Nations had not or have not, any discovery of
the mind of God, the Apostle evinceth the contrary, and proves that the
obedience of the Heathens or Gentiles did declare the law of God written in
their hearts. Romans 2. 15. And the word of truth tells us of Abraham amongst the
Caldeans, Melchizedek amongst the Jebusites, Lot amongst the Sodomites, Joseph
and Moses amongst the Egyptians, Jethro amongst the Ethiopians, Job, Elihu, and
others, amongst the children the East. There was Rahab, Ruth, Vriah, Ittai,
amongst the Cananites. Moabites, Hittites, and Philistims, besides the constant
appearances of the grace, goodness, or love of God, which called and should
have led them to repentance. How evident it is that the Queen of Sheba,
Nebuchadnezzar, Darius, Artaxerxes, the Ninevites, yea all Nations had the word
and will of the Lord made known to them by the servants and Prophets of the
Lord, they that read the Scriptures of the old Testament will quickly perceive.
When there seemed to be (through their rejecting the light) an almost universal
deluge of darkeness or ignorance over the inhabited parts of the earth; the
Lord lifted up his Church of the Jews to such an eminent height upon the
Pillars of truth, and gave them the glory and the Oracles in such an
illustrious manner, that all Nations had notice of it, and some out of every
Nation under heaven Proselyted themselves unto it, as you may gather out of
Act. 2. 5. to 10. Afterward, our blessed Savior sent his Apostles, and they by
his Order the disciples, to Preach the Gospel in all the world, that so the
goodness of God to and in every Creature might be more fully made known: and
have not men heard? surely the sound is gone out into all the earth; and the
mercy of the Lord (which is over all his works) who is good to all, has been
declared before the faces of all men and women. And God has so called to every
one, either by the law in the heart, the light of the Lord, by Moses, the
prophets, and Christ (all demonstrating his rich love) that (though all have
not been led to a change) yet they all shall be left without excuse in the
great day. In a word, what Nation was there, to whom he sent not his
Messengers? what man or woman is there, to whom he has not showed and offered
favor, in whom he has not shined with ^^ght and with whom he has not strived
with his Spirit, even in such a fullness or sufficiency, as to performance of
those works to which they were appointed, as faith, repentance? etc. as for
example, when the wild Indians defile their neighbors wives or daughters, or
steal any thing etc. there is a light set up by the Lord in their hearts, which
persuades them of the evil of their ways (as you see by their endeavors to
conceal their sins) and what I beseech you hinders them from believing that
light or dictate of the Spirit and from turning to that which the means is
sufficient to effect? only they reject the light, follow their lust, and are
ruled by the devil.

Obj. But ( will some say) does God invite all men, and offer grace to all men
really and in good earnest?

I answer He does, though there be that affirm the contrary, and say that God
does not really and in good earnest, or without hypocrisy, offer grace to all:
But this is one of those hard speeches which men have ungodly spoken against
God, and for which he will one day call them to account, as the Apostle Jude
intimates to us, verse. 15.

Object. But he holds not forth his grace alike to all, nor has he given power
alike to all to come to him, that is, to conform to his will revealed.

Ans. This, though it be a frequent yet it is a frivolous Objection. I only say
this to it:

First, that all men have not the same measure of discretion, understanding, or
capacity, nor the will of God revealed in the same manner and cleerness. Yet,

Secondly, Every one has some portion or talent at least; some favor is
showed to the wicked: they that slew the Kings servants, were invited to the
wedding: and that really, Mat. 22: 6, etc. neither indeed does Jehovah expect
the same proportion of acting from every one in the world; he does not require
every man to act as a General; but to what ever he calls forth any soul, he
furnishes that creature with every thing necessary for the doing of what he
expects from him.

For the better understanding of this, consider, that for the enabling of
creatures to act, there is a twofold power requisite, yet both from God through
Christ. The first is, that he has given to men and women, as they are his
creatures: for as such, they can hear, see, know, understand, walk, etc. And
the second comes forth from him to them when they are able to discern betwixt
good and evil; and this is the law, light, or motions of the Spirit of God
presenting his goodness, love, or grace to them, by this to lead them toward
him; forbidding them to do evil, and bidding them do well. The former fits us
to do or act; the latter to do well: and till this latter, I mean, the law,
light, or teachings of God, come in some dispensation or other, the creature
cannot, neither is it required to act according to the rule of Obedience to
God: but when this is come, and the Lord lays truth before them, they may know
and believe him; cease from evil, and learn to do well, according to the light,
law, or power appearing, as I have before showed, from Isa. 43. 9, 10.

But some perhaps may say, that I detract from the free grace of the Creator,
and attribute something to the creature, as if he could contribute something
toward his coming to God, and his eternal happiness.

I hear there are many that talk much of free grace, understanding neither what
they say, neither what they affirm: for though the love, grace, mercy,
goodness, or kindness of Jehovah (being all but one and the same) be ever free,
yet it is not always without a conditian; for Gods appointing of creating,
redeeming, justifying, sanctifying, and calling of all men to live here, to
seek and serve him, be so free, that God required nothing of the creature to do
these things for him; he ask't no price, made no bargain, no man sought to him
in the business; but he alone moved by his own love toward a miserable lost
creature, finished the forementioned works from the foundation of the world
for all mankind: yet they that believe not, shall not enter into rest. For the
Lords sake, read and consider Heb. 4. 1, 2, 3. so that now if men will enjoy
further manifestations of the love of God, they must fulfill the conditions
which God requires of all such as would have such enjoyments: for therefore
has the Great Jehovah done all those things for men freely, that men through
consideration had of his love, might love him that loved them first: and
hereupon he will yet love them, and show more of his kindness to them. Weigh
the words of our Savior well, Joh. 14. 21. He that has my commandments, and
keeps them, he it is that loves me; and my Father will love him, and I will
love him, and will manifest my self to him.

It is not to be doubted but the Father and Christ did love those that keep his
commands, before their Obedience, yea, before they were born, yea so well, as
to redeem, sanctify, and justify them by the blood of the Lamb, from the
power or extent of suffering that came by Adams sin; or else they had never
been born, and so could never have been obedient: yet here he says, My Father
will love him, and I will love him, etc. according to that, Psalm. 147. 11. His
delight is in them that fear him. This further manifestation of love is upon
condition; and this was the way and purpose of God from the beginning: If thou
do well, thou shall be accepted. The Lord is with you, whilst ye are with
him; and if seek ye him, he will be found of you, 2 Chr. 15. 2. He that
confesses and forsakes his sin, shall find mercy, Pro. 18. 13. Hear, and
your soul shall live, Isa. 55. 3. see verse. 7. He that believes and is
baptized shall be saved Mark. 16. 16. Behold I stand at the door and knock: if
any man hear my voice, and open unto me, I will come in to him and sup with him
and he with me, Rev. 3. 20. And if any man does his will he shall know the
doctrine, shall be the mother, brethren, and sisters of Christ, God will hear
him, and he shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Joh. 7. Mark. 3. 35. Joh.
9. 31. Mat. 7. 21.

But can the grace of God be said to be free, when there is a condition of
something to be done by us for the obtaining of it?

I answer: Very well it may be free, though it be our duty to receive and obey
the giver.

For first, God shows man what he would have done, Mica. 6. 8. and made all the
promises of grace, freely, none moving him thereto, nor any, as men, excluded
from them.

Secondly, It is he that gives all the ability by which we do what he lays
before us.

Thirdly, He might require us to do more then he has, yet have made no
promises of further grace, or of eternal life, which is the gift of God; and if
this last were well understood and explained* it would overthrow all the Popish
doctrines of merits, both of condignity and congruity: for without
controversy, all the obedience of the whole race of mankind is not able to
conterpoise (much less deserve) the least of the mercies which we enjoy as to
this life: and if God had laid more labor upon us, and yet given us only what
is here below, we could not have said he had been a hard master. If he had not
pleased to have declared unto us by his Spirit the grace that shall be brought
at the revelation of Jesus Christ, we should never have heard or thought of it.
It must of necessity be then, that the mercy of God to eternal life, and his
continued manifestation of grace in Order thereunto, are most free: for,

Fourthly, Hearing the word of God, faith, repentance, baptism, prayer,
praising of God, and other works of Gospel-obedience, which God enables us to
do, stand us in nothing; they are not like the costly and Burdensome ceremonies
of the Jews: the Lord only requires that we should worship him in Spirit and
in truth (that is, as the word of Christ, which is Spirit, and truth, and life,
teaches us.)

Lastly, our receiving or believing of light, truth, love, and mercyes of God,
is so far from making it not to be a free gift, that this makes it to be so to
each particular: for though God gave his Son, the Gospel, and eternal life
freely, yet no man has either of these to himself, as his proper right to his
everlasting happiness, except he receive it; If a man leave as a legacy two
hundred pound to be divided equally by his steward between twenty persons by
him named, the steward sending for those persons, declares his Lords love and
gift, offers it to them: and to their benefit who reject what was bequeathed,
it becomes a free gift; but to such as accept it, it is not so: their refusal
of it, keeps it from being a gift or free benefit to them, though it still be
free on Gods part, who tenders it by his instruments to them. And thus you see,
that man's doing his duty in believing and obeying according to the Gospel, does
not frustrate the grace of God, no more then a man's stretching out of his hand
to receive any thing, does cause it to cease from being a gift.

Secondly, I am so far from detracting from the grace of God, when I affirm
that God has of his rich and free mercy given to every man and woman power to
do what he expects of them, that the desire of my soul is to advance that
alone; and to clear up this, I desire the impartial reader to judge, who does
most advance the riches of grace, they who affirm, with the Scriptures, That
Christ by the grace of God tasted death for every man, and that all Nations of
men are furnished by the Lord with every thing necessary for the knowing of
him, and obeying of his commands laid on them; or they that say (contrary to
the Scriptures) that Christ did not dye for all, but only for a few; and that
God has not given all men ability to perform what he commands them to do,
that he has appointed some to disobedience, and so to damnation?

Who is it that speaks most to the praise of the glory of Jehovah's grace, he
that says that God does faithfully offer his grace, and call all men to him (
i. e.) to conform to his will or law manifested, giving them liberty and
ability to accept his love, to perform his precepts; or they that say that God
does only externally call all men, and not really; and seemingly offer grace to
all men, yet has beforehand absolutely decreed the unbelief and disobedience
of many of them? For my part, I am fully satisfied with those sayings do most
advance the exceeding riches of grace, which hold forth the free and unfeigned
tenders of mercy to every man, so as that all are left without excuse, and the
Justice of God (who is no respecter of persons) cleared in the sight of all men.

What you would in words say of such a master as would bind his servant hand
and foot, yet beat him for not coming to him when he calls him, or command him
to ride a hundred miles in one hour, and buy two hundred pennyworth of ware
with one penny, threatening him with tortures upon his not-performing such
uncompassable commands; those men who oppose that truth which I plead for do in
effect say of our most gracious and righteous God, when they affirm that he
has decreed the unbelief and sins of men, and yet will condemn them eternally
for these things; and that he has required them to believe and follow him
according to the light he reveals, yet has not enabled them so to do: which
in plain English is, that God exacts more of his creatures then they are able
to do. The Lord in mercy yet grant these men time and space to repent of these
doctrines.

Object. But we do not say God is a hard Master to us, taking up where he laid
not down, etc.

Answ. Then what have you to do to say that he is so to others? you cannot deny
but he gives strength to his Saints to do what he requires of them; and I
beseech you consider whether others have not ability from Jehovah to do by him
what is expected from them in their several stations. Gladly would I demand two
or three Questions of any sober humble soul, that prefers the faithfulness and
glory of God before their own fancies.

First, Whether every Man and Woman have not ability to act something?

Secondly, Whether that power or ability be not from God alone through Christ?

Thirdly, Whether God did indue them with that ability to do well, or to do
ill, or to do nothing? Surely, you will say, not to do ill, not to be idle;
then undoubtedly it was to serve, seek, and glorify him.

And if any shall ask how men come to commit sin then?

I answer, as Adam did they being men, heaken to the old Serpent, reject the
counsel of God, resist his Spirit or Teachings, deny the Lord that bought them
with his precious blood, and bring upon themselves swift destruction.

Object. But surely, if God did call all men really, they would sure come to
him; and if he did invite and offer his grace in good earnest, they could not
but receive it: if God open the heart, it cannot but be opened; if he purge,
men must unresistibly be purged; if God freely give faith and repentance, men
cannot choose but repent and believe.

To which I answer, first, If God, in calling men, and giving out his love, did
make use of an unresistible power (as some fondly dream) all this were true:
But,

Secondly, To say that God does not really intend that grace to men which in
the means he extends to them, is a doctrine which I know makes the hearts of
many precious Saints sad, considering how the God of Heaven is by such sayings
highly dishonored, and abused, by saying or implying at least that men shall
be damned because God did not really and in good earnest call them, and offer
mercy to them; contrary to Prove. 1. 26, 27.

Thirdly, as I have hinted before, God is said to give faith and repentance,
etc. when he affords the means ( i. e.) the word of faith, and doctrine of
repentance to men and women come to understanding, and enabled every way by him
to come to him in the duties by him enjoyed, and to open the heart; when he
affords that key of knowledge, his word (which is spirit and life) and the
motions or beams of his Spirit to poor souls: in a word, Gods work, and our
endeavors, in all spiritual duties, must go together; for God opens the heart
by sending the means; we open to him, by receiving and applying it: but as the
stretching out the hand to receive a bag of gold, is not that which inricheth
the receiver, but the bounty of him that gives it; so our receiving of light
and grace offered, is not that which makes us rich in knowledge and spiritual
treasure, but the bounty of God that gives these to us; yet you know these are
not ours (though extended by the Lord never so freely) if we do not embrace and
apply them which is indeed but our duty; which God himself has enabled us to
perform (and no thanks to us for doing that.)

Fourthly, and lastly, they that heaken to the voice of God, and so come to
know his love, and believe it (or lay it to heart) cannot but come in; the love
of God constrains them to live to him that dyed for them and rose again; and
these are they that are in a special manner the called of God, called to be
Saints; He is not ashamed to call them brethren, Heb. 2. 11. but because all
will confess that the Saints ( i. e.) they who receive the word (whereunto they
were appointed) are partakers of this special calling or vocation, I shall
only add this, That as they who are called, but contemn the call of God,
partake not of his choice mercies, taste not of his supper, but bring upon
themselves destruction; so, Behold what manner of love the Father has showed
us, such as receive the word, the light of Christ) that they should be called
the sons or children of God! 1 John 3. 1. compared with John 1. 12.

And so I come to the last term propounded to be treated on ( Salvation) which
is a delivering of the creature from danger, death, and destruction, and is
general or special, as you may see, 1 Timothy 4. 10. For this cause we both labor
and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living God, who is the Savior of
all men, specially of them that believe.

But, say some to this, (as to what has been spoken before) this is not meant
of Christ, but of the Father.

I answer hereto, first* consider what Christ says, John 5. 19. Whatsoever
things the Father does, the same does the Son likewise. 2. That the Father gave
Christ his work to do, John 17. 4. so that the Father redeemeth, reconcileth,
and saves by Christ; and Christ redeemeth, reconcileth and saves by laying
down his life, and humbling himself to death. 3. Jesus Christ is not a dead
God, but God blessed for ever Romans 9. 5. and received into glory 1 Timothy 16. and
one with the Father; and they that deny, it deserve to be blamed.

And if any shall say that the word in the Original signifies not a Savior,
but a preserver, and so conclude that the Father is the preserver of all men;

I Answer, first, that the Father does preserve by the Son, who bears up the
pillars of the earth, Psalm. 75. 3. and by whom all things consist, and to whom
all power in heaven and earth is given, Matthew. 28. Of him and for him are all
things. For, consider God without a Christ, and you cannot see safety or
preservation for any creature, only justice and swift destruction for sin. Its
manifest then, that the preservation and subsistence of all men through a
crucified Christ, the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world: so that if
the gloss which men put upon this precious truth were truth, yet it makes
nothing against that holy truth of God which I desire to vindicate: but it is as
notorious an untruth and falsehood, as ever came from the mouth or pen of any
man; for wheresoever you find the word Savior used in the New Testament,
relating to Jesus Christ, you shall find the same word for it in the Original,
as is here used by the Apostle, and which is used, Ephesians. 5. Tit. 2. 3. and all
they that can but read greek, will testify the same. Neither is the greek word
Soter ever rendered preserver in the whole book of God, but always Savior.

Lastly, It is the common practice of the enemies of the truth, when any thing
crosses their tenants, to make people believe (if they can) that either the
Scriptures mean otherwise then it speaks, or that the Translation (though given
by men of their own judgments) is not right: as for example; where the word
of truth says that Christ dyed for all, and that God would have all men to be
saved, and that the free gift came unto all men to the justification of life;
they say it means otherwise, and that the text, Heb. 2. 9. He by the grace of
God tasted death for every man, and this word, who is the Savior of all men,
etc. are not well translated; for, say they, it should be for every Son, and he
is the preserver or savior of some men, etc. But I would propound two or three
questions to such men:

First, If these things be not truly, but falsely Translated, why have they (
many of them) an hundred times at least read such false things to us?

Secondly, Why do not they read them to us according to that which they say is
the true Translating of the word, ( viz.) that Christ dyed but for some, and
the free gift came only upon some men to the justification of life; and that
God would have some men to be saved, that Christ tasted death only for every
son, and that the Father is the preserver of some men?

Thirdly, and lastly, Whether we shall be judged by that which some in a slight
way, and through mistake, call the letter) or by that which the Papists,
Prelates, Presbyterians, in their Councels, Comments, and Synods, say is the
meaning of the word?

But leaving to speak of the fancies of these men, I come by Gods assistance to
show how God in Christ, and Christ through God (for these in the great work of
man's salvation must not be severed) is the Savior of all men. And that I may
perform this, I shall endeavor (as in those things before treated) rightly to
divide the word of truth, which holds forth salvation to us under several
considerations: there is salvation as to this life, as Exodus 14. 13. Stand
still, and see the Salvation of God: so Acts 27. 20. and 31. All hope that we
should be saved was taken away. There is salvation preached, Act. 28. 28. The
salvation of God is sent to the Gentiles, and they will hear it, But more
plainly, Hebr. 2. 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation
which at first began to be spoken (or preached) by the Lord himself. And there
is salvation promised, called eternal salvation Heb. 9. 5. and salvation to the
uttermost, Heb. 7. 25. The first is a deliverance from that death that came by
Adams sin; the second is deliverance from death in sins and trespasses by
reason of every man's actual sins; the last is that great deliverance from the
wrath to come, or second death. The former of these only is universal, and
has in it two things considerable: First, what all men are delivered or saved
from; Secondly, what they enjoy. First, our gracious God has saved all
mankind from that death which came by Adams offense, in that he by the ransom
which himself found out delivered Adam (and so all men then in his loins) from
present going down to the pit; so that by Jesus Christ we subsist; and by him
also he wrought our resurrection or deliverance from the grave, from which all
men shall one day be freed and made alive by Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 22.

But some (it may be) will say, If Christ has saved all men from the grave,
how comes it to pass that any dye?

I answer, first, Christ was never sent to prevent men from going to the grave,
but to deliver or save them out of or from it, from the power of it.

Secondly, If the resurrection from death be a deliverance or saving from the
power of the grave (which I think none that fear God will deny) and some only
partake of it, then I confess that God by Christ has not saved all men: but if
all shall rise again, then he is the Savior of all men, as the Scripture
says, and as I from that word of truth have declared.

But some say, It Is not Christ but the Father that raises them up. Others say,
That they rise by the power of Christ, but not as a Mediator.

These weak Objections, and many other silly shifts, men have devised, to evade
the truth, and prop up an opinion: but being not worth taking notice of
(referring the reader to what has been before said) I come to answer one
Objection, with which men fly in the face of God; which is this.

It Is true (say they) God will raise up all men in the great day by Jesus
Christ; but it were better they were let lie in the grave for ever: for he
delivers them out of a bad to a worse condition.

First, I deny that the principal end of Gods raising up men from the grave, is
to damn them: but that all ungodly men may see what great salvation they have
neglected, and that for the neglect thereof they must now be punished. Read I
beseech you, 2 These. 2. 8, 9. Heb. 2. 2.

And that all godly men (and ungodly too) may see the clear impartial righteous
judgment and pure justice of Jehovah; the one declaring it by their praises of
God in their mouths, as Revel. 16. 5, 6, 7. the other, by their speechless
silence, when they shall not be able to open their mouth, or hold up their
faces before him that sits upon the throne, and in the presence of the Lamb,
whose love and ways they have despised.

And lastly, that after the righteous sentence is passed, every man may receive
according to their works, 2 Cor. 5. 10.

Secondly, this Objection is contrary to many maxims of truth, which declare
that life in it self is a blessing, and that annihilation or total
deprivation of a being, is one of the greatest plagues; but especially, it
vilifies the Principal doctrine of the gospel, even the doctrine of the
resurrection, without which no man could have any sound comfort or
encouragement in any service, or sufferings for the sake of Christ.

Thirdly, It teaches men to reproach and upbraid God for his kindness to them.
They may as well say, that God is the Author of their sin, in that he through
his Son created them; as that he is the Author of their damnation, in that he
raises them up by the same Jesus Christ.

What you might truly say of that Servant, who shall murder the only Son of
his Master, who redeemed him out of a most miserable slavery and gave him
liberty to serve him in the nearest relation, that shall upbraid his Lord
bringing of him to a just trial, and say it had been better for me to have
abode still in slavery, then to be tormented for my wickedness; or wish that he
had not brought him out of his bondage etc. we justly say of those men who
fancy the forementioned Objection; yea the damned themselves will not dare to
speak such words before the throne of God, but shall be convinced by their own
amazed consciences, that they shall then suffer for the doing of that
wickedness which they should and might have avoided, and the not doing of that
good which God gave them ability and opportunity to do, and not because God
made them or raised them.

But (say some) God appointed them to be disobedient, and to commit those sins
for which he will damn them.

I confess, if that were true, then the poor damned wretches might hope to have
something to plead with the great Judge for an excuse: but it is most untrue, as
it has been showed. I confess this is the great objection which the devil and
ungodly men ever raised, which brings the greatest advantage to Satan, the
greatest encouragement to sinners, the greatest discomfort to the Saints, and
the greatest dishonor to God, of any thing that ever shall or can be uttered
by the mouth of any mortal man; being contrary to all Scripture; which declares
against all the unrighteousness of men, and appearance of evil; shows us that
our God is of purer eyes then to behold vanity; and reason, which will surely
tell us that God would never appoint men to do that which he abhors, or condemn
men for doing what he had appointed them, or at least for not doing that which
he never gave them either ability or call to perform.

But ( say some) what if it were the pleasure of God to make a thousand worlds,
and to destroy them all?

I answer, first, That is not, nor ever will be the pleasure of God, to do that
which he has not revealed (for, he will do nothing, but he will reveal his
secrets to his servants.) etc.

Secondly, These are unlearned questions; and it argues that when men are put
to such shifts, they have nothing to say from the word of truth for their
opinions: and therefore I shall forbear to follow them in their foolish
curiosities, when they presume to be wise above what is written.

Lastly, God is so far from taking pleasure in destroying one whole world, that
he is not willing that any should perish, 2 Pet. 3 9. Neither does he willingly
afflict no^ grieve the children of men, Lam. 3. 33. Yea, he has sworn that he
has no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his
wicked way, and live, Ezekiel. 33. 11.

Object. Yet the Lord has made the wicked for the day of evil, Prove. 16. 4.

I answer, first, But that does not say that he has made any men (as they are
men) for the day of evil, neither does it say that God made men wicked (as many
say now a days) But he has appointed and ordained that wicked men shall be
destroyed; such as refuse and rebel, Isa. 1. such as turn the grace of God
into wantonness, Jude 4. they that believe not Heb. 3. 18, 19. neither repent
of their wicked deeds, Luke 13. 3. but rejecting the Gospel, not considering
nor laying to heart the loving kindness of the Lord, go on in their whoredom,
lying, swearing, stealing, drunkenness, revilings, heresies, covetousness, and
all abominations; these shall be turned into Hell, with all the Nations that
forget God, Psalm. 9. 17. but that God did ever make or appoint men to be
whoremongers, liars, thieves, or heretics, etc. that so he might destroy them,
is most abominable to imagine.

In a word, God is so far from making men wicked, or destroying them as they
are his creatures, that when Adam had destroyed himself, and the whole world of
men in him, by original or the first sin, the Lord freely, through Christ,
forgave it, and delivered or saved him, and in him all his posterity (for had
Adam at that instant dyed, all had perished for ever with him) but they are so
far saved from that destruction, that he gives life to the world, Joh. 7. 33.
and though men lie down in the grave, and sleep in the dust, yet they shall all
live again in the day of the Lord.

But, may some say, is he so the Savior of all men, that none shall be damned
in the second death?

I answer, No: for though he be the Savior of all men, as I have proved, yet
especially of them that believe, as I shall now also briefly show you by the
Scriptures, Prove. 3. 35. The wise shall inherit glory. Dan. 12. 3. They that be
wise shall (...) as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to
righteous^^ss, as the stars for ever and ever. Mat. 13. 43. Then shall the
righteous shine (...) as the Sun in the kingdom of their Father. Mat. 26. 46.
But the righteous (...). Luke 12. 32. Fear not, little flock, it is your
Fathers good pleasure to giv^ you the Kingdom. Whosoever believes on him,
shall not perish, but (...) Joh. 3. 15, 16, 18, and 36. My sheep hear my voice,
and I know (...) and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, and
they shall not (...), Neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand, Joh. 10.
27, 28. See Joh. 5. 28, 29 All that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and
shall come forth, they that have done good, to the resurrection of life, etc.
Mar. 16. 16. He that believes and (...) baptized, shall be saved. Romans 2. 7.
10. Glory, honor, peace, and eternal life, to every man that patiently
continues in well doing. Mat. 10. 22. He that indureth to the end, shall be
saved. Rev. 2. 23. Be thou faithful unto the death, and I give thee the crown
of life. See verse. the 11, 17, 26, 27, 28. and Rev. 3. 5, 12, 21. He is made
the Author of eternal salvation to those that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. If we suffer
with him, we shall also reign with him, 2 Timothy 2. 12. But the wicked shall be
as stubble, Mal. 4. 1. He that calls on the name of the Lord, shall be saved,
Romans 10. Blessed are all they that do his commandments, that they may have
right to the tree of life, and enter in by the gates into the holy City, Rev.
22. 14. with many other pertinent texts of Scripture, whereby we may
demonstratively evidence that there is a special salvation for some ( viz.)
such as hear, know, believe, and obey God; and that as all men are and shall
surely be saved from the first death, and all that came on them through the
offense of Adam; yet they only who receive the truth in the love of it, shall
be saved from the second death; and they who are contentious, and do not obey
the truth, through their neglect of so great salvation as was purchased by his
blood, and preached in the word or light of Jesus, though they shall be raised
up at the last day from the first death, yet for their wickedness they shall be
cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

All the Objections and Queries that usually men bring in here about the
creatures believing and acting in all kind of obedience, I have handled in the
precedent part of this treatise, where I have proved that God never requires
any duty of any of his creatures, but at some time or other he furnishes them
with ability to fulfill his commands; And all our obedience merits not eternal
life in the least, seeing God might justly have deprived us of a being, or have
given no more but this life, and yet have laid upon us much more work then he
has: but it was the good pleasure of his will to give eternal life, through
his Son, to all such as serve him in their generations according to the light
manifested to them. For which free mercy, all praise, honor, service, and
obedience, is due to Jehovah for evermore. Amen.

THE REASONS, OR ARGUMENTS Which illustrate The truth of Christ's dying for all
men, together with the grand absurdities which unavoidably follow the contrary
Doctrine with the answer to the Objections or Arguments of M. Trough, M. Wood,
and others.
HAving thus by the Scriptures proved that Christ died for all men, and what he
has done for all, or what benefit all men have by him,

I come in the next place, in the strength of the Lord, to illustrate the truth
of this assertion by Reasons or Arguments drawn from the Scriptures, which may
easily evince to sober spirits, and convince the gainsayers of this
soul-establishing Fundamental Doctrine of the Gospel, and they are these:

First, the coming of our Savior into the world is glad tidings of great joy
to all people, Luke 2. 11. which could never be, if Christ had done nothing for
the greatest part of mankind, but it would have been sad tidings to most men,
who must therefore die eternally, because there was no Savior for them, or at
least, because they obey not him, who never paid a price for them.

Secondly, the Word that is to be preach'^, is the Gospel, to every creature,
Mark 16. 15. the Ministers of the Lord Jesus are to declare peace unto every
house where they come, Luke 10. 5. and that can never be done, if they are not
able by the Scriptures to preach a Savior to them, without leaving any doubts
upon their spirits.

Thirdly, God would have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the
truth, 1 Timothy 2. 4. and is not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance: Now if Christ died not for all, then God would have
more men to be saved then Christ died for, M. Grant
(as some have said) which is absurd to imagine, or what good will repentance
do those for whom Christ-never died?

Fourthly, they that are damned, Jo. 3. 18. with ver. 36. are damned, because
they believe not in the only begotten Son of God, therefore the only begotten
Son of God died for those, or else how shall they be damned because they
believe not in him, except men shall be damned for not believing on him that
never died for them?

Fifthly, they that shall be damned might have been saved, if they had received
the truth in the love of it, 2. These. 2. 10, 11, 12, 13. therefore Christ died
for them, or else they had no probability of salvation, seeing there is no name
given unto men under heaven whereby they must be saved, but only the name of
Jesus Christ, Acts 4. 12.

Sixthly, they for whom Christ died may perish and be destroyed; see 1 Cor. 8.
11. with Romans 14. 15.

Seventhly, some deny the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
destruction 2 Pet. 2. 1. so that if Christ died for those that shall be saved,
and those that shall be destroyed, he died for all.

Eighthly, the Apostle commands, that prayers and supplications shall be made
for all men, 1 Timothy 2. 1. surely prayers will do but (...) good to those for
whom Christ never died, or how can we pray in faith for all men, if Christ died
not for them

Ninethly, they who regard lying vanities forsake their own mercies, Jonah 2.
9. I desire to know what mercies they can or do forsake, for whom Christ never
died.

Tenthly, men judge themselves unworthy of eternal life, Act. 13. 46. and
neglect their own salvation: I beseech you consider whether it be possible for
men to put off eternal life, or neglect their salvation, if Christ never died
for them, so as to bring them into a possibility of enjoying everlasting
happiness.

Eleventhly, if Christ died but for some, then the Devil destroys no man, but
they perish for want of a Savior, contrary to J^. 3. 17. and many other places.

Twelfthly, if Christ died not for all, then despair of pardon and salvation in
them that perish, is no sin, seeing there is nothing for those men to believe
unto their everlasting peace, for whom Christ shed not his blood.

Thirteenthly, if Christ died not for all, then it would be a sin for some men
to believe that Christ died for them, in that they should believe a lie, and
all will grant that it is a sin for any man to believe a lie.

Fourteenthly, if Christ died but for some (even such as are eternally saved)
then none can be guilty of that sin of treading under foot the blood of the
Covenant wherewith they were sanctified, contrary to Heb. 10. 29.

Fifteenthly, if Christ died not for all, then Satan does no evil in
persuading some that Christ died not for them, but persuades them to believe
the truth; if it be true that Christ died but for some of the world.

Sixteenthly, if Christ did not die for all, then the Devil does not deceive
those that are damned when he persuades them that Christ died not for them; and
the Opposers of the truth affirm, that he cannot deceive them for whom Christ
died, and so he can deceive none, and by this (if it be true) the devil is no
deceiver.

Seventeenthly, if there be some men that Christ died not for, then it is a
virtue for some men not to believe in Christ for salvation, for in believing
this they believe the truth, and it is a virtue in any to believe every truth.

Eighteenthly, if Christ died not for all mankind, then this unavoidably
follows, that those for whom Christ died not, do as well in believing that
Christ died not for them, as those for whom he died, do in believing that he
did die for them, seeing both are true (if the Adversaries of the truth say
right) and it is as much virtue to believe one truth as another.

Nineteenthly, all are bound to live to him, 2 Cor. 5. 15. even unto him that
died for them, and rose again Now I wonder what good it will do men to live to
Christ, or why we should persuade all men to live to him, yea tell them that
they are bound to do so, if Christ died not for them? yea we know that
therefore men shall be damned at the last day, because they live not to him
that died for them, and rose again.

Twentiethly, he being Lord of quick and dead, shall judge all men at the last
day, as you may most clearly see, Romans 14. 9, 10. For this end Christ both
died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and the
living, and he shall judge (all men) quick and dead at his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.
1. how shall he judge those whom he never purchased with a price? shall we
think that he that reproves men for judging another man's servant, will allow
that which he condemns? God forbid, it must needs be then that Christ died for
all, seeing he is Judge of all, except you will say that Christ will judge men
because they had not a Redeemer.

21. There is no place of Scripture says that Christ died only for the Elect,
or only for his Church, that he died but for a few, or but for some, therefore
they that so say, speak not the language of the Holy Ghost, but a private
interpretation, we speak what we know, and testify what we have seen, that
which we have looked on with our eyes, and heard from Christ and his Apostles
with our ears, which our hands have handled of the Word of life declare we unto
you. Mr. Tro. does as good as confess that there is not one plain Scripture to
prove his position that Christ did not die for all, for if you mark the
inscription of his book, he says not an Antidote against universal Redemption
in ten positive texts of Scriptures, but in ten Reafons deduced from the
Scriptures: I have proved that Christ d d die for all by ten Witnesses
proceeding every one out of the mouth of God, by the Ministry of Christ, the
Prophets and Apostles through the Spirit, and whether you that read will
believe what these say in so many words, or the dark consequences and
conclusions of men, choose ye; if there had been any text that had said that
Christ died only for some, sure Mr. Tro. would have cited it; we know and
acknowledge that Christ died for some, for his Church, for the Elect, for the
Saints, but to say that he therefore died for none else, is contrary to
Scripture, reason, and sense; we may as well argue that he died for none but
Paul, because he says Gal. 2. 20. he loved me, and gave himself for me: and
hence it is that we are persuaded to take whatsoever the Scripture holds out in
this point, which says, he laid down his life for the sheep (i. e.) such as
hear his voice, and follow him, Jo. 18. 15. compared with ver. ^7. and we
believe that he bought those that deny him, and bring upon themselves
destruction, read 2 Pet. 2. 1. and because we believe in Christ, as the
Scripture has said, even all that is written in the Law and the Prophets, for
this cause we are accounted Heretics, and Sectarians, as the Apostles and
Saints of old were, Acts 24. 14. with chap. 28. 22. For they did declare the
love and mercy of God toward all men, and such as laid his love to heart, and
were thereby led to repentance, they did baptize; with these they did walk in
Church Fellowship, in breaking of bread, in prayers and praises, in holiness
of life, and waiting for the Lord Jesus from heaven, I also, and many more,
declare the love of God in Christ toward all men, such as repent and believe
this kindness of his, do we baptize, with these we walk in Church Fellowship,
in breaking of bread, and in prayers, praising God, and provoking each other to
holiness, and to wait for Christ's coming in glory; that this is through the
mercy of God our practice, as it was the practice of the Apostles, our God is
witness, and that for this, as the Apostle was, we are called Heretics, is
manifest to all men, even our enemies themselves being Judges: and because we
will not say that Christ did not die for all, or that he died only for a few,
that Infants are to be baptized, and added to the Church, before they either
repent or believe, and that God does decree the unbelief and disobedience of
men, and that he will damn some eternally for Adams fault, and others for not
doing that, which since they came to discern betwixt good and evil, they had
never ability from the Lord to perform, therefore are we called Heretics; and
because we are willing that our Doctrine should be tried by the word of truth,
both publicly an privately, and desire by the same Touchstone to prove what
others teach for doctrine, and will not be deluded by Philosophy and vain
deceit, not stung with the tail of the old Serpent (I mean the Prophet who
teaches lies) Isa. 9. 15. with Rev. 12. 4. therefore are we counted the
troublers of Israel, such as turn the world upside down, ringleaders of Sects,
etc. as our Brethren of old were, neither are we grieved by these things for
our sakes, but for theirs, even our countrymen and brethren after the flesh,
who rage at us, and incense the Rulers against us because we believe and speak
what is written, and will not receive nor practice the Doctrines and Traditions
which are not written, witness M. W. T. who though he has not one word of
Scripture speaking that which he affirms, yet he raves and rails publicly and
privately, because his Arguments are not held Authentic, accounted Canonical,
and received as Maxims of divine truth, when indeed they are but the thoughts
of his own heart, and collections tha^ he has made from men; that must die. If
I should go from place to place, and say Christ did not die for all, and he
died only for a few men and women, and God commanded men to do no more then he
has enabled them to do, and that he has appointed some even from the
beginning to be disobedient to his commands, might not men say, where is this
written? might they not justly say, that here is no light in these things, and
that these things (not being written) are not for our learning, doubtless they
might.

Ob. But if Christ died for all, then all shall be saved.

All are and shall be saved or delivered from the first death, as I have
declared, and i^ shall be testified in due time, 1 Timothy 2. 6. only the Elect,
the Saints (that is) such as receive the light held forth, to them shall escape
the second death, they that believe and obey him shall enjoy eternal salvation
through him, Rev. 2. 11. 1 These. 1. 10. Heb. ^. 9.

Ob. All profane ignorant persons will say that Christ died for them.

I answer first, they speak truth, though they know not what they say; for put
such profane persons to prove it by Scripture, and to give you the text in
which their evidence is contained, and they come short of assurance, then they
say, they believe he died for them, and at last when they are put to show the
ground of their faith, or what their faith was built on, they will tell you,
they hope he died for them, and he died for all that believe on him and serve
him.

Secondly I answer, it is one thing for a poor soul to say that Christ died for
him, and another thing to know it by an infallible testimony, and therefore we
endeavor to prove this to every man by the Scriptures which hold forth the
dying of Christ for all, that so they may know certainly that Christ shed his
blood for them, and by the knowledge hereof, either be drawn to love and live
to the Lord Jesus, or be left without excuse.

Ob. But cannot men be left without excuse without the preaching of this
Doctrine to them?

Ans. They cannot, when and where this doctrine may be preached and heard;
indeed where the Scriptures are not, people shall not be accused for not
reading, searching, and preaching them, or for their not knowing the words
that are vvitten in them, for God will at the last day, require according to
what he gave, Luke 12. 48. but where this is fully made known (that Christ
tasted death for every man) they who embrace it, and bind it to their hearts
by believing, find abundance of consolation, and they who receive it not,
shall not at the last day be able to plead ignorance; Oh then how sad will it
be at that time for such Preachers as deny, preach write, pray and rail
against this foundation truth of the Gospel!

Ob. Is it not said Rev. M. Tro. M. Wood.
5. 9. and 14. 3. 4. Thou have redeemed us is God, and these were bought from
amongst men, etc.

Ans. These precious texts are true, but yet they do not say that there were
no more bought to God from amongst men; for if we will (...) the Apostle
Peter, there are some that d^ deny the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2. 1. and
to say that because 144000. were redeemed or bought from amongst men,
therefore there were no more redeemed, is bad Logic and worse Divinity, and
is (...) one, ^s ^f a man had redeemed a thousand men out of Turkey, meeting
with three or four of them, should receive an acknowledgment of their
deliverance that he had redeemed them, the standers by should argue that he
redeemed no more.

Ans. Secondly, I have before showed that redemption is considered two ways,
first by the effusion of the blood of Christ from the first sin or original
offense; secondly, by the application of that blood, by which the Elect (such
as walk in Gospell-obedience) receive Redemption or deliverance from their sins
which they have committed in their own bodies since they knew good and evil,
for no sooner is the blood of Christ closely laid to the heart of a sinner, but
he presently begins to loath and leave sin, and at length by a constant
application of it, becomes fully redeemed, freed, or delivered from his
bondage: of these later the texts by M W. T. alleged, are especially to be
understood, and so the word of truth being rightly divided is kept from
clashing and seeming contradiction, all men left without excuse, and the
justice and mercy of God cleared against the calumnies of imperious sinners.

But there are some whose names are not written in the book of M. Wood. M. Tro.
life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world.

It Is most certain that these words Rev. 13. 8. are a prophecy of the great
Antichrist, who shall exercise his power for a time, times and the dividing or
half of time, Dan. 7. 25. two and forty months, or 1260. days, Rev. 11. 2. 3.
with chap. 3. 5. or three years and a half, and many shall follow his
pernicious ways, idolizing him and worshipping him as a God; and it is as
certain, that such as worship him are not written in the Book of Life, for God
has of old ordained to condemnation ungodly men, turning the grace of God unto
wantonness, and all Idolat^rs; but this proves not that Christ never died for
them, but rather that he did die for them, and they not obeying him, but
Antichrist, are condemned, in that they gave the honor due to him to his enemy;
none I think will doubt but these men ought to have worshipped God, but what
good would that have done them, if Christ had never died for them, judge ye:
but if any do say that God did appoint them to serve and worship the Beast, I
refer to Acts 17. 26, 27. and leave them to the Lord, who will take a strict
account one day of all such sayings.

Ans. 2. That the words may be read, whose names are not written from the
foundation of the world, in the Book of Life of the Lamb slain (as M.
Troughton^ says) is utterly false, and a great corruption of Scripture; yet
that Christ is the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, is clear from
this text, which is that which M. Tro. and others, study by all subtilty to
evade.

Lastly, he that sins against God shall have his name blotted out of the
book of Life, Exodus 33. 32. with Rev. 22. 19.

But God loves some with a special love, M. Tro. M. Wood.
Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it.

It is by none that speak the truth in love denied, and it is that which I have
in this whole Treatise endeavored to clear up, that there is a universal and
special manifestation of love from the Lord, the Lord is good to all, and he
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, but his delight is
(...) them that fear him, Psalm. 147. 11. Pro. 21. 20. and as for M. Tro.
saying, that husbands love their wives with a special love, it is true, but we
ought asso to love our enemies, and every creature with the love of good will,
desirous still to do them any good we can, so though Christ delights only in
his Church, that is such as obey him, yet he died for his enemies, and when the
Lamb was slain from the foundation of the world, we were all enemies alike,
neither is any one man better then another as he is a man, but as grace is
manifested and received; neither is it the act of receiving which makes some
men better then others, but the grace which appears to them from the Lord,
from whom every good gift comes, and to whom all the glory is due.

But is it not said that God did hate Esau and loved Jacob, M. Tro. M. Wood.
before they had done either good or evil?

Search the Scriptures diligently, and see if there be any such text, the
Apostle never said any such thing, Romans 9. for that which was said, was not
concerning two children, as some have falsely suggested, but two Nations, as you
may see Genesis 25. 23. compared with Romans 9. 12. and afterward v. 13. he shows,
that God hated Esan, as it is written Mal. 1. 2. 3. I have hated Esau, and laid
his mountains and heritage wast for the Dragons of the Wilderness, certainly
this was not before he was born, for he had no mountains nor heritage to be
laid wast; again it is very considerable, that the person of Esau was never
subservient to Jacob, but Jacob bowed down to him, and called him his Lord,
Genesis 33. and by this it will be clear, that this text speaks not of infants,
but men, and not of single persons personally considered, but of a Nation of
evil doers, especially if you impartially consider what is written by Obadiah
in the 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14. verses of his Prophecy, where the Edomites are
called Esau, and the Jews Jacob.

Secondly, I answer, that they who are spiritual and impartial, will e're
long discern that these things are an Allegory which the Apostle Paul brings in
to illustrate what he had before asserted ( viz.) that it is not the pleasure
and purpose of God that men shall be justified by the Law, but by grace, not by
works, but by him that calls; and though the Jews judge it an unequal thing,
yet God having chosen this to be the way of justification, his choice or
election shall stand; and this you may easily and evidently see, if you will
seriously weigh what follows, To. 9. 30. 31. as the Apostles collection, and
the result of all which he had spoken in the precedent part of the chapter,
what shall we say then? etc.

That the Gentiles which followed not after righteousness, have attained to
righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith.

But Israel which followed after the Law of righteousness, have not attained
to the Law of righteousness; wherefore? because they sought it not by faith,
but as it were by the works of the Law, for they stumbled at the stumbling
stone; so in all the writings of the New Testament, the righteousness of faith,
though not so ancient, is preferred before the righteousness of the Law, and
thus the elder serves the younger; righteousness by the Law, as a servant or
handmaid, does and must follow the righteousness of faith, or the Gospel, for
we are to persuade men first to repent, believe, and be baptized (which things
the Law mentioned not) and then to live righteously, soberly, chastely, and
lovingly, as becomes such as profess the righteousness of Christ in the
Gospel, so showing their faith by their works, as it behooves such as are wise
unto salvation, Ja. 2. 18. and 3. 13. Moses was faithful as a servant, but
Christ in all things has the pre-eminence as a son, Ismael and Esau were elder
then Isaac and Jacob, and Pharaoh and the Egyptians more mighty and puissant
then Moses and the Israelites, out the Lord pulled down the mighty, and exalted
the meek, the Law of works bare date before the faith of the Gospel, but God
has chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, heirs of the Kingdom, Ja. 2.
5. and this is Gods purpose according to election which shall stand for ever,
in Isaac shall thy seed be called, and that this which I have here hinted, as
the scope of the Apostle, and the mind of the Holy Ghost, will be more apparent
if you look into Gal. 4. from 21. to 31. where the Apostle speaking of two
sons, one by Hagar, the other by Sarah, affirms v. 24. these things are an
Allegory, for these (says he) are the two Covenants, etc. thence look back to
Romans 9. 7, 8, 9. where he speaks of the two sons, and shows who are the true
seed, even believers, as Abraham was, they that are of the promise: then, to
show that the Apostle intends the very same thing by the ensuing discourse
concerning Esau and Jacob, he goes on thus; and not only this, as if he had
said, not this of Ismael, and Isaac show, that the believers are blessed with
faithful Abraham, and counted for the seed, but the two sons of Rebecca, as in
an Allegory demonstrate the same; and if any shall yet say, but how is it said,
Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated? I answer, take but these two (as
Ismael and Isaac) for the two Covenants, and then you will see that he prefers
mercy before Sacrifice, the Gospel before the Law, faith before works, the
believers (or children of the promise) before the natural seed, that he
regards not, but hates such as seek for righteousness by the Law, as the
Jews did, and loves or chooses such as seek for the righteousness of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, as the Gentiles did, Isa. 1. 14. says the Lord, thus,
your new Moons, and your appointed Feasts my soul hates, yet once these were
appointed by God; all things that were written of old concerning Ismael, Isaac,
Esau, Jacob, Pharaoh, etc. were directly as they are written, but the Apostle
we see draws out the Allegory, and shows what they did typifie to us, as you
may see, if you diligently search this nineth to the Romans, and reso^ve and
roll up all that is here written, as the Apostle does in the 30. and 31.
verses; but the time will not give me leave to treat largely of these things in
this place, if God give opportunity I shall declare more of this matter in my
Generation, as the great God shall give opportunity and utterance either by
preaching, conference, or writing, in the mean space every sober man will see
that it is not proper to draw positive conclusions from allegorical
expressions, and so these words, I have hated Esau (i.e.) refused righteousness
by the Law or Covenant of works, does not at all prove that Christ did not die
for all; and withal I desire the Reader to consider that M. Tro. has not yet
produced one Scripture that says he died only for a small number, but some few
consequences which are too weak ever to overthrow the faith of Gods Elect.

But says M. Trough. Christ did not die for all, because he did not satisfy
his Fathers wrath and justice for the sins of every man and woman in the world;
M. Tro. and M. Jam. Wood.
for the reprobates go down to hell, but he made a plenary satisfaction for the
sins of those for whom he died, and the Holy God ( says he) cannot, nor will
not exact double payment for the same debt, or punish twice for the same sin.

Answer first, That which he speaks last is true, and it is from this that I
conclude, that Infants shall not be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone,
which is the second death, for if they should, then they must be punished twice
for one fault, viz. Adams offense (as some call it) original sin, and that
Rebrobates (that is wicked men) shall be cast into hell, is as true, Psa. 9.
17. but what he means by plenary satisfaction to the Fathers justice given for
some I know nor, in that I find no such terms in the holy Scriptures, if there
be, why did not M. Tro. produce them? did he think that his bare word is a
sufficient warrant for us to believe by? surely it is not, and the word of
truth testifies that false teachers, who bring in damnable heresies, deny
Christ, and bring upon themselves destruction, were bought by the Lord whom
they deny, and that others trample under foot the blood of the Covenant,
wherewith they were sanctified, Heb. 10. 29.

Answer secondly, if M. Tro. means that Christ did so satisfy for the sins of
some, that none of the punishment due for that sin shall come upon them, but
that it is wholly by the pouring or offering of the blood of Christ prevented,
I shall desire him to prove it: in the mean space, I shall desire the
imparti^ll Reader to remember first that the Elect, the choicest (...) must
di^, (I mean go to the dust) the wise man as well as the fool, by reason of
Adams transgression; so that the punishment which came through that fault is
not plenarily satisfied for, if it had been so indeed God requires double
payment, which he will never (by M. Tro. own confession) do, for if by the
death of the Lamb this debt had been fully paid, the Elect should never have
gone to the grave; and thus you see how M. Tro. is contrary to himself, his
light is darkness, and he wearieth himself to bring others to the same
condition with himself. Secondly, consider that amongst all the sons of Adam,
none shall receive remission of their sins (I mean which themselves have acted)
but believers, Mark 16. 16. Act. 10. 43. so that he did not so satisfy, as to
take away men's actual sins, whether they believe or no. Thirdly, consider that
if any draw back from the Lord, he will take no plea^ure in them, Heb. 10. 38.
and the best of Saints, if they sin, must confess and forsake their sins if
they will find mercy and pardon, Prove. 28. 13. Joh. 1. 9. but I pray read the
whole verse, for M. Tro. leaves out in his book the former, ( viz.) if we
confess our sins as Apocriphal. page 21. and so deals with us as the Devil did
with Christ, Luke 4. 10. 11. conceal that which would make against him. Lastly,
consider and call to mind what I have in this preceding discourse manifested,
that Christ has so died, that all do live by him, and enjoy light by him, Jo.
1. 9. Jo. 6. 33. and that whosoever believes on him should not perish, Jo. 3.
15. and 16. and that all men through him might believe, Jo. 1. 7. and that as
sin has reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness
unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord, Christ has so died, that all
shall ^ise again by him, Jo. 5. 28, 29. I beseech you read and consider, that
the just and unjust shall all be called out of the grave by the Lord Jesus, he
died and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord of quick and dead, Romans 14.
9. that they which live should live to him, 2 Cor. 5. 15.

But we never read that Christ died to satisfy for sin, whilst men continue
in them without repentance, but to manifest his love to all mankind, thereby to
persuade them to leave sin, and love him who loved them first, he was set forth
to be a prop^tiation through faith in his blood, Romans 3. 2^, 26. and that the
world through him might be saved, Io. 3. 17. not by the works of the Law, but
the words of Jesus Christ, God never appointed that righteousness and salvation
should be by the Law, for then Christ had died in vain. Thus you see what the
form of sound words speak concerning the death of Christ, who took or bare away
the sin of the world ( viz. the sin of Adam, in whom the whole world of men
were involved) that so lost mankind through him might have liberty to serve the
living God, and through believing on the light, be delivered from their actual
sins committed before conversion, and by confessing and craving pardon, might
be cleansed from their infirmities after their coming into Christ, by the
intercession, mediation and eternal Priesthood of him whose blood speaks
better things then that of Abel.

But he laid down his life or the sheep. M. Tro. and M. Ia. Wood.
Jo. 10. 14, 15. but all and every man and woman in the world are not the Sheep
of Christ, therefore he died only for the Sheep.

I bes^ech the Reader to behold the fallacy of this sophistical fillogism, by
a parallel thus out of Gal. 2. 20.

Christ loved the Apostle Paul, and gave himself for him, but every man and
woman in the world is not the Apostle Paul, therefore he gave himself only for
the Apostle Paul: whether this be good Logic, let the godly Reader judge, yet
this is as good as M. Troughtons, as any man that is not biased by partiality
may easily discern, and of this Nature all his Arguments are, if you search
them to the bottom.

But he thinks to help himself, by saying, that though Christ says not his
Seeep only, yet he means so, and he endeavors to prove his conception, by
saying, that though the Scripture says not we are justified only by faith, yet
it means so. I answer, the Scripture neither ^ays so, nor means so, for then
all infants must be damned, (which I think M. Tro. will not affirm, though I
confess he is very positive in matters of the greatest improbability) for all
those infants that shall be saved were never justified ^y faith, yet justified
by the blood of the Lamb, or they shall never enter into life, and here let the
wise and godly judge, whether M. Troughton (leaning to his own wisdom, and the
wisdom which is from above) has not brought in an evidence to prov^ his cause
that speaks directly against him, and for the truth of God; and besides I have
before shew^d how all are justified, sanctified, and redeemed, and therefore
shall here spend the less time to answer these reasons which he thinks
impregnable, though others see they are but ropes of sand.

But says he, M. Tro. and M. Ia. Wood.
those that Christ died for shall live eternal life, and shall never perish,
but all men have not eternal life, but many shall perish eternally, therefore
he died not for all.

I answer first, this Sophistry is like all the rest of M. Troughtons reasons,
and though it be finely span, and cunningly woven, yet it is but a spiders web,
and truth will tear it in pieces; for the Scriptures say that they deny the
Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves destruction, and so thy weak
brother perish for whom Christ died, 1 Cor. 8. 11. with many other places: I
know that Christ laid down his life for his sheep, and for the Apostle Paul,
and all the Saints, but not as sheep, or Saints, for no Scripture says so, but
for sinners, for the ungodly, for the world, which are in opposition to sheep
and Saints: And again, as it is true that he died for the sheep, so it is as
true that he bought those that do deny him, if the Scripture may decide the
controversy: Secondly I answer, such fallacious consequences as these do even
strike at the root of the Gospel of Grace, and free love of God, and quits the
devil and all ungodly men of bringing destruction upon themselves, and implies
that men shall be condemned for want of a Redeemer; neither will that thredbare
shift, (that men shall be damned, because they fell in Adam) serve any man's
turn, especially M. Tro. who has acknowledged in his sixth Argument (as he
calls it) that God will not take double payment for the same sin; now all must
once die by reason of that offense, and if after they shall be raised again,
they shall be damned for it again, then there is a double punishment inflicted
for one offense, which God will never do; but if it be because Christ never
died for them, as M. Tro. and thousands of deceived souls seem to say, let them
produce a text of Scripture, or else we shall not believe them, if they say for
unbelief and disobedience (which is most true, and sometimes these men will say
so) then there is a Christ to be believed in and obeyed by them.

But says M. Tro. There is a higher cause why men believe not to salvation, and
have not eternal life, then the stubbornness of men's hearts ( but shows not
what, only adds,) ye believe not, because ye are not my sheep, i. e. says he
in another place, because ye are not elected; if that be his meaning, he has
made the remedy worse then the disease, and andeavour'd to help himself by a
text that speaks truth against errors, for Christ does not say, ye believe not,
because ye are not elected, Ioh. 10. 26. but because ye are not my sheep ( i.
e. because ye hear not my voice) as you may see in the next verse, and I desire
to know how men can believe, if they hear not his words, as they are laid
before them, seeing as the Apostle says, faith comes by hearing, and hearing
by the Word of God, Romans 10. 17. but if he mean the cause is Gods decreeing of
their unbelief, as many hold; I have through the Lords assistance disproved
such opinions before, and only here pray, that the thoughts of his heart may be
forgiven him, if his day of mercy be not past.

But he subjoyns another text, which he thinks also makes for his purpose,
Deuteronomy: 29. 2, 3, 4. ye have seen all that the Lord did before your eyes in the
Land of Egypt, unto Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his Land, the
great temptations which thine eyes have seen, the signs and those miracles, yet
the Lord has not given you an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to
hear unto this day, from whence, as I perceive, he would persuade men to
believe that there are some men to whom God did never afford ability to
perceive, see, and hear his words and wonders, and this (viz. Gods not giving
these things) is a higher cause of their unbelief, then the stubbornness of
their own hearts, and so the dirt must still be flung at Gods door; but such
thoughts are all vain and abominable, for the spirit speaks expressly twice in
the second and third verses, that their eyes had seen all that the Lord did, the
great temptations, signs and miracles, etc. I desire to know who gave them
those eyes, if it was not the Lord who made the seeing eye, and hearing ear? but
it is true, he continued not light to them unto that day ( viz. the time that
Moses spoke these words to them) but took away their wisdom, their light,
their understanding, their counsel; as a man may do many courtesies for his
friend or servant, if they prove false and rebellious, he discontinues his
courtesies; so the Lord dealt with the Israelites, he bare them as on Eagles
wings, and carried them in the days of old, and said, surely they are my
people, etc. but they rebelled and vexed his spirit, so he was their enemy, and
fought against them, Isa. 63. 9. 10. see a further reason of their Lords
withdrawing his light from them, and leaving them to their own counsels, Psalm.
81. where the Lord recounts his mercies verse 6. and 7. lays before them his
Law, 8, 9, and 10. but my people would not hearken to me, Israel would none of
me, so I gave them to their own hearts lusts, they walked in their own
counsels, ver. 11, 12. to this purpose read heedfully Psalm. 78. 10. to 54 and
Psalm. 106. throughout, who so curses his father, his light shall be put out in
obscure darkness, Pro. 20. 20. how much more they that despise the counsel of
God and murmr against him? the candle of the wicked shall be put out, Pro.
24. 20. see also Job 17. 5. 6. chapter 21. 17. the spirit of man is the Lords
candle, searching the innermost parts of the belly, Pro. 20. 27. did not the
Lord take away this candle light, or lamp from Saul. Nebuchadu^zzar, ^ea the
famous Asian Churches, and left them who had rejected the light in obscure
darkness, and has not given them eyes to see, ears to hear, or an heart to
perceive unto this day; and here there are many in this Island (which once saw
the great wonders of Iebovab, and believed his words, and sung his praise as
Israel did, Psalm. 106. 12.) who rejecting further manifestations of light, and
forgetting the rich mercies of the Lord, will have their light obscured their
wisdom turned to foolishness, and be laid aside as unprofitable, M. Syd.
Simpson.
useless plants, rememeber what one of your Prophets has said, Men may be
saved wanting many truths* but rejecting any they cannot. What then? they shall
be cast one day into utter darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth.

But may some say, if this be so, God is changeable, if he takes away the light
he once gave.

I answer it is no such thing, but clearly the contrary, for the Lord has
every where in his word declared, that he will be with us whilst we are with
him, if we forsake him, he will forsake us, if any draw back my soul shall have
no pleasure in him, Heb. 10. 38. Ezekiel. 10. 24. 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. with many other
places. Now when men rebel against God, reject his commands, and turn from
righteousness, and the Lord casts them off, it shows his great constancy to
his own Council and Decrees, whereas, if God should still continue light and
delight to Apostates, and such as still gainsay the truth presented to them,
this would argue God variable from himself, in that he declares that he will
desert back-sliders, and yet continues his favor and liking toward them,
continuing in sin without repentance, as some would fain flatter themselves and
others; A. M.
and this also leads to the tenets of the Ranters, and is of all other
doctrines the greatest enemy to godliness, and encouragement to wickedness
that can be; but men will find it otherwise, the Potter has power over the
clay to do as he pleases with it, and what that is, he has showed us, Jer.
18. 9, 10. At what time I speak concerning a Nation to build and plant it, if
it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice, then will I repent of the
good wherewith I said I will benefit them; so he can do with the Inhabitants of
this Island, and so he will do if they repent not; and thus you see how fully
this text witnesses against M. Tro. conceit that Gods not giving men grace or
light is the highest cause of their unbelief; yea so fully, that it shows they
did once see his great signs, etc. but their sins hid these things from them,
and removed their lights, that it was not continued with them; so it is said of
the Jews, they once saw Christ and his miracles, and had the things belonging
to their peace revealed to them; but now says Christ, they are hid from thine
eyes; it is just with God when men will be wise in their own eyes, to hide from
them the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven, and reveal them to Babes, turning
their wisdom into foolishness; it is just with God to leave M. Tro. to
himself, even to limit and restrain Scripture-Redemption, he having fiercely
set himself to oppose it; the great and gracious God yet grant him time and
space to repent; but though he has never a Scripture, yet he has another
argument against Scripture Redemption, which is this:

All those for whom Christ died, are redeemed from the wrath to come.

But all men are not redeemed from that wrath to come. M. Tro.


Therefore he died not for all.

First I desire the Reader to consider, whether there be any difference between
this argument and the former, and what there is between this, they shall never
perish, but have eternal life, and this, they are delivered from the wrath to
come.

Secondly I answer, his first Proposition is a mere fallacy and falsity, for
there is not one Scripture to prove it, and the consequence that he would draw
from it is, that if Christ died for all, then all shall be saved, which does
not follow; and I have answered this objection fully already, and showed by the
Scriptures, that though Christ died for all, yet many perish, because they will
not come to Christ, Io. 5. 40. because they believe not, and if you would know
how they who were bought by Christ come to perish, or fall under wrath to come,
it is for denying the Lord that bought them, and treading under foot the blood
of the Covenant, wherewith they were sanctified, as I have showed from Heb. 10.
24. 2 Pet. 2. 1. it is for their holding the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.
18. for their uncleanness foolish talking, covetousness, idolatry, whoredom*
lying, and all manner of disobedience, as the Apostle plainly shows, Ephesians. 5.
3, 4. 5, 6. and therefore M. Tro. might have spared this Logic, except he has
a mind still to make God the Author, both of the creatures sin and suffering,
and turn that truth of God (which says thy destruction is of thy self) into a
lie, and say, oh Israel thy destruction is of me; and indeed he may as well
charge the Scriptures expressions, as limit and restrain the Scriptures
redemption.

But he objects further, M. Tro. M. Wood. M. Batty, etc.
Christ did not die for all, because he did not pray for all; and in this he
does so confidently triumph, calling it his strong argument, as if it were
impossible to answer the fallacious deductions which he draws from the pure
word, for he concludes, that because Christ did not at the same time, Jo. 17.
9. or in the same terms pray for all, therefore he did not die for all; to
which: answer, first, if it should be granted that Christ did not pray for all,
yet it does not of necessity follow, that he did not die for all: for there is
no Scripture that says these words, Christ did not die for those, for whom he
did not pray; and M. Tro. bare word is no sufficient proof, yet he is very bold
this way, and says in 34. page of his book, that Christ says thus to his
Father, there is a world that I pray nor for for there is a world that is not
thine, a world that then di^st not give me to die for, and therefore a world
that I must not pray for. I wonder that any man who pretends tenderness of
conscience, and love to the Scriptures, should dare to add to them, but they
that dare to restrain the Scriptures, will dare also to add to the Scriptures,
and in time do any thing, if they repent not. But:

Secondly, though Christ prayed not for the world in the same words, and at
that time when he prayed for his Disciples (both not being in the same
capacity) yet afterward and elsewhere he does, and to clear up this, let us
search the Scriptures, Job. 17. which M. Tro. says is the pattern of his prayer
in heaven; and to prove this, he quotes Arminius, for my part I never read his
works as the searcher of hearts does know* but seeing M. Tro. thinks him
authentic in this point, I shall desire to show this pattern to all those that
shall read this work, that so we may be as well acquainted with the
intercession of Christ, as his Oblation of himself to God for us. Observe then
first, that Christ from the 6. ver. to the end of the 19. makes mention only of
his Disciples in being, as any considerate soul may see if they do but read and
mind what is written, In the 20. and part of 21. he prays for all that should
believe through the word of truth; and in the later part of the 21. and in part
of the 33. for the world, that they might believe and know that the Father sent
him. And if any shall say (as they often do) that by the world is meant the
Believers, Saints, Elect, or the Disciples of Christ, they mistake much, for
Christ says ver. the 8. they (his Disciples) have surely known that I came
out from thee, and have believed that thou did send me; and besides, all
impartial spirits will confess that the world and the Saints are always
opposed to each other.

Secondly, that Christ made intercession for the transgressors, Is^. 53. 12.
and Luke 23. 34. he prays for his persecutors, Romans, Israelites, Jews,
Gentiles, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do, and Christ's
precepts and practice are not contradicting one to the other, nay he commands
us to pray for them that persecute us, Mat. 5. 44. for all men, 1 Timothy 2. 1.
Christ did pray for his friends, and he prayed for his enemies, for Saints and
for sinners, though not in the same expressions, for if he had prayed for the
world (I mean wicked men) in the same terms as for his Disciples, he had prayed
rather against them then for them, when he petitioned that they might be one
(for unity in iniquity is as bad as unity in piety is good) every one that
prays with understanding is apt to pray for the Saints that God would keep them
in peace and unity, that they may continue in the way that they are (...), and
for all people and Nations, that God would disperse the beams of truth amongst
them, that so they may know and believe, and be converted, they desire that God
would preserve their friends, and pardon their persecutors, but do not usually
pray that God would keep the men of the world in the way that they are, in
oneness of mind, etc. or that the Saints may be converted, neither did our
Teacher the Lord Christ do thus, but that the Disciples who had known and
believed might be preserved in one, and kept from evil, and that the world
might know and believe him whom the Father had sent and sealed: Thus you see
(if this prayer of Christ in the 17. of John be the pattern of his prayer in
heaven, as M. Tro. from Arminius has asserted) that then our dear Redeemer
has not left out one man or woman, for there are but two sorts of people, nor
ever were there any more, believers and unbelievers, Saints and sinners, the
Elect and the world, and for both these he prays (though in different
expression) as you have heard before.

Ob. But will some say, that that if Christ had ever prayed for the world that
they might believe and know him, then they should have so done, because Christ
was always heard by the Father, but say they, we see that all do not believe
and know Christ, therefore he need not to pray.

This argument is very deceitful, and grounded upon a false supposition, that
because men do not, therefore they cannot, nor ever could know the Lord, and
believe him; but this supposall being false, the argument is so to, as I have
largely proved before in this discourse.

But secondly I answer, Jesus Christ did never pray in vain, but obtained what
he prayed for; the works of redemption and intercession etc. being finished
from the foundation of the world, and all men may know and believe the Lord, as
the Prophets and Apostles have testified, and as from them I have before showed
out of Isa. 5. 4. Isa. 43. 9, 10. Jo. 1. 7. Romans 1. 19. 20. with many others; I
beseech you read and consider them, and from them you will clearly see, that
God has not been wanting to reveal light and knowledge of himself through
Christ, but men may know and believe it is possible for them, and nothing
hinders them but the devil and themselves, their self-will and their sins,
which cause God to leave them, and hide good things from them; Christ prayed
that the world might believe and know him, and it is granted, all men through
him may believe, Joh. 1. 7. it is true, (as has been formerly showed) that God
does not enable all men to know and believe with the same measure of light, but
every man has sufficient according to his ability; neither shall all men be
accountable for the same proportion of talents, yet he that had but one must
reckon for that; and they that have been faithful in a little, shall be Rulers
over much.

And let this be considered well by all men, that as Christ died for all, yet
none that are men and women shall have eternal life only by his pouring out
his blood for them, without obedience to him, according to what he reveals to
them, so though Christ prays for all men, yet none are saved to the uttermost
merely through his intercession, except they (being invited by the spirit) come
to God through him, as you may see Heb. 7. 25. wherefore he is able to save to
the uttermost them that come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them, and this being true, that all men may know and believe
the Lord, I conclude that this ability is obtained for them through the
intercession of Christ, without whom we never had enjoyed any thing, no not a
being; and that Christ in this was heard, in that he desired all men through
him (according to his request) may know and believe, the world through him may
be saved, yea they who shall be damned might have been saved, had they received
the love of the truth, if the Apostle may be believed, 2 These. 2, 11, 12.

Ob. But (says M. Tro. many dangerous consequences will follow, if we should
grant that Christ died for all, as first it rises up against the power of God
( as M. Tro. says) that he should give his Son to die for the salvation of
thousands, and yet all not be saved.

Ans. 1. To which I answer, first by wa^ of the distinction used by the
Apostle, 1 Timothy 4. 10. he is the Savior of all men, especially of them that
believe: and from hence observe, that God who gave his Son, and Christ who gave
himself a ransom for all* has saved or delivered every man from the power of
the grave, but God never gave his Son to save or deliver any from the wrath to
come, or to bring any to eternal glory, but such as believe and obey, as I
have often proved.

Ans. 2. Secondly, it does not impeach the power of God in that we maintain
that what God did intend to bring to pass by his own sole sovereign power
through the death of his Son is effected (viz.) the breaking of the Serpents
head, the continuance of life to mankind here, making way for light and
salvation, and the raising up all men from the grave, but that God did ever
purpose to bring men to eternal life, whether they believe or no, by an
absolute power, we deny, for the Saints themselves are kept by the power of God
through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5.

Ob. But says M. Tro. it makes the salvation of the creature to depend on the
contingency of his own will and natural ability.

Ans. 1. Answer first, that salvation (I mean everlasting glory) with God, or
eternal life, is Gods gift, as I have formerly proved by the Scriptures.

Ans. 2. Secondly, that none shall enjoy this gift of his, but such as walk as
he has enjoined them, in that Law which he manifested to them, is the eternal
infringeable and unresistable Decree of God, and M. Tro. page 45. confesses,
that though the precepts of God do not show what God has done for us, yet they
determine man's duty, and the rule of his obedience, what God approves as good
in it self, and what is our duty to do, there being a sweet harmony and
connection between the end and the means, which is fully as much as I hold in
this point, ( viz.) that they who would be saved, which is the end, The
Shropshire Ministers.
they must believe and obey as God has enabled them, which is the means, or at
least one means.

But says M. Tro. its contrary to the wisdom, justice and love of God, that he
should give his Son to die for all, and not give them faith and repentance, etc.

Ans. 1. To which I answer as before, that indeed if God had given his Son to
die for all, with an intent to save all, (that is give eternal life to all, or
any) without faith and obedience, then if any had come short of it, it might
have seemed to reflect on the wisdom, justice, and mercy of Jehovah; but the
Scriptures never reveal any such purpose in God, as you may see by Joh. 3. 16.
H^b. 5. 9. with many other places.

Ans. 2. Secondly, so far as God did intend by his Sons death to save or
deliver men, he did, does, and will fully effect ^t; and whether men believe it
or no, they shall one day be saved from the grave by him that died and rose
again.

Ans. 3. Thirdly, that God so put men in a sav^^ble condition, that if any come
short of eternal life, their destruction is of themselves, their rejecting
light, and loving darkness, will be their condemnation.

Ans. 4. God does not give faith and repentance as M. Tro. dreams, viz. make
men to believe by an irresistible power, for I have showed before, that God is
said to give faith and repentance when by his Word or Spirit he persuades men
to believe and repent, or depart from evil, when he gives the Gospel, which
is the Word of Faith (and frequently in the Scriptures is called faith) thus
Faith is the gift of God; and so when by the Gospel or goodness of God any
soul is led to repentance, God is said to give repentance; yet the act or duty
of believing and repenting is never called Gods gift, work, or act, for then
they that shall be damned for unbelief and impenitency, shall perish, because
God gave them not the means, yea because God did not perform his act or work in
the creatures, contrary to all the revealed will of God, so that it appears to
me and thousands besides, that M. Tro. doctrine does highly scandalize, and
impeach, and restrain the power, wisdom, justice, and love of God.

For if Christ did not die for all, or redeem all (from the power of the grave
at least, which is that I hold, and which M. Tro. cries down under the name of
universal redemption) it was either because he could not, or because he would
not, I am certain it is not the later, for he will raise up all men at the last
day, 1 Cor. 15. 20, 21: if M. Tro. says it is because he could not, wise men
will a^hor such savings, both therefore are true, he is willing and able, and
also will do it, all mankind are and shall be freed in due time from whatsoever
Adam brought on them, and whosoever affirms the contrary, debaseth the power of
the omnipotent God, seen ^sp^cially in raising up Jesus from the dead, Ephesians. 1.
20. that so he might be Lord of the quick and dead, (as has before been
manifelled) of which dom^nion, Lordship, or power, M. Iro. and others (though I
hope not knowingly) have endeavored to divest Jesus Christ, except they will
say that our Lord will exercise authority over those whom he never purchased,
the very thought whereof is abominable to every knowing sincere h^aits, seeing
the Scriptures ^re so p^ain, that to this (...) Christ both died and rose
again, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and the living, and
they that oppose this, disparage the power of Christ, scandalize his Scepter,
which is a Scepter of righteousness, and make Christ an arbitrary usurper, the
name whereof (...) amongst all, and (at least in words) exploded by us in this
Island.

And as for the wisdom of the Lord, which is infinite, Mr. Troughtons Doctrine
detracts from it, for he confesses, that the tenders of mercy by the Lords
commands, are, and must be to all where the Gospel comes (though not really and
in good earnest, as one says) yet Christ dyed not for all (says Mr.
Troughton.) M. John Symson.
Now I beseech thee O impartial soul that read this, judge what is right,
and see whether it suits with the wisdom of God, to invite, persuade, beseech,
and stretch out his hands unto stubborn gainsaying wretches, having never
given Christ for them, nor Christ any right to them? would Christ ever have
been grieved for the hardness of the Jews hearts, had he not laid down his
life for them? we account it folly to grieve for that which cannot be helped, so
men ignorantly tax Christ of no less, when they say, God had appointed them to
be har hearted and disobedient, and yet Christ grieved for it.

Object. Oh but God could have softened their hearts if he would have had it so.

Answ. But I say God never did purpose to soften any hearts, otherwise then by
the teachings of his Spirit, and Prophets, and his Son; these being rejected,
he leaves men to themselves, and they bring upon themselves destruction: Does
it suit with the wisdom, justice, and love of a man to command his servants to
do that which he knows they cannot, or are not able to perform? Mr. Troughton
confesses that God commands all to repent and believe, and it is certain many
shall be damned for unbelief; yet he says, that its impossible that all
should believe: nay, he says, That God appointed them to be disobedient, if
this were true (as it is most false) where were the wisdom, justice, and
goodness of God, when he shall command them to believe whom he had appointed
to unbelief; yea damn men for being such, ( viz. disobedient) as he had
appointed them to be; but especially does not this traduce the unfathomed
boundless love of God, when men shall say (as Mr. Troughton does) that Christ
did not die for all, and yet the greatest number of men and women shall be
damned for not believing on him who paid no ransom for them; and does not
this highly impeach the power and truth of God, the holy Word of the glorious
Gospel, when men shall so andaciously affirm that Christ dyed only for some,
and but for a few; and that he dyed not for all. And whereas the word of Faith
says plainly that Christ dyed for all, gave himself a ransom for all, for
every man, for the sheep, and those that deny him, for the living and for the
dead, for the world, yea the whole World. When men I say denies these plain
texs, and like the Papists, suffer not poor souls to read them but by their
Gloss; what do they but vilify and falsify the Scriptures, and give the truth
of God the lie? The good Lord judge between us for his own truth sake. Let Mr.
Troughton produce but one Text of Scripture for all his assertions and we will
believe him, but the Reader may see he has not one, but instead of Scriptures,
brings his own reasons and sophistical Arguments.

Object. But says Mr. Troughton, if Christ dyed for all, then Christ is but
half a Savior, and man must actually save himself, etc.

I Answer first, I have proved already that he is the Savior of all men, and
how he is so, in that he has saved and delivered all men by his death and
resurrection from the Grave, so as that none shall die there eternally for
Adams sin.

Secondly, He has prepared and propounded eternal life or salvation freely,
when none desired it of him, and has provided and given laws for every soul
that will be saved to walk in, (as the Ministers about B. Castles in their
namelesse Paper confess) and through Christ bestowed light to walk and work
by, and what could God do more? except you would have him repent and believe,
or force some to obey, and decree others to disobey, and to be a respecter of
persons, which he will never be, I mean to respect persons personally
considered; the Lord is good to all, and extends his goodness to all, and
thereby they who turn to him shall be built up. Of a truth God is no respecter
of persons, says Peter, Act. 10. But in every Nation he that fears him and
works righteousness is accepted of him. Cornelius never heard of Christ as
some heard of him, yet he was accepted with God (serving him according to the
light he had) which was not without Christ (though as yet he knew him not) for
none are accepted without him; But Mr Troughton finds fault with us, that we
should ever think that Christ shed his blood for those that never heard the
Gospel. To which I answer, If by the Gospel he means those precious sayings
and writings of Christ and his Apostles, as he does, for he calls it the voice
of the Gospel and word of Faith; I think he has no reason to except against
us, for none of the Patriaks, Prophets, and holy men of old so heard it; much
less did Jethro, Ruth, the Eunuch, and many more mentioned in the Scriptures;
yet I hope Mr. Troughton will confess that he dyed for them. I doubt not but
that servant who imployes his one Talent well shall receive the reward of one
Talent.

Thirdly, The Scripture says, Save your selves from this untowardly
Generation, Act. 2. 40. and work out your salvation with fear and trembling,
Phil. 2. 12. which I understand to be but thus, repent, believe, obey, or use
the means which God has appointed you for salvation, and this no sober man
will deny to be our duty; yet when we have done that (and if it were possible
ten thousand times more) we are but unprofitable servants, and do no more merit
or procure salvation then a poor beggar stretching out his hand to receive a
purse of Money (if any were so free as to give it) does merit, procure, or
coin that Gold or Silver which is given him, as I have before showed; God
might have required all dutiful obedience from us, and yet at last have sent
us to the Grave for ever: and as for universal salvation, which Mr. Troughton
terrifies himself and others with; I have often showed how I hold it, to wit,
that all were saved or delivered by Christ, dying and rising, from the miseries
that came by Adam, so that they shall not for ever lie under them; and for any
other universal salvation of fallen Angels and Reprobates I know nothing, for
Christ dyed not for Angels; and as for Reprobates that deny the Lord that
bought, and resist the spirit of God, and violate the Law of Nature, that know
not God, and obey not the Gospel, they shall be destroyed for ever: yet I
believe, that for want of a right dividing, and so of a right understanding of
the word of truth, in the things by me insisted upon; many have run into
gross absurdities about universal salvation, not being able to distinguish
between salvation or deliverance, which is by the death of Christ from Adams
sin and sufferings for it, and salvation which is through believing on him, or
coming to him, Heb. 7. 25. from our sins, which without repentance will damn
man eternally in the second death: They thought (and that rightly) that all are
and shall be saved or delivered from something; but not seriously weighing the
word, and distinguishing, concluded that none shall be damned or consumed
forever, at the last day of Judgment, which is most absurd, and such a
Doctrine of universal salvation ( viz. that none shall be punished or perish in
the lake of fire) my soul abhors, as also Mr Troughtons Doctrine, that any
shall be punished or perish there, merely because it is the pleasure of the
Lord so to have it, or because they were by Jehovah appointed to be
disobedient, and to be damned, or because there was never a Savior that dyed
for them, or because Adam eat of the forbidden tree, my soul also abominates;
and it is the grief of thousands to hear that God is dishonored by such
Declarations.

Though once I confeffe it was my judgment, but the Lord has had mercy upon
my soul, and now I see that every man's destruction is of himself, and that the
vengeance of eternal fire comes on men through their omitting some good that
they might have done, or their committing some evil that they might have
avoided, for rejecting some light that they might have received, or turning
from what they had received, for trampllng under foot the blood of the Covenant
wherewith they were sanctified, and denying the Lord that bought them, etc.

Object. But says Mr. Troughton, if it we should preach that Christ dyed for
all, this would bolster up men in a profane course, or at best in a general
dead faith.

Answ. The contrary to which is true, for one constant use that we make of this
Doctrine, is to diswade, deter, and dehort sinners from profaneness and all
manner of sin, and to persuade them therefore to hate that which is evil, to
die to sin, to live to righteousness, to love and live to the Lord Jesus,
because he dyed for them and rose again; and we declare unto all men, that if
they do not leave sin, repent, and live to Christ, but deny his word, despise
his Spirit, and slight his blood, they shall be sure to be damned for ever,
because they live not to him that dyed for them and rose again; and that
although Christ bought them, or laid down a sufficient price for them, yea
though they profess that truth, yet if in their works they deny him and follow
not those further manifestations of light, which he appears to them in, but
refuse his words, and so receive him not, they shall be destroyed at the last
day.

Secondly, This Doctrine cannot be the Nurse of a dead faith, if truly preached
and received; for this teaches men to know first by the Scriptures, that Christ
dyed for them, and what a man knows infallibly he may believe comfortably,
undoubtedly, and without wavering; yea all faith that is not groundupon
knowledge, is but a mere fancy and very uncertain, when men believe they know
not what.

But one the contrary, Mr. Troughtons Doctrine is the nursery of profaneness
and deadness of faith, or at least of sadness of soul, yea despair of mercy.
How many poor wretches (hearing that God did appoint a certain number of
persons only to believe, and so to be saved, and the rest to disobedience and
so to be damned) have desperately concluded, if I am appointed to believe and
be saved, I shall be saved live how I will: and others, when they commit sin,
sooth up themselves with this conceit, it is Gods will that they should commit
such sins, God did decree and appoint them to be disobedient, and it could
not be avoided, with many such devilish conclusions, tending to all lewdness,
loosnesse, and profaneness that can be imagined: And hence it is there is so
much bitterness, wrath, hatred, revenge and strife amongst men; for did they
but know and seriously lay to heart, that Christ shed his blood for those poor
Creatures, that injure them, and which they so malign, their heart would melt
toward them, they would not hate their persons, nor seek to ruin their
Estates, only abhor their vices, and seek to draw them out of the sinck of
their sins.

It must of necessity also be the root of a dead faith, for what life can that
faith have, which is grounded upon our own qualifications?

For thus Mr. Troughton teaches men to Argue, Christ dyed for believers, sheep,
saints; but I am a believer, a sheep, a saint, therefore Christ dyed for me;
but the Scripture proves neither of his propositions, but teaches us better
Logic thus; Christ dyed for sinners, for the ungodly, for all, for the whole
world, and those that deny him, therefore for me, and this shows gracious
humility, the other vain ostentations; this gives sweet and certain assurance
of Gods love to any poor soul: the other when his qualifications are absent
(as often they are) leaves the Creature in a doubtful despair, whether God
loved it at all; this engages the soul to love God who loved him first, and
gave his Son to dye for him; the other saddens the heart with fear, shakes
the foundation, causing a distressed soul to question, whether ever Christ dyed
for him, or her. If a faithful Gospel preacher should persuade a profane
wretch to repent and turn to God, and the sinner should ask; What should move
him to change his life? The messenger of the Lord must answer, That the
goodness of the Lord should lead them to repentance; if the other should
reply, Wherein God showed his goodness toward him? The Ambassador of the Lord
must rejoyne, in that he gave his Son to dye for him a miserable wretched
sinner, and that there is a door of salvation open for him upon his
repentance, through the blood of Jesus, or he says nothing; for if he should
only tell him of the goodness of God as to this life, or tell him of some wild
uncertain hopes of mercy, without assuring him that Christ was Curcified for
him, it would leave but a slender impression upon his spirits; and to persuade,
exhort, require, and beseech a company of exorbitant sinners to amend their
lives and love the Lord Jesus, is but a lost labor, if we declare not unto
them the certainty of his kindness and love to them first, according to the
Scriptures; for a soul will never truly love Christ except he be assured that
the Lord Christ first loved him; or at best if by a preaching of the Gospel at
random, (as many do) any poor souls are fallen in love with Christ, yet their
spirits are full of fear and perplexing anxieties, till they know and are
assured of his love to them, and wherein that consists the Apostle Paul shows
us, Romans 5. 8. and 1 John 4. 9. 10, 19. Herein is love, not that we loved God,
but he loved us first, and sent his Son to be a propitiation for us.

You would blame that man exceedingly, who should use his utmost endeavor by
all means to persuade his Neighbor being (but a mean man) to set his
affections upon some great Lady, Simil.
admired for virtue, beauty, birth, and riches, being not able to assure his
friend first, that she loves him, and desires to bestow her self upon him; but
if he hear it from her mouth, or have it made under her hand that she loves
such a man, and desires to be joined to him in Marriage, he may boldly and
withal earnestness, stir up his friend to affect her, and seek her love,
who is every way so worthy, and withal so loving to him, that is to far below
her: Of no less folly are they guilty, that spend their spirits in calling and
crying unto sinners to love the Lord Jesus, and seek his face, and yet either
cannot or will not assure them, that Christ loved them, and laid down his life
for them, thereby to move them to place their affections upon him: Nay its
impossible they should know it (and much more impossible they should make
others know it) that say Christ dyed only for a small number. If a wicked
profane wretch should meet a man, and were about to offer some injury to him,
if another should come and make it evident that this man whom he is about to
wrong, ransomed him with a great sum out of Captivity; or when he was
condemned to dye (by giving his own only Child to dye for him) delivered him
from death; this might allay his fury after the resolution, and melt the heart
of the most cruel hard-hearted and injurious person; or if it did not, it would
render him the most odious of Creatures, the most ungrateful of men, and
unworthy of any further pity: And therefore it is that wherever we meet with
profane persons that are treading under foot the Son of God, and crucifying
the Lord of life afresh, by swearing, lying, drunkenness, persecuting the
Saints, etc. and so injuring and denying the Lord that bought them; we acquaint
them that he whom they wrong and persecute is Jesus the Savior of the World,
the redeemer of mankind, that gave himself a ransom for all, bought them with
his precious blood, and dyed for their sins according to the Scriptures, that
thereby we may persuade them from their impious persecuting principles, and
profane practices, or else leave them without excuse, but whilst men continue
ignorant of this great love of Christ, and do not certainly know by the
Scriptures that Christ dyed for them, they are seldom restrained from
profaneness and all sorts of impiety, or at least are filled with frequent
doubtings and tremblings of heat, not knowing whether the Lamb was slain for
them, yet knowing that forsaking of sin and following of righteousness, can
do no good to that soul for whom Christ dyed not, no precepts can be
available, or promises applicable to those for whom the blood of Christ Jesus
was not shed, and so they stand staggering at both; and though sometimes
through the mercy of a long suffering God, they have some sweet tastes of mercy;
yet by attending to false Teachers, and Satan's temptations, they begin to
question whether Christ dyed for them, and then all their unstable hopes
vanish, and their unsettled hearts are hurried into a Labyrinth of soul
dstempering confusions; the Lord pity these poor Creatures, and deliver them
from all self contradicting; yea God contradicting Teachers, who hold the truth
in unrighteousness.

And whereas Mr. Troughton says, That men will argue, that if Christ dyed for
all men, then for me, I shall be saved though I go on and enjoy my lusts, etc.
Its nothing so, and they that hold that Christ dyed for all men according to
the Scriptures, raise no such Arguments, knowing that they that deny to serve
him that bought them shall be destroyed; but they argue thus, Christ dyed for me
among the rest of men, therefore I ought to live to him, love, serve, and obey
him, to forsake my lusts, pride, swearing, coveteousnesse and profaneness to
dye to sin and live to righteousness because he dyed for me and rose again.

But Mr. Troughton says, That Christ's dying for all is a ground of despair to
many, to which I answer.

First, Here Mr. Troughton miserably contradiccts himself, for he holds that
they whom Christ dyed for can never dye in despair; and for others there was
never any hopes of eternal life laid up: But here it seems that there was
something to be enjoyed even by them who despair of it, but I shall not dwell
upon any advantages, but

Secondly I answer, That Mr. Troughtons suggestions is very false, for seeing
that Christ dyed for all, seeing he so loved the World as to give his life for
mankind, much more will he be found willing to receive and save poor sinners
that come to him: But Satan has subtly circumvented men by a great slight,
in persuading them through the Doctrine of the false Ministers (who are
transformed as the Ministers of Christ) that God will save some men that live
and dye in sin; and that others who so live and dye, shall be damned; that
one liar shall be saved, and another be damned; one swearer shall be saved, and
another damned; one Adulerer shall be saved, and another damned: that God is
angry with one drunkard, murderer, whoremonger, and not with another, though
neither of them repent; for they hold, that it is Christ's w^rk to act faith
and repentance; In the Creature, they hold that God was never angry with his
Elect; and hence it, that some say, God was no more angry with David after he
had perpetrated those horrid sins of murder and adultery, then he was at any
other time: others hold, (which is all one in effect) that he forces some to
believe and be saved, and appoints others to sin and be damned, and this
they call the distinguishing love of God, which makes M. Troughton ask, page
56. Where is the distinguishing love of God, if Christ dyed for all?

I answer first, in that he gave Christ to dye for all Men, and not for the
fallen Angels. Secondly, In that he will delight in, abide with, and save such
as repent and obey him, as you may see, Psalm. 147. 11. Jo. 14. 21, 13. Heb. 5.
9. and not others, when he might have required men to have done an hundred
times as much as he has, and yet have made no such promise of further
manifestations of love or life eternal, he gave himself a ransom for all,
yet he gives more (or a further addition of) grace; He resists the proud
(who deny the Lord that bought them) and gives grace to the humble, Isai. 4.
9. so here is distinguishing grace. First, He manifests his goodness, grace,
or favor to men; yea all men, yea to the wicked men, and they who humbly
receive his mercy and truth, shall have more even an increase every way, as I
have in the foregoing part of this Treatise proved from Jo. 14. 21.

An other railing Accusation that Mr. Troughton brings against the truth is
this, If (says he) we shall hold that Christ dyed for all, this will be a
ready way to reconcile us to Rome: I conceive he means the Papists, but the
Papists generally hold that Christ dyed sufficiently, but not efficiently for
all; and they hold directly as Mr. Troughton does in this point; that is, That
his blood in respect of the intrinsicall merit of it, was sufficient for ten
thousand Worlds; but it was not the intention of the Father, that all should
have any benefit by it; we are very unlikely then to be reconciled to Rome in
this point, although Mr. Troughton (who closes much more with them in this
point then we) about original sin, and sprinkling Infants, etc. would so
persuade people, that he might render the truth of God odious.

And as for conditional Election, I know not what the Papists maintain; but as
before manifested, we hold that God did appoint or choose all men to be holy,
and those that are so to happy. But that the natural man has power of himself
without spiritual grace to believe in Christ to eternal life (as Mr.
Troughton says we hold) is most notoriously false; nay wear so far from
thinking any such thing, that we know and teach every where, that the best of
men have not power of themselves to make one hair white or black. But that we
have all our sufficiency of God, and that of his own free mercy through Christ
he has given power to every man and woman, to do what he requires of them; and
that every good and perfect gift is from God, Jam. 1. 17. etc. as I have before
showed: Neither do we say there is no original sin, for Adams sin was the
original or first sin; but we are not so silly, as to think there are two
original sins, neither are we so foolish as with the Papists, Mr. Troughton,
and all false Teachers in the world, as to say that Children bring so much
sin with them into the World, as will (or at least may) damn them eternally
in the second death, or that Baptism does cleanse away original sin, as
some besides the Papists and Prelates, hold, or that men shall be damned
eternally after the Resurrection for Adams ^inne: but we say, that through
original sin all dye or return to the dust, as is before declared at large.
And although we thus hold that Infants bring not with them into the World so
much sin as will or may cast them into the second death, yet this is no way
inconsistent with the Antipaedobaptists; neither does it follow, that because
children may and shall be saved, therefore they may and must be baptized; for
God has declared that unto little Infants belongs the Kingdom of God, Mat. 19.
14. but he has no where commanded, or declared that they may or ought to be
sprinkled with water; for they having done neither good nor evil, have no need
of repentance, faith and baptism, or any other externally or
internally-purifying Ordinances, until they sin against light, and so their
consciences are defiled, which without applying the blood of Jesus, and
obedience to his precepts, will never be purged again; when men come to know
what is good, yet commit that which is evil.

There is no peace of conscience to be had, without conformity to the will of
God revealed to Men and Women: Mr. Deiamain.
But doubtless its the greatest piece of folly in the world, to sprinkle little
Babes under a color of a promise belonging to them, Baptism is a precept that
follows repentance, and is of equal duration with it, even till the coming of
our Lord; so that the sanctification of Infants by the blood of Christ, does
neither help the Paedobaptists nor hurt the Antipaedobaptists: for whatsoever
God has done for little ones, yet we must do no more for them, then the Lord
who gives the fruit of the womb, requires of us.

Its very improbable then, that ever we shall be reconciled to Rome (as Mr.
Troughhton says) whilst we disavow the infalibility of men, the sprinkling of
Babes, the taking of Tithes, or a forced maintenance, and national Churches, in
all which (being the foundation and main building of the Papacy) Mr. Troughton,
and the Parish Ministers are already reconciled to Rome.

Object. But says Mr. Troughton, If Christ dyed for all, then some men may
fall away from a state of grace and salvation.

Ans. It follows not any way, but rather it argues they may not; but may and
ought to hold fast that state of grace and salvation which Christ has brought
them to.

Secondly, We never say that men may fall away from Grace, but that many have
so done, and therefore admonish the Saints who are in a state of grace, to take
heed lest they fall from the grace of God, Heb. 12. 15. and lest there be in
any of them an evil heart of unbelief to depart from the living God: and we
are sure that taking heed, never made any man to fall: But we remember how Adam
being in the favor of God, and a good state fell, how the Israelites fell,
Row. 11. 22. How Hymeneus and Alexander put away, and make shipwreck of faith
and a good conscience, 1 Timothy 1. 19. And how all they in Asia were turned away
from Paul, 2 Timothy 1. 15. yea all the famous Churches of Rome, Corinth, Galatia,
Colosse, Thessalonia, with the seven Churches of Asia, long since fell from the
faith once given to the Saints, and are buried in oblivion.

Ans. 3. By Grace I mean the Gospel, we are not under the Law but under Grace,
Romans 6. 14. Now many have professed the Gospel or Grace of God, and have fallen
from it, whereas had they continued in it, they had been safe, even our
enemies themselves being judger. But they did but seem to profess the truth. I
answer, Then they did well to fall from a seeming profession which is
hypocrisy; it is a virtue to forsake an evil way, but many have forsaken the
right way, 2 Pet. 2. 15. and concerning the faith have erred and put away a
good conscience.

Object. Mr. Powel.
Oh but that was but seeming faith and a bad conscience; to which I answer,

Answ. 1. Then Paul bids Tim. hold fast seeming faith and a good conscience,
for the Apostle bids him hold fast that which some had put away, 1 Timothy 1. 19.

Ans. 2. It seems also that Hymeneus and Alexander were delivered to Satan, for
putting away seeming faith and a bad conscience, whereas they should rather
have been commended and highly praised.

Ans. 3. The Scriptures say, faith and a good conscience, men ^y, it was
seeming faith and a seeming good (other say a ^ad) conscience, believe the
Scriptures or men, which you ^^ease.

But men cannot endure to hear that there is any possibility of falling from
the favor of God, for this would check them in their full career of sinning;
but they would fain have pillowes sown under their Arm-holes, and hear that
whatever sins they commit, yet God is not displeased with them; and that
whatsoever they do, God is not angry with them, contrary to Mal. 2. 17. of whom
I demand what they think if David had dyed in the act of Adultery, or before
his repentance? I know what some have said, that David was as fully in the
favor of God in the time of his sinning as ever he was; but for my part I
think such Doctrine is most horrid and dismal, the sinck of sin, and the
enemy to all close walking with God, the decay and ruin of the power of
godliness; and a little will reconcile the brochers of it to the Ranters. I am
of Christ's mind, Except ye repent ye shall likewise perish, Luke 13. 3. And of
the Prophet Ezekiel's, When a righteous man tnrneth away from his
righteousness, and commits iniquity, etc. all his righteousness which he
has done shall not be mentioned; in his tresp^sse that he has trespassed, and
his sin which he has sinned in them shall he die, Ezekiel. 18. 24. And of Paul's
mind, If any man draw back, the Lord will have no pleasure in them, Heb. 10. 38.

Lastly, I do not say that Mr. Troughton may fall from a state of grace, but I
pray with all my soul that he may come up to it, and continue in it; therefore
he need not be offended, and I am certain no soul that truly fears God will
dislike that Doctrine which persuades to perseverance, and disswades from
carelessenesse and Apostasy.

Object. Lastly, says Mr. Troughton, if we hold that Christ dyed for all, this
may be an occasion to vilify and debase the Scriptures, for they that so hold,
do affirm that the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and fruitful seasons, reveal Christ
as a mediator savingly, etc.

Ans. 1. God has given unto men three principal ways of Teaching, nature
teaches, 1 Cor. 11. The heavens declare (or preach) Psalm. 19. 1. and his
written Word declared by Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles. Now
there are no men upon the face of the earth but have the two former, and where
the Lord affords those only, he expects obedience accordingly; these leave men
without excuse, for man's eternal welfare stands not upon how much light or
truth is manifested, but how that which is manifested is obeyed and followed.

Ans. 2. Where these are, if the word of truth and peace preached by Jesus
Christ may be enjoyed, and is rejected, then the others will not suffice.

Ans. 3. As under the Law there was a dark discovery of Jesus, yet sufficient
as to that dispensation, so in the teachings of nature and the creatures; there
is some discoveries of mercy and goodness in and from God which is not without
Christ, and will be found sufficient to those who have no other means, For God
accepts where there is a willing mind, not according to what men have not, but
ac^rding to what they have, 2 Cor. 8. 12. and will require according to what he
gives, if Christ may be judge, Luke 12. 43.

I see some very inquisitive, what shall become of Heathens, Turks, and Jews
etc. others insulting over them, judging and censuring them as a people of whom
God has no regard: but who art thou that judge another man's Servant, look
not how little they have, and what shall become of them, but how much thou
have, and what is required of thee; and know that God will expect of thee a
suitable improvement, taking this withal for the debellation of thy haughty
thoughts of thy riches, that as he that hid his one Talent is condemned, and he
that employed well his ten Talents commended; so whoever makes his own Talent
two shall be rewarded, when thou that boastest with thy great light and many
Talents, (if not improved according to the Doners will and bounty) may be
receive the greater condemnation; it shall be easier for Tire, Sidon, Sodom and
Gomerrha, at the great day of the Lord, then for Chorazin, Bethsayda and
Capernaum. Neither let any man think that another improvement will excuse him,
or that he may build his faith, or what men have written in these things of
which I have treated, but on the Rock of ages, and the Doctrine of the Prophets
and Apostles, whose pure rule and perfect prophesies, discover to us the truth
of these things wherein men differ.

Mr, Troughton would persuade men, that its but a fiction to say that Christ
dyed for all, because it is not said in the Scripture that Christ dyed by name
for thee John, Thomas, Robert, etc. their is no such particular Scripture
revelation.

I grant there is no such particular revelation, and therefore we affirm with
the Scripture that Christ dyed for all, that to John, Thomas, Robert, or any
other man may have a ground to believe that Christ dyed for every one of them;
it is true if Christ did not dye for all, then no man can certainly know that
Christ laid down his life for him, except he could find both his names
written in the Scpriptures. And I appeal to every wise and impartial man,
whether Mr. Troughtons Argument does not evidently conclude against himself;
for what need is there that every man's name should be recorded in Scripture,
seeing Christ gave himself a ransom for all: But if that were true that
Christ bought only a small number, then its requisite that their names should
be expressed, or else no man can positively conclude, that Christ dyed for him:
as for example, If a pardon should be sent to all the prisoners in a prison,
there is no need of nominating them; but if it be only for two or three
amongst many, their names being not mentioned in the pardon, the bringer of the
pardon cannot tell who to call for, nor the Keeper of the Prison whom to
release, nor the prisoners to whom it relates: for if a man should come to a
place where a thousand prisoners lay bound, and should pretend that he comes
with joyful tidings to them, and then at last tell them that two or three of
them are only redeemed, though every one of them may have some hopes, Simil.
yet no man can know who it is till their names are manifested, but if the act
of Grace be sealed to them all, every one has a certain ground of serious
rejoicing; by this you that love the truth and peace, may see the bottom of
Mr. Troughtous errors, and depth of his wisdom.

Who teaches men in the next place to argue thus, M. Trough. Argument.
Whosoever believes on Christ shall be saved: But I believe in Christ,
therefore I shall be saved.

For Answer hereto, Consider how improper it is for men to tell men they must
believe in Christ before they know who he is, and what he has done for their
souls, except you would have men believe they know not what, and to walk by an
implicit faith, as Mr. Trovghton does; and then you will soon be reconciled to
Rome. The Scriptures teach us another Doctrine, Ye may know and believe, Isai.
43. 10. They that know thy name will put their trust in thee, Psalm. 9. 10. we
have known and believed the love that the Father has to us, Jo. 4. 16. Let
all the house of Israel know assuredly, etc. Act. 2. 36. after they have
escaped the pullutiont of the world through the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior, 2 Pet. 2 20. I know whom I have believed; I know that my Redeemer
lives, etc. Men will hardly give credit to, much less rely upon him they
never knew; and therefore when Christ asked the blind man whether he did believe
on the Son of God, he answered and said, Who is he that I might believe on
him? Jo. 9. 35. 36. He must know him before he could believe on him.

Object. But says Mr. Troughton, It Is the will of Gods purpose who Christ dyed
for in particular; and therefore thou can not fetch the ground of thy faith
from thence, but look to the generality of the offer of grace, and command to
believe.

Ans. 1. I grant it, and its that which I ever say that no man has a ground to
believe that Christ dyed for him, if he dyed for some particular persons only.

Ans. 2. It seems then, there is a general offer of grace, and a precept of
God, commanding and encouraging to believe. I entreat the discreet Reader to
consider what clear truth Mr. Tronghton professes, and how he has with one
hand ruined that great building of the Doctrine of restrained Redemption; which
he and many more with all their hands, heads and hearts have labou^ed (almost
these two hundred years) to raise up: for seeing there is a General tender of
Grace and manifestation of goodness from the most high God, that offer is
real or not. Mr. Troughton I think dare not say that it is not real (though
I fear dares say any thing, or else would never have restrained and limited
Scripture Redemption) for then he makes God like the worst of men: If it be
real, then I have ail that granted which largue for, as fully as my soul can
desire. For if there be a general and real offer of Grace from God: (as most
certainly there is) surely then Christ dyed for all, or else God offers grace
to them, and commands and encourages them to believe for whom his Son
never dyed, and consequently to whom that grace could never have done any good.

Object. But God fore-knew they would not receive it.

Ans. But he fore-knew as well that by those abilities by him given them, they
could and might have received it; and therefore he offers it that they may be
left without excuse, which could not have been if the tender had never been
made, and that in good earnest too: though Mr. Sympson in half says the
contrary. And wherein is the first act of Grace manifested, but in Gods giving
of Christ to be a propitiation for the sins of the whole world. That then
which is the first and principal manifestation of grace or love (which are all
one) is Gods giving his Son to dye for sinners, and doubtless is first and
principally to be made known to the world, that they may know and believe the
love of God, and so come to turn from Idols to serve him that so loved them, or
else we shall make a preposterous preaching of the Gospel. What Mr. Troughton
says, That we are not to look at Christ's dying for us, but to the precept of
God for our encouragement to believe, is utterly false, and merely legal; for
all obedience that is not grounded upon love to him, whom we obey is little
worth: But self contradictions break no square in Mr. Troughtons Doctrine, as
you shall see in the next place, where he says,

The command to believe and come to Christ is open and revealed, but who Christ
dyed for, M. Trough.
is secret and hid; neither is Gods call and command, that thou should repent
and believe, grounded upon Christ's dying for thee in particular.

I Answer, 1. This last clause is in part true, for its grounded upon his dying
for all in General, see Joh. 3. 16. and so is the f^rst ( viz) that the
command to believe is open and rev^aled; but that it is a secret thing who
Christ dyed for, is untrue; for there is not any one thing in all the
Scriptures morefully and plainly revealed, then this, as I have clearly proved.
But if it be a secret, how came Mr. Troughton to know any thing of its in
reference to himself or others.

Ans. 2. If a man have a conceit at large that Christ dyed for him, or a
certain knowledge that he dyed for all; yet if a man apply it not to his own
souls in particular, his faith will be but ill founded: For if certain
knowledge of every truth be the sure ground of every act of saving faith, how
can I believe that Christ dyed for me in particular, except I f^rst know that
he dyed for me in particular? and how any man can know that but by confessing
that he dyed for all, let any soul judge: But many that would be thought
Christians, are grown just like the Jews; yea the Pharisees, that have high
thoughts of themselves, and despise others, and that Christ never bought wicked
men and Heretics, but only seemed so to do. If I could see the man that has
not been a wicked man, or a Heretic, I should (it may be) say so too; but
there is not that man on the face of the earth, that has not been one or both
of these, as every humble heart will ingenuously confess; and that it was the
knowledge of the love of God in Christ, that drew them out of the sinck of
sin, superstition and error, led them to repentance and obedience, and so to
peace of conscience and joy in the Lord, the spirit of God in the Word, and
their own experience can and will testify with many thousands.

Obj. But (says Mr. Troughton) There are many thousands of precious Saints,
some yet alive, and other at rest with the Lord, who had true faith and peace
of conscience, and yet were stranger to the Doctrine of Christ's dying for all
men.

I Answer first, So there are that never knew that Christ suffered at
Jerusalem; yea many thousands that never heard of Christ, as Infants and
others, who dye before they have done or known good or evil; and others that
were ignorant of many pure divine truths in all ages and places of the world.

Answer, 2. Suppose it be so, does that argue that when we may have more and
clearer light and knowledge in the love of God and matters of salvation, that
we should neglect and oppose it, though they who are invincibly and inevitably
ignorant of many heavenly truths may be happy, yet they who resist them cannot
be so.

Answer, 3. If they had true faith and joy in the Holy Ghost, who did not
certainly know whether Christ dyed for them or no, (they living under such
Ministers only, that held that Christ dyed only for some) what strength of
faith, peace of conscience and rejoicing in the Lord may they have, who know,
and can prove by many plain text of Scriptute, that Christ dyed for them? How
may such souls exult and leap for joy through the love of God, who know and
believe the love of God to them.

A man who desires such a one to wife, may sometimes be at peace and quiet in
his mind, and have some hopes of attaining his desires; Simil.
but when he knows that he is beloved by her whom he loves, his joy is more
solid, and his mind more settled.

Answer, 4. I, and many more (who have known both states) can testify that
our joy, peace, love to God, faith and knowledge etc. were very weak, low and
mercenary, when we the Doctrine of Christ's dying for all: (although some of us
profited above many our equals, set a good face upon the business, and were
able to say much against the truth) and for my own part, I disputed so long
against Christ's dying for all, that at last I could not tell whether he dyed
for me, and would have given a thousand worlds if it had been possible to have
known it by the Scriptures, well knowing that no other evidence can po^sibly
satisfy a doubting heart, except we shall decline them, and incline to
Enthustasmes, and spirits that are to be accursed: For if any brings glad
tidings to us, any otherwise then the Scriptures declare them, he is so to be
accounted, Gal. 1. 8. 9. What he says about Christ's meriting faith for men, is
a wild Popish-assertion, no where found in the Scriptures; having no savor of
the form of sound word, is very inconsiderable and contrary to what he says
in page 45. of his Book, that the commands of God (of which, that we should
believe, is one of the chiefest, 1 John 3. 23) show not what God or Christ has
done for us, but what is our duty to do. (But for M. Trough. and all men of his
judgment, to contradict themselves is is no new thing, as I know by sad
experience in my former ignorance.)

But I shall through Gods help answer his question: which is this, Let me ask
our Adveasaries this question, What men a^e bound to believe for the peace of
their Consciences, when they take it for granted already, that Christ dyed for
them, being comprehended in the world of mankind?

I Answer, 1. That he is raised and ascended up, without which we had been in
our sins, 1 These. 4. 14. Jo. 20. 17. Act.

Answer, 2. They ought to believe that he is the Son of God, the Christ, ( i.
e.) the only Anointed King, Priest, and Prophet, who alone is to mediate,
gives Laws, and teach the fear of the Lord, who (and none else) is to be
heard in matters appertaining to Gods worship, and the gathering and govering
the Church or Congregation of the Lord, Jo. 6. 66. Act. 2. 36. 1 Timothy 2. 5.
Isai. 9. 6. with 33. 22. Heb. 7. 17, Jo. 6. 14.

Answer, 3. We must beliive all the Commandments, Psalm. 119. 66. Yea, All
things that are written in the Law and the Prophets, Act. 24. 14. Now by
believing his precepts; I do not mean that we should only believe that they
are his, and that they are true and righteous, etc. Although this be truth, and
must be first believed, and relates to that which some call faith of assurance,
(in that we believe and are sure that they are the commands of Christ) But we
must adhere to them, apply them to our hearts, and apply our bodies and souls
to the practice of them. And hence it is that all Gospel obedience is sometimes
concluded under the name faith, as Romans 16. 26. and all disobedience of times,
is comprehended under unbelief, as Heb. 3. 19. compared faithfully with Romans
10. 16. And without this obedience of faith, or faithful obedience to the
Gospel, or will of God, or light revealed to us; there is no peace of
conscience to any man or woman in the world. Disobedient persons may close
their eyes, stop their ears, and harden their necks, and yet bless
themselves in their hearts, saying they say shall have peace; they may for a
space be a sleep in sin, insensible of wrath, yea persuaded that they are
children of the most high, and in favor with the Almighty; that they are
Disciples, Saints Christians, and the chosen of God; but ere long again, their
consciences being awakened, considering how far they differ and stand at a
distance from the commands of Jesus, their hearts condemn them, or at least
are full of doubts, fears and flashings of terror; they question their
present and future state, and are amazed at the wrath which the light or Law of
nature presents to their souls: the turth they oppose, the errors they
maintain and practice, their bosom, darling, closet sins, stare them in the
face; but above all, their continual incertainty about Christ's dying for them,
and their election, etc. do so perplex their spirits, that there is no peace to
them; whereas they who know and so believe, that Christ dyed for for them, are
by that love of his constrained to love him, compelled to come i^to his ways,
and obey his commands, and thereby they have the answer of a good conscience
before the Lord, 1 Pet. 3. 21.

4thly. They are to believe all the promises of the Lord both in this life and
that which is to come, Luke 11. 13. Such as these, Act. 2. 38. Repent and be
baptized, etc. and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, Act. 10. 43.
Whosoever believes on him shall receive remission of sins, Mark 16. 16. he
that believes and is baptized shall be saved, 10. 22. He that endures to the
end shall be saved, 1 Jo. 1. 9. that if the Saints confess their sins he
will forgive them, and the blood of Christ shall cleanse them, etc. That the
Lord Jesus shall come the second time, Heb. 9. 28. that he shall raise up the
just and unjust, Act 24. 14. yet toe dead in Christ shall rise first; this is
the first resurrection, 1 These. 4. 16. Rev. 20. 5. that Christ shall reign and
prosper, and execute judgment and justice in the earth, Jer. 23. 5. yea he
shall reign till he has put all his enemies under his feet, 1 Cor. 15. 25.
that he will give the Kingdom to the Saints of the most high the little
flock, that hear his voice and follow him, Luk, 12 32. that they who do his
commandments shall have right to the tree of life, and enter in by the gates
into the holy City, Rev. 22. 14. where they shall see his face, behold his
glory, be like him and with him for ever, where they shall know as they are
known, see him as he is, and rest with him under the crown of everlasting
peace, joy and righteousness to all eternity.

In a word, They are to believe that he who dyed for them, has so justified
and delivered them from the one offense of Adam, and the miseries that came by
it, that they shall not for ever lie under them; and that they shall never be
acco^^able or punished for that sin, after they are raised from the Grave.

2dly. That if they repent and turn from their sins (be they never so many,
great, open, secret, old, festred sins) God will pardon them through Christ,
according to the promise, Isai. 1. 16. 17. and that Isai. 55. 7. Let the
righteous forsake his way, and the wicked man his thoughts, and turn to the
Lord, for he will have mercy on him, and our God, for he will abundantly
pardon. The Lord is not wanting to convert us, or to do whatsoever he has
promised for the turning of us to himself They that come to the Lord must
believe that he is, and that he is a bountifully rewarder of them that
diligently secke him, Heb. 11. 6. They must constantly apply the sufferings of
Christ to their hearts, and their hearts and minds, bodies and souls to his
statutes, always believe their Resurrection from the dust, and those glorious
joys and songs of Triumph and peace, which are in the mansions of bliss; this
will purify the Saints, 1 Jo. 3. 3. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Thus believing they become
eighteous through Christ, and are justified, from what they could not be
justified by the Law of Moses, Act. 13. 39. And being justified by believing,
they have peace with God through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 5. 1. Exercising
themselves in these things, as the Apostle Paul did himself, Act. 24. 14. 15.
16. they come to have a conscience void of offense toward God and men.

They are to believe that God has freely redeemed, justified, sanctified, and
saved them through the blood of his dear, only spotless Son, from that
destruction which Adam brought on all mankind by his sin, that fury is not
in God (in reference to that offense) and the believing of this great and
infinite love with the heart, will so cleanse and sanctify poor souls, that
they will thereby come to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, for with the heart men
believes unto righteousness: Yea, this love known and believed, will
constrain sinners to confess the Lord that bought them, and so with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation, Romans 10. 10. which salvation also they are
to believe and wait for, knowing certainly that our Redeemer Jesus Christ will
come and will not tarry.

Thus have I answered Mr. Troughtons Question, and showed what men who know
that Christ dyed for them are to believe for the peace of their consciences.
Much more might be added, but I proceed to speak a word or two, to the
conclusion of Mr. Troughtons Book, that I may also draw toward the conclusion
of this work.

We declare unto you in our Mimistry ( says he) That Christ dyed M. Trough.
Conclusion
for all, for all the world, for every man and woman that shall believe on him,
and accept of him upon the terms of the Gospel; and is not here encouragement
to poor sinners, be their sins never so great? Thou art not excluded by
name, and why should thou exclude thy self through unbelief?

This Mr. Troughton calls the conclusion, (he might rather call it the
confusion) of his small Tract (as he terms it.) For as I showed you before he
pulled down the maine building of his opinion, in his 61. page, By confessing
that there is a general offer of Grace; and page 62. where he confesses there
it an umversalit^ie of the offer of Christ, ( which offer none that regard the
honor of God, will doubt to be real) and here he razes the very foundation of
his contradictious Doctrine, in that he acknowledges, that they who miss of
mercy, exclude themselves through unbelief, and (like men refusing help when
they are almost drowned) bring destruction to themselves through their neglect
or refusal, not striving to lay hold of mercy that they might be saved, but
questioning whether Christ were offered them with an intent to save them. From
whence these Coclusions do very freely flow.

1. That there was mercy for them to lay hold on by faith, who perish through
unbelief.

2. That they who enjoy not this mercy, exclude themselves from it.

3. That it is beyond doubt and question, that Gods offer of Christ to men, is
with a purpose of his part to save them.

4. That they who would be saved by Christ, must strive to lay hold on him; all
which are pure heavenly and eternal truth, and comes from Mr. Troughton as
blessings from Balaam, his heart dissenting from his hand and tongue. For
another while you shall find Mr. Troughton peremptorily concluding, that God
never intended his Son, or mercy by him to all, as Page 52. of his Book,
where he speaks these very words in effect; that it was not the purpose of God
to give his Son to dye for all, and that his death should be a sufficient
price for all, was never intended by God. Now how should God send down his
Son to save that which was lost, and yet not give him to dye for them, or
that he should offer his Son to more then he gave him to dye for is senseless
to imagine, except we should make God a mocker of his poor undone Creatures,
(as Mr. Tronghton and others sometimes do) In another place you shall hear him
say, That God appointed or decreed men to be disobedient; How then can their
destruction be of themselves? yea how can their sin be of themselves, if God
appointed them to be disobedient? Another while that Christ meriteth faith for
the Saints, and that he works or acts faith in the Creatures, how then can
that be true which he says here, that men must strive to lay hold on Christ,
and they that do not, perish through unbelief? Can there be any possibility
that they should believe, for whom Christ meirteth not faith, seeing all that
do believe had faith merited for them? and it was not they that believed, but
Christ in them, or that they believed at least by an unresistable power: Sure
then they laid not hold of the rope, as Mr. Troughton says, drawing men out to
do, not asking questions; much less did they strive so to do: but the rope
laid hold on them, and plucked them up whether they would or no. And thus you
see that Mr. Troughtons Doctrine is but like ropes of Sand, it holds not
together, none can lay any sure hold of it, it will not hold his own weight, for
what he fastens in one place he breaks in another; and what truth he speaks in
one leaf o^ his Book, he leaves, yea denies in another; what he buildes in a
month, he throws down in a minute. For how is it possible that any soul can
believe in God or Christ through his Teaching, for he says that God did not
give his Son to dye for all, yet he offers grace to all, that Redemption is
not universal, but the tenders of Christ are universal: That God did let or
send down Christ to save lost man, and they are not to question it; but yet he
appointed the greatest part of men to be disobedient: That men exclude
themselves by unbelief; yet there was never a Christ for them to believe,
(except they would believe on one, that never dyed for them.) That God decreed
both the sin and suffering of the Creature; yet their destruction is of
themselves. With a hundred more of such contradictions which may be found in
his, and other men's Books which maintain his Opinion, which leaves many poor
souls in the dark, many in despair, more in prophanness; and builds up the
rest as I have showed, upon an uncertain sandy foundation.

This he calls his or their Ministry, and well he may, for it is not the
Ministry of Christ, or ministration of the Spirit, for where does the Spirit
of God say, Christ died for all and every man that accepts of him: (this
Doctrine sets a soul to accept of Christ before they know what he has done for
them) The ministration of the Spirit speaks thus, that he di^d for all, for
every man, for the whole world, sinners, heretics which deny him, and they
that receive, accept, or believe on him shall not perish, etc. and this is the
doctrine which we teach, which the Lord has blessed, blessed be his name, to the
conversion and consolation of mine and many thousand souls within these seven
years.

Thus you see the conclusion of M. Troughtons little Tract put forth to less
purpose, which though some may judge legitimate, yet such as have seen what men
have formerly writ on this subject, will discern that it is but borrowed out of
other men's works of this kind, M. Resb^ry. M. Owen. M. Rutherford. M. Staltham.
yet he begs a blessing on his Babe, but if ever his wisdom return to him,
and his eyes are opened to see the deformity of the self contradiction and
soul-distraction that is in it, he will fly from it as Moses from his changed
Rod, and rather curse the day that this misshapen Monster came to light, to
restrain and limit Scripture Redemption.

I wonder what use M. Tro. can put his Doctrine to, it affords no encouragement
to the rebellious to come in, for if they should be of that number which Christ
died not for, (which is far the greater, if M. Tro. doctrine were true) it will
not benefit them at ill as to their eternal state, it can yield no solid or
certain comfort to a drooping heart; for if Christ did not die for all, still
he doubts, whether he died for him: And if God appointed men to be disobedient,
how dares M. Tro. reprove them for being so? no sound exhortation to repent and
believe arises from his tenets, for he says, God has not enabled his
creatures to do either, but it must be done in them by an irresistible power;
he can never convince a soul of the riches of the grace and love of God to him,
for nothing will do that, but the unerring evidence of the Spirit in the Word
of God, and where that says Christ died for all, he denies it, and says the
Scripture means no such thing: it sends forth no dehortations from vice, for he
says, that they who are partakers of the Grace, the state (to use his
expression) can never fall finally from it, nor they that Christ died not for,
shall never come to it; and what need M. Tro. dissuade any man from an evil
way be this doctrine? And how can he inform any poor soul of the great
kindness of God and Christ to him or her, when he cannot clearly prove by
express texts of Scripture, that Christ died for them? H^ may say thus, seeing
Christ did not die for all (which is his doctrine) then this serves to reprove
them that say he did, and that is ^saiah, Christ, Paul, Peter and John; and
seeing God has appointed most men to be disobedient, this may encourage and
comfort them in their disobedience, in that they do what God appointed them to
do; and seeing God commands all to believe and accept of Christ, yet has not
given power or ability to any so to do, (as he says) it shows what a hard
Master God is, who requires of his creatures that which they can never, yea
that which at least he never intended the greatest part should perform: And
seeing those that he calls Saints can never fall away from that state, this may
encourage men to go on in sin, and cry peace and safety, till sudden
destruction hurles them into endless misery. And though M. Tro. will not in
words make such uses of his Doctrine, yet Satan has and does prevail upon
thousands, (the more's the pity) to make such uses of it, they so naturally
arising form those positions which he maintains, I know that such uses are
wicked, much more is the doctrine that yields them; if such fruit be to be
abhorred, (as sure it is) much more the tree that bears it, a good tree cannot
yield such corrupt fruit; the great God lay his Axe to the root of it, and
pluck up every plant that his hand has not planted; not by might, nor by
power, but by the Spirit of the Lord. But if Mr. Tro. has better uses, which
clearly come from his doctrine, I wonder he did not produce them; for my part I
shall as briefly as I can show you that read these things, what uses the Lord
has taught me by his Spirit in the Word to make of the Doctrine that I hold
forth, and which M. Tro. calls heretical, erroneous, and corrupt opinions, A
corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit: search therefore courteous Reader,
and see whether the uses I am by the strength of the Lord about to lay down be
good, and then whether they be not the natural and genuine issue of those
doctrines which men call heretical.

1. If Christ died for all (which is Paul's Doctrine and mine) Doct. 1.
for the world, for the whole world, for every man, as the Scriptures say, etc.
it may serve to convince M. Tro. and every man and woman that he died for him,
and her that hears this glad tidings, and that there is good news, or Gospel
for them, and also to convince them of sin who believe not on him, which could
not be, if he died not for them.

2. It serves to reprove them that continue in sin, and act contrary to him
that gave his only Son to die for them.

3. It informs us of the great and infinite love of the Father, that gave his
only Son, and he his dearest hearts blood (first virtually in the promise, then
actually in person) rather then lost man should want a Redeemer, and withal to
inform men of the horrid and odious nature of sin, which nothing can fully take
away without the blood of the Son of God.

4. This may serve to persuade, yea constrain sinners, who do all live through
Jesus Christ, to love him that loved them first, and gave his Son to be a
propitiation for them, and to keep his Commandments, that is, to live to him
that died for them and rose again.

5. This may encourage the greatest sinner that groaneth under sin, to forsake
sin, and come to Christ, who (seeing he loved him so well as to die for him)
will in no wise cast him out, when by the word or teachings of God (which are
his drawings) he comes to him.

6. To reprove obstinate proud Rebels, who deny the Lord that bought, and dare
sin against such grace and kindness, as is seen by the Fathers giving his Son
for them.

7. This serves to leave all men without excuse, they cannot say that God has
not commended his love to them, seeing he has written it in legible Characters
of his Sons blood.

8. Here is consolation for the Saints, who through the knowledge of such love
have been drawn to obey God, they know whom, and in whom they have believed,
and are as sure that Christ died for them, as if he had told them with his own
mouth, in that they believe the Scriptures affirming that he ransomed all.

9. This may serve to them as an antidote against sin and errors, in that
Christ died for their sins, according to the Scriptures.

10. It may serve to incite us to love every creature with the love of good
will or pity at least, when we remember that Christ died for them as well as
for us; oh if this doctrine were fully known, it would so increase love, and
quench hatred, discord, and debate, peace, justice and mercy would flourish, and
wars, oppression, and cruelty would be banished; some beams of this universal
love of God beginning to shine forth upon the hearts of our Commanders, Rulers,
Judges, etc. have inclined them to more clemency, righteousness and pity then
some former time^ have afforded, and as it is more manifested, we shall
doubtless see more of God (who is love, and loved us when enemies) appearings.
It Is true, a man that truly fears God cannot delight in an ungodly person,
neither can our heavenly Father, yet he does them good, and the Saints desire
the conversion of their enemies, and will do good unto all, according to their
ability, and their fellow creatures capacity, and though they hate the vices of
men, yet they love their persons, so as that they will exhort, entreat, and
admonish them to come in to the Lord that bought them, and not seek the ruin
of their bodies, states, reputations, and souls, as I fear too many, who deny
the death of Christ for all, would if it were in their power, and could wish
that there were something in force like that Popish Statute de Haereticis
comburendis, as appears by their continual appeals to the civil, yea and
military powers, their complaints and petitions against such as hold the truth
in love, by all means laboring to persuade the Magistrates to unsheath their
swords, to cut off, banish, or silence by might of men those who are full of
might by the Spirit of the Lord to declare against their corrupt principles and
practice, they have a zeal, but not according to knowledge, for did they know
what love the Father has showed those whom they malign, and what sweet
communion they have with God, and that God loved those whom they hate, so as to
give his Son to die for them, they would never suffer that cursed root that
bears gall and wormwood to spring up in their hearts, but would endeavor to
instruct them with meekness, or contend against them, at least with the sword
of the spirit: But this they do not, but by all means seek their
impoverishment and ruin, and will not speak to them, though they bring the
same doctrine which Christ and his Apostles taught, they shun disputing with
them, under pretext that they are Heretics, and reject them, not knowing that
that advise is proper to those that are members together of the Church of
Christ, and not those that are of different Churches, for what authority has
any Church to cast out or reject one that is not immembred with them; but the
truth is, these men are afraid of the light, and have no love to such as are of
Paul's opinion, that Christ died for all, and therefore they incense authority,
gnash their teeth against them. But we know that Christ died for them, and
desire that they also may know it, and by that goodness be led to repent of
all their evils, and in particular of their envy and consultations against the
Saints of the most high, who believe, as the Scripture says, and will not
receive the corrupt glosses which men put on them, or the sad and dark
conclusions and consequences which they draw from them. In a word, if Christ
died for all, this may serve to keep the poor sin-sick sinner from despair, and
the proud transgressor from presumption, to reprove such as give the Scripture,
yea the Spirit of God the lie, who in so many place^ has clearly evidenced it,
yet they deny what is there written, and would have us rather adhere to their
expositions, which are all darker then the text.

Again, Doct. 2.
if God has of his free mercy in Christ appointed and ordained all men to
serve him, and furnished them with every thing necessary for so doing, so that
all Nations may know and believe him, through that light which lights every
man which comes into the world, according to that manifestation of it which
shines forth to them; (as undoubtedly he has) then this serves to reprove such
as say God did appoint some men, as men to be disobedient, that is to serve sin
and Satan.

2. Such as teach* that God has not enabled all his creatures to do what he
requires of them, but that he exacts more of his creatures then he has given
ability to perform, and so make God is an austere man, as the wicked servant
did, yea as bad as Pharaoh.

3. This may serve fully to convince every sober spi^i^ of the real truth of
those sayings, thy destruction is of thy self, and that the damned bring upon
themselves swift destruction.

4. It serves to clear the pure justice of God, and leave all without excuse,
when they hear that God through his Sons blood has made all Nations of the
earth to seek him, and in order thereto, has done what could be done for his
Vineyard.

5. This may serve to stir up poor creatures to be thankful, and admire the
riches of grace, and speak good of the name of the Lord so merciful and
bountiful, and to incite them to arise and be doing, (1 Chronicles. 22. 16.) and
God will be with them, some to hear, search, read, inquire, that they may know
and believe the Lord, and them that come to know and apply his love, to repent
and be baptized, to separate from the world, and such again to continue in the
grace of God, in the fellowship and doctrine of the Apostles, in breaking of
bread and prayers, in praising of God, in holiness of life, watching against
sin, and for the coming of their Lord and Master Jesus Christ; it is true, all
are not capable of the same exhortation, for to exhort a wicked man that never
yet believed the Gospel, to pray and break bread with the Saints, and wait for
the day of Christ, is preposterous; but to exhort such to hear, to seek, or
inquire after God, hear, read, and search the Scriptures (that so they may come
to know, believe and repent) is suitable to the direction of the Spirit through
the whole book of God, who has enabled men and women come to years of
discretion, (so as to discern between good and evil) thus to do. To call them
to baptism, and so make them members of a visible Church, who never heard of
God, is ridiculous, and M. Tro. himself (in his Epistle to the Reader)
confesses it under his own hand, That visible title to, and interest in the
Covenant of Grace, consisting in a s^rious profession of the Christian faith,
accompanied with a suitable conversation, is that which constitutes a member of
the visible Church of Christ; whence two things are considerable: 1. That
infants are not, whilst infants, visible Members of the Church of Christ, in
that they make no profession of the Christian Faith, neither is their
conversation suitable to the holy precepts of the most high, (for they speak
and act as children) neither does God require that it should be so, for he
speaks not to children. 2. This discovers the folly of Baby-sprinklers, who
require more of poor creatures then they are able to perform, which shows that
their Ministry in this, as in other things, is not of God, who never exacts
that of any, which he of his own free mercy and goodness has not given them
ability to bring to pass; yea they are contrary to God, and palpably
contradict themselves.

After this short digression, a sixth use that may be made of this doctrine is
this, that seeing God has appointed, set apart, or chosen all men to serve
him, and enabled them so to do, this should teach Ministers to take heed that
they add not to, neither diminish from the precepts which God has given to
mankind, by laying more or less upon persons then they are able to perform,
which is a usual thing; for they say of infants, that they must be baptized,
and be Church Members, (though they have done neither good nor evil, nay know
not their right hand from their less, and tell men that are 20. 40. 50. years
of age, that they cannot believe nor repent, nay that they must not be
baptized, etc.

Lastly, this may serve for a trial and examination to every man, whether he
has done all that good which God enabled him to do, and avoided that evil,
which he by the light manifefested from God might have shunned, that so he may
through a certain knowledge of his actings in these things, be comforted in his
obedience through Christ, the strength and arm of the Lord, or repent of his
nonperformance of that which through that light or power he might have
performed. And now let the judicious Reader judge, whether these things being
very profitable, do not freely flow from that doctrine which men call heresy.

Thirdly, Doct. 3.
seeing some departed from the faith, Hymeneus and Alexander put away faith and
a good conscience, all they in Asia turned away from Paul, others deny the Lord
that bought them, and some tread under foot the Son of God, and count the blood
of the Covenant, wherewith they were sanctified, an unholy thing, and doing
despite to the Spirit of Grace, and seeing the Holy Ghost says, it is
impossible to renew them again by repentance, who fall away after they are
enlightened, and are partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word
of God, and the powers of the world to come; therefore we admonish the Saints
in the language of the Lord, nay the Lord warns them by us to beware, and take
heed lest they fall, and le^t there be in any of the brethren an evil heart of
unbelief to depart from the living God, and to beware lest any man deceive
them, and lest any of them fall from the grace of God, as some did, Gal. 5. 4.
to beware of false Prophets, and take heed lest they fall away from their own
sted^astnesse, etc. which precious words of the eternal God were of no use, if
the Saints were not in danger, even in their best estate here below: We exhort
them to watch and pray, and stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has
made them free, and to beg of God that he would hold up their go^ngs in his
paths, that their footsteps may not slide, and to keep them from falling, and
turning back from him, and knit their hearts to him, pray one for another to
him that is able to build them up, that he would preserve them blameless in
body soul, and Spirit, to the coming of Jesus Christ, all which, and thousand
such like Petitions were frivolous, if there were no danger, and all those
^recepts and promises, he that endures, -- be thou faithful -- he that
overcomes. It Is true, we do not exhort any to beware, but such as walk in that
way, as those Saints of old did, to whom those words we use were written and
spoken, that were improper, and one means it has been to deceive the poor
^ouls in this Island, and make them think they were all Saints, according to
the Scripture account, when they were exhorted not to fall away from their
present s^ate, whereas it had been happy for many thousand if they had fallen
from it, so they had fallen down and worshipped God according to his Word. We
do not exhort the Parish-Ministers of Great Britain (much lest those poor
bl^nd creatures who follow them, idolize them, and are led by an implicit
faith) to hold fast their profession, for it is very bad, and Antichristian, or
to continue in the way where they are, for it is not good, nor to take heed
that they depart not from the way of God, for they are not in it, or from the
living God, for they are not with him: But we bese^ch them to repent, and turn
to God, that so they may be baptized, and added to the Church, and enjoy the
precious privileges that pertain to such as worship G^d in spirit and truth i.
e. according to his word, which is spirit and truth, well knowing that men may
as well ^e destroyed for resisting the power of God, and putting from them the
Word of God and eternal life, as for deserting the way of righteousness, add
turning from the holy Commandment delivered unto them, and therefore they have
no just cause to be angry against us, (as they are) for the searcher of hearts
is witness, that we desire earnestly their conversion and salvation; and
therefore for my part I shall in love tell them this, that if they shall still
oppose Christ, and call his way heresy, take part with the Pope and Prelates
in their National Churches, Baby-sprinkling, forced maintenance, etc. none of
which are according to the testimony of Jesus, within few years they will be
driven to darkness; but as many of them as embrace the Gospel, and walk in
the way of righteousness, which men call heresy, whether they have little or
much, life or death, they shall rejoice in the God of their salvation, say to
the righteous, it shall be well with them: And if any shall say, that if they
should quit their forced maintenance, peoples hearts would be so hard, that
they would allow them nothing: I answer, 1. Through the power of the word many
would be converted, and then they cannot withhold their carnal things from
those, who minister spiritualls to them, then the love of Christ would
constrain them to do willingly, that at least, which before the Law of men
compelled them to by that uncouth force of treble damages: And 2. They shall
find that a little which the righteous has, is better then the grrat revenues
that come with hatred, strife, and contention; 'twas the saying of Elies sons,
thou shall give it us, or we will take it by force, and they were sons of
Belial, who knew not the Lord. I hope the Ministers of England and Scotland,
who term themselves the Ministers of Christ, will not conform to such
Ministers, if they do, and resolve so to do, God will cut them off, as he did
them: And let not any ask what became of our Forefathers, for God who causes
the light to shine out of darkness, has appeared in far more translucent
brightness of Gospel purity then they knew, and therefore more is expected of
us; they were precious instruments in the hand of God, but few years ^ince many
of them, and others yet are alive, who were such, their labors successeful,
and persons acceptable, who neglecting to follow, yea opposing another, or more
discoveries of divine light, have been laid aside, are grown dull and dead, and
some taken off short by the hand of divine justice. Oh therefore you who are
the Parish Teachers in this Isle, consider that Christ died for you, as well as
for the rest of the sons and daughters of Adam, therefore love him, and show
your love by keeping his Commandments, and his only, do not do any more in
Gods worship then Christ has commanded you; he requires you to believe, or do
no more then what is written, do not add to your task and Christ's yoke,
consider how the Lord will deal with such as add to, or diminish from his will;
beware of stumbling at the word, being disobedient where unto you were
appointed (or set;) they that stumble at the rock shall be broken in pieces,
and they upon whom that rock or stone shall fall, shall be ground ^o powder;
God is not willing that you should perish, but rather that you should turn
from your own way and live: I know this to be truth, for he has spoken it, and
Christ has sealed it with his blood he shed for you, which he would never have
done, if he had not desired your welfare.

And thus you see how useful the Doctrine we preach is, and therefore no way
to be despised, or disparaged, as it is by many in our Generation, who speak
evil of the things they understand not.

But I come in the last place, by the blessed assistance of God, to show you by
whom and why this doctrine is opposed, and then I shall conclude this work.

1. This Doctrine is opposed by Satan, who knows that if it should be evinced
that Christ died for all, then men would come to see the love of God to them,
and would every where begin to love God, and so obey his voice; and if it
should be published and proved, that God has of his own free mercy ord^in'd
that all men may and ought to serve him, and has furnished them with ability
to know and believe him, and to do whatsoever he requires of them, and that if
they perish it is their own fault, then they would bless his name, and be doing
his work, and listen to his word, all which things destroy Satan's Kingdom.

And if it should be manifested, that there is very great danger of departure
from God, and of being deceived, then he knows that the Saints would be more
heedfull and watchful; they would be fearful of falling into sin, and of back
s^^ding from truth, which things are contrary to Satan's projects and profit,
for he strives more to train aside one poor soul from the way of
righteousness, then to keep twenty in the way of wickedness, knowing that he
can make the enemies of the truth ^riumph, and blaspheme more by the fall of
one that is called to be a Saint, then by a thousand sins done by others.

2. This Doctrine is opposed by false Teachers, such as deny Scriptures, Order,
Ordinances, or such as rage and rail against the way of Christ, and practice
contrary to him, worshipping the true God falsely, yea all sorts of false
Teachers; as for example, Christ says, Disciple all Nations, baptizing them,
but says the world baptize them, and disciple them afterward, for infants as
infants cannot be Disciples, for he that takes not up his Cross, and
follows Christ, cannot be his Disciple, and that infants cannot do; the
Spirit of God says, repent and be baptized, the men of the world say, be
baptized, and repent after; yet they say, they bring sin enough into the world
to damn them eternally, and they baptize them before they repent of it; the
Spirit says, if thou believe thou may; the world says, they may be
baptized who believe not, the Spirit of God says, who can forbid water that
they should not be baptized, who have received the Holy Ghost? some men say,
that they who are baptized with the Spirit, need not, nay ought not to be
baptized with water, though they know not who they are. In a word, they who
eit^^r in judgment or practice continue contrary to light revealed, oppose the
doctrine and light held forth by Christ, his Word, and Spirit, and walk by the
light of their own fires (fancies I may say) oppose that Doctrine by me, and
thousands received from the Scriptures.

1. Because if it should be declared that Christ died for all, then people
would begin to love him, and to repent of sin, and enquire after him and his
ways, and forsake all false Teachers, and every false way, then they would so
love Jesus Christ, that they will cry out, Lord what will thou have me to do?
and more or less they would not willingly do in his worship then he has
required, not more, because he has given enough, and works of supererogation,
and to be wise above what is written, are abominable in the sight of God; not
less, because that which he requires of us, is but little, in comparison of
the great things he has done and suffered for us.

2. If it should be published that Christ died for all, then the greatest part
of the Scripture must be taken as it is written, and that is contrary to the
profit of the Papists, and all false Prophets, who would fain have people
believe that the Scriptures are very obscure, that so they may deter the people
from studying them, and give them money according to their demands, for to
expound them by their corrupt glosses, and the^ also great would be the company
of the publishers of the Gospel, for the love of God would so fill their
hearts, as with new wine, that they could not but declare what God has done
for their souls; and this would make false teachers, filled with the wisdom of
this world fret, when the mysteries of the love of God should be revealed to
and by Babes in the Gospel.

3. Self is much an enemy to it, for most men, yea all those many thousands
which now own this truth of Christ's dying for all, do well know, that not only
Satan and false Teachers did secretly and openly incite them against it, but
their own heart corrupt through custom in fin did rise against it; and that
for this reason, If they should acknowledge that Christ died for all, and that
God through him has appointed and enabled them to do his will, then they
should have no liberty or leisure to linger and loiter in fin, but they must
appear in love to Jesus Christ, to be doing his work which he calls them to,
there must be no sleeping nor slumbring, nor folding their hands to sleep, but
up and be doing, and as in the bodily, so in this spiritual labor, the
creature deluded by Satan cannot endure to do his duty which the Gospel calls
for and this self (I mean self-love, self-will, self-interests and ends etc.)
till it be subdued by the appearing and receiving the light from the Lord,
cannot endure to hear that there is any possibility of falling from the favor
of God, for this would be a mighty check to their pleasure, profit, and delight
they have in sin, fain would self, even the fleshly mind root out all such
thoughts, that it may feed it self with lusts, and take its full swindge in sin
without control. And whatever specious pretenses men may cover their conceits
with, and cry out against this Doctrine as uncomfortable, etc. yet the Serpents
head lies hid beneath them, who prompts them to decry it, that so he may keep
them from that godly fear and trembling, with which they ought to work our
their own salvation.

I know we must serve God without fear of displeasing men by obeying him, and
without fear of his deceiving of us of any thing he ha^^ promised, yet
continually fearing to offend him who loved us, and fearing lest we should come
short of what is promised through our own unbelief. The Apostle Paul was as
eminent a Saint as most, yet he kept his body in subjection, lest by any means
when he had preached to others, he himself should be a east-away.

In a word, if this Doctrine should be faithfully published, it would
wonderfully draw out men's souls after Christ, drive out the power of sin,
carry forth men's Spirits to propagate the Gospel, hurl down the Kingdom of
Satan and Antichrist by the mighty increase of knowledge, faith, and love,
advance holiness, sobriety, and righteousness, stir up men to diligence,
godly fear, and watchfullnesse, at least leave men without any encouragement to
live in sin one moment, take away all those Cob-web cloaks with which men
palliate their impieties, remove all excuses, and even force men to confess
their destruction is of themselves, and therefore is it opposed by Satan,
self, and false teachers, who would all suffer loss by the fire of Gods Word,
if their deceits and doctrines come to be discovered by the glorious light of
these truths which men call heresy and erroneous opinions.

I am not unacquainted with the tossings and torments of mind which they are
subject to that hold the doctrines contrary to these in the foregoing treatise
insisted on, their dejections of spirit, and dubiousnesse of heart, one while
even drownes them in black despair, another while their foundationlesse faith,
and groundless confidence through the exceeding subtilty of Satan, makes them
to dare to adventure upon a sin, upon this score, that if they are elected,
they cannot hereby fall finally, and if they are not, it will not be any
impairing of their irrecoverable hopeless condition. I know Satan will provoke
men to fret exceedingly against these things with the highest risings and
liftings up of spirit. But it being my own experience in former times, and of
hundreds who have communicated theirs with mine since the days of their
conversion, I cannot, neither will I conceal the counsels and cunning of so
great an enemy, but speak truth to his, (yea to my own) shame; neither am I
ignorant of the strong consolation in obedience, the strength against
temptations, the heedfull diligence, care, and watchfullnesse against sin,
which they are possessed with, who knowingly and cordially hold and lay to heart
that Christ died for all, for thereby they are so sure that he died for them,
that it is a hard matter for the devil and world to drive his love out of their
hearts, and draw them into disobedience; but they that hold the contrary, call
the truth of many, and so at length of all the Scriptures into question, as the
Shropshire Ministers confess, pag^ 1. of their namelesse paper.

And I am confident, that as the Lord has, so he will bless this Doctrine,
with those that profess it, and practice that holiness, righteousness, and
sobriety, which that grace of God which ^ringeth salvation to all men teaches,
and by his own Spirit, (not the word and arm of flesh) will signally appear,
to the overturning of that great mountain of false doctrine, that has kept
poor creatures from beholding the face of the Son of righteousness in the
truth of the Gospel, and that they who say Christ did not die for all (so
giving the lie to the Spirit of God) and that God did absolutely appoint the
greatest part of men to be disobedient, not giving them ability to do what he
requires, and yet will damn them for not doing it; that God commands men to do
that which he will work in them by an irresistible power, and to make as though
God contradicts himself, that the Lord that bought false Teachers was not
Christ, etc. shall be convinced, or covered with the cloak of confusion. For my
part, if any malign me for the pu^^ishing of this plain downright
discourse, I desire the Lord to forgive them, and turn their hearts, and yet
graciously wait to manifest to them that prec^ous ^r^th which they oppose, that
by it they may be comfo^ted and established in their minds, encouraged to take
up the Cross of Jesus, and follow him in all Gospell-obedience. I desire no
less for the greatest of my Adversaries, then that they may come out of
Babylon (the false Church) and worship one God in spirit and truth amongst such
as keep the commands of Jesus, as he has given them out to us by his Spirit in
the word of truth, that so we may walk in the light of the Lord whilst we are
here, and (being accounted worthy to escape all those things which shall come
upon this Generation) may hereafter sit down with Abraham, Isaac; and Jacob,
in the everlasting Kingdom of God our Savior. Amen.

FINIS.

