A KEY TO THE KINGS CABINET; OR ANIMADVERSIONS upon the three Printed Speeches,
of Mr Lisle, Mr Tate, and Mr Brown, spoken at a Common Hall in London, 3.
July, 1645. Detecting the Malice and Falsehood of their Blasphemous Observations
made upon the KING and QVEENES LETTERS.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University, 1645.

A Key to the King's Cabinet, OR Certain Animadversions upon the Three Printed
Speeches of Mr Lisle, Mr Tate, and Mr Brown, spoken at a Common Hall in
London, 3. July, 1645.
WHen the Athenians waged War against Philip King of Macedon, amongst many
several advantages of the dice, which Fortune cast upon them, They chanced one
day to intercept a Packet of the King's Letters, going Helladius Besantin.
on the way; which, with great Triumph and Ostentation, They presently sent
unto their great Council at Athens, there to be opened, in a Full House,
before them: nothing doubting, but that, besides the Credit of the surprise,
this profit also would redound unto them, That those Letters of Philip's would
inform them something for their advantage; would open to them something of his
Design in the managery and carrying on of that present War, which could not
but have good influence upon their own Affairs, which were then in hot
dispute and agitation. When the whole House was set, and the Packet opened;
There were indeed, sundry Letters found, says our Author, and to sundry
Persons of Note and Trust at Court, addressed: but none of them were any thing
considerable in their Contents, in respect of any light which they gave, or
umbrage of discovery which they made, concerning either Philips Actions or
Counsels. At last, they found one Letter amongst the rest, with this
Superscription, Philippus Olympiadi. That is, Philip to Olympias. And that
Letter was a Letter from the King to his own dear Wife; to Olympias the
Queen. And in that Letter, had Philip opened unto her the very secrets of his
Heart. In that Letter, besides many warm testimonies of his entire Conjugall
Faith, and Innocent Affection, had Philip represented unto her, the whole frame
and fashion of all his Designs. In that Letter had he laid open before her,
the sad history of his sufferings, from those unquiet Athenians, that would
never let him rest; and of those hopeful expedients also, which presented
themselves in the shape of Comfort to him, whereby he doubted not in short time
to work himself out of His Vexations and Troubles. Yet, notwithstanding all
this, says the Historian, when the seal of that Letter was even now breaking
up, as the others had been broken up before it; when Philip's whole Design was
now upon the instant of discovery, and lay at the mercy of that Enemies Hand,
against whose only Head it was contrived and framed; The whole Assembly rose
in some disorder: cried out, that, that Letter should by no means be opened;
but understanding that it was addressed to Olympias the Queen, without any the
least violation offered to the Sacred Seal, to Her they sent it: Protesting
that it was a barbarous and unmanly thing, to betray the secrets between Man
and Wife, unto the whole World, although the knowledge thereof would prove
never so beneficial and advantageous unto them that did it. Adeo vtile, non
anteponebant honesto (for so Helladius concludes) So did these Turbulent
Athenians yet, prefer their Honesty before their Profit; and as great as
their Hostility was, yet, their Humanity still, was greater.

Without question, if the Rebels of this Age, could but do half so well like
Men, as they can say, like Christians; They would never have embas'd their late
Victory with such ignoble Trophies, as they have done. They would never have
lead a poor Cabinet, Captive; and displayed the King and Queens Letters in
triumph, as they did, their Colors; They would never have made the Spoils of
very Manhood, a sacrifice to the wanton spleen of Man. They would never have
commanded their Orators to lay down that vomit at Guild Hall, which they had
lickt up, at Westminster. They would never have prostituted those chaste and
holy Papers, to the base adulteries of all common Eyes; They would never have
ruminated and chaw'd those Letters into Notes and Observations, that the People
might more easily conceive them: When I have good reason to think, that there
are not Three men in both the two Houses, that were ever yet honest enough,
themselves to understand them. But the Tree of knowledge, does still find the
luck in most men to be desired, before the Tree of Life; And, so factious and
seditious Persons, can get any fuel to maintain Rebellion but in the credit
of a flame: they care not whether they ransack Heaven or Hell to fetch it. They
care not, whether they break down the Hedges of Nations, or of Nature (for so
they call the Laws) if but either of them will afford a few crackling thorns,
or any combustible matter whatsoever, that will foment and feed it.

Men indeed, whose Religion will allow them to ransack God's Cabinet, no
marvel, if they quickly find reason not to spare the King's. The greatest
complaint is, They are not Aequall Villains; they are not Indifferent, no, not
in their very Riots. They do not use both Parties alike. For, what Papers
soever which they find in God's Cabinet, although they breath nothing but the
severe and sour expressions of Hate, and of Destruction, and that destruction
to be extended to the greatest part of all Mankind, yet if they publish those
Papers, they do it, still, in the way of Service to God, and for his Glory.
But what Papers soever, which they light on in the King's Cabinet, although
they breath nothing but the sweets of Love and Preservation, and that
preservation to be contracted up to his own Just Interests and Right; nay, to
his own very Life: yet, They will be sure to publish them in the way of the
greatest Disservice which they can imagine, and to his most Dishonor. They
will not let him loath a Rebel, nay, they will not let him love a Wife; They
will not let him use his Sword, nay, they will not let him use his Pen, but
they will expose him for it. Like those ill natured Enemies to Pompey the
great, whom Plutarch speaks of, who when they had no great matter against him,
upon the sudden, for which they might revile him: at last exclaymed upon him,
for scratching of his head, with one finger, least they should have had
nothing, to have said against him.

And truly, that which is the result of all their Observations and Annotations,
and Speeches, with which they spatter and asperse the King, is little more: So
very little, that I should never have thought all which has been objected,
worth an Answer, but, that I suspect some men have arrived to such a
singularity of folly, as, to take that for an Honor, which is meant for a
Neglect; but that, I believe, there are some men, of such an all-sufficient
pride; that, if they say a thing, never so foolish and ridiculous, and receive
no present Answer to that which they have said; They make that advantage of
their getting Plutarch.
no Answer, which Cato, they say, made, when he could get no Statue; who gave
out, that it was more for his Honor and Reputation, that posterity should
enquire, why Cato had no Statue, then why he had. And therefore I shall take
them, all three in order as they lie; beginning first with M. Lisles Oration,
whose masculine eloquence it seems, was thought worthiest to enjoy the
Mayden-head of the Cities Attention, who bespeaks them in the manner following.

M. Lisle his Speech.
My Lord Major, and you worthy Gentlemen of the Famous City of London, I am
commanded, by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, to observe to you
some passages, out of these Letters which you have heard; They are passages of
that nature, though it be most happy to this Kingdom and Parliament to know
them, yet my very heart does bleed to report them.

Animadversions.
Well said, good obedient Orator Higgin: you have said nothing, it seems, but
what you were commanded; But, I say not, well done my Lord Major, and you
worthy Gentlemen of the famous City of London; for, you have done a thing which
no body could command you; you have resigned and given up your senses and your
understanding here, to three Brothers of the Observance; as if you were able to
mark nothing of your selves, but what they Observe unto you. What my Masters?
are the Walloones that came over lately, crept already from the Camp into your
Council, that a Common Hall at London cannot understand English when they
hear it? Have you not only lost your Loyalty, but your very Language, that you
must have an Interpreter to your own Mothers tongue? take my word for it, the
Letters, although they were not the old English foretoppe in their forehead,
of, After my hearty commendations remembered unto you, hoping to God that you
are in good health, as I am at the writing hereof, yet, they are writ in
nothing but errand English; The King and the Queen, as much as you suspect them
for superstition, are not yet come to that height of Popery, as to write their
mutual private Letters, in an unknown Tongue. For shame then, be not such
Wittalls to your own understanding, as to say, you know not English when you
do? I can tell you, the Cost of this Interpreter, may chance prove greater
then the Worship; you see, M. Lisles heart bleeds in the very beginning of the
business; It was never known but, Blood would have Blood, you know; and I
fear, your Hearts also, (that is your Purses) will bleed, before ever it be
done. There is so much of the Pharisee between you, that if his Trumpet should
go before, and your Alms should not follow after; I would swear one of you
were very much out, in playing of his part: but M. Lisle is not out; for he
goes on.

Mr Lisle.
The first thing that I shall observe to you, is concerning the King's
endeavors to bring Foreign Forces, a Foreign Prince with an Army into this
Kingdom: By His Letters to the Queen, which you have heard read, He endeavors
to basten the Duke of Loraine with an Army into England. It is well known to
the Parliament, that the Duke of Loraine, is a Prince highly esteemed at Rome;
the most complying with Jesuits, of any Prince in Christendomes and yet the
King writes to the Queen, to hasten the Duke of Loraine to come with an Army
into England.

Animadversions.
If the Major and his Brethren must observe and note this as a piece of
Novelty, which they knew not of before, namely, that the King did intend to
bring in Foreign Forces; me thinks, the Exchange had been a fitter Theater,
then the Guild-Gall, to have called the Citizens together to have heard it, and
Mr Lisle's heart needed not to bleed for that. But if they must observe and
note this as a piece of Tyranny in the King, as a breach and violation of any
known Law in the Land: (and to that end, it is most likely, he would have them
to observe it,) Then truly does Mr Lisle deserve to have his Nose bleed, as
well as his Heart; he deserves to be well beaten, for offering such a Cheat
unto the Common People. For Gods sake, why may not the King bring over
Foreigners, when He shall be deserted, and derelicted of his own Subjects?
Why, may not the King invite Foreign Forces hither, now at the last, for his
Preservation and Relief, whom the Rebels themselves have entertained already,
this two whole years and over for his Destruction and Ruin? I cannot imagine,
why the worthy Citizens of London are to note and observe this, as any
unlawful thing, unless Mr Lisle will undertake to prove, that the King, by
bringing in of such Forces into the Land, does trespass upon their several
Acts against Foreigners, which are of so great force in London; For I know no
other Law written, against which He does offend.

For I demand; either it is lawful for the King to defend himself by Force,
against those that do rebel against him, or it is not lawful. If they say,
it is not lawful for him to defend himself by Force, then have the Rebels the
same argument against the King's raising of his Domestique Forces, from amongst
his own Subjects here at home; which they have, against his bringing in of
Foreign, from abroad; For if it be not lawful for him to defend himself by
Force, then is it not lawful for him to raise any kind of Forces. If they say,
it is lawful for him to defend himself by Force, then doubtless, are all
kind of Forces in themselves equally lawful. Because in this great Action of
Defense, no body but the King himself, indeed, is a proper Agent; All others,
whether Persons or Things, are but nearer or remoter Instruments, used and
employed by Him, for his best advantage; and therefore, he that says, it is
lawful for the King to defend himself against Rebels, with a native English
or a Welsh man, but not with a Dutch or French man; not with a Turk or Jew:
and thinks he has spoken high reason to the point that is in question; He
says nothing more in effect, then this: That, it is lawful for the King to
defend himself against the Rebels, with an English Sword, but not with a
Spanish Blade; or, that it is lawful for him to shoot powder at them, which is
made for him here in England; but not to shoot that, which is sent him hither,
out of France. Or lastly, that it is lawful for him to charge the Rebels upon
a Horse, that has been bred for him here at Brackley, but not upon a Horse
that has been brought him over hither, from Barbary. For, as all sorts of
Weapons, so all kinds of men, are but the Kings Instruments in this great
Action of his Defense; and it is as lawful for him, to use the One for his
defense, as to use the Other.

That which is there added, concerning the Duke of Lorrain's estimation and
power in the Court of Rome, and concerning his complying with the Jesuits, is
mere froth and fume. For, does not all the World know, that the Rebels
themselves care not, out of what quarter of the Compass the wind blow, so it
do but hoyse the Sails up of their seditious Designs? Alas! there needs no
breaking up of Cabinets, or forcing private Letters, to come by this
Intelligence, which all the World knows; namely, that at this very instant,
the Rebels have their Factors and Agents with the King of Spain: and the King
of Spain questionless is a Prince full of as great esteem at Rome, as the
Duke of Lorraine can be; And that he complies faitely with the Jesuits too,
there is more then a suspicion, or a saying; For it is notoriously known, that
the Rebels of Westminster, who have so often exclaym'd and inveighed against
the King, for suspending the execution of Law against Recusants, as if he
savoured of Popery: have themselves notwithstanding, at the solicitation and
instigation of some Agents for the King of Spain, pardoned two Jesuits of
late, out of their pure zeal unto the Protestant Religion.

Mr Lisle.
The next thing that I shall observe to you, are Endeavors to overthrow the
Law of the Land by Power, to repeal the Laws and Statutes of this Realm by
Force and Arms. Endeavors by Force and Arms, to repeal all the Statutes of
this Kingdom against Papists. I shall read a passage to you, which you have
already heard out of one of the Kings Letters to the Queen. The Letter was
dated the fifth of March, 1644.

I give thee Power in my Name to promise, that I will take away all the Penal
Statutes in England, against the Roman Catholics, as soon as God shall enable
me to do it; so as by their means, or in their Favors, I may have so
powerful assistance as may deserve so great a Favor.

When we Consider that the Statutes of this Kingdowe against Papists must be
taken away by Force; when we consider that the Laws of this Kingdom are to be
Repealed by Power: who cannot, but when he calls to mind the Declarations that
have been made to put the Laws in execution against Papists; of the
Protestations, that have been made, and have been often made, to maintain the
Laws of this Kingdom, who can choose but greive to think of it.

Animadversions.
I remember a report that goes of Socrates, who being instigated once in a
dream to make some Verses, was very much afflicted the next day when he
awak't, how he should do it. For, accounting Poesy, nothing but Color and
Fiction, and having been himself all his life long, a professed Votary to Truth:
He found that he wanted the faculty of making probable Lies; and therefore he
went and took Aesops Fables, which he knew to be nothing else but Fictions
ready framed to his hands, and put them into Verse: that he might in some
manner satisfy the will and pleasure of his Inspiration. You see, Socrates was
much troubled here to make Verses, because he could not lie; But, if you do
but sever and divide these Complicated aspersions, which are here cast upon the
King, you will easily see, that Mr Lisle is not much troubled how to lie,
because he makes not Verses: for, in all that has been said here, there is not
so much as one tittle of considerable Truth, that colors for a Crime. The
principal Ingredients to this Oleo of malice, are three; First, that the King
endeavors to overthrow the Law of the Land. Secondly, that he endeavors to
overthrow that Law by Force and Arms: and thirdly, That he endeavors to do
both, notwithstanding all his Declarations and Protestations, which have been
made, unto the contrary.

For the first of these, If, by Overthrowing the Law of the Land be meant a
total eradication and extirpation of all the Ancient Laws which are of the
Foundation of this Kingdoms Government, as if the King purposed to new mould
the Commonwealth, and to let nothing pass for Law, but what he likes; Then,
that which is here said, is very considerable indeed, and to the purpose, but
it is not true. For I hope, no man of understanding, will suffer himself to be
convinced by this Argument; The King will take away all the Penal Laws in
England, which have been made against Recusants: Therefore the King will take
away all the Laws of England, that ever have been made. And if, by
Overthrowing the Law of the Land, be meant only the Suspension, or the
Annihilation of so much of the Law of the Land as concerns Recusants, and was
made, but since the beginning of the last Queens Reign; Then, that which is
here said, is indeed very true, but it is no whitt considerable, or to the
purpose. For, against what Law is it, to have a purpose or a resolution to
Repeal any Law? Certainly, the Laws made here in England, are not like the
Laws of the Medes and Persians, that never must be changed. They may be
sometimes abrogated by consent; they may be sometimes abrogated by dissuetude,
and disuse; They may be sometimes abrogated, by continual contrary Practices,
and Usage; And those Laws which seem to have the best and strongest
Constitution, are notwithstanding subject to this just Fatality, that they
never live longer, then their Reasons. And then, doubtless, if there be no
sin in the Repeal it self of any Law, there can be no very great offense,
in the Resolution of Repealing.

I take not upon me now, to meddle with the Religion of those Laws, which were
then made against Recusants, or how far it may be, or, may not be Lawful, to
use outward violence, in matters that concern inward persuasion, (although, I
profess, I am apt enough to think, that, that is not Religion, which does
force men to Religion; and, that those men, who by the sense or expectation of
any thing which is evil to the nature of man, as fining, imprisoning, or the
like, do endeavor to compel the Will of man to an assent of those
conclusions, whereof he is not, in the least measure convicted, in his
understanding, do but only let him see, that they want better arguments.) I
look only now, upon the Reason, why those Laws were made. And certainly, those
Laws were not made, to determine the Truth of those points in controversy,
which then were, and still are, between the Church of England and Rome; for if
so, then do we our selves, strike against a worse rock, then that which has
already shipwrackt them; for whereas, they only make their Church, we make our
State, Infallible. The State may make Laws against Recusants, and yet that,
which those Recusants do believe and teach, may be True; and the State may
repeal Laws made against Recusants, and yet that, which those Recusants do
believe and teach, may be still false; And, it is no better argument, to say,
the King will repeal all the Laws made against Recusants, therefore the King
is a Papist; then it is to say; the King will make no Laws against the reading
of the Alcaron, therefore the King is a Turk. The making or unmaking of Laws
of this nature, having no natural Influxe, upon the Truth or Falsehood of the
Things, or that conception, which those men have of those things, who make that
Law; but only, upon the Conveniences or Inconveniences, of Times. The necessity
then, of those present times, was the reason of the making of those Laws; the
Queens person was in danger from the Catholics; and that danger, was so much
the more, because those Catholics could not well be known. To discover them,
and to defend her self, were all those Laws enacted; and, as God would have
it, they did that, for which they were made; they distinguished Traitors from
good Subjects; they made her loved of the one, and feared of the other: and so
between both, she continued a long and prosperous Reign amongst us.

But now, the Tables are clean turned. And the Kings Person is more in danger
from a pestilent faction of Schismatiques, then ever the Queen was, from her
Catholics. So that, ceasing the reason of those Laws, there can be no great
offense, if the Laws themselves, now, be made to cease; and other Laws
established against those kind of men, of whom the Person of the King is so
notoriously known to be in great peril and danger.

Well: the thing it self being thus cleared, that any Law made may be
Repealed: the King, does not err in the Matter of his promise, when He bidds
the Queen promise in His name, that he will take away all the Laws in England,
made against Recusants; (provided they shall deserve so great a favor at His
hands) for he promises nothing, but what may be performed, without any breach
of any known Law of the Kingdom whatsoever. All the scruple is, that he has
erred in the Manner of it; and that in Mr Liste's opinion, these two ways;
first privatively, by secluding those, that have the right of Abrogation with
him, that is both His Houses of Parliament, and assuming the power wholly to
himself; because, the words of His Letter do run thus, I will take away
etc. and, so soon as God shall enable me to do it. And secondly, Positively,
by superinducing those, that have no right of abrogation, either with him or
without him, and that is, Force and Arms; because he speaks in his Letter, of
some powerful assistance, which surely can be meant of nothing else, but of
Arms and Forces.

But the truth is, it is neither so, nor so. For first, concerning His
excluding of the Parliament; Is any man so simple, as to think the King is
bound, to write every private Letter of Complement, in that severe style, and
clogging form, as if he were to write an Act of Parliament? and to choke up
every line, with [ The Kings Majesty, by the Advice of his Lords and Commons in
Parliament assembled] as often as occasion offers him discourse, of the
Transaction of any Parliament affairs? Nothing can be plainer, then, that the
King, in saying, I will take away the penal Laws, implies the Power of the
Parliament, as virtually comprehended in Him; and means, that He will do it,
in a Free convention of Parliament, and as it ought, for to be done: and
therefore, if you mark it, he adds, as soon as God shall enable me to do it;
which words, must refer to such a Convention, or they have no meaning. For,
if the King had a meaning to repeal these Laws without his Parliament: or
could think, that He could Lawfully so do; Certainly He might have done it
long ere this; God has enabled Him, with Power and Might, answerable to the
compass of many such Designs. (and for my part, if He should do it to morrow
(though I am confident He never will, yet) cannot I see what the Rebels have
to object against it; For I would feign know, why the King may not repeal the
Laws against Recusancy, without the Parliament, as well and as far forth, as
the Parliament Repeales the Laws for the Common Prayer, and for Episcopacy,
without the King.) But, the Kings Power, loves Justice, as the Psalmist
speaks; and Psalm. 99. 4.
he considers not his Might, so much as his Right; and, therefore, knowing
well enough, that He cannot lawfully do it, but in Parliament, He presumes so
far upon the affections and gratitude, of all His true hearted Subjects, as
to promise the Catholic party, that, in their names, out of a Parliament,
which he doubts not, but the better eloquence of success against this present
Rebellion, by means of their Assistance, will make appear reasonable in it,
to perform.

Nor does this any way cross shinnes with those Declarations and
Protestations, which the King has made, if a reasonable man have the laying of
them both together. For, what if the King have, upon some occasions, made a
Declaration, to put the Laws in execution against Papists? Surely, their
suspicions and jealousies owe him more thanks, for that inanimation, which no
doubt procured it. But, did the King, ever make a Declaration, that, upon no
occasion whatsoever, He would consent to the Repealing of those Laws? If He
did not, then certainly, the King may Declare that the Laws against Recusants
should be put in execution, for one Reason at one time; and yet consent, that
those very Laws should be repealed for another Reason, at another time: His
Religion all this while being the same, although his Reason be not. For his
reason for the one, was but their suspicion; His reason for the other, is his
own safety: which certainly is the better reason of the twain; in regard, that
the obligation, which is upon the King, to satisfy the suspicion of a peevish
sort of People; as he did in the one, is but a Temporal obligation; but that
which is upon the King, to provide for His own safety, and the safety of all
his good Subjects, as he did in the other, is an eternal.

The King has made Declarations in behalf of the Starrechamber, and of the
Common Prayer: and yet the Rebels are well contented, He should quite abrogate
the one, and at this instant, are as angry with him, that He will not abolish
the other; nay, it is yet within the memory of Man, since our dear brethren of
Scotland, were esteemed and accounted Rebels, by a Declaration, and yet these
men, never yet questioned, or accused the King for Accepting and Treating with
them afterward, like honest Subjects. When they have a purpose to repeal the
Laws made concerning Episcopacy, then, every solemn Oath which the King has
made against it, is esteemed but a Gnatt: but when they have a purpose not to
Repeal the Laws made against Recusants, then, every Declaration made for
executing of those Laws, becomes a Camel. This is just the trick of the
Jugglers books, that so amazes Country People and Children; which being turned
one way, shows you nothing but Men or Women's Faces, but being turned the other
way, is as full of horned Beasts, or Devils.

And then, as touching the Kings Protestations which have been often made to
maintain the Laws of this Kingdom; for God's sake, what of them? If they
mean, That, because the King protests to maintain the Laws of the
Kingdom, therefore he cannot repeal any one of those Laws whom he has
protested to maintain? why then, do they press him to repeal diverse and
sundry Laws, made concerning Episcopacy, and the Book of Common Prayer? seeing
they are Laws, which he is bound to maintain, by this Protestation? But, if
the meaning of those words be, That, the King protests to maintain the Law,
which is established for Law, to be ruled by that Law, and to do nothing in an
arbitrary way, contrary to that Law (as no doubt, that is the meaning of his
words) then does not the repealing and abrogating of any Law, thwart and cross
his Protestation of maintaining the Law; because, when it is Repealed, it is no
longer a Law; And, as the Divines use to say, that our Savior, when he came
and touched the dead man's Coffin, offended not against the Law, which holds
such Persons unclean; because he purposed to restore him again to life: So
does not the king offend against His Protestation of maintaining the Law of the
Land, if upon good occasion offered, he should a little suspend the Execution
of those Laws made against Recusants for the present; which hereafter a free
Convention of Parliament, will find as good occasion wholly to take away, if
their Assistance of the King in this his present exigence and necessity, shall
appear to them, so vigorous and hearty, to deserve so great a Favor.

Mr Lisle.
The third thing (Gentlemen) that I shall observe to you, is concerning the use
and the ends that have been made, (which you may observe out of these Letters)
of a Treaty with the Parliament. I shall read His Majesty's words to you in a
Letter of the fifteenth of Febr. 1645. a Letter to the Queen.

And be confident, that in making Peace, I shall ever show my Constancy in
adhering to Bishops, and to all our Friends, and not forget to put a short
period to this perpetual Parliament.

And in his Letter to the Queen of the ninth of Febr. 1644. there is this
passage.

Be confident, I will never quit Episcopacy, nor the Sword.

We did all hope, that the end of a Treaty had been to settle a happy Peace, a
firm and a well grounded Peace: But now we see by the Kings Letter, that his
Resolutions are, still to keep the Sword in his own hands. We did all hope,
that the end of a Treaty was to settle Church Government according to the
Protestation, the Solemn Vow and Covenant, which we have all taken. But you
see by the Kings Letters, that he avowes to the Queen, that he will never quit
Episcopacy. We did all hope, that the end of a Treaty was rather to confirm
the Parliament, then to dissolve it; But the King says in his own Letter,
that he will not forget at this Treaty, to put a short period to this
perpetual Parliament.

Animadversions.
Here is a very fine Rhetorical Rainbow; much, is represented in show,
naught, in substance. Mr Lisle knew well enough to whom he spoke; to the common
sort of People, Qui frequenter in hoc ipsum fallendi sunt, ne errent, as
Quintilian speaks of them: who are always to be cousened, and even for this
very purpose, often, That they may not be deceived. For I dare say, Mr Lisle is
no more persuaded, in himself, of the truth of these particular Aspersions,
which are here cast upon the King, then Theopompus, when he changed clothes
with his wife, and escaped out of prison, could believe himself a woman,
because he made the keepers to believe it. We will only divide, a little,
between his Conclusions and his Clouds, and then, you will the more easily
perceive it. One of the Conclusions which he takes upon him to persuade, and
work in the minds and affections of the people, is this: That the King never
intended Peace in the last Treaty. The Cloud which is cast about that
Conclusion, to cover it from their understandings, is this. Because his
Resolutions are, still, to keep the Sword in his own hands. Now, the People
can do no less, then subscribe to this Proposition, as being necessarily
true: He that is resolved to keep the Sword still in his hands, is resolved not
to have a Peace.

But the double acceptance of that notion, [the Sword] would easily dispell
this Cloud, and spread it into nothing. For the word Sword, as well in Sacred
as in Civil Writers, as it sometimes implies the material Sword, that
Instrument of violence, wherewith one private man smites and hurts another, of
which our Savior Christ speaks in the Gospel, when he says unto S. Peter,
Put up thy Sword; So does it other whiles imply the Civil Sword, or, that
power and administration of Justice, which resides in the Supreme Magistrate,
and inflicts several punishments on several persons, according to their
several offenses; of which S. Paul speaks in his Epistle, when he says of
Nero the Emperor, that, He bears not the Sword in vain. Now, nothing can be
playner, then, that the King uses that word [ Sword] in this latter
Acceptance; and, as by Episcopacy, They cannot but acknowledge, that the King
understands that old Form of Hierarchicall Government, in the Church now
established, which he tells the Queen he will not quit, for that of the
Presbytery, which is the new Fangle; So they cannot deny, without denying their
reason, that, by the [ Sword] which the King there joyneth with Episcopacy, He
means that Monarchical Form of Government in the State now established; which
He tells the Queen, He will never quit for a Democracy, which the Rebels
labor so hard to superinduce upon him; And then, this horrid Conclusion having
broken thus through the Cloud, resolves, into less then a man's Hand: for, it
resolves into no more but this: The King never intended to change the present
Government of the Church, or the present Government of the State; Therefore the
King in the last Treaty never intended Peace.

But, what needed the Queens Letters to be broken up for this? Did not the
King's Commissioners, when they were at Vxbridge, tell you the very same thing
twenty days together? that, the King would not alter the Government of the
Church or State, unless there were better Reasons urged, then your bare wills?
how comes this then half a year afterward, to be told the good Citizens of
London, for such news? Alas! you must think, They have brought up the men of
London (who, by nature, were never very fierce) to such a tamenesse of
understanding, that they must needs think every thing a great Secret, and of
some mysterious Consequence in the Queens Letters; and therefore, they care
not at how dear a price of Inhumanity, they purchase it. Not much unlike the
simple fellow, spoken of in Lucian, who gave Lucian.
three hundred pence for one of Epictetus his Candles ends, which was not
worth three half pence; because he had a conceit, that he could not choose but
prove an excellent Philosopher, if he studied never so little by Epictetus's
Candle.

And, of as great Consequence, that is, just of none at all, is that which
follows, where the King says, He will not forget at this Treaty, to put a
short period to this perpetual Parliament. And I shall only say this to it; He
that is offended with the King for desiring to put an end to this present
Parliament, that another of better temper, and affection, may be Summoned; let
him groan unpittyed, under the pressures and miseries, which from this present
Parliament he suffers, and ever will, so long, as this present Parliament
endures.

Mr Lisle.
The last thing that I shall observe to you (for you will have the rest
observed to you by a better hand) is concerning the King's disavowing this
Parliament, to be the Parliament of England; We cannot have greater assurance
of any thing from the King, then of this present Parliament; There is no Law
stronger, that gives a property to the Subject, then the Law is, to continue
this present Parliament.

This is so well known to the World, that Kingdoms and States abroad
acknowledge it, and now for the King to disavow it, after it is confirmed and
continued by Act of Parliament; after the King has so lately acknowledged it,
now so suddenly to disavow it, How can we be more confident of any assurance
or Act from His Majesty?

There be many things more observable in these Letters, but I shall leave them
to those worthy Gentlemen, that come after me.

Animadversions.
It was a common practice of the Popes Emissaries, in the beginning of the
Reformation, when any considering or discerning man, began to speak ought
against the grosle Corruptions and Imposthumes in that See, (which were then as
visible, as that pretended Head it self, that bred them;) To brand him for
deserting the Church of Rome, in some point of Doctrine and Belief; (that so,
they might expose him to the greater ignominy and danger) who, good man, only
distasted the Court of Rome, in some point of Discipline and Manners; And by
this cunning artifice, they maintained the Sea of Rome, in the height of all
her villainies and impieties: no man, for a long time, daring to oppose them. In
like manner deal the Rebels with the King. The King distasts a factious and
seditious Party, grown too potent in the Parliament; a Party, which have
frighted most of the honest Members that are present, and forced away more of
them that are absent; and therefore, are no more a Parliament indeed, then a
nut, is a nut, where the maggot has eat out the Meat; and this distasting of
this turbulent Faction in this Parliament, is branded by Mr Lisle, for a
disavowing of this Parliament, to be a Parliament, on purpose to draw the
greater odium upon the King; who, I think, is as rare in this unhappiness, as
in many of his Virtues, that he is, not only the first King, but the first Man,
that ever yet wentabout to persuade the People, and to let them see, they were
not well governed, and could not be believed. The King disavowes not this
Parliament; nor any one Act, that ever He yet past this Parliament; no, not so
much, as that Act, which continues this Parliament; although perchance, he may
think that Act as liable to a Repeal, as any other; and so for diverse causes,
may repeal it; Nay, in endeavoring and resolving to Repeal it, he does
acknowledge it an Act.

And whereas Mr Lisle thinks, he has struck this scandalous aspersion home
into their Memories, with this hammer of his Eloquence, that There is no Law
stronger, that gives any Property to the Subject, then the Law is to continue
this present Parliament. I shall only interpose and lay this soft Reply
between, to dead the noise and fury of the Blow; and that is this: That, if the
Law to continue this present Parliament, were no stronger, then any Law; which
I know in the Kingdom, which gives any Property to the Subject, is; The King
need not take such care to put a period to it; For, as they have done, it would
soon cease, and vanish of it self, and come to nothing; The sum total,
indeed, of all, that Mr Lisle has said. And therefore, as Demosthenes used to
say of Phocyon, when ever he saw him rising up to speak; (...) Demosth.
Behold, here rises the Hatchet of all my words; and so would go no farther.
So does Mr Lisle at the sight of Mr Tate, who is now rising. and if the
Citizens heads should prove so hard all over, that neither Hammer nor Hatchet
should do any good upon them, it were very strange: but commonly, where there
are two men that have Malice enough which is the Father of a Scandal; there
will be twenty, that will afford Credulity enough, which is the Mother. And no
doubt, but so it happened here.

Mr Tate his Speech.
The Letters are so full, that I shall rather be your remembrancer, of what you
have heard in them, then give you any observations upon them.

Animadversions.
Then does this Speech come after those Letters, like an Eve after an Holy Day;
which should have come, before it; For, sure I am, those Letters are not so
Full, but this speech is as Empty. I begin to have a conceit, that these three
honest men, had a dangerous plot in their heads, and that was, to make one good
Orator between them. For Mr Tate seems to be disposed of, in the Middle Region,
where Rhetoric is coldest, and where the Laws of Oratory do indulge most
remissness and relaxation; for this very purpose, that, according to their
ordinary distribution of Preaching-houres, the Major and his Brethren, may be
silent, at the beginning, till they have used themselves a little to hear
sense; may Censure the latter end, as being the only part of the speech which
they remember; and may sleep about the middle, while Mr Tate the
City-Remembrancer, may proceed in his new office, without more Interruption.

Mr Tate.
I shall present before you a very sad spectacle, The whole Kingdom of Ireland
bleeding, a Kingdom all in Peace without any thoughts of War, without any
thoughts of Arms; and of a sudden, a Popish Partyrising up, laying hold upon
all the Forts, seizing all the Lands, and all the Goods of the Protestants in
Ireland, and not content with that, when they had done, killing one hundred
thousand of them, Man, Woman, and Child. These Rebels of Ireland, that had
thus inhumanely murdered so many Protestants; (here is the sadness) Now the
Favorites of the King, and those Subjects that the King did profess to
maintain, in maintaining Arms against those Rebels; We that by Acts of
Parliament of the Kings own Grant, had the Irish Rebels Lands and Territories
granted to us, to maintain a War against them; now because we maintain that
War, we are Rebels and Traitors; and the Irish Rebels, because that they
stand against you, They shall be freed from all Penal Laws, They shall have
any thing that They desire, nothing is too dear for them, any Laws may be
altered for their sakes: But when the Protestants come to desire an Alteration
of Law for the advancement of the Protestant Religion, and for the settlement
of the Protestants, nothing can be granted to them by a Protestant King, but
every thing to the Irish. I shall say but a word more, and pray consider of it;
The Condition why all this is granted to the Irish, and denied to you, it is
only this; That the Irish may come over into England, to cut your Throats, as
they cut the throats of all the Irish Protestants in Ireland. This is the
cause, for which they are encouraged to come hither. If there be such a reward
for Treachery, if there be such a fruit of the Protestations of the King, what
can we expect?

Animadversions.
Truly, the Kingdom of Ireland bleeding, were a very sad spectacle, did not
the Kingdom of England bleeding, call for both our Eyes. A Kingdom, before
this Parliament began, so grown aged in continual Happiness, that, as they
use to say of the spiced and persum'd Air, in which the Sabeans Agatharo.
live, Summus quidem odor, sed volupt as minor; The very Excess seemed to
abate the pleasure; and the Repetition of nothing but the same Blessings, which
were still, as constant, as their Days, did not so much affect the Sense of
the Nation, as dull it. When, on the sudden, an Anabaptisticall Party rising
up, lays hold upon all the Kings Forts, and Ships, seizes all His Lands,
rifles all the Goods of most of the Protestants in England: and not content
with that, has opened more then one hundred Thousand Veins, of as good
Protestant blood, and made of as good milk, as ever the Church of England
gave, since She lay in of her first Reformation. Now, these Rebels of England,
that have dispoyled their own lawful Sovereign of all his Royal Interests,
and just Rights, and that have thus inhumanely murdered so many thousands of
their own Protestant Brethren, ( here is the sadness) avow themselves the
loyal and most obedient Subjects of the King; and those Subjects, who venture
their Lives and Fortunes in the Cause of God, and of the King, Those, they
traduce for Malignants, Traitors, and Rebels. God forbid, that the King, or any
good Protestant should justify that Rebellion in Ireland half so much, as
these English Rebels themselves do, that exclaim most against it; For
assuredly, no man justifies a sin more, then he, that does commit it.

When the Rebellion brake out first in Ireland, all the world knows, there was
no man in England more forward in expressing the sense of his Indignation
against it, then the King. Both Houses of Parliament, could not suggest any
probable Expedient for the quenching of that Flame, but the King straight way
ratified and approved it. Nay, His Industry, was so, like His Interest, far
transcending theirs, that, whilst they were only hovering about Advice; He was
upon the wings of Action, and would have interposed his own Sacred Person in
the Quarrel, if they would have allowed it, and thought it fit. But, now that
a greater Flame is kindled in the Bowels of this Kingdom, and, that those
very Buckets, which, there, should have cast on water, to have quenched it, are
here, cast on themselves, to augment and raise the fire; he, that will blame
the Kings affections for being corrupted, because they are a little coold; He
that will accuse Him, for being false to the Principles of Law, which binds
Him to defend His Subjects against the Rebels in Ireland; because He is true
to the Principles of Nature, which binds him to defend himself, against the
Rebels here in England: Certainly, that man will approve his Humor for
Discretion, who, when the fatal Axe hung over him, took greater care for his
Hair, then for his Head. And therefore, M. Tate adds little to the credit of
his Cause, when he heaps up these exaggerations upon the King; That, the Irish
Rebels, can be freed from all the penal Laws, that they, may have any thing
which they desire; and, that Nothing is to dear for them etc. for the more
dishonorable and dear the conditions are, on which the King purchases the
settlement of Irelands Peace; The more infamous and odious is this Treason and
Rebellion here in England, which alone has raised the Market: For, if England
would not Pipe so as it does, Ireland, would have but little mind to Dance.

And whereas Mr Tate is of opinion, that all this is granted to the Irish, that
they may come over into England, and cut Throats; Truly I am of opinion, that
if they do not make more have, then I can yet perceive they do, they will
loose their Labor; for the Scots will have done their Work, before they come.
Whose encouragements no doubt, are the better of the twain: For, what they
loose in gay promises, they find in good Pay. What they have not in Repealing
of Laws; they have, in Reaping the profit of good Lands. What they want in
three or four Complements, They have in five Counties; And a Scott that will
not cut Throats upon these Terms, let him live by cutting of Purses: or,
(which is more Merchant-like) by selling of Pinnes.

Mr Tate.
All I have to say is, you see you must stand to your Arms, and defend your
selves; For there is no hopes for you, unless you can submitt your necks to
the Queen, and be transformed into Irish Rebels, and Papists. I know not how
you can obtain any favor at Court, especially having such a Mediator as you
have, a Parliament, that is so hated by the King. As long as that mediates for
you, you shall have nothing; but if you can have a Popish Catholic Queen to
solicit in your behalf, you shall have any thing. I know you are too much
Englishmen, and Protestants, to submit to such base conditions: Therefore lay
aside all division, and unite your selves in this Cause, that you may be
Masters of the Popish Party, that otherwise will kill you all.

Animadversions.
Are you come to say all that you have to say already? I protest a very
moderate Gentleman; and one, that is not like to be a Lecturer long; for,
though he knows not what to speak, yet he knows when to hold his Tongue. I
will undertake, after this rate, he might have talked till midnight. But sir,
do you think your Aldermen are awake? or rather, do not you think that you
have talked all this while, in your sleep? For my part, I confess, I am so
far a Citizen of the Common Hall, that I do not understand you; and I take
it for a great blessing upon mine Innocence, that I do not reach your meaning.
The truth is, I do a little suspect, that, if the matter were well examined,
you that pass for one of the Speakers here, would prove rather, one of the
Sybills, who they say, never understood their own Prophecies.

Quintilian observes, that there are some streynes in Oratory, quae fortia
sunt, dum laedunt, stulta vero cum laeserint, which are strong and able to do
mischeife in the minds of men, and then are as weak and simple, when they have
done it: as if some kind of Rhetorique had that operation on the mind, which
some Physic has upon the body; That opens and loosens it, when you take it,
and then ties and binds it up as fast, when it is taken; And Mr Tate is
excellent at these strains. I warrant you, when Mr Tate did but cry, stand to
your Arms Gentlemen, and defend your selves; the Citizens could imagine
nothing less, then that Sir Colebrand would forsake his Overseers place about
the Clock-house, and come amongst them presently like a Clubb man. No question,
but when he tells them of submitting their Necks to a Popish Catholic Queen
(you may see, his words cost him nothing, he is so liberal to give us two for
one) the Citizens could not take the Queen for less, then a She-Tamberlaine,
and began to think, that if she would needs tread upon their necks, she might
chance hurt her feet. I dare say, when Mr Tate told them, they must be
Transformed into Irish Rebels, and Papists; the Londoners began to consider,
whether it was not against their Charter, and Liberties, that any body should
transform them, besides their own Wives. So, are simple men affected, and
wrought upon, they know not with what, more, then with what they know, as
women, and Children are more affrighted with a naked Ghost, then with an Armed
man.

And such another Raw head and bloody bones is that Popish Party, which, if
they be not masters of betimes, will kill them all. in Mr Tates opinion; though
truly how they should be masters of them, I do not well see; for this Popish
Party consisting of Horse, Foot, and some Dragoones; The Horse fly in the
air, and have lately taken a great Castle there; The Foot, march under ground;
and have made wooden Ordinances, of most of Middletons Pipes; and the
Dragoones, swim with their matches in their mouths, and have nothing but their
very bare heads above the water. Why, but hark you my masters, will this
cruel Popish Party have no more pity, then to kill them all? what, fee, fa,
fum? man, woman, child and all? what? not leave so much as one Alderman and his
wife, for the City Government to Breed on? what? not let one Lecturer run up to
seed, against another years Rebellion? No, not spare a man: you shall be
killed All; and Mr Tate, to my thinking, has ended his Speech, as the Country
Fellows did their Play, who killed one another so fast; till they left never a
man living, to conclude it; So that, I know nothing else is to be said, but
Sound Drums and Trumpets, and exit Mr Tate, carrying off the dead.

Mr Brown his Speech.
My Lord Major and you worthy Citizens of the City of London, I shall not
trouble you to repeat any of the Letters, that you have heard read; I doubt
not, but you that heard them, do remember most of them: only this I will say
to you; That for my part, I know not whether we have more cause of Joy or
Sorrow, for this which this day you have heard. Cause I know, we have to be
sorrowful, that things are so ill with us, as they are: And I am sure we have
Cause to rejoice, that things are now discovered and brought to light, that
have been so long hid in darkness. This is a day of discovery. Heretofore
those that spoke those things, that you have heard this day manifested unto
you, were accounted the Malignant Party. They were termed Rebels, they were
suspicious jealous People without Cause. The Lords and Commons in Parliament,
they have heretofore declared their fears of the things, that you now see
proved; Answers have been given to those Fears, with slights and scorns.
Things are this day discovered to you, that were enjoined to be kept secret, by
the strongest engagements; The goodness of God giving success to our Army
has brought these things to light.

Animadversions.
The Rebels at Westminster, in opening these pretended mysteries of darkness
to the Citizens of London, to my thinking, have proceeded in that manner, by
the way of method; which Nazianzen, in opening a dark place of Scripture to St
Jerome, is related to have proceeded in, only by the way of mirth. For, being
importuned by him, to know the meaning of those words in the 6th of Luke. Now
upon the second Sabbath after the first; of which words even Nazianzen
himself, knew not the proper meaning: He bid him come to Church next Sunday,
when he Preached, and then; he would tell him; because he knew, that although he
himself should not be able to give Jerome any satisfaction: yet then, and
there, he knew well enough too, that Jerome would not be very willing to give
him any Reply. They are now grown so cunning at the City-Cheat, that they will
never show any Stuffes willingly, but by their own Lights. And their Two great
Lights, are; Sermons and Speeches, like the Sun, to rule the Day: and Bells and
Bonefires, like the Moon, to govern the Night; and, by these Lights, are the
Masks of most of their Thankesgivings, ever acted. What a preparation is here
made to some great Solemnity? what Occasions and Causes of Joy, presented, for
some wonderful Discovery? If the Title Page had not told us, that this Speech
was spoken, the third of July; who would not have thought, it had been made,
for the fifth of November? when in very deed, the fowlenesse of the matter here
discovered, does no more expiate, that fowler unworthiness of the means used
in the discovery: then that famous Italian Painter could answer, his killing of
a man; by making a good Picture of a man, newly killed. But, Mr Brown knows,
he is, as Nazianzen was in his Pulpit, where he may say any thing, and not be
contradicted; and, (as the Fellow in Plutarch, who had wrastled with one that
had a good Tongue, and given him a sound Fall: when, he was ask't who had the
better on it, answered, it was very uncertain, because, says he, although I am
sure, that I had the better in throwing him, yet he has the better of me, in
denying it, and persuading of the Spectators, there was no such matter: So) the
Citizens of London, although, by the light of their own understanding, they
see well enough, that there is nothing of moment in these private Letters, but
what the King may openly justify to God, and to the World: Yet, when Mr Brown
observes such horrible Discoveries unto them; when he tells them of such
Secrets brought to light, as were to be concealed by the strongest engagements
of Faith and Love; They begin to think it so, indeed: forgetting, that it is as
easy a matter, for a French Cook, and a Committee-man, to make a Feast out of
a Straw, as it is an ordinary thing, for themselves, to make a Solemn
Funeral, when there is nothing in the Coffin, but a Faggot. But, let us hear,
what these Discoveries are.

Mr Brown.
Before His Majesty departed from the Parliament, the Lords and Commons by a
Petition to him, did present unto him their Fears, occasioned by the favoring
of Recusants; Their Fears, that he would bring in Foreign Forces; That he
would change and alter the Laws. They gave him their Reasons for all: But he
was pleased to give his Answer with denying all, as they affirmed all. For that
of Foreign Forces, because he gave a punctual Answer to that, I will tell
you what it was. When they told him, that they were informed that the Popes
Nuncio did deal with the French and Spanish Kings, to send to him, 4000 men a
piece, the King did Answer to them,

That it was improbable in it self, and Scandalous to him, for which he
desired Reparation at their hands.

And at another time, he answers that very point concerning Foreign Forces,
positively, and says.

No sober, nor honest man can believe, that we are so desperate, or so
senseless ( they are His very words) to entertain such a design, as to bring
in Foreign Forces, which would not only bring this Our Kingdom in
distraction and Ruin, but Our own name and Posterity in perpetual Scorn and
Infamy.

You have heard what has been said for that; you have heard his own Letters
how He deals with the Queen, and how pressing He is with Her, to bring into
this Kingdom; the Duke of Lorraine with his Army. The Duke of Lorraine you
know, is a Catholic, Popish, Foreign Prince. So you see how much He is
altered from what He thought then, and how His endeavors are now; that both
Honest men, and Sober men, may believe that He would do it, because He writes
to Her, with such earnestness, to pray Her to do it for Him.

Animadversions.
The scope and purpose of this Paragraph, is to expose His Majesty to the
reproach of Falsehood, and Contradiction, by committing some of His open Answers
and Protestations, with some of His Private Instructions and Letters; and to
make them clash together, in the point of Foreign Forces. And truly, if Mr
Brown had done this, he had done something; that is, if M. Brown had
evidently demonstrated this, that the King at the very same time, and being in
the very same state and condition, when He professed openly, that no Sober or
Honest Man could believe He was so desperate, or senseless, to entertain such
a design, as to bring in Foreign Forces; had privately notwithstanding, and
by Letters under hand, solicited the Queen for Forces from the Duke of
Lorraine; This indeed had cast a blemish upon His Faith and Honor; This had
clouded, one of the brightest Stones in all the Crown; for nihil est, quod
clariore lumine praefulgeat, quam recta fides in Principe; Hotoman.
says the great Lawyer: There is nothing of that Luster, like a Princes Word
and Honor. This had been a plain breach of Faith and Honesty; to which
nothing could have been said, by way of modification or excuse, that could have
rendered it, either Honorable or Lawful.

But, if M. Brown only demonstrate this, that the King at one time, and being
in one condition, professed against Foreign Force; and then, that, at another
time, and being in another condition, he pressed the Queen for it: I believe,
this will not amount to any fault, if it be strictly considered; much less, to
any Falsehood. For, what do they take the meaning of those words of the Kings
to be; That, no sober nor honest man can believe him so desperate or so
senseless, to entertain such a design, as to bring in Foreign Forces?
Either they must take those words, in the nature of a bare Assertion,
expressing for the time to come, the Kings mind, as it was at present; and so,
to justify the uprightness of such an Assertion, it is sufficient, that a man
means as he speaks, when he speaks, and not, that he should continue always
in that meaning. For a man has power and right too, to change his mind; And,
if, in that change and alteration there be any thing that is ill, (as
oftentimes it falls out, there is) That evil, is no way intrinsecall to the
mutation; but it arises from the matter; namely, when the first opinion was
better, then the second is; so that, unless M. Brown can prove, that the King
had a mind to bring in Foreign Forces, at that very time, when He professed
He had no such thought, or entertained any such design, His Assertion remains
entire, and without fault, notwithstanding any change or alteration of His
mind, which since might happen to it. Or, they must understand those words, in
the nature of a contract or promise, which obliges the King, not only for the
present, to mean what he says; but for the future, to continue in that
meaning; and if so, then, there are two several Rules in the Civil Law, which
would be considered: for, they will acquit the King from the disreputation of
Infidelity, or breach of promise; notwithstanding his endeavors by the Queen,
to bring in Foreign Forces. The first Rule, is this: Omnis promissio habet in
se tacitam conditionem hans, Rebus sic stantibus: and Menoch.
aliquo, de novo, non superveniente. That is, Every Promise, has this tacit
Condition, employed and involved in it, of [ Things being as they were] when the
Promise was made; for, if there be any notorious change or mutation in the
Condition, either of the Persons, or Things; A man is not then, says the Law,
obliged by his Promise. And, is there not a remarkable Alteration of both, in
our present Case? Are not both the Persons changed, and the very Things? when
the King promised he would entertain no such design, as to bring in Foreign
Forces, he promised that to Subjects, and in the time of Peace; but, they that
claim this promise of him now, are Rebels, and they claim it, being
themselves against him, in an open War: And is not this a sad Change, and
Alteration? when the King promised, not to bring in Foreign Forces, the thing
was a matter of Indifferency: for, the King was in no visible danger, but that
he might have subsisted well enough without them; But now, when they claim it,
it is a matter of necessity: and for ought any man knows, the only visible
way, under Heaven, left to the King for to defend himself; And is not this s
sensible Mutation? therefore the Condition of the Times, Persons, and Things
being changed: the Obligation of the promise also, says the Law, is not in
reason, longer to continue.

The second Rule amongst the Civilians is this: Quoties per alium fit, quo
minus id impleatur, quod est promissum, habetur ^^^^ell.
illud, quod promittitur, ac si fuisset impletum. When it is long of Him, only,
to whom the promise is made, why it is not performed; it is all one in equity,
as if it were performed, according to that of the Historian; who says,
persolut a fide, quia per eum non stetit, quo minus prestaretur, that is; as
having discharged his Faith and promise, (says he) because it was not his
fault, any Live: Hist.
way, that his Faith was not discharged. And was it not long of them, that the
King did not keep his promise? He that cannot reach the clearenesse of this
Truth, by reason of that eminent distance, between the people of a Kingdom,
and the Prince; will comprehend it easily, brought nearer home unto him, by
this familiar Instance and Example. A Master of a Family keeps many servants in
his House, and every man knows what work he has to do, and accordingly he
does it. At last, being conscious to themselves, that their work went not on,
so as it should, a rumor and a whisper flies amongst them from one unto
another, that their Master means to retain some Journey-men and Hirelings, of
his Neighbors, and will have them lie together, and work together, with his
servants, that his work may be the better and the sooner done. Hereupon, they
move their Master in the point, and declare unto him, that if He call in any of
his Neighbors to the work, it would breed ill blood; He must look to have his
house very much disordered, and his goods embeasel'd, for none of his Servants
would take charge of them, nor could: So many strangers coming in and out,
that it was impossible. The Master, who was sure to have the worst of it, if
any thing were lost, is easily persuaded hereunto, not having indeed the least
thought or Imagination of any such thing: but (being a man of so much
gentleness and meekness, as to let his own Servants, take their own times
and ways) of his own free accord, he makes this solemn promise, to them,
that no stranger shall come in to them, from amongst his Neighbors, either to
meddle with their work or them. At last, these servants have a plott upon
their Master, to take away his life: and to that purpose, they break up all his
Chests, seize upon all his Monyes, and are now forcing his own Bedchamber
Door, to murder him. The good man perceiving their intent, tells them, that,
if they offer to break open the doors upon him, he will call to his Neighbors
out at the window, to send their servants in unto his help, and then their
Villainy, will be discovered, and they, severely punished, whereas if they will
go quietly to bed again, He will say nothing of it, and for once, put the
matter up. The Servants tell him again, that they know he is an honest man,
and scorns to break his promise: He promised them above a month ago, that he
would not suffer any stranger to come in to his House, and they hope he will
not offer, now, at this time of the night, to call them. If this man should
think himself obliged by that promise, to let his own servants come in, and
cut his throat; Will not any man say, that he had more Conscience, then Sense?
For, the Master does not break his promise, but the servants will not suffer
him to keep it. And, this is just the Kings Case, in the point of Foreign
Forces: which, if any dull Citizen of London will not understand, as it is
delivered by Doctrine; let some of his own servants, beat it into his Brains,
(as these servants would have done,) by a nearer Application.

Mr Brown.
For their Fears, of his making War against the Parliament, of his
alteration of Religion and Laws, he has heretofore in his Printed
Declaration, expressed these words.

We do again, in the presence of Almighty God, our Maker and Redeemer, assure
the World, that we have no more thought of making War against the Parliament,
then against our own Children; that we will maintain and observe the Acts
assented to by Us this Parliament, without violation, and that we have not, nor
shall not have any thought of using any Force, unless we shall be driven to
it, for the Security of our Person, and for the Defense of the Religion, Laws,
and Liberties of the Kingdom, and the Just Rights and Privileges of
Parliament.

And in another of his Printed Declarations, he has said.

God so deal with me and mine, as my Thoughts and Intentions are upright for
the maintenance of the True Protestant Religion, and for observation, and
preservation of the Laws of the Land.

And in another Declaration, he says, that

He is resolved not only duly to observe the Laws Himself, but to maintain
them, against what opposition soever, though with the hazard of his being.

And in his Declaration, concerning his Resolution to go into Ireland, which
is also Printed, he calls God to witness, the sincerity of his Professions
there made, with this assurance.

That His Majesty will never Consent, upon what pretense soever to a Toleration
of the Popish Profession there; or to the abolition of the Laws now in force
against Popish Recusants in that Kingdom.

What could his Majesty have said more to satisfy his People? Now, compare his
Actions with his Declarations; and compare his Letters to the Queen, with his
Promise and Protestations to the Parliament, and you will say, Quantum mutatus?
how much is his Majesty changed.

All that we have heard read, we may divide into three parts. The first,
contains the Letters, Propositions, and Transactions, concerning Ireland.

The second, the Letters from the Queen to the King.

The third, Letters from the King unto the Queen, etc.

Animadversions.
Here are three particulars more, laid to His Majesty's charge by M. Brown,
wherein His private Letters, are made to cross and contradict His public
Protestations, that so with more color, they may asperse him with the sin of
Levity, Falsehood, and breach of Faith; by which easy wickedness, they hope to
make him as vile, in all His Peoples eyes, as His own obstinate Goodness, has
made him cheap in theirs. The first is, concerning His making War against the
Parliament; The second is, concerning the Alteration of Religion; and the third
is, concerning His Alteration of Laws; Against these three, they produce His
Protestations and Promises, which, they would have the world believe, He does
so directly check, by His private endeavors and practices; as if he esteemed
no more of what He promised, then that Egyptian King, whom they nicknamed
Doso, that is to say, Dabo, because he would Diod. Sieul.
promise any thing which men asked of him, and would be as sure, never to
perform any thing unto them, which he had promised.

Concerning the first of these, His making War against the Parliament, (which
is such a threadbare piece of malice, that, as it never had any Truth, so now,
it has worn away the very Sense) They press those words of His Declaration,
which they conceive expressly makes against it, wherein the King does assure the
World, that He has no more thought of making War against the Parliament,
then, against His own Children; and, that he has not, nor shall not have, any
thought of using of any Force; unless he shall be driven to it, for the
security of his Person; and for the defense of the Religion; which words truly,
do condemn the King to my thinking, just as Pilate did Christ, namely, by
washing of his hands; For, can any thing be plainer, then that, as those terms
of Ampliation, We have not, nor shall not have, any thought, of using of any
Force, do comprehend in them, a formal profession, that the King will not
wage War against the Parliament; so, those words of Limitation and exception,
unless we shall be driven to it, for the security of our Person: do contain
in them a virtuall profession also, that He will? And therefore, when M.
Brown, will condemn the King, for making War against the Parliament, as
doing contrary to His express Declaration; and will take no notice, of that
Case of Reservation annexed thereto, (which, as expressly justifies all that the
King has done.) He says no more, in truth, against the King; then the
Welch-man did against the Judge, who cried out upon him, for putting him to
death for stealing a Rope, but left out the Mare.

Concerning the second, His Alteration of Religion, they produce these words
out of another of the Kings Declarations: God so deal with Me and Mine, as My
thoughts and intentions are upright, for the maintenance of the true Protestant
Religion: and those words in His Declaration, concerning His going into
Ireland: That His Majesty will never consent, upon what pretense soever, to a
Toleration of the Popish profession there, or the Abolition of the Laws, now
in force against Recusants in that Kingdoms. And then, concerning the third,
that is, His Alteration of the Laws; the words of another Declaration are
remembered and cast in His teeth; wherein He professes. That He is resolved not
only duly to observe the Laws Himself, but to maintain them against what
opposition soever, though with the hazard of his being. And now, how false the
King has been to both these solemn Professions, by His secret practices, let
His Letters and M. Brown declare.

Mr Brown.
Concerning Ireland, you have heard the Propositions made to the Queen, for
sending into this Kingdom, diverse Irish Rebels, under the command of two
professed Papists; six Thousand of them were to be under the command of the
Lord Glamorgan, the Earl of Worcesters eldest Son; the other of ten Thousand,
under the command of Colonel Fits. Williams: The terms that they were to
come upon, were read to you in the Propositions; which themselves sent to the
Queen. You will not think, that these came to maintain the Laws, but to
destroy them, not to maintain the Protestant Religion, but to overthrow it;
These Propositions being sent to the Queen, and allowed by Her, and She sent
them to the King.

For, the Letters concerning Ireland, they were written by the King, to the
Earl of Ormond, who is now Governor there; in some of them Letters, the King
gives way to the suspending of Poynings Law, which was an Act of Parliament, in
the tenth year of Henry the seventh. It was called Poynings Law, because Sir
Edward Poynings was Governor of Ireland, when that Law was made. That Law, made
all Statutes, that were before made in England, of force in Ireland; and the
King may as well suspend all the Laws there as that Law. By that Law of
Poynings, all Laws that were after to be presented at the Parliament in
Ireland, must be first sent hither for approbation, before they could be
presented to the Parliament there; and no Parliament must be called there,
before the causes of calling the Parliament, and the Acts to be passed in that
Parliament, are first sent hither and approved. But that Law now, must be
suspended.

Further in the Letters to the Lord of Ormond, you see the King does not count
it a hard Bargain; for to make a Law in Ireland, to suspend, or to take away
the Penal Laws, against Papists there, so that they will help Him here
against His Protestant Subjects. When this promise was made, the Declaration
was not remembered, wherein the King does declare, that upon no pretense
whatsoever, he will Tolerate the Popish profession in Ireland, or Abolish the
Laws against Popish Recusants, now in force there. He farther says in another
Letter to my Lord of Ormond, that rather then He will fail of making a Peace
or a Cessation with the Rebels, He would have him engage himself to join
with the Rebels against the Scots, and the Lord Jnchequin, which is the maine
visible Protestant Forces that are in Ireland: all this is enjoined to be kept
secret, from all but two or three of the chiefest Rebels in Ireland, whom you
heard named in the Letters. You may farther observe, that a Peace was Treated
of with the Rebels, about the same time, that the King did Treat with the
Parliament here concerning Ireland; and the King wished a quick dispatch of the
Peace there, least if He should make a Peace here first, He could not show such
Favor to the Irish, as He intended: They are the words of His Letter. You may
see by all the Letters to my Lord of Ormond, that the King did little stick at
any thing, to grant to the Rebels for a Peace with them; but how little He
granted to the Parliament of England at the last Treaty, I hope all the World
will soon know.

Animadversions.
Here are two principal things offered by way of proof, out of the Kings own
Papers concerning the Transaction of Affairs in Ireland, to convince the King
of Falsehood, and breach of Faith, in two former Professions. The first is,
where he promises my Lord of Ormond, that He will suspend Poynings Law, which
they say, crosses and contradicts his Solemn Protestation of maintaining the
Laws, against what opposition soever, though, with the hazard of his being.
And the second is, that he proposes unto him. The taking away of all Penal
Laws made against Recusants in Ireland: which, they say, is poynt-blanke
against his own Declaration, which he Printed, when he had a resolution to go
over into Ireland, wherein he does assure all his Subjects, That He will never
Consent, upon what pretense soever, to a Toleration of the Popish Profession
there, or the Abolition of the Laws now in force, against Popish Recusants in
that Kingdom.

And truly, the maine Engine of their detraction and Calumny, moves upon these
two Hinges; These two particular Impeachments, help and further all the rest,
to the Reputation of Crimes: as, one or two good pieces of Wine, they say, will
put off a whole range in the Merchants Sellar, at the same rate and value, with
themselves. Concerning the suspension of Poynings Law; I must needs say, that,
if it were True, that is, True, in that latitude of understanding, and vast
Comprehension of Sense, which the Rebels, would have the simple People swallow;
The King were to be condemned indeed: not only, as a man false to his
Conditions, but as a King false unto his Crown: For, amongst all those
Flowers, that at several times have been transplanted out of other Soyles into
the English Crown, there is scarce any one, that illustrates the beauty of her
Majesty, with more vigorous and fresher Colors, then this very Law. Because,
that by this, and by no one thing so much as This, is the Subordination and
Dependence, which Ireland has upon this Kingdom established, and the blush of
her first Conquest, revived.

For first, This Law, transported whole Colonies of other Laws: So that, all
the Statutes, which, were then made in England, like Trees with their ground
about the roots, were removed into that Kingdom, where they prospered and
thrived, though in another air, as if, there, they had been first set, and
planted. And the King were much too blame, indeed, if he thought of suspending
this part of that Law: For, this were even to lay the reins upon the Horses
neck, for fear least he should slip the bit out of his mouth; This were, to
set open the Prison door, for fear the Prisoner should make some escape out at
a window: This were, to break that whole Chain of dependence, which unites
that Kingdom in her subordination to this, to prevent some men, from loosning
of a link. Secondly, By this Law, there could no Law, be presented to the
Parliament in Ireland, to be confirmed and ratified as a Law: unless it were
first sent hither into England, for the Kings Approbation, before ever it was
proposed; And this part of that Law, was not intended, so much, for an
Abasement of the Subjects Liberty, as for an Allay, unto the Superiour's Power:
to put the Deputies in mind, still, that their Authority was not Absolute. And
truly, if the King had promised to suspend this part of that Law, (although it
was somewhat unlikely, that those of Ireland, would put any thing, which
concerned the Superiors Advantage, into the Subjects Scale) The King had not
done well; for, as in making the picture of a Crown, there is more Art use to
paint it in Colors, so that it shall look like Gold, then to paint it, in pure
Gold, indeed: So, in making Lievtenants which are but Counterfeits of Kings;
there is more Policy, to embellish them with the shadows and semblances of
Royalty, then with the Real species.

But, the King promises neither this, nor that; as the words of Letter. XVI.
his Letter plainly do declare; and the truth of the whole matter, is but
briefly this. A Peace in Ireland, was now in agitation, when the King wrote
these Letters to my Lord of Ormond: and the necessities of the Kings Affairs,
called for all quick dispatch therein; That dispatch, the King apprehended, as
it was indeed, altogether Impossible: if every particular Bill, upon every
particular emergent occasion, which might facilitate and expedite that work,
must first be sent hither, and then sent back again, with the King's
Approbation to it, before ever it could pass in Parliament, (as the letter of
that Law requires) the passage being so obstructed as it was; and the ways so
dangerous. And therefore the King, in favor of those affairs, the quick
transaction whereof, so nearly concerned the good of both his Kingdoms,
promised my Lord Ormond, to take no advantage against him, by Poynings Law, if
he passed such Bills, as might promote this business, without sending them
over unto him: provided, he passed nothing that might be prejudicial to the
safety of His Protestant Subjects, and the preservation of His own Royal
Authority; And, this particular suspension, of this particular Branch, of
Poynings Law, limited to this particular Time, and to be no farther extended;
do the Rebels aggravate and heighten to a Suspension of all Poynings his Law:
yea, and of all the Laws, that were ever there made besides; as if the King
purposed, to destroy them all, at one blow, and without any more ado: without
any the least regard had to His Solemn Declaration, and Promise, for the
maintaining thereof.

But, is this a Crossing and Contradicting of the Kings own words in his
Declaration, where he promises to maintain the Laws against what opposition
soever, though with the hazard of his being? I cannot think it. For, I ask but
this; Of what kind of Laws, will a reasonable man conceive, that His Majesty
there speaks? questionless, not of those, which concern His own Royal
State, Person, or Dignity, (notwithstanding, those are as true and as necessary
Laws, as any other) because, it is not imaginable, that the People should
suspect, that He would not maintain them: But, of those Laws which concern
the Subjects Interest, Right, and Property; as being most liable to their
suspicion, that the King, by His Prerogative, or by some violent and unnatural
Course or other, might entrench too much upon them. Now, what color of
Contradiction, or Falsehood, is there in this Inference; The King, by a second
Promise, undertaketh to dispense with a rigorous circumstance of one Law, which
only diminishes and minorates a little, the Grandour and Honor of his own
Royal Person, and Dignity; therefore the King breaks his first Promise, of
maintaining the Laws against what opposition soever, which only concern His
Subjects Interest, their Liberties, and their Property. There is nothing
plainer, then that both these promises, may well consist together, without
clashing. But, if the Lion say, that the Foxes ears, are horns; The Fox has
more wit then to gainesay it: And, if the Rebels at Westminster, say, that the
sign of St Laurences paralelled gridiron, is the sign of St Peter's Cross
Keys, the Citizens of London, have so little wit, as not to disbeleive it. But
any man of common sense, may now easily distinguish between the Pastboard, and
the Vizard, and make him mirth with that, in his own hands, which affrighted
him, but a little before, upon another Face.

In that other Impeachment of Abolishing the Laws made against Recusants in
Ireland, notwithstanding His former Professions, that He would never do it; I
confess, there is something which has the color and complexion of a Crime,
at the first blush, and at a distance; and therefore, I shall desire leave, to
come a little nearer to it, and to look better upon it, in the disquisition of
these ensuing particulars and pieces; which certainly, cannot but discover it,
if there be any thing, truly Criminal, within it. First, we will consider,
whether the Abolition of these Laws made against Recusants, be in it self, a
thing that is unjust; Secondly, we shall consider, how far, it may become so,
by the Kings Promise and Protestation to the contrary; And lastly, we shall
consider, how far that Promise does bind and tie up all other contrary
Promises, which may be made upon contrary reasons and enducements, for fear,
either of Contradiction, or Injustice.

And first, it is out of question, that all Penal Laws, are but Obligations
of some persons to some punishments, with relation to some Actions or
Omissions, which, either have in themselves an intrinsecall pravity, by reason
of the immutable nature of the thing; or else, an extrinsecall obliquity, by
reason of some contrary Command. Now, if Refusal of Communion with the Church
of England, should be confessed an Omission of the former sort, that is, an
Omission, which in the very nature of the Thing, were intrinsecally vicious or
evil (and such an Omission it may be, to refuse to worship God; but, to refuse
to worship him, after this, or that manner, will hardly rise unto it.) yet
would it not straight way follow, That because it is Just, that offenders in
that kind, should be punished, therefore the Supreme Magistrate is unjust; that
inflicts no punishment upon them. Because, we are to know, that Injustice, does
not always follow upon the not doing, of what is Just. For, as it does not
follow, that, because a Prince is liberal, if he give a Pension of a thousand
pounds per annum, to one, that is a well deserving Servant, at his hands;
Therefore, he is sordid and illiberall, if he give him not a penny; So, neither
is it perpetually true, That, that thing, which is very Justly done, cannot be,
but uniustly, let alone; as we see, in the case of Blasphemy: which the King
might justly punish with death, if he should make a Law against it; as the
people of Israel did: and yet, we do not say, He is unjust, because He does
not do it.

But, if Refusal of Communion with the Church of England, prove but an
Omission of the second sort, that is, an Omission of a thing, which has
nothing of Evil in it, further then External denomination, as being the
Result of some positive Law or other, that does command it; Then, certainly,
the same power that enacted, may abolish it: Perpetuity, not being any whit
essential to any positive Law, to continue it unto the end; but Power, that it
may be severely kept, and may reach those Eudes, for which it is continued. And
therefore, the very Philosophers, by the light of reason could observe, that
nothing Sopat. Epist. ad Demet.
was more easily dispensable, then Penal Laws; It being the privilege of all
Authority, whether Divine, Civil, Paternall, or Despoticall, upon emergent
occasions, in things which are Indifferent, to make Laws, and so by
consequent, sins: without adding the least entity to the things themselves,
which continue still the same, whether they be commanded one while, or, another
while, forbidden. And, that Communion with the Church of England, in the manner
of Gods worship, is but a Thing, in its own Nature, and before the Law
commanding it, Indifferent; will easily be made appear, by this: that, as some
Persons are punishable by Law, that do refuse it (as, in our present case, of
such men who are Recusants:) So, are other persons punishable by Law, that use
it; (as, in the case of persons excommunicate;) which could never certainly be
done, if the Thing it self, were in its own nature, Evil. For, the State
might as well command a man, to forswear himself three or four days
together, or to commit Adultery, three or four nights together, by way of
punishment, for some preceding Sin; as, to command him, not to Communicate
with the Church of England, in her public worship, if this not communicating,
had that Intrinsecall pravity, rooted in the very nature of the Thing, which,
that Forswearing, and committing of Adultery, are acknowledged to have in them.

But those Laws, which in themselves are mutable, and subject to abolition,
without the least Injustice, (whether we speak of that which is unjust in
nature, or of that, which is in Law) may notwithstanding become Immutable,
these two several ways, either by Oath or Promise. For every Oath, is a sign
of Immutability brought upon that thing to which an Oath is added: The Apostle
is plain for it, who tells us, that God willing to show the Immutability of
his Council (in the 6. Heb. 17.) confirmed it by an Oath; That, by two
Immutable things, etc. And a promise, does give such a right and interest to
the Party promised, that, without Injustice, it can not be taken from him. Now,
because, although it be in the free Power of the Magistrate to make such a
Promise, yet, it is not in his Power to break that, which He has freely made;
therefore, we reckon, that a promise not to abrogate a Law, does add and
imprint an Immutability, in that very Law; and superinduces a legal
Impossibility upon it, ever to be abrogated, or changed. In the second place
therefore, let us see, what that Promise and Profession was, which the King did
make, against this Abolition; and how far, the said Abolition becomes unjust,
by virtue of that Promise.

When the Rebellion first brake out in Ireland; and those several expedients,
which were suggested by the Parliament of England for the suppression thereof,
proved not so dextrous, and happy when they came to Action, as they seemed,
when they were but in Design: The Kings Majesty, to the perpetual honor of
His Innocence, who was as^ersed, as having some kind of secret Influence upon
the Revolt of that whole Kingdom, made this offer to His two Houses, that He
would expose himself to the danger of an expedition thither, in his own sacred
Person, if they would think it fit, and make a Trial, if He could reduce it.
And, because the guiltiness of their own intentions, prompted them to a base
suspicion of His; as if He might use some means of Reduction, more
prejudicial to the Crown, then the Revolt; by, permitting a toleration of the
Roman Profession, to the Catholic party there; (who notwithstanding, had been
used to a gentle connivence from the supreme Magistrate in the point of
Conscience, ever since the first Reformation of this Church:) His Majesty, for
the clear satisfaction of His two Houses, and of all His Subjects, in their
unworthy misinterpretations, and murmures; and, for the justification of the
Piety, and Honor of His Resolutions and designs in this present expedition,
and adventure; Opens Himself in a Declaration to all the World; and amongst
other particular expressions of a sincere Heart, and cordial affection to Gods
cause, and His Own: He gives them this Assurance, that, if He does go over in
Person, as He does intend; He will never consent, upon what pretense soever, to
a Toleration of the Popish Profession there; or, the Abolition of the Laws now
in force against Popish Recusants, in that Kingdom. Insomuch, that Mr Brown
does well, to rejoyne unto those words of the Kings Declaration, these of his,
What could His Majesty have said more to satisfy His people? For, by this
promise of not abolishing those Laws, he has invested his People, with such a
Right in those Laws; that, he cannot easily, nay, he cannot without Injury,
ever take it from them; unless they themselves, will. And there is no question
in the World, but if the King had, at that time gone over into Ireland, and had
assented either to a Toleration of the Catholic Religion; or, had given way
to the Abolition of those Laws then in force against Recusants, upon any
Terms whatsoever, which the wit of man could imagine be most Honorable, or
Advantageous, either to him or to his Kingdom; he had done, not only that
which is unjust, but that which is impossible (as the Lawyers use to speak)
because, eadem est impossibilitas Juris and Naturae: F. Con^^us.
That which is impossible by Law, is as far from being done, that is, Lawfully
done; as that which is impossible, by Nature; For, standing the condition of
this promise, which is the substance of it, and standing the circumstances of
Times, Persons, Places, and such like, which are subservient unto it; The King
could never do it. And therefore in the third place, it is high time we should
look, whether this Promise of not abolishing those Laws now to them, do not
bind, and tie up that other Promise to abolish them, which he since made unto
my Lord of Ormond; as being impossible to be performed by him, without
contradiction, and the breach of his former Promise; which is as impossible to
Justice.

Now, that the influence of this first promise, upon the second promise is not
such; as renders that second promise, either impossible, or, which is as bad,
unjust, it may be these two several ways demonstrated. First, by way of
Annihilation and voiding of the first promise; and secondly, by Application of
that first promise made in General, to such several particulars, which could
never reasonably be presumed to be comprehended and contained, therein.
Concerning the first of these: the Civilians tell us, that there are two ways
how a man may H. Grotius.
not keep his promise; and yet, not be unjust; The one is, by defect of a
Condition, without which, the party promising contracts no obligation, and
hither also, they refer that case; If the other party, first, do not keep
his word; For, the several branches of one and the same Contract, in the
several parties, are but by the way of a Condition; as if it had been formally
thus expressed; This I promise to do, if he will do that. And so, this
Promise of the Kings, that he never would consent to the Abolition of the Laws
made in Ireland against Recusants, either it had no Condition at all, (and then
the King contracts no obligation thereby; nor, is bound to keep it) or, it was
made on this Condition, that His two Houses, would first consent, to this His
present Expedition for Ireland, and put the Mannaging and Trust of those
affairs, into His hands: In which Condition, they breaking first, on their
parts, have left Him unobliged on His. The other way is, by compensation; and
then, they tell us, that, that which we have promised, we may Lawfully not
perform, and yet, not be reckoned unjust: when that which we promise, and
perform not, is but of equal worth, if put into the Scales, with some other
thing of Ours, which unjustly is detained from us, and restored not. And so, if
the King should break this one promise, which he made to them, yet were he not
unjust; because he would still be behind hand with them, for those iterated
promises, and repeated Oaths, of Fidelity and Obedience, of Subjection, and
Allegiance, which they have made, and made again, to Him, and yet have broke
them All.

The second way, to demonstrate, that there is no Injustice, or Contradiction
in these two promises; is, by Application of that first promise made in
general, to such several particulars, which could never reasonably be
presumed, to be comprehended and contained therein, when the promise was made.
And to this purpose, observeable is that maxim in the Civil Law: Promissio
Generalis non trahitur ad ea, ad quae verisimiliter promittens, L. obligatione.
ff. de pign. Capit.
si in specie interrogatus fuisset, minime se obligasset, that is to say; No
General promise, is to be drawn and extended unto those things, to which, the
party promising, in all likelihood, if He had been then questioned in
particular concerning them, would never have been obliged; and we apply it
thus, The King, having a desire to pass over into Ireland, and to suppress
the Rebellion there, while it was young; and being willing also, to satisfy
both His Houses, that, in the pursuance thereof, He would use no dishonorable
and unworthy means, makes this solemn Profession, that however the Rebels in
Ireland might pretend, that they rose only for Religion, and that, if they
might be but permitted their Liberty of Conscience, they would all be quiet;
yet, He would never consent, upon what pretense soever, to a Toleration of the
Popish profession there; or, the Abolishing of the Laws now in force against
Popish Recusants in that Kingdom. This is the General Promise; and to many
particulars, it may be drawn and applied: and to many; it may not. To those
only particulars, says the Law, may it be drawn; to which the King, if He
had been interrogated particularly concerning them, would, in all probability
have obliged himself, when He made that Promise: as for example. When the King
made this general Promise, that He would never consent to abrogate those
Laws; If the Lords and Commons, had come to these particulars and said; Your
Majesty promises never to Consent to the Abolition of the Laws against
Recusants, upon any pretense whatsoever; but, will you not consent to abolish
them, if you think, you have good Reason? Your Majesty promises never to
Consent to it, while you are Here; But, will you remember to perform that
promise, when you come There? Your Majesty promises never to give Consent, that
is, to do it, Willingly; But, will you not suffer your self, so to come
within the Rebels power, that you must be forced to do, out of Necessity? To
these particulars, and many more like these, because it is very probable, the
King would have obliged Himself, (knowing the clean Intentions of His Heart)
when He made this general Promise; Therefore, this general Promise, (says
the Law) reaches those Particulars, and is applyable to them. But then, if the
Lords and Commons, hearing this general Promise of the Kings, that, upon no
pretense whatsoever, He would abolish those Laws, had come to these
particulars, and said; Your Majesty promises never to Consent to an Abolition
of those Penal Laws, because, you are confident, we will assist you, in
reducing those Irish Rebels by Force, if Fair means, will not do; But, if we
should Rebel against you, as well, as They; will you be obliged by this
Promise, then? If we should drive you to those streights, that, unless the
Catholics of Ireland help you, the Schismatics and Brownists of England,
will dispoyle you of your Revenues, and your Royalties: will take away your
Laws, nay, would take away your Life? will you be obliged, by this Promise,
then? To these particulars, and others, like to these, because it is more then
probable, the King would never have obliged Himself, being interrogated
concerning them, when He made this general Promise, of not Abolishing those
Laws; Therefore, that general Promise of His extends not, nor is appliable,
says the Law, to these Particulars.

And so, by Consequence, the King promising to Abolish those Laws, upon such
enforcements, and such reasons, as He would never have promised, Not to Abolish
them; if He had been moved particularly thereunto; Does nothing by this second,
that either is unjust, or contradicts, that His first Promise. So that when the
King made this Promise, the King did remember (though Mr Brown is pleased to
think, that He did not) that Declaration, wherein He does declare, that He
will not abolish the Laws made against Recusants; but the King does not
remember any thing in that Declaration, that ties Him, why He may not make it;
and, although many simple Citizens are men of so well-affected Ignorance, that
they cannot see this; yet, I hope, there may be some, who may lie under the
suspicion of having some common-Sence; and, I am sure, They cannot, but
discern it.

Mr Brown.
The next are, the Queens letters to the King; in them, you may see her
unwearied endeavors by Sea and Land to raise Forces against the Parliament to
destroy it. You see, She marches in the Head of an Army, and calls Her self
the Generalissima. You may see farther in her letters, the great Interest She
has in the Kings Counsels. No Office, or Place, can be disposed of without
her. You may see her letters, her advice concerning Peace. In making Peace, She
advises the King not to abandon those that have served Him, for fear they
forsake Him in his need: She expresses whom She means; the Bishops, and the
poor Catholics. She advises the King, for the honor of God, that He trust
not himself in our hands. If He go to London, before the Parliament is ended,
She tells Him, He is undone. You may see, by her Letters, how active She is
with the Duke of Lorraine, for sending over 10000 men. You may see her Advice
concerning this Parliament; She says, That perpetual Parliament must be
disbanded; The rest She says, will follow: if the King conclude a Peace
without that, She will into France, She says. I am sure, you cannot forget
these passages.

Animadversions.
Having been somewhat over long in these Animadversions, which past upon the
Section going before: I am afraid, I shall do by these Animadversions upon
this which is next unto it, as the Fellow did, by his Character and Description
of the great Church, which he reported to be two miles at least in length, and
when he perceived the company were not very forward to believe it; he vowed,
that notwithstanding all that, it was not above two Inches in breadth, and so
thought that he had well mended his Matter. For, all that I shall say, will be
nothing but this: Here is much of Care, in a Pious and most Exemplary Queen;
here is nothing of Crime; And He that will think the worse of Good Council,
because his Wife does give it; Let some other man think better of his Wife then
He does: and let Him not believe it.

Mr Brown.
In the King's Letters to the Queen, you may observe these following
particulars.

First His Apology to Her, for calling us a Parliament, at the last Treaty. It
seems she was offended at it, and you may see by his letters, with what
difficulty he did it; For he says, that if but two more had joined with him in
opinion to the contrary, he would never have done it, yet he has told us; He
will keep all the Acts of this Parliament inviolable. How those can stand
together, let all men Judge. He has told us, that he will maintain the Laws,
and observe them himself; yet you may see, he lays that blood of the Kingdom
which is shed in these Wars upon the shedding of the Innocent blood, as he
calls it, of my Lord Strafford. Yet my Lord of Strafford was condemned by
himself, and by the Law, that he says he will maintain.

Animadversions.
The King is here charged with a brace of Contradictions; May he never receive
more hurt from any other Bullet. The first is, that he makes an Apology to the
Queen for calling the Rebels at Westminster, a Parliament; and yet he
professes, he will keep inviolable all the Acts of this Parliament; This is one
horrible Contradiction, and all men are called in to Judge, how these two can
stand together. The second is, That the King tells them He will maintain the
Laws and observe them, and yet he calls the blood of my Lord Strafford, [the
innocent blood of my Lord Strafford] which was shed by the Law, which he says,
he will maintain; This is another. For the first of these: The King may keep
inviolable all Acts that have bin made this Parliament; that is, all Acts which
have passed Both Houses, and had his own Consent, while He was joined with
them; For then they were a Parliament, and a perfect Body: and yet the King,
may not account that excrementitious Part of that Body, which now remains at
Westminster, to be a Parliament; because they possess the place of the
Parliament, no more then a man sworn a Squire of the Body to some Prince, and
doing the Person of that Prince all Service, can think himself bound to give
Reverence to his Close-stoole, if it should, by chance, be brought and set
down, in the Presence.

And then, for that other charge, about my Lord of Strafford; First, what a
simple Inference is this: The King thinks my Lord of Strafford dyed Innocent,
who was condemned by Law; Therefore the King does not maintain the Law?
Certainly, many poor men, in a year, through the malice or ignorance, through
the presumptions, or perjuries, of those that bring in Evidence against them,
have bin, and may be thought Innocently condemned, as guilty persons of that
fact, which they never did, and yet those men that think so, may not, nay do
not, think the Law nocent, which condemns them, or hold it no longer fitting
for to be maintained. In the second place, what ever that Law was, whereby my
Lord of Strafford was condemned, all the world knows, they themselves have
taken order, that the proceeding against my Lord of Strafford, by that Law,
should not be drawn to President for after times: And yet these men charge the
King for not maintayning that Law, which they themselves are ashamed of, and
will not stand by.

Mr Brown.
You see, how pressing He is to the Queen, to procure aid from the Duke of
Lorraine: upon hopes of his coming He is very glad, and says; the Prince of
Orange shall help to transport His Soldiers. Compare this with his former
Declarations concerning Foreign Forces. It needs no Aggravation. We have all
of us, more Cause to pray for Him.

For his maintaining the Laws, you may observe in a Letter dated in March
last, to the Queen, there is this passage.

I give Thee leave to promise in my Name, to all that thou think fit, that I
will take away all the Penal Laws against the Roman Catholics in England,
as soon, as God shall enable me to do it, so as I may by their means have
such assistance, as may deserve so great a favor, and enable me to do it.

To this promise of His, He enjoynes much secrecy, which He has need to do,
being so contrary to former Declarations, and Protestations. If this be done,
He may as well alter and take away all our Laws, both for property and
liberty. These Laws against Papists, are of as much force, and bind as much as
any Laws whatsoever. Upon all these Letters and Passages together, you may
observe the great Design to put an end to this Parliament, although it cannot
be done without the Consent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, and the
Kings joining with them.

You see another Design is, to take away all Laws against Recusants, and that
must be, when the King is able to do it, as He says, and that cannot be,
without Force. You see, to enable himself to do these things, He invites in
Foreign Forces: You see He deals with Papists and Protestants, and all to
assist Him, against the Parliament. You see by those letters, what Privileges
and Immunities are promised to Papists, and nothing at all to His Protestant
Subjects; You see, the great Trust Hereposeth in the Queen, to make a bargain
for Him; although it concern Religion, which is the strongest point of
Confidence, He can express to her. I need not repeat the words.

Animadversions.
All this upon the matter, is nothing but some of Mr Lisles cold meat, newly
minc't: and the whole face of this part of the discourse, is but dressed up, like
Mr Sheriffs door; somewhat perchance added of Paint, but, still the same Post.
All that has not been said and answered before, is this; That the King
reposeth such trust in the Queen, as to make a Bargain for him, though it
concern Religion; which is the strongest point of confidence He can express
unto Her. And to this Mr Brown, in a negligent and loose manner, adds, I need
not repeat his words. But, is the matter worth the seeing, and are the words
not worth the saying? pray let us hear you repeat them. Your Citizens are
used to repetitions; and will like it well enough, unless, you think to put
them off (as they do Beggars) with saying, It was the last thing you did; for
I am sure, in all this Section, you have done nothing else, but repeated, what
Mr Lisle has said before you. Well, if you will not repeat them, I will repeat
them for you. For, I will not have my Countrymen of London, cousened in their
measure. You shall not think, to serve them, with a bare yard, and then, save
the thumb. The whole period of the Kings Letter, is this: I need not tell thee
what secrecy this business requires; yet this I will say, that this is the
greatest point of confidence I can express to thee; For, it is no thanks to
me, to trust thee in any thing else, but in this, which is the only thing of
difference in opinion betwixt us. And can a cleerer testimony be given, of the
Kings uprightness in the point of His Religion? If men would not tread inward
with their faith, and believe nothing but what makes for their own ends and
advantages, the Industry and Art of Innocence, could not invent a clearer Light
to shine by. For, here is Fire without Smoke: here is Truth, without
modifications and disguises. Here is nothing of design, like that profession
the King makes in His often Declarations, (which the jealous world is tender of
believing, for fear of being cousened) but here is a downeright profession, of
differing in Religion with Her, who, with all Her heart (I dare say) could
wish, the King would have deceived Her. And therefore, as some Heretics, are
said to worship Judas, not because he betrayed his Lord and Master, but,
because of that inestimable benefit which accrewed to mankind by means of his
betraying, which otherwise could never have befallen it: So, will some men, who
doubted here to fore, of the Kings Innocence in His public Declarations, have
reason to forgive this Rape upon His private Letters, for the very Religion of
this Evidence and Satisfaction, which otherwise, could never have so clearly
been transmitted, and derived unto them.

And thus, have you seen the bottom of that Heart, which the Scripture calls
unsearcheable. The Cabinet has imparted Prove. 25. 2.
to you, so perfect an Image of the Kings very Thoughts; that the Rack could
not afford a clearer. The Rebels have often promised to make him a Great King;
and now, (as the High Priest, when he prophesied) they have made him so indeed,
when they never meant it; In stead of His Three Kingdoms, they have endowed
him with Four several Empires; For so long as Kings or Christians, so long as
Husbands or Men, shall live upon this habitable earth; they will all submit to
the Scepter of His Pen, and confess themselves subdued, in their chiefest
Graces and Glories.

As a Man, see, but with what Sagacity He writes, and with what Judgment; See,
but what a clean sense he has of things; which does so overlooke all his most
perplexed Affairs, that they seem to blush, they have no better Difficulties.
See, but how far his Wisdom looks into men's Persons; which does so weigh
them and their Actions, with the grains and allowance of their unworthy,
servile ends; that He seems not more to observe, then Prophecy. See, but what
an even spirit of Elegancy runs through every line; which bears and leaps,
as much, in the description of His saddest condition, as of his serenest
Fortune; in so much, that, posterity will a little, love His Misery, for her
very clothing.

Then, as a Husband, do but observe, how kind He is, and yet withal, how
Chaste? How full of warm expressions of Love, and yet how far from Wanton?
Do but observe, how He weighes his own Health, by His Wives Standard; Every
line bears a Venus in it, and yet, bears no Doves; And He drives the Trade of
Thoughts, between the Queen and Him, with so much eagerness, and yet, with so
much Innocence in all His Letters, as if He meant, they should be intercepted.

As a Christian, see, but what a Conscience He makes of Oaths; esteeming them,
not (according to the Popular account) as if their Ceremony, made them the
less Sacred. Or, as too many men use them in the World, as bracelets to their
Speech, not (as they are indeed) as chains unto their Soul; look but how He
startles at the name of Sacrilege; though never so commodious a sin; Do but
observe, notwithstanding all his succors from the Queen, on whom His patient
eyes do wait for better Help; how he throws himself upon the Providence of
God; how he rolls, and gathers upon his justice, in a confidence, that, as
their mutual interest in innocent Blood, has hither to poys'd the balance,
between both sides: So now, the Rebels overflowing guilt and wickedness, will
at last, turn the Scales. And then, do but observe His Constancy to the
Protestant Religion; which is the greatest difference, between His Queen and
Him; and yet such a difference too, that diversa virtus parem laudem consecuta
est, (as the Orator speaks of Thucydides and Herodotus in his Institutions;) He
is as much to be admired, for his Difference, as for his Love.

Last of all, as a King, see, but what a constant and True soul He bears to
Justice; which none of His sad infelicities, can alter. A Soul, that would
come off True, were it put to Plato's trial; who says, that, for a man to
approve himself a True Just Plato.
man indeed; His virtue must be spoiled of all her ornaments; He must be
thought a vicious man, though, he be never so virtuous: He must be reekon'd a
False man of his word, though he be never so True; He must be mocked, scorned,
and derided, as though he were a Fool, be he never so Wise; nay says that
Philosopher ( I had almost said, that Father) He must give up his Life, into
the power of those that seek it, laetius esse honestum putans, quoties magno
sibi constat; esteeming it the greatest pleasure of Honesty, to be gotten at
the dearest purchase. How many of these Trials has the King endured, and yet,
has never shrinkt? How has his happy Government been traduced, and his own
sacred Person, exposed? How has his Affection been abused, and his Judgment
scorned? how often has he been reputed for a weak man? nay, how often for a
Wicked? how often has he been esteemed a Fickle man, nay, how often a False? and
yet, our of all these His Letters, (which are the very Thoughts of the Kings
heart, but once remoov'd; and, where all the scapes of Nature, or Breeding,
were most like to harbor:) cannot their acute malice, impute or fasten, any
one thing upon him, which is inconsistent, either with the principles of
Prudence, Justice, Conscience, or Honor. Insomuch, that, notwithstanding it be
very probable, that the Publication of these Papers, is conceived by some
slight men at this present, as an attestation of the perfect glories of their
Conquest; and to show the world, how near they came, even to the very Person
of the King: yet, it is altogether as probable, that, to men of the next sad,
and wiser age, this very Triumph, will confute the Victory; whilst,
attributing that just veneration, which is due from all clean eyes, to the
Magistery of that Religion, Elegancy, Judgment, Wit, and Honesty, which rules
in this hasty composition and sudden style; They will never gain this Power
over their belief, or so far subdue their understanding, as to think, either
that so decryed a King, as He has been, could Pen such Papers, or, that such
wise Rebels, as they would feign be thought, could Print them.

FINIS.

