THE SILENT SOUL, WITH, SOVEREIGN ANTIDOTES Against the Most Miserable
Exigents: OR, A Christian with an OLIVE-LEAF in his mouth, when he is under the
greatest afflictions, the sharpest and sorest trials and troubles, the saddest
and darkest providence and changes, with Answers to diverse Questions and
Objections that are of greatest importance, all tending to win and work souls
to be still, quiet, calm and silent under all changes that have, or may pass
upon them in this world, etc.

By Thomas Brooks Preacher of the Word at Margarets New Fish-street London, and
Pastor of the Church of Christ meeting there.

The Lord is in his holy Temple: let all the earth keep silence before him.
Hab. 2. 20.

London, Printed by R. I. for John Hancock, to be sold at the first shop in
Popes-head-Alley next to Cornhill. 1660.

Mr. BROOKS his MVTE CHRISTIAN.

TO All afflicted, distressed, dissatisfied, disquieted, and discomposed
Christians throughout the world.
Dear hearts,
THe choicest Saints are born to troubles, as the Psalm. 34. 19 Job 5. 1 Psa.
88. 3, 4 Qui non est crucianus, non est Christianus. Luther.
sparks fly upwards. Many are the troubles of the Righteous; if they were many,
and not troubles, (then as it is in the Proverb) the more the merrier; or if
they were troubles, and not many, then the fewer the better cheer; but God who
is infinite in wisdom, and matchless in goodness, has ordered troubles, yea
many troubles to come trooping in upon us on every side. As our mercies, so our
crosses seldom come single, they usually come treading one upon the heels of
another; they are like April showers, no sooner is one over, but another comes.
And yet Christians, it is mercy, it is rich mercy, that every affliction is not
an execution, that every correction is not a damnation. The higher the waters
rise, the nearer Noah's Ark was lifted up to Heaven; the more thy afflictions
are increased, the more thy heart shall be raised Heaven-wards.

Because I would not hold you too long in the porch, I shall only endeavor
two things; First, To give you the reasons of my appearing once more in Print;
and Secondly, A little counsel and direction, that the following Tract may turn
to your souls advantage, which is the white that I have in mine eye. The true
reasons of my sending this piece into the world (such as it is) are th^se,

First, The afflicting hand of God has been hard upon my self, and upon my
dearest relations in this world, and upon many of my precious Christian
friends, whom I much love and honor in the Lord* which put me upon studying
of the mind of God in that Scripture, that I have made the subject matter of
this following discourse. Luther could not understand some Psalms, till he was
afflicted, the Christ-cross is no letter in the book, and yet says he* it
has taught me more than all the letters in the book, afflictions are a golden
key, by which the Lord opens the rich treasures of his word to his peoples
souls; and this in some measure through grace Judge. 14. 9, 10.
my soul has experienced; when Sampson had found honey, he gave some to his
Father and Mother to eat; some honey I have found in my following Text, and
therefore I may not, I cannot be such a churl, as not to give them some of my
honey to taste, who have drunk deep of my gall and wormwood. Some have
accounted nothing their own that they have not communicated to others.
Austin observes on that, Psalm. 66. 16. Come and hear all ye that fear God,
and I will declare what he has done for my soul. He does not call them
(says he) to acquaint them with speculations, how wide the earth is, how far
the Heavens are stretched out, what the number of the stars is, or what is the
course of the Sun; but come, and I will tell you the wonders of his grace, the
faithfulness of his promises, the riches of his mercy to my soul; gracious
experiences are to be communicated; Lilmod Lelammed, we therefore learn, that
we may teach, is a proverb among the Rabbis; And I do therefore lay in and
lay up, says the Heathen, that I may draw forth again, and lay out for the
good of many; when God has dealt bountifully with us, others should reap some
noble good by us; the Family, the Town, the City, the Country, where a man
lives, should fare the better for his faring well; our mercies and experiences
should be as a running spring at our doors, which is not only for our own
use, but also for our neighbors, yea and for strangers too.

Secondly, What is written is permanent, litera scripta manet, and-spreads it
self further by far, for time, place and persons than the voice can reach; the
pen is an artificial tongue, it speaks as well to absent, as to present
friends; it speaks to them that are afar off, as well as those that are near;
it speaks to many thousands at once; it speaks not only to the present age,
but also to succeeding Heb. 11. 4 Zech. 1. 5
ages; the Pen is a kind of Image of eternity, it will make a man live when
he is dead; though the Prophets do not live for ever, yet their labors may; a
man's writings may preach, when he cannot, when he may not, and when by reason
of bodily distempers, he^ dares not; yea and that which is more, when he is
not.

Thirdly, Few men, if any, have Iron memories; how soon is a Sermon preached
forgotten, when a Sermon written remains? Augustine writing to August. Epist. 1.
ad Volus.
Volusian, says, That which is written is always at hand to be read, when
the reader is at leisure; men do not easily forget their own names, nor their
Fathers house, nor the wives of their bosoms, nor the fruit of their loins nor
to eat their daily bread; and yet Ah! how easily do they forget that word of
grace, that should be dearer to them than all? most men's memories, especially
in the great concernments of their souls are like a sieve or bowlter, where the
good Corn, and fine Flower goes through, but the ligh^ chaff and course bran
remains behind; or like a strainer, where the sweet liquor is strained out,
but the dreggs are left behind; or like a grate, that lets the pure water run
away, but if there be any straws, sticks, mud, or filth that it holds, as it
were with Iron hands, most men's memories are very treacherous, especially in
good things; few men's memories are a holy Ark, a heavenly Stare-house, or
Magazine for their souls; and therefore they stand in the more need of a
written word. But

Fourthly, Its marvelous suitableness and usefulness under these great turns
and changes that have past upon us. As every wise husbandman observes the
fittest seasons to sow his seed; some he sows in the Autumn, and fall of the
leaf, some, in the spring Isa. 28. 25
of the year, some in a dry season, and some in a wet, some in a moist clay,
and some in a sandy dry ground: So every spiritual husbandman must observe the
fittest times to sow his spiritual seed in, he has heavenly seed by him for
all occasions and seasons, for spring and fall, for all grounds, heads and
hearts; now whether the seed sown in the following Treatise be not suitable to
the times and seasons wherein we are cast, is left to the judgment of the
prudent Reader to determine; if the Author had thought otherwise, this babe had
been stifled in the womb.

Fifthly, The good acceptance that my other weak labors have found; God has
blessed them, not only to the Romans 15. 21 Phil. 1. 9, 10, 11
conviction, the edification, confirmation, and consolation of many, but also
to the conversion of many. God is a free Agent to work by what hand he
pleases, and sometimes he takes pleasure 1 Cor. 1. 17, -- 29
to do great things by weak means, that no flesh may glory in his presence. God
will not despise the day of small things, and who or what art thou that dare
despise that day? the Spirit breathes upon whose preaching and writing he John
3
pleases, and all prospers according as that wind blows.

Sixthly, That all afflicted and distressed Christians may have a proper salve
for every sore, a proper remedy against every disease at hand* as every good
man* so every good book is not Prove. 25. 11 That remedy is no remedy, that is
not proper to the dis^ase.
fit to be the afflicted man's companion, but this is, here he may see his
face, his head his hand his heart, his way his works; here he may see all his
diseases discovered, and proper remedies proposed and applied; here he may
find Arguments to silence him, and means to quiet him, when it is at worst
with him; in every storm here he may find a tree to shelter him, and in every
danger here he may find a City of Refuge to secure him, and in every
d^fficulty here he may have a light to guide him, and in every peril here he
may find a buckler to defend him, and in every distress here he may find a
cordial to strengthen him, and in every trouble here he may find a staff to
support him.

Seventhly, To satisfy some bosomefriends, some faithful friends; man is made
to be a friend* and apt for friendly offices; he that is not friendly, is not
worthy to have a friend, and he that has a friend, and does ^ot show h^mself
friendly, is not worthy to be accounted a man; friendship is a kind of life,
without which there is no comfort of a man's life. Christian friendship 1 Samuel
22. 1, 2. 3.
ties such a knot, that great Alexander cannot cut: Summer friends I value not,
but winter friends are worth their weight in gold, and wh^ can deny such any
thing, especially in th^se days, wherein real, faithful, constant friends are
so rare to be found? O^ my friends! I have never a friend, said Socrates; a
friend is a very mutable creature, says Plato
The friendship of most men in these days, is like Jonahs Gourd; now very
promising and flourishing, and anon fading and withering; it is like some
plants in the water, which have broad leaves on the surface of the water, but
scarce any root at all; their friendship is like Lemons, cold within, hot
without; their expressions are high, but their affections are low, they speak
much, but do little; as Drumms and Trumpets, and Ensigns in a battle make a
great noise, and a fine show, but act nothing: so these counterfeit friends
will* complement highly, how hansomely, speak plausibly, and promise lustily,
and yet have neither a hand nor a heart to act any thing cordially or
faithfully; from such friends it is a mercy to be delivered: And therefore
King Antigonus was wont to pray to God that he would protect him from his
friends, and when one of his Council asked him why he prayed so, he returned
this answer, every man will shun and defend himself against his professed
enemies, but from our professed or pretended friends, of whom few are faithful,
none can safeguard himself, but has need of protection from Heaven; but for
all this there are some that are real friends, faithful friends, active
friends, winter friends, bosomefriends, fast friends, and for their sakes
(especially those among them) that have been long, very long under the Smarting
Rod, and in the fiery Furnace, and that have been often poured from vessel to
vessel, have I once more appeared in Print to the world.

Eighthly and lastly, There* has not any Authors or Author come to my hand
that has handled this subject, as I have done, and therefore I do not know but
it may be the more grateful and acceptable to the world; 1 These. 1. 7, 8 2
Cor. 8. 10. chapter 9. 1, ^
and if by this assay others that are more able shall be provoked to do more
worthily upon this subject, I shall therein rejoice; I shall only add, that
though much of the following matter was preached upon the Lords visitation of
my dear yoak-fellow, my self, and some other friends, yet there are many things
of special concernment in the following Tract, that yet I have not upon any
accounts communicated to the world. And thus I have given you a true and
faithful account of the reasons that have prevailed with m^e to publish this
Treatise to the wo^ld, and to dedicate it to your selves.

Secondly, The second thing promised was, the giving of you a little good ^
unsel* that you may so read the following discourse, as that it may turn much
to your souls advantage; for, as many fish and catch nothing, so many read Luke
5. 5
good books and get nothing, because they rea^ them over cursorily, slightly,
superficially, but he that would read to profit, must then,

First, Read, and look up for a blessing; Paul may plant, and Apollo may water,
but all will be to no purpose, except the Lord give the increase. God must 1
Cor. 3. 6, 7
do the deed, when all is done, or else all that is done will do you no good;
if you would have this work successeful and effectual, you must look off from
man, and look up to God, who alone can make it a blessing to you. As without a
blessing Micah 6. 14.
from Heaven thy clothes cannot warm thee, nor thy food nourish thee, nor
physic cure thee, nor friends comfort thee: So without a blessing from Hag. 1.
6.
Heaven, without the precious breathings and influences of the Spirit, what
here is done, will do you no good, it will not turn to your account in the day
of Christ; and therefore cast an eye heavenwards. It is Sencca's observation,
that the husbandmen in Egypt never look up to Heaven for Rain, in the time of
drought, but look after the overflowing of the banks of Nilus, as the only
cause of their plenty. Ah! how many are there in these days, who when they go
to read a book, never look up, never look after the Rain of Gods blessing, but
only look to the River Nilus, they only look to the wit, the learning, the
Arts, the parts, the eloquence, etc. of the Author, they never look so high as
Heaven; and hence it comes to pass, that though these read much, yet they
profit little.

Secondly, He that would read to profit, must read and meditate; meditation
Animae viaticum est meditatio. Bern. Lectio sine meditatione arida est,
meditatio sine lectione erronea est, oration sine meditatione livida est. August.
is the food of your souls, it is the very stomach and natural heat whereby
spiritual truths are digested. A man shall as soon live without his heart, as
he shall be able to get good by what he reads, without meditation. Prayer
(says Bernard) without meditation, is dry and formal, and reading without
meditation is useless and unprofitable. He that would be a wise, a prudent,
and an able experienced statesman, must not hastily ramble and run over many
Cities, Countries, Customs, Laws and Manners of People, without serious musing
and pondering upon such things as may make him an expert Statesman: So he
that would get good by reading, that would complete his knowledge, and perfect
his experience in spiritual things, must not slightly and hastily ramble and
run over this book, or that, but ponder upon what he reads; as Mary pondered
the saying of the Angel in her heart. Lord (says Austin) the more I meditate
on thee, the sweeter thou art to me: So the more you shall meditate on the
following matter, the sweeter it will be to you; they usually thrive best, who
meditate most; meditation is a soul-fatning duty, it is a grace-stergthning
duty, it is a duty-crowning duty. Gerson calls meditation the nurse of prayer;
Hier(...) calls it his Paradise Basil calls it the treasury where all the
graces are locked up; Theophylact calls it the very gate and portal by which
we enter n^o glory and Ari^t^^le, though a Heathen places felicity in the
contemplation of the mind; you may read much, and ^ear much, yet without
meditation you will never be excellent, you will never be eminent Christians.

Thirdly, Read and try what thou read, take nothing upon trust, but all upon
trial: As those Noble Bereans 1 John 4. 10 Act. 17. 10, 11.
did. You will try, and tell, and weigh gold, though it be handed to you by
your Fathers; and so should you all those heavenly truths that are handed to
you by your spiritual Fathers. I hope upon trial you will find nothing, but
what will hold weight in the balance of the sanctuary; and though all be not
gold that glisters, yet I judge that you will find nothing here to glister,
that will not be found upon trial to be true gold.

Fourthly, Read and do, read and practice what you read, or else all your
Augustine speaking of the Scripture, says, verba vivenda, non legenda.
reading will do you no good; he that has a good book in his hand, but not a
lesson of it in his heart, or life, is like that Ass that carries rich burdens,
and feeds upon thistles. In divine account a man knows no more than he does;
Profession without practice will but make a man twice told a child of
darkness; to speak well, is to sound like a Cymbal, Isiodorus.
but to do well, is to act like an Angel; he that practices what he reads,
and understands, God will help him to understand, Joh. 7. 16, 17 Psalm. 119. 98,
99, 100
what he understands not; there is no fear of knowing too much, though there is
much fear in practicing too little; the most doing man, shall be the most
knowing man; the mightiest man in practice, will in the end prove the mightiest
man in Scripture. Theory is the guide of practice, and practice is the life of
Theory. Salvian relates, Salvianus de G. D. l. 4.
how the Heathen did reproach some Christians, who by their lewd lives made the
Gosbel of Christ to be a reproach; where (said they) is that good Law which
they do believe? where are those rules of godliness which they do learn? they
read the holy Gospel, and yet are unclean; they hear the Apostles writings, and
yet live in drunkenness; they follow Christ, and yet disobey Christ; they
proprofess a holy Law, and yet do lead impure lives: Ah! how may many Preacher
stake up sad complaints against many Readers in these days? they read our
works, and yet in their lives they deny Seneca had rather be sick, than idle
and do nothing
our works, they praise our works, and yet in their conversations they reproach
our works, they cry up our labors in their discourses, and yet they cry them
down in their practices: Yet I hope better things of you, into whose hands this
Treatise shall fall. The Samaritan woman did not fill her pi^^her with water,
that she might talk Joh. 4. 7. Genesis 30. 15
of it, but that she might use it; and Rachel did not desire the Mandrakes to
hold in her hand, but that she might thereby be the more apt to bring forth.
The Application is easy. But

Fifthly, Read and apply; reading is but the drawing of the bow, application is
the hitting of the white; the choicest truths will no further profit you, than
they are applied by you; you were The plaster will nor heal, if it be not
applied.
as good not to read, as not to apply what you read: No man attains to health
by reading of Galen, or by knowing Hippocrates his Aphorisms, but by the
practical application of them; all the reading in the world will never make for
the health of your souls, except you apply what you read; the true reason why
many read so much, and profit so little, is, because they do not apply and
bring home what they read to their own souls. But

Sixthly and lastly, Read and pray; he that makes not conscience of praying
over what he reads, will find little Prayer is porta caeli, ^lav^s p^r^disi.
sweetness or profit in his reading; no man makes such earnings of his reading,
as he that prays ove^ what he reads. Luther professes, that he profited
more in the knowledge of the Scriptures by prayer in a short space, than by
study in a longer. A^ John by weeping got the sealed book open: so certainly
men would gain much more than they do, by reading good men's works, if they
would but pray more over what they read. Ah Christians! pray before you read,
and pray after you read, that all may be blessed and sanctified to you; when you
have done reading, usually close up thus,

So let me live, so let me die,
That I may live eternally.
And when you are in the Mount for your selves, bear him upon your hearts, who
is willing to spend and 2 Cor. 12. 15
be spent for your sakes, for your souls. O pray for me, that I may more and
more be under the rich influences, and glorious pourings out of the Spirit;
that I may be an able Minister of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 3. 6
not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; that I may always find an everlasting
spring, and an overflowing fountain within me, which may always make me
faithful, constant, and abundant in the work of the Lord; And that I may live
daily under those inward teachings of the Spirit, that may enable me to speak
from the heart, to the heart* from the conscience, to the conscience, and from
experience, to experience; that I may be a burning and a shining light; that
everlasting arms may be still under me; that whilst I live, I may be
serviceable to his Glory and his Peoples good; that no discouragements may
discou^age me in my work, and that when my work is done, I may give up my
account with joy, and not with grief. I shall follow these poor labors with my
weak prayers, that they may contribute much to your internal and eternal
welfare; And so rest

Your souls servant in our dearest Lord, THOMAS BROOKS.

THE MUTE CHRISTIAN Under the SMARTING ROD.
PSALM. 39. 9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it.
NOt to trouble you with a tedious Preface, wherein usually is a flood of
words, and but a drop of matter.

This Psalm consists of two parts, the first Exegetical or narrative, the
second Eutical or precative, a Narration and Prayer take up the whole: In the
former you have the Prophets Disease discovered, and in the latter the Remedy
applied. My Text falls in the latter part, where you have the way of David's
cure, or the means by which his soul was reduced to a still and quiet temper. I
shall give a little light into the words, and then come to the point that I
intend to stand upon.

I was dumb, the Hebrew word Some read it thus, I should have been dumb, and
not have opened my mouth, according to my first resolution. verse. 1, 2.
(...) from (...) signifies to be mute, tongue-tied, or dumb; the Hebrew word
signifies also to bind, as well as to be mute and dumb, because they that are
dumb, are as it were tonguetied, they have their lips stitcht and bound up: Ah
the sight of Gods hand in the afflictions that was upon him, makes him lay a
law of silence upon his heart and tongue.

I opened not my mouth, because thou did it; he looks through all secondary
causes, to the first cause, and is silent, he sees a hand of God in all, and
so sits mute and quiet: the sight of God in an affliction, is of an
irresistible efficacy, to silence the heart, and to stop the mouth of a
gracious man. In the words you may observe three things.

1 The person speaking, and that is David; David a King, David a Saint, David a
man after Gods own heart, David a Christian; and here we are to look upon
David, not as a King, but as a Christian, as a man whose heart was right with
God.

2 The action and carriage of David under the hand of God, in these words, I
was dumb, and opened not my mouth.

3 The reason of this humble and sweet carriage of his, in those words, because
thou did it; the Proposition is this;

Doct. That it is the great duty and concernment of gracious souls, to be mute
and silent under the greatest afflictions, the saddest providence, and
sharpest trials that they meet with in this world.

For the opening and clearing up of this great and useful truth, I shall
enquire,

First, What this silence is that is here pointed at in the Proposition.

Secondly, What a gracious, a holy silence does include.

Thirdly, What this holy silence does not exclude.

Fourthly, The Reasons of the point; and then bring home all by way of
application to our own souls.

For the first, What is the Silence here meant? I answer, there is a sevenfold
Silence.

First, There is a Stoical Silence: the Stoics of old thought it altogether
below a man that has reason and understanding, either to rejoice in any good,
or to mourn for any evil; but this Stoical Silence is such a sinful
unsensibleness as is very provoking to a holy God, Isa. 26. 10, 11. God will
make the most insensible sinner sensible, either of his hand here, or of his
wrath in Hell. It is a Heathenish and a horrid sin to be without natural
affections, Romans 1. 31. And of this sin Quintus Fabius Maximus seems to be
foulely guilty, who when he heard that his Mother and Wife whom he dearly
loved, were slain by the fall of an house, and that his younger son, a brave
hopeful young man, died at the same time in Umbria, he never changed his
countenance, but went on with the affairs of the Commonwealth, as if no such
calamity had befallen him; this carriage of his spoke out more stupidity than
patience.

And so Harpalus was not at all appalled, when he saw two of his sons laid
ready dressed in a charger, when Astyages had bid him to Supper; this was a
sottish insensibleness. Certainly, if the loss of Job 36. 13 Isa. 57. 1
a child in the house be no more to thee, than the loss of a Chick in Hos. 7.
9 Balaams Ass reproves this dumbness.
the yard, thy heart is base and sordid, and thou may well expect some sore
awakening judgment: This age is full of such Monsters, who think it below the
greatness and magnanimity of their spirits, to be moved, affected or
afflicted with any afflictions that befalls them. I know none so ripe and ready
for H^ll as these.

Aristotle speaks of Fishes, that though they have spears thrust into their
sides, yet they awake not: God thrusts many a sharp spear through many a sinners
heart, and yet he feels nothing, he complains of nothing; these men's souls
will bleed to death. Seneca reports of Senecio Cornelius, who minded his body
more than his Epist. 10.
soul, and his many more than Heaven; when he had all the day (...) waited on
his dying friend, (...) his friend was dead, he re(...) his house* s^ps
merrily, (...) himself quickly, goes to (...) his sorrows were ended, and the
time of his mourning expired, before his deceased friend was interred. Such
stupidity is a curse that many a man lies under: But this Stoical Silence,
which is but a sinful fullenness, is not the Silence here meant.

Secondly, There is a Politic Silence: Many are silent out of policy, should
they not be silent, they should lay themselves more open, either to the rage
and fury of men, or else to the plots and designs of men; to prevent which they
are silent, and will lay their hands upon their mouths, that others may not lay
their hands upon their estates, lives, or liberties. And Saul also went home to
Giheah, 1 Samuel 26. 27
and there went with him a band of men, whose hearts God had touched. But the
Children of Belial said, How shall this man save us? and they despised him, and
brought him no presents; but he held his peace, or was a^ though he had been
deaf. This new King, being but newly entered upon his Kingly Government, and
observing his condition to be but mean and low, his friends but few, and his
enemies many and potent, Sons of Belial, i. e. men without yoke (as the word
signifies) men that were desperately wicked, that were marked out for hell,
that were even incarnate Devils, who would neither submit to reason, nor
Religion, nor be governed by the Laws of Nature, nor of Nations, nor yet by
the Laws of God; now this young Prince, to prevent sedition and rebellion,
Hear, see, and be silent, if thou will live in peace, is a French Proverb.
blood and destruction, prudently and politickly chooses rather to lay his hand
upon his mouth, than to take a Woolf by the ear, or a Lion by the beard; he
wanted neither wit nor will to be mute, he turns a deaf ear to all they say,
his unsettled condition requiring Silence.

Henry the sixth, Emperor of Germany, used to say ( Qui nescit tacere, nescit
loqui) he that knows not how to be silent, knows not how to speak. Saul knew
this was a time for Silence, he knew his work was rather to be an Auditor,
than an Orator: But this is not the Silence the Proposition speaks of.

Thirdly, There is a foolish Silence: Some fools there be that can neither do
well, nor speak well; and because they cannot word it, neither as they would,
nor as they should, they are so wise as to be mute, Prove. 17. 28. Even a fool,
when he holds his peace, is counted wise: and he that shuts his lips, is
esteemed a man of understanding. As he cannot be wise that speaks much, so
he cannot be known for a fool that says nothing. There are many wise fools
in the world; there are many silly souls, who by holding their tongues, gain
the credit and honor of being discreet men: He that does not discover his
want of wisdom by foolish babbling, is accounted wise, though he may be
otherwise. Silence is so rare a virtue, where wisdom does regulate it, that it
is accounted a virtue where folly does impose it. Silence was so highly
honored among the old Romans, that they erected Altars to it. That man shall
pass for a man of understanding, who so far understands himself, as to hold his
tongue: For though it be a great misery to be a fool, yet it is a greater that
a man cannot be a fool, but he must needs show it: But this foolish silence
is not the Silence here meant.

Fourthly, There is a sullen Silence: Many to gratify an humor, a lust, are
sullenly silent; these are troubled with a dumb Devil, which was the worst
Devil of all the Devils you read of in the Scripture, Mark 9. 17, -- 28.

Pliny in his natural History makes Lib. 7 cap. 2.
mention of a certain people in the Indies upon the River Ganges, called
Astomi, that have no mouth, but do only feed upon the smell of herbs and
flowers. Certainly there is a Generation amongst us, who when they are under
the afflicting hand of God, have no mouths to plead with God, no lips to praise
God, nor no tongues to justify God; these are possessed with a dumb Devil, and
this dumb Devil had possessed Ahab for a time, 1 King. 21. 4. And Ahab came into
his house, heavy and displeased, and laid him down upon his bed, and turned
away his face, and would eat no bread. Ahabs ambitious humor, his covetous
humor, being crossed, he is resolved to starve himself, and to dye of the
sullens. A sullen Silence is both a sin and a punishment; no Devil frets and
vexes, wears and wastes the spirits of a man, like this dumb Devil, like this
sullen Silence.

Some write of a certain Devil whom they call Hudgin, who will not (they say)
hurt any body, except he be wronged. I cannot speak so favorably of a sullen
Silence, for that wrongs many at once, God and Christ, bodies and souls: But
this is not the Silence here meant.

Fifthly, There is a forced Silence: Many are silent perforce; he that is
under the power of his enemy, though he suffer many hard things, yet he is
silent under his sufferings, because he knows he is liable to worse; he that
has taken away his liberty, may take away his life; he that has taken away
his money, may take off his head; he that has let him blood in the foot, may
let him blood in the throat, if he will not be still and quiet; and this
works Silence perforce: So when many are under the afflicting hand of God,
conscience tells them, that now they are under the hand of an enemy, and the
power of that God whom they have dishonored, whose Son they have crucified,
whose Spirit they have grieved, whose righteous Laws they have transgressed,
whose Ordinances they have despised, and whose People they have abused and
opposed. And that he that has taken away one child, may take away every
child; and he that has taken away the wife, might have taken away the
husband; and he that has taken away some part of the estate, might have taken
away all the estate; and that he who has inflicted some distempers upon the
body, might have cast both body and soul into hell fire for ever; and he that
has shut him up in his chamber, may shut him out of Heaven at pleasure: The
thoughts and sense Oculos quos peccatum claudit, paena aperit. Gr. The eye that
sin shuts afflictions open.
of these things, makes many a sinner silent under the hand of God; but this is
but a forced Silence: And such was the Silence of Philip the second King of
Spain, who when his invincible Armado that had been three years a fitting, was
lost, he gave command, that all over Spain, they should give thanks to God and
the Saints, that it was no more grievous. As the cudgel forces the Dog to be
quiet and still; and the Rod forces the child to be silent and mute: so the
apprehensions of what God has done, and of what God may do, forces many a soul
to be silent, Jer. 3. 10. 1 King. 14. 5, -- 18. But this is not the silence
here meant; a forced Silence is no Silence in the eye of God.

Sixthly, There is a despairing Silence: A despairing soul is Magor-Missabib,
Psa. 94. 17 Psa. 28. 1
a terror to himself, he has a hell in his heart, and horror in his
conscience. He looks upwards, and there he beholds God frowning, and Christ
bleeding; he looks inwards, and there he finds conscience accusing and
condemning of him; he looks on the one side of him, and there he hears all
his sins crying out, we are thine, and we will follow thee, we will to the
grave with thee, we will to judgment with thee, and from judgment we will
to hell with thee; he looks on the other side of him, and there he sees
infernal fiends in fearful shapes, amazing and terrifying of him, and waiting
to receive his despairing soul as soon as she shall take her leave of his
wretched body; he looks above him, and there he sees the gates of Heaven shut
against him; he looks beneath him, and there he sees hell gaping for him; and
under these sad sights he is full of secret conclusions against his own soul;
there is mercy for others, says the despairing soul, but none for me; grace
and favor for others, but none for me; pardon and peace for others, but none
for me; As that despairing Pope said, the cross could do him no good, because
he had so often sold it.
blessedness and happiness for others, but none for me; there is no help,
there is no hope, no, Jer. 2. 25. chapter 18. 1^. (this seems to be his case who
died with this desperate saying in his mouth, spes and fortuna v^lete* farewell
life and hope together:) Now under these dismal apprehensions and sad
conclusions about its present and future condition, the despairing soul sits
silent, being filled with amazement and astonishment, Psalm. 77. 4. I am so
troubled that I cannot speak: But this is not the Silence here meant. But

Seventhly and lastly, There is a prudent Silence, a holy, a gracious Silence,
a Silence that springs from prudent principles, from holy principles, and from
gracious causes and considerations; and this is the Silence here meant: And
this I shall fully discover in my Answers to the second Question, which is this,

Quest. 2 What does a prudent, a gracious, a holy Silence include?

Answer 1 It includes and takes in these eight things.

First, It includes a sight of God, and an acknowledgement of God, as the
author of all the afflictions that come upon us: And this you have plain in the
Text, I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it. The Psalmist In
second causes, many times a Christian may see much envy, hatred, malice, pride,
etc. But in the first cause he can see nothing but grace and mercy, sweetness
and goodness.
looks through secondary causes, to the first cause, and so sits mute before
the Lord. There is no sickness so little, but God has a finger in it, though
it be but the aching of the little finger. As the Scribe is more eyed, and
properly said to write, than the pen; and he that makes and keeps the
Clock, is more properly said to make it go and strike, than the wheels and
weights that hang upon it; and as every workman is more eyed, and properly
said to effect his works, rather than the tools which he uses as his
instruments: so the Lord who is the chief Agent and mover in all actions, and
who has the greatest hand in all our afflictions, is more to be eyed and
owned, than any inferior or subordinate causes whatsoever. So Job, he beheld
God in all, Job 1. 21. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away: Had he not
seen God in the affliction, he would have cried out, Oh these wretched
Chaldeans, they have plundered and spoiled me! These wicked Sabeans, they have
robbed and wronged me. Job discerns Gods Commission in the Chaldeans and the
Sabeans hands, and then lays his own hand upon his mouth. So Aaron beholding
the hand of* God in the untimely death of his two sons, holds his peace, Levit.
10. 3. the sight of God in this sad* stroke, is a bridle both to his mind and
mouth, he neither mutters nor murmurs. So Joseph saw the hand of God, in his
brethrens selling of him into Egypt, Genesis 45. 8. and that silences him.

Men that see not God in an affliction, are easily cast into a feverish fit,
they will quickly be in a flame, and when their passions are up, and their
hearts on fire, they will begin to be saucy, and make no bones of telling God
to his teeth, that they do well to be angry, Jonah 4. 8, 9. Such as will not
acknowledge God to be the author of all their afflictions, will be ready
enough to fall in with that mad principle of the Manachees, who maintained the
Devil to be the Author of all calamities. As if there could be any evil (of
affliction) in the City, and the Lord have no hand in it, Amos 3. 6. Such as
can see the ordering hand of God in all their afflictions, will with David lay
their hands upon their mouths, when the Rod of God is upon their backs, 2 Samuel
16. 11, 12. If Gods hand be not seen in the affliction, the heart will do
nothing but fret and rage under affliction.

Secondly, It includes and takes in some holy gracious apprehensions, of the
Majesty, Sovereignty, Dignity, Authority, and presence of that God, under whose
afflicting hand we are, Hab. 2. 20. But the Lord is in his holy Temple, let all
the earth be silent, or as the Hebrew reads it, be silent all the earth
before his face. When God would have all the people of the earth to be hushed,
quiet, and silent before him, he would have them to behold him in his Temple,
where he sits in state, in majesty, and glory. Zephan. 1. 7. Hold thy peace at
the presence of the Lord God. Chat not, murmr not, repine not, quarrel not:
Whist, stand mute, be silent, lay thy hand on thy mouth, when his hand is upon
thy back, who is ( totus oculus) all-eye, to see, as well as all hand, to
punish. As the eyes of a well-drawn picture, are fastened on thee which way
soever thou turnest; so are the eyes of the Lord; and therefore thou have cause
to stand mute before him.

Thus Aaron had an eye to the sovereignty of God, and that silences Levit. 10.
3 Job 37. 23, 24. 1 Samuel 3. 11, -- 19.
him. And Job had an eye upon the majesty of God, and that stills him. And Elie
had an eye upon the authority and presence of God, and that quiets him. A man
never comes to humble himself, nor to be silent under the hand of God, till
he comes to see the hand of God to be a mighty hand, 1 Pet. 5. 6. Humble your
selves therefore under the mighty hand of God. When men look upon the hand of
God as a weak hand, a feeble hand, a low hand, a mean hand, their hearts rise
against his hand, Who is* the Lord, said Pharaoh, that I should obey his voice?
Exodus 5. 2. And till Pharaoh came to see the hand of God, as a mighty hand, and
to feel it as a mighty hand, he would not let Israel go. When Tiribazus a
Noble Persian was arrested, at first he drew out his sword and defended
himself, but when they charged him in the Kings name, and informed him that
they came from the King, and were commanded to bring him to the King, he
yielded willingly. So when afflictions arrest us, we shall murmr, and
grumble, and struggle and strive even to the death, before we shall yield to
that God that strikes, till we come to see his majesty and authority, till we
come Isa. 26. 11, 12 Rev. 1. 5.
to see him as the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. It is such a sight of God
as this, that makes the heart to stoop under his Almighty hand. The Thracians
being Herod.
ignorant of the dignity and majesty of God, when it thundered and lightened,
used to express their madness and folly in shooting their arrows against
Heaven, threatning-wise. As a sight of his grace chears the soul, so a sight of
his greatness and glory silences the soul. But

Thirdly, A gracious, a prudent Silence, takes in a holy quietness Animus
cujusque est quisque, the mind is the man.
and calmnesse of mind and spirit under the afflicting hand of God: A gracious
Silence shuts out all inward heats, murmurings, frettings, quarrellings*
wranglings, and boilings of heart, Psalm. 62. 1. Truly my soul keeps silence
unto God, or is silent or still; that is, my soul is quiet and submissive to
God, all murmurings and repineings, passions and turbulent affections, being
allayed, tamed and subdued. This also is clear in the Text, and in the former
instances of Aaron, Ely, and Job, they saw that it was a Father that put those
bitter cups into their hands, and love, that laid those heavy crosses upon
their shoulders, and grace, that put those yoaks about their necks; and this
caused much quietness and calmnesse in their spirits. Marius bit in his pain,
when the Chirurgian cut off his leg. Some men, when God cuts off this mercy,
and that mercy from them, they bite in their pain, they hide and conceal their
grief and trouble; but could you but look into their hearts, you would find
all in an uproar, all out of order, all in a flame; and however they may seem
to be cold without, yet they are all in a hot burning fever within: Such a
feverish fit David was once in, Psalm. 39. 3. But certainly a holy Silence
allaies all tumults in the mind, and makes a man in patience Luke 21. 19.
to possess his own soul, which next to his possession of God, is the choicest
and sweetest possession in all the world. The Law of Silence is as well upon
that man's heart and mind, as it is upon his tongue, who is truly and divinely
silent under the rebuking hand of God. As tongue-service abstracted Isa. 29.
13. Mat. 15. 8, 9.
from heart service, is no service in the account of God; so tonguesilence
abstracted from heartsilence, is no silence in the esteem of God. A man is then
graciously silent, when all is quiet within and without.

Terpander a Harper and a Poet, was one, that by the sweetness of his verse
and music, could allay the tumultuous motions of men's minds: As David by his
Harp did Saul's. When Gods people are under the Rod, he makes by his spirit and
word such sweet music in their souls, as allaies all tumultuous motions,
passions, and perturbations, Psalm. 94. 17, 18, 19. Psalm. 119. 49, 50. so that
they sit Noah-like, quiet and still, and in peace possess their own souls.

Fourthly, A prudent, a holy Plato calls God, the horn of plenty, and the Ocean
of beauty, without the least spot of injustice.
Silence, takes in an humble, justifying, clearing and acquitting of God, of
all blame, rigor, and injustice, in all the afflictions he brings upon us.
Psalm. 51. 4. That thou may be justified when thou speak, and be clear
when thou judge, that is, when thou correctest. Gods judging his people, is
Gods correcting or chastening of his people, 1 Cor. 11. 32. When we are
judged, we are chastened of the Lord. David's great care when he was under the
afflicting hand of God, was to clear the Lord of injustice: Ah Lord (says he)
There is not the least show, spot, stain, blemish, or mixture of injustice, in
all the afflictions thou have brought upon me; I desire to take shame to my
self, and to set to my seal that the Lord is righteous, and that there is no
injustice, no cruelty, nor no extremity in all that the Lord has brought upon
me: And so in that, Psalm. 119. 75. 137. he sweetly and readily subscribes
unto the righteousness of God in those sharp and smart afflictions that God
exercised him with. I know O Lord that thy judgments are right, and that thou
in faithfulness have afflicted me. Righteous art thou O Lord, and upright are
thy judgments. Gods judgments are always just, he never afflicts but in
faithfulness, his will is the rule of justice; and therefore a gracious soul
dares not cavil nor question his proceedings; the afflicted soul knows, that a
righteous God can do nothing but that which is righteous; it knows, that God is
uncontrollable, and therefore the afflicted man puts his mouth in the dust, and
keeps silence before him. 2 Samuel 16. 10. Who dare say, Wherefore have thou done
so?

The Turks, when they are cruelly lashed, are compelled to return to the judge
that commanded it, to kiss his hand, give him thanks, and pay the officer that
whipped them, and so clear the Judge and Officer of injustice. Silently to
kiss the Rod, and the hand that whips with it, is the noblest way of clearing
the Lord of all injustice.

The Babylonish captivity was the sorest, the heaviest affliction that ever God
inflicted upon any people under Heaven, witness that 1 Samuel 12. and Daniel 9.
12, etc. yet under those smart afflictions, wisdom is justified of her
children, Neh. 9. 33. Thou art just in all that is brought upon us; for thou
have done right, but we have done wickedly, 1 Samuel 18. The Lord is righteous,
for I have rebelled against him. A holy Silence shines in nothing more, than in
an humble justifying and clearing of God from all that which a corrupt heart is
apt enough to charge God with in the day of affliction. God, in that he is
good, can give nothing, nor do nothing but that which is good, others do
frequently, he cannot possibly, says Luther, in Psalm. 120.

Fifthly, A holy Silence, takes in gracious, blessed, soul-quieting
Conclusions, about the issue and event of those afflictions that are upon us,
Lam. 3. 27, -- 34. In this choice Scripture you may observe these five
soul-stilling Conclusions.

First, (And that more generally) That they shall work for their good, verse.
27. It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth. A gracious soul
secretly concludes, As stars shine brightest in the night, so God will make my
soul shine and glister like gold, whilst I am in this furnace, and when I come
out of this furnace of affliction, Job 23. 10. He knows the way that I take;
and when he has tried me, I shall come forth as gold.

Surely as the tasting of honey did open Jonathans eyes, so this cross, this
affliction, shall open mine eyes; by this stroke I shall come to have a clearer
sight of my sins, and of my self, and a fuller sight of my God, Job 33. 27, 28.
Job 40. 4, 5. chap. 42. 1, -- 7.

Surely this affliction shall issue in the purging away of my dross, Isa. 1.
25.

Surely as plowing of the ground kills the weeds, and harrowing breaks hard
clots, so these afflictions shall kill my sins, and soften my heart, Hos. 5.
ult. chap. 6. 1, 2, 3.

Surely as the plaster draws out the core, so the afflictions that are upon
me, shall draw out the core of pride, the core of self-love, the core of envy,
the core of earthlinesse, the core of formality, the core of hypocrisy, Psalm.
119. 67, 71.

Surely by these the Lord will crucify my heart more and more to the world,
and the world to my heart, Gal. 6. 14. Psalm. 131. 1, 2, 3.

Surely by these afflictions the Lord will hide pride from my soul, Job 33. 14,
-- 21.

Surely these afflictions are but the Lords pruning-knives, by which he will
bleed my sins, and prune my heart, and make it more fertile and fruitful; they
are but the Lords potion, by which he will clear me, and rid me of those
spiritual diseases and maladies which are most deadly and dangerous to my soul.

Affliction is such a potion, as will carry away all ill humors, better than
all the benedicta medicamenta, as Physicians call them, Zach. 13. 8* 9.

Surely these shall increase my spiritual experiences, Romans 5. 3, 4

Surely by these I shall be made more partaker of Gods holiness, Heb. 12. 10.
As black soap makes white clothes: so does sharp afflictions make holy hearts.

Surely by these God will communicate more of himself unto me, Hos. 2. 14.

Surely by these afflictions the Lord will draw out my heart more and more to
seek him, Isa. 26. 16. Tatianus told the Heathen Greeks, that when they were
sick, then they would send for their gods to be with them, as Agamemnon did at
the siege of Troy, send for his ten Counselors. Hos. 5. 15. In their
afflictions they will seek me early, or as the Hebrew has it, they will
morning me; in times of affliction Christians will industriously, speedily,
early seek unto the Lord.

Surely by these trials and troubles, the Lord will fix my soul more than ever
upon the great concernments of another world, Joh. 14. 1, 2, 3. Romans 8. 17, 18.
^ Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18.

Surely by these afflictions the Lord will work in me more tenderness and
compassion toward those that are afflicted, Heb. 10. 34. chap. 13. 3. As that
Tyrian Queen said,

Evils have taught me to bemoan

All that afflictions make to groan.

The Romans punished one that was seen looking out at his window with a Crown
of Roses on his head, in a time of public calamity. Bishop Bonner was full of
guts, but empty of bowels; I am afraid this age is full of such Bonners.

Surely these are but Gods lovetokens, Some say, if a knife or needle be
touched with a loadstone of an Ironcolour, it will cut or enter into a man's
body, without any sense of pain at all, so will afflictions, when touched with
the loadstone of divine love.
Rev. 3. 19. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten. Seneca persuaded his
friend Polybius to bear his affliction quietly, because he was the Emperors
favorite, telling him, that it was not lawful for him to complain whilst
Caesar was his friend: So says the holy Christian, O my soul! be quiet, be
still, all is in love, all is a fruit of divine favor: I see honey upon the top
of every twig, I see the rod is but a Rosemary-branch; I have sugar with my
gall, and wine with my wormwood; therefore be silent O my soul; And this
general Conclusion, that all should be for good, had this blessed effect upon
the Church, verse. 28. He sits alone, and keeps silence, because he has
born it upon him.

Afflictions abase the loveliness of the world without, that might entice us;
It abates the lustiness of the flesh within, which might else ensnare us; And
it abates the spirit in his quarrel, against the flesh, and the world; by all
which it proves a mighty advantage unto us.

Secondly, They shall keep them humble and low, verse. 29. He puts his mouth
in the dust, if so be there may be hope. Some say, that these words are an
allusion to the manner of those, that having been conquered and subdued, lay
their necks down at the conquerours feet, to be trampled upon, and to lick up
the dust that is under the conquerours feet; Others of the learned look upon
the words as an allusion to poor petitioners, who cast themselves down at
Princes feet, that they may draw forth their pity and compassion toward them.
As I have read of Aristippus, who fell on the ground before Dionysius, and
kissed his feet, when he presented a petition to him, and being asked the
reason, answered ( Aures habet in pedibus) he has his ears in his feet; take
it which way you will, it holds forth this to us, That holy hearts will be
humble under the afflicting hand of God. When Gods Rod is upon their backs,
their mouths shall be in the dust: A good heart will lie lowest, when the hand
of God is lifted highest, Job 42. 1, -- 7. Act. 9. 1, -- 8.

Thirdly, The third soul-quieting Conclusion you have in verse. 31. For the Lord
will not cast off for ever; the Rod shall not always lie upon the back of the
righteous. At even-tide lo^ there is trouble, but before morning it is gone,
Isa. 17. 14. As Athanasius said to his friends, when they came to bewail his
misery and banishment; Nubecula est cito transibit, it is but a little cloud
(said he) and will quickly be gone. There are none of Gods afflicted ones
that have not their lucida intervalla, their intermissions, respites, A little
storm, as one said of Julians persecution, and an eternal calm follows.
breathing-whiles; yea, so small a while does the hand of the Lord rest upon
his people, that Luther cannot get diminutives enough to extenuate it; for he
calls it a very little, little cross that we bear, Isa. 26. 20. Come, my
people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee: hide thy
self as it were for a little moment (or for a little space, a little while)
until the indignation be overpast. The indignation does not transire, but
pertransire, pass, but over-passe. The sharpness, shortness, and suddenness
of the Saints afflictions, is set forth by the travel of a woman, John 16. 21.
which is sharp, short, and sudden.

Fourthly, The fourth soul-silencing Conclusion you have in verse. 32. But
though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion according to the multitude
of his mercies; in wrath God remembers mercy, Hab. 3. 2. Weeping may endure for
a night, but joy comes in the morning, Psalm. 30. 5. their mourning shall last
but till morning; God will turn their winters night into a summers day, their
sighing into singing, their grief into gladness, their mourning into music,
their bitter into sweet, their wilderness into a paradise: the life of a
Christian is filled up with interchanges of sickness and health, weakness and
strength, want and wealth, disgrace and honor, crosses and comforts, miseries
and mercies, joys and sorrows, mirth and mourning; all honey would harm us, all
wormwood would undo us; a composition of both is the best way in the world to
keep our souls in a healthy constitution; it is best, and most for the health
of the soul, that the South Wind of mercy, and the North Wind of adversity, do
both blow upon it: And though every wind that blows, shall blow good to the
Saints, yet certainly their sins die most, and their graces thrive best, when
they are under the drying, nipping, Northwind of calamity, as well as under the
warm cherishing South Wind of mercy and prosperity.

Fifthly, The fifth soul-quieting Conclusion you have in verse. 33. For he does
not afflict willingly (or as the Hebrew has it, from his heart) nor gr^eve the
children of men. The Church concludes, that Gods heart was not in their
afflictions, though his hand was; he takes no delight to afflict his children,
it goes against the hair and the heart; it is a grief to him to be grievous to
them, a pain to him to be^ punishing of them, a death to him to be striking of
them; he has no will, no motion, no inclination, no disposition to that work
of afflicting of his people; and therefore he calls it his work, his strange
work; Isa. 28. 21. Mercy and punishment they flow from God, as the honey and the
sting from the Be^; the Be yields honey of her own nature, but she does not
sting, but when she is provoked; he takes delight in showing of mercy, Micah
7. 18. he takes no pleasure in giving his people up to adversity, Hosea 11. 8.
Mercy and kindness flows from him freely, naturally; he is never severe,
never harsh, he never stings, he never terrifies us, but when he is sadly
provoked by us. Gods hand sometimes may lie very hard upon his people, when his
heart, his bowels (at those very times) may be yerning toward his people,
Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20. No man can tell how the heart of God stands, by his hand,
his hand of mercy may be open to those against whom his heart is set: As you
see in the rich (poor) fool, and Dives in the Gospel; and his hand of severity
may lie hard upon those on whom he has set his heart, as you may see in Job
and Lazarus. And thus you see those gracious blessed soul-quieting Conclusions
about the issue and event of afflictions, that a holy, a prudent Silence does
include.

Sixthly, A holy a prudent Silence includes and takes in a strict charge, a
solemn command that conscience lays upon the soul to be quiet and still.
Psalm. 37. 7. Rest in the Lord ^or as the Hebrew has it be silent to the Lord)
and wait patiently for him. I charge Matthew. 8. 25, 26. The Heathen could say, A
( recta conscientia ne latum quidem unguem discedendum) man may not depart an
hairs* breadth all his life long from the dictates of a good conscience.
thee, O my soul, not to mutter, not to murmr; I command thee O my soul, to
be dumb and silent under the afflicting hand of God. As Christ laid a charge,
a command upon the boisterous winds, and the roaring raging Sea, be still, and
there was a great calm; so conscience lays a charge upon the soul to be quiet
and still, Psalm. 27. ult. Wait on the Lord: be of good courage, and he shall
strengthen thy heart: wait I say on the Lord. Peace O my soul, be still, leave
your muttering, leave your murmuring, leave your complaining, leave your
chasing and vexing, and lay your hand upon your mouth, and be silent.
Conscience allaies and stills all the tumults and uproars that be in the soul,
by such like reasonings as the Clerk of Ephesus stilled that uproar, Act. 19.
40. For we are in danger to be called in question for this days uproar,
there being no cause whereby we may give an account of this concourse. O my
soul, be quiet, be silent, else thou will one day be called in question for
all those inward mutterings, uproars and passions that are in thee, seeing no
sufficient cause can be produced why you should murmr, quarrel, or wrangle
under the righteous hand of God.

Seventhly, A holy, a prudent Silence, includes a surrendering, a resigning up
of our selves to God, whilst we are under his afflicting Psalm. 27. 8. James 4.
7 1 Samuel 3. 18. 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26. Act. 21. 13. 14, etc.
hand: the silent soul gives himself up to God; the secret language of the soul
is this, Lord, here am I, do with me what thou please, write upon me as
thou please; I give up my self to be at thy dispose.

There was a good woman, who when she was sick, being asked whether she were
willing to live or dye, answered, which God pleases; but said one that stood
by, if God should refer it to you, which would you choose? truly said she, if
God should refer it to me, I would even refer it to him again, this was a soul
worth gold. Well says a gracious soul, the ambitious man gives himself up to
his honors; but I give up my self unto thee; the voluptuous man gives himself
up to his pleasures, but I give up my self to thee; the covetous man gives
himself up to his bags, but I give up my self to thee; the wanton gives
himself up to his minion, but I give up my self to thee; the drunkard gives
himself up to his cups, but I give up my self to thee; the Papist gives up
himself to his Idols, but I give up my self to thee; the Turk gives up himself
to his Mahomet, but I give up my self to thee; the Heretic gives up himself to
his heretical opinions, but I give up my self to thee, Lord, lay what burden
thou will upon me, only let thy everlasting arms be under me. Strike Lord,
Luther.
strike, and spare not, for I am lain down in thy will; I have learned to say
Amen, to thy Amen; thou have a greater interest in me, than I have in my self,
and therefore I give up my self unto thee, and am willing to be at thy
dispose, and am ready to receive what impression thou shall stamp upon me. O
blessed Lord! have thou not again and again said unto me, as once the King of
Israel said to the King of Syria, I am 1 King. 20, 14.
thine, and all that I have. I am thine, O soul! to save thee; my mercy is
thine, to pardon thee; my blood is thine, to cleanse thee; my merits are thine,
to justify thee; my righteousness is thine, to cloathe thee; my Spirit is
thine, to lead thee; my grace is thine, to enrich thee; and my glory is thine,
to reward thee; and therefore says a gracious soul, I cannot but make a
resignation of my self unto thee. Lord, here I am, do with me a^ seems good
in thine own eyes. I know the best way to have my own will, is to resign up my
self to thy will, and to say Amen, to thy Amen.

I have read of a Gentleman, who meeting with a Shepherd in a misty morning,
asked him what weather it would be? it will be says the Shepherd what
weather pleases me, and being courteously requested to express his meaning,
Sir (says he) it shall be what weather pleases God, and what weather
pleases God, pleases me. When a Christians will is molded into the will of
God, he is sure to have his will. But

Eighthly and lastly, A holy, a prudent Silence, takes in a patient waiting
upon the Lord under our afflictions, till deliverance comes. Psalm. 40. 1, 2, 3.
Psalm. 62. 5. My soul wait thou only upon God, for my expectation is from him,
Lam. 3. 26. It is good that a man should both hope, and quietly (or as the
Hebrew has it, silently) wait for the salvation of the Lord. The Husbandman
patiently waits James 5. 7, 8.
for the precious fruits of the earth, the Mariner patiently waits for wind
and tide, and so does the watchman for the dawning of the day; and so does the
silent soul in the night of adversity, patiently wait for the dawning of the
day of mercy; the mercies of God are not styled the swift, but the sure mercies
of David; and therefore a gracious soul waits patiently for them. And thus you
see what a gracious, a prudent Silence does include.

The second thing is to discover what a holy, a prudent Silence under
affliction does not exclude: Now there are eight things that a holy patience
does not exclude.

First, A holy, a prudent Silence under affliction, does not exclude and shut
out a sense and feeling of our afflictions, Psalm. 39. though he was dumb, and
laid his hand upon his mouth, verse. 9. yet he was very sensible of his
affliction, verse. 10, 11. Remove thy stroke away from me: I am consumed by the
blow of thine hand. When thou with rebukes do correct man for iniquity, thou
make his beauty to consume away like a moth: Surely every man is vanity. He
is sensible of his pain, as well as of his sin; and having prayed off his sin
in the former verses, he labors here to pray off his pain; diseases, aches,
sicknesses, pains, they are all the daughters of sin, and he that is not
sensible of them, as the births and products of sin, does but add to his sin,
and provoke the Lord to add to his sufferings, Isa. 26. 9, 10, 11. No man shall
ever be charged by God for feeling his burden, if he neither fret nor faint
under it; grace does not destroy nature, but rather perfect it, grace is of a
noble offspring, it neither turns men into stocks, nor to Stoics; the more
grace, the more sensible of the tokens, frowns, blows, and lashes of a
displeased Father. Though Calvin under his greatest pains, was never heard to
mutter, nor murmr, yet he was heard often to say, How long Lord, how long? A
religious Commander being shot in battle, when the wound was searched, and the
bullet cut out, some standing by pitying his pains, he replied, though I
groan, yet I bless God I do not grumble: God allows his people to groan,
though not to grumble. It is a God-provoking sin to be stupid and senseless
under the afflicting hand of God. God will heat that man's furnace of affliction
sevenfold hotter, who is in the furnace, but feels it not, Isa. 42. 24, 25. Who
gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the Robbers? did No judgment to a stupid
spirit, a hardened heart, and a brazen brow.
not the Lord, he, against whom we have sinned? for they would not walk in his
ways, neither were they obedient unto his Law. Therefore he has poured upon
him the fury of his anger, and the strength of battle: and he has set him on
fire round about, yet he knew not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to
heart. Stupidity lays a man open to the greatest fury and severity.

The Physician, when he finds that the potion which he has given his
patient will not work, he seconds it with one more violent, and if that will
not work, he gives another yet more violent. If a gentle plaster will not
serve, then the Surgeon applies that which is more corroding, and if that
will not do, then he makes use of his cauterizing knife: So when the Lord
afflicts, and men feel it not, when he strikes, and they grieve not, when he
wounds them, and they awake not, then the furnace is made hotter than ever;
then his fury burns, then he lays on Irons upon Irons, bolt upon bolt, and
chain upon chain, until he has made their lives a hell. Afflictions are the
Saints dyet-drink, and where do you read in all the Scripture, that ever any of
the Saints drunk of this dyet-drink, and were not sensible of it?

Secondly, A holy, a prudent Silence, does not shut out prayer for It is an old
saying, ( Qui nescit or are, discat navigare) He that would learn to pray, let
him go to Sea.
deliverance out of our afflictions; though the Psalmist lays his hand upon
his mouth, in the Text, yet he prays for deliverance, verse. 10, Remove thy
stroke away from me, and verse. 11, 12. Hear my prayer, O Lord, and give ear
unto my cry; hold not thy peace at my tears: For I am a stranger with thee, and
a sojourner, as all my Fathers were. O spare me, that I may recover strength,
before I go hence, and be no more. James 5. 13. Is any among you afflicted?
let him pray. Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver
thee, and thou shall glorify me. Times of affliction by Gods own injunction,
are special times of supplication. David's heart was more often out of tune,
than his harp, but then he prays, and presently cries, Return to thy rest O
my soul. Jonah prays in the Whales belly, and Daniel prays when among the
Lions, and Job prays when on the dunghill, and Jeremiah prays when in the
dungeon; etc. Yea the Heathen Mariners, as stout as they were, when in a storm,
they cry every man to his God, Jonah 1. 5, 6. to call upon God especially in
times of distress and trouble, is a lesson that the very light and law of
nature teaches. The Persian Messenger (though an Heathen) as Aeschiles
observes, says thus, When the Grecian forces hotly pursued our host, and we
must needs venture over the great water Strymon, frozen then, but beginning to
thaw, when a hundred to one we had all died for it; With mine eyes I saw,
says he, many of those Gallants, whom I had heard before, so boldly maintain,
There was no God, every one upon his knees, and devoutly praying that the Ice
might hold till they got over. And shall blind nature do more than grace? If
the time of affliction be not a time of supplication, I know not what is.

As there are two kinds of Antidotes against poison, viz. hot and cold; so
there are two kinds of Antidotes against all the troubles and afflictions of
this life, viz. prayer and patience, the one hot, the other cold, the one
quenching, the other quickening. Chrysostom understood this well enough, when
he cried out, O! (says he) it is more bitter than death to be spoiled of
prayer, and thereupon observes, that Daniel chose rather to run the hazard of
his life, than to lose his prayer: Well, this is the second thing; a holy
Silence does not exclude prayer. But Read the 9th. of Ezra, the 9th. of
Nehemiah, and the 9th. of Daniel, and Psalm 51. with that 7th. chapter of Job.


Thirdly, A holy, a prudent Silence, does not exclude men's being kindly
affected and afflicted with their sins, as the meritorious cause of all their
sorrows and sufferings, Lam. 3. 39, 40. Wherefore does a living man complain, a
man for the punishment of his sin? Let us search and try our ways, and turn
again to the Lord. Job 40. 4, 5. Behold, I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I
will lay my hand upon my mouth. Once have I spoken, but I will not answer: yea
twice, but I proceed no further. Micah 7. 9. I will bear the indignation of the
Lord, because I have sinned. In all our sorrows we should read our sins, and
when Gods hand is upon our backs, our hands should be upon our sins.

It was a good saying of one, I Vivaldus.
hide not my sins, but I show them, I wipe them not away, but I sprinkle them,
I do not excuse them, but accuse them: The beginning of my salvation is the
knowledge of my transgression. When some told Prince Henry (that delitiae
generis humani) that darling of mankind, that the sins of the people brought
that affliction on him; O no, said he. I have sins enough of mine own to cause
that; I have sinned, says David, but what have these poor sheep done? When a
Christian is under the afflicting hand of God, he may well say, I may thank
this proud heart of mine, this worldly heart, this froward heart, this formal
heart, this dull heart, this backsliding heart, this self-seeking heart of
mine, for that this cup is so bitter, this pain so grievous, this loss so
great, this disease so desperate, this wound so incurable; it is mine own self,
mine own sin, that has caused these floods of sorrows to break in upon me. But

Fourthly, A holy, a prudent Silence, does not exclude the teaching and
instructing of others when we are afflicted; the words of the afflicted stick
close* they many times work strongly, powerfully, strangely, savingly upon the
souls and consciences of others. Many of Paul's Epistles were written to the
Churches when he was in bonds, viz. Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians,
Colossians, Philemon; he begot Onesimus in his bonds, Phil. 10. And many of
the brethren in the Lord waxed bold and confident by his bonds, and were
confirmed, and made partakers of grace by his Ministry, when he was in bonds,
Phil. 1. 7. 13, 14. As the words of dying persons do many times stick and work
gloriously; so many times does the words of afflicted persons, work very
noblely and efficaciously. I have read of one Adrianus, who seeing the Martyrs
suffer such grievous things in the cause of Christ, he asked what that was
which enabled them to suffer such things? and one of them named that, 1 Cor. 2.
9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man,
the things which God has prepared for them that love him: This word was like
Apples of Prove. 25. 11
Gold, in Pictures of Silver, for it made him not only a Convert, but a Martyr
too. And this was the means of Justin Martyrs conversion, as himself
confesses. Doubtless many have been made happy by the words of the afflicted;
the tongue of the afflicted has been to many as choice silver, the words of
the afflicted many times are both pleasing and profitable; they tickle the ear,
and they win upon the heart; they slide insensibly into the hearers souls, and
work efficaciously upon the hearers hearts. Eccles. 10. 12. The words of a wise
man's mouth are gracious (or Grace, as the Hebrew has it;) and so Hierome reads
it, Verba oris sapientis gratia, the words of the mouth of a wise man are
grace: They minister grace to others, and they win grace and favor from
others; gracious lips make gracious hearts; gracious words are a grace, an
ornament to the speaker, and they are a comfort, a delight, and an advantage to
the hearer.

Now the words of a wise man's mouth, are never more gracious, than when he is
most afflicted and distressed. Now you shall find most worth and weight in his
words: Now his lips like the Spouses, are like a thread of Scarlet, they are
red, with talking much of a crucified Christ, and they are thin, like a thread
not swelled with vain and unprofitable discourses. Now his mouth speaks
wisdom, and his tongue talks judgment, for the Law of the Lord is in his
heart, Psalm. 37. 30. now his lips drop hony-combs, Cant. 4. 10. now his tongue
is as a tree of life, whose leaves are medicinable, Prove. 12. 18. Numb. 10. 10
As the silver Trumpets sounded most joy to the Jews in the day of their
gladness; so the mouth of a wise man, like a silver Trumpet, sounds most joy
and advantage to others in the days of his sadness.

The Heathen man could say* ( Quand^ sapiens loquitur, aulea animi ^perit) when
a wise man speaks, he opens the rich treasures and wardrobe of his mind;
so may I say, when an afflicted Saint speaks, Oh the pearls, the treasures that
he scatters! But

Fifthly, A holy, a prudent Silence, does not exclude moderate mourning or
weeping under the Psalm. 6. 6. Psa. 39. 12. Jer. 9. 1, 2 Lam. 1. 2. chap. 2. 11.
18.
afflicting hand of God, Isa. 38. 3. And Hezekiah wept sore, or, as the Hebrew
has it, wept with great weepings. But was not the Lord displeased with him for
his great weeping? no, verse. 5. I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears:
behold, I will add unto thy days fifteen years. God had as well a bottle for
his Psalm. 56. 8
tears, as a bagg for his sins. There is no water so sweet, as the Saints
tears, when they do not overflow the banks of moderation; tears are not mutes,
they have a voice, and their oratory is of great prevalency And the Greeks call
the apple of the eye, the damsel of the eye, the girl of the eye, and the
Latins call it the babe of the eye.
with the Almighty God. And therefore the weeping Prophet calls out for
tears, Lam. 2. 18. Their heart cries unto the Lord, O wall of the daughter of
Zion, let tears run down like a river day and night, give thy self no rest, let
not the apple of thine eye cease, or as the Hebrew has it, let not the
daughters of thine eye be silent (that which we call the ball or apple of the
eye, the Hebrews call the daughter of the eye, because it is as dear and tender
to a man, as an only daughter; and because therein appears the likeness of a
little daughter.) Upon which words, says Bellarmine, Clames assidue ad Deum;
non lingua, sed oculis; non verbis, sed lachrymis; ista enim est oration, quae
placare solet: Cry aloud, not with thy tongue, but with thine eyes; not with
thy words, but with thy tears; for that is the prayer that makes the most
forcible entry into the ears of the great God of Heaven. When God strikes, he
looks that we should tremble; when his hand is lifted high, he looks that our
hearts should stoop low; when he has the rod in his hand, he looks that we
should have tears in our eyes; as you may see by comparing of these Scriptures
together, Psalm. 55. 2. Psalm. 38. 6. Job 30. 26, -- 32. Good men weep easily,
says the Greek Poet; and the better any are, the more enclining to weeping,
especially under affliction. As you may see in David (whose tears instead of
Gemms, were the common ornaments of his bed) Jonathan, Job, Ezra, Daniel, etc.
How (says one) shall God wipe away my tears in Heaven, if I shed none on
earth? and how shall I reap in joy, if I low not in tears? I was both with
tears, and I shall die with tears; and why then should I live without them in
this valley of tears?

There is as well a time to weep, as there is a time to laugh; and a time to
mourn, as well as a time to dance, Eccles. 3. 4. The mourning garment among the
Jews was the black garment, and the black garment was the mourning garment,
Psalm. 43. 2. Why go ye in mourning, the Hebrew word kadar signifies black, why
go ye in black; sometimes Christians must put off their gay ornaments, and put
on their black, their mourning garments, Exodus 33. 3, 4, 5, 6. But

Sixthly, A gracious, a prudent Silence, does not exclude sighing, You may see
much of this by comparing the following Scriptur^^, Lam. 1. 4. 11, 21, 22.
Psalm. 31. 10 Jer. 45. 3 Exodus 2. 24 Job 23. 2 Psalm. 6. 6
groaning, or roarings under affliction. A man may sigh, and groan, and roar
under the hand of God, and yet be silent; it is not sighing, but muttering; it
is not groaning, but grumbling; it is not roaring, but murmuring, that is
opposite to a holy Silence, Exodus 2. 23. And the children of Israel sighed by
reason of the bondage. Job 3. 24. For my sighing comes before I eat (or as the
Hebrew has it, before my meat) his sighing, like bad weather, came unsent for,
and unsought for, Psalm. 38. 9. Lord, all my desire is before thee; and my
groaning is not hid from thee, Psalm. 102. 5. By reason of the voice of my
groaning, my bones cleave to my skin. Job 3. 24. And my roarings are poured out
like the waters. Psalm. 38. 8. I am feeble and sore broken: I have roared, by
reason of the disquietnesse of my heart. Psalm. 22. 1. My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? why art thou so far from helping me, and from the words of
my roaring? Psalm. 32. 3. When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my
roarings all the day long. He roars, but does not rage, he roars, but does
not repine; when a man is in extremity, nature prompts him to roar, and the law
of grace is not against it; and though sighing, groaning, roaring, cannot
deliver a man out of his misery, yet they do give some ease to a man under his
misery. When Solon wept for his sons death, one said to him, weeping will not
help, he answered, Alas! therefore do I weep, because weeping will not help:
So a Christian many times sighs, because sighing will not help; and he groans,
because groaning will not help; and he roars, because roaring will not help.
Sometimes the sorrows of the Saints are so great, that all tears are dried up,
and they can get no ease by weeping; and therefore for a little ease they fall
a sighing and groaning, and this may be done, and yet the heart may be quiet
and silent before the Lord. Peter wept and snob'd, and yet was silent.
Sometimes the sighs and groans of a Saint, do in some sort tell that which his
tongue can in no sort utter. But

Seventhly, A holy, a prudent Silence, does not exclude nor shut 2 King. 5. 10,
-- 14 Mat. 4. 6, 7. and chapter 22. 4, 5, 8 Luke 14. 16, -- 24 Act. 27. 24, 25, 31
out the use of any just or lawful means, whereby persons may be delivered out
of their afflictions. God would not have his people so in love with their
afflictions, as not to use such righteous means as may deliver them out of
their afflictions. Mat. 10. 23. But when they persecute you in this City, flee
ye into another. Act. 12. When Peter was in prison, the Saints thronged
together to pray (as the original has it) verse. 12. and they were so instant
and earnest with God in prayer, they did so beseech and besiedge the Lord, they
did so beg and bounce at Heavens gate, verse. 5. that God could have no rest,
till by many miracles of power and mercy, he had returned Peter as a
bosome-favour to them, Act. 9. 23, 24, 25. And after that many days were
fulfilled, the Jews took counsel to kill him: But their laying await was known
of Saul: and they watched the gates day and night to kill him. Then the
Disciples took him by night, and let him down by the wall in a basket. The
blood of the Saints is precious in Gods eye, and it should not be vile in
their own eyes. When providence opens a door of escape, there is no reason why
the Saints should set themselves as marks and bu^s for their enemies to shoot
at. 2 These. 3. 1, 2. The Apostles desire the Brethren to pray for them, that
they may be delivered from unreasonable ((...) absurd) and wicked ((...)
villainous) men; for all men have not faith. It is a mercy worth a seeking, to
be delivered out of the hands of absurd, villainous, and troublesome men.

Afflictions are evil in themselves, and we may desire and endeavor to be
delivered from them, James 5. 14, 15. Isa. 38, 18, 19, 20, 21. both inward and
outward means are to be used for our own preservation. Had not Noah built an
Ark, he had been swept away with the flood, though he had been with Nimrod
and his crew on the Tower of Babel, which was Heylin. Cosm. l. 3
raised to the height of one thousand five hundred forty six p^ces, as Heylin
reports. Though we may not trust in means, yet we may and ought to use the
means; in the use of them, eye that God that can only bless them, and you do
your work. As a Pilot that guides the Ship has his hand upon the Rudder, and
his eye on the Star, that directs him at the same time, so when your hand is
upon the means, let your eye be upon your God, and deliverance will come. We
may tempt God as well by neglecting of means, as by trusting in means; it is
best to use them, and in the use of them* to live above them. Augustine tells
of a man, that being fallen into a pi^* one passing by, falls a questioning of
him, what he made there, and how he came in? O! says the poor man, ask me
not how I came in, but help me, and tell me how I may come out: The
Application is easy. But

Eighthly and lastly, A holy, a prudent Silence, does not exclude a just and
sober complaining against the Authors, contrivers, abettors or instruments of
our afflictions. 2 Timothy 4. 14. Alexander the Copper-Smith did me much evil,
the Lord reward him according to his works. This Alexander is conceived by some
to be that Alexander that is mentioned, Act. 19. 32. who stood so close to
Paul at Ephesus, that he run the hazard of losing his life by appearing on his
side; yet if glorious professors come to be furious persecutors, Christians
may complain. 2 Cor. 11. 24. Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes
save one. They inflict, says Maimonides, no more than forty stripes, though
he be as strong as Sampson, but if he be weak, they abate of that number:
They scourged Paul with the greatest severity, in making him suffer so often the
utmost extremity of the Jewish Law, when as they that were weak had their
punishment mitigated. Verse. 25. Thrice was I beaten with Rods, that is, by the
Romans, whose custom it was to beat the guilty with Rods.

If Pharaoh make Israel groan, Israel may make his complaint against Pharaoh to
the keeper of Israel Exodus 2. If the proud and blasphe^^ous King of Assy^ia
shall come with his mighty Army to destroy the people of the Lord, Isa. 37. 14,
-- 21.
Hezekiah may spread his letter of blasphemy before the Lord.

It was the saying of Socrates, that every man in this life had need of a
faithful friend, and a bitter enemy, the one to advise him, and the other to
make him look about him; and this Hezekiah found by experience.

Though Joseph's bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made
strong, by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob; yet Joseph may say, that the
Archers (or the Arrow-masters, as the Hebrew has it) have sorely grieved him,
and shot at him, and hated him, Genesis 49. 23, 24. And so David sadly complained
of Doeg, Psalm. 109. 1, -- 21. yea Christ himself (who was the most perfect
pattern for dumbness and silence under sorest trials) complains against Judas,
Pilate, and the rest of his persecutors, Psalm. 69. 20, -- 30, etc. yea though
God will make his peoples enemies to be the workmen that shall fit them and
square them for his building, to be Goldsmiths, to add Pearls to their Crown,
to be Rods to beat off their dust, skullions to scour off their rust, fire to
purge away their dross, and water to cleanse away their filthiness,
fleshliness, and earth liness, yet may they point at them, and pour out their
complaints to God against them, Psalm. 142. 2, -- ult. This truth I might make
good by above a hundred Texts of Scripture; but it is time to come to the
Reasons of the point.

Why must Christians be mute and silent under the greatest afflictions, the
saddest providence, and sharpest trials that they meet with in this world? I
answer,

Reas. 1. That they may the better hear and understand the voice of the Rod. As
the word has a Schola ^rucis est Schola lucis.
voice, the spirit a voice, and conscience a voice, so the Rod has a voice.
Afflictions are the rod of Gods anger, the rod of his displeasure, and his rod
of revenge; he gives a commission to this rod to awaken his people, to reform
his people, or else to revenge the quarrel of his Covenant upon them, if they
will not beat the rod, and kiss the rod, and sit mute and silent under the rod.
Micah 6. 9. The Lords voice cries unto the City, and the man of wisdom shall
see thy name: hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it. Gods Rods are not
mutes, they are all vocal, they are speaking, as well as smiting; every twig
has a voice: Ah soul! says one twig, thou say it smarts; well, tell me,
is it good provoking of a jealous Jer. 4. 18.
God? Ah soul! says another twig, thou say it is bitter, it reaches to thy
heart; but has not thine own doings procured these things? Ah soul! says
another twig, where is the profit, the Romans 6. 20, 21.
pleasure, the sweet that you have found in wandering from God? Ah soul! says
another twig, was Hos. 2. 7
it not best with you when you were high in your communion with God, and when
you were humble and close in your walking with God? Ah Christian, says Micah
6. 8
another twig, will thou search thy heart, and try thy ways, Lam. 3. 40
and turn to the Lord thy God? Ah soul! says another Romans 14. 6, 7, 8 Gal. 6.
14.
twig, will thou dye to* sin more than ever; and to the world more than ever,
and to relations more than ever, and to thy self more than ever? Ah soul! says
another twig, will thou live more to Christ than ever, and cleave closer to
Christ than ever, and prize Christ more than ever, and venture further for
Christ than ever? Ah soul! says another twig, will thou love Christ with a
more enflamed love, and hope in Christ with a more raised hope, and depend upon
Christ with a greater confidence, and wait upon Christ with more invincible
patience? etc. Now if the soul be not mute and silent under the rod, how is it
possible that it should ever hear the voice of the rod, or that it should ever
hearken to the voice of every twig of the rod? the rod has a voice that is in
the hands of earthly Fathers, but children hear it not, they understand it not,
till they are hushed, and quiet, and brought to kiss it, and sit silently under
it; no more shall we hear or understand the voice of the rod that is in our
heavenly Fathers hands, till we come to kiss it, and sit silently under it. But

Reas. 2. Gracious souls should be mute and silent under their greatest
afflictions, and sharpest trials, that they may difference and distinguish
themselves from the men of the world, who usually fret and fling, mutter and
murmr, curse and swagger when they are under the afflicting hand of God. Isa.
8. 21, 22. And they shall pass through it, hardly bestead and hungry; and it
shall come to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret
themselves, and curse their King, and their God, and look upward. And they
shall look unto the earth* and behold, trouble and darkness, dimness of
anguish; and they shall be driven to darkness. Ah how fretful and froward, how
disturbed and distracted, how mad and forelorn are these poor wretches under
the rebukes of God! they look upward and downward, this way and that way, on
this side and on that, and finding no help, no succor, no support, no
deliverance, like Bedlams, yea like incarnate Devils, they fall upon cursing of
God and their King. Isa. 59. 11. We roar all like Bears, and mourn sore like
Doves: we look for judgment, but there is none; for The Bea^, as Aristotle
observes, licketh her whelps into form, and loves them beyond measure, and is
most fierce roaring and raging when she is robbed of them.
salvation, but it is far off from us. They express their inward vexation and
indignation by roaring like Bears* when Bears are robbed of their whelps, or
taken in a pit, O how dreadfully will they roar, rage, tear and tumble! So when
wicked persons are fallen into the pit of affliction, O how will they roar,
rage, tear, and cry out, not of their sins, but of their punishments: As Cain,
my punishment is greater than I am able to bear. Isa. 51. 20. Thy Sons have
fainted, they lie at the head of all the streets, as a wild Bull in a net;
they are full of the fury of the Lord, the rebuke of thy God. When the huntsman
has taken the wild Bull in his toil, and so entangled him, that he is not
able to wind himself out: Oh how fierce and furious will he be! how will he
spend himself in struggling and striving to get out! Such wild Bulls are wicked
men. when they are taken in the net of affliction.

It is said of Marcellus the Roman General, that he could not be quiet ( nec
victor nec victus) neither conquered, nor conqueror; it is so with wicked men,
they cannot be quiet, neither full, nor fasting, neither sick, nor well,
neither in wealth, nor want, neither in bonds, nor at liberty, neither in
prosperity, nor in adversity, Jer. 51. 37, 38. And Babylon shall become heaps,
a dwelling place for Dragons, an astonishment, and an hissing, without Amos 3.
8.
an inhabitant. They shall roar together like Lions, they shall yell as Lions
whelps. When the Lion roars, all the beasts of the field tremble: Ambrose.
When the Lion roars, many creatures that could outrun him, are so amazed and
astonished at the terror of his roar, that they are not able to stir from the
place: such roaring Lions are wicked men, when they are under the smarting rod,
Rev. 16. 8, -- 12. They gnaw their tongues for pain, and they blaspheme the God
of Heaven, because of those sores, pains, and plagues that are poured upon
them, and they repented not of their deeds, to give him glory. And therefore
gracious souls have cause to be silent under their sorest trials, that they
may difference and distinguish themselves from wicked men, who are like the
troubled Sea, when it cannot Isa. 57. 20
rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. The verb (...) signifies to make a
stir, to be exceeding busy, unquiet or troublesome. Ah what a stir do wicked
men make, when they are under the afflicting hand of God! As the Sea is
restless and unquiet when there is no storm, it cannot stand still, but has
his flux and reflux; so it is much less restless, when by tempest upon tempest
it is made to roar and rage, to foam and cast up mire and dirt; the raging Sea
is a fit emblem of a wicked man that is under Gods afflicting hand.

Reas. 3. A third reason why gracious souls should be silent and mute under
their sharpest trials, is, that they may be conformable to Christ their head,
who was dumb Justin Martyr being asked which was the greatest miracle that our
Savior Christ wrought, answered, Pattentia ejus tanta in laboribus tantis, his
so great patience in so great troubles.
and silent under his sorest trials, Isa. 53. 7. He was oppressed, and he was
afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a Lamb to the
slaughter, and as a Sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his
mouth. Christ was tongue-tied under all his sorrows and sufferings, 1 Pet. 2.
21, 22, 23. Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should
follow his steps. Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. Who
when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not,
but committed himself to him that judges righteously. Christ upon the cross
did not only read us a lecture of patience and silence, but he has also set
us (...), A Copy or Pattern of both, to be transcribed and imitated by us;
when we are under the smarting Rod: It will be our sin and shame if we do not
bear up with patience and silence under all o^^ sufferings, considering what an
admirable copy Christ has set before us. It is said of Autiochus, that being
to fight with 1 Macch. 6. 34.
Judas Captain of the host of the Jews, he showed unto his Elephants the blood
of the grapes and mulberries, to provoke them the better to fight. So the Holy
Ghost has set before us the injuries and contumelies, the sorrows and
sufferings, the pains and torments, the sweat and blood of our dearest Lord,
and his invincible patience, and admirable silence under all, to provoke us,
and encourage us to imitate the Captain of our salvation, in patience and
silence under all our sufferings.

Hiorome having read the life and death of Hilarion (one that lived graciously,
and died comfortably) ^olded up the book, saying, well, Hilarion shall be the
Champion that I will follow, his good life shall be my example, and his good
death my president. Oh! how much more should we all say, we have read how
Christ has been afflicted, oppressed, distressed, despised, persecuted, etc.
and we have read how dumb, The Arabians, if their King be sick, or lame, they
all feign themselves so.
how tongue-tied, how patient, and how silent he has been under all. Oh! he
shall be the Copy which we will write after, the Pattern which we will walk
by, the Champion which we will follow! But alas! alas! how rare is it to
find a man that may be applauded with that Elogie of Salvian, singularis
Domini, praeclarus imitator! An excellent Disciple, of a singular Master. The
Heathens had this notion amongst them (as La^tantius reports) that the way to
honor their Gods, was to be like them; and therefore some would be wicked,
counting it a dishonor to their gods to be unlike to them. I am sure, the way
to honor our Christ, is in patience and silence, to be like to Christ,
especially when a smarting rod is upon our backs, and a bitter cup put into our
hands.

Reas. 4. A fourth reason why the people of God should be mute and silent
under their afflictions, is this, because it is ten thousand times a greater
judgment and affliction to be given up to a fretful spirit, a froward spirit,
a muttering or murmuring spirit under an affliction, than it is to be
afflicted. This is both the Devils sin, and the Devils punishment. God is still
afflicting, crossing, and vexing of him, and he is still a fretting, repining,
vexing, and rising up against God; no sin to the Devils sin, no punishment to
the Devils punishment. A man were better to have all the afflictions of all the
afflicted throughout the world, at once upon him, than to be given up to a
froward spirit, to a muttering, murmuring heart under the least affliction.
When thou see a soul fretting, vexing, and stamping under the mighty hand of
God, thou see one of Satan's firstborn, one that resembles him to Iren^us
calls such, or a Diaboli, the Devils mouth.
the life; no child can be so much like the Father, as this froward soul is
like to the Father of lies; though he has been in chains almost this six
thousand years, yet he has 1 Pet. 5. 8
never lain still one day, nor one night, no not one hour in all this time, but
is still a fretting, vexing, tossing and tumbling in his chains, like a
princely Bedlam; ^ee is a Lion, not a Lamb, a roaring Lion, not a sleepy Lion,
not a Lion standing still, but a Lion going up and down; he is not satisfied
with the prey he has got, but is restless in his designs to fill hell with
souls: He never wants an Apple for an Eve, nor a Grape for a Noah, nor a
change of raiment for a Gehezi, nor a wedge of gold for an Achan, nor a Crown
for an Absalom, nor a bagg for a Judas, nor a world for a Demas; if you look
into one company, there you shall find Satan a dishing out his meat to every
palate; if you look into another company, there you shall find him a fitting a
last to every shoe; if you look into a third company, there you shall find
him a suiting a garment to every back: he is under wrath; and cannot but be
restless: Here with Jael, he allures poor souls in with milk, and murders them
with a nail; there with Joa^, he embraces with one hand, and stabs with
another; here with Judas, he kisses, and betraies, and there with the Whore of
Babylon, he presents a golden cup with poison in it* he cannot be quiet,
though his bolts be always on, and the more unquiet any are under the rebukes
of God, the more such resemble Satan to the life, whose whole life is filled up
with vexing and fretting against the Lord. Let not any think (says Luther)
that the Devil is now dead, no nor yet asleep, for as he that keeps Israel,
so he that hates Israel never slumbereth nor sleeps. But in the next place.

Reas. 5. A fifth reason why gracious souls should be mute and silent under
the greatest afflictions, and sharpest trials that do befall them, is this,
because a holy, a prudent silence, under afflictions, under miseries, does best
capacitate and fit the afflicted for the receipt of mercies. When the rolling
bottle lies still, you may pour into it your sweetest or your strongest waters;
when the rolling tumbling soul lies still, then God can best pour into it the
sweet waters of mercy, and the strong waters of divine consolation. You read of
the peaceable fruits of righteousness, Heb. 12. 11. Now no chastening for the
present seems to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless, afterward it
yields the peaceable fruits of righteousness, unto them which are exercised
thereby, Jam. 3. 18. And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace, of them
that make peace. The still and quiet soul is like a Ship, that lies still and
quiet in the harbor* you may take in what goods, what commodities you please,
whilst the Ship lies quiet and still: So when the The Angels are most quiet
and st^ll, and they take in most of God, of Christ, of Heaven.
soul is quiet and still under the hand of God, it is most fitted and
advantaged to take in much of God, of Christ, of Heaven, of the Promises, of
Ordinances, and of the Love of God, the Smiles of God, the Communications of
God, and the counsel of God; but when souls are unquiet, they are like a Ship
in a storm, they can take in nothing.

Luther speaking of God, says, God does not dwell in Babylon, but in Salem;
Babylon signifies confusion, and Salem signifies peace; now God dwells not in
spirits that are unquiet, and in confusion, but he dwells in peaceable and
quiet spirits: Unquiet spirits can take in neither counsel nor comfort, grace
nor peace* etc. Psalm. 77. 2. My soul refused to be comforted. The Impatient
Patient will take down no cordials, he has no eye to see, nor hand to take,
nor palate to relish, nor stomach to digest any thing that makes for his
health and welfare; when the man is sick and froward, nothing will down, the
sweetest music can make no melody in his ears, Exodus 6. 6, 7, 8, 9. Wherefore
say unto the children of Israel, I am the Lord, and I will bring you out from
under the burdens of the Egyptians and I will rid you out of their bondage: and
I will redeem you with a stretched out arm, and with great judgment. And I
will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you a God: and ye shall
know that ^ am the Lord your God, which brings you out from under the burdens
of the Egyptians. And I will bring you in unto the Land, concerning the which ^
did swear to give it, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, and ^ will give it
you for an heritage; I am the Lord. The choicest cordials and comforts that
Heaven or Earth could afford* are here held forth to them, but they have no
hand to receive them. Here Moses his lips drops hony-combs, but they can taste
no sweetness in them: here the best of Earth, and the best of Heaven is set
before them, but their souls are shut up, and nothing will down: here is such
ravishing music of paradise, as might abundantly delight their hearts, and
please their ears, but they cannot hear: here are soulenlivening,
soul-supporting, soulstrengthening, soul-comforting, soul-raising, and
soul-refreshing words, but they cannot hearken to them. v. 9. And Moses spoke
so unto the children of Israel, but they hearkened not unto Moses, for anguish
of spirit, and for cruel bondage: They were under their aguish, feaverish-fits,
and so could neither hear, nor see, taste, nor take in any thing that No air
agrees well with weak, pevish sickly bodies.
might be a mercy or a comfort to them; they were sick of impatiency and
discontent; and these humors being grown strong, nothing would take with them,
nothing would agree with them. When persons are under strong pangs of passion,
they have no ears, neither for Reason, nor Religion.

Reas. 6. A sixth Reason why gracious souls should be silent under the
smarting Rod, is this, viz. If Bedlams will not lie quiet, they are put into
darker rooms, and heavier chains are put upon them.
because it is fruitless, it is bootless to strive, to contest, or contend with
God; no man has ever got any thing by muttering or murmuring under the hand of
God, except it has been, more frowns, blows and wounds. Such as will not lie
quiet and still when mercy has tied them with silken cords, justice will put
them in Iron chains; if Golden fetters will not hold you, Iron shall. If Jonah
will vex, and fret, and fling, justice will fling him overboard, to cool him,
and quell him, and keep him prisoner in the Whales belly, till his stomach be
brought down, and his spirit be made quiet before the Lord: What you get by
struggling and grumbling, you may put in your eye, and weep it out when you have
done, Jer. 7. 19. Do they provoke me to anger, says the Lord? do they not
provoke themselves to the confusion of their own faces? By provoking of me,
they do but provoke themselves, by angring of me, they do but anger
themselves, by vexing of me, they do but fret and vex themselves. 1 Cor. 10.
22. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he?

Zanchy observes these two things from these words.

1 That it is ill provoking God to wrath, because he is stronger than we.

2 That though God be stronger than we, yet there are those who provoke him to
wrath; and certainly there are none that do more provoke him, than those who
fume and fret when his hand is upon them: Though the cup be bitter, yet it is
put into your hand by your Father; though the Cross be heavy, yet he that
has laid it on your shoulders, will bear the heaviest end of it himself, and
why then should you mutter? Shall Bears and Lions take blows and knocks from
their keepers, and wilt not thou take a few blows and knocks from the Keeper of
Israel? why should the Clay contend with the Potter, or the Creature with his
Creator, or the servant with his Lord, or weakness with strength, or a poor
nothing creature, with an omnipotent God? Can stubble stand before the fire?
can chaff abide before the whirlewind? or can a worm ward off the blow of the
Almighty? A froward and impatient spirit under the hand of God, will but add
chain to chain, cross to cross, yoke to yoke, and burden to burden* the more
men tumble and toss in their feverish fits, the more they strengthen their
distemper, and the longer it will be before the cure be effected: the easiest
and the surest way of cure, is to lie still and quiet, till the poison of the
distemper be sweat out: Where patience has its perfect work, there the cure
will be certain and easy; when a man has his broken leg set, he lies still
and quiet, and so his cure is easily and speedily wrought; but when a horse his
leg is set, he frets and flings, he flou^ces and flies out, unjointing it
again and again; and so his cure is the more difficult and tedious. Such
Christians that under the hand of God are like the Horse or Mule, fretting and
flinging, will but add to their own sorrows and sufferings, and put the day of
their deliverance further off.

Reas. 7. A seventh Reason why Christians should be mute and silent under
their afflictions, is, because hereby they shall cross and frustrate Satan's
great design and expectation. In all the afflictions he brought upon Job, his
design was not so much to make Job a beggar, as it was to make him a
blasphemer; it was not so much to make Job outwardly miserable, as it was to
make Job inwardly miserable, by occasioning him to mutter and murmr against
the righteous hand of God: That so he might have had some matter of accusation
against him to the Lord. He is the unwearied accuser of the brethren, Rev. 12.
10. The accuser of the brethren is cast down, which accuses them before our
God day and night. Satan is the great makebate between God and his children;
he has a mint constantly going in Hell, where, as an untired mint-master, he
is still a coining and hammering out of accusations against the Saints; first
he tempts and allures souls to sin, and then accuses them of those very sins
he has tempted them to, that so he may disgrace them before God, and bring
them (if it were possible) out of favor with God; and though he knows
beforehand that God and his people are by the bond of the Covenant, and by the
blood of a Redeemer, so closely united, that they can never be severed, yet
such is his rage and wrath, his envy and malice, that he will endeavor that
which he knows he shall never effect: Could he but have made Job froward or
fretful under the Rod, he would have quickly carried the tidings to Heaven,
and have been so bold, as to have asked God whether this was a carriage
becoming such a person, of whom himself had given so That devil that accused
God to man, Genesis 3. and Christ to be an Impostor, will make no bones to accuse
the Saints, when they miscarry under the Rod.
glorious a character. Satan knows, that there is more evil in the least sin,
than there is in all the afflictions that can be inflicted upon a person; and
if he could but have made a breach upon Jobs patience, Ah how would he have
insulted over God himself! could he but have made Job a mutinere, he would
quickly have pleaded for Martial Law to have been executed upon him; but Job by
remaining mute and silent under all his trials, puts Satan to a blush, and
spoils all his projects at once. The best way to out-wit the Devil, is to be
silent under the hand of God; he that mutters is foiled by him but he that is
mute overcomes him; and to conquer a devil, is more than to conquer a world.

Reas. 8. The eighth and last Reason why Christians should be silent and mute
under their sorest trials, is this, that they may be conformable to those
noble patterns that are set before them by other Saints, who have been patient
and silent under the smarting Rod. As Aaron, Exodus 10. 3. So Elie, 1 Samuel 3.
18. So David, 2 Samuel 16. 7, -- 13. So Job, chap. 1. 21, 22. So Eliakim, Shebna,
Praecepta do^ent, exempla movent, Precepts may instruct, but examples do
persuade.
and Joah, Isa. 36. 11, 21. So those Saints in that, Act. 21. 12, ^ 15 And that
cloud of witnesses pointed at, in Heb. 12. 1. Gracious examples are more
awakening, more convincing, more quickening, more provoking, and more
encouraging than precepts; because in them we see that the exercise of grace
and godliness is possible, though it be difficult. When we see Christians
(that are subject to like infirmities with our selves) mute and silent under
the afflicting hand of God: We see that it is possible that we may attain to
the same noble temper of being tongue-tied under a smarting Rod; certainly it
is our greatest honor and glory in this world to be eying and imitating the
highest and wo^thiest examples. What Plutarch said of Demosthenes, that he was
excellent at praising the worthy acts of his Ancestors, but not so at imitating
them, may be said of many in these days; Oh they are very forward and
excellent at praising the patience of Job, but not at imitating it; at praising
the silence of Aaron, but not at imitating it; at praising David's dumbness, but
not at imitating it; at praising Elies muteness, but not at imitating it. It
was the height of Caesar's glory, to walk in the steps of Alexander, and of
Selymus (a Turkish Emperor) to walk in Caesar's steps, and of Themistocles, to
walk in Miltiades steps. Oh how much more should we account it our highest
glory, to imitate the worthy examples of those worthies, of whom this world is
not worthy! It speaks out much of God within, when men are striving to write
after the fairest copies. And thus much for the Reasons of the Point. I come
now to the Application.

You see beloved by what has been said, That it is the greatest duty and
concernment of Christians, to be mute and silent under the greatest
afflictions, the sadest providence, and the sharpest trials that they meet
with in this world. If this be so, then this truth looks sourely and wishly
upon several sorts of persons. As

First, This looks sourely and sadly upon murmurers, upon such as do nothing
but mutter and murmr under the afflicting hand of God: This was Isreal's sin
of Exodus 16. 7, 8, 9 Numb. 12. 14, 27, 29. chap. 17. 5, 10. Exodus 15. 24 Deuteronomy.
1. 27 Psalm. 106. 25.
old, and this is Englands sin this day: Ah what murmuring is there against
God! what murmuring against instruments! and what murmuring against providence
is to be found amongst us! Some murmr at what they have lost, others murmr
at what they fear they shall lose; some murmr that they are no higher, others
murmr because they are so low; some murmr because such a party rules, and
others mutter because themselves are not in the saddle; some murmr because
their mercies are not so many as others, and others murmr because their
mercies are not so great as others are; some murmr because they are
afflicted, and others murmr because such and such are not afflicted as well
as they. Ah England, England! had thou no more sins upon thee, thy murmuring
were enough to undo thee, did not God exercise much pity and compassion
toward thee: But more of this hereafter; and therefore let this touch for the
present suffice.

Secondly, This truth looks sourely upon those that fret, chafe, and vex, when
they are under the afflicting hand of God. Many when they feel the Rod to
smart, ah how do they fret and fume! Isa. 8. 21. When they were hardly bestead
and hungry, they fret themselves, and curse their King, and their God. Prove.
19. 3. The foolishness of man perverteth his way; and his heart fretteth
against the Lord. The heart may be fretful and 2 King. 6. 33 Psalm. 37. 1, 7, 8
froward, when the tongue does not blaspheme. Folly brings man into misery, and
misery makes man to fret; man in misery is more apt to fret and chafe against
the Lord, than to fret and chafe against his sin that has brought him into
sufferings. A fretful soul dares let fly at God himself. When Pharaoh is
troubled with the frets, he dare spit in the very face o^ God himself; Who is
the Lord, that I should obey him? And when Jonah is in a fretting humor, he
dares tell God to his face, that he does well to be angry. Jonah 4. 8. Jonah
had done well if he had been angry with his sin, but he did very ill to be
angry with his God. God will vex every vein in that man's heart, before he has
done with him, who fumes and frets, because he cannot snap in sunder the cords
with which he is bound, Ezekiel. 16. 43. Sometimes good men are sick of the
frets, but when they are, it costs them dear; as Job and Jonah found by
experience. No man has ever got any thing by his fretting and flinging, except
it has been harder blows, or heavier chains; therefore fret not when God
strikes.

Thirdly, This truth looks sourely upon those who charge God foolishly, in the
day of their adversity, Lam. 3. 39. Why does a Lam. 1. 12 Psalm. 77. 7, -- 12.
Ezekiel. 18. 25. chapter 29. 33. 17, 20, 29.
living man complain? He that has deserved a hanging, has no reason to
charge the Judge with cruelty, if he escape with a whiping: And we that have
deserved a damning, have no reason to charge God for being too severe, if Some
of the Heathens, as Homer observes, would lay the evils that they did incur by
their own folly, upon their gods; so do many upon the true God.
we escape with a fatherly lashing: Rather than a man will take the blame, and
quietly bear the shame of his own folly, he will put it off upon God himself,
Genesis 3. 12. It is a very evil thing when we shall go to accuse God, that we
may excuse our selves, and unblame our selves, that we may blame our God, and
lay the fault any where, rather than upon our own hearts and ways. Job was a
man of a more noble spirit, Job 1. 22. In all this Job sinned not, nor charged
God foolishly. When God charges many men home, then they presently charge God
foolishly, they put him to bear the brunt and blame of all, but this will be
bitterness in the end: When thou art under affliction, thou may humbly tell
God that thou feel his hand heavy, but thou must not blame him because his
hand is heavy. No man has ever yet been able to make good a charge against
God, and will thou be able? surely no. By charging God foolishly in the day of
thy calamity, thou do but provoke the Lord to charge thee through, and through,
more fiercely, and furiously, with his most deadly darts of renewed misery; it
is thy greatest wisdom to blame thy sins, and lay thy hand upon thy mouth; for
why should folly charge innocence? That man is far enough off from being mute
and silent under the hand of God, who dares charge God himself for laying his
hand upon him. But Exodus 32. 11 Psalm. 10. 1 Psalm, 22. 1, 2 Job 3. 11, 12. chapter
19. 11, 13, 14.


Fourthly, This truth looks sourely and sadly upon such as will not be silent,
nor satisfied under the afflicting hand of God, except the Lord will give them
the particular reasons why he lays his hand upon them. Good men sometimes
dash their feet against this stumbling-stone, Jer. 15. 18. Why is my pain
perpetual, and my wound incurable? etc. Though God has always reason for what
he does, yet he is not bound to show us the reasons of his doings. Jeremiah's
passion was up, his blood was hot, and now nothing will silence nor satisfy
him, but the reasons why his pain was perpetual, and his wound incurable, So
Job, chap. 7. 20. Why have thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a
burden to my self? It is an evil and a dangerous thing to cavil at, or to
question his proceedings, who is the chief Lord of Romans 9. 20 Dan. 4. 34, 35
all, and who may do with his own what he pleases? He is unaccountable, and
uncontrollable; and therefore who shall say what do thou? As no man may
question his right to afflict him, nor his righteousness in afflicting of him;
so no man may question the reasons why he afflicts him. As no man can compel
him to give a reason of his doings; so no man may dare to ask him the
particular reasons of his doings. Kings think themselves not bound to give
their subjects a reason of their Eccles. 8. 4
doings; and shall we bind God to give us a reason of his doings? who is the
King of Kings, and Rev. 1. 5, 6
Lord of Lords, and whose will is the true reason, and only rule of justice.
The general grounds and reasons that God has laid down in his word, why he
afflicts his people, as viz. for their profit, Heb. 12. 10. for the purging
away of their sins, Isa. 1. 25. for the reforming of their lives, Psalm. 119.
67. 71. and for the saving of their souls, 1 Cor. 11. 32. should work them to
be silent and satisfied under all their afflictions, though God should never
satisfy their curiosity in giving them an account of some more hidden causes
which may lie secret in the abyss of his eternal knowledge, and infallible
will. Curiosity is the spiritual drunkenness of the soul; and look, as the
drunkard will never be satisfied, be the cup never so deep, unless he see
the bottom of it; so some curious Christians, whose souls are overspread with
the leprosy of curiosity, they will never be satisfied, till they come to see
the bottom, and the most secret reasons of all Gods dealings toward them; but
they are fools in folio, who affect to know more than God would have them: Did
not Adams curiosity render him and his posterity fools in folio? and what
pleasure can we take to see our selves every day fools in print? As a man by
gazing and prying into the body of the Sun may grow dark and dim, and see less
than otherwise he might: So many by a curious prying into the secret reasons
of Gods dealings with them, come to grow so dark and dim, that they cannot see
those plain reasons that God has laid down in his word, why he afflicts and
tries the children of men.

I have read of one Sir William John Stows survey of London.
Champney (in the Reign of King Henry the third) once living in Tower-street
London, who was the first man that ever built a Turret on the top of his house,
that he might the better overlook all his neighbors; but it so fell out, that
not long after he was struck blind, so that he who could not be satisfied to
see as others did see, but would needs see more than others, saw just nothing
at all, through the just judgment of God upon him. And so it is a just and
righteous thing with God, to strike such with spiritual blindness, who will not
be satisfied with seeing the reasons laid down in the word, why he afflicts
them, but they must be curiously prying and searching into the hidden and more
secret reasons of his severity toward them. Ah Christians! it is your wisdom
and duty to sit silent and mute under the afflicting hand of God, upon the
account of revealed reasons, without making any curious inquiry into those more
secret reasons that art locked up in the golden Cabinet of Gods own breast.
Deuteronomy. 29. ^9.

Fifthly, This truth looks sourely and sadly upon those, who instead 1 Samuel 21.
12, -- ult. Genesis 12. 13, -- 20. chap. 20. 2, -- 14. chapter 26. 7, 8, 9, 10. Jonah
1. 1 Samuel 28. throughout
of being silent and mute under their afflictions, use all sinful shifts and
ways to shift themselves out of their troubles, who care not though they break
with God, and break with men, and break with their own consciences; so they may
but break off the chains that are upon them; who care not by what means the
prison door is opened, so they may but escape; nor by what hands their bolts
are knocked off, so they may be at liberty. Job* 36. 21. Take heed, regard not
iniquity, for this have thou chosen rather than affliction. He makes but an
ill choice, who chooses sin, rather than suffering; and yet such an ill choice
good men have sometimes made (as you may see by the proofs in the Margint) when
troubles have compassed them round about. Though no Lion roars like that in a
man's own bosom, conscience, yet some to deliver themselves from troubles
without, have set that Lion a roaring within. Some to deliver themselves from
outward tortures, have put themselves under inward torments; he purchases his
freedom from affliction at too dear a rate, who buies it with the loss of a
good name, or a good conscience.

Now because there is even in good men sometimes too great an aptness and
pronenesse to sin, and shift themselves out of afflictions, when they should
rather be mute and silent under them: Give me leave to lay down these six
considerations to prevent it.

Frist, Consider, that there is infinitely James 3. 5, -- 11.
more evil in the least sin, than there is in the greatest miseries and
afflictions that can possibly come upon you; yea there is more evil in the
least sin, than there is in all the troubles that ever came upon the world, yea
than there is in all the miseries and torments Prove. 8. 36 1 John 3. 4 chap. 1.
7. Rev. 21. 8.
of hell: the least sin is an offense to the great God, it is a wrong to the
immortal soul, it is a breach of a righteous Law; it If you consider sin
strictly, there cannot be any little sin, no more than there can be a little
god, a little hell, or a little damnation, yet comparatively some sins may be
said to be little.
cannot be washed away, but by the blood of Jesus; it can shut the soul out of
Heaven, and shut the soul up a close prisoner in Hell for ever, and ever: The
least sin is rather to be avoided, and prevented, than the greatest
sufferings; if this Cockatrice be not crushed in the Egg, it will soon become
a Serpent; the very thought of sin, if not thought on, will break out into
action, action into custom, custom into habit, and then both body and soul
are lost irrecoverably, to all eternity. The least sin is very dangerous;
Caesar was stabbed with bodkins, Herod was eaten up of Lice, Pope Adrian was
choked with a Gnat. A Mouse is but little, yet kills an Elephant, if he
gets up into his Trunck; a Scorpion is little, yet able to sting a Lion to
death; though the Leopard be great, yet he is poisoned with a head of
Garlic: the least spark may consume the greatest house; and the least leak
sink the greatest ship: a whole arm has been impostumated with the prick of a
little finger; A little Postern opened, may betray the greatest City; A dram of
poison diffuseth it self to all parts, till it strangle the vital spirits, and
turn out the soul from the body; if the Serpent can but wriggle in his tail, by
an evil thought, he will soon make a surprisal of the soul, as you see in that
great instance of Adam and Eve. The trees of the forest (says one in a
Parable) held a solemn Parliament, wherein they consulted of the innumerable
wrongs which the Axc had done them, therefore made an Act, that no tree should
hereafter lend the Axe an helve, on pain of being cut down; The Axe travels up
and down the forest, begs wood of the Cedar, Oak, Ash, Elm, even of the
Poplar, not one would lend him a chip: At last he desired so much as would
serve him to cut down the briers and bushes, alleging, that such shrubs as
they did but suck away the juice of the ground, and hinder the growth, and
obscure the glory of the fair and goodly trees; hereupon they were all content
to afford him so much; he pretends a through reformation, but behold a sad
deformation; for when he had got his Helve, down went both Cedar, Oak, Ash,
Elm, and all that stood in his way. Such are the subtle reaches of sin, it will
promise to remove the Briers and Bushes of afflictions and troubles, that
hinder the soul of that juice, sweetness, comfort, delight and content that
otherwise it might enjoy. Oh do but now yield a little to it, and instead of
removing your troubles, it will cut down your peace, your hopes, your comforts,
yea it will cut down your precious souls. What is the breathing of a vein, to
the being let blood in the throat, or a scratch on the hand, to a stab at the
heart? no more are the greatest afflictions to the least sins, and therefore
Christians never use sinful shifts to shift your selves out of troubles, but
rather be mute and silent under them, till the Lord shall work out your
deliverance from them. But,

Secondly, Consider, it is an impossible thing for any to sin themselves out of
their troubles. Abraham, Job, and Jonah attempts it, but could not effect it:
the devils have experienced this near this six Jer. 2. 36, 37. chapter 17. 5, 6, 11.
thousand years, they had not been now in chains, could they but have sinned
themselves out of their chains; could the damned sin Jude 6.
themselves out of everlasting burnings, Isa. 33. 14
there would have been none now a roaring in that devouring unquenchable fire:
Hell would have no inhabitants, could they but sin themselves out of it. Ah
Christians! devils and damned spirits shall as soon sin themselves out of Hell,
as you shall be able to sin your selves out of your afflictions: Christians!
you shall as soon stop the Sun from running her course, contract the Sea in a
Nut shell, compass the earth with a span, and raise the dead at your pleasure,
as ever you shall be able to sin your selves out of your sufferings* and
therefore it is better to be silent and quiet under them, than to attempt that
which is impossible to accomplish; this second consideration will receive
further confirmation by the next particular.

Thirdly, As it is an impossible thing, so it is a very prejudical, a very
dangerous thing, to attempt to sin your selves out of your troubles; for by
attempting to sin your selves out of one trouble, you will sin your selves into
many troubles, as Jonah and Jacob did: 1 Samuel 2^. 5, -- ult.
and by laboring to sin your selves out of less troubles, you will sin your
selves into greater troubles, as Saul did; and by endeavoring to sin your
selves from under outward troubles, you will sin your selves under inward
troubles and distresses, which are the sorest and saddest of all troubles; thus
did Spira, Jerome of Prague, Bilney and others. Some there have been, who by
laboring to sin themselves out of their present sufferings, have sinned
themselves under such horrors and terrors of conscience, that they could
neither eat, nor drink, nor sleep, but have been ready to lay violent hands
upon themselves.

And Cyprian in his Sermon de laps^s, speaks of diverse, who forsaking the Faith
to avoid sufferings, were given over to be possessed of evil spirits, and died
fearfully. Oh man! thou do not know what deadly sin, what de^dly temptation,
what deadly judgment, what deadly stroke thou may fall under, who attempts
to sin thy self out of troubles: what is it to take Venice, and to be hanged
at the gates thereof? It is better to be silent and mute under thy
afflictions, than by using sinful shifts, to sin thy self under greater
afflictions.

Fourthly, Consider, it is a very ignoble and unworthy thing, to go to sin your
selves out of your troubles and straights; it argues a poor, a low, a weak, a
dasterdly, and an effeminate spirit, to use base shifts, to shuffle your selves
out of your troubles. Men of noble, courageous and magnanimous spirits, will
disdain and scorn it. As you may see in the three children, Dan. 3. 8, -- ult.
chapter 6. Heb. 10. 34 Lactantius speaks of many such brave spirits.
Daniel, and those worthies, in that 11th of the Hebrews, of whom this world
was not worthy. Jerome writes of a brave woman, who being upon the rack, bad her
persecutors do their worst, for she was resolved to die, rather than lie. And
the Prince of Conde being taken prisoner by Charles the ninth King of France,
and put to his choice, whether he would go to Mass, or be put to death, or
suffer perpetual imprisonment; his noble answer was, that by Gods help he
would never choose the first, and for either of the latter he left to the Kings
pleasure, and Gods providence.

A soul truly noble, will sooner part with all, than the peace of a I might
produce a cloud of witnesses from among the Primitive Christians, wh^ have been
noble and gallant this way.
good conscience: Thus blesied Hooper desired to be rather discharged of his
Bishopric, than yield to certain ceremonies.

I have read of Marcus Arethusus, an eminent servant of the Lords in Gospel
work, who in the time of Constantine, had been the cause of overthrowing an
Idol Temple; but Julian coming to be Emperor, commanded the people of that
place to build it up again; all were ready so to do; Only he refused it,
whereupon his own people, to whom he had preached, fell upon him, stripped off
all his clothes, then abused his naked body, and gave it up to children and
school-boies to be lanched with their pen-knives; but when all this would not
do, they caused him to be set in the Sun, having his naked body anointed all
over with honey, that so he might be bitten and stung to death by Flies and
Wasps; and all this cruelty they exercised upon him, because he would not do
any thing toward the rebuilding of that Idol Temple; nay, they came so far,
that if he would but give one halfpenny toward the charge, they would
release him, but he refused it with a noble Christian disdain; though the
advancing of an halfpenny might have saved his life; and in so doing he did
but live up to that noble principle (that most commend, but few practice) viz.
that Christians must choose rather to suffer the worst of torments, than to
commit the least of sins, whereby God should be dishonored, his Name
blasphemed, Religion reproached, Profession scorned, weak Saints discouraged,
and men's consciences wounded, and their souls endangered. Now tell me
Christians, is it not better to be silent and mute under your sorest trials
and troubles, than to labor to sin and shi^t your selves out of them, and so
proclaim to all the world, that you are persons of very low, poor, and ignoble
spirits? But Jer. 17. 5, 6, 11. Ezekiel. 7. 13, 14 1 Samuel 28. 5, 6, 7, etc. 1
King. 21. 18, 19. compared with chap. 22. 38


Fifthly, Consider, sinful shifts and means God has always cursed and blasted;
Achans golden wedge was but a wedge to cleave him, and his garment a shroud to
shroud him* Ahab purchases a Vineyard with the blood of the owner, but
presently it was watered with his own blood, according to the word of the Lord.
Gehazi must needs have a talent of silver, and two changes of raiment, and that
with a lie, I say with a lie; well, he has them, and he has with them a
Leprosy that cleaved to him and his seed for ever, 2 King. 5. 22, -- ult. With
those very hands that Judas took money to betray his Master, with those very
hands he fitted a halter to hang himself. The rich and wretched glutton fared
delicately, and went bravely every day, but the next news you hear of him, is
of his being in hell, crying out for a drop, who when he was on earth, would
not give a crum. The Coal that the Eagle carried from the Altar to her nest,
set all on fire.

Crassus did not long enjoy the fruit of his Coverousness, for the Parthians
taking of him, poured melted gold down his throat.

Dionysius did not long enjoy the fruit of his Sacrilege, and tyranny, for he
was glad to change his Scepter into a Feruler, and turn Schoolmaster for his
maintenance. Ah Christians! Christians, is it not far better to sit quiet and
silent under your afflictions, than to use such sinful shifts and means which
God will certainly blast and curse? But

Sixthly and lastly, Consider this, that your very attempting to sin, and shift
your selves out of troubles and afflictions, will cost you dear; it will cost
you many prayers, many tears, many sighs, A man may buy any thing too dear, but
Christ, Grace, his own Soul, and the Gospel.
many groans, many gripes, many terrors, and many horrors. Peter by
attempting to sin himself out of trouble, sins himself into a Sea of sorrows,
Matthew. 26. ult. He went forth and wept bitterly.

Clement observes, That every night when he heard the Cock crow, he would
fall upon his knees and weep bitterly, others say, that his face was furrowed
with continual tears. Were Abraham, David, Jacob and Jonah now alive, they
would tell you, that they have found this to be a truth in their own
experience. Ah Christians! it is far better to be quiet and silent under your
sufferings, than to pay so dear for attempting to sin, and shift your selves
out of your sufferings. A man will not buy gold too dear, and why then should
he buy himself out of troubles at too dear a rate?

But now I shall come to that use that I intend to stand most upon, and that is
an use of Exhortation: Seeing it is the great duty and concernment of
Christians, to be mute and silent under the greatest afflictions, the saddest
providence, and sharpest trials that they meet with in this world: Oh that I
could prevail with you Christians! to mind this great duty, and to live up,
and live out this necessary truth, which that I may, give me leave to propound
some Considerations, to engage your souls to be mute and silent under your
greatest troubles, and your sorest trials. To that purpose

Consider first, The greatness, sovereignty, majesty and dignity Rev. 4. 10,
11. Jer. 10. 7. chap. 5. 22. 2 King. 2. chap. 3. 5.
of God, and let that move thee to silence. Psalm. 46. 8, 9, 10. Come, behold
the works of the Lord, what desolations he has made in the earth. He makes
wars to cease unto the end of the earth: he breaks the bow, and cutteth the
spear in sunder, he burns the chariot in the fire. Be still, and know that
I am God: I will be exalted among the Heathen, I will be exalted in the
earth. Who can cast his eye upon the greatness of God, the majesty of God, and
not sit still before him? Zeph. 1. 7. Hold thy peace at the presence of the
Lord God. Oh chat not, murmr not, fret not, but stand mute before him! Shall
the child be hushed before his Father, the servant before his Master, the
subject before his Prince, and the guilty person before the Judge when he
majestically rises off his judgment seat, and composes his countenance into an
aspect of terror and severity, that his sentence may fall upon the offender
with the greater dread? and shall not a Christian be quiet before that God
that can bathe his sword in Heaven, and burn the chariots on earth? Nay, shall
the Sheep be hushed before the Wolf, Birds before the Hawk, and all the Beasts
of the field before the Lion? and shall not we be hushed and quiet before
him, who is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah? Rev. 5. 5. God is mighty in power,
and mighty in counsel, and mighty in working, and mighty in punishing; and
therefore be silent before him. It appears that God is a mighty God, by the
Epithet that is added unto El, which is Gibbor, importing that he is a God of
prevailing might; in Daniel he is called El Elim, the mighty of mighties.
Moses magnif^ing of Exodus 15.
his might, says, Who is like unto thee among the gods? Now certainly this
Epithet should be a mighty motive to work souls to that which Ha^akkuk
persuades to, Hab. 2. ult. The Lord is in his holy Temple: let all the earth
keep silence before him. Upon this very consideration, Exodus 14. 13, 14
Moses commands Israel to hold their peace.

It is reported of Augustus the Turk. Hist. 236. 415.
Emperor, and likewise of Tamberlain that warlike Scythian, that in their
eyes sat such a rare Majesty, that many in talking with them, and often
beholding of them, have become dumb. Oh my brethren! shall not the brightness
and splendour of the Majesty of the great God, whose sparkling Glory and Majesty
dazles the eyes of Angels, and makes those Princes of glory stand mute before
him, move you much more to silence, to hold your peace, and lay your hands upon
your mouths? Surely yes. But

Secondly, Consider, That all your afflictions, troubles and trials, shall work
for your good, Romans 8. 28. And we know that all Afflictiones Benedictiones.
Bern. Afflictions are blessings. Doubtless Manasseh would not exchange the good
he got by his Iron chains for all the gold chains that be in the world.
things shall work together for good to them that love God. Why then should you
fret, fling, fume? seeing God designs your good in all. The Be sucks sweet
honey out of the bitterest herbs: so God will by afflictions teach his children
to suck sweet knowledge, sweet obedience, and sweet experiences, etc. out of
all the bitter afflictions and trials he exercises them with; that scouring
and rubbing which frets others, shall make them shine the brighter, and that
weight which crushes and keeps others under, shall but make them like the
palmtree, grow better and higher. And that hammer which knocks others all in
pieces, shall but knock them the nearer to Christ the cornerstone. Stars shine
brightest in the darkest night: Torches give the best light, when beaten:
Grapes yield most Wine, when most pressed: Spices smell sweetest, when pounded;
Vines are the better for bleeding; Gold looks the brighter for scouring;
Juniper smells sweetest in the fire; Camomile, the more you tread it, the more
you spread it; the Salamander lives best in the fire; the Jews were best, when
most afflicted; the Athenians would never mend, till they were in mourning; the
Christ's-cross (says Luther) is no letter in the book, and yet (says he) it
has taught me more than all the letters in the book. Afflictions are the
Saints best benefactors to heavenly affections; where afflictions hang
heaviest, corruptions hang loosest. And grace that is hid in nature, as sweet
water in Rose-leaves, is then most fragrant, when the fire of affliction is put
under to distill it out. Grace shines the brighter for scouring, and is most
glorious, when it is most clouded.

Pliny in his natural history, Lib. 12. cap. 9.
writes of certain Trees growing in the red Seas, which being beat upon by the
waves, stand like a rock, immovable, and that they are bettered by the
roughness of the waters. In the Sea of afflictions God will make his people
stand like a rock, they shall be immovable, and invincible, and the more the
waves of afflictions beat upon them, the better they shall be, the more they
shall thrive in grace and godliness. Now how should this engage Christians to
be mute and silent under all their troubles and trials in this world,
considering that they shall all work for their good? God chastises our
carcasses, to heal our consciences, he afflicts our bodies, to save our souls,
he gives us gall and wormwood here, that the pleasures that be at his right
hand may be the more sweet hereafter; here he lays us upon a bed of thorns,
that we may look and long more for that easy bed of down (his bosom) in
Heaven.

As there is a curse wrapped up in the best things he gives the wicked, so there
is a blessing wrapped up Psa. 25. 10. Deuteronomy. 28 26
in the worst things he brings upon his own. As there is a curse wrapped up in a
wicked man's health, so there is a blessing wrapped up in a godly man's sickness:
As there is a curse wrapped up in a wicked man's strength, so there is a blessing
wrapped up in a godly man's weakness: As there is a curse wrapped up in a wicked
man's wealth, so there is a blessing wrapped up in a godly man's want: As there is
a curse wrapped up in a wicked man's honor, so there is a blessing wrapped up in a
godly man's reproach: As there is a curse wrapped up in all a wicked man's mercies,
so there is a blessing wrapped up in all a godly man's crosses, losses, and
changes: and why then should he not sit mute and silent before the Lord? But

Thirdly, Consider, That a holy silence is that excellent precious grace, that
lends a hand of support to every grace. Silence is Romans 15. 4
Custos, the Keeper of all other virtues, it lends a hand to Faith, a hand to
Hope, a hand to Love, a hand to Humility, a hand to Selfdenial, etc. A holy
silence has its influences upon all other graces that be in the soul, it
causes the Rose-buds of grace to blossom and bud forth. Silence is ( virtus
versata circa adversa) a grace that keeps a man gracious in all conditions; in
every condition Silence is a Christians right hand; in prosperity, it bears the
soul up under all the envy, malice, hatred and censures of the world; in
adversity, it bears the soul up under all the neglect, scorn and contempt that
a Christian meets with in the world; it makes every bitter sweet, every burden
light, and every yoke easy. And this the very Heathen seemed to intimate in
placing the Image of Angeronia with the mouth bound upon the Altar of Volupia,
to show, that silence under sufferings, was the ready way to attain true
comfort, and make every bitter sweet. No man honors God, nor no man justifies
God at so high a rate, as he who lays his hand upon his mouth, when the Rod
of God is upon his back. But

Fourthly, To move you to Silence under your sorest and your sharpest trials,
consider, That you Lam. 3. 39 Mic. 7. 7, 8, 9
have deserved greater and heavier afflictions than those you are under; has
God taken away one mercy? thou have deserved to be stripped of all; has he
taken away the delight of thine eyes? he might have taken away the delight of
thy soul; art thou under outward wants? thou have deserved to be under outward
and inward together; art thou cast upon a sickbed? thou have deserved a bed in
Hell; art thou under this ach and that pain? thou have deserved to be under
all aches and pains at once; has God chastised thee with whips? thou have
deserved to be chastised with 1 King. 12. 11, 14.
Scorpions; art thou fallen from the highest pinnacle of honor to be the scorn
and contempt of men? thou have deserved to be scorned and contemned by God and
Angels; art thou under a severe whipping? thou have deserved an utter damning.
Ah Christians! let but your eyes be fixed upon your demerits, and your hands
will be quickly upon your mouths; whatever is less than a final separation
from God, whatever is less than Hell, is mercy; and therefore you have cause to
be silent under the smartest dealings of God with you. But

Fifthly, Consider, A quiet silent spirit is of great esteem with God: God sets
the greatest value upon persons of a quiet spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 4. But let it be
the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the
ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great
price. A quiet spirit is a spark of the divine nature, it is a ray, a beam of
glory, it is a heaven-born spirit: No man is born with a holy Silence in his
heart, as he is born with a tongue in his mouth: this is a flower of paradise,
it is a precious Jem that God makes very great reckoning of. A quiet spirit
speaks a man most like to God, it capacitates a man for communion with God, it
renders a man most serviceable to God, and it obliges a man to most accurate
walking with God: A meek and quiet spirit is an incorruptible ornament, much
more valuable than gold.

First, There is a natural quietness, which proceeds from a good temper and
constitution of body.

Secondly, There is a moral quietness, which proceeds from good education and
breeding, which flows from good injunctions, instructions, and examples.

Thirdly, There is an artificial quietness; some have an art to imprison their
passions, and to lay a Law of restraint upon their anger and wrath, when they
are all in a flame within: As you may 2 Samuel 13. 20, -- 33
see in Cain, Esau, Absalom, and Joab, who for a time cast a close cloak over
their malice, when their hearts were set on fire of Hell: so Domitian would
seem to love them best, whom he willed least should live.

Fourthly, There is a gracious quietness which is of the spirits infusion, Gal.
5. 22, -- 25. Now this quietness of spirit, this spiritual frame of heart, is
of great price in the sight of God. God values it above the world, and
therefore who would not covet it more than the world, yea more than life it
self? Certainly the great God sets a great price upon nothing but that which is
of an invaluable price; what stretching, struggling and striving is there for
those things that the great ones of the earth do highly prize? Ah what
stretching of wits, interests, and consciences is there this day, to gain and
hold up that which justice will cast down? how much better would it be if all
persons would in good earnest struggle and strive, even as for life, after a
quiet and silent spirit, which the great and glorious God sets so great a price
upon? this is a pearl of greatest price, and happy is he that purchases it,
though it were with the loss of all. But

Sixthly, Consider, that if you sit not quiet and silent under your greatest
troubles, and your sorest trials, you will be found fighters against your own
prayers. How often have you prayed that the will of God may be done, yea, that
it may be done on the earth as the Angels (those glistering Courtiers, Mat. 6.
10
those Princes of glory) do it now in Heaven? when troubles and afflictions
come upon you, the will of God is done, his will is accomplished, why then
should you fret, fling, and fume, and not rather quietly lie down in his will,
whose Voluntas Dei necessitas rei, every gracious soul should say Amen to Gods
Amen; he should put his fiat, his placet, to Gods, go it never so much against
the hair with him.
will is a perfect will, a just and righteous will, a wise will, an overruling
will, an infinite will, a sovereign will, a holy will, an immutable will, an
uncontrollable will, an omnipotent will, and an eternal will; certainly you
will but add affliction to affliction, by fighting against your own prayers,
and by vexing and fretting your selves when the will of God is done; it is sad
to see a man to fight against his friends, it is sadder to see him fight
against his relations, it is saddest of all to see him fight against his
prayers, and yet this every Christian does, who murmures and mutters when the
Rod of God is upon him; some there be that pray against their prayers, as
Augustine, who prayed for continency, with a proviso, Lord give me continency,
but not yet; And some there be who fight against their prayers, as those who
pray that the will of God may be done, and yet when his will is done upon them,
they are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, they are still fretting
against the Lord. Ah Christians! have you not sins to fight against, and
temptations to fight against, and a Devil to fight against yea a whole world to
fight against? why then should you be found fighting against your own prayers?
But

Seventhly, Consider, A holy Silence under the heaviest burdens, the greatest
afflictions, the saddest providence and changes, will make all tolerable, and
easy to a Christian; the silent soul can bear a burden without a burden; those
burdens and troubles that will break a froward man's Micah 7. 7, 8, 9, 10 Psalm.
62. 1, -- 6
back, will not so much as break a silent man's sleep; those afflictions that
lie as heavy weights upon a murmurer, will lie as light as a feather upon a
mute Christian; that bed of sorrow, which is as a bed of thorns to a fr^tful
soul, will be as a bed of down to a silent soul; a holy Silence unstings every
affliction, it takes off the weight of every burden, it adds sweet to every
bitter, it changes dark nights into Sunshiny days, and terrible storms into
desirable calms; the smallest sufferings will easily vanquish an unquiet
spirit, but a quiet spirit will as easily triumph over the greatest sufferings.
As little mercies are great mercies, so great sufferings are but little
sufferings in the eye of a silent soul; the silent soul never complains that
his affliction is too great, his burden too heavy, his cross too weighty, his
sufferings too many; Silence makes him victorious over all; And therefore as
ever you would have heavy afflictions light, and be able to bear a burden
without a burden, labor as for life after this holy silence. But

Eighthly, Consider, That a holy Silence under afflictions will be your best
armor of proof against those temptations that afflictions may expose you to;
times Luke 22. 31, -- 34. Job 1. 3 Zach. 1. 2, 3, 4 Mat. 4. 1, 2, 3
of afflictions, often prove times of great temptation; and therefore
afflictions are called temptations, James 1. 12. Blessed is the man which
endures temp(...)on, for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of
life, etc. The Greek word (...), is to be understood of temptations of
probation, of afflicting temptations, and not of temptations of suggestion,
James 4. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 9
of seduction, for they are not to be endured, but resisted and abhorred. Now
affliction is called temptation,

1 Because, as temptation tries what metal a Christian is made of, so do
afflictions.

2 Because, as Satan usually has a great hand in all the temptations that come
upon us, so he has a great hand in all the afflictions that befall us. As you
see in that great instance of Job.

3 Because, as temptations drive to God, 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8. so do afflictions,
Isa. 26. 16. Hosea 5. ult. but mainly, because Satan chooses times of
afflictions as the fittest season for his temptations; when Job was sorely
afflicted in his estate, children, wife, life, then Sa(...) lets fly, and
makes his fiercest assaults upon him; now Satan tempts him to entertain hard
thoughts of God, to distrust, to impatiency, to murmuring Many Saints have
experienced this truth, when they have been upon their sick and dying beds
and muttering: As when Israel was feeble, faint and weary, Amaleck assaulted
them, and smote the hindmost of them, Deuteronomy. 25. 17, 18. So when Christians are
most afflicted, then usually they are most tempted.

Luther found this by experience, when he said, I am without, set upon by all
the world* and within, by the Devil and all his Angels. Satan is a coward, and
loves to strike us, and trample upon us, when afflictions have cast us down.
When besiedged Towns, Cities and Castles are in greatest straights and
troubles, then the besiedgers make their fiercest assaults: So when Christians
are under the greatest straights and trials, then Satan assaults them most,
like a roaring Lion. Now silence under afflictions is the best antidote and
preservative against all those temptations that afflictions lay us open to.
Silence in afflictions is a Christians armor of proof, it is that shield, that
no spear or dart of temptation can pierce; whilst a Christian lies quiet under
the Rod, he is safe; Satan may tempt him, but he will not conquer him, he
may assault him, but he cannot vanquish him, Satan may entice him to use
sinful shifts, to shift himself out of trouble, but he will choose rather to
lie, yea dye in trouble than to get out upon Satan's terms. But

Ninthly, Consider, That holy Silence under afflictions and trials, will give a
man a quiet and peaceable possession of his own soul, In patience possess your
souls; now next to the possession of God, the Luke 21. 19. Vide Greg. in
Evangel. Hom. 35.
possession of a man's own soul is the greatest mercy in this world. A man may
possess honors and riches, and dear relations, and the favor and assistance
of friends under his trials, but he will never come to a possession of his own
soul under his troubles, till he comes to be mute, and to lay his hand upon
his mouth. Now what are all earthly possessions, to the possession of a man's
own soul? he that possesses himself, possesses all, he that possesses not
himself, possesses nothing at all; he possesses not the use, the sweet, the
comfort, the good, the blessing of any thing he enjoyes, who enjoyes not
himself; that man that is not Master of himself, he is Master of nothing; holy
Silence gives a man the greatest Mastery over his own spirit, and Mastery over
a man's own spirit, is the greatest Mastery in the Prove. 16. 32
world. The Egyptian Goddess they paint upon a rock standing in the Sea, where
the waves come roaring and dashing upon her, with this Motto, Semper eadem,
storms shall not move me. A holy Silence will give a man such a quiet
possession of his own soul, that all the storms of afflictions shall not move
him; it will make him stand like a Rock in a Sea of troubles; let a man but
quietly possess himself, and troubles will never trouble him. But

Tenthly, Consider the commands and injunctions that God in his word has laid
upon you to be silent, to be mute and quiet, under all the troubles, trials
and changes that have or may pass upon you. Zach. 21. 3. Be silent, O all
flesh! before the Lord; for he is raised Gods commands are like those of the
Medes, that cannot be changed.
up out of his holy habitation, Isa. 41. 1. Keep silence before me* O Islands.
Hab. 2. 20. The lord is in his holy Temple; let all the earth keep silence
before him. Amos 5. 1^. Therefore the prudent shall keep silence in that time,
for it is an evil time. Psa. 46. 10. Be still, and know that I am God. Psa. 4.
4. Commune with your heart, and be still. Exodus 14. 13. Stand still, and see
the salvation of God. 2 Chronicles. 20. 17. Stand ye still, and see the salvation
of the Lord with you, O Judah and Jerusalem. Job 37. 14. Hearken unto this, O
Job: stand still, and consider the wondrous works of God. It is a dangerous
thing for us to neglect one of his commands, who by another is able to command
us into nothing, or into Hell at pleasure; to act or run cross to Gods express
command (though under pretense of revelation from God) is as much as a man's
life is worth, as you may see in that sad story, 1 King. 13. 24, etc. Divine
Obedientia non discutit Dei mandata, sed facit. Prosper. Romans 7. 12, 14
commands must be put in speedy execution, without denying or delaying,
without debating or disputing the difficulties that may attend our subjection
to them. Gods commands are spiritual, holy, just and good; and therefore to be
obeyed without muttering or murmuring: Divine commands are backed with the
strongest reason, and attended with the highest encouragements. Shall the
servant readily obey the commands of his Master? the subject the commands of
his Prince, the soldier the commands of his General, the child the commands of
his Father, the wife the commands of her husband, and shall not a Christian as
readily obey the commands of his Christ? nay, shall vain men readily and
willingly obey the sinful and senseless commands of men, and shall not we be
willing to obey the commands of God? 2 Samuel 13. 28, 29. Now Absalom had
commanded his servants, saying, Mark ye now when Amnons heart is merry with
Wine, and when I say unto you, Smite Amnon, then kill him, fear not: have not I
commanded you? be courageous, and be valiant. And the servants of Absalom did
unto Amnon, as Absalom had commanded: they made no bones of obeying the bloody
commands of Absalom, against all Law, Reason and Religion.

I have read of one Johannes Abbas, Cassian. de Institut. renunciant. lib. 4.
cap. 24
who willingly fetched water near two miles every day for an whole year
together, to pour upon a dry stick, upon the bare command of his Confessor.

I have also read of the old Kings of Peru, that they were wont to use a tassel
or fringe made of red wool, which they wore upon their heads, and when they
sent any Governor to rule as Vice Roy in any part of their Country, they
delivered unto him one of the threeds of the tassel, and for one of those
simple threeds he was as much obeyed, as if he had been the King himself: Now
shall one single thread be more forcible to draw Infidels to obedience, than
all those golden commands last cited, shall be of force to draw you to be
quiet and silent under the troubles and changes you meet with in this world?
the Lord forbid.

Shall carnal and wicked persons be so ready and willing to comply with the
bloody, and senseless, Non parentum aut majorum authoritas, sed Dei docentis
imperium. Jerome. The commands of God must outweigh all authority and example
of men.
and superstitious commands of their superiors? and shall not Christians be
more ready and willing to comply with the commands of the great God? whose
commands are all just and equal, and whose will is the perfect rule of
Righteousness. Prior est autoritas imperantis, quam utilitas servientis.
Tertul. The chief reason of obedience, is the authority of the Lord, not the
utility of the servant. Ah Christians! when your hearts begin to fret and fume
under the smarting Rod, charge one of those commands last cited upon your
hearts, and if they shall mutter, charge another of those commands upon your
hearts, and if after this they shall vex and murmr, charge another of those
commands upon your hearts, and never leave charging and rubbing those commands
one after another upon your hearts, till you are brought to lay your hands upon
your mouths, and to sit silent before the Lord under your greatest straights,
and your sorest trials.

Eleventhly, Consider, That mercy is nearest, deliverance and Act. 27. 20, --
26 Dan. 9. 20, -- 24. Isa. 58. 8, 9. chap. 30. 19. and chapter 65. 24
salvation is at hand, when a Christian stands still, when he sits quiet and
silent under his greatest troubles, and his sorest trials. Exodus 14. They were
in very great straights; Pharaoh with a mighty Army was behind them, the Red
Sea before them, Mountains on each hand of them, and no visible means to
deliver them: But now they stand still to see the salvation of the Lord, verse.
13. and within a few hours their enemies are destroyed, and they are gloriously
delivered, verse. 24, -- ult. Psalm. 39. 9. David is dumb, he sits mute under
his smart afflictions, but if you look to the second and third verses of the
fortieth Psalm, you shall find mercy draws near to him, and works salvation
for him. He brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of the mire and
clay, and set my feet upon a rock, and established my goings. And he has put
a new song into my mouth, even praise unto our God: many shall see it and fear,
and shall trust in the Lord. And so when Absalom had made a great conspiracy
against him, and his subjects fell off from him, and he was forced to flee for
his life, his spirit was quiet and calm, 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26. And the King said
unto Zadock* Carry back the Ark of God into the City: if I shall find favor
in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me both it, and
and his habitation. But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee, Behold here
am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him. And the same calmness and
quietness of spirit was upon him, when Shimei bitterly cursed him, and railed
upon him, chap. 16. 5, -- 14. And within a few days, as you may see in the two
following Chapters, the conspirators are destroyed, and David's Throne more
firmly established; mercy is always nearest, when a man can in quietness
possess his own soul; salvation is at hand, when a Christian comes to lay his
hand upon his mouth; mercy will be upon the wing, loving kindness will ride
post, to put a period to that man's troubles, who sits silent in the day of his
sorrows and sufferings. Ah Christians, as you would have mercy near, as you
would see to the end of your afflictions, as you would have deliverance come
flying upon the wings of the wind, sit mute and silent under all your troubles.
As Wine was then nearest when the water-pots were filled with water John 2. 1,
-- 12.
even to the brim: so when the heart is fullest of quietness and calmness, then
is the Wine of mercy, the Wine of deliverance nearest.

The twelfth and last Motive to work you to silence under your greatest trials,
is this, Seriously consider the heinous and dangerous nature of murmuring; now
that you may, let me propose these following particulars to your most sober
consideration.

First, Consider, That murmuring Heb. 12. 15 Deuteronomy. 29 18. Heb. 3. 12
speaks out many a root of bitterness to be strong in thy soul; murmuring
speaks out sin in its power, corruption upon its Throne. As holy Silence argues
true Grace, much Grace, yea Grace in its strength, and in its lively vigor; so
murmuring, muttering under the hand or God, argues much sin, yea a heart full
of sin, it speaks out a heart full of self-love, Exodus 15. 24. chap. 16. 7, 8.
and full of slavish ^ears, Numb. 13. 32, 33. chap. 14. 1, 2, 3. and full of
ignorance, John 6. 41, 42, 61. and full of pride and unbeleef, Psalm. 106. 24,
25. yea they despised the pleasant land, Psalm. 78. 19, 20 Unbeleef is virtually
all ill.
or the land of desire (there is their pride) they believed not in his word,
there is their unbeleef, what follows? they murmured in their tents, and
hearkened not unto the voice of God; they were sick of the fullens, and
preferred Egypt before Canaan, a wilderness before a paradise. As in the first
Chaos, there were the seeds of all creatures: so in the murmurers heart, there
is not only the seed of all sin, but a lively operation of all sin; sin is
become mighty in the hearts of murmurers, and none but an Almighty God can root
it out; those roots of bitterness have so spread and strengthened themselves in
the hearts of murmurers, Isa. 26. 4
that everlasting strength must put in, or they will be undone for ever. But

Secondly, Consider, That the Holy Ghost has set a brand of infamy upon
murmurers, he has stigmatized them for ungodly persons, Jude 15. 16. To
execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them of
all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their
hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoker against him. But who are these
ungodly sinners? They are murmurers, complainers walking after their own lusts,
etc. verse. 16. When Christ comes to execute judgment upon ungodly ones,
murmurers shall be set in the front, they shall experience the firstness of
his wrath, and the fierceness of his wrath, and the greatness of his wrath; the
front you know is first assaulted, and most strongly assaulted, Christ will
bond all his power and strength against murmurers, his little finger shall be
heavier upon 1 Kings 12. 11, 14
them, than his loins shall be upon others, other sinners shall be chastised
with whips, but ungodly murmurers shall be chastised with scorpions; if you
can joy in that black character of ungodly sinners, be murmurers still, if
not, cease from murmurings; where murmuring is in its reign, in its dominion,
there you may speak and write that person ungodly; let murmurers make what
profession they will of godliness, yet if murmuring keeps the Throne in their
hearts, Christ will deal with them at last as ungodly sinners; a man may be
denominated ungodly, as well from his murmuring, if he lives under the
dominion of it, as from his drunkenness, swearing, whoring, lying, stealing,
etc. A murmurer is an ungodly man, he is an ungodlike man, no man on earth
more unlike to God, than the murmurer; and therefore no wonder if when Christ
comes to execute judgment, he deals so severely and terribly with him. In the
wars of Tamberlain, one having found a great pot of Gold that was hid in the
earth, he brought it to Tamberlain, who asked whether it had his Fathers stamp
upon it, but when he saw it had not his Fathers stamp, but the Roman stamp
upon it, he would not own it, but cast it away. The Lord Jesus, when he shall
come with all his Saints to execute judgment, Oh he will not own murmurers,
nay, he will cast them away for ever, because they have not his Fathers stamp
upon them. Ah souls! souls, as you would not go up and down this world with a
badge of ungodliness upon you, take heed of murmuring.

Thirdly, Consider, That murmuring Numb. 16. 41. chapter 17. 10.
is a mother sin, it is the Mother of harlots, the Mother of all abominations,
a sin that breeds many other sins, viz. disobedience, contempt, ingratitude,
impatience, distrust, rebellion, cursing, carnality; yea it charges God with
folly, yea with blasphemy; Judge. 17. 2.
the language of a murmuring, a muttering soul, is this, Surely God might have
done this sooner, and that wiser, and the other thing better, etc. As the River
Nilus brings forth many Crocodiles, and the Scorpion many Serpents at one
birth, so murmuring is a sin that breeds and brings forth many sins at once:
Murmuring is like the Monster Hydra, cut off one head, and many will rise up in
its room. Oh! therefore bend all thy strength against this Mother sin; As the
King of Syria said 1 Kings 22. 31.
to his Captains, Fight neither with small nor great, but with the King of
Israel: So say I, fight not so much against this sin or that, but fight against
your murmuring, which is a Mother sin; make use of all your Ephesians. 6. 10, 11.
Christian armor, make use of all the ammunition of Heaven, to destroy the
Mother, and in destroying of her, you will destroy the daughters. When Goliath
was slain, the Philistians fled; when a General in an Army is cut off, the
common soldiers are easily and quickly routed and destroyed: So, destroy but
murmuring, and you will quickly destroy disobedience, ingratitude, impatience,
distrust, etc. Oh! kill this Mother sin, that this may never kill thy soul. I
have read of Senacherib, that after his Army was destroyed by an Angel, Isa.
37. and he returned home to his own Country, he enquired of one about him,
what he thought the reason might be why God so favored the Jews, he
answered, that there was one Abraham their Father that was willing to sacrifice
his Son to death at the command of God, and that ever since that time God
favored that people: well, said Senacherib, if that be it, I have two Sons,
and I will sacrifice them both to death, if that will procure their God to
favor me; which when his two Sons heard, they (as the story goes) slew their
Father, Isa. 37. 38. choosing rather to kill, than be killed: So do thou, choose
rather to kill this Mother sin, than Psalm. 137. 8, 9
to be killed by it, or by any of those vipers that are brought forth by it.

Fourthly, Consider, That murmuring is a God-provoking sin; it is a sin that
provokes God, not only to afflict, but also to destroy Numb. 26. ult. Numb.
12. 10 Rev. 16. 8, 9, 10, 11
a people, Numb. 14. 27, 28, 29. How long shall I bear with this evil
Congregation which murmr against me? I have heard the murmuring of the
children of Israel, which they murmr against me. Say unto them, As truly as
I live, says the Lord, as ye have spoken in mine ears, so will I do to you:
Your carcasses shall fall in this wilderness, and all that were numbered of you,
according to your whole number from twenty years old and upward, which have
murmured against me. 1 Cor. 10. 10. Neither murmr ye, as some of them also
murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer. All our murmurings do but
provoke the Lord to strike us, and destroy us.

I have read of Caesar, that having Seneca.
prepared a great feast for his Nobles and Friends, it so ^ell out, that the
day appointed was extreme ^oul, that nothing could be done to the honor of the
meeting, whereupon he was so displeased and enraged, that he commanded all
them that had bows, to shoot up their arrows at Jupiter (their chief God) as in
defiance of him for that rainy weather, which when they did, their arrows fell
short of Heaven, and full upon their own heads, so that many of them were very
sorely wounded: So all our mutterings and murmurings which are as so many
arrows shot at God himself, they will return upon our pates, hearts; they reach
not him, but they will hit us; they hurt not him, but they will wound us;
therefore it is better to be mute, than to murmr, it is dangerous to provoke
a consuming fire. Heb. 12. ult. Irenaeus calls murmurers, ora diaboli, the
Devils mouth. Job 1. 8, 9 Luke 22. 31, -34 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10


Fifthly, Consider, That murmuring is the Devils Image, sin, and punishment;
Satan is still a murmuring* ^hee murmures at every mercy that God bestows, at
every dram of grace he gives; he murmures at every sin he pardons, and at
every soul he^ saves; a soul cannot have a good look from Heaven, nor hear a
good word from Heaven, nor receive a Love-letter from Heaven, but Satan
murmures at it; he murmures and mutters at every act of pitying grace, and at
every act of preventing grace, and at every act of supporting grace, and at
every act of strengthening grace, and at every act of comforting grace that God
exercises toward poor souls; he murmures at every sip, at every drop, at
every crum of mercy that God bestows* Cyprian, Aquinas and others, conceive,
that the cause of Satan's banishment from Heaven, was his grieving and murmuring
at the dignity of man whom he beheld made after Gods own Image, insomuch that
Genesis 3.
he would relinquish his own glory, Satan can never be quiet ( nec victor,
nec victus) neither conquered, nor conqueror.
to divest so noble a Creature of perfection, and rather be in Hell himself,
than see Adam placed in Paradise. But certainly, after his fall, murmuring and
envy at man's innocence and felicity, put him upon attempting to plunge man into
the bottomeless gulf of sin and misery; he knowing himself to be damned, and
lost for ever, would needs try all ways how to make happy man eternally
unhappy. Mr. Howel tells it as a strange thing, that a Serpent was found in the
heart of an Englishman when he was dead; But alas! this old Serpent was by sad
experience found to have too much power in the heart of Adam whilst alive, and
whilst in the height of all his glory and excellency; murmuring is the
firstborn of the Devil, and nothing renders a man more like to him than
murmuring. Constantines Sons did not more resemble their Father, nor Aristotle's
scholars their Master, nor Alexanders Soldiers their General, than murmurers
do resemble Satan. And as murmuring i^ Satan's sin, so it is his punishment: God
has given him up to a murmuring spirit, nothing pleases him, all things go
against him, he is perpetually a muttering and murmu^ing, at persons or
things: Now, Oh what a dreadful thing is it to bear Satan's image upon us, and
to be given up to the Devils punishment! it were better not to be, than thus
to be given up; and therefore cease from murmuring, and sit mute under your
sorest trials. But

Sixthly, Consider, That murmuring is a mercy-imbittering sin, a mercy-souring
sin. As put the sweetest things into a sour vessel, it soures them, or put
them into a bitter vessel, and it imbitters them; murmuring puts gall and
wormwood into every cup of mercy, that God gives into our hands. As holy
silence gives a sweet taste, a delightful relish to all a man's mercies; so
murmuring imbitters all; the murmurer can taste no sweetness in his sweetest
morsels, every mercy, every morsel tastes Job 6. 6.
like the white of an Egg to him; this mercy, says the murmurer, is not
toothsome, nor that mercy is not wholesome; here is a mercy wants salt, and
there is a mercy wants sauce. A murmurer can taste no sweet, he can feel no
comfort, he can take no delight in any mercy he injoyes. The murmurer writes
Marah, that is, bitterness upon all his mercies, and he reads and tastes
bitterness in all his mercies. All the murmurers Grapes, are Grapes of Gall,
and all their clusters are bitter, Deuteronomy. 32. 32. As to the hungry soul, every
Prove. 27. 7
bitter thing is sweet: So to the murmuring soul, every sweet thing is bitter;
the mute Christian can suck sweetness from every breast of mercy, but the
murmurer cries out, Oh it is bitter! Oh these breasts of mercy are dry!

Seventhly, Consider, That murmuring is a mercy-destroying sin, a
mercy-murthering sin; murmuring cuts the throat of mercy, it stabs all our
mercies at the heart, it sets all a man's mercies a bleeding about him at once,
Numb. 14. 30. Doubtless ye shall not come into the land concerning which I
swear to make you dwell therein, save Caleb the Son Psalm. 89. 30, 31. Deuteronomy. 31.
16, 17
of Jephunneh, and Joshua the Son of Nun. God promises them that they should
possess the holy land upon the condition of their obedience; this condition
they brake, and therefore God was not forsworn, though he cut them off in the
wilderness, and kept them out of Canaan; but what is the sin that provokes the
Lord to bar them out of the land of Promise, and to cut them off from all those
mercies that they enjoyed, which entered into the holy land? why it was their
murmuring, as you may see, in verse. 1, 2, 3, 26, 27, 28, 29. As you love your
mercies, as you would have the sweet of your mercies, and as you would enjoy
the life of your mercies, take heed of murmuring; murmuring will bring a
consumption upon your mercies, it is a worm that will make all your mercies to
wither. As there be some that love their mercies into the grave, and others
that plot their mercies into the grave: so there be some that murmr their
mercies into the grave. As you would have your mercies always fresh and green,
smiling and thriving, as you would have your mercies to bed and board with you,
to rise up, and lie down with you, and in all conditions to attend you; murmr
not, murmr not; the mute Christians mercies are most sweet, and most
long-lived; the murmurers mercies, like Jonab's Gourd, will quickly wither.
Murmuring has cut the throat of national mercies, of domestical me^cies, and
of personal mercies; and therefore Oh how should men fly from it, as from a
Serpent! as from the avenger of blood! yea, as from Hell it self!

Eighthly, Consider, That murmuring unfits the soul for duty: Exodus 6. 6, -- 10
A murmurer can neither hear to profit, nor pray to profit, nor read to profit,
nor meditate to profit; the murmurer is neither fit to do good, nor receive
good; murmuring unfits the soul for doing of duties, it unfits the soul for
delighting in duties, it unfits the soul for communion with God in duties;
murmuring fills the 1 Cor. 7. 33, 34, 35.
soul with cares, fears, distractions, vexations; all which unfits a man for
duty. As a holy quietness and calmness of spirit prompts a man to duty; as it
makes every duty easy and pleasant to the Prove. 3. 17
soul: so murmuring, that unhinges the soul, that indisposes the soul, that
takes off the Chariot wheels of the soul, that the soul cannot look up to God,
nor do for God, nor receive from God, Psalm. 40. 12.
nor wait on God, nor walk with God, nor act Faith upon God, etc. Oh therefore!
as ever you would be in a blessed preparedness, 2 King. 6. 33 Isa. 26. 9, 10,
11
and a blessed fittedness for duty, take heed of murmuring, and ^it mu^e and
silent under the afflicting hand of God.

Ninthly, Consider, That murmuring unmans a man, it strips Isa. 5. 18, 19, 20
him of his reason and understanding, it makes him call evil good, and good
evil, it puts light for darkness, and darkness for light, bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter, it calls Saviors destroyers, and deliverers murderers;
Exodus 14, 15, 16. chapters. Lam. 5. 16
As you see in the murmuring Israelites; murmuring uncrowns a man, the murmurer
may say, my Crown is fallen from my head; murmuring strips a man of all his
glory, it spoils all his excellency, it destroies the nobility of man, it
speaks him out to be a base ignoble Creature; murmuring clouds a man's
understanding, it perverts his judgment, it puts out the eye of reason, it
stupifies his conscience, it soures the heart, it disorders the will, and
distempers the affections, it be beasts a man, yea it sets him below the beast
that perishes; for a man were better be a beast, than be like a beast; the
murmurer is the Hieroglyphick of folly, he is a comprehensive vanity, he is a
man, and no man, he is sottish and senseless, he neither understands God, nor
himself, nor any thing as he should, he is the man that must be sent to
school, to learn of the beasts of the field, and the birds of the Isa. 3. 8
Jer. 7. 6. Mat. 6, Prove. 6.
air, and the creeping things of the earth, how to cease from murmuring, and
how to be mute. Ah Sirs! as you would have the name, the honor, the
reputation of being men, I say men, Take heed of murmuring, and sit silent
before the Lord.

Tenthly, Murmuring is a timedestroying sin: Ah the precious time that is
buried in the grave of murmuring! when the murmurer should be a praying, he
is a murmuring against the Lord; when he should be a hearing, he is a
murmuring against divine providence; when he should be a reading, he is a
murmuring against instruments; the murmurer spends much precious time in
musing, in musing how to get out of such a trouble, how to get off such a yoke,
how to be rid of such a burden, how to revenge himself for such a wrong, how
to supplant such a person, how to reproach those that are above him, and how to
affront those that are below him, and a thousand other ways murmurers have to
expend tha^ precious time, that some would redeem with a world. As Queen
Sumptus pretiocissimus tempus, Time is of precious cost, says Theophrastus.
Elizabeth on her deathbed, cried out, time, time, a world of wealth for an
inch of time; the murmurer lavishly and profusely trifles away that precious
time that is his greatest interest in this world to redeem, Ephesians. 5. 16. every
day, every hour in the day is a talent of time, and God expects the Rev. 2. 21
1 Pet. 4. 2. 5
improvement of it, and will charge the non-improvement of it upon you at last.
Caesar observing the Ladies in Rome to spend Plutarch in the life of Pericles.
much of their time in making much of little Dogs and Monkies, asked them
whether the women in that Country had no children to make much of? Ah
murmurers! murmurers, you who by your murmuring, trifle away so many golden
hours and seasons of mercy; have you no God to honor? have you no Christ to
believe in? have you no hearts to change? no sins to be pardoned? no souls to
save, no Hell to escape? no Heaven to seek after? Oh! if you have, why do you
spend so much of your precious time in murmuring against God? against men?
against this or that thing? Eternity rides upon the back of Time. Hoc est
momentum, this is the moment, Aut male, aut nihil, aut aliud agendo.
if it be well improved, you are made for ever, if not, you are undone for
ever.

I have read of Archias a Lacedemonian, that whilst he was rioting and
quaffing in the midst of his cups, one delivers him a letter purposely to
signify that there were some that lay in wait to take Plutarch.
away his life, and withal desires him to read it presently, because it was a
serious business and matter of high concernment to him; Oh! said he, seria
cras, I will think of serious things to morrow, but that night he was slain.
Ah murmurer! cease from murmuring to day, or else thou may be for ever
undone by murmuring to morrow; the old saying, was, nunc aut nunquam, now or
never: So say I, now or never, now or never, give over murmuring, and let it
swallow up no more of your precious time; what would not many a murmurer give
for one of those days, yea for one of those hours which he has trifled away
in murmuring, when it is a day too late?

The Rabbis glory in this conceit, that a man has so many bones, as there
be latters in the Decalogue, and just so many joints and members, as there be
days in the year, to show, that all our strength and time should be expended
in Gods service. Ah murmurers! you will gain more by one days faithful serving
of God, than ever you have gained by murmuring against God. But

Eleventhly, Consider this Christians, that of all men in the world, you have
least cause, yea no cause to be murmuring and Lam. 3. 24 Ephesians. 3. 8 1 Pet. 1.
3, 4
muttering under any dispensations that you meet with in this world: is not God
thy portion? Chrysostom propounds this question, Chrysostom. Hom. 4. de
patientia Job.
was Job miserable when he lost all that God had given him? and gives this
answer, no, he had still that God who gave him all* Is not Christ thy
treasure? is not Heaven thine inheritance? and will thou murmr? have thou not
much in hand, and more in hope? have thou not much in possession, but much more
in reversion, and will thou murmr? has not God given thee a changed heart, a
renewed nature, and a sanctified soul? and will thou murmr? has he not
given thee himself, to satisfy thee? his Son, Omne bonum in summo bono.
to save thee? his Spirit, to lead thee? his grace, to adorn thee? his
covenant, to assure thee? his mercy, to pardon thee? his righteousness, to
cloathe thee? and will thou murmr? has he not made thee a friend, a son, a
brother, a bride, an heir, and will thou murmr? has not God often turned thy
water into wine, thy brass into silver, and thy silver into gold? and will thou
murmr? when thou was dead, did not he quicken God is all in all, and all
without all.
thee? and when thou wast lost, did not he seek thee? and when thou wast
wounded, did not he^ heal thee? and when thou were falling, did not he
support thee? and when thou were down, did not he raise thee? and when thou
were staggering, did not he establish thee? and when thou were erring, did
not he reduce thee? and when thou were tempted, did not he succor thee? and
when thou were in dangers, did not he deliver thee? and will thou murmr?
what thou that art so highly advanced and exalted above many thousands in the
world? Murmuring is a black garment, and it becomes none so ill as Saints.

Twelfthly and lastly, Consider, That murmuring makes the life of man invisibly
miserable, every murmurer is his own executioner: Murmuring vexes the heart, it
wears and tears the heart, it inrages and inflames the heart, it wounds and
stabs the heart; every murmurer is his own Martyr, every murmurer is a
murderer, he kills many at once, viz. his joy, his comfort, his peace, his
rest, his soul; no man so inwardly miserable, as the murmurer, no man has such
inward gripes and grief, as he, such inward bitterness and heaviness, as he,
such inward contentions and combustions, as he; every murmurer is his own
tormentor, murmuring is a fire within, that will burn up all, it is an
earthquake within, that will overturn all, it is a disease within, that will
infect all, it is poison within, that will prey upon all* And thus I have done
with those motives that may persuade us not to murmr nor mutter, but to be
mute and silent under the greatest afflictions, the saddest providence, and
sharpest trials that we meet with in this world.

I shall now address my self to answer those Objections, and to remove those
Impediments which hinder poor souls from being silent and mute under the
afflicting hand of God, etc.

Object. 1. Sir, did I but know that I were afflicted in love, I would hold my
peace under my affliction, I would sit mute before the Lord, but Oh! how shall
I come to understand that these strokes are the strokes of love, that these
wounds are the wounds of a friend? I answer,

First, If thy heart be drawn more out to the Lord by the affliction, Psalm.
18. 1, -- 8. Psalm. 116. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Psalm. 119. 67, 71. Isa. 38.
then the affliction is in love; if they are so sanctified, as that they draw
out thy soul to love the Lord more, and to fear the Lord more, and to please
the Lord more, and to cleave to the Lord more, and to wait on the Lord more,
and to walk with the Lord more, then they are in love. Oh! then they are the
wounds of a friend indeed. It is reported of the Lioness, that she leaves her
young whelps till they have almost killed themselves with roaring and yelling,
and then at last gasp, when they have almost spent themselves, she relieves
them, and by this means they become more courageous; and so if the afflictions
that are upon us do increase our courage, strengthen our patience, raise our
faith, inflame our love, and enliven our hopes: Certainly they are in love, and
all our wounds are the wounds of a friend. But

Secondly, If you are more careful and studious how to glorify God in the
affliction, and Dan. 3. and 6. chapters Heb. 11.
how to be kept from sinning under the affliction, than how to get out of the
affliction, then certainly your affliction is in love: where God smites in
love, there the soul makes it his work how to glorify God, and how to lift up
God, and how to be a name and an honor to God; the daily language of such a
soul under the rod, is this, Lord stand by me that I sin not, Josh. 7. 7, 8,
9, 10
uphold m^e that I sin not, strengthen me that I sin not; he that will not
sin to repair and make up his losses, though he knew assuredly that the
committing of such a sin would make up all again, he may conclude that his
affliction is in love.

I have read of a Noble man, whose Son and Heir was supposed to be bewitched,
and being advised to go to some wizard or cunning man (as they are called) to
have some help for his Son, that he might be unwitched again, he answered,
Oh by no means! I had rather the Witch should have my Son, than the Devil; his
Son should suffer, rather than he would sin him out of his sufferings. He
that will not break the hedge of a fair Command, to avoid the foul way of some
heavy affliction, may well conclude, that his affliction is in love.
Christians! what say you when you are in the Mount, do you thus bespeak the
Lord? Lord take care of thy glory, and let me rather sink in my affliction,
than sin under my affliction; if this be the bent and frame of thy heart, it
is certain the affliction that is upon thee is in love; the primitive times
afforded many such brave spirits, though this age affords but few.

Thirdly, If you enjoy the special presence of God with your spirits in your
affliction, then your Psalm. 23. 4, 5, 6
affliction is in love. Isa. 43. 2. When thou passest through the waters, I will
be with thee, and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: The bush
which was a type of the Church consumed not all the while it burned with fire,
because God was in the midst of it
when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the
flames kindle upon thee. Have thou a special presence of God with thy spirit,
strengthening of that, quieting of that, steeling of that, satisfying of that,
chearing and comforting of that? Psalm. 94. 19. In the multitude of my thoughts
(that is, of my troubled, intricated, insnarled, intertwined, and perplexed
thoughts (as the branches of a tree by some strong wind are twisted one within
another, as the Hebrew word properly signifies) thy comforts delight my soul.
Here Is a presence of God with his soul, here is comforts and delights that
reaches the soul, here is a cordial to strengthen his spirit. When Knoles. Turk.
Hist. page 164
all things went cross with Andronicus the old Emperor of Constantinople, he
took a Psalter into his hand, and opening the same, he lighted upon Psalm. 68.
14. When the Almighty scattered Kings, they shall be white as Snow in Salmon;
which Scripture was a mighty comfort and refreshment to his spirit: Now you are
to remember that Salmon signifies shady and dark, and so was this Mount by the
reason of many lofty fair spread trees, that were near it, but made lightsome
by Snow that covered it: so that to be white as Snow in Salmon, is to have joy
in affliction, light in darkness, mercy in misery, etc. And thus God was to the
Psalmist as Snow in Salmon in the midst of his greatest afflictions. When Paul
would wish his dear Son Timothy the best mercy in all the world, the greatest
mercy in all the world, the most comprehensive mercy in all the world, a mercy
that carries the virtue, value and sweetness of all mercies in it, he wishes
the presence of God with his spirit, 2 Timothy 4. 22. The Lord Jesus Christ be
with thy spirit: in point of honor, in point of profit and pleasure, in point
of safety and security, and in point of comfort and joy, it is the greatest
blessing and happiness in this world, to have the presence of God with our
spirits, especially in times of trials, 2 Cor. 4. 16. For which cause we faint
not, but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by
day. By the outward man you are to understand, not merely our bodies, but our
persons, estates, and outward condition in this world; and by the inward man
you are to understand our souls, or persons, considered according to our
spiritual estate. Now, when the inward man gains new strength by every new
trouble, when as troubles, pressures, afflictions, and tribulations are
increased, a Christians inward strength is increased also, then his afflictions
are in love; when the presence of God is with our inward man, chearing,
comforting, encouraging, strengthening and renewing of that, we may safely
conclude, that all these trials, though they are never so sharp and smart, yet
they are in love.

I have read of a company of poor Christians that were banished into some
remote parts, and one standing by, seeing them pass along, said, That it was a
very sad condition those poor people were in, to be thus hurried from the
society of men; and to be made companions with the beasts of the field; true
said another, it were a sad condition indeed, i^ they were carried to a place
where they should not find their God; but let them be of good cheer, God goes
along with them, and will exhibit the comforts of his presence whithersoever
they go; the presence of God with the spirits of his people, is a breast of
comfort that can never be drawn dry, it is an everlasting spring that will
Heb. 13. 5, 6 Isa. 40. 29, 30, 31
never fail. Well Christian, thou art under many great troubles, many sore
trials, but tell me, does God give into thy soul such cordials, such supports,
such comforts, and such refreshments, that the world knows not of? O then
certainly thy affliction is in love.

Fourthly, If by your affliction, you are made more conformable Witness Judas,
Demas, and those in the 6th. of John, and many Q^akers, and other deluded
people among us this day.
to Christ in his virtues, then certainly your afflictions are in love; many
are conformable to Christ in their sufferings, that are not made conformable to
Christ in his virtues by their sufferings; many are in poverty, neglect, shame,
contempt, reproach, etc. like to Christ, who yet by these are not made more
like to Christ, in his meekness, humbleness, heavenliness, holiness,
righteousness, faithfulness, fruitfulness, goodness, contentedness, patience,
submission, subjection. Oh but if in these things you are made more like to
Christ, without all peradventure your afflictions are in love. If by
afflictions the soul be led to show forth, or to preach forth the virtues of
Christ, as that word imports, in that 1 Pet. 2. 9. then certainly Exaggeilete,
publicly to set forth.
those afflictions are in love; for they never have such an operation, but
where they are set on by a hand of love; when God strikes as an enemy, there
all those strokes do but make a man more an enemy to God, as you see in Pharaoh
and others; but when the strokes Isa. 26. 8, 9, 10 Jer. 5. 3. Amos 6. 1, -- ult.
of God are the strokes of love, Oh then they do but bring the soul nearer
Christ, and transform the soul more and more into the likeness of Christ; if by
thy afflictions thou art made more holy, humble, heavenly, etc. they are in
love. Every afflicted Christian should strive to be honored with that Elogie
of Salvian, singularis domini praeclarus imitator, An excellent Disciple of a
singular Master. But

Fifthly, If by outward afflictions thy soul be brought more under Job 34. 31,
32
the inward teachings of God, doubtless thy afflictions are in love. Psalm. 94.
12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord! and teach him out of
thy Law. All the chastening in the world, without divine teaching, will never
make a man blessed; that man that finds correction attended with instruction,
and lashing with lessoning, is a happy man. If God by the affliction that is
upon thee shall teach thee how to loathe sin more, and how to trample upon the
world more, and how to walk with God more, thy afflictions are in love; if God
shall teach thee by afflictions how to dye to sin more, and how to dye to thy
relations more, and how to dye to self-interest more, thy afflictions are in
love; if God shall teach thee by afflictions how to live to Christ more, how to
lift up Christ more, and how to long for Christ more, thy afflictions are in
love; If God shall teach thee by afflictions, to get assurance of a better
life, and to be still in a gracious readiness and preparedness for the day of
thy death, thy afflictions are in love; if God shall teach thee by afflictions
how to mind Heaven more, how to live in Heaven more, and how to fit for Heaven
more, thy afflictions are in love; if God by afflictions shall teach thy proud
heart how to lie more low, and thy hard heart how to grow more humble, and thy
censorious heart how to grow more charitable, and thy carnal heart how to grow
more spiritual, and thy froward heart how to grow more quiet, etc. thy
afflictions are in love. When God teaches thy reins as well as thy brains, thy
heart as well as thy head these lessons, or any of these lessons, thy
afflictions are in love. Socrat. lib. 4. cap. 18.
Pambo an illiterate dunce, as the Historian terms him, was a learning that one
lesson, I said I will take heed to my ways that I sin not with my tongue,
nineteen years, and yet had not learned it. Ah! it is to be feared that there
are many who have been in the school of affliction above this nineteen years,
and yet have not learned any saving lesson all this while; surely their
afflictions are not in love, but in wrath; where God loves, he afflicts in
love, and wherever God afflicts in love, there he will first or last teach
such souls such lessons as shall do them good to all eternity. But

Sixthly, If God suit your burdens to your backs, your trials to Isa. 27. 8
Jer. 30. 11. chapter 46. 28
your strength, according to that golden promise, 1 Cor. 10. 13. Your
afflictions are in love. There has no temptation taken you, but such as is
common to man: but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted,
above that ye are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to
escape, that ye may be able to bear it. When Gods strokes and a Christians
strength are suited one to another, all is in love; let the load be never so
heavy Genesis 49. 23, 24.
that God lays on, if he put under his everlasting arms, all is in love. As
Egypt had many venomous creatures, so it had many antidotes against them; when
God shall lay antidotes into the soul against all the afflictions that befall a
Christian, then they are all in love; it is no matter how heavy the burden is,
if God gives a shoulder to bear it, all is in love; it is no matter how bitter
the cup is, if God give courage to drink it off; it is no matter how hot the
furnace is, if God gives power to walk in the midst of it, all is in love.

Seventhly, I^ thou art willing to lie in the furnace till thy dross be
consumed, if thou art willing Job 23. 10 Mic. 7. 9
that the plaster should lie on (though it smart) till the cure be wrought,
if thou art willing that the physic should work (though it makes thee sick)
till the humors be expelled, all is in love. Cain and Saul, and Pharaoh, were
all for the removing away of the stroke, the affliction; they cry not out, our
sins are greater than we are able to bear, but they cry out, our punishment is
greater Genesis 4. 13 Isa. 28. 1, -- 6. chapter 59. 9, -- 17 Exodus 7, 8, 9, 10.
chapters.
than we are able to bear; they cry not out, Lord take away our sins, but Lord
remove the stroke of thy hand. Oh! but when an affliction comes in love upon a
soul, the language of that soul is this, Lord remove the cause, rather than the
effect, the sin, rather than the punishment, my corruption, rather than my
affliction: Lord, what will it avail me, to have the sore skinned over, if the
corrupt matter still remains in? there is no evil Lord, to the evil of sin, and
therefore deliver me rather from the evil of s^n, than the evil of sufferings.
I know Lord, that affliction cannot be so displeasing to me, as sin is
dishonorable and displeasing to thee; and therefore Lord let me see an end of
my sin, though in this world I should never see an end of my sorrows; Oh! let
me see an end of my corruptions, though I should never see an end of my
corrections. Lord, I had rather have a cure for my heart, than a cure for my
head; I had rather be made whole and sound within, than without; I had rather
have a healthy soul, than a healthy body, a pure inside, than a beautiful
outside; if this be the settled frame and temper of thy spirit, certainly thy
afflictions are in love.

There was one, who being under marvelous great pains and torments in his body
(occasioned by many sore diseases that were upon him) cried out, had I all the
world, I would give it for ease, and yet for all the world, I would not have
ease, till the cure be wrought, sure his afflictions were in love; the first
request, the great request and the last request of a soul afflicted in love,
is, a cure Lord, a cure Lord, a cure Lord, of this wretched heart, and this
sinful life, and all will be well, all will be well.

Eighthly and lastly, If you live a life of Faith in your afflictions, then
your afflictions are in love. Now, what is it to live by Faith in affliction,
but to live in the exercising These following promises have been choice
cordials, to many Christians under sore distresses. Isa. 57. 15 chapter 41. 10 1 Timothy 1. 15 Joh. 10. 27, 28, 29 Isa. 26. 3 Mat. 11. 28 1 John 3. 14
of Faith upon those precious promises that are made over to an afflicted
condition? God has promised to be with his people in their afflictions, Isa.
43. 2, 3. he has promised to support them under their afflictions, Isa. 41.
10. he has promised to deliver his people out of their afflictions, Psalm. 50.
15. he has promised to purge away his peoples sins by affliction, Isa. 1. 25.
he has promised to make his people more partakers of his holiness by
affliction, Heb. 12. 10. he has promised to make afflictions an inlet to a
more full and sweet enjoyment of himself, Hosea 2. 14. he has promised that
he will never leave nor forsake his people in their afflictions, Heb. 13. 5,
6. he has promised that all their afflictions shall work for their good,
Zech. 13. 9. Romans 8. 28. Now if thy Faith be drawn forth to feed upon these
promises, if these be heavenly Manna to thy Faith, and thy soul lives upon
them, and sucks stre(...) (...) sweetness from them, und(...) (...) trials and
troubles that (...) (...)on thee, thy afflictions are in love.

A Be can suck honey out of a flower, which a Fly cannot; if thy Faith can
extract comfort and sweetness in thy saddest distresses out of the breasts of
precious promises, and gather one contrary out of another, Honey out of the
Deuteronomy. 32. 13.
Rock, thy afflictions are in love. The Promises are full breasts, and God
delights that Faith should As the mother delights that the child should draw
hers.
draw them, they are pabulum fidei, and anima fidei, the food of Faith, and the
very soul of Faith. They are an everlasting spring, that can never be drawn
dry, they are an inexhaustible treasure, that can never be exhausted, they are
the garden of Paradise, and full of such choice flowers that will never fade,
but be always fresh, sweet, green, and flourishing; and if in the day of
affliction they prove thus to thy soul, thy afflictions are in love. Sertorius
paid Plutarch.
what he promised with fair words, but so does not God; men many times eat
their words, but God will never eat his, all his promises in Christ are Yea,
and in 2 Cor. 1. 20.
him Amen; has he spoken it, and shall it not come to pass? if in all thy
troubles thy heart be drawn forth to act Faith upon the promises, thy troubles
are from love; and thus much by way of answer to the first Objection.

Object. 2 Oh but Sir! The Lord has smitten me in my nearest and dearest
comforts and contentments, and how then can I hold my peace? God has taken
away a husband, a wife, a child, an only child, a bosom friend, and how
then can I be silent? etc.

Answ. To this I Answer, First, If God did not strike thee in that mercy, which
was near and dear unto thee, it would not amount to an affliction; that is not
worthy the name of an affliction, that does not strike at some bosom mercy;
that trouble is no trouble, that does not touch some choice contentment; that
storm is no storm, that only blows off the leaves, but never hurts the fruit;
that thrust is no thrust, that only touches the clothes, but never reaches the
skin; that cut is no cut, that only cuts the hatt, but never touches the head;
neither is that affliction any affliction, that only reaches some remote
enjoyment, but never reaches a Joseph a Benjamin, etc.

Secondly, The best mercy is not too good for the best God; the best of the
best, is not good enough for him who is goodness it self; the best child, the
best yoak-fellow, the best friend, the best Jewel in all thy Crown must be
readily resigned to thy best God; Isa. 43. 22, -- 25. Mal. 1. 13, 14.
there is no mercy, no enjoyment, no contentment worthy of God, but the best;
the milk of mercy is for others, the cream of mercy is due to God; the
choicest, the fairest, and the sweetest flowers, are fittest for the bosom of
God; if he will take the best flower in all thy garden, and plant it in a
better soil, have thou any cause to murmr? will thou not hold thy peace?

Thirdly, Your near and dear mercies were first the Lords, before they were
yours, and always the Lords more than they were yours; when God gives a mercy,
he does not relinquish his own right in that mercy, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. All
things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. The sweet of mercy
is yours, but the sovereign right to dispose of your mercies is the Lords.
Quicquid es, debes creanti, quicquid potes, debes redimenti. Bern. Whatsoever
thou art, thou owe to him that made thee; and whatsoever thou have, thou
owe to him that redeemed thee. You say it is but just and reasonable that men
should do with their own as they please, and is it not just and reasonable,
that God, who is Lord Paramount, should do with his own as he pleases? do
thou believe that the great God may do in Heaven what he pleases, and on the
Seas what he pleases, and in the Nations and Kingdoms of the world what he
pleases, and in thy heart what he pleases? and do thou not believe that God
may do in thy house what he pleases, and do with thy mercies what he pleases?
Job 9. 12. Behold Job plainly alludes to Gods taking away his children,
servants, and cattle.
he takes away, or he snatcheth away (it may be a husband, a wife, a
child, an estate) who can hinder him? who will say unto him what do thou?
Who dares cavil against God? who dares question that God that is
unquestionable? that chief Lord that is uncontrollable? and who may do with his
own what he pleases? Dan. 4. 35. And all the Inhabitants of the earth are
reputed as nothing: and he does according to his will, in the Army Isa. 45. 9
of Heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay his hand,
or say unto him, what do thou? Where is the Prince, the Peasant, the Master,
the Servant, the Husband, the Wife, the Father, the Child, that dares say to
God, what do thou? In matters of Arithmetical accounts, set one against ten,
ten against a hundred, a hundred against a thousand, a thousand against ten
thousand, although there be great odds, yet there is some comparison; but if a
man could set down an infinite number, then there could be no comparison at
all, because the one is finite, the other infinite; so set all the Princes and
Powers of the earth in opposition to God, they shall never be able to
withstand him. It was once the saying of Pompey, that with one stamp of his
foot he could raise all Italy in Arms, but let the Plutarch in vita Pompei.
great God but stamp with his foot; and he can raise all the world in Arms, to
own him, to contend for him, or to revenge any affronts that by any are put
upon him; and therefore who shall say unto him, what do thou? water is
stronger than earth, fire stronger than water, Angels stronger than men, and
God stronger than them all; and therefore who shall say unto God, what do
thou, when he takes their nearest and their dearest mercies from them? But

Fourthly, It may be thou have not made a happy improvement of thy near and
dear mercies whilst thou injoyest them: thou have been taken with thy mercies,
but thy heart has not been taken up in the improvement of them; there are many
who are very much taken with their mercies, who make no conscience of improving
their mercies; have thy near and dear mercies been a star to lead thee to
Christ? have they been a cloud by day, and a pillar of light by night to lead
thee toward the heavenly Canaan? have they been a Jacobs Ladder to thy soul?
have thou by them been provoked to give up thy self to God as a living Romans 12.
1
Sacrifice? have thou improved thy near and dear mercies to the enflaming of
thy love to God? to the strengthening of thy confidence in God? to the raising
of thy communion with God? and to the engaging of thy heart to a more close and
circumspect walking before God? etc. if thou have not thus improved them, thou
have more cause to be mute, than to murmr, to be silent, than to be
impatient, to fall out with thy self, than to fall out with thy God. Children
and fools are taken with many things, but improve n^thing; such children and
fools a^e most men, they are much taken with their mercies, but they make no
improvement of their mercies; and therefore no wonder if God strip them of
their mercies. The candle of mercy is set up, not to play by, but to work by.

Pliny speaks of one Cressinus, who Lib. 18. cap. 6.
improved a little piece of ground to a far greater advantage, than his
neighbors could a greater quantity of land, thereupon he was accused of
witchcraft, but he to defend himself, brought into the Court his servants,
and their working-tools, and said, Veneficia mea Quirites haec sunt, these are
my witch-crafts (O ye Romans) these servants, and these workingtools, are all
the witchcraft that I know of; when the people heard this plea, with one
consent they acquitted him, and declared him not guilty; and so his little
piece of ground was secured to him; there is no way to secure your mercies, but
by improving of them, there is nothing that provokes God to strip you of your
mercies, like the non-improvement of them, Matthew. 25. 24, -- 31. Take therefore
the talent from him, and give it unto him which has ten talents. By some
stroke or other God will take away the mercy that is not improved; if thy
slothfulness has put God upon passing a sentence of death upon thy dearest
mercy, thank thy self, and hold thy peace.

Fifthly, If in this case God had made thee a president to others, thou must
have held thy peace, how much more then should thou be mute when God has
made many others presidents to thee? Did not God smite Aaron in his dear and
near enjoyments, Levit. 10. 1, 2. and does he not hold his ^eace? did not God
smite David in his Absalom, and Abraham in his Sarah, and Job in his sons,
daughters, estate and body, and Jonah in his Guard? art Jonah 4. 6, 7, 8.
thou more beloved than these? no; have thou more grace than these? no; have
thou done more for divine glory than these? no; art thou richer in spiritual
experiences than these? no; have thou attained to higher enjoyments than these?
no; have thou been more serviceable in thy Generation than these? no; have thou
been more exemplary in thy life and conversation than these? no, etc. then why
should thou murmr and fret at that which has been the common lot of the
dearest Saints?

Though God has smitten thee in this or that near and dear enjoyment, it is
thy wisdom to hold thy peace; for that God that has taken away one, might
have taken away all. Justice writes a sentence of death upon all Jobs mercies
Job 1.
at once, and yet he holds his peace, and wilt not thou hold thine, though God
has cropped the fairest Flower in all thy garden?

Anytus a young spark of Athens, came revelling into Alcibiades house, and as
he sat at supper with some strangers, he rose on a sudden, and took away one
half of his plate, thereupon the Guests stormed, and took on at it, he bade
them be quiet, and told them, that he had dealt kindly with him, since that
he had left the one half, whereas he might have taken all: so when our hearts
begin to storm and take on, when God smites us in this near mercy, and in that
dear enjoyment, Oh! let us lay the Law of silence upon our hearts, let us
charge our souls to be quiet; for that God that has taken away one child,
might have took away every child, and he that has taken away one friend,
might have taken away every friend, and he that has taken away a part of thy
estate, might have taken away thy whole estate; therefore hold thy peace, let
who will murmr, yet be thou mute.

Sixthly, It may be thy sins have been much about thy near and dear
enjoyments; it may be thou have over-loved them, and over-prized them, and
overmuch delighted thy self in them; it may be they have often had thy heart,
when they should have had but thy hand; it may be that care, that fear, that
confidence, that joy that should have been expended upon more noble objects,
has been expended upon them; thy heart, Oh Christian! is Christ's bed of
spices, and it may be thou have beded thy mercies with thee, when Christ has
been put to lie in an Luke 2. 7
out-house; thou have had room for them, when thou have had none for him, they
have had the best, when the worst have been counted good enough for Christ. It
is said of Genesis 49. 4.
Ruben, that he went up to his Fathers bed. Ah! how often has one
creature-comfort, and sometimes another, put in between Christ and your sou^s?
how often have your dear enjoyments gone up to Christ's bed? It is said of the
babylonians, that they came in to Aholah, Ezekiel. 23. 17.
and Aholibahs bed of love; may it not he said of your near and dear mercies,
that they have come into Christ's bed of lov^? your hearts, they being that bed
wherein Christ Cant. 3. 7
delights to rest and repose himself. Now, if a husband, a child, a friend,
shall take up that room in thy soul that is proper and peculiar to God, God
will either imbitter it, remove it, or be the death ^f it; if once the love of
a wife runs out more to a servant, than to her husband, the Master will turn
him out of doors, though otherwise he were a servant worth gold. The sweetest
comforts of this life, they are but like treasures of Snow; now do but take a
handful of Snow, and crush it in your hands, and it will melt away presently,
but if you let it lie upon the ground, it will continue for some time; and so
it is with the contentments of this world, if you grasp them in your hands, and
lay them too near your hearts, they will quickly melt and vanish away, but if
you will not hold them too fast in your hands, nor lay them too close to your
hearts, they will abide the longer with you. There are those that love their
mercies into their graves, that hug their mercies to death, that kiss them,
till they kill them: Many a man has slain his mercies, by setting too great a
value upon them; many a man has ^unk his ship of mercy, by taking up in it;
over-loved mercies are seldom long-lived, Ezekiel. 24. 21. -- when I take from
them the joy of their glory, the desire of their eyes, and that whereupon they
set their minds, their sons and their daughters; the way to lose your mercies,
is to indulge them; the way to destroy them, is to fix your minds and hearts
upon them; thou may write bitterness and death upon that mercy first, that
has first taken away thy heart from God. Now, if God has stripped thee of that
very mercy with which thou have often committed spiritual Adultery, and
Idolatry, have thou any cause to murmr? have thou not rather cause to hold
thy peace, and to be mute before the Lord? Christians, your hearts are Christ's
royal Throne, and in this Throne Christ will be chief (as Pharaoh said to
Joseph, Genesis 41. 40.) he will endure no competitor, if you shall attempt to
throne the creature, be it never so near and dear unto you, Christ will
dethrone it, he will destroy it, he will quickly lay them in a bed of dust,
who shall aspire to his royal Throne. But

Seventhly, Thou have no cause to murmr, because of the loss of such near and
dear enjoyments, considering those more noble and spiritual mercies and favors
that thou still enjoyest; grant that Joseph is not, and Benjamin is not, yet
Genesis 42. 36, Heb. 13. 8
Jesus is, he is yesterday and to day and the same for ever; thy union and
communion with Christ remains 1 John 3. 9.
still* the immortal seed abides in thee still, the Sun of Righteousness shines
upon thee still, thou art in favor with God still, and thou art under the
anointings of the Spirit still, and under the influences of Heaven still, etc.
and why then should thou mutter; and not rather hold thy peace? I have read
Jerome.
of one Dydimus a godly Preacher* who was blind, Alexander a godly man once
asked him whether he was not sore troubled and afflicted for want of his
sight? Oh yes I said Dydimus, it is a great affliction and grief unto me, then
Alexander chid him, saying, has God given you the excellency of an Angel, of
an Apostle, and are you troubled for that which Rats, and Mice, and brute
beasts have? So say I, Ah Ephesians. 1. 3, 4
Christians! has God blessed you with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
places? has the Lord given you himself for a portion? has he given you his
Son for your redemption, and his Spirit for your instruction? and will you
murmr? has he given his grace to adorn you? his promises to comfor^ you,
his ordinances to better you, and the hopes of Heaven to encourage you? and
will you mutter? Paulinus Nolanus, when his City was taken from him, prayed
thus, Lord (said he) let me not be troubled at the loss of my gold, silver,
honor, etc. for thou art all, and much more than all these unto me; in the
want of all your sweetest enjoyments, Christ will be all in all unto you: my
Jewels are my husband, said Phocion's wife, Col. 3. 11 Plutar^h. in vita
Phocion.
my ornaments are my two sons, said the Mother of the Gracchi, my treasures are
my friends, said Constantius; and so may a Christian under his greatest losses,
say, Christ is my richest Jewels, my chiefest treasures, my best ornaments, my
sweetest delights; look what all these things are to a carnal heart, a worldly
heart, that (and more) is Christ to me.

Eighthly* If God by smiting thee in thy nearest and dearest inj^yments shall
put thee upon a more through smiting and mortifying of thy dearest sins, thou
have no cause to murmr; God cures David of adultery, by killing his endeared
child. There is some Dalilah, some darling, some beloved sin or Psa. 18. 23
Heb. 12. 1
other, that a Christians calling, condition, constitution, or temptations
leads him to play withal, and to hug in his own bosom, rather than some
other. As in a ground that lies untilled, amongst the great variety of weeds,
there is usually some master-weed that is rifer and ranker than all the rest;
And as it is in the body of man, that although in some degree or other, more or
less, there be a mixture of all the four elements, not any of them wholly
wanting, yet there is some one of them predominant, that gives the
denomination, in which regard some are said to be of a sanguin, some of a
phlegmatic, some of a choleric, and some of a melancholic constitution: So
it is also in the souls of men, though there be a general mixture and medly of
all evil and corrupt qualities, yet is there some one usually that is
Paramount, which like the Prince of Devils, is most powerful and prevalent,
that swayeth and shows forth it self more eminently and evidently than any
other of them do. And as in every man's body there is a seed and principle of
death, yet in some there is a proneness to one kind of disease more than other
that may hasten death: So, though the root of sin and bitterness has spread it
self over all, yet every man has his inclination to one kind of sin, rather
than another, and this may be called a man's proper sin, his bosom sin, his
darling sin. Now, it is one of the hardest works in this world to subdue and
bring under this bosom sin. Oh! the prayers, the tears, the sighs, the sobs,
the groans, the gripes that it will cost a Christian before he brings under
this darling sin!

Look upon a Rabbets skin, how well it comes off till it comes to the head, but
then what haling and pulling is there before it stirs? So it is in the
mortifying, in the crucifying of sin; a man may easily subdue and mortify such
and such sins, but when it comes to the head sin, to the master-sin, to the
bosome-sin, Oh! what tugging and pulling is there? what striving and struggling
is there, to get off that sin, to get down that sin? Now, if the Lord by
smiting thee in some near and dear enjoyment shall draw out thy heart to fall
upon smiting of thy master-sin, and shall so sanctify the affliction, as to
make it issue in the mortification of thy bosom corruption, what eminent cause
will thou have rather to bless him, than to fit down and murmr against him?
and doubtless, if thou art dear to God, God will, by striking thy dearest
mercy, put thee upon striking at thy darling-sin; and therefore hold thy peace,
even then when God touches the apple of thi^e eye.

Ninthly, Consider, That the Lord has many ways to make up the loss of a near
and dear mercy to thee; he can make up thy loss in Mat. 19. 27, -- ult.
something else that may be better for thee, and he will certainly make up
thy loss, either in kind, or in worth; he took from David an Absalom, and he
gave him a Solomon, he took from him a Michal, and gave him a wise Abigail,
he took from Job seven sons The first and last chapters of Job compared. Joh,
16. 7, 8. etc. Act. 2.
and three daughters, and afterward he gives him seven sons and three
daughters, he took from Job a fair estate, and at last doubled it to him, he
removed the bodily presence of Christ from his disciples, but gave them more
abundantly of his spiritual presence, which was far the greater and the sweeter
mercy. If Moses be taken away, Joshua shall be raised in his room; if David
be gathered to his Fathers, a Solomon shall succeed him in his Throne; if John
be cast into prison, rather than the Pulpit shall stand empty, a greater than
John, even Christ himself will begin to preach: he that lives upon God in the
loss of creature comforts, shall find all made up in the God of comforts, he
shall be able to say, though my child is not, my friend is not, my
yoak-fellow is not, yet my God lives, and blessed be my Rock, Psalm. 89. 46.
though this mercy is not, and that mercy is not, yet covenant mercies, yet the
sure mercies 2 Samuel 23. 5.
of David continue, these bed and board with me, these will to the grave, and
to glory with me. I have read of a godly man, who living near a Philosopher,
did often persuade him to become a Christian: Oh but said the Philosopher! I
must, or may lose all for Christ; to which the good man replied, if you lose
any thing for Christ, he will be sure to repay it a hundred fold; I but said
the Philosopher, will you be bound for Christ, that if he do not pay me, you
will? yes that I will, said the good man: So the Philosopher became a
Christian, and the good man entered into bond for performance of covenants;
sometime after it happened that the Philosopher fell sick on his deathbed, and
holding the bond in his hand, sent for the party engaged, to whom he gave up
the bond, and said, Christ has paid all, there is nothing for you to pay, take
your bond and cancel it. Christ will suffer none of his children to go by the
loss; he has all, and he will make up all to them; in the close Christ will
pay the reckoning; no man shall ever have cause to say, that he has been a
loser by Christ; and therefore thou have much cause to be mute, thou have no
cause to murmr, though God has snatched the fairest and the sweetest flower
out of thy bosom.

Tenthly, How can thou tell, but that that which thou call a near and dear
mercy, if it had been The Lamentations of Jeremiah are a full proof of this.
continued longer to thee, might have proved the greatest cross, the greatest
calamity and misery that ever thou did meet with in this world? Our mercies
like choice Wines, many times turn into Vinegar; our fairest hopes are often
blasted, and that very mercy which we sometimes have said should be a staff to
support us, has proved a sword to pierce us; how often have our most
flourishing mercies withered in our hands? and our bosome-contentments been
turned into gall and wormwood? If God had 2 Samuel 12. 16.
continued the life of David's child to him, it would have been but a living
Monument of his sin and shame, and all that knew the child would have pointed
at him, yonder goes David's bastard, and so This age affords many sad instances
of this nature; who can think of Tiburn, and question it? and of killing and
drowning, and say, how can this be?
have kept David's wound still a bleeding; many Parents who have sought the
lives of their children with tears, have lived afterward to see them take such
courses, and come to such dismal ends, as have brought their gray-hairs with
sorrow to their graves. It had been ten thousand times a greater mercy to many
Parents to have buried their children, as soon as ever they had been born, than
to see them come to such unhappy ends as they often do. Well Christian! it may
be the Lord has taken from thee such a hopeful son, or such a dear daughter,
and thou say how can I hold my peace, but hark Christian, hark, can thou
tell me how long thou must have traveled in birth again with them before they
had been born again, before they had been twice born? would not every sin that
they had committed against thy gracious God, cause a new throw in thy soul?
would not every temptation that they had fallen before, been as a dagger at thy
heart? would not every affliction that should have befallen them, been as a
knife at thy throat? what are those pains, and pangs; and throws of
childbirth, to those after pains, pangs and throws that might have been
brought upon thee by the sins and sufferings of thy children? Well Christians,
hold your peace, for you do not know what thorns in your eyes, what goads in
your sides, nor what spears in your hearts, such near and dear mercies might
have proved, had they been longer continued.

Eleventhly, Thou can not tell how bad thy heart might have Deuteronomy. 32. ult. 5.
to the end. Jer. 5. 7, 8, 9. chapter 2. 31. and chapter 22. 21. Hosea 4. 7
proved under the enjoyment of those near and dear mercies that now thou have
lost. Israel were very bad whilst they were in the wilderness, but they were
much worse when they came to possess Canaan, that Land of desires; man's blood
is apt to rise with his outward good: In the winter, men gird their clothes
close about them, but in the Summer they let them hang loose; in the winter of
adversity many a Christian girds his heart close to God, to Christ, to Gospel,
to Godliness, to Ordinances, to Duties, etc. who in the summer of mercy, hangs
loose from all.

I have read of the Pine Tree, that if the bark be pulled off, it will last a
long time, but if it continue long on, it rots the tree. Ah! how bad, how
rotten, how base would many have proved, had not God pulled off their bark of
health, wealth, friendship, etc? near and dear relations they stick as close to
us as the bark of a tree sticks to the tree, and if God should not pull off
this bark, how apt should we be to rot and corrupt our selves? therefore God
is fain to bark us, and peel us, and strip us naked, and bare of our dearest
enjoyments, and sweetest contentments, that so our souls, like the Pine Tree,
may prosper and thrive the better; who can seriously consider of this, and not
hold his peace, even then when God takes a Jewel out of his bosom? Heap all
the sweetest contentments, and most desirable enjoyments of this world upon a
man, they will not make him a Christian; heap them upon a Christian, they will
not make him a better Christian; many a Christian has been made worse by the
good things of this world, but where is the Christian that has been bettered
by them? therefore be quiet when God strips thee of them.

Twelfthly and lastly, Get thy heart more affected with spiritual losses, and
then thy soul will be less afflicted with those temporal losses that thou
mournest under: Have thou lost nothing of that presence Qui te non habet,
Domine Deus, totum perdidit. Bern.
of God that once thou had with thy spirit? have thou lost none of those
warmings? meltings? quicknings and chearings that once thou had? have thou
lost nothing of thy communion with God? nor of the joys of the spirit, nor of
that peace of conscience that once thou enjoyedst? have thou lost none of that
ground that once thou had got upon sin, Satan, and the world? have thou lost
nothing of that holy vigor and heavenly heat that once thou had in thy
heart? if thou have not (which would be a miracle, a wonder) why do thou
complain of this or that temporal loss? for what is this but to complain of the
loss of thy purse, when thy gold is safe? if thou art a loser in spirituals,
why do thou not rather complain that thou have lost thy God, than that thou
have lost thy gold? and that thou have lost thy Christ, than that thou have
lost thy Husband? and that thou have lost thy Peace, than that thou have lost
thy Child? and that thou art damnified in spirituals, than that thou art
damnified in temporals? Do thou mourn over the body the soul has left? mourn
rather over the soul that God has 1 Samuel 15. 35
forsaken (as Samuel did for Saul) says one.

I have read of Honorius a Roman Emperor, who was simple and childish enough,
when one told him Rome was lost, he was exceedingly grieved, and cried out,
Alas! Alas! for he supposed it was his Hen that was called Rome, which Hen
he exceedingly loved; but when it was told him it was his imperial City of
Rome that was besiedged by A^aricus, and taken, and all the Citizens rifled and
made a prey to the rude enraged soldiers, then his spirits were revived, that
his loss was not so great as he imagined; now, what is the loss of a husband,
a wife, a child, a friend, to the loss of God, Christ, the Spirit, or the
least measure of Grace, or Communion with God? etc. I say, What are all such
losses, but the loss of a Hen to the loss of Rome? and yet so simple and
childish are many Christians, that they are more affected and afflicted with
the loss of this and that poor temporal enjoyment, than they are with the loss
of their most spiritual attainment. Ah Christians! be but more affected with
spiritual losses, and you will be more quiet and silent under temporal losses;
let the loss of Rome trouble you more, and then the loss of your Hen will not
trouble you at all. Let these things suffice for answer to the second Objection.

Object. 3. Oh but my afflictions, my troubles, have been long upon me* and
how then can I hold my peace? were they but of yesterday I would be quiet, but
they are of a long continuance, and therefore how can I be silent? etc.

To this I answer, First, Thou can not date thy affliction from the first day
of thy pollution; thou have been polluted from the womb, but thou have not been
afflicted from the womb; many have Psalm. 51. 5 Romans 5. 12
been the days, the years since thou wast born in sin, few have been the
days, the years that thou have experienced sorrow; thou can not easily
number the days of thy sinning, thou can easily number the days of thy
suffering; thou can not number thy days of mercy, thou can easily number
thy days of calamity; thou can not number thy days of health, but thou
can easily tell over thy days of sickness.

Secondly, Thy afflictions are not so long as the afflictions of other Saints;
compare thy winter nights and other Saints winter nights together; thy storms
and troubles, and other Saints storms and troubles together, thy losses and
other Psalms 77, and 88. Genesis 15. 12, 13. Exodus 12. 40, 41, 42 Jer. 25. 11, 12.
Saints losses together, thy miseries and other Saints miseries together,
witness the proofs in the Margin; thy afflictions are but as a moment, they are
but as yesterday, if compared with the afflictions of other Saints, whose whole
lives have been made up of sorrows and sufferings, as the life of Christ was;
many a man's life has been nothing but a lingering death, Job 21. 25. And
another dies in the bitterness of his soul, and never eats with pleasure.
There are those that have never a good day all their days, who have not a day
of rest among all their days of trouble, not a day of health among all their
days of sickness, nor a day of gladness among all their days of sadness, nor
a day of strength among all their days of weakness, nor a day of honor among
all their days of reproach, whose whole life is one continued winters night,
who every day drink gall and wormwood, who lie down sighing, who rise groaning,
and who spend their days in complaining, no sorrow to our sorrows, no
sufferings to our sufferings; some there be who have always tears in their
eyes, sorrows in their hearts, rods on their backs, and crosses in their hands,
but it is not so with thee, therefore be silent.

Thirdly, The longer thy affliction has been, the sweeter will Heaven be to
thee at last; the Psalm. 126. 1, 2, 5, 6. compared.
longer the Israelites had been in the wilderness, the sweeter was Canaan to
them at last; the longer the storm, the sweeter the calm; the longer the winter
nights, the sweeter the summer* days; long afflictions will much set off the
glory of Heaven; the harbor is most sweet and desirable to them that have been
long tossed upon the Seas: So will Heaven be to those who have been long in a
Sea of troubles. The new Wine of Christ's Kingdom is most sweet to Luke 22. 18
those that have been long a drinking of gall and vinegar, the Crown of glory
will be most delightful to them, who have been long in combating with the
world, the flesh, and the devil. The longer our Journey is, the sweeter will be
our end; and the longer our passage is, the sweeter will our Haven be; the
higher the mountain, the gladder we shall be when we are got to the top of
it; the longer the heir is kept from his inheritance, the more delight he will
have when he comes to possess it.

Fourthly, They are not long, but short, if compared to that eternity of glory
that is reserved for the Saints, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18. If you turn to the
words, you shall See this largely opened in my String of Pearls.
find for affliction glory, for light afflictions, a weight of glory, and for
short momentany afflictions, eternal glory; there will quickly be an end of thy
sadness, but there will never be an end of thy happiness; there will soon be
an end of thy calamity and misery, there will never be and end of thy felicity
and glory; the Kingdoms of this world are not Psalm. 45. and 72. and 89. Isa.
9. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 4 2 Epist. 1. 11.
lasting, much less are they everlasting, they have all their climacterical
years, but the Kingdom of Heaven is an everlasting Kingdom, of that there is
no end. There were seven sorts of Crowns that were that were in use among the
Roman Victors, but they were all fading and perishing; but the Crown of glory
that at last God will set upon the heads of his Saints, shall continue as long
as God himself continues. Who can look upon those eternal Mansions that are
above, and those everlasting pleasures that be at Gods right hand, and say,
that his affliction is long? Well Christian, let thy afflictions be never so
long, yet one hours being in the bosom of Christ, will make thee forget both
the length and strength of all thy afflictions.

Fifthly, The longer you have been afflicted, the more in spiritual experiences
you have been enriched, 2 Cor. 1. 5. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in
us, so our consolation also abounds by Christ. The lower the ebb, the higher
the tide, the more pain, the more gain, the more afflicted, the more comforted,
the lower we are cast, the higher we shall be raised. Of all Christians, none
so rich in spiritual experiences, as those that have Heb. 12. 11 2 Cor. 12. 9
Job 33. 17, -- 22
been long in the school of affliction. Oh the blessed stories that such can
tell of the power of God supporting them, of the wisdom of God directing them,
of the favor of God comforting them, of the presence of God assisting them! Oh
the love tokens, the love letters, the bracelets, the Jewels, that they are
able to produce since they have been in the furnace of affliction! Oh the sins
that long afflictions have discovered and mortified! O the temptations that
long afflictions have prevented and vanquished! you shall as soon number the
stars of Heaven, and the sands of the Sea, as you shall number up the heavenly
experiences of such Christians that have been long under afflictions; the
afflicted Christians heart is fullest of spiritual treasure; though he may be
poor in the world, yet James 2. 5
he is rich in faith and holy experiences, and what are all the riches of this
world to spiritual experiences? one spiritual experience is more worth than a
world, and upon a dying-bed, and before a judgment seat, every man will be of
this opinion. The men of this world will with much quietness and calmness of
spirit, bear much, and suffer much, I and suffer long, when they find their
sufferings to add to their revenues: and shall nature do more than grace? It is
the common voice of nature, Who will show us any Psalm. 4. ^
good? how shall we come to be great, and high, and rich in the world? we
care not what we suffer, nor how long we suffer, so we may but add house to
house, Isa. 5. 8
heap to heap, bagg to bagg, and land to land. Oh how much more then should
Christians be quiet and calm under all their afflictions? though they are
never so long? considering that they do but add Jewels to a Christians Crown;
they do but add to his spiritual experiences; the long afflicted Christian
has the fullest and the greatest trade: and in the day of account will be
found the richest man.

Sixthly, Long afflictions sometimes are but preparatives to long lived
mercies; Joseph's thirteen years imprisonment, was but a preparative to
fourscore years reigning like a King; David's seven years banishment, was but a
preparative to forty years reigning in much honor and glory; Jobs long
afflictions were but preparatives to more long-lived mercies, as you may see in
that last of Job; and those sad and sore trials that the Jews have been under
for above this sixteen hundred years, are to prepare them for those matchless
mercies, and those Isa. 62. 63. and chapter 66
endless glories (in some sense) that God in the latter days will crown them
with. Isa. 54. 11, 12, 13, 14. O thou afflicted! tossed with tempest, and not
comforted, behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy
foundations with saphires. And I will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates
of carbuneles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones. And all thy children
shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy children.
Inrighteousness shall thou be established, thou shall be far from oppression,
for thou shall not fear; and from terror, for it shall not come near thee.
Though they have been long afflicted and tossed, yet they shall at last upon
glorious foundations be established; God will not only raise them out of
their distressed estate, wherein now they are, but he will advance them to a
most eminent and glorious condition in this world; they shall be very
glorious, and outshine all the world in spiritual excellencies, and outward
dignities, Isa. 60. 14, 15. The sons also of them that afflicted thee, shall
come bending unto thee; and all they that despised thee, shall bow themselves
down at the soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee, The City of the Lord,
The Zion of the holy One of Israel. Whereas thou have been forsaken and hated,
so that no man went through thee: I will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy
of many Generations. Ah Christians I do not mutter nor murmr under your long
afflictions, for you do not know but that by these long afflictions God may
prepare and fit you for such favors and blessings that may never have end; by
long afflictions God many times prepares his people for temporal, spiritual,
and eternal mercies; if God by long afflictions makes more room in thy soul for
himself, his Son, his Spirit, his Word; if by long afflictions he shall
crucify thy heart more to the world, and to thy relations, and frame and
fashion thy soul more for celestial enjoyments, have thou any cause to murmr?
surely no. But

Seventhly, The longer a Saint is afflicted on earth, the more glorious he
shall shine in Heaven; 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18 Mat. 5. 10, 11, 12
the more affliction here, the more glory hereafter: This Truth may be thus
made out:

First, The more gracious souls are afflicted, the more their graces are
exercised and increased, Heb. 12. 10. Romans 5. 3, 4, 5. Now, the more grace
here, the more glory hereafter; the higher in grace, the higher in glory. Grace
differs nothing from glory but in name; grace is glory in the bud, and glory is
grace at the full; glory is nothing but the perfection of grace; 2 Cor. 3. ult.
happiness is nothing but the perfection of holiness; grace is glory in the
seed, and glory is grace in the flower; grace is glory militant, and glory is
grace triumphant; grace and glory differ ( non specie, sed gradu) in degree,
not kind, as the learned speak. Now it is most certain, that the more gracious
souls are afflicted, the more their graces are exercised; and the more grace is
exercised, the more it is increased, as I have sufficiently demonstrated in
this treatise already. But

Secondly, The longer a gracious soul is afflicted, the more his religious
duties will be multiplied, Psalm. 109. 4. For my love they are my adversaries:
but I give my self unto prayer, or as the Hebrew reads it, But I am prayer, or
a man of Psa. 42. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Psalm. 63. 1, 2, 3, 8. J^r. 31. 18, 19 Hos. 5.
ult. with chapter 6. 1, 2 Psalm. 116. 3, 4. and Psalm. 143. 6, 7
prayer. In times of affliction a Christian is all prayer, he is never so much
a man of prayer, a man given up to prayer, as in times of affliction. A
Christian is never so frequent, so fervent, so abundant in the work of the
Lord, as when he is afflicted, Isa. 26. 16. Lord, in trouble have they visited
thee, they poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them. Now, they do
not only pray, but they pour out a prayer, they were freely, largely, and
abundantly in prayer, when the rod was upon them. Look, as men plentifully pour
out water for the quenching of a fire, so did they plentifully pour* out their
prayers before the Lord; and as affliction puts a man upon being much in
prayer, so it puts him upon other duties of Religion answerably. Now this is
most certain, that though God will reward no man for his works, yet he will
reward every man according to Matthew. 25. 14. 26. God will reward his people,
secundum labo^em. Bern.
works, 1 Cor. 15. ult. Therefore my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast,
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as you know
that your labor is not in vain in the Lord, 2 Cor. 9. 6. But this I say, he
which sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly; and he which sows bountifully,
shall reap bountifully; or he which sows in benedictions or blessings, shall
reap in benedictions, as it runs in the original.

It is an excellent observation of Calvin upon Gods rewarding the Rechabites
obedience, Jer. 35. 19. God (says he) often recompenceth the shadows and
seeming appearances of virtue, to show what complacency he takes in the ample
rewards he has reserved for true and sincere piety. Now, if the longer a
Christian is afflicted, the more his religious services will be multiplied,
and the more they are multiplied, the more his glory at last will be
increased, then, the longer a Saint is afflicted on earth, the more glory he
shall have when he comes to Heaven. But

Thirdly, The longer any Saint is afflicted, the more into the image and
likeness of Christ he will be transformed: It is one of Romans 8. 28, 29, etc.
2 Cor. 1 5, 6, 7 Phil. 3. 10 Heb. 2. 10 2 Timothy 2. 12.
Gods great designs and ends in afflicting of his people, to make them more
conformable to his Son, and God will not lose his end; men often lose theirs,
but God never has, nor will lose his, and experience tells us, that God does
every day by afflictions accomplish this end upon his people; the longer they
are afflicted, the more they are made conformable to Christ, in meekness,
lowliness, spiritualness, heavenliness, in faith, love, selfdenial, pity,
compassion, etc. Now certainly, the more like to Christ, the more beloved of
Christ; the more a Christian is like to Christ, the more he is the delight of
Christ; and the more like to Christ on earth, the nearer the soul shall sit to
Christ in Heaven; nothing makes a man more conformable to Christ than
afflictions. Justin Martyr (in his second Apology for the Christians) has
observed, that there is scarce any prediction or prophecy concerning our
Savior Christ the Son of God to be made man, but the Heathen writers (who
were all after Moses) did from thence invent some fable, and feign it to have
been acted by some one or other of Jupiters Sons, only the Prophecies about
the cross of Christ, they have taken for the ground of no fable, they have not
among all their fictions told us of any one of Jupiters Sons that was
crucified, that acted his part upon the cross; many would wear the Crown with
Christ, that do not care for bearing the cross with Christ. But

Eighthly, The longer they have been, the greater cause thou have to be silent
and patient, for impatience will but lengthen out the day of thy sorrows; every
impatient act adds one link more to the chain, every act of frowardness adds
one lash more to those that have already been laid on, every act of muttering
will but add stroke to stroke, and sting to sting; every act of murmuring will
but add burden to burden, and storm to storm; the most compendious way to
lengthen out thy long afflictions, is to fret, and vex, and murmr under them;
as thou would see a speedy issue of thy long afflictions, sit mute and
silent under them.

Ninthly, Gods time is the best time; mercy is never nearer; salvation is at
hand, deliverance is at the Act. 27. 13, -- ult.
door, when a man's heart is brought into such a frame, as to be freely willing
that God should time his mercy, and time his deliverance for him. The
Physicians time is the best time for the patient to have ease; the impatient
patient cries out to his Physician, Oh Sir! a little ease, a little
refreshment; Oh the pains, the torments that I am under! Oh Sir! I think every
hour two, and every two ten, till comfort comes, till refreshment comes; but
the prudent Physician has turned the hourglass, and is resolved that his
Physic shall work so long, though his patient frets, flings, roars, tears: So
when we are under afflictions, we are apt to cry out, how long Lord shall it
be before ease comes? before deliverance comes? Oh the tortures! Oh the
torments that we are under! Lord a little refreshment; Oh how long are these
Psalm. 6. 3. Psalm. 13. 1, 2 Psalm. 94. 9, 10 Rev. 6. 10
nights! Oh how tedious are these days! but God has turned our Glass, and he
will not hearken to our cry, till our Glass be out; after all our fretting and
flinging we must stay his time, who knows best when to deliver us, and how to
deliver us ou^ of all our troubles, and who will not stay a moment when the
Glass is out that he has turned. But

Tenthly and lastly, They shall last no longer than there is need, and then
they shall work for thy good; it is with souls as it is with bodies, some
bodies are more easily and more suddenly cured than others are, and so are some
souls; God will not suffer the plaster to lie one day, no not one hour, no not
a moment longer than there is need; some flesh heals quickly, proud flesh is
long a healing; by affliction God quickly heals some, but others are long a
healing, 1 Pet. 1. 6. If need be ye are in heaviness through manifold
temptations, or through various afflictions; the burden shall lie no longer
upon thee than needs must, thy pain shall endure no longer than needs must, thy
physic shall make thee no longer sick than needs must, etc. thy heavenly
Father is a Physician as wise as he is loving; when thy heart begins to grow
high, he sees there is need of some heavy affliction to bring it low; when thy
heart grows cold, he sees there is need of some fiery affliction to heal it
and warm it; when thy heart grows dull and dead, he sees there is need of some
smart affliction to enliven and quicken it. And as thy afflictions shall
continue no longer than there is need, so they shall last no longer than they
shall work for thy good; if all along they shall work for thy good, thou have
no cause to complain that thy afflictions are long: that they shall thus work,
I have fully proved in the former part of this book; and thus much for answer
to the third Objection.

Object. 4. I would be mute and silent under my afflictions, but my
afflictions daily multiply and increase upon me; like the waves of the Sea,
they come rouling one over the neck of another, etc. and how then can I hold my
peace? how can I lay my hand upon my mouth, when the sorrows of my heart are
daily increased?

To this I answer thus, First, Thy afflictions are not so many as thy sins; thy
sins are as the stars of Psa. 40. 12
Heaven, and as the sands of the Sea, that cannot be numbered; Psalm. 16. ult.
there are three things that no Christian can number; 1 His sins. 2 Divine
favors. 3 The joys and pleasures that be at Christ's right hand; but there is
no Christian so poor an accountant, but that he may quickly sum up the number
of his troubles and afflictions in this world; thy sins, Oh Christian! are like
the Syrians that filled the Country, but thy afflictions are like the two
little flocks of Kids, that pitched before them, 1* King. 20. 27. therefore
hold thy peace.

Secondly, If such should not be mute and silent under their afflictions,
whose afflictions are increased and multiplied upon them, then there are none
in the world who will be found mute and silent under their afflictions: for
certainly there are none who do not find the waters of affliction to grow
daily upon them; if this be not so, what means the bleating of the Sheep, and
the lowing of the 1 Samuel 15. 14.
Oxen? what means the daily sighs, groans, and complaints of Christians amongst
us? if their troubles, like the waters in Ezekiels Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 47. 1, -- 20
be not still increasing upon them; every day brings us tidings of new
straights, new troubles, new crosses, new losses, new trials, etc.

Thirdly, They are not so many as God might have exercised thee with; God could
as easily exercise thee with ten, as with two, and with a hundred as with ten,
and with a thousand as with a hundred; let thy afflictions be never Lam. 3.
39. Luke 23. 41
so many, yet they are not so many as they might have been; had God either
consulted with thy sins, with thy deserts, or with his own What are the number
of Princes to the subjects that are under them, or what are the number of
Generals, to the number of soldiers that are commanded by them? no more are
thy afflictions to thy mercies
justice; there is no comparison between those afflictions that God has
inflicted upon thee, and those that he might have inflicted; thou have not one
burden of a thousand that God could have laid on, but he would not; therefore
hold thy peace.

Fourthly, Thy afflictions are not so many as thy mercies, nay, they are not to
be named in the day wherein thy mercies are spoken of, what are thy crosses to
thy comforts, thy miseries to thy mercies, thy days of sickness to thy days
of health, thy days of weakness to thy days of strength, thy days of
scarcity to thy days of plenty? and this is that the wise man would have us
seriously to consider, Eccles. 7. 14. In the day of adversity consider, but
what must we consider, that God has set the one over against the other. As
God has set winter and summer, night and day, fair weather and foul, one over
against another: So let us set our present mercies over against our present
troubles, and we shall presently find that our mercies exceed our troubles,
that they mightily overbalance our present afflictions; therefore let us be
silent, let us lay our hands upon our mouths.

Fifthly, If you cast up a just and righteous account, you will find Read but
the ten persecutions, and thou will be full of this opinion.
that they are not so many as the afflictions that has befallen other Saints;
have you reckoned up the afflictions that befell Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, Job,
Asaph, Heman, the Prophets and Apostles; if you have, you will say that your
afflictions are no afflictions to those that have befallen them; their lives
were filled up with sorrows and sufferings, but so are not yours; therefore
kiss the rod and be silent. It may be if thou look but upon thy relations,
thy friends, thy neighbors, thou may find many whose afflictions for
number and weight do much ou^ weigh thine; therefore be silent, murmr not,
hold-thy peace.

Sixthly, Not so many as attended our Lord Jesus, whose whole life, from the
cradle to the cross, Isa. 53. read the whole chapter.
was nothing but a life of sufferings. Osorius writing of the Sufferings of
Christ, says, that the Crown of Thorns bored his head with seventy two wounds.
Many seventy two afflictions did Christ meet with whilst he was in this world;
none can be ignorant of this, who have but read the new Testament; he is
called a man of sorrows, his whole life was filled up with sorrows, when he
was but a little past thirty years of age, sorrows, pains, troubles,
oppositions, persecutions, had so worn him, that the Jews judged him toward
fifty, John 8. 57. a man were as good compare the number of his b^some-friends
with the stars of Heaven, as compare his afflictions and the afflictions of
Christ together.

Seventhly, Muttering and murmuring will but add to the number; when the child
is under the rod, his crying and fretting does but add lash to lash, blow to
blow; but of this enough before.

Eighthly and lastly, Though they are many, yet they are not so many Psalm. 16.
ult. Isa. 64. 4. 1 Cor. 2. 9
as the joys, the pleasures, the delights that be at Christ's right hand: as
the pleasures of Heaven are matchless and endless, so they are numberless.
Augustine speaking August. de Triplici habitu. cap. 4.
concerning what we can say of heaven, says, that it is but a little drop of
the Sea, and a little spark of the great Furnace; those good things of eternal
life, are so many, that they exceed number, so great, that they exceed measure,
so precious, that they are above all estimation; ^^c Christus, nec coelum
patitur hyperbolem, neither Christ nor Heaven can be hyperbolized; for every
affliction many thousand joys and delights will attend the Saints in a
glorified estate; what will that life be, or rather what will not that life
be (says one speaking of Heaven) since all good either is not at all, or is
in such a life? Light which place cannot comprehend, Voices and music which
time cannot ravish away, Odours which are never dissipated, a Feast which is
never consumed, a Blessing which eternity bestows, but eternity shall never
see at an end; and let this suffice for answer to this fourth Objection.

Object. 5 My afflictions are very great, how then can I hold my peace? though
they were many, yet if they were not great, I would be mute, but alas, they
are very, very great. Oh! how can I be silent under them? how can I now lay my
hand upon my mouth?

To this answer, First, Though they are great, yet they are not so great as thy
sins, thy self being Read Psa. 106. and Nehem. 9.
Judge; therefore hold thy peace, Ezra. 9. 13. And after all that is come upon
us, for our evil deeds, and for our great trespass, seeing that thou our God
have punished us less than our iniquities deserve. They that are under the
sense and guilt of great sins, have cause to be silent under their greatest
sufferings. Never complain that thy afflictions are great, till thou can say
that thy sins are not great; it is but justice that great afflictions should
attend great sins; therefore be quiet: thy sins are like great Rocks, and
mighty Mountains, but so are not thy afflictions; therefore lay thy hand upon
thy mouth: the remembrance of great sins should cool and calm a man's spirit
under his greatest troubles; and if the sense of thy great sins will not stop
thy mouth, and silence thy heart, I know not what will.

Secondly, It may be they are not great, if you look upon them with
Scripture-spectacles; flesh and 1 Pet. 5. 10
blood many times looks upon Mole-hills as Mountains, and scratches upon the
hand as stabs at the heart we make Elephants of Flies, and of little Pigmies
we frame Giants: Carnal reason often looks upon troubles through false
glasses. As there are some glasses that will make great things seem little, so
there are others that will make little things seem great, and it may be that
thou look upon thy afflictions through one of them. Look upon thy
afflictions in the Isa. 54. 7, 8. chapter 26. 20.
glass of the word, look upon them in a Scripture dress, and then they will be
found to be but little; he that shall look into a Gospel-glass, shall be
able to say, heavy afflictions are light, long afflictions are short, bitter
afflictions are sweet, and great afflictions are little, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18.
It is good to make a judgment of your afflictions by a Gospel light, and by a
Gospel rule.

Art^mon an Engineer, was afraid of his own shadow; men that look not upon
their afflictions in a Scripture dress, will be afraid even of the shadow of
trouble, they will cry out, no affliction to our affliction, no burden to our
burden, no cross to our cross, no loss to our loss; but one look into a
Gospelglass would make them change their note. The Lion is not always so great
nor so terrible as he is painted, neither are our troubles always so great as
we fancy them to be: when Hagars bottle of water was spent, she sat down
and fell a weeping, as if she had been utterly undone, her provision and her
patience, her bottle and her Genesis 21. 17, 18, 19
hope were both out together; but her affliction was not so great as she
imagined, for there was a well of water near, though for a time she saw it
not: So many Christians, they eye the empty bottle, the cross, the burden that
is at present upon them, and then they fall a weeping, a whining, a
complaining, a repining, a murmuring, as if they were utterly undone, and yet a
well of water, a well of comfort, a well of refreshment, a well of deliverance
is near, and their case no ways so sad, nor so bad as they imagine it to be^.

Thirdly, The greater thy afflictions are, the nearer is deliverance to thee;
when these waters rise high, then salvation comes upon the wing; when thy
troubles are very great, then mercy will ride Scripture and History speaks
fully to this head.
post to deliver thee. Deuteronomy. 32. 36. For the Lord shall judge his people, and
repent himself for his servants; when he sees that their power (or hand) is
gone, and there is none shut up, and left. Israel of old, and England of late
years, has often experienced this truth. Wine was nearest Joh. 2. 1, 2, 3.
when the water-pots were filled with water up to the brim: So oftentimes mercy
is nearest, deliverance is nearest, when our afflictions are at the highest,
when a Christian is brim-full of troubles, then the wine of consolation is at
hand; therefore hold thy peace, murmr not, but sit silent before the Lord.

Fourthly, They are not great, if compared to the glory that shall be
revealed, Romans 8. 18. For I 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18
reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared
with the glory that shall be revealed in us, or upon us. The Apostle upon
casting up of his accounts, concludes, that all the pains, chains, troubles,
trials, and torments that they met with in this world, was not to be put in
the balance with the glory of Heaven. As the Globe of the Earth, which after
the Mathematicians account is many thousands of miles in compass, yet being
compared unto the greatness of the starry skies circumference is but a center,
or a little prick: So the troubles, afflictions, and sorrows of this life, in
respect of eternal happiness and blessedness, are to be reputed as nothing,
they are but as the prick of a pin to the starry Heavens; they that have heard
most of the glory of Heaven, have not heard one quarter of that which the
Saints shall find there; that glory is unconceivable, and unexpressable.
Augustine in one of his Epistles has this relation, that the very same day
wherein Jerome died, he was in his study, and had got Pen, Ink, and Paper, to
write something of the glory of Heaven to Jerome, and suddenly he saw a light
breaking into his study, and a sweet smell that came unto him, and this voice
he thought he heard. O Augustine! what do thou? do thou think to put the
Sea into a little vessel? when the Heavens shall cease from their continual
motion, then shall thou be able to understand what the glory of Heaven is, and
not before, except you come to feel it, as now I do. Nicephorus speaks of one
Agbarus Eccles. Hist.
a great man, that (hearing so much of Christ's fame, by reason of the miracles
he wrought) sent a Painter to take his picture, and that the Painter when he
came was not able to do it, because of that radiancy and divine splendour which
sat on Christ's face; such is the splendour, the brightness, the glory, the
happiness and blessedness that is reserved for the Saints in Heaven, that had I
all the tongues of men on earth, and all the excellencies of the Angels in
Heaven, yet should I not be able to conceive, nor to express that vision of
glory to you; it is best hastening thither, that we may feel and enjoy that
which we shall never be able to declare.

Fifthly, They are not great, if compared with the afflictions and torments of
such of the damned, who when they were in this world 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19, 20 Jude
6, 7. Mat. 10. 15. ^h. 11. 23, 24
never sinned at so high a rate as thou have done. Doubtless there are many now
in Hell, who never sinned against such clear light as thou have done, nor
against such special love as thou have done, nor against such choice means as
thou have done, nor against such precious mercies as thou have done, nor
against such singular remedies as Isa. 33. 14 The fire in hell, is like that
stone in Arcadia, which being once kindled, could not be quenched.
thou have done; certainly there are many now a roaring in everlasting
burnings, who never sinned against such deep convictions of conscience as thou
have done, nor against such close and strong reasonings of the Spirit as thou
have done, nor against such free offers of mercy, and rich tenders of grace as
thou have done, nor against such sweet wooings, and multiplied entreaties of a
bleeding dying Savior as thou have done; therefore hold thy peace: What are
thy afflictions, thy torments, to the torments of the damned, whose torments
are numberless, easeless, remediless, and endless, whose pains are without
intermission or mitigation, who have weeping served in for the first course,
and gnashing of teeth for the second, and the gnawing worm for the third, and
intolerable pain for the fourth (yet the pain of the body is but the body of
pain, the very soul of sorrow, and pain, is the souls sorrow and pain) and an
everlasting alienation and separation from God for the fifth? Ah Christian! how
can thou seriously think on these things, and not lay thy hand upon thy
mouth, when thou art under the greatest sufferings? thy sins have been far
greater than many of theirs, and thy greatest afflictions are but a flea-bite
to theirs; therefore be silent before the Lord.

Sixthly and lastly, If thy afflictions are so great, then what madness and
folly will it be for thee to make them greater by murmuring? every act of
murmuring will but add load unto load, 1 Cor. 10. 10.
and burden to burden. The Israelites under great afflictions fell a murmuring,
and their murmuring proved their utter ruin; as you may see in that, Numb. 14.
Murmu^ing will but put God upon heating the furnace seven times hotter;
therefore hold thy peace: But of this I have spoken sufficiently already.

Object. 6. Oh! But my afflictions are greater than other men's afflictions are,
and how then can I be silent? Oh! there is no affliction to my affliction, how
can I hold my peace?

I answer, First, It may be thy sins are greater than other men's Jer. 3. 6, --
12
sins; if thou have sinned against more light, more love, more mercies, more
experiences, more promises than others, no wonder if thy afflictions are
greater than others; if this be thy case, thou have more cause to be mute,
than to murmr; and certainly, if thou do but seriously look into the black
book of thy conscience, thou will find greater sins there than any thou can
charge upon any person or persons on earth; if thou should not, I think thou
would justly incur the censure which that sour Philosopher past upon
Grammarians, viz. That they Diogenes apud Laertium. l. 6
were better acquainted with the evils of Ulysses, than with their own: Never
complain that thy afflictions are greater than others, except thou can
evidence that thy sins are lesser than others.

Secondly, It may be thou art under some present distemper that dis-inables
thee to make a right judgment of the different dealings Deuteronomy. 28. 28. Good men
are sometimes strangely besotted, and infatuated.
of God with thy self and others: When the mind is distempered, and the brain
troubled, many things seem to be that are not, and then little things seem
very great. Oh! the strange passions, the strange imaginations, the strange
conclusions, that attend a distempered judgment.

I have read of a foolish Emperor, who to show the greatness of his City, made
show of many Spiders; when the mind is disturbed, men many times say they know
not what, and do they know not what; it may be when these clouds are blown
over, and thy mind cleared, and thy judgment settled, thou will be of another
opinion. The supplicant woman appealed from drunken King Philip, to sober King
Philip; it is good to appeal from a distempered mind, to a clear composed mind,
for that is the way to make a righteous judgment of all the righteous
dispensations of God, both toward our selves, and toward others. Nothing but
strong vomits, strong purges, strong glisters will cure some.


Thirdly, It may be that the Lord sees that it is very needful, that thy
afflictions should be greater than others, it may be thy heart is harder than
other men's hearts, and prouder and stouter than other men's hearts; it may be
thy heart is more impure than others, and more carnal than others, or else more
passionate and more worldly than others, or else more deceitful and more
hypocritical than others, or else more cold and careless than others, or else
more secure than others, or more formal and lukewarm than others; now if this
be thy case, certainly God sees it very necessary for the breaking of thy hard
heart, and the humbling of thy proud heart, and the cleansing of thy ^oul
heart, and the spiritualizing of thy carnal hear, etc. that thy afflictions
should be greater than others; and therefore hold thy peace; where the disease
is strong, the physic must be strong, else the cure will never be wrought.
God is a wise Physician, and he would never give strong physic, Jer. 30. 11.
chapter 46. 28.
if weaker could effect the cure. Isa. 27. 8. The more rusty the Iron is, the
oftener we put it into the fire to purify it; and the more crooked it is, the
more blows, and the harder blows we give to straiten it; thou have been long a
gathering rust; and therefore if God deal thus with thee, thou have no cause to
complain.

Fourthly, Though thy afflictions are greater than this and that particular
man's afflictions, yet doubtless there are many thousands in the world, whose
afflictions are greater than thine: Can thou seriously consider the sore
calamities and miseries that the devouring sword has brought upon many
thousand Christians in foreign parts, and say that thy afflictions are greater
than theirs? surely no. Lib. 8 cap. 21.
Pliny in his natural history writes, that the nature of the Basilisk is to
kill all trees and shrubs it breathes upon, and to scorch and burn all Read
Josephus, and the history of the Bohemian persecution
herbs and grass it passes over. Such are the dismal effects of war; the sword
knows no difference between Catholics and Lutherans (as once the Duke of
Medina Sidonia said) betwixt the innocent and the guilty, betwixt young and
old, betwixt bond and free, betwixt male and female, betwixt the precious and
the vile, the godly and the profane; betwixt the Prince and the subject,
betwixt the Noble man and the beggar; the sword eats the flesh, and drinks the
blood of all sorts and sexes, without putting any difference betwixt one or the
other. The poor Protestants under the Duke of Savoy, and those in Poland,
Denmark, Germany, and several other parts have found it so. Many of their
wounds are not healed to this day; Who can retain in his fresh and bleeding
memory, the dreadful work that the sword of war has made in this Nation, and
not say, surely many thousands have been greater sufferers than my self; they
have resisted unto blood, but so have not I, Heb. 12. 4. But

Fifthly, As thy afflictions are greater than other men's, so it may be thy
mercies are greater than other men's mercies, and if so, thou have no cause but
to hold thy peace; as Jobs afflictions were greater than other men's, so his
mercies were greater that other Job 1
men's; and Job wisely sets one against another, and then lays his hand upon
his mouth. It may be thou have had more health than others, and more strength
than others, and more prosperity than others, and more smiling providence than
others, and more good days than others, and more sweet and comfortable
relations than others: And if this be thy case, thou have much cause to be
mute, thou have no cause to murmr; if now thy winter nights be longer than
others, remember thy summer days have formerly been longer than others; and
therefore hold thy peace. But

Sixthly and lastly, By great afflictions the Lord may greaten thy graces, and
greaten thy name and James 5. 10, 11
fame in the world; by Jobs great afflictions, God did greaten his faith, and
greaten his patience, and greaten his integrity, and greaten his wisdom and
knowledge, and greaten his experience, and greaten his name and fame in the
world, as you all know that have but read his book. Bonds and afflictions Act.
20. 23. 2 Cor. 11.
waited on Paul in every City; his afflictions and sufferings were very great,
but by them the Lord greatned his spirit, his zeal, his courage, his
confidence, his resolution, and his name and fame, both among sinners and
Saints. Certainly, if thou art dear to Christ, he will greaten thee in
spirituals, by all the great afflictions that are upon thee; he will raise thy
faith, and inflame thy love, and quicken thy hope, and brighten thy zeal, and
perfect thy patience, and perfume thy name, and make it Prove. 22. 1 Eccles. 7. 1
like a precious ointment, like a preciou^ ointment poured forth; so that good
men shall say, and bad men shall say, Lo, here is a Christian indeed, here is a
man more worth than the gold of Ophir; therefore hold thy peace, though thy
afflictions are greater than others.

Object. 7. I would be silent, but my outward affliction is attended with sore
temptations; God has not only outwardly afflicted me, but Satan is let loose
to buffet me; and therefore how can I be silent? how can I hold my peace, now
I am fallen under manifold temptations. To this I answer.

First, No man is the less beloved, because he is tempted, nay, those that God
loves best, are usually Ephesians. 6. 12
tempted most; witness David, Job, Joshua, Peter, Paul, yea Christ himself,
Matthew. 4
who as he was beloved above all others, so he was tempted above all others;
he was tempted to question his sonship, he was tempted to the worst Idolatry,
even to worship the Devil himself; to the greatest infidelity, to distrust his
Fathers providence, and to use unlawful means for necessary supplies; and to
self-murder, cast thy self down, etc. Those that were once glorious on earth,
and are now triumphing in Heaven, have been sorely tempted and assaulted; it is
as natural and common for the choicest Saints to be tempted, as it is for the
Sun to shine, the Bird to fly, the Fire to burn. The Eagle complains not of
her wings, nor I am without set upon by all the world, and within, by the Devil
and all his Angels, says Luther.
the Peacock of his train, nor the Nightingale of her voice, because these are
natural to them; no more should Saints of their temptations, because they are
natural to them. Our whole life, says Austin, is nothing but a tentation; the
best men have been worst tempted; therefore hold thy peace.

Secondly, Temptations resisted and bewailed, will never hurt you, nor harm
you; distasted temptations seldom or never prevail, so long as the soul
distastes them, and the will remains firmly averse against them, they can do no
hurt; so long as the language of the soul is, Get thee behind me Satan, Mat.
16. the soul is safe; it is not Satan's tempting, but my assenting, it is He
that can say, when he is tempted as that young convert, ego non sum ego, is
happy enough under all his temptations
not his enticing, but my yielding that mischiefs me; temptations may be
troubles to my mind, but they are not sins upon my soul whilst I am in arms
against them; if thy heart trembles, and thy flesh quakes when Satan tempts,
thy condition is good enough; if Satan's temptations be thy greatest
afflictions, his temptations shall never worsen thee, nor harm thee; and
therefore if this be thy case, hold thy peace.

Thirdly, Temptations are rather hopeful evidences that thy estate is good,
that thou art dear to God, and that it shall go well with thee for ever, than
otherwise. God had but one Son without corruption, Heb. 2. 17, 18
but he had none without temptation. Pirates make the fiercest assaults upon
those vessels that are most richly laden: So does Satan upon those souls that
are most richly laden with the treasures of grace, with the riches of glory.
Pirates let empty vessels pass and repass, without assaulting them: so does
Satan let souls that are empty of God, of Christ, of the Spirit, of Grace, pass
and repass without tempting or assaulting of them. When nothing will satisfy
the soul but a full departure out of Egypt, from the bondage and slavery Exodus
14. 9
of sin and that the soul is firmly resolved upon a march for Canaan, then
Satan Pharaoh-like, will furiously pursue after the soul with Horses and
Chariots, that is, with a whole Army of Temptations. Well, a tempted soul, when
Israel going into Egypt, had no opposition, but traveling into Canaan, they
were never free.
it is at worst with him, may safely argue thus, if God were not my friend,
Satan would not be so much my enemy; if there were not something of God within
me, Satan would never make such attempts to storm me; if the love of God were
not set upon me, Satan would never shoot so many fiery darts to wound me; if
the heart of God were not toward me, the hand of Satan would not be so
strong against mec. When Beza was tempted, he made this answer, Whatsoever I
was, Satan, I am now in Christ a new Creature, and that is it which troubles
thee; I might have so continued long enough ere thou would have vexed at it,
but now I see thou do envy me the grace of my Savior. Satan's malice to
tempt is no sufficient ground for a Christian to dispute Gods love upon, if it
were, there is no Saint on earth that should quietly possess divine favor, a
week, a day, an hour. The Jailer is quiet, when his prisoner is in bolts, but
if he b^e escaped, then he pursues him with hue and cry; you know how to
apply it. Men hate not the picture of a Toad, the Wolf flies not upon a painted
Sheep; no more does Satan upon those he has in chains; therefore hold thy
peace, though thou art inwardly tempted, as well as outwardly afflicted.

Fourthly, Whilst Satan is tempting Romans 8. 34 1 John 2. 1, 2 Zach. 3. 1, 2, 3
of thee, Christ in the Court of glory is interceding for thee, Luke 22. 31,
32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired to have you,
that he may sift you as wheat: But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail
not: Satan would fain have been shaking of him up and down, as wheat is shaken
in a fan, but Christ's intercession frustrates Satan's designed temptations: when
ever Satan stands at our elbows to tempt us, Christ stands at his Fathers to
intercede for us, Heb. 7. 25. He ever lives to make intercession. Some of the
learned think, that Christ intercedes only by virtue of his merits, others
think that it is done only with his mouth, probably it may be done both
ways, the rather because he has a tongue (as also a whole glorified body) in
Heaven, and is it likely that that mouth which pleaded so much for us on earth,
should be Joh. 17.
altogether silent for us in Heaven? Christ is a person of highest honor, he
is the greatest favorite in the Court of Heaven, he always stands betwixt us
and danger, if there be any evil plotted or designed against us by Satan (the
great accuser of the brethren) he foresees it, and by his intercession
prevents it. When Satan puts in his pleas, and commences suit upon suit against
us, Christ still undertakes our cause, he answers all his pleas, and non-sutes
Satan at every turn, and in despite of Hell he keep us up in divine favor;
when Satan pleads, Lord here are such and such sins that thy children have
committed, and here are such and such duties that they have omitted, and here
are such and such mercies that they have not improved, and here are such and
such ordinances that they have slighted, and here are such and such motions of
the Spirit, that they have quenched: divine Justice, answers, All this is true;
but Christ has appeared on their behalf, he has pleaded their Says Christ,
Lord, here is wisdom for their folly, humility for their pride, heavenliness
for their earthliness, holiness for their wickedness, etc.
cause, he has fully and fairly answered whatever has been objected, and
given complete satisfaction to the utmost farthing: So that there is no
accusation nor condemnation that can stand in force against them; upon which
account the Apostle triumphs in that, Romans 8. 34. Who is he that condemns?
it is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the
right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. Christ's intercession
should be the souls Anchor-hold in time of temptation; in the day of thy
temptation thou need not be disturbed nor disquieted, but in peace and
patience possess thine own soul, considering what a friend thou have in the
Court of glory, and how he is most active for thee, when Satan is most busy
in tempting of thee.

Fifthly and Lastly, All temptations that the Saints meet with, shall work much
for their good, they shall be much for their gain, the profit and advantage
that will redound to tempted souls by all their temptations, is very great; now
this will appear to be a most Romans 8. 28 Jam. 1. 12.
certain truth, by an induction of particulars, thus:

First, By temptations God multiplies and increases his childrens spiritual
experiences; the increase of which is better than the increase Rom 5. 3, 4
Frequent engagements add to the soldiers skill, and much increase his
experiences.
of gold; in the school of temptation God gives his children the greatest
experience of his power supporting them, of his word comforting of them, of his
mercy warming of them, of his wisdom counselling of them, of his faithfulness
joying of them, and of his grace strengthening of them, 2 Cor. 12. 9. My grace
shall be sufficient for thee. Paul never experienced so deeply what Almighty
power was, what the everlasting arms of mercy were, and what infinite grace and
goodness, as when he was under the buffetings of Satan.

Secondly, All their temptations shall be physical, their temptations shall
be happy preventions of great abominations, 2 Cor. 12. 7. Lest I should be
exalted, lest I Those soldiers that are most in fighting, are least in
sinning, and most free from diseases.
should be exalted, it is twice in that one verse, he begins with it, and he
ends with it; if he had not been buffeted, he might have been more highly
exalted in his own conceit, than he was before in his exstacie. Ah tempted
souls! you say you are naught, very naught, but had it not been for the school
of temptation, you might have been stark naught before this time; you say you
are sick, you are even sick to death, why your sickness had before this time
killed you, had not temptations been physical to you; you are bad under
temptation, but doubtless you would have been much worse, had not God made
temptation a diet-drink to you.

Thirdly, Temptations shall much promote the exercise of grace, as the spring
in the watch sets all the wheels a going; and as Solomon's virtuous woman set
all her Prove. 30. 10, -- ult. 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7
maidens to work: So temptation sets faith on work, and love on work, and
repentance on work, and hope on work, and holy fear on work, and godly sorrow
on work. Tapers burn clearest in the dark.
As the wind sets the Mill at work, so the wind of temptation sets the graces
of the Saints a going; now faith runs to Christ, now it hugs a promise, now it
pleads the blood of Christ, now it looks to the recompense of reward, now it
takes the sword of the Spirit, etc. now Cant. 3. 6, 7
love cleaves to Christ, now love hangs upon Christ, now love will fight it out
to the death for Christ, now hope flies to the horns of the Sanctuary, now hope
puts on her helmet, now hope casts her anchor upon that within the veil, etc.
Heb. 6. 19
Grace is never more acted, than when a Christian is most tempted. Satan made a
bow of Jobs wife (of his Rib, as Chrysostom speaks) and shot a tentation by
her at Job, thinking to have shot him to the heart, curse God and dye, but the
activity of Jobs graces was a breastplate that made him temptationproof; the
Devil tempting Bonaventure, told him he was a reprobate, and therefore
persuaded him to drink in the present pleasures of this life (for says he)
thou art excluded from the future joys with God in Heaven ( Bonaventures
graces being active) he answers, no, not so Satan, if I must not enjoy God
after this life, let me enjoy him as much as I can in this life.

Fourthly, By temptations the Lord will make you the more serviceable and usefu
to others; none so fit and able to relieve tempted The skilfulest commanders
and leaders are of greatest service and use to the soldiers.
souls, to sympathize with tempted souls, to succor tempted souls, to counsel
tempted souls, to pity tempted souls, to support tempted souls, to bear with
tempted souls, and to comfort tempted souls, as those who have been in the
school of temptations, 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4. Blessed be God, even the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort; Who
comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them
which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted
of God. By temptations God trains up his servants, and fits and capacitates
them to succor and shelter their fellow brethren. One tempted Christian, says
Luther, is Luther in Genesis 27. Rev. 2. 24
more profitable and useful to other Christians, than a hundred (I may add,
than a thousand) that have not known the depths of Satan, that have not been in
the school of temptation; he that is Master of Arts in the school of
temptation, has learned an Art to comfort, to succor, and gently to handle
tempted and distressed souls, infinitely beyond what all humane Arts can reach
unto; no Doctor to him that has been a Doctor in the school of temptation, all
other Doctors are but illiterate dunces to him.

Fifthly, It is an honor to the Saints to be tempted, and in the issue to
have an honorable conquest ever the tempter; it was a great honor to David,
that he should be put to fight hand to hand 1 Samuel 17.
with Goliath, and in the issue to overcome him; but it was a far (...)ter
honor to Job and Paul, Job 1. 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9, 10
that they should be put to combat in the open field with Satan himself, and
in the close to gain a famous conquest over him, as they did; it was a very
great honor to 2 Samuel 23. 13, -- 18.
David's three mighty men* that in jeopardy of their lives they brake through the
host of the Philistines, to bring water to David out of the well of Beth-lehem,
and did effect it in spite of all the strength and power of their enemies,
though it were to the extremest hazard of their blood and lives; but it is a
far greater honor to the Saints to be furnished with a spirit of Romans 8. 35,
-- ult. 1 John 1. 3, 4
strength, courage, and valor, to break through an army of temptations, and in
the close (...) triumph over them, and yet this honor have all the Saints, 1
Cor. 10. 13. But God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above
that ye are able; but will, with the temptation, also make a way to escape,
that ye may be able to bear it. Romans 16. 20. And the God of peace shall tread
Satan under your feet shortly. 1 John 2. 13, 14. I write unto you Fathers,
because ye have known him that is from the beginning; I write unto young men,
because you have overcome the wicked one; I write unto you children, because
ye have known the Father; I have written unto you Fathers, because ye have
known him that is from the beginning; I have written unto you young men,
because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have
overcome the wicked one, 1 John 5. 18. We know that whosoever is born of God
sins not (that is, that sin that is unto death, verse. 16. nor he sins
not as other men do, delightfully, greedily, customarily, resolvedly,
impenitently, etc.) but he that is begotten of God keeps himself, and that
wicked one touches him not. The glorious Exodus 14.
victory that the people of God had over Pharaoh, and his great Host, was a
figure of the glorious victory that the Saints shall obtain over Satan and his
instruments, which is clear from that, Rev. 15. 3. Where we have the song of
Moses, and of the Lamb; but why the song of Moses, and of the Lamb? but to hint
this to us, that the overthrow of Pharaoh was a figure of the overthrow of
Satan, and the triumphal song of Moses was a figure of that song which the
Saints shall sing for their overthrow of Satan. As certainly as Israel overcame
Pharaoh, so certainly shall every true Israelite overcome Satan. The Romans
were worsted in many fights, but were never overcome in a set war, at the long
run they overcame all their enemies; though a Christian may be worsted by
Satan in some particular skirmishes, yet at the long run he is sure of an
honorable conquest. God puts a great deal of honor upon a poor soul, when he
brings him into the open field to sight it ou^ with Satan* by fighting he
overcomes, he gains the victory, he triumphs over Satan, and leads captivity
captive. Augustine gives this reason why God permitted Adam at first to be
tempted, viz. that he might have had the more glory in resisting and
withstanding Satan's temptation; it is the glory of a Christian to be made
strong to resist, and to have his resistance crowned with a happy conquest.

Sixthly, By temptations the Lord will make his people more frequent and more
abundant in the work of prayer; every temptation proves a strong alarm to
prayer. When Paul was in the school of temptation, he prayed 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9
thrice, that is, often; days of temptation, are days of great supplication.
Christians usually pray most, when they are tempted most; they are most busy
with God, when Satan is most busy with them; a Christian is most upon his
knees, when Satan stands most at his elbow.

Augustine was a man much tempted, So Bernard, Basil, G^rgonia, Trucilla,
James, Jacob, Daniel.
and a man much in prayer; holy prayer, says he, is a shelter to the soul, a
sacrifice to God, and a scourge to the Devil.

Luther was a man under manifold temptations, and a man much in prayer; he is
said to have spent three hours every day in prayer, he used to say, that
prayer was the best book in his study.

Chrysostom was much in the school of temptation, and delighted much in
prayer; Oh! says he, it is more bitter than death to be spoiled of prayer,
and hereupon (as he observes) Daniel chose rather to run the hazard of his
life, than to lose his prayer. But

Seventhly, By temptations the Lord will make his people more and more
conformable to the Image of his Son. Christ was much Luke 4,
tempted, he was often in the school of temptation; and the more a Christian
is tempted, the more into the likeness of Christ he will be transformed* of
all men in the world; tem^ted souls do most resemble Christ to the life, in
meekness, low liness, holiness, heavenliness, etc. The Image of Christ is most
fairly stamped upon tempted Heb. 12. 1, 2 2 Cor. 3. 18. Heb. 2. 17, 18
souls; tempted souls are much in looking up to Jesus, and every gracious look
upon Christ changes the soul more and more into the Image of Christ; tempted
souls experience much of the succourings of Christ, and the more they
experience the sweet of the succourings of Christ, the more they grow up into
the likeness of Christ; temptations are the tools by which the Father of
spirits does more and more carve, form and fashion his precious Saints into the
similitude and likeness of his dearest Son.

Eighthly and lastly, (Take many things in one) God by temptations makes sin
more hateful, and the world less delightful, and relations less hurtful: by
temptations God discovers to us our own weakness, and the creatures
insufficiency 1 Pet. 5. 8
in the hour of temptation to help us, or succor us; by temptations God will
brighten our Christian Ephesians. 6. 10, -- 18
Armor, and make us stand more upon our Christian watch, and keep us closer to
a succouring Christ; by temptations the Lord will make his ordinances to be
more highly prized, and Heaven to be more earnestly desired. Now, seeing 2 Cor.
5. 1, 2, 3.
that temptations shall work so eminently for the Saints good, why should not
Christians be mute and silent? why should they not hold their peace, and lay
their hands upon their mouths, though their afflictions are attended with great
temptations?

Object. 8 Oh! But God has deserted me, he has forsaken me, and he that
should comfort my soul stands afar off, how can I be silent? the Lord has hid
his face from me? clouds are gathered about me* God has turned his back upon
me, how can I hold my peace? supposing that the desertion is real, and not in
appearance only, as sometimes it falls out: I answer.

First, It has been the common lot, portion and condition of the choicest
Saints in this world, to be deserted and forsaken of God, Psalm. 30. 6, 7. Psalm.
77. and 88. Job 23. 8, 9. Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. chapter 5. 6, 7. Isa. 8. 17. Micah.
7. 7, 8, 9. If God deal^ no worse with thee than he has dealt with his most
bosom friends, with his choicest Jewels, thou have no reason to complain. But

Secondly, Gods forsaking of thee is only partial, it is not total; God may
forsake his people in part, but he never wholly forsakes them, he may forsake
them in respect of his quickening presence, and in respect of his comforting
Psalm. 9. 4. Genesis 49. 23, 24
presence, but he never forsakes them in respect of his supporting presence, 2
Cor. 12. 9. My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in
weakness, Psalm. 73. 23, 24. The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord,
and he delights in his way. Though he fall he shall not be utterly cast
down: for the Lord upholdeth him with his As the Nurse upholds the little
child, etc.
hand. Gods supporting hand of grace is still under his people, Psalm. 63. 8. My
soul follows hard after thee: thy right hand upholdeth me. Christ has
always one hand to uphold his people, and another hand to embrace them, Cant.
2. 16. The everlasting arms of God are always underneath his people, Deuteronomy. 33.
27. And this the Saints have always found, witness David, Heman, Asaph, Job,
etc.

Geographers write, that the City of Syracuse in Sicily, is so curiously
situated, that the Sun is never out of sight: though the children of God
sometimes are under some clouds of afflictions, yet the Sun of Mercy, the Sun
of Righteousness, is never quite out of sight. But

Thirdly, Though God has forsaken thee, yet his love abides and continues
constant to thee; he loves thee with an everlasting love, Jer. 31. 3. Where
he loves, he loves to the end, John 13. 1. Isa. 49. 14, 15, 16. But Zion
said, the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. But was not
Zion mistaken? yes. Can a woman forget her The very Heathen has observed that
God does not love his children with a weak affection, but with a strong
masculine love. Seneca.
sucking child that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb?
yea, they may forget, yet will not I forget thee. Behold I have graven thee
upon the palms of my hands, thy walls are continually before me. Look as
persons engrave the mark, name or picture of those whom they dearly love, and
entirely affect, upon some stone that they wear at their breasts, or upon some
ring that they wear on their finger: So, had God engraven Zion upon the palms
of his hands, she was still in his eye, and always dear to his heart, though
she thought not so. As Joseph's heart was full of love to his brethren, even
then when he Genesis 42.
spoke roughly to them, and withdrew himself from them; (for he was fain to go
aside, and ease his heart by weeping) so the heart of God is full of love to
his people, even then when he seems to be most displeased with them, and to
turn his back upon them; though Gods dispensations may be changeable toward
his people, yet his gracious disposition is unchangeable toward them. When God
Mal. 3. 6.
puts the blackest veil of all upon his face, yet then his heart is full of
love to his people, then his bowels are yearning toward them, Jer. 31. 18, 19,
20. Is Ephraim my dear Son? is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke against
him, I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for
him: I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord. The Mothers bowels
cannot more yearn after the tender babe, than Gods does after his distressed
ones. As Moses his Mother, when she had put him into Exodus 2.
the Ark of Bul-rushes, wept to see the babe weep, and when she was turned
from him, she could not but cast a weeping eye of love toward him: So when
God turns aside from his people, yet he cannot but cast an eye of love toward
them. Hosea 11. 8. How shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? etc. Here are four
several hows in the text, the like not to be found in the whole book of God. I
am even at a stand, justice calls for vengeance, but mercy interposeth; my
bowels yearn, my heart melts: O! how shall I give thee up? O! I cannot give
thee up, I will not give thee up. Gods love is always like himself,
unchangeable, his love is everlasting, it is a love that never decaies, nor
waxes cold, it is like the stone Albestos, of which Solinus writes, that being
once hot, it can never be cooled again.

Fourthly, Though the Lord has hid his face from thee, yet certainly thou have
his secret presence with thee. God is present, when he is seemingly absent.
The Psalm. 23* 4 Psalm. 139. Genesis 28. 16
Lord was in this place, and I knew it not, says Jacob. The Sun many times
shines when we do not see it, and the husband is many times in the house when
the wife does not know it. God is in thy house, he is in thy heart, though
thou feast him not, thou feel him not, though thou hear him not, Heb. 13.
5. I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, or as it may be rendered
according to the Greek, I will not not leave thee, neither will I not not
forsake thee. Art thou not now drawn out to prize God, and Christ, and his
love, above all the world? yes; art thou not now drawn out to give the Lord
many a secret visit, Cant. 2. 14
in a corner behind the door, in some dark hole where none can see thee, nor
hear thee but the Lord? Psalm. 42. 1, 2, 3 Psalm. 63. 1, 2, 3
yes; are there not strong breathings, pantings and longings after a clearer
vision of God, and after a fuller fruition of God? yes; art thou not more
affected and afflicted with the withdrawings of Christ, than thou art with the
greatest afflictions Cant. 5. 6.
that ever befell thee? yes, Austin upon that answer of God to Moses, Thou
can not see my face and Exodus 33. 20.
live, makes this quick and sweet reply, then Lord let me die, that I may see
thy face. Do thou not often tell God that there is no punishment Psalm. 30. 6,
7
to the punishment of loss, and no hell to that of being forsaken of God? yes;
do thou not find a secret power in thy soul, drawing thee forth to struggle
with God, to lay hold on God, and patiently to wait on God, till he shall
return unto thee, and lift up the light of his countenance upon thee? yes; well
then, thou may be confident that thou have a secret and blessed presence of
God with thee, though God in regard of his comfortable presence may be
departed from thee; nothing below a secret presence of God, with a man's spirit,
will keep him waiting and working till the Sun of Righteousness shines upon
him. If any vain persons should put that deriding Mal. 4. 2.
question to thee, where is thy God? thou may safely and boldly answer them,
my God is here, he is nigh me, he is round about me, yea he is in the
midst of me, Zeph 3. 17. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty, he
will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest in his love, he
will joy ^ver thee with singing. The bush, which was a type of the Church,
consumed not all the while it burned with fire, because God was in the midst of
it. It is no Argument that Christ is not in the Ship, because tempests and
storms arise.

Fifthly, Though God be gone, yet he will return again; though your Sun be
now set in a cloud, yet it will rise again; though sorrow may abide for a
night, yet joy Isa. 17. 14 Psalm. 30. 5. Psalm. 40. 1, 2, 3 Psalm. 5. 11 Psalm. 42.
5, 8, 9, 11
comes in the morning. A Christians mourning shall last but till morning, Micah
7. 19. He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us. Cant. 3. 4. It
was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my soul loves;
I held him, and I would not let him go, etc. Psalm. 94. 19. In the multitude of*
my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul. Isa. 54. 7, 8, 10. For a
moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee. In a
little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy redeemer; for the
mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall not
depart from thee; neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, says the
Lord that has mercy on thee. God will not suffer his whole displeasure to
arise upon his people, neither will he forsake them totally or finally; the
Saints shall taste but some sips of the cup of Gods wrath, sinners shall drink
the dreggs, their storm shall end in a calm, and their winter night shall be
turned into a summers day. There was a woman who was thirteen years under
desertion, which was so vehement, that for the most part of her time, she was
fain to keep her bed through weakness: A godly Minister, who was affected with
her condition, went to comfort her, and to pray with her, but when he came and
offered to do it, she shrieked out, utterly refusing and forbidding him to
pray with her, for said she, I have too many abused mercies to answer for
already; yet he would not be put off, but prayed by her, and so prevailed
with God on her behalf, that the next morning she was delivered from all her
fears, and had such exceeding joy, that the like has rarely been heard of; the
Lord that had been long withdrawn from her, returned at length in a way of
singular mercy to her. There was So Mris. Honeywood, Mris. Katherine Breterg,
and diverse others.
another precious woman, who was several years deserted, and hearing a precious
godly Minister preach, she of a sudden fell down overwhelmed with joy, crying
out, O! he is come whom my soul loves! and for diverse days after she was
filled with such exceeding joys, and had such gracious and singular ravishing
expressions, so fluently coming from her, that many came to hear the rare
manifestations of Gods grace in her, the lowest of her pious expressions did
exceed the highest that ever the Minister had read in the book of Martyrs. But

Sixthly and lasty, Gods deserting, Gods forsaking of his people, shall many
ways work for their good. As

First, God by withdrawing from his people, will prepare and fit them for
greater refreshings, manifestations and consolations, Psalm. 71. 11, 20, 21.
Saying, God has forsaken him, persecute and take him, for there is none to
deliver him. But shall this forelorn condition work for his good? yes. Thou
which have showed me great and sore troubles, shall quicken me again, and
shall bring me up again from the depths of the earth. Thou shall increase my
greatness, and comfort me on every side. When Joseph's brethren were in Genesis
45. 1, 2, 3, 4
their greatest distress, then Joseph makes known himself most fully to them,
so does Christ our spiritual Joseph to his people. Hudson the Martyr, deserted
at the stake, went from under his chain, and having prayed earnestly, was
comforted immediately, and suffered valiantly.

2 By Gods withdrawing from his people, he prevents his peoples withdrawing
from him; and so by an affliction he prevents sin: for God to withdraw from
me is but Heb. 10. 38, 39. Christ the Captain of our salvation will execute
Martial Law upon all that withdraw from their colors, etc.
my affliction, but for me to withdraw from God, that is my sin; and therefore
it were better for me that God should withdraw a thousand times from me, than
that I should once withdraw from God: God therefore forsakes us, that we may
not forsake our God; God sometimes hides himself, that we may cleave the
cl^ser to him, and hang the faster upon him. As the Mother hides her self from
the child for a time, that the child may cleave the closer, and hang the
faster upon her all the day long; God sometimes hid himself from David, Psalm.
30. 7. Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled, I was allamort; well, and
is that all? no, verse. 8. I cried to thee O Lord, and unto the Lord I made
supplication. Now he cries louder, and cleaves closer to God than ever; so in
that, Psalm. 63. 1, 2. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul
thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty land, where
no water is. To see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in thy
Sanctuary. Well, and how do these withdrawings of God work? why this you may
see in verse 8. My soul follows hard after thee, or as the Hebrew reads it,
my soul cleaves after thee; look as the husband cleaves to his wife, so does
my soul cleave to the Lord, the Psalmist now follows God even hard Genesis 2. 24
at heels, as we say* But

Thirdly, The Lord by withdrawing from his people, will inhance and raise the
price, and commend the worth, excellency, sweetness 2 Pet. 1. 4
and usefulness of several precious promises, which otherwise would be but as
dry breasts, and as useless weapons to the soul. As that, Micah 7. 18, 19. He
will turn again, he will have compassion upon us, etc. and that, Isa. 54. 7,
8. but now opened; and that, Heb. 13. 5, 6. and that, Hab. 2. 3. and that, And
that, John 14. 21, 23. and that, 1 Samuel 12. 20. Isa. 60. 19, -- ult.
Psalm. 5. 12. For thou Lord wilt bless the Righteous; with favor thou will
compass him (or crown him) as with a shield; the Lord will compass the
righteous about with his favor, as the Crown compasses about the head, as the
Hebrew imports; and that, Psalm. 112. 4. Unto the upright there arises light in
darkness; he is gracious and full of compassion, and righteous. And that, Jer.
3^* 37. Thus says the Lord, if Heaven above can be measured, and the
foundations of the earth searched out beneath, I will also cast off all the
seed of Israel, for all that they have done, says the Lord. As sure as Heaven
cannot be measured, nor the foundations of the earth searched by the skill or
power of any mortal man: So sure and certain it is, that God will not utterly
cast off his people, no no^ for all the evil that they have done; now at what a
rare does a deserted sou^ v^^ue these precious promises? well, says he, these
Psalm. 119. 103. 72. v. ^sa. 19. 10 Pro. 8. 11 Jo^ 23. 12
promises are sweeter than the honey or the honeycomb, they are more precious
than gold, than fine gold, than much gold, than all the gold in the world. I
prefer them before my food, before my deligh^ul food, yea before my necessary
food, before my appointed portion. As Alexander laid up Homers Iliads in a
Cabinet embroidered with gold and pearls, so deserted souls will lay up these
precious promises in the Cabinet of their hearts, as the choicest treasure the
world affords. Dol(...)ns they say love music, so do ^eserted souls the music
of the promises. That promise, 1 Timothy 1. 15. was music to Bilny the Martyr;
and that promise, John 10. 29. was music to Vrsine; and that promise, Isa. 57.
15. was music to another; and that promise, Isa. 26. 3. was music to another,
and that to another, Mat. 11. 28, etc. promises that are suited to a deserted
man's condition, make the sweetest music in his car, and are the most sovereign
cordials to bear up his spirits, that God can give, or Heaven afford, or the
soul desire. Deuteronomy. 32. 13. He made him to ride on the high places of the
earth, that he might e^^ the fruits of the field; and he made him to suck
honey out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock. Ah the honey, the oil that
deserted souls suck out of such promises that speak home and close to their
conditions!

Fourthly, By Gods hiding his face, and withdrawing himself from thee, thou
will be enabled more feelingly, and more experimentally to sympathize with
others Heb. 5. 2
and to have compassion on others that are or may be in the dark, and forsaken
of God, as now thou art. Heb. 13. 2. Remember them that are in bonds, as bound
with them; and them which suffer adversity, as being your selves also in the
body. It is observed of the Bees, that Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 11. cap. 17
when one is sick, they all mourn; and of the Sheep, that if one of them be
faint, the rest of the flock will stand between it and the Sun, until it be
revived; in the natural body, if one member grieve, and is in pain, all suffer
with it; when a thorn is got into the foot, how does the back bow, and the eyes
pry, and the hands go to pluck the thorn out; none so compassionate toward
deserted souls, as those who have been deserted and forsaken of God themselves.
Oh! they know what an evil and a bitter thing it is to be left and forsaken of
God; and therefore their bowels, their compassions run out much to such, yea
most to such; they know that there is no affliction no misery, no hell, to that
of being forsaken of God.

Anaxagoras seeing himself old, Plutarch,
and forsaken of the world, laid himself down, and covered his head close,
determining to starve himself to death with hunger; but alas! what is it to
be forsaken of the world, to a man's being forsaken of God? were there as many
worlds, as there be men in the world, a man were better be forsaken by them
all, than to be forsaken of God: There is a great truth in that saying of
Chrysostom, Chrysostom. ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 47. and in Mat. Hom. 24.
viz. That the torments of a thousand hells, if there were so many, come far
short of this one, to wit, to be turned out of Gods presence with a non novi
vos, I know you not, Mat. 7. 23. The schools have long since concluded, that
paena sensus, the pain of loss, is far greater than paena damni, the pain of
sense: what a grief was it to Absolon to see the Kings face clouded? and how
sadly was Eli and his daughter affected with the loss of the Ark, which was but
a testimony of Gods presence? but Oh how much more is a Christian affected and
afflicted with the loss of the face and favor of God? the remembrance of which
makes his heart to melt, and his bowels to yearn toward those whose Sun is set
in a cloud.

Fifthly, Hereby the Lord will teach his people to set a higher price upon his
face and favor, when they come to enjoy it. Cant. Austin says, Lord, I am
content to suffer any pains and torments in this world, if I might see thy face
one day; at such a rate did he prize the face of God.
3. 4. It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my
soul loves; I held him, and I would not let him go, etc. No man sets so high a
price upon Christ, as he that has lost him, and found him again. Jesus in the
China tongue signifies the rising Sun, and so he is, Mal. 4. 2. especially to
souls that have been long clouded. The poor Northern Nations in Strabo, who
want the light of the Sun for some months together, when the term of his
return approaches, they climb up into the highest mountains to spy it, and he
that spies it first was accounted the best and most beloved of God, and usually
they did choose him King; at such a rate did they prize the return of the Sun:
Ah! so it is with a poor soul, that for some months, years, has been deserted,
Oh how highly does he prize and value the Sun of Righteousness, his returning
to him, and shining upon him! Psa. 63. 3. Thy loving kindness is better than
life, or better than lives, as the Hebrew has it, divine favor Chaimi.
is better than life, it is better than life with all its revenues, with all
its appurtenances, as honors, riches, pleasures, applause, etc. yea it is
better than many lives put together. Now you know at what a high rate men value
their lives, they will bleed, sweat, vomit, purge, part with an estate, yea
with a limb, yea limbs, to preserve their lives. As he cried out, give me any
deformity, any torment, any misery, so you spare my life. Now, though life be
so dear and precious to a man, yet a deserted soul prizes the returnings of
divine favor upon him, above life, yea above many lives; many men have been
weary of their lives, as is evident in Scripture and History; but no man was
ever yet found that was weary of the love and favor of God; no man sets so
high a price upon the Sun, as he that has lain long in a dark dungeon, etc.
But

Sixthly, Hereby the Lord will train up his servants in that precious life of
faith, which is the most honorable, and the most happy life in all the world.
2 Cor. 5. 7. For we walk by faith, and not by sight. The life of sense, the
life of reason is a low life, a mean life; the life of faith is a noble life, a
blessed life; when Elisha demanded of the Shunamite 2 King. 4. 15, 16
what he should do for her, whether he should speak for her to the King, or
the Captain of the Host? she answered, I dwell among my people, that is, I
dwell nobly and happily among my people, I have no need to make any suit to
King or Captain; and this she accounts her great happiness; and indeed it is
the greatest happiness in this world to live much in the exercise of Faith; no
man lives so free a life, so holy a life, so heavenly a life, so happy a life,
as he that lives a life of faith; by divine withdrawings the soul is put upon
hanging upon a naked God, a naked Isa. 50. 10
Christ, a naked Promise; Now, the soul is put upon the highest and the purest
acts of Faith, viz. to Chap. 63. 15, 16
cleave to God, to hang upon God, and to carry it sweetly and obedientially
toward God, though he frowns, though he chides, though he strikes, yea
though he kills. Those are the most excellent and Job. 13. 15 Faith acts in
the most kingly way when it hangs upon a killing God.
heroic acts of faith that are most abstracted from sense and reason; he that
suffers his reason to usurp upon his Faith, will never be an excellent
Christian; He that goes to school to his own reason, has a fool to his
schoolmaster, and he that suffers his faith to be overruled by his reason,
shall never want woe, where reason is strongest, faith usually is weakest, but
now the Lord by forsaking of his people for a time, he makes them skilful in
the life of faith, which is the choicest and the sweetest life in this world.
But

Seventhly, By divine withdrawings Psalm. 22. 1, 2 Christ was only forsaken in
regard of his humane nature, not in respect of his Godhead.
you are made more conformable to Christ your head and husband, who was under
spiritual desertion as well as you, Mat. 27. 46. My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? There is an hidden Emphasis in the Hebrew word, El signifies a
strong God, Eli, Eli, My strong God, my strong God; the unity of Christ's person
was never dissolved, nor his graces were never diminished; in the midst of this
terrible storm, his faith fortifieth and strengthens it self upon the
strength of God; My God, my God; yet in respect of divine protection, and
divine solace, he was for a time forsaken of his Father* and if this be thy
case, thou art herein but made conformable to thy Lord and Master, nay, thou
do but sip of that bitter cup, of which Christ drank deep; thy cloud is no
cloud to that which Christ was under. But

Eighthly and lastly, By these transient and partial forsakings, Psalm. 71. 20,
21
the Lord will exceedingly sweeten the clear, full, constant and uninterrupted
enjoyments of himself in Heaven to all his people. Ah! how sweet and precious
was the face and favor of the King to Absalom, after he had for a time been
banished, and at length restored to his royal favor again? Onesimus departed
from Philemon for a Phil. 15.
season, that he might receive him for ever: so the Lord departs from his
people for a time, that they may receive him for ever; he hides himself for a
season, that his constant presence amongst his children in glory, may be the
more sweet and delightful to them, etc.

Object. 9. Oh! but I am falselyaccused, and sadly reproached, and my good
name, which should be as dear or dearer to me than my life, is defamed, and
flye-blown, and things are laid to my charge that I never did, that I never
knew, etc. and how then can I be silent? how can I hold my peace? I cannot
forget the proverb, oculus and fama non patiuntur jocos, a m^ns eye and his
good name can bear no jeasts, and how then can I be mute to see men make
jeasts upon my good name? and every day to see men lade it with all the scorn
and contempt imaginable, that they may utterly blast it? etc. To this I say,

First, That it must be granted, that a good name is one of the choicest
Jewels in a Christians Crown; though a great name many times is little worth,
yet a good name is rather to be chosen than great riches, it is better to have
a good name abroad, than silver or gold laid up in a chest at home. A good name
is better than precious ointment, Eccles. 7. 1. Precious ointments were greatly
in use, and highly esteemed of among the Israelites, in those Eastern parts;
they Isa. 39. 2 A good renown is better than a golden girdle, says the French
Proverb.
were laid up among the most precious things even in the Kings treasury. Sweet
ointments can but affect the smell, and comfort the brain, and delight the
outward man; they reach not the best part, the noble part, viz. the soul, the
conscience of a Christian; but a good name does both; what is the perfume of
the nostrils, to the perfume of the heart?

I have read, that in some Countries they have a certain Art of drawing of
Pigeons to their Dovehouses in those Countries by anointing the wings of one of
them with sweet ointment, and that Pigeon being sent abroad, does by the
fragrancy of that ointment dequoy, invite, and allure others to that house
where it self is a domestic; such is the fragrancy of a good name, that it
draws other men after the savor thereof. Among all sorts and ranks of men in
the world, a good name has an attractive faculty; it is a precious ointment
that draws hearers to attend good Preachers, Patients to attend Physicians,
Clients to attend Lawyers, Scholars to attend Schoolmasters, and Customers to
attend Shopkeepers, who with Demetrius, 3 John 12.
has a good report of all good men: Let a man's good name be but up, and he
cannot easily want any thing that men or money can help him to; a good name will
bring a man into favor and keep a man in favor with all that are good;
therefore says the Moralists,

Omnia si perdas, famam servare memento,
Qua semel amissa postea nullus eris.
Whatsoever commodity you lose, be sure yet to preserve that Jewel of a good
name; a Christian should be most chary of his good name, for a good name
answers to all things, as Solomon speaks of money, Ego si bonam famam servasso,
sat dives ero; if I may but keep a good name, I have wealth enough said Plaut.
the Heathen; a Christian should rather forgo gold, than let go a good name,
and he that robs a Christian of his good name, is a worse thief, than he that
robs him of his purse, and better deserves a hanging than he, etc. But

Secondly, It must be granted, that a good name once lost, is very hardly
recovered again, a man may more easily recover a lost friend, a lost estate,
than a lost name; a good name is like a Princely structure, quickly ruined, but
long a rearing; the Father of the Prodigal could say of his lost son, Luke 15.
ult.
This my Son was lost, but is found, he was dead, but is alive; but how few
Christians can say, this my good name was lost, but is found, it was dead, but
now it lives. As when Orpha once left Naomi, she returned Ruth 1. 14
no more to her: so when once a good name leaves a man, it hardly returns to
him again; a cracked credit will hardly be sodered anew; new Wine is rarely
put into old bottles; a man should stand upon nothing more than the credit of
his conscience, and the credit of his Act. 24. 16
name.

In Japan the very children are so jealous of their reputation, that in case
you lose a trifle, and say to one of them, sirrah, I believe you have stolen
it, without any pause the boy will immediately cut off a joint from one of his
fingers, and say, Sir, if you say true, I wish my finger may never heal again:
Three things a Christian should stiffly labor to maintain, 1 The honor of God.
2 The honor of the Gospel. 3 The honor of his own name; If once a Christians
good name sets in a cloud, it will be long before it rises again.

Thirdly, Though all this be true, yet it has been the portion of Gods
dearest Saints and servants to be slandered, reproached, vilified, Mat. 5. 10,
11, 12 1 Pet. 3. 14. chapter 4. 14 Psalm. 69. 7 Genesis 39. Psalm. 52. 2 Samuel 16. 11,
12. 6. 13. 15. chapter of Job. Jer. 51. 51
and falsely accused, Psalm. 31. 18. Let the lying lips be put to silence,
which speak grievous things proudly, and contemptuously against the righteous:
How sadly and falsely was Joseph accused by his wanton Mistress; David by Doeg
and Shimei, Job of hypocrisy, impiety, inhumanity, cruelty, partiality, pride
and irreligion? Job 22. Was not Naboth accused of speaking blasphemy against
God and the King? did not Haman represent the Jews to the Esth. 3.
King as Refractories and Rebels? was not Elias accused to be the troubler of
Israel, and Jeremy the Jer. 20. 7, 8, 9. Romans 3. 8 2 Cor. 6. 8 1 Cor. 4. 12, 13
trumpet of rebellion, the Baptist a stirrer up of sedition, and Paul a
pestilent incendiary? were not the Apostles generally accounted deceivers and
deluders of the people, and the offscouring of the world? etc. Athanasius and
Eustathius Act. and Mon.
were falsely accused of Adultery; Adultery, Heresy and Treason were charged
upon Cranmer, Parricide upon Philpot, sedition upon Latimer. As the primitive
persecutors usually put Christians into Bears skins, and Dogs skins, and then
baited them: so they usually As Tertullian, Minutius, Faelix, and others
declare.
loaded their names and persons with all the reproach, scorn, contempt and
false reports imaginable, and then baited them, and then acted all their malice
and cruelty upon them. I think there is no Christian, but sooner or later,
first or last, will have cause to say with David, Psalm. 35. 11. False witnesses
did rise up, they laid to my charge things that I knew not; they charged me
with such things whereof I was both innocent and ignorant. It was Hippias.
the saying of one, that there was nothing so intolerable as accusation,
because there was no punishment ordained by Law for accusers, as there was for
thieves, although they stole friendship from men, which is the goodliest riches
men can have. Well Christians, seeing it has been the lot of the dearest
Saints to be falsely accused, and to have their names and reputes in the world
reproached and flie-blown; do you hold your peace, seeing it is no worse with
you, than it was with them of whom this world was not world? The Kimchi.
Rabbis say, that the world cannot subsist without patient bearing of
reproaches. But

Fourthly, Our Lord Jesus Christ was sadly reproached, and falsely accused; his
precious name (that deserves to be always writ in characters of gold, as the
Persians usually write their Kings) was often eclipsed, before the Sun was
eclipsed at his death; his sweet name, that was sweeter than all sweets, was
often crucified before his body. Oh the stones of reproach that were frequently
rolled upon that name by which we must be saved, if ever we are saved! Oh
the jears, the scoffs, the scorns that were cast upon that name that can only
bless us. The name of Jesus (says Chrysostom) has a thousand treasures of
joy and comfort in it. The name of a Savior (says Bernard) is honey in the
mouth, and music in the ear, and a jubilee in the heart; and yet where is the
heart that can conceive, or the tongue that can express how much dung and filth
has been cast upon Christ's names? and how many sharp arrows of reproach and
scorn have been, and daily, yea hourly, are shot by the world at Christ's name
and honor? Such ignominious reproaches were cast upon Christ and his name in
the time of his life, and at his death, It is a foolish thing, says Cato, to
hope for life by another death; the world practically speaks as much every day.
that the Sun did blush, and masked her self with a cloud, that he might no
longer behold them, Mat. 11. 19. The Son of man came eating and drinking, and
they say, behold, a man gluttonous, and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and
sinners: but was he such a one? no; wisdom is justified of her children:
Wisdoms children will stand up and justify her before all the world. Mat. 27.
63. Saying, Sir, We remember The Greek word signifies one who does profess an
Art of couzening people to their faces.
that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive, after three days I will
rise again; but was he a deceiver of the people? no; he was the faithful and
true witness, Rev. 1. 5. chap. 3. 14. John 7. 20. The people answered and said,
thou have a Devil: who goes about to kill thee? chap. 8. 48. Then answered the
Jews, and said unto him, say we not well that thou art a Samaritane, and have a
Devil? chapter 10. 20. And many of them said* he has a Devil, and is mad, why hear
ye him? It was a wonder of wonders that the earth did not open and swallow up
these Monsters, and that God did not rain Hell out of Heaven upon these horrid
blasphemers, but their blasphemous assertions were denied and disproved by some
of wisdoms children, verse. 21. Others said, these are not the words of him
that has a Devil: can a Devil open the eyes of the blind? The Devil has no
such power, nor any such goodness as to create eyes to him that was born blind.

Will you yet see more scorn, dirt and contempt cast upon the Lord of glory?
why then cast your eyes upon that, Luke 16. 14. And the Pharisees also who were
covetous, heard all these things, and they derided him; or as the Greek reads
it, They blew their noses at him, in scorn and Exe mukterizon. Read that, Mark
15. 19. Isa. 57. 4. Mat. 27. 28, 29.
derision. The Pharisees did not only laugh, flear and jear at Christ, but
they gave also external signs of scorn and derision in their countenance and
gestures; they blew their noses at him, they contemned him as a thing of
naught. And in chapter 23. 35. both people and Rulers blew their noses at him; for
the original word is the same with that in the forementioned chapter, John 19.
12. he is accused for being an enemy to Caesar. Now, who can seriously
consider of the scorn, reproach and contempt that has been cast upon the name
and honor of our Lord Jesus, and not sit silent and mute under all the scorn
and contempt that has been cast upon his name or person in this world?

Fifthly, To be well spoken of by them that are ill spoken of by God, to be
in favor with them, The tongues of wicked men are like the Duke of Medina,
Sidonia's sword, that knew no difference between a Catholic and a Heretic,
the lashes of lewd tongues is as impossible to avo^d, as necessary to contemn.
who are out of favor with God, is rather a reproach than an honor to a man.
Our Savior himself restifieth that in the Church and Nation of the Jews, they
that had the most general approbation and applause, they who were most admired
and cried up, were the worst, not the best men; they were the false, not the
true Prophets. Luke 6. 26. Woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you;
for so did their Fathers to the false Prophets. Austin feared the praises of
good men, and detested the praises of evil men. I would not, says Luther, have
the glory and fame of Erasmus, my greatest fear is the praises of men. Phocion
had not suspected his speech, had not the common people applauded it.
Antisthenes mistrusted some ill in himself for the vulgar commendations.
Socrates ever suspected that which past with the most general commendations. To
be praised of evil men (said Bion) is to be praised for evil doing; so the
better they speak of a man, the worse; and the worse, the better. The
Lacedaemonians would not have a good saying sullied with a wicked mouth; a
wicked tongue soils all the good that drops from it; it is a mercy to be
delivered from the praises of wicked men; wicked men's applauses oftentimes
becomes the Saints reproaches: the Heathen could say, Quid mali Socrates.
feci? what evil have I done, that this bad man commends me? there is a truth
in that saying of Senica, Recti argumentum est, pessimis displicere. The worst
men are commonly most displeased with that which is best. Who can seriously
dwell on these things, and not be mute and silent under all the reproaches and
scorn that is cast upon his name and credit in this world?

Sixthly, There will come a day when the Lord will wipe off all the dust and
filth that wicked men have cast upon the good names of his people; there shall
be a resurrection Isa. 65. 15. chapter 61. 7 Psa. 68. 13 Mal. 3. 17, 18.
of names, as well as of bodies, their names that are now buried in the open
sepulchers of evil throats shall surely rise again; their innocence shall shine
forth as the light, and their righteousness as the noonday, Psalm. 37. 6. Though
the clouds may for a time obscure the shining forth of the Sun, yet the Sun
will shine forth again as bright and glorious as ever. The Righteous shall be
had in everlasting remembrance. Though the malicious slanders, and false
accusations of wicked men, may for a time cloud the names of the Saints, yet
those clouds shall vanish, and their names shall appear transparent and
glorious: God will take that care of his peoples good name, that the infamy,
calumnies, and contumelies that is cast upon it shall not long stick. Mat. 27.
ult. chapter 28. 2.
The Jews rolled a stone upon Christ to keep him down, that he might not rise
again, but an Angel quickly rolls away the stone, and in despite of his
keepers, he rises in a glorious triumphant manner: So, though the world may
roll this stone, and that of reproach and contempt upon the Saints good names,
yet God will roll away all those stones, and their names shall have a glorious
resurrection, in despite of men and devils: That God that has always one hand
to wipe away his childrens tears from their eyes, that God has always another
hand to wipe off the dust that lies upon his childrens names: wronged innocence
shall not long lve under a cloud; dirt will not stick long upon Marble, nor
statues of Gold. Well Christians, remember this, the slanders and reproaches
that are cast upon you, they are but badges of your innocence and glory. Job
31. 35, 36. If mine adversary should write a book against me, Surely I would
take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a Crown to more. All reproaches are
pearls added to a Christians Crown. Hence Austin, Quisquis volens detrahit
famae meae nolens addit mercedi meae, he that willingly takes from my good
name, unwillingly adds to my reward; and this Moses knew well enough, which
Heb. 11. 25, 26
made him prefer Christ's reproach before Pharaohs Crown. That God that knows
all his children by name, will not suffer their names to be long buried under
the ashes of reproach and scorn; and therefore hold thy peace; the more the
foot of pride and scorn tramples upon thy name for the present, the more
splendent and radiant it will be. As the more men trample upon a figure graven
in gold, the more lustrious they make it; therefore lie thy hand upon thy
mouth. But

Seventhly, The Lord has been a swift and a terrible witness against such that
have falsely accused his children, and that have laded Isa. 41. 11 Jude 15.
their names with scorn, reproach and contempt. Ahab and Jezabel that suborned
false witness 1 King. 22. 1. 22 2 King. 9
against Naboth, had their bloods licked up by Dogs. Amaziah, who falsely
accused the Prophet Amos to the King, met with this message Amos 7. 17
from the Lord. Thy wife shall be an harlot in the City, thy sons and daughters
shall fall by the sword, and thy land shall be divided by line, thou shall dye
in a polluted land. Haman, who falsely accused the Jews, was one day feasted
with the King, and the Esth. 7. 10. chapter 9, 10
next day made a feast for Crows. The envious Courtiers, who falsely Dan. 6. 24.
accused Daniel, were devoured of Lions. Let me give you a taste of the
Judgments of God upon such persons out of histories.

Caiphas the High Priest, who gathered the Council, and suborned false
witnesses against the Lord Jesus, Eusebius.
was shortly after put out of office, and one Jonathan substituted in his room,
whereupon he killed himself. John Cooper a godly man being falsely accused in
Queen Mary's Act. and Mon.
days, by one Grimwood, shortly after the said Grimwood being in perfect
health, his bowels suddenly fell out of his body, and so he died miserably.

Narcissus a godly Bishop of Jerusalem, was falsely accused by three men, of
many foul matters, who sealed up with oaths and imprecations their false
testimonies; but shortly after that, one of them with Eusebius.
his whole family and substance was burnt with fire: another of them was
stricken with a grievous disease, such as in his imprecation he had wished to
himself; the third terrified with the sight of Gods judgments upon the former,
became very penitent, and poured out the grief of his heart in such abundance
of tears, that thereby he became blind.

A wicked wretch under Commodus Niceph.
the Emperor, accused Apollonius a godly Christian to the Judges, for certain
grievous crimes, which when he could not prove, he was adjudged to have his
legs broken, according to an ancient Law of the Romans.

Gregory Bradway falsely accused one Brook, but shortly after through terrors
of conscience, he sought to cut his own throat, but being prevented, he fell
mad.

I have read of Socrates's two false accusers, how that the one was trodden to
death by the multitude, and the other was forced to avoid the like by a
voluntary banishment. I might produce a multitude of other instances, but let
these suffice, to evidence how swift and terrible a witness God has been
against those that have been false accusers of his people, and that have laded
their precious names with scorn and reproach; the serious consideration of
which, should make the accused and reproached Christian to sit dumb and silent
before the Lord.

Eighthly and lastly, God himself is daily reproached; men tremble not to cast
scorn and contempt upon God himself; sometimes they charge the Lord that his
ways are not equal, that it is a Ezekiel. 18. 25. chapter 29. 33. 17. 20, 29. Jer. 2.
5, 6.
wrong way he goes in; sometimes they charge God with cruelty, My punishment
is greater than I am able to bear, Genesis 4. 13. Sometimes they charge God with
partiality, and respect of persons, because here he strokes, and there he
strikes; here he lifts up, and there he casts down; here he smiles, and
there he frowns; here he gives much, and there he gives nothing, here he
loves, and there he hates; here he prospers Rom 9 Psalm. 50. 21 It were very
strange that I should please a world of men, when God himself does not give
every man content. Salv.
one, and there he blasts another. Mal. 2. 17. Where is the God of judgment?
i. e. no where; either there is no God of judgment, or at least not a God of
exact, precise and impar^ial judgment, etc. Sometimes they charge God with
unbountifulness, that he is a God that will set his people to hard work, to
much work, but will pay them no wages, nor give them no reward, Mal. 3. 14. Ye
have said, it is in (...) to serve God: and what profit is it, that we have
kept his ordinances, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of
Hosts? Sometimes they charge God, that he is a hard Master, and that he reaps
where he has not sown, and gathers where he has not strowed, Mat. 25. 24,
etc. Oh the infinite reproach and scorn that is every day, that is every hour
in the day cast upon the Lord, his name, his truth, his ways, his ordinances,
his glory! Alas! all the scorn and contempt that is cast upon all the Saints,
all the world over, is nothing to that which is cast upon the great God every
hour, and yet he is patient. Ah! how hardly do most men think of God? and how
hardly do they speak of God? and how unhansomely do they carry it toward God?
and yet he bears: They that will not spare God himself, his name, his truth,
his honor, shall we think it much that they spare not us, or our names? etc.
surely no. Why should we look that those should give us good words, that
cannot afford God a good word from one weeks end to another? yea from one years
end to another? why should we look that they should cry out Hosanna, Hosanna,
to us, when as every day they cry out of Christ, crucify him, crucify him.
Mat. 10. 25. It is enough for the Disciple that he be as his Master, and the
servant as his Lord; if they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub (or
a Master-flye, or a dunghill god, or the chief Devil) how much more shall they
call them of his household? It is preferment enough for the servant to be as his
Lord; and if they make no bones of staining and blaspheming the name of the
Lord, never wonder if they flye-blow thy name; and let this suffice to quiet
and silence your hearts, Christians, under all that scorn and contempt that is
cast upon your names and reputations in this world.

The tenth and last Objection is this, Sir, In this my affliction I have sought
to the Lord for this and that mercy, and still God delays me, and puts me
off; I have several times thought that mercy had been near, that deliverance
had been at the door, but now I see it is afar off, how can I then hold my
peace? how can I be silent under such delays and disappointments? To this
Objection, I shall give you these Answers.

First, The Lord does not always time his Answers to the swiftness of his
peoples expectations; he that is the God of our mercies, is the Lord of our
times; God has delayed long his dearest Saints; times belonging to him, as
Psalm. 70. 5 Psalm. 6. 13 Psalm. 13, 1, 2 Psalm. 94. 3, 4 Zech. 1. 12
well as issue, Hab. 1. 2. O Lord, how long shall I cry, and thou will not
hear? even cry out unto thee for violence, and thou will not help? Job 19. 7.
Behold I cry out of violence, but I have no answer, I cry, but there is no
judgment. Psalm. 69. 3. I am weary of crying, my throat is dry, mine eyes fail
while I wait for my God. Psalm. 40. 17. Make no t^^rying, O my God! Though God
had promised him a Crown, a Kingdom, yet he puts him off from day to day, and
for all his haste he must stay for it till the set time is come. Paul was
delayed 2 Cor. 1. 8, 9 Psalm. 105. 17, 18, 19
so long, till he even despaired of life, and had the sentence of death in
himself. And Joseph was delayed so long, till the Irons entered into his soul.
So he delayed long the giving in of comfort to Mr. Glover, though he had
sought him frequently, earnestly, and denied himself to the death for Christ.
Augustine being under convictions, a shower of tears came from him, and casting
himself on the ground under a Fig Tree, he cries out, O Lord! how long? how
long shall I say to morrow, to morrow? why not to day Lord? why not to day?
Though Abigail made haste to prevent David's fury, and Rahab made haste to hang
out her scarlet thread, yet God does not always make haste to hear and save
his dearest children; and therefore hold thy peace, he deals no worse with
thee, than he has done by his dearest Jewels.

Secondly, Though the Lord does defer and delay you for a time, yet he will
come, and mercy and deliverance shall certainly Deuteronomy. 32. 36. (...). Exodus 12.
17, 41, 42 51
come; he will not always forget the cry of the poor. Heb. 10. 37, For yet a
little little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry.
Hab. 2. 3. The vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall
speak, and not lie: though it tarry, wait for it. God will come, and mercy will
come; though for the present thy Sun be set, and thy God seems to neglect
thee, yet thy Sun will rise again, and thy God will answer all thy prayers, and
supply all thy necessities. Psalm. 71. 20, 21. Thou which have showed me great
and sore troubles, shall quicken me again, and shall bring me up again from
the depths of the earth. Thou shall increase my greatness, and comfort me on
every side, Three Martyrs being brought to the stake, and all bound, one of
them slips from under his chain (to admiration) and falls down upon the ground,
and wrastled earnestly with God, for the sense of his love, and God gave it in
to him then, and so he came and embraced the stake, and died cheerfully a
glorious Martyr. God delays him, till he was at the stake, and till he was
bound, and then sweetly lets out himself to him.

Thirdly, Though God do delay thee, yet he does not forget thee, he remembers
thee still, thou art Isa. 49. 14, 15, 16 Jer. 31. 20. Psalm. 77. 9, 10 Isa. 54.
7, 8, 9, 10 Isa. 62. 3, 4, 5
still in his eye, and always upon his heart; he can as soon forget himself,
as forget his people; the Bride shall sooner forget her ornaments, and the
Mother shall sooner forget her sucking child, and the Wife shall sooner forget
her Husband, than the Lord shall forget his people. Though Sabin^s in Seneca
could never in all his life time remember those three names of Homer, Ulysses
and Achilles, yet God always knows and remembers his people by name. Genesis 8.
1. chapter 19. 29. and 30. 31. 1 Samuel 1. 9. Jonah* 4. 10, 11, etc. therefore be
silent, hold thy peace, thy God has not forgotten thee, though for the present
he has delayed thee.

Fourthly, Gods time is always the best time, God always takes the best and
fittest seasons to do us good, Isa. 49. 8. Thus says the Lord, in an
acceptable time have I heard th^e, and in a day of salvation have I helped
thee. I could have heard thee before, and have helped thee before, but I have
taken the most acceptable time to do both. To set God his time, is to limit
him, it is to exalt our selves above him, as if Psalm. 78. 41
we were wiser than God; though we are not wise enough to improve the times
and seasons which God has set us to serve and honor him in, yet we are apt
to think that we are wise enough to set God his time, when to hear, and when
to save, and when to deliver; to circumscribe God to our time, and to make our
selves Lords of time, what is this but to divest Act. 1. 7. chapter 17. 26
God of his royalty and sovereignty of appointing times? it is but just and
equal that that God that has made time, and that has the sole power to
appoint and dispose of time, that he should take his own time to do his people
good; we are many times humorous, preposterous and hasty, and now we must
have mercy or we dye, deliverance or we are undone, but our impatience will
never help us to a mercy, one hour, one moment before the time that God has
set; the best God will always take the best time to hand out mercies to his
people^ there is no mercy so fair, so ripe, so lovely, so beautiful, as that
which God gives out in his own time, therefore hold thy peace, though God
delays thee, yet be silent, for there is no possibility of wringing a mercy
out of Gods hand, till the mercy be ripe for us, and we ripe for the mercy,
Eccles. 3. 11.

Fifthly, The Lord in this life will certainly recompense, and make his
children amends for all Psa. 90. 15 Psalm. 70. 20, 21. and the first and last
chapters of Job compared.
the delays and put offs that he exercises them with in this world. As he
did Abraham in giving him such a Son as Isaac was; and Hannah, in giving her a
Samuel; he delayed Joseph long, but at length he changes his Iron fetters
into chains of gold, his rags into royal Robes, his stocks into a Chariot, his
prison into a palace, his bed of thorns into a bed of down, his reproach into
honor, and his thirty years of suffering into eighty years reigning in much
grandeur and glory: so God delayed David long, but when 2 Samuel 1
his suffering hours were out, he is anointed, and the Crown of Israel is set
upon his head, and he is made very victorious, very famous and glorious for
forty years together. Well Christians, God will certainly pay you interest upon
interest for all the delays that you meet with; and therefore hold your peace.
But

Sixthly and lastly, The Lord never delays the giving in of this mercy, or
that deliverance, or the other favor, but upon great and weighty reasons; and
therefore hold thy peace.

Quest. But what are the reasons that God does so delay and put off his people
from time to time as we see he does?

Answ. First, For the trial of his people, and for the differencing Mat. 15.
21, -- 29. 1 Pet. 1. 7 Job 23. 8, 9, 10 Deuteronomy. 8. 2
and distinguishing of them from others. As the furnace tries gold, so delays
will try what metal a Christian is made of; delays will try both the truth and
the strength of a Christians graces; delays are a Christian-touchstone, a
lapis Lydius, that will try what metal men are made of, whether they be gold
or dross, silver or tin; whether they be sincere or unsound, whether they be
real or rotten Christians. As a Father by crossing and delaying his children
tries their dispositions, and makes a full discovery of them, so that he can
say, that child is of a muttering and grumbling disposition, and that is of an
humorous and wayward disposition, but the rest are of a meek, sweet, humble and
gentle disposition: So the Lord by delaying and crossing of his children, he
discovers their different dispositions. The manner of the Psylli, Plin. lib. 28.
(which are a kind of people of that temper and constitution that no venom
will hurt them) is, that if they suspect any child to be none of their own,
they set an Adder upon it to sting it, and if it cry, and the flesh swell, they
cast it away as a spurious issue, but if i^ do not cry, if it do not so much as
quatch, nor do not grow the worse for it, then they account it for their own,
and make very much of it: So the Lord by delays, which are as the stinging of
the Adder, tries his children; if they patiently, quietly and sweetly can bear
them, then the Lord will own them, and make much of them, as those that are
near and dear unto him, but if under delays they fall a crying, roaring,
storming, vexing and fretting, the Lord will not own them, but reckon them as
bastards, and no sons. Heb. 12. 8.

Secondly, That they may have the greater experience of his power, grace* love,
and mercy in the close. Christ loved Martha and her Sisters and Lazarus, yet
Joh. 11. 3, 5, 6, 17
he defers his coming for several days, and Lazarus must die, be put in the
grave, and lie there till he stinks; and why so? but that they might have the
greater experience of his power, grace and love towar(...) them.

Thirdly, To sharpen his childrens appetite, and to put a greater edge upon
their desires, to make Cant. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4 Isa. 26. 8, 9, 16.
them cry out as a woman in travel, or as a man that is in danger of drowning.
God delays, that his people may set upon him with greater strength and
importunity* he puts them off, that they may put on with more life and vigor;
God seems to be cold, that he may make us the more hot; he seems to be
slack, that he may make us the more earnest; he seems to be backward, that
he may make us the more forward in pressing upon him; the Father delays the
child, that he may make him the more eager, and so does God his, that he may
make them the more divinely violent. When Balaam Numb. 22. 15
had once put off Balak, he sent again (says the Text) certain Princes more,
and more honorable than they. Balaam's put off, did but make Balak the more
importunate, it did but increase and whet his desires; this is that that God
aims at by all his put offs, to make his children more earnest, to whet up
their spirits, and that they may send up more, and yet more honorable prayers
after him, that they may cry more earnestly, strive more mightily, and wrestle
more importunately with God, and that they may take Heaven with a more sacred
violence. Anglers draw back the hook, that the fish may be the more forward to
bite; and God sometimes seems to draw back, but it is only that we may press
the more on: And therefore as Anglers when they have long waited, and perceive
that the fish do not so much as nibble at the bait, yet do they not impatiently
throw away the Rod, or break the Hook and Line, but pull up, and look upon the
bai^, and mend it, and so throw it in again, and then the fish bites: so when a
Christian prays, and prays, and yet catches nothing, God seems to be silent,
and Heaven seems to be shut against him, yet let him not cast off prayer, but
mend his prayer, pray more beleevingly, pray more affectionately, and pray more
fervently, and then the fish will bite, then mercy will come, and comfort will
come, and deliverance will come. But

Fourthly, God delays and puts off his people many times, that he may make a
fuller discovery of themselves to themselves. Few Christians see themselves,
and understand themselves; by delays God discovers much of a man's sinful self
to his religious self, much of his worser part to his better part, of his
ignoble part, to his most noble part. When the fire is put under the pot, then
the scum appears: so when God delays a poor soul, Oh! how does the scum of
pride, the scum of murmuring, the scum of quarrelling, the scum of distrust,
the scum of impatience, the scum of despair, 2 King. 6. 33
discover it self in the heart of a poor creature? I have read of a fool, who
being left in a chamber, and the door locked, when he was asleep, after he
awakes, and finds the door fast, and all the people gone, he cries out at the
window, O my self! my self! O my self! So when God shuts the door upon his
people, when he delays them, and puts them off, Ah! what cause have they to
cry out of themselves, to cry out of proud self, and worldly self, and Psalm.
73. 21, 22
carnal self, and foolish self, and ^roward self? etc. We are very apt, says
Seneca (utimur perspicillis magis quam speculis) to use spectacles to behold
other men's faults, rather than* looking-glasses to behold our own; but now Gods
delays are as a looking-glass, in which God gives his people to see their own
faults. Oh! that baseness, that vileness, that wretchedness, that sink of
filthiness, that gulf of wickedness that God by delays discovers to be in the
hearts of men! But

Fifthly, God delays and puts off his people, to enhaunce, to raise the price
of mercy, the price of deliverance; we usually set the highest price, the
greatest esteem upon such things that we obtain with greatest difficulty; what
we dearly Act. 22. 28 Cant. 3. 4
buy, that we highly prize; the more sighs, tears, weepings, waitings,
watchings, strivings, and earnest longings, this mercy and that deliverance,
and the other favor costs us, the more highly we shall value them; when a
delaied mercy comes, it ^astes more like a mercy, it sticks more like a mercy,
it warms more like a mercy, it works more like a mercy, and it endears the
heart to God like a mercy, more than any other mercy that a man enjoyes.

This is the child (says Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 27.
after God had long delayed her) for which I prayed; and the Lord has given
me my petition which I asked of him. Delaied mercy is the cream of mercy; no
mercy so sweet, so dear, so precious to a man, as that which a man has gained
after many put offs. Mr. Glover the Martyr sought the Lord earnestly and
frequently for some special mercies, and the Lord delaied him long, but when
he was even at the stake, then the Lord gave in the mercies to him, and then
as a man over joyed, he cries out to his friend, he is come, he is come. But

Sixthly, The Lord delays his people, that he may pay them home in their own
coin. God sometimes loves to retaliate. The Spouse puts off Christ, Cant. 5. 2.
I have put off Prove. 1. 23, ult. Zach. 7. 13
my coat, how can I put it on? etc. And Christ puts her off, verse. 5, 6, 7, 8.
Thou have put off God from day to day, from month to month, yea from year to
year; and therefore if God puts thee off from day to day, or from year to year,
have thou any cause to complain? surely no; thou have often and long put off
the motions of his Spirit, the directions of his word, the offers of his grace,
the entreaties of his Son; and therefore what can be more just, than that God
should delay thee for a time, and put thee off for a season, who have delaied
him, and put off him days without number? if God serves thee, as thou have
often served him, thou have no reason to complain. But

Seventhly and lastly, The Lord delays his people, that Heaven may be the more
sweet to them at last; here they meet with many delays, and with many put
offs, but in Heaven they shall never meet with one put off, with one delay;
here many times they call and cry, and can get no answer; Lam. 3. 8, 44
here they knock and bounce, and yet the door of grace and mercy opens not to
them; but in Heaven they shall have mercy at the first word, at the first
knock; there, whatever heart can wish shall without delay be enjoyed* here God
seems to say sometimes, souls, you have mistaken the door, or I am not at
leisure, or others must be served before you, or come some other time, etc. But
in Heaven God is always at leisure, and all the sweetness, and blessedness,
and happiness of that state, presents it self every hour to the soul there; God
has never, God will never say to any of his Saints in Heaven, come to morrow;
such language the Saints sometimes hear here, but such language is no ways
suitable to a glorified condition; and therefore seeing that the Lord never
delays his people, but upon great and weighty accounts, let his people be
silent before him, let them not mutter nor murmr, but be mute. And so I have
done with the Objections.

I shall come now in the last place to propound some helps and directions, that
may contribute to the silencing and stilling of your souls under the greatest
afflictions, the sharpest trials, and the saddest providence that you meet
with in this world; and so close up this discourse.

First, All the afflictions that come upon the Saints, they are the Prove. 3. 12
Jer. 9. 7
fruits of divine love. Rev. 3. 19. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten,
be zealous therefore, and repent. Heb. 12. 6. For whom the Lord loves, he
chasteneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives. Job 5. 17. Behold,
happy is the man whom God corrects: therefore despise not thou the chastening
of the Almighty. chapter 7. 17, 18. What is man, that thou should magnify him?
and that thou should set thine heart upon him? And that thou should visit
him every morning; and try him every moment? Isa. 48. 10. Behold, I have
refined thee, but not with silver: I have chosen thee in the furnace of
affliction. When Munster lay sick, and his friends asked him how he did, and
how he felt himself, he pointed to his sores and ulcers (whereof he was
full) and said, these are Gods Gems and Jewels wherewith he decketh his best
friends, and to me they are more precious than all the gold and silver in the
world. A Gentleman highly prizes his Hawk, he feeds her with his own hand, he
carries her upon his fist, he takes a great deal of delight and pleasure in
her; and therefore he puts vervells upon her legs; and a hood upon her head,
he hood-winks her, and fetters her, because he loves her, and takes delight
in her: So the Lord by afflictions hood-winks and fetters his children, but all
is because he loves them, and takes delight and pleasure in them; there cannot
be a greater evidence of Gods hatred and wrath, than his Hos. 4. 14. 19 Ezekiel.
16. 42 Isa. 1. 5 Nihil est infaelicius ^o, cui nil unquam contigit adversi.
Seneca.
refusing to correct men for their sinful courses and vanities; why should you
be smitten any more? you will revolt more and more; where God refuses to
correct, there God resolves to destroy; there is no man so near the Axe, so
near the flames, so near Hell, as he whom God will not so much as spend a Rod
upon. God is most angry where he shows no anger. Jerome writing to a sick
friend, has this expression, I account it a part of unhappiness not to know
adversity; I judge you to be miserable, because you have not been miserable;
nothing (says another) Demetrius.
seems more unhappy to me, than he to whom no adversity has happened. God
afflicts thee, O Christian in love; and therefore Luther cries out, strike
Lord, strike Lord, and spare not; who can seriously muse upon this, and not
hold his peace, and not be silent under the most smarting Rod?

Secondly, Consider, that the trials and troubles, the calamities and miseries,
the crosses and losses that you meet with in this world, is all the Hell that
ever you shall have; here you have your Hell, hereafter you shall have your
Heaven; this is the worst of your condition, the best is to come. Lazarus had
his Hell first, his Heaven Luke 16. 19, -- 29
last; but Dives had his Heaven first, and his Hell at last; thou have all thy
pains, and pangs, and throws here that ever thou shall have, thy ease, and
rest, and pleasure is to come; here you have all your bitter, your sweet is to
come; here you have your sorrows, your joys are to come; here you have all
your winter nights, your summer days are to come; here you have your passion
week, your Ascension day is to come; here you have your evil things, your good
things are to come; death will put a period to all thy sins, and to all thy
sufferings, and it will be an inlet to those joys, delights and contents that
shall never have end; and therefore hold thy peace, and be silent before the
Lord.

Thirdly, Get an assurance that Christ is yours, and pardon of sin See my
Treatise called Heaven on Earth.
yours, and divine favor yours, and Heaven yours, and the sense of this will
exceedingly quiet and silence the soul under the sorest and the sharpest trials
a Christian can meet with in this world; he that is assured that God is his
portion, will never mutter nor murmr under his greatest burdens; he that can
groundedly say nothing shall separate me from the love of God in Christ, he
will be able to triumph in the midst of the greatest Romans 8. 33, -- ult. Cant.
2. 16
tribulations; he that with the Spouse can say, My Beloved is mine, and I am
his, will bear up quietly and sweetly under the heaviest afflictions. In the
time of the Marian Act. and Mon.
Persecution, there was a gracious woman, who being convened before bloody
Bonner (then Bishop So John Noyes, Alice Driver, Mr. Bradford, Mr. Tailor, and
Justin Martyr, with many more.
of London) upon the trial of Religion, he threatened her that he would take
away her husband from her; says she, Christ is my husband; I will take away
thy child, Christ, says she, is better to me than ten Sons; I will strip
thee, says he, of all thy outward comforts, yea but Christ is mine, says
she, and you cannot strip me of him. Oh! the assurance that Christ was hers
bore up her heart, and quieted her spirit under all. You may take away my life,
(says Basil) but you cannot take away my comfort, my head, but not my Crown,
yea, quoth he, had I a thousand lives, I would lay them all down for my
Saviors sake, who has done abundantly more for me. John Ardley professed to
Bonner, when he told him of burning, and how ill he could endure it, that if
he had as many lives, as he had hairs on his head, he would lose them all in
the fire before he would lose his Christ, Assurance will keep a man from
muttering and murmuring under the sorest afflictions. Henry and John (two
Augustine Monks) being the first that were burnt in Germany, and Master Rogers
the first that was burnt in Queen Mary's days, did all sing in the flames. A
soul that lives in the assurance of divine favor, and in its title to glory,
cannot but bear up patiently and quietly under the greatest sufferings that
possibly can befall it in this world. That Scripture is worth its weight in
gold. The Inhabitants of Sion shall not say, Isa. 33. 24
I am sick, the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity. He
does not say they were not sick, no, but though they were sick, yet they should
not say they were sick; but why should they forget their sorrows, and not
remember their pains, nor be sensible of their sickness? why, the reason is,
because the Lord has forgiven them their iniquities. The sense of pardon took
away the sense of pain, the sense of forgiveness took away the sense of
sickness. Assurance of pardon will take away the pain, the sting, the trouble
of every trouble and affliction that a Christian meets with; no affliction will
daunt, startle or stagger an assured Christian; assured Christians Psalm. 23. 1,
4, 5, 6, 7
will be patient and silent under all. Melanchthon makes mention of a godly
woman, who having upon her deathbed been in much conflict, and afterward much
comforted, brake out into these words, Now, and not till now, I understand the
meaning of these words, Thy sins are forgiven; the sense of which did mightily
cheer and quiet her: He that has got this Jewel of assurance in his bosom,
will be far enough off from vexing or fretting under the saddest dispensations
that he meets with in this world.

Fourthly, If you would be quiet and silent under your present troubles and
trials, then dwell There was a good man that had got so much good by his
afflictions, that he counted it his greatest affliction to want an affliction;
and therefore he would sometimes cry out, Oh my friends! I have lost an
affliction, I have lost an affliction.
much upon the benefit, the profit, the advantage that has redowned to your
souls by former troubles and afflictions that have been upon you, Eccles. 7.
14. In the day of adversity consider. Oh! now consider how by former
afflictions the Lord has discovered sin, prevented sin, and mortified sin;
consider how the Lord by former afflictions has discovered to thee the
impotency, the mutability, the insufficiency, and the vanity of the world, and
all worldly concernments; consider how the Lord by former afflictions has
melted thy heart, and broken thy heart, and humbled thy heart, and prepared thy
heart for clearer, fuller, and sweeter enjoyments of himself; consider what
pity, what compassion, what bowels, what tenderness, and what sweetness former
afflictions have wrought in thee toward others in misery; consider what room
former afflictions have made in thy soul for God, for his word, for good
counsel, and for divine comfort; consider how by former afflictions the Lord
has made thee more partaker of his Christ, his Spirit, his Holiness, his
Goodness, etc. Consider how by former afflictions the Lord has made thee to
look toward Heaven more, to mind Heaven more, to prize Heaven more, and to
long for Heaven more, etc. Now, who can seriously consider of all that good
that he has got by former afflictions, and not be silent under present
afflictions? who can remember those choice, those great, and those precious
earnings that his soul had made of former afflictions, and not reason himself
into a holy silence under present afflictions? thus, Oh my soul! has not God
done thee much good, great good, special good by former afflictions! yes; Oh my
soul! has not God done that for thee by former afflictions, that thou would
not have to do for ten thousand worlds? yes; and is not God, Oh my soul! as
powerful as ever, as faithful as ever, as gracious as ever, and as ready and
willing as ever to do thee good by present afflictions, as he has been to do
thee good by former affliction? yes, yes; why, why then do thou not sit
silent and mute before him under thy present troubles, Oh my soul? It was the
saying of one, that an excellent memory was needful for three sorts of men;
first, for trades men, for they, having many businesses to do, many reckonings
to make up, many Irons in the fire, had need of a good memory. Secondly, Great
talkers, for they being full of words, h^d need to have a good storehouse in
their heads to feed their tongues. Thirdly, For liars, for they telling many
untruths, had need of a good memory, lest they should be taken in their lying
contradictions; And I may add for a fourth, viz, those that are afflicted, that
they may remember the great good that they have gained by former afflictions,
that so they may be the more silent and quiet under present troubles.

Fifthly, To quiet and silence 2 Timothy 1. 12 1 Timothy 1. 5 2 Timothy 4. 8
your souls under the sorest afflictions, and sharpest trials; consider, that
your choicest, your chiefest treasure is safe, your God is safe, your Christ is
safe, your Portion is safe, your Crown is safe, your Inheritance is safe, your
royal Palace is safe, and your Jewels, your Graces are safe; therefore hold
your peace.

I have read a story of a man that had a suit, and when his cause was to be
heard, he applied himself to three friends, to see what they would do for him;
one answered, he would bring him as far on his journey as he could; the
second promised him that he would go with him to his journies end; the third
engaged himself to go with him before the Judge, and to speak for him, and not
to leave him till his cause was heard and determined. These three are a man's
riches, his friends, and his graces; his riches will help him to comfortable
accommodations, while they stay with him, but they often take leave of a man,
before his soul takes leave of his body; 1 Timothy 6. 18, 19
his friends will go with him to the grave, and then leave him; but his graces
will accompany him before God, they will not leave him, nor ^orsake him, they
will to the grave, to glory with him.

In that famous battle at Leuctrum, where the Thebans got a signal victory, but
their Captain Epaminondas a little before his death demanded whether his
buckler were taken by the enemy, and when he understood that it was safe, and
that they had not so much as laid their hands on it, he died most willingly,
cheerfully, and quietly. Well Christians, your shield of faith is safe, your
portion is safe, your Royal Robe is safe, your Kingdom is safe, your Heaven is
safe, your happiness and blessedness is safe; and therefore under all your
afflictions and troubles, in patience possess your own souls. But

Sixthly, If you would be silent and quiet under your sorest troubles and
trials, then set your selves in good earnest upon the mortification of your
lusts; it is unmortified Austin says, if thou kill not sin till it dye of it
self, sin has killed thee, and not thou thy sin.
lusts which is the sting of every trouble, and which makes every sweet bitter,
and every bitter more bitter; sin unmortified, adds weight to every burden, it
puts gall to our wormwood, it adds chain to chain; it makes the bed uneasy,
the chamber a prison, relations troublesome, and every thing vexatious to the
soul. James 4. 1. From whence come wars and fightings among you? come they not
hence, even of your lusts that war in your members? So say I, from whence comes
all this muttering, murmuring, fretting and vexing? etc. come they not hence,
even from your* unmortified lusts? come they not from your unmortified pride,
and unmortified selflove, and unmortified unbeleef, and unmortified passions?
etc. Surely they do. Oh therefore! as ever you would be silent under the
afflicting hand of God, labor for more and more of the grace of the Spirit, by
which you may mortify the lusts Romans 8. 13
of the flesh; it is not your strongest resolutions or purposes, without the
grace of the Spirit, that can over-master a lust; a foul sore, till it be
indeed healed, will run, though we resolve and say it shall not. It was the
blood of the Sacrifice, and the Oil, that cleansed the Leper in the Law, and
that by them was meant the blood of Levit. 14. 14, 15, 16 Mark 5. 25, 26, 27
Christ, and the grace of his Spirit, is agreed on all hands. It was a touch of
Christ's garment that cured the woman of her bloody Issue. Philosophy (says
Lacta^tius) it may hide a sin, but it cannot quench it, it may cover a sin, but
it cannot cut off a sin, like a black patch in stead of a plaster, it may
cover some deformities in nature, but it cures them not; neither is it the
Papists purgatories, watchings, whippings, etc. nor St. Francis his kissing or
licking of Lepers sores, which will cleanse the fretting leprosy of sin; in
the strength of Christ, and in the power of the Spirit, set roundly upon the
mortifying of every lust. Oh! hugg none, indulge none, but resolvedly set upon
the ruin of all. One leak in a ship will sink it; one wound strikes Goliath
dead, as well as three and twenty did Caesar; one Dalilah may do Sampson as
much spite and mischief, as all the Philistines; one broken wheel spoils all
the whole Clock; one veins bleeding will let out all the vitals, as well as
more; one Fly will spoil a whole box of ointment; one bitter herb all the
pottage; by eating one Apple, Adam lost Paradise; one lick of honey endangered
Jonathans life; one Achan was a trouble to all Israel; one Jo^^h raises a
storm, and becomes lading too heavy for a whole ship; so one unmortified lust,
will be able to raise very strange and strong storms and tempests in the soul,
in the days of affliction; and therefore as you would have a blessed calm, and
quietness in your own spirits under your sharpest trials, set thoroughly upon
the work of mortification. Gideon had seventy sons, Judges 8. 30, 31. chapter 9. 1,
-- 7.
and but one bastard, and yet that bastard destroyed all his seventy sons. Ah
Christian! thou do not know what a world of mischief one unmortified lust may
do; and therefore let nothing satisfy thee but the blood of all thy lusts.

Seventhly, If you would be silent under your greatest afflictions, your
sharpest trials, then make this consideration your daily companion, viz. That
all the afflictions that come upon you, come upon you by and through that
covenant of grace that God has made with you; in the covenant of grace, God
has engaged himself to keep you Jer. 32. 36, -- ult.
from the evils, snares and temptations of the world; in the covenant of grace
God has engaged himself to purge away your sins to brighten and increase your
graces, to crucify your hearts to the world, and to prepare you, and preserve
you to his heavenly Kingdom; and by afflictions he effects all this, and that
according to his covenant too, Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. If his children
forsake my Law, and walk not in my commandments; If they break my statutes,
and keep not my commandments; in these words you have a supposition, that the
Saints may fall both into sins of commission, and sins of omission; in the
following words you have Gods gracious promise, Then will I visit their
transgressions with the rod, and their iniquities with stripes. God engages
himself by promise and covenant, not only to chide and check, but also to
correct his people for their sins. Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not
utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. Afflictions are
fruits of Gods faithfulness, to which the covenant binds him; God would be
unfaithful, if first or last, more or less, he did not afflict his people;
afflictions are part of that gracious covenant which God has made Psalm. 119. 75
with his people; afflictions are mercies, yea covenant-mercies. Hence it is
that God is called the terrible God, keeping covenant and mercy, Neh. 1. 5.
Because by his covenant of mercy he is bound to afflict and chastise his
people. God by covenant is bound to preserve his people, and not to suffer them
to perish, and happy are they that are preserved, whether in Salt and Vinegar,
or in Wine and Sugar: All the afflictions that come upon a wicked man, come
upon him by virtue of a covenant of works, and so are cursed unto him; but all
the afflictions that come upon a gracious man, they come upon him by virtue of
a covenant of grace, and so they are blessed unto him; and therefore he has
eminent cause to hold his peace, to lay his hand upon his mouth.

Eighthly, If you would be silent and quiet under afflictions, then dwell much
upon this, viz. that all your afflictions do but reach the worser, the baser,
and the ignobler part of a Christian, viz. his body, his outward man. 2 Cor. 4.
16.
Though our outward man decay, yet our inward man is renewed day by day. As
Aristarchus the Heathen, said, when he was beaten by the Tyrants, Beat on, it
is not Aristarchus you beat, it is 1 Timothy 5. 23 3 John 2.
only his shell. Timothy had a very healthful soul in a crazy body, and Gaius
had a very prosperous soul in a weak distempered body. Epictetus and many of
the more refined Heathens, have long since concluded, that the body was the
organ (or vessel) the soul was the man and Merchandise. Now, all the troubles
and afflictions that a Christian meets with, they do not reach his soul, they
touch not his conscience, they make no breach upon his noble part; and
therefore he has cause to hold his peace, and to lay his hands upon his
mouth; the soul is the breath of God, the beauty of man, the wonder of Angels,
and the envy Heb. 12. 9 Zach. 12. 1
of Devils, it is a caelestial plant, and of a divine offspring; it is an
immortal spirit; souls are of an Angelick nature, a man is an Angel clothed in
clay; the soul is a greater miracle in man, than all the miracles wrought
amongst men; the soul is a demi-semi-God dwelling in a house of clay. Now, it
is not in the power of any outward troubles and afflictions that a Christian
meets with, to reach his soul; and therefore he may well sit mute under the
smarting Rod.

Ninthly, If thou would be silent and quiet under the saddest providence,
and sorest trials, then keep up Faith in continual exercise; Now Faith in the
exercise of it will quiet and silence the soul; thus,

1 By bringing the soul to sit Joh. 14. 8 Psa. 17. 15
down satisfied in the naked enjoyments of God.

2 By drying up the springs of pride, self-love, impatience, murmuring,
unbeleef, and the carnal delights of this world.

3 By presenting to the soul greater, sweeter, and better things Heb. 11. 8, 9,
10, 14. Phil. 3. 7, 8
in Christ, than any this world does afford.

4 By lessening the souls esteem of all outward vanities; do but keep up the
exercise of Faith, and thou will keep silent before the Lord. No man so mute,
as he whose Faith is still busy about invisible objects.

Tenthly, If you would keep silent, then keep humble before the Lord. Oh!
labor every day to be more humble, and more low, and little in your own eyes;
who Job 7. 1, 18
am I, says the humble soul, but that God should cross me in this mercy, and
take away that mercy, and pass a sentence of death upon every mercy? I am not
worthy of the least mercy, I deserve not a crum of mercy, I have forfeited
Prove. 13. 16
every mercy, I have improved never a mercy. Only by pride comes contention;
it is only pride that puts men upon contending with God and men; an humble
soul will lie quiet at the foot of God, it will be contented with bare
commons; As you see sheep can live upon the bare Commons, which a fat Ox
cannot. A Dinner of green herbs relisheth well with the humble man's palate,
whereas a stalled Ox is but a course dish to a proud man's stomach; an humble
heart thinks none less than himself, nor none worse than himself; an humble
heart looks upon small Genesis 32. 10, 11. Austin being asked what was the first
grace? answered, humility; what the second? humility; what the third? humility.
mercies, as great mercies, and great afflictions, as small afflictions; and
small afflictions, as no afflictions; and therefore sits mute and quiet under
all; do ^ut keep humble, and you will keep silent before the Lord; pride kicks,
and flings, and frets, but an humble man has still his hand upon his mouth.
Every thing on this side Hell is mercy, much mercy, rich mercy, to an humble
soul; and therefore he holds his peace.

Eleventhly, If you would keep silence under the afflicting hand of God, then
keep close, hold fast these soul-silencing and soul-quieting maxims or
principles. As

First, That the worst that God does to his people in this world, is in order
to the making of them a Heaven on Earth; he brings them into a wilderness, but
it is, that he may speak comfortably to them: he Hos. 2. 14
casts them into the fiery furnace, but it is, that they may have more of his
company; do the stones come thick and threefold about Stephens ears? it is but
to knock Act. 7.
him the nearer to Christ, the cornerstone, etc.

Secondly, If you would be silent, then hold fast this principle, viz. That
what God wills is best; Heb. 12. 10
when he wills sickness, sickness is better than health; when he wills
weakness, weakness is better than strength; when he wills want, want is better
than wealth; when he wills reproach, reproach is better than honor; when he
wills death, death is better than life. As God is wisdom it self, and so knows
that which is best, so he is goodness it self, and therefore cannot do any
thing but that which is best; therefore hold thy peace.

Thirdly, If thou would be silent under thy greatest afflictions, then hold
fast to this principle, viz. That the Lord will bear thee company in all thy
afflictions, Isa. 41. 10, chapter 43. 2. Psalm. 23. 4. Psalm. 90. 15. Dan. 3. 25.
Genesis 39. 20, 21. 2 Timothy 4. 16, 17. These Scriptures are breasts full of divine
consolation; these wells of salvation are full; will you turn to them and draw
out, that your souls may be satisfied and quieted.

Fourthly, If you would be silent under your afflictions, then hold fast this
principle, that the Lord has more high, more noble, and more blessed ends in
the afflicting of you, than he has in the afflicting of the men of the world.
The stalk and the ear of corn fall upon the threshing flore, under one and the
same flail, but the one is shattered in pieces, the other is preserved; from
one and the same Olive, and from under one and the same press is crushed out
both Oil and dreggs, but the one is tunn'd up for use, the other thrown out as
unserviceable; and by one and the same breath the fields are perfumed with
sweetness, and annoyed with unpleasant savours: so, though afflictions do
befall good and bad alike, as the Scripture speaks, yet Eccles. 9. 2
the Lord will effect more glorious ends by those afflictions that befall his
people, than he will effect by those that befall wicked men; and therefore the
Lord puts his people into the furnace, for their trial* but the wicked for
their ruin; the one is bettered by affliction, the other is made worse; the
one is made soft and tender by afflictions, the other is more hard and
obdurate; the one is drawn nearer to God by afflictions, the other is driven
further from God, etc.

Fifthly, If you would be silent under your afflictions, then you must hold
fast this principle, viz. Matthew. 15. 21, -- 29
That the best way in this world to have thine own will, is to lie down in the
will of God, and quietly to resign up thy self to the good will and pleasure of
God. Luther was a man that could have any thing of God, and why? why because
he submitted his will to the will of God, he lost his will in the will of
God. Oh soul! it shall be even as thou will, if thy will be swallowed up in
the will of God.

Sixthly and lastly, If thou would be silent under the afflicting hand of
God, then thou must hold Psa. 94. 19 Dan. 9. 19, -- 24 Genesis 28. 7 Act. 16. and
27, chapter Hos. 2. 14
fast to this principle, viz. That God will make times of affliction, to be
times of special manifestations of divine love and favor to thee. Tiburtius
saw a Paradise when he walked upon hot burning coals. I could confirm this by
a cloud of witnesses, but that I am upon a close. Ah Christians! as ever you
would be quiet and silent under the Smarting Rod, hold fast to these
principles, and keep them as your lives. But

Twelfthly and lastly, To silence and quiet your souls under the afflicting
hand of God, dwell much upon the brevity or shortness of man's life; this
present life is not vita, sed via ad vitam, life, but a motion, a journey
toward life* man's life, says one, is the shadow of smoke, yea the dream of a
shadow, says another; man's life is so short, that Austin doubt^th whether to
call Aug. l. 1. Conf.
it a dying life, or a living death; thou have but a day to live, and perhaps
thou may be now in the twel^th hour of that day; therefore hold out faith
and patience, thy troubles and thy life will shortly end together* therefore
hold thy peace; thy grave is going to be made, thy Sun is near setting* death
begins to call thee off o^ the stage of this world, death stands at thy back,
thou must shortly sail forth upon the Ocean of eternity; though thou have a
great deal of work to do, a God to honor, a Christ to close with, a soul to
save, a race to run, a Crown to win, a Hell to escape, a pardon to beg, a
Heaven to make sure, yet thou have but a little time to do it in; thou have one
foot in the grave, thou art even a going a shore on eternity, and will thou now
cry out of thy afflictions? will thou now mutter and murmr when thou art
entering upon an unchangeable condition? what extreme folly and madness is it
for a man to mutter and murmr when he is just a going out of prison, and his
boults and chains are just a knocking off? Why Christian, this is just thy
case; therefore hold thy peace; thy life is but short, therefore Romans 8. 18
thy troubles cannot be long; hold up, and hold out quietly and patiently a
little longer, and Heaven shall make amends for all.

FINIS.
A TABLE, Showing the Principal things in this TREATISE.
THe words opened, and the Doctrine raised, viz. That it is the great duty and
concernment of gracious souls, to be mute and silent under the greatest
afflictions, the saddest providence and sharpest trials they meet with in this
world. from p. 1, to 4.

For the opening of the point, First,

1 There is a sevenfold silence. p. 4, to 16. 2 What does a prudent, a
gracious, a holy silence include, showed in eight things. p. 16, -- 44. 3 What
a prudent, a holy silence under afflictions does not exclude, showed in eight
things. p. 44, -- 67. 4 Eight Reasons why Christians must be mute and silent
under their greatest afflictions, etc. p. 67, -- 92. Use, This Truth looks
sourely upon five sorts of persons. p. 92, -- 102 Six considerations to prevent
men from using sinful shifts and courses to deliver themselves out of their
afflictions, etc. p. 102, -- 116. Twelve considerations to prevail with
Christians, to be mute and silent under the sharpest afflictions, etc. that
they meet with in this world. p. 116, -- 145 The heinous and dangerous nature
of murmuring, discovered in twelve particulars. p. 145, -- 169 Object. 1 Did I
but know that my afflictions were in love, I would be quiet, I would hold my
peace, etc. Answered eight ways. p. 169, -- 187 Object. 2 The Lord has
smitten me in my nearest and dearest comforts and contentments, and how then
can I hold my peace? Answered twelve ways. p. 187, -- 116 Object. 3 Oh! But my
afflictions, my troubles have been long upon me, and how then can I hold my
peace? Answered ten ways. p. 216, -- 236 Object. 4 I would be mute and silent
under my afflictions, but they daily multiply and increase upon me, etc. how
then can I be silent? Answered eight ways. p. 236, -- 242 Object. 5 My
afflictions are very great, how then can I hold my peace? etc. Answered six
ways. p. 242, -- 252 Object. 6 Oh! But my afflictions are greater than other
men's, etc. how then can I be silent? Answered six ways. p. 252, -- 260
Object. 7. I would hold my peace, but my outward afflictions are attended with
sore temptations, etc. how then can I be silent? Answered five ways, wherein
eight advantages are discovered, that Saints gain by their temptations. p. 260,
-- 279 Object. 8 Oh! But God has deserted me, he has forsaken me, and hid
his face from me, etc. how can I then be silent? Answered six ways; Also
eight advantages the Saints gain by their being clouded. p. 279, -- 304 Object.
9 Oh! But I am falsely accused, and sadly charged, and reproached in my good
name, etc. how then can I be silent? Answered ten ways. p. 304, -- 325
Object. 10 I have sought the Lord in this my affliction for this and that
mercy, and still the Lord delays me, and puts me off, etc. how can I then
hold my peace? how can I be silent? etc. Answered six ways. p. 325, -- 333
Quest. But what are the reasons that God does so delay and put off his people?
Answered seven ways. p. 333, -- 343 Quest. What are the means that may help
persons to be silent and quiet under their greatest afflictions, their
sharpest trials? etc. Answered, from p. 343. to the end of the book.
ERRATA.
Page 67. l. 20. read hear, for bare, page 235. l. 17. r. heal, for heat, p.
258. l. 5. r. that, for than, ^p. 268. l. 26. add was, p. 274. l. 12. add you,
p. 276. l. 3. r. sight, for fight, p. 299. Margent, read Chaiim, p. 311. l. 7.
r. world, for worthy.

Books printed, and are to be sold by John Hancock, at the first shop in
Popes-head-Alley, next to Cornhill.
A Book of Short-writing, the most easy, exact, lineal, and speedy method,
fitted to the meanest capacity; composed by Mr. Theophilus Metealf, Professor
of the said Art.

Also a Schoolmaster, explaining the Rules of the said Book.

Another Book of new Shorthand, by Thomas Cross.

A Coppy-book of the newest and most useful hands, with Rules, whereby those
that can read, may quickly learn to write: To which is added, Brief Directions
for true spelling and cyphering, etc.

Six Books lately published by Mr. Thomas Brooks, Preacher of the Gospel at
Margarets New Fishstreet.

1 Precious Remedies against Satan's Devices: OR,

Salve for Believers and Unbeleevers Sores, being a companion for those that
are in Christ, or out of Christ, that slight or neglect Ordinances, under a
pretense of living above them; that are growing in spirituals, or decaying,
that are tempted, or deserted, afflicted, or opposed, that have assurance, or
want it; on the ad. of the Corinthians, the 2d. and the 11th.

2 Heaven on Earth: OR,

A serious Discourse, touching a well-grounded Assurance of men's everlasting
happiness and blessedness; discovering the nature of Assurance, the possibility
of attaining it, the Causes, Springs and Degrees of it, with the resolution of
several weighty questions, on the 8th. of the Romans, 32, 33, 34 verses.

3 The Unsearchable Riches of Christ: OR,

Meat for strong Men, and Milk for Babes, held forth in two and twenty Sermons,
from Ephesians 3. 8. preached on his Lecture-nights at Fish-street-hill.

4 His Apples of Gold for Young Men and Women, And,

A Crown of Glory for Old Men and Women: Or, the Happiness of being Good
betimes, and the Honor of being an Old Disciple, clearly and fully discovered,
and closely and faithfully applied.

5 A String of Pearls: OR,

The Best Things reserved till last; Delivered in a Sermon preached in London,
June 8. 1657. at the Funeral of (that Triumphant Saint) Mris. Mary* Blake, late
Wife to his worthy friend Mr. Nicholas Blake, Merchant.

6 The Silent Soul, with Sovereign Antidotes against the most miserable
Exigents: OR,

A Christian with an Olive-leaf in his mouth, when he is under the greatest
afflictions, the sharpest and sorest trials and troubles, the saddest and
darkest providence and changes, with answers to diverse Questions and
Objections that are of greatest importance, all tending to win and work souls
to be still, quiet, calm, and silent under all changes, that have, or that may
pass upon them in this world, etc.

Altum Silentium: OR,

Silence the Duty of Saints, under every sad Providence. An Occasional Sermon
preached after the Death of a Daughter, by her Father, viz. By John Durant,
Preacher of the Gospel in Christ's-Church Canterbury.

The Godly Man's Ark: OR,

City of Refuge, in the day of his Distress, discovered in diverse Sermons; The
first of which was preached at the Funeral of Mris. Elizabeth Moore.

Whereunto are annexed Mris. Moors Evidences for Heaven, composed and
collected by her in the time of her health, for her comfort in the time of
sickness. By Ed. Calamy, B. D. and Pastor of the Church at Aldermanbury.

The Scriptures Stability: OR,

The Scripture cannot be broken: Proved, explained, and several ways applied,
whereby all Scripture may with singular advantage come to be improved. By
Robert Perrot, Minister of Gods Word, at Deane in Bedfordshire.

The Expert Physician:

Learnedly treating of all Agues and Fevers essential, whether simple or
compound, confused, Erratick and Malignant, showing their different Nature,
Cause, Sign, and Cure, written originally by that famous Doctor in Physic,
Bricius Bauderon, and translated into English by Doctor Wells, Licentiate in
Physic, by the University of Oxford. To be sold by John Hancock, at the first
Shop in Popes-head-Alley, next to Cornhill.


