A SOLILOQVY of the SOVLE: Or A PILLAR OF THOVGHTS. With reasons proving ye
Jmmortality of the Sovle.

by S^. Rich: Baker. R^.

W.M. sculp.


A SOLILOQVY OF THE SOVLE: Or, A PILLAR OF THOUGHTS.

With reasons proving the Immortality of the Soul.

Written by Sir RICHARD BAKER, Knight.

LONDON: Printed by T. Pain, for Francis Eglesfield, at the Marigold in Paul's
Churchyard. 1641.

TO MY WORTHILY much Honored Brother, Sir John Corbet of Stoke in the County
of Salop, Baronet; and to his virtuous Lady.
HAving heard you take pleasure sometimes to read some poor Writings of mine
which have bin made public to the World, I have thought good to make one
Writing proper to your (...); at least, for which (if it be worth the thanks)
the world shall thank you, for being public; For, but for your sakes, and for
testifying my love to you both, I had never, I think, had a thought of writing
it. God has blessed you with a numerous issue, as though he meant, for every
one of your virtues, to bestow upon you a child; and if, the fuller ones
Quiver is of such Arrows, (...) happier he is; I may justly, with David,
pronounce you a pair, that have as few your matches in happiness, as in
virtue. When I intended to write something to the memory of your Names, because
I knew the seriousness of your dispositions, and how far you are from taking
pleasure in vain discourses; I made choice of an Argument, of all other the
most serious: for, what so serious, as the immortality of the soul? Of which,
though we have Divine Testimonies, far more forcible then any Humane Reasons
can be; yet it gives a kind of satisfaction, to see Divine certainties
seconded by Humane probabilities, and Faith by Reason; For though Divine
proofs be more proportionable to the stronger part of the Mind; yet natural
reasons make a greater impression in the weaker part; at least, both of them
running one way, and making both but one current; it cannot be denied them, to
make the belief, as Vis unita, the stronger. Accept it then, most Honored
Brother and sister, with the like affection as I offer it, and let him at least
have some place in your respects, who so much respects you both; as professing
always to continue,

Your truly loving Brother to serve and honor you, RICHARD BAKER.

A Soliloquie of the SOVLE: Or, A Pillar of Thoughts.
AS Lots wife was turned into a Pillar of Salt, that her inconstancy night be
fixed, and yet be melting still: So thou, my ^oule, if I had my wish, ^ouldst be
turned into a Pillar of Thoughts; that thy volubility might be restrained, and
yet be thinking still. And of what then is it, I would have thee to think? Not
of the miseries of the World, though there be cause enough; but alas, this
would be too sad a subject to think upon continually: Nor the Pleasures of the
world, though this were like to have all men's voices; but alas, they would
scarce last so long, to hold out the thinking: Nor yet of the world it self,
though this would be a large field to walk in; but alas! not large enough for
the swift Thoughts, that can run it over in an instant: No, my soul, but to
think of God; for He only is the cheerful subject that can be a comfort to
thee, when thou art in greatest misery; He only the lasting object that can
minister matter of meditation, when all vain pleasures shall have their
period; He only, the large Field with variety of walks, where thy thoughts may
be walking everlastingly, and never come to the end. To think of the miseries
of the world, is to put the Thorns into my eyes, that were before but in my
sides; and make the the harder, because my sense the tenderer; therefore think
not of miseries. To think of the pleasures of the world, would make me to
blush for shame; and to weep for sorrow, that I should ever be enchanted by
such Sirens, and not see my folly, till I feel my fall; therefore think not
of pleasures. To think of the World, would make me think myself at liberty,
when I am but in a prison; and make me like the Dog, that lies biting upon
the chain that ties him: therefore think not of the World. No, my soul, but
think of God; for to be thinking of God, is a kind of being present with him;
and then what greater joy than to be present with him, in whose presence is the
fullness of joy for evermore. What though the World take no notice of thy joy?
Can thou not, In sinu gaudere, and keep thy joy to thy self? does the Worlds
knowing thy happiness, add any thing to thy happiness? No my soul, though thy
thoughts be only to thy self, yet let it suffice thee Tibi plaudere, and be
thinking of God still. For thinking is the food of the memory, which nourishe^^
it, and keeps it in life; and without thinking, we starve it; for what we
little think of, we soon forget; and therefore, my soul, that thou may
not forget him, who only is worthy to be remembered, be thinking of God still.
For to think of God is never out of season; all other thoughts have their
fits; are fit at one time, unfit at another; but to think of God is fit for
all times; In adversity; to mitigate; in prosperity, to moderate; in sickness,
to consolate; and in health, to consolidate; It is indeed the superlative
thought, and sers a spel to al other thoughts, that none can come near it, none
in any degree bear any proportionw it and the^ fore that thou may not be in
the reere of thoughts, be thinking of God still.

But if thou be always thinking of God, it behooves thee to be careful what
thou think; for to think unworthily of him, thou were better be thinking of
something else; and alas, being so dazeled with his brightness, so astonished
at his Greatness, as I ^n; what can I think, that is worthy of him, in the
least degree? For what an ring have my thoughts, but either Memory, or
Understanding? and what can my Memory think worthy of him, that is time out of
mind? What can my Understanding apprehend worthy of him, that passes all
understanding? If I think of the time past, I find, that was, but is not: If
I think of the time present, I find that past while I am thinking: If I think
of the time to come, I find it cannot be found whether ever it will be, or no:
and what are these to him, of whom it is truly said, As he was in the
beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. I can think of him
indeed, as he is Eternal, but then it must be an Eternity by succession of
time, in which there is something before, and something after; where his
Eternity is all at once, and has nothing to do with time, nor time with it,
seeing he is always the same, and his years never fail. I can think of him,
as he is infinite, but then, it must be an infiniteness by extension of
Magnitude; and that the work only of Imagination, or conceit; where his
Infiniteness is a Transcendent to Quantity, and leaves imagination behind it,
and conceit below it; or rather, makes Imagination weary, and Conceit ashamed.
I can perhaps apprehend more than he is, but not so much: for I can apprehend
many gods; but all of them, not so much, as he that is but One. And why then
would I so feign be thinking of him, when I can think of nothing that is worthy
of him? Yet I must think of him, or I can think of nothing that is worth the
thinking of. If I think of the wisdom of Solomon; If of the beauty of
Absalom; If of the strength of Sampson: Alas! what are these to think of? Great
indeed, to be thought of, by themselves; but compared with his wisdom, with
his beauty, with his strength, they are less then nothing. When I can measure
out the Sea by dioppes, and when I can sum up the Sands with Counters, I may
then hope to find out something to think of, that is worthy of him.

But though I cannot apprehend him, as he is unum integrale, One entire being,
yet I may perhaps apprehend him, as Humane Capacity conceives him in parts
Alas, no better at all. For if I think of his, Providence, and his Providence
is the most visible Character in his Economy of the World; I find my self
even confounded with the course he holds in it; Why he suffers the wicked of
the World to prosper and flourish, and the godly whom he loves best, and who
love him best, to be in affliction? as though he did mistake either his
blessings, or them he blesses; taking Ephraim for Manasses, and Manasse, for
Ephraim, as old Jacob did? If I think of his Justice (and every one has a
right in Justice) I am then confounded to think, why Abel, that was the first
Saint should be the first Martyr; and why Cain, that was the Murderer of his
brother, should have the blessing of long life? as though it were justice with
him to punish an innocent, and to reward an offender? If I think of his Power
(and power will always make it self be thought of) I am then confounded to
think how he could make all things of nothing, and why they are said to be
the works of his hands, when yet they were made with a word of his mouth? as
though Nature were not worthy to be his Apprentice, and as though it were with
him but a word and a deed? But most of all, if I think of his Mercy (and his
mercy is over all his works) I am then confounded to think how it can be
mercy in him, to give the life of his Son, to save the lives of his Enemies;
an Innocent for Delinquents, a Lamb for Wolves, a God for men? O my soul,
this may well be thy astonishment, seeing it is the wonder of An^els: But
though his Jutice may be brought in ^uestion by it; yet his Mercy certainly it
makes ^ut of question; for what reater Mercy, then to save ^lany by One; and
many that could not help themselves, by one that could ^oth save himself and
o^^ers? Neither yet is his justice brought in questi^n by it; for is it not
just, that as he did make man by his word, which is his Son; so he should
save man by his Son who is the Word? Is it not just he should employ his Son
where most honor might be gotten? and is there any greater honor than that
which he has gotten by this employment, to sit at the right hand of his
Father; and to have a Name at which both men and Angels must bow their knees.

And now, O my soul, thou have found out a thing in God, most worthy for thee
to think of, of him to be thought; for as his mercy is over al his works, so
it may justly take up all thy thoughts. But can nothing be found in God, worthy
to be thought of, but his Mercy? Not his Wisdom? Not his Power? Not his
Justice? Yes, my soul, most worthy to be thought of, all of them, but not so
much; or if as much in themselves, yet not of us; and therefore not so much of
us, because not communicated so much to us: For, his Wisdom is to us a
secret; his Power, a transcendent; his Justice, an abyssus; only his Mercy
offers to communicate it self to us: that if it were not for his Mercy, we
neither could hope, nor durst presume to have Access unto him: and therefore in
all our suites, we Pray him not to hear us, for his wisdoms sake, or for his
powers sake, or for his Justice sake, but only and always for his Mercyes
sake. It is his Mercy that emboldens us when we are fearful, that encourages
us when we are doubtful. It is his Mercy that directs us when we are Erring,
that upholds us when we are falling; and indeed his Mercy not only is Invocated
by us, but is it self an Advocate for us: that we may truly say; Of all his
Attributes there is none has Bowels in it, but only his Mercy. Here
therefore, My soul, Fixe^ thy Pillar of Thoughts, and let this Mercy of God be
thy perpetual Object: For, as some superstitious in the sect of Mahomet, when
they have once seen his Tomb at Mecha, pull out their Eyes presently, as never
possible to see so worthy a sight again: so Thou, my Soul, when thou have
once entered upon this Thought of Gods Mercy, thou may seal up the doors of
thy Heart, as never possible to let in so comfortable a Thought again.

But if, with all thy thinking, thou can not sufficiently apprehend it, then
at least admire it; that by admiring it, thou may be drawn to love it; or
rather, to love him for it; yet not to love him only for his mercy to thee,
but for his mercy; and not only for his being Merciful, but for his being:
for then, my soul, thou love God truly, when thou love him for himself,
and not for his benefits; for how else can thou say with Job, Though thou
kill me, O Lord, yet will I love thee. Indeed to love God, apart from his
benefits, is a work for the soul, when it is parted from the Body; for as
long as we live in this world of Vanity, our love to God, I may say, is but
Mercenary; even David, as much a man as he was after Gods own heart, yet says
but this; I love thee, O Lord, because thou have heard my supplication: So this
Benefit of God was the Motive of his love to God; that if it had not been for
this motive, his love to God might have been as little as another. O ye
blessed Seraphins, that burn with an ardour of this love of God; how happy are
ye in this your ardour? and though I cannot wish to be a Seraphin, yet I wish,
at least, some portion of your ardour; for then I should love God, not for his
benefits, but for himself; and not love my self, but only for him. And yet, O
my soul, that thou could love God but as David did, though but only for
his Benefits; for then, at least, thou might be a soul after Gods own
heart, as David was. And why, my soul, should thou not? Alas, why do thou
not love him as David did; seeing thou have as great Motives as David had? For
what was his Motive, but that God heard his supplication? and what was his
supplication, but that God would defend him from his Enemies, from Sin and
Satan? and do not these assault thee, as strongly as they did David? And have
they not overcome thee; at least had they not overcome thee, if God had not
defended thee? O my soul, It is the great mercy of God, that sin has not
already swallowed thee up; and that thou have not long since been made a prey
to Satan. If therefore, my soul, thou can not apprehend the greatness of
Gods mercy by considering it in it self, then take a view of it by considering
the greatness of thy sin: For, as they that cannot look upon the brightness of
the sun as it is in it self, do, by looking in the water, come to discern
it in some measure: so, though thou can not apprehend Gods mercy, as it is in
it self; yet by viewing it as it were in the water of thy sins (Alas! in
themselves a filthy puddle, but for this purpose a clear stream,) thou may
come to apprehend it, at least, in some proportion. For according to the
greatness of thy sin, is the greatness of Gods mercy in forgiving thy sin.
But in considering thy sin, let this be a part of thy Pillar of Thoughts;
that as Christ's wounds were remaining on his body at his Resurrection, so the
wounds of thy sin will remain upon thy soul at the day of Judgment; and
least thou should think in so long a time they might all be forgotten, let
this also be added to thy thoughts; that there will then be kept a sessions,
where all the circumstances of thy sins will be summoned to meet together, to
give Evidence against thee: and then Time it self will come in, and tell the
very hour, when; Place it self will come in, and show the very room, where;
the Persons themselves will come in, and present the very faces of them, with
whom, or against whom thou did commit any sin, in the whole course of thy
life: and al as visibly, as when the sins were a doing; and even thy evil
thoughts which yet never came further then the cloister of thy heart, will then
come forth as fresh, as when they were a thinking; and all thy profane words,
as audible, as when they were a speaking; and all thy filthy writings, as
legible as when they were a writing; and lest there should want an accuser, as
there did to the Adultresse in the Gospel, Satan himself will take that Office
upon him, and do it most spitefully; in such sort, my soul, that it cannot be
said, whether thy shame or thy Horror will then be greater: thy shame, to see
thy filthiness discovered and laid open before all people; or thy horror, to
find thy case desperate, and past all hope or possibility of relieving. And is
it not time, before this time, to think of that time? a fearful thing to
think of, I confess; but without thinking of it now, there will be no helping
of it then; and therefore think of it, my soul, but think of it to prevent
it: and as desperate as thy case may be, yet do not despair: Never yield,
how great so ever thy sin be, or be made appear to be, that it can be greater,
or any thing near so great as Gods mercy: For compare them, my soul,
together; Thy sin is great, because a transgression of Gods law; but Gods mercy
must needs be greater, because a law to himself: Thy sin is no more then
thou art able to do; but Gods mercy is more then thou art able to think: thy
sin is but a Plot of Satan's to entrap thee; but Gods mercy is his own purpose
to relieve thee; thy sin is but infinite in Relation; but Gods mercy is
infinite in it self, and absolutely: thy sin is but an Accidental thing in
thee; but Gods mercy, I may say, is his very substance; that as much as himself
is greater then thy self; so much his mercy is greater then thy sin: and
indeed, if thy sin could be greater then Gods mercy, there should be something
in thee greater then that which is greatest in God: for of all the things that
humane capacity conceives to be in God, there is none greater then his mercy,
none so great as his mercy: at least as greater and lesser may be conceived,
where all are Infinite.

But though Gods mercy be greater then any man's sin, yet any man's sin may
come to be greater then Gods mercy; if either despair reject it, or
presumption slight it: for both these are of force to make Gods mercy of no
force, at least of no force to forgive, because they leave no capacity to be
forgiven. For all capacity of Forgiveness is then clean barred up, when either
Despair or Presumption stand at the En^rance. In all other cases, Gods mercy
has the Pre^eminence, and makes the greatest sins become like ^loudes,
either blown away, as with the wind of his goodness; or else dissolved, as
with the sun of his kindness.

And now, my soul, thy ^houghts, me thinks, are come to some fashion of a
Pillar; they are solid and firm, and want but Erecting; but all the difficulty
is to erect them: for though Gods mercy, if once attained, be greater then any
man's sin; yet it is no easy matter to attain it, seeing there is no
attaining it, but from his Mercy seat; and his Mercy seat is the highest part
of all his Arc, and this must needs be a great height, far higher then we
of our selves are ever able to reach: No, my soul, there is no way to reach
it, no means to climb up to it, but only by Jacobs ladder, which ladder is
Christ: and if in climbing up this ladder, there be not the greater heed
taken, in stead of raising thee up, it will but cast thee down, and give thee
the greater Fall. Thou must not therefore do as the Apostate Angels did;
ascend first, and then descend: ascend first in Presumption, and then descended
in Despair: Ascend first, in scorning this ladder, as thinking their own
nature more worthy for the Son of God to take, then the seed of the woman;
and then descend by falling off the ladder, and have their heads broken by the
seed of the woman: no, my soul, thou must take a contrary course; Descend
first, and then Ascend: Descend first in Humility, and the^ Afcend in Hope:
Descend first into a serious confideratio^ of thy sin, and then Ascend to a
steadfast apprehension of Gods mercy; Descend first with Christ into Hell, by
Patience in Adversity, and then Ascend up with him into Heaven by a lively
Faith, and by a Heavenly conversation: For, thus Ascending, thou shall be out
of the reach of Time, and Place, and all other circumstances of thy sin; and,
which is most of all, thou shall be out of Satan's walk, which goes no further
then compassing the Earth, that thou need not now to fear, either their
Testimony, o^ his Accusation.

But, O my soul, there is one step of this ladder yet behind, without which
thou can never climb up so high as to Gods Mercyseat; and the step is this:
to Refer all thy Thoughts, thy Words and Actions to the glory of God: For if
thou should have faith, that thou could remove Mountains; if thou
should perform all the Works of the Law, as exactly as any Sadducee, and
not refer them to Gods glory; they would all be taken but for ungrateful
complements, and be of no account, nor thou for them in any account with God.
And great reason it should be so; for, why did God make the World, and all
that is in the world, but only for his glory? and shall any, that live in the
world, have another End in using it, then God had in making it? shall man, that
is made after his Image, do no more to the setting forth of Gods glory, then
every creeping thing of the Earth? be only a passive instrument of his glory,
and not an active? Can he take it well at his servants hands, to be
backwardest in a service in which they should be forwardest; to neglect his
greatest work, and then think to please him with Tything of Mint? can thou
look to have Recompense of God for thy service; and God to have no recompense
of thee for his favors? and what recompense? what Retribuam Domino have thou
for God, but only to take Calicem salutaris, to Glorify his Name? How can any
man justly complain of his mean estate, when the meanest man that is, has
that in him, which is in man the most excellent thing? and what is that most
excellent thing? what my soul; but a power to glorify God? for this Power is
a greater Dignity then the greatest dignity of any earthly Power: It is the
work which Angels do in Heaven; and is there any work done in Heaven, that
is not better then the best that is done on Earth? and more then this, it is
the very work that makes the Angels happy; for without doing this work they
could not be happy: and if we want any thing in this life of being happy, it
is because we want something of doing this work. For never shall we come to
be perfectly happy, till we come to be able to do this work perfectly. What
was wanting in the Moral virtues of Heathen men, but only this, that they
referred them to their own, and not to Gods glory? Aristides in a high degree
was just; Cato, sober; Socrates, Patient; Regulus, Constant; all excellent
parts toward the perfecting of a Building; but yet no benefit of them, because
they came not up to the Roof they had not the Crown of Glory to God; and
therefore not the crown of reward to themselves. It is an easy lesson to say,
but a hard to learn; and few but David have ever practiced it; Not unto us, O
Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the Glory: for is it not, that we
seem all to have a spice of Lucifer in us? though we can be content to allow
the greatest glory to God; yet feign we would reserve some at least for our
selves: when, alas, if we reserve any at all to our selves, we leave none at
al for God; for neither is glory a thing that can be parted; neither is God
one that can endure a partner, and specially in his Glory: for though all his
Attributes be Excellent and Admirable; yet Majesty is Attributed to none of
them but to his Glory: As it is in the Angels song, Heaven and earth are full
of the Majesty of thy Glory: and what greater Derogation to Majesty then to
have a Partner? Indeed Gods Glory is in it self most perfect always; and
nothing that man can do, can either add to it, or detract from it: but such
is Gods graciousnesse to us, so great his desire to endeere us to him; that he
infinitely overvalues our Endeavors, and sets a far greater price upon them
then they are worth; counting, as if we added to it, when we detract not from
it; at least, as if we then give it him, when we ascribe it to him. If
therefore, O my soul, thou will ever be admitted into the quire of Angels, to
sing, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Sabbath, Heaven and Earth are full of the
Majesty of thy Glory; It must be thy care, thy principal, and, I may say,
thy only care, to ascribe all Glory and Praise to God, and to him only; that
if the Angels will undertake for Heaven, thou for thy part may undertake
for the Earth; that their song shall sung out to the End; Heaven and Earth are
full of the Majesty of thy Glory: that when both of them be full of his glory,
there may be no room left for any of ours.

And thus, my soul, when thou have made thee a Pillar of Thoughts, with these
three, as I may call them, Precious stones: The consideration of thy sin, with
a penitent heart; The apprehensio^ of Gods mercy with a Faith unfeigned; and the
Referring all to the Glory of God with an humble Reverence; thou will then be
able to climb up this ladder of Jacob, to the uppermost step: where meeting
with saints and holy Angels, that stand ready to receive thee, thou will be
taken into the number of their society: the happiness of which company, the
joy of which Happiness, the greatness of which joy, no Pillar of Thoughts can
ever reach so high, as to apprehend; no, my soul, not so much as to Imagine:
Yet add this one Thought more to thy Pillar, to think of the great Difference
of the Happiness that will be then, and the Happiness that can be now; for
all our happiness now, is but Expectation of happiness; we joy not so much in
that we are, whatsoever we are; as in that we hope we shall be, though we know
not what we shall be; the mind is so longing after the Future, that it never
rests satisfied with the present; nor ever will, till there shall be no more
Future to long after, but all shall be present; and then at last I shall have my
wish; ^or thou, my soul, wilt ^hen be turned into a Pil^ar of Thoughts; they
will ^ot then be voluble nor moveable, as now they are, being out of their
right place, and having various objects; but they will be quiet and quiescent,
as being fixed in their true center, and fixed upon their proper object, The
beautiful face of God blessed for ever; and never till then will thy state be
capable of this counsel, Quod sis esse velis, nihilque malis.

But, O My soul, though thou have raised thy thoughts to a great height, and
they seem to have some solidnesse in them; yet there is one doubt must be
cleared, before they can come to be a Pillar: for if the soul perish with the
body, as some vain men Imagine, what will then become of thy thoughts? For the
breath of man goes out, he returns again to Earth, and then all his Thoughts
perish: and if all his thoughts perish, he can then think no more; and if he
can think no more, there can be no soul. For as thesoule is the life of the
Body, so thinking is the life of the soul: That without thinking, at least
without a power to think it is a thing vain to think there can be a soul. It
is more vain conceit, the to build castles in the air to think the soul
lives wh^ it is vanished into air, an^ of which when it dies it i^ truly said;
Et procul in tenu^ em evanuit auram. For the soul is a Breath, and the death
of the soul is the last gasp of that breath and this is so plain, tha^
Solomon affirms plainly; As a Beast dies, so dies a man; for they have all
one Breath, all go unto one place: and who knows the spirit of man that
goes upward, and the spirit of a beast that goes downward? And shall we now
think the soul lives, because we know not how it dies? shall we therefore
think there is a difference after death, betwixt the soul of a man and the
soul of a Beast, because we see there is no difference, nor none to be seen?
What is this but to give the soul a Being, out of our own not-knowing; and to
make our ignorance her Foundation? Had the soul any being, but by being in the
body; and how then can it have any longer being, then while it is in the body?
If it be truly said; Infundendo creatur, and creando infunditur; why is it not
as truly said, Extinguendo Exit, and Exeundo Extinguitur? Is the soul any
thing but a temper of the Body; and when that temper cease, then also the
soul, as well in man as in beast' cease? If the soul should remain after
the body, it must remain without its Faculties, at least without a power to
use its Faculties. And were not this a blemish to nature to give the soul
Faculties; and not give a power to be able to use them? and use them it cannot
without the body; and therefore without the body, without wrong to nature, we
cannot think there can be a soul.

But, O my soul, what aspersions are these upon Nature? Or rather what
blasphemies against the God of Nature? For did not God breath the soul of man
into his body at first; and can Gods breath be ever out of breath? No more can
the soul ever cease to be. Did not God make the body and soul asunder; and
shall they not continue to be, when they are asunder? The body gives not life
to the soul; but it is the soul that gives life to the body: and shall that
which gives life cease to be, because that, to which it gives life, cease
to be? can any thing perish that has no contraries; at least nothing within
it, or without it, to oppose it? For all things perish by one of these
opposites; but the soul is a simple substance, uncompounded, and without
mixture; and therefore neither has contraries, nor any thing within it, or
without it, to oppose it; and therefore cannot perish: and therefore is
immortal. Can any thing perish, that is Principium sibi ipsi, is life to it
self; and such a Principium has God made the soul of man, and therefore
cannot perish, and therefore is immortal. The body perishes not by
Annihilating, but by being turned into its first matter, which was not the same
that now it is, but dust and earth: Neither can the soul perish by
Annihilating, but by being turned into its first matter, which was the same at
first that now it is; and therefore other, then now it is, it can never be,
and therefore is Immortal. If the soul were made by God, and not made
Immortal, either it was because he could not make it such, or because he
would not: to say he could not, is to make him no God, because not omnipotent.
To say he would not, is to make him not good, because no rewarder of his
servants; for what rewarding if the soul be mortal? An Angel can put on a
body, though nature have ordained it none, and yet be a perfect Angel still;
and why not the soul put off a body, though Nature have assigned it one: and
yet remain a perfect soul still? God made man in his own image, and where i^
is Gods image so appar^^ as in man's immortality? and wherein is man's
immortality so apparent, as in his soul? The soul had a being when it came
into the body, and shall it not have a being when it goes out of the body? was
it separate then, and is it inseparable now? But then we must not conceive the
soul of man to be such a kind of thing as the soul of a beast is. For the
soul of a Beast is perhaps nothing else but the very life of the beast; or if
a soul, yet such a one as is endued only with the Faculties of sense and
vegetation, which depending upon bodily Organs, must needs decay with the
decay of those organs, and perish with the body: but the Soul of man is a
heavenly substance, endued besides sense and vegetation, with the divine
Faculty of reason and understanding, which not depending upon bodily Organs,
neither decays with their decaying, nor yet perishes with the body, but is a
substance subsisting of it self; and as being a spirit, when once it leaves
the body, ascends up to the place of spirits; where God himself is, who is the
Father of Spirits; as Ecclesiastes says; The Spirit returns to God that gave
it. And if the Soul be a Spirit, and God the Father of Spirits: Then must the
soul be needs immortal; For though all things perhaps perish, of which God is
the Creator; yet nothing perishes of which God is the Father.

God made the Beasts living creatures all at once, at least made the Earth
bring them forth all at once: and as they were made all at once, so they perish
all at once, body and soul, such a one as they have, both together: but God
made man a living Creature by parts; and if his parts were made severally;
shall they not continue and subsist severally? And although the body separated
from the soul, cannot long continue, because it wants the cement of life that
should keep it together: and being a compound matter, without its proper form
must needs be soon dissolved into the first matter; yet the soul separated
from the Body, may continue long enough, seeing it is a simple form, and a
Cement to it self, which can never be dissolved; and therefore is Immortal.

Is not the soul of man of a middle nature, between Formae simpliciter
separatae, and Formae simpliciter Inseparabiles, between Forms that can never
be but separate, and forms that can never be but inseparable? and therefore the
soul may inform the body, and yet subsist without informing it

But if the soul depend not upon the body, how happens it that if the heart or
brain of a man be wounded or hurt, the man dies? I say not therefore that the
soul depends not upon the body, but that the Rational Soul depends not upon
it: For the sensitive and vegetative parts of the soul depend, no doubt, upon
the Heart and brain; the Animal upon the Brain, the Vital upon the Heart;
for these are their proper forges, I may say, and seats; and if any of these
places be so hurt, that it is made unfit to be their forge or seat any
longer, they have then no longer any being in the body; because no longer any
operation in the body, as wanting their Forges to operate in and fit
instruments to operate with, and then a man dies. But yet why should not the
Rational soul stay in the body, though the sensitive be gone? for seeing it
depends not upon any part of the body; why should the hurt of any part of the
body drive it away? It is not that, Quoad Existentia^ in corpore; as to
subsisting in the body, the soul is indivisible? that if one Faculty be
abolished, the other cannot stay? at least, not the superior without the
inferior; not the Sensitive without the Vegetative; not the Rational without
the sensitive. For as the Elements of fire and earth, could never be joined in
one co^pound, if the air and water did not intercede between them: so the
Rational soul and the body could never be joined in one subsistence, if the
sensitive and vegative parts did hot mediate between the^; and, were the bond
of connection to hold them together, the same perhaps which Ecclesiastes calls the
silver cord; that if this be loosened, there is nothing to hold them any
longer toge there, but they are prefently parted from one another. And indeed,
when the Rational is left alone by it self, it is then Pure spiritus, merely
and simply a spirit; and being such, it can not rest any where, but either in
Heaven or Hell: the two proper Centers of all separate spirits. And seeing
these places are immortal Mansions, what should the soul do in either of
the^, if it were mortal? The soul therefore, at least the Rational soul,
which is also in Habit the whole soul, must needs be immortal.

If it may be made good, that the Rational faculty can exercise its operation
without bodily Organs, there needs then no other proof, for the immortality
of the soul, seeing Modus operandi sequitur modum Essendi; As every thing
operates, so it is: that if the soul can open rate without bodily Organs, it
may then also sub^ siistwithout them; and if sub^ sist without them, then i^ it
separable from the body, and thereupon immortal. And that the Rational
faculty can exercise its operation with out bodily Organs, is a thing of all o^
other the most apparent; for what is the proper work of the Rational faculty,
but to contemplate, and to view it self in it self, as in a glass by
reflection? and who can deny, but that the soul can do this of it self,
without the help of any other; and then certainly, without the help of
bodily Organs. The sensitive faculty indeed has parts of the body made of
purpose for the exercise of her operation: the eye to see; the ear to hear;
the tongue to taste; and for a spring head to them all, the brain in the Head;
but the Rational faculty has no parts of the body made for her; and why has
it none, but because it needs none: as that which can exercise its operation
without them. For, if the Rational faculty did use bodily Organs, as the
sensitive does, what reason can be given, why Beasts should not be reasonable
creatures as well as men? seeing they have as many, and all the same parts as
me^ have; that it must be acknowledged, some parts of the body, to be either
superfluous in Beasts, or defective in Men: superfluous in Beasts, if they have
parts proper for understanding, and yet understand not; or defective in men, if
they should have parts proper for understanding, and have them not; which,
because both of them are in prejudice of Nature, therefore neither of them is
to be admitted. It is true, the Rational Faculty makes use sometimes of the
Fantasy, an issue from the Brain, and may therefore be counted a Bodily
Organ; at least, Germen Organi: but this is not of necessity, but for
convenience, whilst it is in the Body; and that chiefly, if not only In ordine
ad sensibilia: and if you will say, that the Rational Faculty must needs
directly have dependence upon the Brain; seeing when the Brain is hurt, the
understanding is hurt; when the Brain is distempered, the understanding is
distempered; as in drunken or Phrantick men; May it not be justly answered,
that the operation of the understanding, in this case, is not merely the work
of the Rational Faculty, but rather a mixed work of the Rational and
Senfitive both together; seeing the hurt or distemper of the Brain, works not
Primo and Per se upon the Rational Faculty, but upon the Sensitive, and from
thence is transmitted to the Rational, only Compatiendo, by reason of the
Sympathy that is between them; and this is no cause to infer a necessity of
Dependence: For, when upon the separation of the Soul from the Body, the
operation of the sensitive Faculty shall absolutely cease; this Sympathy
between it and the Rational Faculty shall then cease also, and neither
directly nor indirectly there shall be then any more dependence upon the Brain
Indeed the Soul, once separated from the Body, has no more use of the Brain,
because no more need of the Fantasy at all, but moves then upon its own
hinges; and exercises her operation within her own Sphere, as that which can
make its own objects, and as being Speculum sibi ipsi, a Glass to it self, by
so much the cleerer, by how much the freer; for though the body be a necessary
help to the sensitive Faculty, yet to the Intellectual, at least Quoad
Intelligibilia, it is an impediment and a clogge, that from hence we may draw
an Argument, which draws an Inference with it greater then it self; That to
which the Body is no help, but an impediment, not only may subsist without the
Body, but may subsist the better; and if it may, then at last it must; For,
Frustra fit potentia quae non reducitur in actum; Nature is no such unskilful
Artificer, to make a power that comes not into act: and so it is for the credit
of Nature, that the soul be immortal. And why has Nature implanted in the
Soul of man, a desire of immortality, if it be not capable of immortality? Can
any thing be more vain then to desire impossibility? If it be not more vain
to think that Nature makes any thing in vain; and so it is for the credit of
Nature still, that the soul be immortal. Nature has made man in Duration of
Body, like to those Inferior Creatures, to whom she has made him like in
faculties of the Body: and has she not as well in duration of Soul, made him
like to those Superior Creatures, to who^ she has made him like in Faculties
of the Soul? And so it is for the Equity of Nature, that the Soul be
immortal. But more than this, Nature has given to her meanest creatures, as
Trees and Beasts, folong a continuance, that though they be not Eternal, yet
they seem to be Aeviternall; at least, far exceed the continuance of man;
and would she do this, and not make man, her Noblest Creature, some amends
for it, by a longer duration in another life? and so it is for the Equity of
Nature still, that the Soul be immortal.

Who knows not, that the Soul of man has in it three Faculties, the
Vegetative, the Sensitive, and the Rational; of which, the two first are
common to man with Beasts; the third, proper only to man: The two first have
relation only to the Body, and depend upon it: The third has no relation, at
least no necessary relation to the Body, nor dependence on it; and therefore
the two first make a Soul, which may properly be called Anima: the third, a
Soul, which may properly be called Spiritus, as Ecclesiastes calls it: Not
saying the Soul, but The Spirit returns to God that gave it. Yet not that
Anima and Spiritus are two distinct Souls, as the ancient Didymas thought, but
that they are both but one Soul under two names, expressing a twofold
Existence and Operation: properly Anima, as it Animates, and is sensitive and
inseparable: properly Spiritus, as inseparable and intellectual. And although
the Soul, separated from the Body, retain all the three Faculties in Habit,
yet the third only in Operation, because only the third operates without
bodily Organs, which the other two cannot; and yet reason enough to call it the
immortality of the Soul; not only of the Spirit. And further, it may perhaps
be, that as while the Soul is in the Body, the Rational Faculty makes use of
some things which were made of purpose for the Sensitive Faculty: So when the
Soul shall be separated from the Body, the sensitive Faculty shall have the
power of reflection, and be Speculum sibi ipsi, a Glass to it self, which was
proper before to the Rational Faculty: at least, by the like Endowment,
whereby Angels see and hear, be enabled to do that without bodily Organs,
which it could not do before, but with them.

If the Soul of man were not immortal, it should be Ex Traduce from the
Patents, as the souls of Beasts are, which are drawn E potentia materiae, from
the power of the matter, of which their bodies are made; but the Soul of man
is not drawn from the power of the matter; but Extrinsecus advenit, comes to
the Body from a foreign power: as Christ says, Pater meus usque nunc
operatur, and therefore is not Ex Traduce; and therefore is immortal. That
which is drawn from the power o^ the matter, must needs be material; but the
soul of man is a substance immateriall; for if it were not immateriall, how
could it comprehend things that are immateriall? seeing Modus operandi sequitur
modum Essendi; Every thing operates according to its Essence; but the soul of
man co^prehends things immateriall, Angels and Spirits, Forms and Universals:
and could it do this, if it were not that? could it apprehe^d things
immateriall, if it self were not immateriall? A stream can never naturally rise
higher than its Spring; lower it may fall, and level it may run, but higher
it cannot rise; so if the soul were material, it could never rise to
apprehend things immateriall, which are higher than it self; but being
immateriall, it may apprehend things material, which are lower than it self;
and things also immateriall, which are but level with it self; and then, if
it be immateriall, it is also incorruptible: For all corruption is from matter;
where no matter is, there can be no corruption; and if incorruptible, then also
immortal; for all Mortality is from corruption; where no corruption is, there
can be no mortality; and so of these linkes I may say, is made up the chain of
the souls immortality: It is not drawn from the power of the matter; and
therefore is immateriall; and therefore is incorruptible; and therefore is
immortal.

But if the soul be not Ex Traduce from the Parents; why is it said in
Genesis, that sixty six souls went down with Jacob into Egypt, which came all
out of his loins? for what is it to come out of his loins but to be Ex
Traduce? Is it not, that they are called souls, because they were persons then
living, when they went down into Egypt? Or is it, that they are called
souls, a Notiori part, not a meliori; from ^he sensitive and vegetative
parts, which are visible, and, in a kind, common to man with Beasts; and
therefore in a kind also, transmitted from the Parents; but the intellectual
part, which only is the soul that properly is immortal, was never in the
loins of Jacob; and therefore issued not to his issue from thence; nor is Ex
Traduce from the Parents.

But how then comes o^ riginall sin to be in the soul, if it be not
transmitted from the Parents? and how is it transmitted, if the soul be not Ex
Traduce? O my Soul, is not this the doubt, that gravelled the great Saint
Austin, a knot that has busied the most learned wits to untye, and yet perhaps
is not so untyed, but that it remains entangled still? at least, the solution
to ordinary capacities not made so plain, but that there are seeming
difficulties still in it? For is it enough to say, that Adams sin was not
only personal, but extends to all mankind? Or to say, that he sinned not as
a private person, but as one that obliged his whole Posterity? For does it not
follow by this, that original sin should be by imputation rather than by
inherencie? when yet the saying of David, I was co^ceived in sin, pretends to
more then imputation? And if it be inherent, then must it be transmitted from
the Parents; and if transmitted from them, then must the soul also be Ex
Traduce; and so, this seems not to clear the doubt, but leaves us in the
briars with S. Austin still.

Is it then, that as Saint James says, He that breaks one Commandment, is
guilty of the breach of all: so if some part of the soul be tainted with
sin, it sets a taint upon the whole? And is it not, that so much of the
soul, as is common to man with Beasts, which are the sensitive and vegetative,
may well enough be said to be Ex Traduce from the Parents; and with them the
concupiscible part, which is the proper seat and origin of sin? and they being
originally tainted with sin, as being transmitted from the Parents, set a
taint also upon the intellectual part, by the union with them; and yet, no
consequence, that this, as they, should be Ex Traduce from the Parents. What
though the soul were breathed by God, entire at first into the body: Is it
necessary it should be so continued, as it was at first given? Why more, then
that the body was made by God, all at once at first; and yet now by generation,
is continued and made up by parts? For who knows not the order of Nature in
forming the parts of the Body in the Mothers womb? First, the heart is formed
and lives; an^ this is yet but the vegetative part of the soul: the^ (after
the forming of some Ministerial parts) the Brain; and this is yet bu^ the
sensitive part of the soul; and thus far, Ex Traduce from the Parents may
not unprobably be allowed: but the Rational part is behind still, as having
no part of the body for the Fountain of her operation. This therefore remains
to be infused by God, and is perhaps one of the works which Christ meant, when
he said, Pater meus usque nunc operatur; and differs from the first work but
only in this, that where he then breathed the whole soul into the Body at
once, he now leaves to Nature the two inferior parts, and reserves to
himself only the consummating part, which is the Rational.

But would it not follow by this, there should be two souls in man; one
generated by the Parents, another immitted into the Body by God? Indeed no;
for they make all but one soul, only augmented by a Faculty; or rather not a
Faculty, but the true substance which makes it properly to be a soul: For
where only the vegetative is, as in Trees; or only the vegetative and
sensitive, as in beasts, though they be commonly called souls; yet, truly
considered, they are but Faculties of life, drawn E^potentia materiae, from
the power of the matter, of which the creatures are made, and are but as
degrees and stages to the Rational; this only that, which consummates and
perfits it to be a soul and is so a part of the soul that it makes the whol^
soul indivisible into parts and as coming immediately from God himself (...)
can never be dissolved, but by God himself; and is therefore by his Decree,
immortal; which the vegetative and sensitive could never be, if the Rational
did not take them into her society, or rather join them as unisons in Music
and make them one with ^er own being. That which is a Roof to a low^r room,
is but a Floor ^o a higher; and so the ^egetative which was a ^oule in Plants;
is but a Faculty to the sensitive in Beasts; and the sensitive, which was a
soul in Beasts, ^s but a Faculty to the Rational in man; for the Rational is
the supreme Roof that perfits it to be a soul, and makes it fixed; and
therefore immortal. But as the Rational makes the sensitive immortal in one
kind; so the sensitive makes the Rational mortal in another; not in
duration, but in corruption* as tainting it with that fin which brought the
sentence of Morte morieris upon Adam, and justly in Adam upon all his posterity
But whether the corruption of the sensitive, before the Rational come to it,
which, according to the best Writers, is not till the fourth month after
conceptio^, make the Embryon, dying within that space, obnoxious to original
sin or no, is a depth that exceeds the line of my knowledge; and perhaps of any
man's else, without Divine Revelation: For though the soul be not actually
perfitted, till that time; yet it is actually prepared, and has an actual
Praeviam pravam dispositionem in it before that time; and who can tell, whether
this may not serve, and be sufficient to make obnoxious? For why else should
David say, I was conceived in sin, when the Rational is not infused, till
after the conception?

Or is it not, that to say, The soul is Ex Traduce from the Parents, and the
soul is not Ex Traduce from the Parents, are both true in the Disjunctive,
because the Rational is not, the sensitive is; but that the whole Soul is
guilty of original sin; not only when borne, but when first conceived,
universally may pass without disjunctive. Or is it not, that when God at first
created Adam, it is said, Male and female created he them; and therefore,
though the soul be Ex Traduce from the Parents; yet till the Embryon be so
far grown, that it may be said to be Male or Female; which is not, till the
parts be all formed, and that it has its perfect shape (which is not till a
certain time after the conception; but that certain time, uncertain how
long) it cannot be justly thought to be obnoxious to original sin, because
not be murder in any that shall destroy it. And this may appear by the Law
which Moses sets down, Exodus 21. If one strike a woman, that her fruit go from
her; which in some Copies is thus expressed, that her fruit go from her, not
perfitly shaped, the punishment shall be the lighter but if perfitly shaped,
the punishment shall be death And as long as it is in state not to make it
murder i^ any that shall destroy it so long, neither can it be^ in state, to be
obnoxious to original sin. Or may it not perhaps be true, tha^ the whole
soul, with all its Faculties, is Ex Traduc^ from the Parents; as has been
held by many? and so indeed it will be plain, how original sin is
propagated: But then, it will not be so plain, how the soul shall be
immortal; For if it be Ex Traduce from the Parents, it must be drawn E
potentia materiae, from the power of the matter; and if drawn from the power of
the matter, then must it be material, as the soul of a Beast is; and if
material, then also corruptible; and if corruptible, then also morta^^ Indeed
no; for though (...) be drawn E potentia materiae, from the power of the
matter; yet not from the power of the matter, simply; but E potentia materiae
inspiratae a Deo, from the power of the matte^ inspired by God; as i^ was at
first in Adam, and as in Beasts, it never was; and though the being drawn from
the power of ^e matter, would make it ^^e mortal; yet Inspiratio ^^ei, the
being inspired by God, makes it be, as himself is, immortal. When God at the
Creation brea^ed the soul into the bo^y of Adam, there is nothing spoken of
the ^oule of Eve, because she was taken out of Adams ^ide; and if it served
her ^or a soul, that she was made of a part of Adam body; why not as well also
for all other Descendents from Adam, Et natis natorum and qui nascentur ab^
illis? seeing as the soul was then Tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part,
all in the whole, and all in every part of Adams body; so it is still in every
one of ours.

Or lastly, if this also be refused; Is it not then, that we are all borne of
that ^cursed seed, upon which ^e sentence of Morte mo^eris, was, for the sin
of ^isobedience, justly pro^ounced; and though the ^oule be not Ex Traduce ^om
the parents; yet when (...) once joins with this ^ccursed seed, and is made
^ne with it; it justly be^omes both guilty of the ^inne and subject to the
^urse; and shall so continue, until the seed of the woman take both the guilt
of the sin, and the curse of the Law upon himself, to free us from both; and
now if you will say, It is hard measure in God, to lay the penalty of one man's
offense, upon all his posterity; you must withal say, it is great mercy in
God, to impute the merit of one man's righteousness, to all his followers; that
as the most you can say in that case, is that God is a just Judge; so the least
you can say in this case, is, that he is a Merciful Redeemer, and now and
ever, a Faithful Creator.

If the soul did die with the body, why should it not as well be sick with
the body, and grow old with the body? But this is found by daily experience,
that in the sickness of the body, the soul is commonly best in health; and in
the age of the body, the soul is yet young still, or rather has the greatest
vigor in these two seasons; the sensitive part indeed, because it uses bodily
Organs, must needs decay with their decaying; but the intellectual part which
neither uses any, nor has use of any, continues to be it self still, what
ever they be; corrupted perhaps in her quality, but not made corruptible in her
substance; and even when it is at the very point of disbanding and leaving the
body, yet then she exercises the operation of her Faculty, in as great vigor
as ever, understands as much, knows as much, apprehends as much as at any time
before: And could it do so, if it depended upon the body, which is then all
out of frame and in confusion? It is indeed plainly to be seen, that while the
vegetative Faculty is in the greatest vigor, all that while we use the
sensitive but little, the Rational not at all, as is seen in Infants and
little Children; and while the sensitive Faculty is in the greatest vigor, all
that while we use the Rational but little, which makes youth commonly so
intemperate as it is; but when the sensitive and vegetative Faculties grow to
decay, as in old age they do, then comes the Rational to be in greatest
force; which makes old men commonly to be of soundest judgments; and therefore
seeing the Rational Faculty decays not with the body, as the other do;
neither is it possible it should be extinct with the Body, as the other are.

If the soul perish together with the body, then it perishes before the body;
for the body reteines its proportion and shape, at least for some time, after
the soul has left it; but the foul, if it perish then, reteines nothing at
all of all her Faculties, they are all extinct and gone; and so by this
reckoning, the body should be a longer laster than the soul; which though it
be true in Beasts, whose soul is perhaps nothing but the life; yet it is false
in man, whose soul is a substance, subfisting by it self, and separable from
the body.

But though by these words of Solomon, Who knows the Soul of a man that
goes downward, or the soul of a man that goes upward; It may be gathered
there is Aliquid imperceptibile in the soul of man, something so obscure and
hidden, that makes it impossible to be thoroughly understood; and therefore no
demonstrative Arguments can be drawn from thence, to make a peremptory
conclusion of its immortality; yet there are Arguments enough, some drawn from
the nature of the soul it self, and some from foreign circumstances, that
evidently evince it, against all opposition, to be immortal: For the soul of
man can apprehend immortality, which Beasts cannot; and shall it not be
capable of immortality, though Beasts are not? And more then this, the soul of
man can discharge the Function of immortality, which is to make of all times,
one; reducing the time past, and that which is to come, into the present; and
is it possible it should do the work of immortality, and not be immortal?
If the soul of man be not immortal, then neither are the Angels immortal;
for they are all made of the same immateriall metal; which if it be durable
in the one, why not as well durable in the other? must not those creatures be
needs of the same nature and condition, which do all alike the same actions,
insist all alike upon the same object, have all alike the same Summum bonum;
but all these are common alike to men and Angels; to both which the Summum
Bonum is to enjoy Gods Presence; the chief Object, is the blessed Face of God;
the Final actions, are to glorify God; if then Immortality be granted to the
Nature of Angels; how can it be denied to the Soul of man? The Soul of man
can apprehend God, who only is immorall; and can that be mortal, which
apprehends him that is immortal? and more then this, the soul of man is the
only Creature in this inferior world, that can praise God; and seeing Gods
praise shall never cease; can that cease which is to praise him? And so it is
for the glory of God, that the soul be immortal. Has not God made the
Heavens and the Earth for the use of man, therein to glorify him? and shall he
use them no longer than this life? and longer he cannot use them if the soul
be mortal: and so it is for the glory of God still, that the soul be
immortal. If the soul be not immortal; when is it, that God punishes the
wicked, and rewards the godly? seeing, not in this life, if not in another?
and not in another, if the soul be mortal? and so it is for the Justice of
God, that the soul be immortal. If the soul be not immortal; what good is
it, that In memoria aeterna erit justus, the Righteous shall be had in
everlasting remembrance; of which he can neither be sensible nor intelligent?
and so it is for the Justice of God still, that the soul be immortal. If the
soul be not immortal, how shall the places of the Angels that fell, be filled
up again? Or shall they stand empty for ever, as though God had not power to
fill them up? and so it is for the Power of God, that the soul be immortal.
If the Soul be not immortal; how is God, the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob? for he is not the God of the dead, but of the
living; and living they could not be, if the Soul were mortal; and so it is
for the Power of God still, that the soul be immortal? And now, my soul,
will thou rather detract from Gods Glory, from his Justice, from his Power,
than believe and acknowledge, that the soul is immortal? Shall Heathen men,
who had scarce any hope of good after this life? Shall a Heathen Poet say, Et
cum frigida mors Anima seduxerit artus; making death not a destruction of the
soul, but only a separation of it from the body; and shall we whose chief
blessedness consists in the expectation of our souls blessedness after this
life, make a doubt, whether the soul of man be immortal, or no? Are there not
manifest Arguments to evince it; and such as are obvious to sense, both in the
dead, and in the living? For, is it nothing, that in all ages there have been
apparitions of man departed; whereof, though some perhaps be Fables, and some
delusions; yet many, no doubt, are true Relations, and have been Real
Representations; which could be none, if the soul were mortal. And if it be
doubted, whether any such apparitions have been, or no; have we not the learned
Melancthon, a reverend Writer of late time, affirming himself to have been an
eyewitness? Have we not the learned Ludovicus Vives, affirming many of his
acquaintance, men worthy of credit, to have seen and spoken with them, and
heard many things related by them, above the pitch of Nature? that nothing is
more certain than such apparitions, which could be none, if the soul were
mortal. What though it were not the true Samuel that appeared to Saul, but a
delusion of Satan; yet was there no ground for his using such delusion, which
could be none, if the soul were mortal. Is it nothing, that the Devil
oftentimes makes Pacts and bargains with wicked men, to do great matters for
them in this present life, upon a hope and desire of their destruction in the
next? which could be none if the soul were mortal: and if any doubt of such
Pacts with the Devil, have we not Confitentes reos, daily examples of
Delinquents themselves, averring it at their deaths, no time to dissemble? that
nothing is more certain, then that such Pacts are made; which could be none,
if the soul were mortal. Is it nothing, that the consciences of all men,
whether good or bad, give evident testimony of this truth, of the souls
immortality? For why else should good men dye so patiently, indeed so joyfully,
if they had not a hope of a better life after this? which could be none if the
soul were mortal. Or why should wicked men dye so unwillingly, indeed so
fearfully, if their conscience did not give them, there would be sense of
pain remaining after death; which could be none, if the soul were mortal Have
not all wise men, a the world over, affirm and believed the soul o^ man to be
immortal; only some few fools wh^ have said in their hearts there is no God;
have said also with their mouths, The soul i^ mortal: and shall we rather
join in assent wit^ these few fools, tha^ with those many wise men? No, my
soul, let Epicureans, and Sadducees, and Atheists doubt their pleasures, till
their doubt be resolved by the feeling Argument of eternal pains; but let
this be thy Pillar, or rather thy Murus Aheneus; that after this life, there
will be reward for the Godly, and punishment for the wicked; that In memoria
aeterna erit justus; the Righteous shall be had in Everlasting remembrance;
that the number of Angels that fell from Heaven, shall be filled up with Saints
from the Earth; and especially, that God is the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob; and then I doubt not thou will be satisfied of
this doubt; and not on^y of thine own, but of ^hy bodies immortality; that so
thou may por ^onely immortally be Spiritus, but immortally be Anima; for
though thou will properly be but Spiritus, till the body rise again; yet
after the Re^urrection, thou will pro^erly be Anima again, and have all thy
Faculties, not only in Habit, but in Operation, and Animate the Body in a
greater perfection than ever before; for the body will then have greater
endowments of thy Faculty (...) thou art properly (...) by a more vigorous
vegetation, and perspicacity of sense, and greater endowments also of thy
Faculties, as thou art properly Spiritus, by celerity of motion, and by
subtilty of dimension; by which perhaps it was that Christ after his
Resurrection, came in amongst his Apostles when the doors were shut; for so it
was fit for a body being then spiritual. Now indeed, Corpus aggravat Animam,
the body is a burden to the soul; but as much as the body aggravates the
soul now, and makes her participate of its infirmities, so much and more will
the scale then alleviate the body, and make it participate of her perfections.

And who now is so stupid, that finds not a sweet shower of persuasion to fall
upon him from this cloud of Reasons? whereof, though every drop by it self may
seem to wet but little, yet all together make a shower able to wet to the
root; but if any man's temper be so hard, that no shower will mollify it; if
any man be so unreasonable, that no reason will satisfy him; yet there is
hope, that Faith will; for Faith raines down a stronger shower of persuasion
than Reason can; and this belief of the souls Immortality, is the main Root,
upon which all Faith is grounded; For if the soul be not believed to be
Immortal; where is the assurance of forgiveness of sins? where the hope of
Resurrection from the Dead? where, the expectation of life everlasting? And if
any man still be possessed with a stupidity of this doubt, that, neither Reason
can persuade him, as a man; nor Faith overruled him, as a Christian, I must
then leave him, to feed upon grass with the Beast of the Field, like
Nabuchadonozer, until like Nabuchodonozer he recover his senses; and recant
his Error; and then he will be able and shall have leave, to make a benefit,
and to take the benefit of this cloud of Reasons.

And now, my soul, thou art sure of immortality, a Fee Simple, that no time
can wear out, no forfeiture extinguish: but alas! what good is it to have
Immortality, if it be not accompanied with Beatitude? and accompanied with
Beatitude it will never be, if God vouchsafe not his Beatificall Vision; and
that Vision he will never vouchsafe thee, if thou be not Mundo Cord, of a
pure heart in his sight: For Be^ti mundo Cord, quoniam ^psi videbunt Deum,
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God: O therefore, my soul,
endeavor so to serve God, with a pure heart in this mortal life, that wh^^
thou come to thy true Immortality in the next thou may be admitted to see
that Beatificall Vision; and may be immortal in ^^joying of Happiness and
not in feeling of torments; thy Joy may be ^mmortall, and not thy Misery. And
let this be ^y Pillar upon which to ^^xe thy Thoughts.


