PRECIOUS REMEDIES AGAINST SATAN'S Devices. OR, Salve for Believers and
Unbelievers Sores. Being a Companion for those that are in Christ, or out of
Christ; That are high, or low, learned, or illiterate, staggering, or
wandering; That slight, or neglect Ordinances, under a pretense of living above
them; That are growing (in spiritualls) or decaying; That are Tempted, or
Deserted, afflicted, or Opposed; That have Assurance, or that want Assurance;
That are Self-seekers, or the Commonwealths Caterpillars; That are in love
sweetly united, or that yet have their spirits too much imbittered, etc. By
THOMAS BROOKS, a willing Servant unto God, and the faith of his people, in the
glorious Gospel of Christ, at Margarets Fish-street hill. The Second Edition
Corrected and Enlarged.

Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the
Wiles of the Devil. Ephesians. 6. 11. But unto you I say, and unto the rest in
Thyatira, as many as have not this Doctrine, and which have not known the
Depths of Satan, as they spoke, I will put upon you no other burden, but that
which you have already, hold fast till I come, Rev. 2. 24, 25. LONDON: Printed
by M. Simmons, for John Hancock at the first shop in Pope's Head Alley, next to
Cornhill. 1653.

THE EPISTLE Dedicatorie. TO HIS Most Dear and Precious Ones, The Sons and
Daughters of the most High God, over whom the holy Ghost has made him a
Watchman.
Beloved in our dearest Lord;
CHrist, the Scripture, your own hearts, and Satan's Devices, are the four
prime things that should be first and most studied and searched; if any cast
off the study of these, they cannot be safe here, nor happy If a Minister had
as many eyes as Argus, to watch; as many heads as Typheus to dispose, and as
many hands as Briareus to labor, he might find employment enough for them all.
hereafter. It Is my work as a Christian, but much more as I am a watchman, to
do my best, to discover the fullness of Christ, the emptiness of the
creature, and the snares of the great Deceiver; which I have endeavored to do
(in the following discourse) according to that measure of grace, which I have
received from the Lord. God once accepted a handful of meal for a sacrifice;
and a gripe of Goats hair for an oblation; and I know that you have not so
learned the Father, as to despise the day of small things. Beloved, Satan being
fallen from light to darkness, from felicity to misery, from Heaven to hell,
from an Angel to a Devil, is so full of malice and envy, that he will leave
no means unattempted, whereby he may make all others eternaly miserable with
himself; he being shut out of Heaven, and shut up under chains of darkness
till the judgment of the great day, makes use of all his power and skill, to
bring all the sons of men into the same condition, and condemnation with
himself. Satan has cast such sinful seed into our souls, that now he can no
sooner tempt, but we are ready to assent; he can no sooner have a plot upon us,
but he makes a conquest of us; if he does but show men a little of the beauty,
and bravery of the world, how ready are they to fall down, and worship him.

What ever sin the heart of man is most prone to, that the Devil will help
forward. If David be proud of 2 Samuel 24.
his people, Satan will provoke him to number them, that he may be yet prouder.
If Peter be slavishly Matthew. 16. ver. 22. 26. chapter 69. ult.
fearful, Satan will put him upon rebuking and denying of Christ, to save his
own skin. If Ahabs 1 Kings 22.
Prophets be given to flatter, the Devil will strait way become a lying spirit
in the mouths of four hundred of them, and they shall flatter Ahab to his
ruin. If Judas will John 13. 2.
be a Traitor, Satan will quickly enter into his heart, and make him sell his
Master for money, which some Heathens would never have done. If Ananias will
lie Acts 5. 3.
for advantage, Satan will fill his heart that he may lie (with a witness) to
the Holy Ghost. Satan loves to sail with the wind, and to suite men's
temptations to their conditions, and inclinations; if they be in prosperity, he
will tempt them to deny God; if they be in adversity, he will tempt them to
distrust Prove. 30. v. 9.
God; if their knowledge be weak, he will tempt them to have low thoughts of
God; if their conscience be tender, he will tempt to scrupulosity; if large, to
carnal security; if we be bold-spirited, he will tempt to presumption; if
timorous, to desperation; if flexible, to inconstancy, if stiff, to
impenitency, etc.

From the power, malice, and skill of Satan, does proceed all the soul killing
plots, devices, stratagems, and machinations, that be in the world; Several
devices he has to draw souls to sin, and several plots he has to keep
souls from all holy, and heavenly services; and several stratagems he has,
to keep souls in a mourning, staggering, doubting, and questioning condition.
He has several devices, to destroy the great, and honorable, the wise, and
learned; the blind, and ignorant; the rich, and the poor; the real, and the
nominall Saints, etc. One while he will refrain from tempting, that we may
think our selves secure, and neglect our watch; another while he will seem to
fly, that he may make us proud of the victory; one while he will fix men's
eyes more on others sins, then their own, that he may puff them; another while
he will fix their eyes more on others graces then their own, that he may
overwhelme them etc. A man may as well tell the stars, and number the sands of
the sea, as reckon up all the devices of Satan; yet those which are most
considerable, and by which he does most mischief to the precious souls of
men, are in the following Treatise discovered, and the Remedies against them
prescribed, etc.

Beloved, I think it necessary to give you, and the world a faithful account
of the Reasons, moving me to appear in Print, in these days, wherein we may
say there was never more writing, and yet neverlesse practicing, and they are
these that follow, etc.

First, because Satan has a 1. Reason.
greater influence upon men, and higher advantages over men (having the wind
and the hill as it were) then they think he has, and the knowledge of his
high advantages is the high way to disappoint him, and to render the soul
strong in resisting, and happy in conquering, etc.

Your importunity, and the importunity 2. Reason.
of many other precious sons of Zion has after much striving with God, my own
heart, and others, made a conquest of me and forced me to do that at last,
which at first was not a little contrary to my inclination, and resolution, etc.

The strange opposition that I 3. Reason. Pirates make the strongest and the
hottest oppositions against those vessels that are most richly laden; so does
Satan that arch Pirate against those truths, that have most of God, Christ, and
Heaven in them.
met with from Satan, in the study of this following discourse, has put an
edge upon my spirit, knowing that Satan strives mightily, to keep those things
from seeing the light, that tend eminently to shake and break his Kingdom of
darkness, and to lift up the Kingdom and glory of the Lord Jesus Christ, in
the souls and lives of the children of men, etc.

Its exceeding usefulness to all sorts, ranks, and conditions of men 4. Reason.
in the world; here you have salve for every sore, and a plaster for every
wound, and a Remedy against every disease; especially against those, that tend
most to the undoing of souls, and to the ruin of the State, etc.

I know not of any one, or 5. Reason.
other that have writ of this Subject; all that I have ever seen, have only
touched upon this string, which has been no small provocation to me, to attempt
to do something this way, that others, that have better heads and hearts, may
be the more stirred to improve their Talents, in a further discovery of Satan's
Devices, and in the making known of such choice Remedies, as may enable the
souls of men to triumph over all his plots and stratagems, etc.

I have many precious friends in 6 Reason.
several Countries, who are not a little desirous, that my pen may reach them,
now my voice cannot. I have formerly been, by the help of the mighty God of
Jacob, a weak instrument of good to them, and cannot but hope, and believe,
that the Lord will also bless these labors to them, they being (in part) the
fruit of their desires, and prayers, etc.

Lastly, not knowing how soon 7. Reason.
my Glass may be out, and how soon I may be cut off by a hand of death, from
all opportunities of doing further service for Christ, or your souls in this
world, I was willing to sow a little handful of spiritual seed among you;
that so, when I put off this earthly Tabernacle, my love to you, and that dear
remembrance of you, which I have in my soul, may strongly engage your minds
and spirits, to make this Book your Companion; and under all external, or
internal changes, to make use of this heavenly Salve, which I hope, will by
the blessing of the Lord, be as effectual for the healing of all your Wounds,
as their looking up to the brazen Serpent, was effectual to heal theirs that
were bit, and stung with fiery Serpents. I shall leave this Book with you, as a
Legacy of my dearest Love, desiring the Lord to make it a far greater, and
sweeter Legacy, then all those carnal Legacies are, that are left by the high
and mighty ones of the earth, to their nearest and dearest relations, etc.

Beloved, I would not have affection carry my pen too much beyond my
intention; therefore only give me leave to signify my desires for you, and my
desires to you; and I shall draw to a close.

My desires for you are, That he would grant you according to the riches Ephesians.
3.
of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner Verse. 17.
man. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being rooted and
grounded in love; May be able to Verse. 18.
comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, Verse.
19.
and height: And to know the love of Christ that passes knowledge; That ye
might be filled with all the fulness of God. And that ye might walk Colos.
1. 10.
worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and
increased in the knowledge of God, Strengthened with all might, according Verse.
11.
to his glorious power, unto all patience, and long-suffering with
joyfullnesse. That ye do no evil. That 2 Cor. 13. 7.
your love may abound yet more and more in Knowledge, and in all Judgment.
Phil. 1. 9.
That ye may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be sincere, Verse.
10.
and without offense till the day of Christ. And that our God would 2 Thessalonians. 1.
11.
count you worthy of this calling, and fulfill all the good pleasure of his
goodness, and the work of Faith with Verse. 12.
power. That the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye
in him, according to the grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ. And that
you may be eminent in Psalm. 93. 5.
Sanctity; Sanctity being Zions glory, that your hearts may be kept upright,
your judgments sound, and your lives unblamable. That as you are now my joy,
so in the day of Christ you may be my Crown; That I may see my labors in your
lives, that your conversation may not be earthly, when the things you hear are
heavenly; but that it may be as becomes the Gospel. That as the Fishes which
live in the salt Sea, yet are fresh; so you, though you live in an uncharitable
world, may yet be charitable and loving. That ye may like the Be, suck Honey
out of every Flower; That ye may shine in a sea of troubles, as the Pearl
shines in the sky, though it grows in the Sea; That in all your trials you may
be like the stone in Thracia, that neither burns in the fire, nor sinketh in
the water. That ye may be like the Heavens, excellent in substance, and
beautiful in appearance; that so you may meet me with joy, in that day,
wherein Christ shall say to his Father, Lo, here am I, and the children that
thou have given me.

My desires to you are, That you would make it your business to study Christ,
his Word, your own Hearts, Satan's Plots, and Eternity, more then ever; that ye
would endeavor more to be inwardly sincere, then outwardly glorious; to live,
then to have a name to live. That ye would labor with all your might, to be
thankful under Mercies, and faithful in your Places, and humble under Divine
Appearances, and fruitful under precious Ordinances; that as your means and
mercies are greater then others, so your account before God may not prove worse
then others. That ye would pray for me, who am not worthy to be named among the
Saints, that I may be a precious instrument in the hand of Christ, to bring in
many souls unto him, and to build up those that are brought in, in their most
holy Faith; And that Utterance may be given to me, that I may make known all
the will of God. That 2 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
I may be sincere, faithful, frequent, fervent, and constant in the work of
the Lord, and that my labor be not in vain in the Lord; That my Labors may
be accepted of the Lord, and his Saints, and I may daily see the travel of my
soul, etc.

But above all, pray for me, that I may more and more find the power, and
sweet of those things upon my own heart, that I give out to you and others;
and that my soul be so visited with strength from on high, that I may live up
fully, and constantly to those truths that I hold forth to the world; and that
I may be both in Life and Doctrine, a burning and a shining light; That so,
when the Lord Jesus shall appear, I may receive a crown of glory, which he
shall give to me in that day, and not only to me, but to all that love his
appearing, etc.

For a close, remember this, that your life is short, your duties many, your
assistance great, and your reward sure; therefore faint not, hold on, and hold
up in ways of well doing, and Heaven shall make amends for all.

I shall now take leave of you, when my heart has by my hand subscribed that I
am,

Your loving Pastor under Christ, according to all Pastor all affections, and
engagements in our dearest Lord. THOMAS BROOKS.

A WORD TO THE READER.
Dear Friend!
SOLOMON bids us buy the Pro. 23. 23
Truth, but does not tell us what it must cost, because we must get it, though
it be never so dear; we must love it both Multi ama^^ veritatem lucentem, o
derunt redarguentem.
shining and scorching; every parcel of Truth is precious, as the filings of
gold; we must either live with it, or dye for it; As Ruth said to Naomi,
Whither thou go, I will go, and Ruth 1. 16, 17.
where thou lodgest, I will lodge, and nothing but death shall part thee and
me; So must gracious spirits say, where Truth goes, I will go, and where
Truth lodges, I will Si veritas est causa discordiae, mori possum tacere con
possum. J^rome.
lodge, and nothing but death shall part me and Truth. A man may lawfully sell
his House, Lands, and Jewels, but Truth is a Jewel that exceeds all price,
and must not be sold. It Is our Heritage; Thy Testimonies have I taken Psalm.
119. 11^.
as an Heritage for ever; it is a Legacy that our forefathers have hought with
their bloods, which should make us willing to lay down any thing, and to lay
out any thing, that we may with the wise Merchant in the Gospel, purchase this
precious Pearl, M^t. 5. 18. Verit^s vin^it. Truth at last triumphs.
which is more worth then Heaven and Earth, and which will make a man live
happily, die comfortably, and reign eternally.

And now if thou please, read the Work, and receive this council from me.

First, Thou must know that every etc.

Secondly, Remember, it is not hasty It Is a Law among the Persees in India, to
use premeditation in what they are to do, that if it be bad, to reject it, if
good, to act it.
holy, and heavenly truths, that makes them prove sweet and profitable to the
soul. It Is not the Bees touching of the Flower that gathers Honey, but her
abiding for a time upon the Flower, that draws out the sweet. It Is not he that
reads most, but he that meditates most, that will prove the choicest, sweetest,
wisest, and strongest Christian, etc.

Thirdly, Know, that it is not the If you know these things, blessed John 15.
14. Mat. 7. 21.
and happy are you, if you do them. Not every one that says Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the 'Twas a good saying of Justin Martyr, Non in verbis sed in
factis res nostrae religioni^ consistunt.
Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father that is in Heaven.
Judas called Christ Lord, Lord, and yet betrayed him, and is gone to his place;
ah! How many Judasses have we in these days, that kiss Christ, and yet betray
Christ; That in their words profess him, but in their works deny him; that
bow The Heathen Philosopher ( Seneca) liked not such that are ( semper victuri)
always about to live better, but never begin. God loves (says Luther)
currist^^, not qu^ristas, the ^unner not the questioner Pacunius has an
elegant saying, I hate (says he) the men that are idle in deed and
philosophical in word, etc.
their knee to him, and yet in their hearts despise him; that call him Jesus,
and yet will not obey him for their Lord.

Reader, If it be not strong upon thy heart, to practice what thou read, to
what end do thou read, to increase thy own condemnation? If thy light and
knowledge be not turned into practice, the more knowing man thou art, the more
miserable man thou will be in the day of recompense; thy light and knowledge
will more torment thee, then all the Devils in hell. Thy knowledge will be
that rod that will eternally lash thee, and that Scorpion that will for ever
bite thee, and that worm that will everlastingly gnaw thee; therefore read,
and labor to know, that thou may do, or else thou art undone for ever.
When Demosthenes was asked what was the first part of an Orator, what the
second, what the third; he answered, action; the same may I say, if any should
ask me, what is the first, the second, the third part of a Christian? I must
answer, action; as that man that reads that he may know; and that labors to
know, that he may do, will have two Heavens; a Heaven of Joy, Peace, and
Comfort on earth, and a Heaven of glory, and happiness after death.

Fourthly, and lastly, if in thy reading I commend thee to God, and to the word
of his grace, which is able to Acts 20. 32.
build thee up, and to give thee an inheritance among them which are
sanctified. And rest

Reader, Thy souls Servant in every office of the Gospel, THOMAS BROOKS.

PRECIOUS REMEDIES AGAINST SATAN'S Devices.
2 CORINTHIANS. 2. 11. Lest Satan should get an advantage of us: for we are not
ignorant of his Devices.
IN the fifth Verse, the Apostle shows, that the incestuous person had by his
incest, sadded those precious souls that God would not have sadded; souls that
walk sinfully are Hazaels to the godly, and draw many sighs and tears from
them; Jeremy weeps in secret for Judah's sins, and Paul cannot speak of those
Belly* Gods with dry eyes, Phil. 3. 18. And Lots righteous soul was burdened,
(...).
vexed, and racked by the filthy Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8. Every sinful
Sodomite was a Hazael to his eyes, a Hadadrimmon to his heart; Gracious souls
use to mourn for other men's sins as well as their own, and for their souls
119 Psalm. 136. 158.
and sins, who make a mock of sin, and a jest of damning their own soul^.
Guilt or grief is all that gracious souls get by communion with vain souls.

In the sixth Verse, he shows, that the punishment that was inflicted upon the
incestuous person was sufficient, and therefore they should not refuse to
receive him, who had repented, and sorrowed for his former faults and follies.
It Is not for the honor of Christ, the credit of the Gospel, nor the good of
souls, for Professors to be like those Act. and Mon. sol. 1392.
bloody wretches, that burnt some that recanted at the stake, saying that they
would send them out of the world while they were in a good mind.

In the 7, 8, 9, and 10 Verses, the Apostle stirs up the Church to forgive
him, to comfort him, and to confirm their love toward him, lest he should be
swallowed up with over much sorrow, Satan going about to mix the detestable
darnell of desperation with the godly sorrow of a pure penitent heart. It was a
sweet saying of one, Let a man Doleat and de dolor gaudeat, Jerome.
grieve for his sin, and then joy for his grief; that sorrow for sin that keeps
the soul from looking toward the Mercie-Seat, and that keeps Christ and the
soul asunder, or that shall render the soul unfit for the communion of Saints,
is a sinful sorrow.

In the eleventh Verse, he lays down another reason to work them to show pity
and mercy to the penitent sinner, that was mourning and groaning under his sin
and misery, i. e. Lest Satan should get an advantage of us: for we are not
ignorant of his Devices. A little for the opening of the words.

Lest Satan should get an advantage of us, (...).
least Satan overreach us, the Greek word signifies to have more then belongs
to one; the comparison is taken from the greedy Merchant, that seeks and
takes all opportunities to beguile and deceive others. Satan is that wily
Merchant, that devoureth not widows houses, but most men's souls.

For we are not ignorant of Satan's devices, or plots, or machinations, or
stratagems; Non(...).
he is but a titular Christian, that has not personal experience of Satan's
stratagems, his set and composed machinations, his artificially-moulded
methods, his plots, darts, depths, whereby he outwitted our first parents, and
fits us a pennyworth still, as he sees reason.

The maine Observation that I shall draw from these words, is this.

That Satan has his several devices to deceive, entangle, and undo the souls
of men.

I shall first prove the point, and secondly show you his several Devices; and
thirdly the Remedies against his Devices; and fourthly, how it comes to pass,
that he has so many several Devices to deceive, entangle, and undo the
souls of men. Fifthly, I shall lay down some Propositions concerning Satan,
and his Devices. For the proof of the point, take these few Scriptures. Ephesians.
6. ver. 11. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand
against the wiles of the Devil. The Greek word (...).
that is here rendered wiles, is a notable emphaticall word.

1. It signifies such snares as are laid behind one, such treacheries as come
upon ones back at unawares. It notes the methods, or way-layings of that old
subtle Serpent, who, like Pans adder in the path, biteth the heels of
passengers, and thereby transfuseth his venom to the head and heart; the word
signifies an ambushment, or stratagem of War, whereby the enemy sets upon a man
ex ins^diis, at unawares.

2. It signifies such snares as are set to (...).
catch one in ones road; a man walks in his road, and thinks not of it, on the
sudden he is Caught by thieves, or falls into a pit, etc.

3. It signifies such as are purposely, artificially, and craftily set for the
taking the prey at the greatest advantage that can be; the Greek (...) being
derived from (...) and (...), signifies properly a way-laying, circumvention,
or going about, as they do which seek after their prey. Julian by his craft,
drew more from the Faith, then all his persecuting Predecessors could do by
their cruelty. So does Satan more hurt in his sheepskin, then by roaring like a
Lion.

Take one Scripture more for the proof of the point, and that is in the second
of Timothy, the second chapter, and the last verse, And that they may recover
themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him at his
will. The Greek word that is here rendered recover themselves, signifies to
awake (...).
themselves. The Apostle alludeth to one that is asleep, or drunk, who is to be
awaked and restored to his senses; and the Greek word that is here rendered
taken captive, signifies to be taken alive; (...)
the word is, properly, a warlike word, and signifies to be taken alive, as
Soldiers are taken alive in the wars, or as Birds are taken alive, and
ensnared in the Fowlers net. Satan has snares for the wise, and snares for the
simple, snares for Hypocrites, and snares for the upright; snares for generous
souls, and snares for timorous souls, snares for the rich, and snares for the
poor, snares for the aged, and snares for youth, etc. happy are those souls
that are not taken and held in the snares that he has laid. Take one proof
more, and then I will proceed to the opening of the Point, and that is in the
2d Revelations, and the 24. v. But unto you I say, and unto the rest in
Thyatira, as many as have not Pareus in loc. 1 Timothy 4. 1.
this Doctrine, and which have not known the depths of Satan, as they speak,
I will put upon you no other burden, but to hold fast till I come. Those poor
souls called their opinions the depths of God, when indeed they were the
depths of Satan; you call your opinions depths, and so they are, but they are
such depths as Satan has brought out of Hell, they are the whisperings and
hissings of that Serpent, not the inspirations of God.

Now the second thing that I am to show you, is his several Devices, and
herein I shall first show you the several Devices that he has to draw the
soul to sin; I shall instance in these twelve, which may bespeake our most
serious consideration.

His first Device to draw the soul to 1 Device.
sin, is to present the bait, and hide the hook; to present the golden cup, and
hide the poison; to present the sweet, the pleasure, and the profit that may
flow in upon the soul, by yielding to sin, and by hiding from the soul the
wrath and misery that will certainly follow the committings of sin. By this
Device he took our first Parents, Genesis 3. 4, 5. And the Serpent said unto
the woman, ye shall not surely die. For God does So to reduce D. Tailor
Martyr, they promised him not only his pardon, but a Bishopric. Act. and Mon.
folio 1386. Inest peccatum cum delectaris: regnat si consen^ ser^. August in
Psalm. 50.
know, that in the day ye* eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye
shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil. Your eyes shall be opened, and ye
shall be as Gods, here is the bait, the sweet, the pleasure, the profit, Oh!
but he hides the hook, the shame, the wrath, and the loss that would certainly
follow. There is an opening of the eyes of the mind to contemplation and joy,
and there is an opening of the eyes of the body to shame and confusion. He
promises them the former, but intends the latter, and so cheats them, giving
them an Apple in exchange for Paradise, as he deals by thousands now adays.
Satan with ease puts fallacies upon us, and then, by his golden baits, leads
us, and leaves us in a fools Paradise; he promises the soul honor, pleasure
and profit, etc. but paye's the soul with the greatest contempt, shame, and
loss that can be; by a golden bait he labored to catch Christ This world at
last shall be burnt for a witch, says one. Multi amando res noxias sunt
miseri, habendo miseriores. August. in Psa. 26. Many are miserable by loving
hurtful things, but they are more miserable by having them. Men had need pray
with Bernard, Da domine ut sic possideamus tempora lia ut non perdamus aeterna.
Grant us Lord that we may so partake of temporal felicity, that we may not
loose eternal.
in the 4 of Mat. 8. 9. he shows him the beauty and the bravery of a
bewitching world, which doubtless would have taken many a carnal heart; but
here the devils fire fell upon wet tinder, and therefore took not; these
tempting objects did not at all win upon his affections, nor dazzle his eyes;
though many have eternally died of the wound of the eye, and fallen for ever by
this vile Strumpet the world, who by laying forth her two fair breasts of
profit and pleasure, has wounded their souls, and cast them down into utter
perdition; she has by the glistering of her pomp and preferment, slain
millions, as the S^rpent Scytale, which when she cannot overtake the fleeing
passengers, does, with her beautiful colors, astonish and amaze them: so that
they have no power to pass away, till she have stung them to death. Adversity
has slain her thousand, but prosperity her ten thousand.

Now the Remedies against this Device of the Devil, are these.
FIrst, keep at the greatest distance from 1 Remedy.
sin, and from playing with the golden bait that Satan holds forth to catch
you; for this you have the 12 Romans 9. v. Abhor that which is evil, cleave to
that which is good; when we meet with any thing extremely evil, and contrary
to us, nature abhors it, and retires as far as it can (...). The simple verb
imports extreme detestation, which is aggravated by the composition. Chrysostom.
from it. The Greek word that is there rendered abhor, is very significant, it
signifies to hate it as Hell it self, to hate it with horror. Anselm used to
say, that if he should see the shame of sin on the one hand, and the pains of
hell on the other, and must of necessity choose one, he would rather be thrust
into Hell without sin, then go into Heaven with sin: so great was his hatred
and detestation of sin. It Is our wisest and our safest Prove. 5. 8. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
22.
course to stand at the furthest distance from sin, not to go near the house
of the Harlot; but to fly from all appearance of evil; the best course to
prevent falling into the pit, is to keep at the It was a divine saying of a
Heathen, that if there were no God to punish him, no Devil to torment him, no
Hell to burn him no man to see him; yet would he not sin ser the ugliness and
filthiness of sin, and the grief of his own Conscience. Seneca.
greatest distance; he that will be so bold as to attempt to dance upon the
brink of the pit, may find by woeful experience, that it is a righteous thing
with God, that he should fall into the pit. Joseph keeps at a (distance from
sin, and from playing with Satan's golden baits, and stands; David draws near,
and plays with the bait, and falls, and swallows bait and hook with a witness.
David comes near the snare, and is taken in it, to the breaking of his bones,
the wounding of his conscience, and the loss of his God.

Sin is a plague, yea the greatest and the most infectious plague in the world,
and yet, ah how few are there that tremble at it? that keep at a distance from
it, 1 Cor. 5. 6. Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump? As
soon as one sin had seized upon Adams heart, all sin entered into his soul and
overspread Sin is like those Diseases that are called by Physicians,
Corruption totius substantiae.
it. How has Adams one sin spread over all mankind. 5. Romans 12. ver.
Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin: and so
death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. Ah! how does the Fathers
sin infect the child, the Husbands infect the Wife, the Masters the Servant?
The sin that is in one man's heart, is able to infect a whole world, it is of
such a spreading and infectious nature. The story of the Italian, who first
made his enemy deny God, and then stabbed him, and so at once murdered both
body and soul, declares the perfect malignity of sin; and Oh! that what has
been spoken upon this head* may prevail with you, to stand at a distance from
sin.

The second Remedy, is, to consider 2 Remedy. When the golden bait is cast
forth to catch us, we must say as Demosthenes the Orator did, of the
beauti^ull Lais, when he was asked an excessive sum of money to behold her; I
will not buy repentance so dear, I am not so ill a merchant as to seleternals
for temporals.
that sin is but a bitter-sweet; that seeming sweet that is in sin will quickly
vanish, and lasting shame, sorrow, horror, and terror will come in the room
thereof. 20. Job 12, 13, 14. Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though
he bide it under his tongue, though he spare it, and forsake it not, but keep
it still within his mouth, yet his meat in his bowels is turned, it is the gall
of Asps within him. Forbidden profits and pleasures are most pleasing to vain
men, who count madness mirth, etc. Many long to be meddling with the murdering
morsels of sin, which nourish not but rent and consume the belly, the soul
that receives them. Many eat that on earth, that they digest in hell; sins
murdering morsels will deceive those that devour them. Adams If intemperance
could afford more pleasure then temperance, Heliogobalus should have been more
happy then Adam in Paradise.
Apple was a bitter-sweet; Escu's mess was a bitter-sweet; the Israelites
quails a bitter-sweet, Jonathans honey a bitter-sweet, and Adonijahs dainties a
bitter-sweet; after the meal is ended comes the reckoning: Men must not think
to dance and dine with the Devil, and then to sup with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven: to feed upon the poison of Asps, and yet that
the Vipers tongue shall not slay them; when the Aspe stings a man, it does
first tickle him so, as it makes him laugh, till the poison by little and
Plutark.
little gets to the heart, and then it pains him more then ever it delighted
him: so does sin, it may please a little at first, but it will pain the soul
with a witness at last; yea, if there were the least real delight in sin,
there could be no perfect Hell where men shall most perfectly be tormented with
their sin.

The third Remedy against this Device 3 Remedy.
of Satan is, solemnly to consider, that sin will usher in the greatest and the
Isa. 59. 2. Psalm. 51. 12. Isa. 59. 8. 2 Chronicles. 15. 3, 4. Jer. 17. 18.
saddest losses that can be upon our souls; it will usher in the loss of that
Divine favor that is better then life, and the loss of that joy that is
unspeakable, and full of glory, and the loss of that peace that passes
understanding, and the loss of those Divine influences, by which the soul
has been refreshed, quickened, Jer. 5. 25.
raised, strengthened, and gladded, and the loss of many outward desirable
mercies, which otherwise the soul might have enjoyed. It was a sound and
savory reply of an English Captain at the loss of Callice, when a proud
Frenchman scornfully demanded, when will you fetch Callice again? replied,
Quando peccata vestra, erunt nostris graviera.
When your sins shall weigh down ours; ah England! my constant Prayer for
thee is, that thou may not sin away thy mercies into their hands, that
cannot call mercy mercy, and that would joy in nothing more then to see thy
sorrow and misery, and to see that hand to make thee naked, that has clothed
thee with much mercy and glory.

The fourth Remedy against this Device 4 Remedy. In Sardis there grew an herb
called Appium Sardis that would' make a man lie laughing when he was deadly
sick-such is the operation of sin.
of Satan, is seriously to consider, that sin is of a very deceitful and
bewitching nature, sin is from the greatest deceiver; it is a child of his own
begetting, it is the ground of all the deceit in the world, and it is in its own
nature exceeding deceitful. Heb. 3. 13. But exhort one another daily, while it
is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfullnesse of
sin; it will kiss the soul, and pretend fair to the soul, and yet betray the
soul for ever; it will with Dalilah smile upon us, that it may betray us into
the hands of the Devil, as she did Sampson into the hands of the Pro. 5. 22, 23.
Philistimes; sin gives Satan a power over us, and an advantage to accuse us,
and to lay claim to us, as those that wear his badge; it is of a very
bewitching nature, it bewitches the soul where it is upon the throne, that the
soul cannot leave it, though it perish eternally by it. Sin so bewitches the
soul, that it makes Which occasioned Chrysost^me to say, when Eudoxia the
Empress threatened him, Go tell her ( Nil nisi pr^^atum ti(...)) I fear
nothing but sin.
the soul call evil good, and good evil, bitter sweet, and sweet bitter,
light darkness, and darkness light; and a soul thus bewitched with sin will
stand it out to the death, at the swords point with God; Let God strike, and
wound, and cut to the very bone, yet the bewitched soul cares not, fears not,
but will still hold on in a course of wickedness, as you may see in Pharaoh,
Balaam, and Judas; tell the bewitched soul that sin is a Viper that will
certainly kill when it is not killed; that sin often kills secretly, insensibly,
eternally, yet the bewitched soul cannot, nor will not cease from sin. When the
Physicians told (...)nen (...) Ambrose. Ambrose.
Theotimus that except he did abstain from drunkenness, and uncleanness, etc.
he would loose his eyes, his heart was so bewitch't to his sins, that he
answers, Then farewell sweet light; he had rather loose his eyes then leave his
sins: So a man bewitched with sin, had rather loose God, Christ, Heaven, and his
own soul, then part with his sin; O therefore for ever take heed of playing, or
nibling at Satan's golden baits.

The second Device of Satan to draw 2 Device.
the soul to sin, is, by painting sin with virtues colors; Satan knows, that
if h^ should present sin in its own nature and dress, the soul would rather
fly from it, then yield to it, and therefore he presents it unto us, not in its
own proper colors, but painted and gilded over with the name and show of
virtue, that we may the more easily be overcome by it, and take the more
pleasure in committing of it. Pride, he presents to the soul under the name and
notion of neatness, and cleanliness; and covetousness (which the Apostle
condemns for idolatry) to be but good husbandry, and drunkenness to be good
fellowship, and riotousnesse under the name and notion of liberality, and
wantonness as a trick of youth, etc.

Now the Remedies against this Device of Satan are these.
FIrst, Consider that sin is never a whit 1 Remedy.
the less filthy, vilde, and abominable, by its being colored and painted
with virtues colors. A poisonous Pill is never a whit the less poisonous,
because it is gilded over with gold; nor a Wolf is never a whit the less a
Wolf, because he has put on a sheeps-skin; nor the Devil is never a whit the
less a Devil, because he appears sometimes like an Angel of light, so neither
is sin any whit the less filthy, and abominable, by its being painted over
with virtues colors.

The second Remedy is this, That the 2 Remedy.
more sin is painted forth under the color Turpiora sunt vitia quae virtutum
specie celantur, Jerome. Thus the Illuminates (as they called themselves) a
pestilent Sect in Arragon, professing and affecting in themselves a kind of
Angelical purity, fell suddenly to the justifying of beastiality, as many have
done in these days.
of virtue, the more dangerous it is to the souls of men; this we see evident in
these days, by those very many souls that are turned out of the way that is
holy, (and in which their souls have had sweet and glorious communion with God)
into ways of highest vanity and folly, by Satan's neat coloring over of sin,
and painting forth vice under the name and color of virtue; this is so
notoriously known, that I need but name it; the most dangerous vermin is too
often to be found under the fairest and sweetest Flowers, and the fairest glove
is often drawn upon the foulest hand, and the richest robes are often put upon
the filthiest bodies: so are the fairest and the sweetest names upon the
greatest, and the most horriblest vices and etrors that be in the world; ah!
that we had not too many sad proofs of this amongst us.

The third Remedy against this Device, 3 Remedy.
is to look on sin with that eye, Tacitus speaks of Tiberius. that when his
sins did app^ar in their own colors, they did so terrify and torment him,
that he protested to the Senate, that he suffered death daily.
which within a few hours we shall see it; ah souls! when you shall lie upon a
dying bed, and stand before a judgment seat, sin shall be unmaskt, and its
dress and robes shall then be taken off, and then it shall appear more vile,
filthy, and terrible then Hell it self; then that which formerly appeared most
sweet, will appear most bitter, and that which appeared most beautiful, will
appear most ugly, and that which appeared most delightful, will then appear
most dreadful to the soul; ah! the shame, the pain, the gall, the bitterness,
the horror, the hell, that the fight of sin, when its dress is taken off, will
raise in poor souls. Sin will surely prove evil, and bitter to the soul, when
its robes are taken off. A man may have the Stone, who feels no fit of it.
Conscience will work at last, though for the present one may feel no fit of
accusation, Laban Satan that now allures thee to sin, will ere long make thee
see, that ( Peccatum est deicidium) sin is a murdering of God, and this will
make thee murder two at once, thy soul and thy body, unless the Lord in
mercy holds thy hand.
showed himself at parting; sin will be bitterness in the latter end, when it
shall appear to the soul in its own filthy nature. The Devil deals with men, as
the Panther does with Beasts, he hides his deformed head, till his sweet sent
has drawn them into his danger; till we have sinned, Satan is a Parasite, when
we have sinned, he is a Tyrant. Ah souls! the day is at hand, when the Devil
will pull off the paint and garnish that he has put upon sin, and present that
monster sin in such a monstrous shape to your souls, that will cause your
thoughts to be be troubled, your countenance to be changed, the joints of your
loins to be loosed, and your knees to be dashed one against another, and your
hearts to be so terrified, that you will be ready with Achitophel, and Judas,
to strangle, and hang your bodies on earth, and your souls in Hell; if the
Lord has not more mercy on you, then he had on them; oh! therefore look upon
sin now, as you must look upon it to all eternity, and as God, Conscience, and
Satan will present it to you another day.

The fourth Remedy against this device 4. Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that even these very sins, that Satan
paints, and puts new names and colors V^a guttula plus valet quam coelum and
terra Luther i. e. one little drop (speaking of the blood of Christ) is more
worth then Heaven and Earth.
upon, cost the best blood, the noblest blood, the lifeblood, the heartblood
of the Lord Jesus; that Christ should come from the eternal bosom of his
Father to a Region of sorrow, and death; that God should be manifested in the
flesh, the Creator made a Creature; that he that was clothed with glory should
be wrapped with rags of flesh; he that filled heaven and earth with his glory,
should be cradled in a manger; that the power of God should fly from weak man,
the God of Israel into Egypt; that the God of the Law should be subject to the
Law; One of the Rabbis, when he read what bitter torments the Messiah should
suffer, when he came into the world, cried out Veniat Messiah at ego non videam
i. e. Let the Messiah come, but let not me see him. Dionysius being in Egypt
at the time of Christ's suffering, and seeing an Eclipse of the Sun, and knowing
it to be contrary to nature, cried out ( aut Deus naturae patitur aut mundi
machina dissolvitur) Either the God of Nature suffered, or the frame of the
world will be dlssolved.
the God of Circumcision circumcised; the God that made the Heavens working at
Joseph's homely trade; that he that binds the Devils in chains should be
tempted; that he whose is the world, and the fullness thereof, should hunger
and thirst; that the God of strength should be weary, the Judge of all flesh
condemned, the God of life put to death; that he that is one with his Father,
should cry out of misery, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me; that he
that had the keys of Hell and death at his girdle, should lie imprisoned in
the sepulcher of another, having in his life time, no where to lay his head,
nor after death, to lay his body; that that head, before which the Angels do
cast down their Crowns, should be crowned with thorns; and those eyes, purer
then the Sun, put out by the darkness of death; those ears, which hear
nothing but Hallelujahs of Saints and Angels, to hear the blasphemies of the
multitude; that face, that was fairer then the Sons of men, to be spit on by
those beastly wretched Jews; that mouth and tongue, that spoke as never man
spoke, accused for blasphemy; those hands that freely swayed the Scepter of
Heaven, nailed to the Cross; those feet like unto fine brass, nailed to the
Cross for man's sins; each sense annoyed, his feeling, or touching with a
spear and nails; It Is an excellent saying of Bernard (quanto pro nobis vilior
tanto nobis charior) the more vilde Christ made himself for us, the more dear
he ought to be to us.
his smell with stinking savor, being crucified about Golgatha, the place of
Skulls; his taste with vinegar and gall; his hearing with reproaches; and sight
with his mother and Disciples bemoaning him; his soul comfortless, and
forsaken; and all this for those very sins that Satan paints, and puts fine
colors upon; oh how should the consideration of this stir up the soul against
it, and work the soul to fly from it, and to use all holy means, whereby
sin may be subdued, and destroyed. After Julius Caesar was murdered, Antonius
brought forth his coat all bloody, and cut, and laid it before the people,
saying, look, here you have your Emperors coat thus bloody, and torn;
whereupon the people were presently in an uproar, and cried out to slay those
murderers, and they took their tables and stools that were in the place, and
set them on fire, and ran to the houses of them that had slam Caesar, and burnt
them: so when we consider that sin has slain our Lord Jesus, ah! how should
it provoke our hearts to be revenged on sin, that has murdered the Lord of
Glory, and Nolo vivere sine vulnere cum te video vulneratum. Oh my God! as long
as I see thy wounds, I will never live without wound, says Bonaventure.
has done that mischief, that all the Devils in Hell could never have done.
'Twas good counsel one gave; never let go out of your minds, the thoughts of
a crucified Christ; let these be meat and drink unto you, let them be your
sweetness, and consolation; your honey, and your desire; your reading, and
your meditation; your life, death, and resurrection.

The third device that Satan has to 3. Device.
draw the soul to sin, is by extenuating, and lessening of sin; ah! says
Satan, it is but a little pride, a little worldliness, a little uncleanness, a
little drunkenness, etc. As Lot said of Zoar, Genesis 19. 20.
it is but a little one, and my soul shall live; ahlas! says Satan, it is but
a very little sin, that you stick so at, you may commit it without any danger
to your soul, it is but a little one, you may commit it, and yet your soul
shall live.

Now the Remedies against this device of Satan are these.
FIrst, solemnly consider, that those 1. Remedy.
sins, which we are apt to account small, has brought upon men the greatest
wrath of God; as the eating of an Apple; gathering a few sticks on the Sabbath
day, and touching of the Ark; oh! the dreadful wrath that these sins brought
down, upon the Draco the Rigid Lawgiver, being asked why, when sins were not
equal, he appointed death to all? Answered, he knew that sins were not all
equal; but he knew the least deserved death. So though the sins of men he not
all equal, yet the least of them deserves eternal death.
heads, and hearts of men; the least sin is contrary to the Law of God, the
nature of God, the being of God, and the glory of God, and therefore it is often
punished severely by God; and do not we see daily the vengeance of the
Almighty falling upon the bodies, names, estates, Families, and souls of men
for those sins, that are but little ones in their eyes. Surely, if we are not
utterly left of God, and blinded by Satan, we cannot but see it. Oh! therefore,
when Satan says it is but a little one, do thou say, oh! but those sins that
thou call little, are such, that will cause God to rain Hell out of Heaven
upon sinners, as he did upon the Sodomites.

The second Remedy against this device 2. Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that the giving way to a less sin, makes
way for the committing of a greater; he that to avoid a greater sin will yield
to a lesser, ten thousand to one, but God in Justice will leave that soul to
fall into a greater; if we commit one sin to avoid another, it is just we should
avoid neither; we having not law nor power in our own hands, to keep off sin,
as we pleas, and we by yiedling to the Psalm. 137. ver. 9. Happy shall he be
that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the stones. Hugho's Gloss is
pious, etc. ( Sit nihil in te Babylonicum) Let there be nothing in thee of
Babylon, no^ only the grown men, but the little ones must be dashed against
the stones, not only great sins, but little sins must be killed, or they will
kill the soul for ever.
lesser, do tempt the tempter to tempt us to the greater. Sin is of an
incroaching nature, it creeps on the soul by degrees, step by step, till it
has the soul to the very height of sin; David gives way to his wandering eye,
and this led him to those foul sins, that caused God to break his bones, and
to turn his day into night, and to leave his soul in great darkness. Jocab,
and Peter, and other Saints have found this true, by woeful experience, that
the yielding to a lesser sin, has been the ushering in of a greater; the
little thief will open the door, and make way for the greater; and the little
wedge knocked in will make way for the greater; Satan will first draw thee to
sit with the drunkard, and then to sip with the drunkard, and then at last, to
be drunk with the drunkard; he will first draw thee to be unclean in thy
thoughts, and then to be unclean in thy looks, and then to be unclean in thy
words, and at last, to be unclean in thy practices; he will first draw thee to
look on the golden wedge, and then to like the golden wedge, and then to
handle the golden wedge; and then at last, by wicked ways to gain the golden
wedge, though thou runnest the hazard of loosing God, and thy soul An Italian
having found his enemy at an advantage, promised him, if he would deny his
faith, he would save his life; he to save his life denied his faith, which
having done, he stabbed him, rejoicing, that by this, he had, at one time, taken
revenge both on soul and body.
for ever: as you may see in Gehazi, Achan, and Judas, and many in these our
days. Sin is never at a stand, Psalm. 1. v. 1. First, ungodly, then sinners,
then scorners; here they go on from sin to sin, till they come to the top of
sin, viz. to sit in the seat of scorners, or as ris in the Septuagint ((...))
to affect the honor of the chair of Pestilence. Austin writing upon John,
tells a story of a certain man, that was of an opinion, that the Devil did
make the fly, and not God; says one to him, if the Devil made flies, then
the Devil made worms, and God did not make them; for they are living
creatures, as well as flies; true said he, the Devil did make worms; but said
the other, if the Devil did make worms, then he made birds, beasts, and man;
he granted all: thus says Austin, by denying God in the fly, he came to deny
God in man, and to deny the whole Creation; by all this we see, that the
yielding to lesser sins, draws the soul to the committing of greater; Ah! how
many, in these days have fallen, first, to have low thoughts of Scripture, and
Ordinances, and then to slight Scripture, and Ordinances, and then to make a
nose of wax of Scripture, and Ordinances, and then to cast off Scripture and
Ordinances; and then at last, to advance, and lift up themselves, and their
Christ-dishonouring, and soul-damning opinions, A young man being long tempted
to kill his Father or lie with his mother, or be drunk, he thought to yield to
the lesser, viz. to be drunk, that he might be rid of the greater; but when he
was drunk, he did both kill his Father, and lie with his Mother.
above Scripture and Ordinances. Sin gains upon men's souls by insensible
degrees, Ecclesiastes 10. v. 13. The beginning of the words of his mouth is
foolishness, and the end of his talking is mischievous madness: Corruption in
the heart, when it breaks forth, is like a breach in the Sea, which begins in a
narrow passage, till it eat through, and cast down all before it. The debates
of the soul are quick, and soon ended; and that may be done in a moment, that
may undo a man for ever. When a man has begun to sin, he knows not where, or
when, or how he shall make a stop of sin; usually the soul goes on from evil
to evil, from folly, to folly, till it be ripe for eternal mis^ry; men
usually grow from being naught, to be very naught, and from very naught to be
stark naught, and then God sets them at naught for ever.

The third Remedy against this third 3. Remedy.
device, that Satan has to draw the soul to sin, is solemnly to consider, that
it is sad to stand with God for a trifle; Dives would not give a crum, therefore
Luk 16. 21.
he should not receive a drop; it is the greatest folly in the world, to
adventure the going to hell for a small matter; I tasted but a little honey,
said Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14. 43.
and I must dye; it is a most unkind, and unfaithful thing, to break with God
for a little; little sins carry with them but little temptations to sin, It was
a vexation to King Lysimachus, that his staying to drink one small draught of
water, lost him his Kingdom: and so it will eternally vex some souls at last*
that for some one little sin, (compared with great transgressio^s) they have
lost God Heaven, and their souls for ever.
and then a man shows most viciousness, and unkindnesse, when he sins on a
little temptation; It Is divelish to sin without a temptation, it is little
less then divelish to sin on a little occasion; the less the temptation is to
sin, the greater is that ^inne; Readiness sin in not staying for Samuel, was not
so much in the matter, but it was much in the malice of it; for though Samuel
had not come at all, yet Saul should not have offered Sacrifice; but this cost
him dear, his Soul, and his Kingdom. It Is the greatest unkindnesse that can be
showed to a friend, to adventure the complaining, bleeding, and grieving of his
soul, upon a light and slight occasion,: so it is the greatest unkindnesse that
can be showed to God, Christ, and the Spirit, for a soul to put God upon
complaining, Christ upon bleeding, and the Spirit upon grieving, by yielding to
little sins; therefore, when Satan says it is but a little one, do thou
answer, that often times there is the greatest unkindnesse showed to Gods
glorious Majesty, in the acting of the least folly, and therefore thou will not
displease thy best and greatest friend, by yielding to his least enemy.

The fourth Remedy against this Device 4 Remedy.
of Satan is, seriously to consider, that there is great danger, yea many times
most danger, in the smallest sins; 1 Cor. 5. 6.
A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump; if the Serpent wind in his head, he
will draw his whole body after. Greater sins do sooner startle the soul, and
awaken, and rouse up the soul to repentance, Caesar was stabbed with bodkins.
then lesser sins do; little sins often slide into the soul, and breed, and
work secretly, and undiscernably Pope Adrian was choked with a Gnat.
in the soul, till they come to be so strong, as to trample upon the soul,
and to cut the throat of the soul; there is, oftentimes, greatest danger to
our bodies in the least Diseases, that hang upon us, because we are apt to make
A Scorpion is little, yetable to sting a Lion to death; a Mouseis but little,
yet kills an Elephant, if he gets up into his trunck.
light of them, and to neglect the timely use of means for the removing of
them, till they are grown so strong, that they prove mortal to us: so there is
most danger often in the least sins, we are apt to take no notice of them, and
to neglect those heavenly helps, whereby they should be weakened and destroyed,
till they are grown up to that strength that we are ready to cry out, the
Medicine is The Leopard being great, is poisoned with a head of Garlic.
too weak for the Disease; I would pray, and I would hear, but I am afraid that
sin is grown up by degrees to such a head, that I shall never be able to
prevail over it; but as I have begun to fall, The smallest errors prove many
times most dangerous. It is as much treason to coin pence, as bigger pieces.
so I shall utterly fall before it, and at last perish in it, unless the
power, and free grace of Christ does act gloriously, beyond my present
apprehension, and expectation. The Viper is killed by the little young ones
that are nourished, and cherished in her belly: so are many men eternally
killed and betrayed by the little One little miscarriage does in the eyes of
the world, overshaddow all a Christians Graces, as one little cloud does
sometimes overshadow the whole body of the Sun.
sins (as they call them) that are nourished in their own bosoms. I know not,
says one, whether the maintenance of the least sin, be not worse then the
commission of the greatest; for this may be of frailty, that argues obstinacy;
a little hole in the Ship sinks it; a small breach in a Sea-bank carries away
all before it; a little stab at the heart kills a man, and a little sin without
a great deal of mercy, will damn a man.

The fifth Remedy against this Device 5 Remedy. Melius mori fame quam Idolothys
is vesci, August. It is better to dye with hunger, then to eat that which is
offered to Idols.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that other Saints have chosen rather to
suffer the worst of torments, rather then they would commit the least sin, i.
e. such as the world accounts: so as you may see in Daniel, and his Companions,
that would rather choose to burn, and be cast to the Lions, then they would bow
to the Image that Nebuchadnezzer had set up: when this peccadillo (in the
worlds account) and a hot fiery furnace stood in competition, that they must
either fall into sin, or be cast into the Many Heathens would rather dye, then
cozen or cheat one another: so faithful were they one to another. Will not
these rise in judgment against many Professors in these days, who make
nothing of overreaching one another?
fiery furnace; such was their tenderness of the honor and glory of God, and
their hatred and indignation against sin, that they would rather burn, then
sin; they knew that it was far better to burn for their not sinning, then that
God and conscience should raise a hell, a fire in their bosoms, for sin. I
have read of that noble servant of God, Marcus Arethusius, Minister of a Church
in the time of Constantine, who in Constantines time, had been the cause of
overthrowing an Idols Temple; afterward, when Julian came to be Emperor, he
would force the people of that place to build it up again, they were ready to
do it, but he refused; whereupon, those that were his own people, to whom he
preached, took him, and stripped him of all his clothes, and abused his naked
body, and gave it up to the Children, to lance it with their pen-knives, and
then caused him to be put in a basket, and anointed his naked body with Honey,
and set him in the Sun, to be stung with Wasps; and all this cruelty they
showed, because he would not do any thing toward the building up of this
Idol-Temple; nay, they came to this, that if he would do but the least toward
it, if he would give but a halfepenny to it, they would save him; but he
refused all, though the giving of a halfpenny might have saved his life; and
in doing this, he did but live up to that principle that most Christians talk
of, and all profess, but few come up to it, viz. That we must choose rather to
suffer the worst of Torments that men and Devils can invent, and inflict, then
to commit the least sin, whereby God should be dishonored, our consciences
wounded, Religion reproached, and our own souls endangered.

The sixth Remedy against this Device 6 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that the soul is never able to stand
under the guilt and weight of the least sin, when God shall set it home upon
the soul; the least sin will press, and sink the stoutest sinner as low as
hell: when God shall open the eyes of a sinner, and make him see the horrid
filthiness, and abominable vildnesse that is in sin. What so little, base, and
vile creatures as lice or gnats, and yet by these little, poor creatures, God
so plagued stout-hearted Pharaoh, and all Egypt, that ^ainting under it, they
were forced to cry out, This is the finger of God: When little Exodus 8. 16, 17,
18, 19.
Creatures, yea the least Creatures, shall be armed with a power from God, they
shall press and (...) down the greatest, proudest, and stoutes^ Tyrants that
breath: so when God shall put a sword The Tyrant Maximinus, who had set forth
his Proclamation engraven in brass, for the utter abolishing of Christ, and
his Religion, was eaten of Lice.
into the hand of a little sin, and arm it against the soul, the soul will
faint and fall under it. Some, who have but projected adultery, without any
actual acting it; and others having found a trifle, and made no conscience to
restore it, knowing by the light of natural Conscience, that they did not do,
as they would be done by; and others, that have had some unworthy thought of
God, have been so frighted, amazed, Vna guttula malae conscien^iae totum mare
mundani gaudii absorbet. i. e. One drop of an evil conscience swallows up the
whole sea of worldly joy. How great a pain, not to be borne, comes from the
prick of this small thorn, said one.
and terrified for these sins which are small (in men's account) that they have
wished they had never been, that they could take no delight in any earthly
comfort; that they have been put to their wits end, ready to make away
themselves, wishing themselves annihilated.

Mr Perkins mentions a good man, but very poor, who being ready to starve,
stole a Lamb, and being about to eat it, with his poor children, and (as his
manner was before meat) to crave a blessing, durst not do it; but fell into a
great perplexity of Conscience, acknowledged his fault to the owner, promising
payment if ever he should be able.

The seventh Remedy against this Device, 7 Remedy.
is solemnly to consider, That there is more evil in the least sin, then in
the greatest affliction; and this appears as clear as the Sun, by the severe
dealing of God the Father, with his beloved Son, who let all the vials of his
fiercest wrath upon him, and that for the least sin as well as for the
greatest; The wages Death is the hire of the least sin; the best wages that the
least sin gives his soldiers, is death of all sorts; in a strict sense, there
is no sin little, because no little God to sin against.
of sin is death, of sin indefinitely, whether great or small; Oh! how should
this make us tremble, as much at the least spark of lust, as at hell it self?
Considering that God the Father would not spare his bosom Son, no, not for the
least sin; but would make him drink the dregs of his wrath. And so much for the
Remedies that may fence and preserve our souls from being drawn to sin, by this
third Device of Satan.

The fourth Device that Satan has 4 Device.
to draw the soul to sin, is, by presenting to the soul the best men's sins, and
by hiding from the soul their virtues; by showing the soul their sins, and by
hiding from the soul, their sorrow^, and ^ep^ntance; as by setting before the
soul the Adultery of David, the Pride of Hezekia^, the Impatience of Job, the
Drunkenness of Noah, the Blasphemy of Peter, etc. and by hiding from the soul
the tears, the sighs, the groans, the meltings, humblings, and repentings of
these precious souls.

Now the Remedies against this Device of the Devil are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this Device 1 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that the Spirit of the Lord has been as
careful to note the Saints rising by repentance out of sin, as he has to note
their falling into sin; David falls fearfully, but by repentance he rises
sweetly. Blot out my transgressions, wash me thoroughly from my iniquity, and
cleanse me from my sin; for I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever
before me. Purge me with Hysop, and I shall be clean, wash me, and I shall be
whiter then snow; deliver me from blood-guiltinesse, O God, thou God of my
salvation. It Is true, Hezekia^'s heart was lifted up, under the abundance of
mercy, that God had cast in upon him; and it is as true, that Hezekia^ 2 Chronicles.
32. 25, 26.
humbled himself, for the pride of his heart: so that the wrath of the Lord
came not upon him, nor upon Jerusalem, in the days of Hezekiah. It Is true, Job
curses the day of his Birth, and it is ^^ true, that he rises by repentance.
Behold, I am vile (says he) what shall I answer thee? Job. 40. 4, 5. chapter 42.
5, 6.
I will lay my hand upon my mouth, once have I spoken, but I will not answer,
yea, twice, but I will proceed no further. I have heard of thee by the hearing
of the ^are, but now mine eye sees thee: Wherefore I abhor my Tertullian says
that he was (Nalli rei natus nisi penitentiae) borne for no other purpose, but
to repent.
self, and repent in dust and ashes. Peter falls dreadfully, but rises by
repentance sweetly; a look of love from Christ, melts him into tears; he knew
that repentance was the key to the Kingdom of Grace. As once his Faith was so
great, that he leapt, as it were, into a sea of waters, to come to Christ: so
now his repentance was so great, that he leapt, as it were, into a sea of
tears, for Luther confesses, that before his conversion, he met not with a more
displeasing word in allhis study of Divinity, then Repent, but afterward he
took delight in the work ( poenitens de peccaio dolet and de dolor g^udet) to
sorrow for his sin, and then to rejoice in his sorrow.
that he had gone from Christ. Some say, that after his sad fall, he was ever
and anon weeping, and that his face was even furrowed with continual tears; he
had no sooner took in poison, but he vomited it up again, ere it got to the
vitals; he had no sooner handled this Serpent, but he turned it into a rod to
scourge his soul with remorse, for sining against such clear light, and strong
love, and sweet discoveries of the heart of Christ to him. Clement notes, that
Peter so repented, that all his life after, every night, when he heard the Cock
crow, he would fall upon his knees, and weeping bitterly, would beg pardon of
this sin; Ah souls! you can easily sin as the Saints, but can you repent with
the Saints? Many can sin with David and Peter, that cannot repent with David
and Peter, and so must perish for ever. Theodosius the Emperor pressing, that
he might receive the Lords Supper, excuses Theodorit. hist. l. 4. c. 17.
his own foul fact by David's doing the like, to which Ambrose replies, Thou
have followed David transgressing, follow David repenting, and then think thou
of the Table of the Lord.

The second Remedy against this Device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that these Saints did not make a trade of
sin, they fell once, or twice (and rose by Repentance) that they might The
Saints cannot sin ( voluntate plena sed semiplena) with a whole will, but as it
were with an half will, an unwilling willingness, not with a full consent, but
with a dissenting consent.
keep the closer to Christ for ever; they fell accidentally, occasionally, and
with much reluctance; and thou sinnest presumptuously, obstinately, readily,
delightfully, and customarily; thou have by thy making a trade of sin,
contracted upon thy soul a kind of cursed necessity of sinning, that thou can
as well cease to be, or cease to live, as thou can cease to sin; sin is by
custom become as another nature to thee, which thou can not, which thou will
not lay aside, though thou know, that if thou do not lay sin aside, God
will lay thy soul aside for ever; though thou know, that if sin and thy soul
do not part, Christ and thy soul can never meet; if thou will make a trade of
sin, and cry out, did not David sin thus, and Noah 2 Pet. 2. 14. Pro. 4, 14.
16. Though sin do ( habitare) dwell in the regenerate, as Austin notes, yet it
does not ( regnare) reign over the regenerate, they rise by repentance.
sin thus, and Peter sin thus, etc.? No, their hearts turned aside to folly one
day, but thy heart turns aside to folly every day, and when they were fallen,
they rise by repentance, and by the actings of Faith upon a crucified Christ,
but thou fallest, and have no strength, nor will to rise; but wallowest in sin,
and wilt eternally dye in thy sins, unless the Lord be the more merciful to
thy soul. Do thou think, oh soul, this is good reasoning? Such a one tasted
poison but once, and yet narrowly escapt, but I do daily drink poison, yet I
shall escape: yet such is the mad reasoning of vain souls; David and Peter,
etc. sinned once foully and fearfully, they tasted poison but once, and were
sick to death, but I taste it daily, and yet shall not taste of eternal death.
Remember, oh souls, that the day is at hand, when self-flatterers will be found
self-deceivers, yea, self-murtherers.

The third Remedy against this Device 3 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that though God does not (nor never will)
disinherit his people for their sins, yet he has severely punished his people
for their sins. David sins, and God breaks his bones for his sin. Make me to
Psalm 51. 8. Josephus reports, that not long after the Jews had crucified
Christ on the cross, so many of them were condemned to be crucified, that
there were not places enough for crosses, nor crosses enough for the bodies
that were to be hung thereon
hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken, may rejoice.
And because thou host do^e this, the Sword shall not depart from thy house, to
the day of thy death. Though God will not utterly take from them his loving
kindness, nor suffer his faithfulness to fail, nor break his Covenant, nor
alter the thing that is gone out of his mouth, yet will he visit their
transgressions with a rod, and their iniquity with stripes, Psalm. 89. 30. 35.
The Scripture abounds with instances of this kind; this is so known a truth,
among all that know any thing of truth, that to cite more Scriptures to prove
it, would be to light a Candle to see the Sun at noon. The Jews have a
Proverb, that There is no punishment comes upon Israel, in which there is not
one ounce of the Golden Calfe: Meaning, that that was so great a sin, as that
in every plague God remembered it, that had an influence into every trouble that
befell them. Every man's heart may say to him in his sufferings, as the heart of
Apollodorus (...).
in the kettle, I have been the cause of this. God is most angry, when he
shows no anger, God keep me from this mercy; this kind of mercy is worse then
Qui non est crucianus non est christianus, says Luther, there is not a
Christian that carries not his cross.
all other misery. One writing to a sick friend, has this expression, I
account it a part of unhappiness not to know adversity, I judge you to be
miserable, because you have not been miserable. It Is mercy that our affliction
is not an execution, but a correction; he that has deserved hanging, may be
glad if he escape with a whipping. Gods corrections are our instructions, his
lashes our lessons, his Psalm. 94. 12. Pro. 3. 12, 13. chapter 6. 23. 26. Isaiah 9.
scourges our Schoolmasters, his chastisements our advertisements; and to note
this, both the Hebrews, and the Greeks express chastening and teaching
(...)(...).
by one and the same word ( musar paideia) because the latter is the true Job
36. 8, 9, 10.
end of the former, according to that in the Proverb, Smart makes wit, and
vexation gives understanding; whence Luther fitly calls affliction, The
Christians man's Divinity: Theologiam christianorum.
so says Job (Chap. 33. 16. 19) God speaks once, yea twice, yet man
perceives it not, in a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep
falls upon men, in slumbrings upon the Bed: then he opens Afflictiones
benedictiones. Ber. Afflictions are blessings.
the ears of men, and seals their instruction, that he may withdraw man from
his purpose, and hide pride from man: he keeps back his soul from the pit,
and his life from perishing by the sword. When Satan shall tell thee of other
men's sins, to draw thee to sin, do thou then think of the same men's
sufferings, to keep thee from sin; lay thy hand upon thy heart, and say oh my
soul, if thou sinnest with David, thou must suffer with David, etc.

The fourth Remedy against this Device 4 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, That there are but two main ends of Gods
recording of the falls of his Saints; and the one is, to keep those from
fainting, I have known a good man, said Bernard, who when he heard of any, that
had committed some notorious sin, he was wont to ^ay with himself ( ille body
and ego cras) he fell to day, so may I to morrow.
sinking, and despair, under the burden of their sins, who fall through
weakness and infirmity; and the other is, that their falls may be as
Landmarks, to warn others that stand, to take heed lest they fall; it never
entered into the heart of God to record his Childrens sins, that others might be
encouraged to sin, but that others might be warned to look to their standings,
and to hang the faster upon the skirts of Christ, and avoid all occasions and
temptations, that may occasion the soul to fall, as others have fallen. When
they have been left by Christ, the Lord has made their sins as Landmarks, to
warn his people to take heed how they come near those sands, and rocks; those
snares and baits that have been fatal to the choycest treasures, to wit, the
joy, peace, comfort, and glorious enjoyments of the bravest spirits, and
noblest souls that ever sailed through the ocean of this sinful, troublesome
world; as you may see in David, Job, Peter, etc. There is nothing in the world,
that can so notoriously cross the grand end of Gods recording of the sins of
his Saints, then for any from thence, to take encouragement to sin, and where
ever you find such a soul, you may write him Christlesse, Graceless, a soul
cast off by God, a soul that Satan has by the hand; and the eternal God
knows whether he will lead him.

The fifth Device that Satan has, to 5 Device.
draw the soul to sin, is, to present God to the soul, as one made up all of
mercy; oh! says Satan, you need not make such a matter of sin, you need not be
so fearful of sin, nor so unwilling to sin; for God is a God of mercy, a God
full of mercy, a God that delights in mercy, a God that is ready to show mercy,
a God that is never weary of showing merey, a God more prone to pardon his
people, then to punish his people; and therefore he will not take advantage
against the soul, and why then, says Satan, should you make such a matter of
sin?

Now the Remedies against this Device of Satan are these.
THe first Remedy is, seriously to consider, 1 Remedy.
that it is the sorest judgment in this world, to be left to sin upon any
pretense whatsoever; oh! unhappy man, when God leaves thee to thy Humanum est
peccare, Diaboli cum perseverare, and Angelicu^ resurgere (Austin) i. e. It is
a humane thing to fall into sin, a dive^ish to persevere therein, and an
Angellcal or supernatural to rise from it.
self, and does not resist thee in thy sins; woe, woe to him, at whose sins God
does wink: when God lets the way to Hell be a smooth and pleasant way, that is
hell on this side hell, and a dreadful sign of Gods indignation against a
man; a token of his rejection, and that God does not intend good unto him; that
is a sad word, Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone, he will be
uncounsellable, and uncorrigible, he has made a match with mischief, he shall
have his belly-full of it, he falls with open eyes, let him fall at his own
perrill; and that is a terrible saying, So I gave them up unto their own hearts
Psalm. 81. 12. Hosea 4. 14.
lusts, and they walked in their own counsels. A soul given up to sin* is a
soul ^ipe for hell, a soul posting to destruction. Ah A me, me slava Domine.
Deliver me O Lord from that evil man, my self. Aug.
Lord! this mercy I humbly beg, that what ever thou give me up to, thou will
not give me up to the ways of mine own heart; if thou will give me up to be
afflicted, or tempted, or reproached, etc. I will patiently sit down, and say,
It Is the Lord, let him do with me what seems good in his own eyes; do any
thing with me, lay what burden thou will upon me, so thou do not give me up
to the ways of my own heart, etc.

The second Remedy against this Device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that God is as just, as he is merciful:
as the Scriptures speak him out to be a very merciful God, so they speak him 2
Pet 2. 4, 5, 6. God hanged them up in Gibbets, as it were, that others might
hear, and fear, and do no more so wickedly.
out to be a very just God; witness his casting the Angels out of Heaven, and
his binding them in chains of darkness, till the judgment of the great day;
and witness his turning Adam out of Paradise; his drowning of the old world;
and his raining Hell out of Heaven upon Sodom; and witness all the crosses,
losses, sicknesses, and diseases that be in the world; and witness Tophet that
is prepared of old, witness his treasuring up of wrath, against the day of
wrath, unto the revelation of the just judgments of God; but above all,
witness the pouring forth of all his wrath upon his bosom Son, when he did
bare the sins of his people, and cried out, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken-me? Mat. 27. 46.


The third Remedy against this Device 3 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that sins against mercy, will bring the
greatest, and the sorest judgments upon men's heads and hearts; Mercy is Alpha,
Justice is Omega; David speaking of these Attributes, places Mercy in the
foreward, and Justice in the rereward, saying, My Song shall be of Mercy and
Judgment; Psalm. 101. 1.
when Mercy is despised, then Justice takes the Throne. God is like a Quanto
gradus altior tanto casus gravior, the higher we are indignity, the more
grievous is our fall and misery.
Prince, that sends not his Army against Rebels, before he has sent his
Pardon, and proclaimed it by a Herald of Arms. He first hangs out the white
Flag of Mercy, if this wins men in, they are happy for ever; but if they stand
out, then God will put forth his red Flag of Justice and Judgment; if the one
be despised, the other shall be felt with a witness; see this in the
Israelites, Deus tardus est ad iram sed tarditatem gravitate ^^nae compensat.
God is slow to anger, but he recompenceth his slownesse with grievousnesse of
punishment.
he loved them, and chose them, when they were in their blood, and most
unlovely, he multiplied them, not by means, but by miracle; for from seventy
souls, they grew in few years, to six hundred thousand; the more they were
oppressed, the more they prospered: like Camomile, the more you tread it, the
more you spread it; or to a Palm tree, the more it is pressed, the further it
spreads; or to fire, the more it is raked the more it burns; their mercies
came in upon them, like Job's Messengers, one upon the neck of another. If we
abuse mercy to serve our lusts, then in Salvians phrase, God will rain hell out
of Heaven, rather then not visit for such sins.
He put off their sackcloath, and girded them with gladness, and compassed
them about with songs of deliverance; he carried them on the wings of Eagles,
he kept them as the Apple of his eye, etc. But they abusing his mercy, became
the greatest objects of his wrath; as, I know not the man that can reckon up
their mercies: so I know not the man that can sum up the miseries that are come
upon them for their sins; for as our Savior prophesied concerning Jerusalem,
That a stone Vespasian brake into their City at Cedron, where they took Christ,
on the same Feast day that Christ was taken. he whipped them where they whipped
Christ, he sold twenty Jews for a penny, as they sold Christ for 30 pence 8.
Andr. cat.
should not be left upon a stone: so it was fulfilled forty years after his
Ascension, by Vespasian the Emperor, and his Son, Titus, who having besi^ged
Jerusalem, the Jews were oppressed with a grievous famine, in which their food
was old shoes, old leather, old hay, and the dung of Beasts; thene died partly
of the Sword, and partly of the Famine, eleven hundred thousand of the poorer
sort; two thousand in one night were imbowelled, six thousand were burned in a
porch of the Temple, the whole, City was sacked and burnt, and laid level to
the ground, and ninety seven thousand taken Captives, and applied to base and
miserable service; as E^sebius and Josephus says: and to thi^ day, in all the
parts of the world, are they not the offscouring of the world? none less
beloved, and non^ more abhorred, then they: And so Caparnaum, that was lifted up
to Heaven, was threatened to be Men are therefore the wors, because they ought to
be better, and shall be deeper in Hell, because Heaven was offered unto them,
but they would not. Ingentia beneficia flagitia, supplicia, good turns
aggravate unkindnesses, and men's offenses are increased by their obligation.
(...). shift off, disregard.
thrown down to Hell. No souls fall so low into Hell (if they fall) as those
souls, that by a hand of mercy, are lifted up nearest to Heaven; you flight
souls that are so apt to abuse mercy, consider this, that in the Gospel days,
the plagues that God inflicts upon the despisers, and abusers of mercy, are
usually spiritual plagues; as blindness of mind, hardness of heart,
benumednesse of conscience, which are ten thousand times worse then the worst
of outward plagues that can b^fall you, and therefore though you may escape
temporal Judgments, yet you shall not escape spiritual Judgments: How shall
we escape if we neglect so great salvation? says the Apostle. Oh! therefore,
when ever Satan shall present God to the soul, as one made up all of mercy,
that he may draw thee to do wickedly, say unto him, that sins against mercy
will bring upon the soul the greatest misery, and therefore, whatever becomes
of thee, thou will not sin against mercy, etc.

The fourth Remedy against this Device 4 Remedy.
of Satan, is seriously to consider, that though Gods general mercy be over
all his works, yet his special mercy Augustus in his solemn Feasts gave
trifles to some, but gold to others that his heart was most set upon: so God by
a hand of general mercy, gives these (poor trifles) outward blessings ^o
those that he least loves, but his gold, his special mercy is only toward
those that his heart is most set upon.
is confined to those that are divinely qualified; so in Exodus 34. 6, 7. And
the Lord passed by before him, and proclaimed, the Lord, the Lord God,
merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth;
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin, and
that will by no means clear the guilty, Exodus 20. 6. And showing mercy unto
thousands of them that love me, and keep my Commandments, Psalm. 25. 10. All
the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth: unto such as keep his Covenant, and
his Testimonies, Psalm. 32. 10. Many sorrows shall be to the wicked, but he that
trusts in the Lord, mercy shall compass him about, Psalm. 33. 18. Behold, the
eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy.
Psalm. 103. 11. For as the Heaven is high above the earth: so great is his mercy
to as ard them that fear him. Ver. 17. But the mercy of the Lord is from
everlasting, to everlasting, upon them that fear him. When Satan attempts to
draw thee to sin, by presenting God as a God all made up of mercy; oh! then
reply, that tho Gods general mercy extends to all the works of his hand; yet
his special mercy is confined to them that are divinely qualified, to them
that love him, and keep his Commandments, to them that trust in him, that by
hope hang upon him, and that fear him, and that thou must be such a one here,
or else thou can never be happy hereafter; thou must partake of his special
mercy, or else eternally perish in everlasting misery, notwithstanding Gods
general mercy.

The fifth Remedy against this Device 5 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that those that were once glorious on
earth, and are now triumphing in Heaven, did look upon the mercy of God, as the
most powerful argument to preserve them from sin, and to fence their souls
against sin, and not as an encouragement Psalm 26. 3, 4, 5, 6.
to sin. Psalm. 26. 3, 4, 5, 6. For thy loving kindness is before mine eyes,
and I have walked in thy truth; I have not sat with vain persons, neither will
I go in with dissemblers: I have hated the Congregation of evil doers, and
will not sit with the wicked. So Joseph strengthens himself against sin, from
the remembrance of mercy. How then can I (says he) do this great Genesis 39. 9.
wickedness, and sin against God? He had fixed his eye upon mercy, and
therefore sin could not enter, though the irons entered into his soul, his soul
being taken with mercy, was not moved by his Mistrisses impudency; Satan
knocked often at the door, but the sight of mercy would not suffer him to answer,
or open: Joseph like a Pearl in a Puddle, keeps his virtue still. So Paul,
Shall we continue in sin that Grace may abound? God Romans 6. 1, 2. The stone
called P^ntaurus, is of that virtue, that it preserves him that carries it,
from taking any harm by poison; the mercy of God in Christ to our souls, is the
most precious stone, or Pearle^ in the world, to preserve us from being
poisoned with sin.
forbid; how shall we that are dead to sin live any longer therein? There is
nothing in the world, that renders a man more unlike to a Saint, and more like
to Satan, then to argue from mercy to sinful liberty; from Divine goodness to
licentiousness; this is the Devils Logic, and in whom ever you find it, you
may write, This soul is lost. A man may a^ truly say, the Sea burns, or fire
cools, as that free grace and mercy should make a soul truly gracious to do
wickedly. So the same Apostle, I beseech you therefore brethren, by the mercies
of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto
God, which is your reasonable service. So John, These things I write unto you,
that you sin not; What was it that he wrote? He wrote, that we might have
fellowship with the Father and his Son; 1 John 2. 1, 2.
and that the Blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin: and that, if we
confess our sins, he is just and faith full to forgive us our sins; and that,
if we do sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.
These choice favors, and mercies the Apostle holds forth, as the choycest
means to preserve the soul from sin, and to keep at the greatest distance from
sin, and if this will not do it, you may write the man void of Christ, and grace,
and undone for ever.

The sixth Device that Satan has to 6 Device.
draw the soul to sin, is, by persuading the soul that the work of Repentance
is ^n easy work, and that therefore the soul need not make such a matter of
sin; why suppose you do sin, says Satan, it is no such difficult thing to
return, and confess, and be sorrowful, and beg pardon, and cry, Lord have
mercy upon me; and if you do but this, God will cut the score, and pardon your
sins, and save your souls, etc. By this Device Satan draws many a soul to sin,
and makes many millions of souls servants, or rather slaves to sin, etc.

Now the Remedies against this device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy is, seriously to consider, 1 Remedy. Fallen man has lost (
imperium suum, and imperium sui) the command of himself, and the command of
the creatures; and certainly, he that cannot command himself, cannot repent of
himself. Da poenitentia^ and postea indulgentiam, said dying Fulgentius.
that Repentance is a mighty work, a difficult work, a work that is above our
power. There is no power below that power that raised Christ from the dead, and
that made the world, that can break the heart of a sinner, or turn the heart of
a sinner; thou art as well melt Adamant, as to melt thine own heart, to turn a
flint into flesh, as to turn thine own heart to the Lord; to raise the dead,
and to make a world, as to Repent. Repentance is a flower that grows not in
Natures garden. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots,
then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil, Jer. 13. 23.
Repentance is a gift that comes down from above, men are not born with
Repentance in their hearts, as they are borne with tongues in their mouths,
Acts. 5. It was a vain brag of King Cyrus, that caused it to be written upon
his Tombstone ((...)) I could do all things. So could Paul too, but it was
through Christ which strengthened him.
31. Him has God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior,
for to give Repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. So in that 2 Timothy
2. 25. In meekness instructing them that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth. It Is
not in the power of any mortal to repent at pleasure: Some ignorant, deluded
souls vainly conceit that these five words, Lord have mercy upon me, are
efficacious to send them to Heaven; but as many are undone by buying a
counterfeit Jewel: so many are in Hell, by mistake of their Repentance; many
rest in their Repentance, though it be but the shadow of Repentance, which
caused one to say, Repentance damneth more then sin.

The second Remedy against this Device 2 R^medy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider of the nature of true Repentance;
Repentance is some other thing then what vain men conceive. Repentance is
sometimes taken in a more strict and narrow The Hebrew word for Repentance, is
(...) from (...) which signifies to return, implying a going back from what a
man had don, it notes a returning or converting from one thing to another, from
sin to God. The Greeks have two words, by which they express the nature of
repentance, one is (...), which signifies to be careful, anxious, solicitous
after a thing is done; the other word is (...), is resipiscentia, after-wit, or
after-wisdom, the minds recovering of wisdom, or growing wiser after our
folly. Ab (...) dementia and (...) post, it being the correction of men's folly,
and returning ad sanam mentem. True repentance is a thorough change, both of
the mind and manners, optima and aptissima poenitentia est nova vita, says
Luther, which saying is an excellent saying. Repentance for sin is nothing
worth, without repentance from sin. If thou repent with a contradiction (says
Tertullian) God will pardon thee with a contradiction; thou repentest, and yet
continuest in thy sin, God will pardon thee, and yet send thee to Hell; there is
a pardon with a contradiction. Negative goodness serves no man's turn to save
him from the axe. It is said of Ithacus, that the hatred of the Priscillian
Heresy, was all the virtue that he had. The evil servant did not riot out his
Talent. Those Reprobates, Mat. 25. robbed not the Saints, but relieved them
not; for this they must eternally perish
sense, for godly sorrow; sometimes Repentance is taken in a large sense, for
Amendment of Life. Repentance has in it three things, viz. the Act, the
Subject, and the Terms.

1. The formal Act of Repentance is a changing, and converting; it is often set
forth in Scripture by Turning, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, says
Ephraim; after that I was turned, I repented, says he; it is a turning from
darkness to light.

2. The Subject changed, and converted, is the whole man; it is both the sinners
heart and life: first his heart, then his life; first his person, then his
practice and conversation. Wash ye, make you clean; there is the change of
their persons; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease
to do evil, learn to do well; there is the change of their practices: So Cast
away (says Ezekiel) all your transgressions, whereby you have transgressed;
there is the change of the life; and make you a new heart, and a new spirit,
there is the change of the

3. The Terms of this change, and conversion from which, and to which, both
heart and life must be changed from all sin, to God; the heart must be changed
from the state and power of sin, the life from the acts of sin, but both unto
God, the heart to be under his power in a state of grace, the life to be under
his rule, in all new obedience, as the Apostle speaks, To open their eyes, and
to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of satan unto God: so
the Prophet Isaiah says, Let the wicked forsake their ways, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord. Thus much of
the nature of Evangelicall Repentance. Now souls, tell me whither it be such
an easy thing to repent, as Satan does suggest; besides what has been spoken,
I desire that you will take notice, that Repentance does include a turning from
the most darling sin: Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with
Idols? Yea, it is a turning from all sin to God. Ezekiel. 18. 30. Therefore I will
judge you, O House of Israel, every one according to his ways, says the Lord
God: repent, and turn your selves from all your transgressions: so iniquity
shall not be your ruin. Herod turned from many, but turned not from his
Herodias, which was his ruin; Judas turned from all visible wickedness, yet he
would not cast out that golden Devil Covetousness, and therefore was cast into
the hottest place in Hell. He that turns not from every sin, turns not aright
from any one sin; every sin strikes at the Honor of God, the Being of God, the
Glory of God, the Heart of Christ, the Joy of the Spirit, and the Peace of a
man's Conscience; and therefore a soul truly penitent, strikes at all, hates
all, conflicts with all; and will labor to draw strength from a crucified
Christ to crucifi^ all; a true penitent knows neither father nor mother,
neither right eye, nor right hand, but will pluck out the one, and cut off the
other. Saul spared but one Ag^g, and that cost him his soul and his Kingdom:
besides, Repentance is not only a turning from all sin, but also a turning to
all good, to a love of all good, to a prizing of all good, and to a following
after all good. Ezekiel. 18. 21. But if the wicked will turn from all his sins
that he has committed, and keep all my Statutes, and do that which is lawful
and right, he shall surely live, be shall not die; that is, only negative
righteousness and holiness is no righteousness nor holiness; David
fulfilled all the wills of God, and had respect unto all his Commandments, and
so had Zacharias and Elizabeth. It Is not enough that the Tree bears not ill
fruit; but, it must bring forth good fruit, else, it must be cut down, and
east into the fire: So, it is not enough that you are not thus and thus wicked,
but you must be thus and thus gracious, and good, else Divine Justice will put
the Axe of Divine Vengeance to the root of your souls, and cut you off for
ever. Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast
into the fire; besides, Repentance does include a sensiblenesse of sins
sinfulness, how opposite and contrary it is to the blessed God: God is light,
sin is darkness, God is life, sin is death, God is Heaven, sin is hell, God is
beauty, sin is deformity. Also true Repentance includes a sensiblenes of sins
mischievousnesse, how it cast Angels out of Heaven, and Adam out of Paradise;
how it laid the first cornerstone in hell, and brought in all the curses,
crosses, and miseries, that be in the world, and how it makes men liable to all
temporal, spiritual, and eternal wrath; how it has made men Godless,
Christlesse, hopeless, and heavenlesse in this world: further, true repentance
does include sorrow for sin, contrition of heart; it breaks the heart with
sighs and sobs, and groans, for that a loving God, and Father is by sin
offended, a blessed Savior a fresh crucified, and the sweet Comforter, the
Spirit, True repentance is a sorrowing for sin as it is offensivum Dei,
aversivum a Deo, this both comes from God, and drives a man to God, as it did
the Church in the Canticles, and the Prodigal. Ezekiel. 20. 22, 23.
grieved and vexed. Again, Repentance does include, not only a loathing of
sin, but also a loathing of our selves for sin; as a man does not only loath
poison, but he loathes the very dish or vessel that has the smell of the
poison: so a true Penitent does not only loath his sin, but he loathes
himself, the vessel that still smells of sin. So Ezekiel. 20. 43. And there shall
ye remember your ways and all your doings, wherein ye have been defiled; and
ye shall loath your selves in your own sight, for all your evils that ye have
committed; true Repentance will work your hearts, not only to loath your sins,
but also to loath your selves. Again, true Repentance does not only work a
man to loath himself for his sins, but it makes him ashamed of his sin also.
What fruit have ye of those things, whereof ye are (now) ashamed? says the
Apostle: so Ezekiel, And thou shall be confounded, and never open thy mouth any
more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee, for all that thou
have done, says the Lord God. When a pen^tentiall soul sees his sins pardoned,
the anger of God pacified, and Divine Justice satisfied, then he sits down (and
blushes, as the Hebrew has it) as one ashamed; yea, true Repentance does
Quantum displicet Deo immunditia pecca^^, in tantum placet deo eruhiscentia
poenitentis. Ber. i. e. So much the more God has been displeased with the
blackness of sin, the more will he be pleased with the blushing of the sinner.
They that do not burn now in zeal against sin, must ere long burn in Hell for
sin.
work a man to cross his sinful self, and to walk contrary to sinful self,
to take a holy revenge upon sin, as you may see in Paul, the Jailer, Mary
Magdalen, and Manasses; this the Apostle shows in that 2 Cor. 7. 10, 11. For
godly sorrow works repentance never to be repented of, but the sorrow of the
world works death; for behold the selfsame thing that ye sorrowed after a
Godly sort, what carefullnesse it wrought in you; yea, what clearing of your
selves; yea, what indignation; yea, what fear; yea, what vehement desire; yea,
what zeal; yea, what revenge. Now souls, sum up all these things together, and
tell me, whether it be such an easy thing to repent, as Satan would make the
soul to believe; and I am confident your hearts will answer, that it is as hard
a thing to repent, as it is to make a world, or to raise the dead. I shall
conclude this second Remedy, with a worthy saying of a precious holy man,
Repentance (says he) strips us stark naked of all the garments of the old
Adam, and leaves not so much as the shirt behind; in this rotten building it
leaves not a stone upon a stone. As the Flood drowned Noa'hs own friends, and
servants: so must the flood of repenting tears drown our sweetest, and most
profitable sins.

The third Remedy against this Device 3 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that Repentance is a continued act; the
word Repent, implies the continuation of it. True Repentance inclines a man's
Anselme in his Meditations confesses, that all his life was either damnable
for sin committed, or unprofitable for good omitted and at last concludes (
Quid restat o peccat^r nisi ut in tota vita tua deplores totam vitam tuam) Oh
what then remains, but in our whole life, to lament the sins of our whole life.
heart to perform Gods Statutes always, even unto the end; a true Penitent must
go on, from Faith, to Faith, from strength to strength, he must never stand
still, nor turn back; Repentance is a grace, and must have its daily
operation, as well as other graces; true Repentance is a continued spring,
where the waters of godly sorrow are always flowing; My sins are ever before
me; a true penitent is often casting his eyes back to the days of his former
vanity, and this makes him morning and evening to water his couch with his
tears: Remember not against me the sins of my youth, says one blessed
Penitent; and I was a blasphemer, and a persecuter, and injurious, says
another Penitent: Repentance is a continued act of turning, a Repentance never
to be repented of, a turning never to turn again to folly; a true penitent
has ever something within him to turn from he can never get near enough to
God, no, not so near him as once he was; and therefore he is still turning and
turning, that he may get nearer and nearer to him; that is his chiefest good,
and his only happiness ( optimum It Is truly said of God, that he is omnia
super omnia.
maximum) the best, and the greatest; they are every day a crying out, O
wretched men that we are, who shall deliver us from this body of death? They
are still sensible of sin, and still conflicting with sin, and still sorrowing
for sin, and still loathing of themselves for sin; Repentance is no transient
act, but a continued act of the soul; and tell me, oh tempted soul! whether it
be such an easy thing, as Satan would make thee believe, to be every day a
turning, more and more from sin, and a turning nearer and nearer to God, thy
choicest blessedness. A true Penitent can as easily content himself with one
act of faith, or one act of love, as he can content himself with one act of
Repentance. A Jewish Rabbie pressing the practice of Repentance upon his
Disciples, exhorting them to be sure to Repent the day before they dyed; one of
them replied, that the day of any man's death was very uncertain; Repent
therefore, every day (said the Rabbin) and then you shall be sure to repent the
day before you dye; you are wise, and know how to apply it to your own
advantage.

The fourth Remedy against this Device 4 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that if the work of Repentance were such
an easy work, as Satan would If thou be backward in the thoughts of
Repentance, be forward in the thoughts of Hell; the flames whereof, only the
streams of the penitent eye can extinguish. Tertul.
make it to be; then certainly so many would not lie roaring, and crying out
(of wrath and eternal ruin) under the horrors and terrors of conscience,
for not repenting; yea, doubtless, so many millions would not go to hell for
not Repenting, if 'twere such an easy thing to repent: Ah! do not poor souls
under horrors of conscience, cry out, and say, were all this world a lump of
gold, and in our hand to dispose of, we would give it for the least dram of
true Repentance, and will thou say, it is an easy thing to repent? When a poor
sinner, whose Conscience is awakened, shall judge the exchange of all the
world, for the least dram of Repentance, to be the happiest exchange that ever
sinner made, tell me, oh soul! is it Oh how shall thou ^ear, and rend thy self?
how shall thou lament fruitless repenting? what will thou say? woe is me, that
I have not cast off the burden of sin; woe is me, that I have not washed away
my spots, but a^ now pierced with mine iniquities, now have I lost the
surpassing joy of Angels. Basil.
good going to hell? is it good dwelling with the devouring fire? with
everlasting burnings? Is it good to be for ever separated from the blessed and
glorious presence of God, Angels, and Saints? And to be for ever shut out from
those good things of eternal life? which are so many, that they exceed number,
so great, that they exceed measure* so precious, that they exceed all
estimation; we know, it is the greatest misery that can befall the sons of men;
and would they not prevent this by Repentance, if it were such an easy thing
to repent, as Satan would make it? well then, do not run the hazard of loosing
God, Christ, Heaven, and thy soul for ever, by hearkening to this Device of
Satan, viz. That it is an easy thing to Repent, etc. If it be so easy, why
then do wicked men's hearts so rise against them, that press the Doctrine of
repentance in the sweetest way, and by the strongest and the choicest Arguments
that the Scripture does afford? And why do they kill two at once? The
faithful Laborers name, and their own souls, by their wicked words and
actings, because they are put upon repenting, which Satan tells them is so
easy a thing: surely, were repentance so easy, wicked men would not be so
much enraged when that doctrine is by evangelicall considerations pressed upon
them.

The fifth Remedy against this Device 5 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that to repent of sin is as great a work
of grace, as not to sin. By our sinful falls the powers of the soul are
weakened, the Yet it is better to be kept from sin, then cu^ed of sin by
Repentance, as it is better for a man to be preserved from a disease then to be
cured of the disease.
strength of grace is decayed, our evidences for Heaven are blotted, fears and
doubts in the soul are raised (will God once more pardon this scarlet sin, and
show mercy to this wretched soul) and corruptions in the heart are more
advantaged, and confirmed, and the conscience of a man after falls, is the more
enraged, or the more benumbed; now for a soul, notwithstanding all this, to
repent of his falls, this shows, that it is as great a work of grace to repent
of sin, as it is not to sin. Repentance is the vomit of the soul, and of all
Physic, none so difficult, and hard, as it is to vomit; the same means that
tends to preserve the soul from sin, the same means works the soul to rise by
Repentance, when it is fallen into sin: We know, the mercy and loving kindness
of God, is one special means to keep the soul from sin, as David spoke, Thy
loving kindness is always before mine eyes, and I have Psalm. 26. 3, 4, 5.
walked in thy truth; I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in
with dissemblers. I have hated the Congregation of evil doers, and will not
sit with the wicked: So by the same means the soul is raised, by Repentance out
of sin, as you may ^ee in Mary Magdalen, who loved much, and Luke 7. 37, 38,
39, etc. Hos 6. 1, 2.
wept much, because much was forgiven her: so those in Hosea, Come, let us
return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal us; he has
smitten, and he will bind us up: after two days he will revive us, in the
third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight; or before his
face, as the Hebrew has it, i. e. in his (...)
favor, confidence in Gods mercy, and love, that he would heal them, and bind
up their wounds, and revive their dejected spirits, and cause them to live in
his favor, was that which did work their hearts to repent, and return unto
him; I might further show you this truth in many other perticulars; but this
may suffice: only remember this in the gnerall, that there is much of the
power of God, and love of God, and faith in God, and fear of God, and care to
please God, and zeal for the glory of God, requisite to work a man to repent 2
Cor. 7. 11.
of sin, as there is to keep a man from sin, by which you may easily judge,
that to repent of sin, is as great a work, as not to sin; and now tell me, oh
soul! is it an easy thing not to sin? we know then certainly, it is not an
easy thing to repent of sin.

The sixth Remedy against this Device 6 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that he that now tempts thee to sin, upon
this account, that repentance is easy, will ere long, to work thee to
despair, Beda tells of a certain great man, that was admonished in his sickness
to repent, who answered, that he would not repent yet, for if he should
recover, his companions would laugh at him, but growing sicker and sicker, his
friends pressed him again to repent; bu^then he told them it was toolate ( Quia
jam judicatus sum and condemnatus) for now (said he) I am judged, and condemned.
to say, we are thine, and we must follow thee; Now Satan will help to work the
soul to look up, and see God angry, and to look inward, and see Conscience
accusing and condemning; and to look downwards, and see Hells mouth open to
receive the impenitent soul, and all this to render the work of repentance
impossible to the soul; what, says Satan, do thou think that that is easy
which the whole power of grace cannot conquer, while we are in this world? Is
it easy, says Satan, to turn from some outward act of sin, to which thou have
been addicted? Do thou not remember that thou have often complained against
such and such particular sins, and resolved to leave them, and yet to this hour
thou have not, thou can not? What will it then be to turn from every sin?
Yea, to mortify, and cut off those sin^, those darling lusts, that are as
joints and members, that be as right hands, and right eyes? Have thou not loved
thy sins above thy Savior? Have thou not preferred earth before Heaven? Have
thou not all along neglected the means of Grace, and despised the offers of
Grace, and vexed the spirit of Grace? There would be no end if I should set
before thee the infinite evils that thou have committed, and the innumerable
good services that thou have omitted, As one Lamachus a Commander said, to one
of his soldiers, that was brought before him for a misbehaviour, who pleaded
he would do so no more, says he ( Non li cet in bello bis peccare) no man
must offend twice in war: so God will not suffer men often to neglect the day
of grace.
and the frequent checks of thy own Conscience, that thou have contemned, and
therefore thou may well conclude, that thou can never repent, that thou
shall never repent; now says Satan, do but a little consider thy numberless
sins, and the greatness of thy sins, the foulness of thy sins, the
heinousness of thy sins, the circumstances of thy sins, and thou shall easily
see, that those sins that thou thoughtest to be but motes, are indeed
mountains; and is it not now in vain to repent of them? Surely says Satan, if
thou should seek repentance and grace with tears, as Esau, thou shall not
find it; thy glass is out, thy sun is set, the door of mercy is shut, the
golden Scepter is taken in, and now thou that have despised mercy, shall be for
ever destroyed by Justice; for such a wretch as thou art to attempt repentance,
is to attempt a thing impossible; it is impossible that thou, that in all thy
life could never conquer one sin, should master such a numberles number
of sins, which are so near, so dear, so necessary, and so profitable to thee,
that have so long bedded and boarded with thee, that have been old acquaintance
and companions with thee; have thou not often purposed, promised, vowed, and
resolved to enter upon the Repentanceis a work that must be timely done, or men
are utterly undone for ever. Aut poenitendum aut pereundum.
practice of repentance, but to this day could never attain it: Surely it is
in vain to strive against the stream, where it is so impossible to overcome;
thou art lost, and cast for ever to hell, thou must to hell, thou shall; ah
souls! he that now tempts you to sin, by suggesting to you the easiness of
repentance, will at last, to work you to despair, present repentance as the
hardest work in all the world, and a work as far above man, as Heaven is above
Hell, as light is above darkness. Oh! that you were wise, to break off your
sins, by timely repentance.

Now the seventh Device that Satan 7 Device.
has to draw the soul to sin, is, by making the soul bold to venture upon the
occasions of sin. Says Satan, you may walk by the Harlots door, though you
will not go into the Harlots bed; you may sit and sip with the drunkard, tho you
will not be drunk with the drunkard; you may look upon Jezabels beauty, and you
may play and toy with Daliloh, though you do not commit wickedness with the
one, or the other; you may with Achan handle the golden wedge, though you do
not steal the golden wedge, etc.

Now the Remedies against this Device are these that follow.
THe first Remedy, is, solemnly to 1 Remedy.
dwell upon those Scriptures that do expressly command us to avoid the
occasions of sin, and the least appearance of evil. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22. Abstain
from all Epiphanius says, that in the old Law, when any dead body was carried
by any house, they were enjoined to shut their doors and windows.
appearance of evil; whatsoever is heterodox, unsound, and unsavory, shun it,
as you would do a Serpent in your way, or poison in your meats. Theodosius
tare the Arrians Arguments, presented to him in writing, because he found them
repugnant to the Scriptures; and Augustine retracted even Ironies only,
because they had the appearance of lying. When God had commanded the Jews to
abstain from Swines flesh, they would not so much as name it, but in their
common talk would call a Sow another thing. To abstain from all appearance of
evil, is to do nothing wherein sin appears, or which has a shadow of sin.
Bernard glosseth finely, Quicquid est male celoratu^.
Whatever is of an ill show, or of ill report, that he may neither wound
conscience, nor credit; we must shun, and be shie of the very show and shadow
of sin, if either we tender our credit abroad, or our comfort at home. It was
good counsel that Livia gave her Husband Socrates speaks of two young men
that flung away their belts, when being in an Idols Temple, the lustrating
water fell upon them, detesting says the Historian, the garment sported by the
flesh.
Augustus; it behooves thee, not only not to do wrong, but not to seeeme to
do so, etc. So Jude 23. v. And others save with fear pulling them out of the
fire, hating even the garment spotted by the flesh. It Is a phrase taken from
legal uncleanesse, which was contracted by touching the houses, the vessels,
the garments of unclean persons. Under the Law men might not touch a menstrous
cloth, nor God would not accept of a spotted peace offering. So we must not
only hate, and avoid gross sins, but every thing that may carry a savor, or
susprition of sin; we must abhor the very signs and tokens of sin; so in
Proverbs 5. ver. 8. Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door of
her house. He that would not be burnt must dread the fire; He that would not
hear the bell, must not meddle with the rope. To venture upon the occasion of
sin, and then to pray, lead us not into One said, as often as I have been among
vain men, I returned home less a man then I was before.
temptation, is all one, as to thrust thy finger into the fire, and then to
pray that it might not be burnt. So in the 4. Prove. 14. 15. you have another
command, Enter not in the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evell
men, avoid it, and pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away. This triple
gradation of Solomon shows with a great Emphasie, how necessary it is for
men, to flee from all appearance of sin: as the Seaman shuns sands, and
shelves, and as men shun those, that have the plague-sores running upon them:
as weeds do endanger the corn, as bad humor^ do endanger the blood, or as an
infected house does endanger the neighborhood: so does the company of the bad
endanger those that are good; entireness with wicked conforts, is one of the
strongest chains of hell, and binds us to a participation, both of sin and
punishment.

The second Remedy against this device 2 Remedy.
of Satan is, solemnly to consider, that ordinarily there is no conquest over
sin, without the soul turns from the occasion of sin; it is impossible for
that man to get the conquest of sin, that plays and sports with the occasions
of sin; God will not remove the tentation, except The Fable says, that the
Butterfly asked the Owl how he should deal with the fire, which had singed
her wings, who counseled her not to behold so much as its smoke.
we turn from the occasion. It is a just and righteous thing with God, that he
should fall into the pit, that will adventure to dance upon the brink of the
pit; and that he should be a slave to sin, that will not flee from the
occasions of sin. As long as there is fuel in our hearts for a temptation, we
cannot be secure; he that has gunpowder about him, had need keep far enough
off from sparkles; to rush upon the occasions of sin, is both to tempt our
selves, and to tempt Satan to tempt our souls; it is very rare that any soul
plays with occasions of sin, but that soul is ensnared by sin; it is seldom
that God keeps that soul from the acts of sin, that will not keep off from the
occasions of sin; he that adventures upon the occasions of sin, is as he that
would quench the fire with Oil, which is a fuel to maintain it; and increase
it. Ah souls! often remember, how frequently you have been overcome by sin,
when you have boldly gone upon the occasions of sin; look back souls, to the
days of your vanity, wherein you have been as easily conquered, as tempted,
vanquished, as assaulted, when you have played with the occasions of sin; and
therefore, as you would for the future be kept from the acting of sin, and be
made victorious over sin, oh flee from the occasions of sin.

The third Remedy against this Device 3 Remedy.
of Satan, is seriously to consider, that other precious Saints that were once
glorious on earth, and are now triumphing in heaven, have turned from the
occasions of sin, as Hell it self; as you may see in Joseph, Genesis 39. 10. And
it came to pass, as she spoke to Joseph day by day, that he hearkened not unto
her, to lie by her, or to be with her. Joseph was famous for all the four
Cardinal virtues; if ever any were in this one temptation, you may see his
Fortitude, Justice, Temperance, There are stories of Heathens, that would not
look upon excellent beauties, lest they should be ensnared.
and Prudence, in that he shuns the occasion (for he would not so much as be
with her) and that a man is indeed, that he is in a temptation, which is but a
tap to give vent to corruption. The Nazarite might not only not drink wine, but
not taste a grape, or the husk of a grape. The Leaper was to shave his hair,
and pair his nails. The Devil counts a fit occasion, half a conquest; for
he knows that corrupt nature has Democritus plucked out his own eyes, to
avoid the danger of uncleanness.
a seed-plot of all sin, which being drawn forth, and watered by some sinful
occasion, is soon set a work to the producing of death and destruction; God
will not remove the temptation, till we remove the occasion. A Bird whiles a
loft, is safe, but she comes not near the snare without danger; the shunning
the occasions of sin renders a man most like the best of men; a soul eminently
gracious, dares not come near the train, though he be far off the blow. So Job
31. 1. I made a Covenant with mine eyes, (...) I cut a Covenant; In making
Covenants, it was a custom among the Jews, to cut some beast or other in
pieces, and to walk between the pieces, to signify, that they desired God to
destroy them that should break the Covenant.
why then should I think upon a maid? I set a watch at the entrance of my
senses, that my foul might not by them be infected, and endangered; the eye is
the window of the soul, and if that should be always open, the soul might
smart for it. A man may not look intently upon that, that he may not love
entirely. The Disciples were set a gogg, by beholding the beauty of the Temple;
it is best and safest to have the eye always fixed upon the highest and noblest
objects; as the Mariners eye is fixed on the star, when their hand is on the
stern: so David, when he was himself, he shuns the occasion of sin, Psalm. 26.
4, 5. I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with
dissemblers; I have hated the Congregation of evil doers, and will not sit
with the wicked. Stories speak of some that could not sleep, when they thought
of the Trophies of other Worthies, that went before them; the highest and
choycest examples are to some, and should be to all very quickening and
provoking; and oh! that the examples of those worthy Saints, David, Joseph, and
Job, might prevail with all your souls to shun and avoid the occasions of sin;
every one should strive to be like to them in grace, that they desire to be
equal with in glory. He that shoots at the Sun, though he come far short,
will shoot higher, then he that aims at a shrub; it is best (and it speaks out
much of Christ within) to eye the highest, and the worthiest examples.

The fourth Remedy against this Device 4 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that the avoiding the occasions of sin, is
an evidence of grace, and that which lifts up a man above most other men in the
world; that a man is indeed, which he is in temptation; and when sinful
occasions do present themselves before the soul, this speaks out both the
truth, Plutarch says of Demosthenes, that he was excellent at praising the
worthy acts of his Ancestors, but not so at imitating them, oh that this were
not applicable to many professors in our times.
and the strength of grace; when with Lot, a man can be chaste in Sodom, and
with Timothy can live temperately in Asia, among the luxurious Ephesians; and
with Job can walk uprightly in the land of Vz, where the people were profane
in their lives, and superstitious in their worship; and with Daniel, be holy in
Babylon; and with Abraham righteous in Chaldea; and with Nehemiah, zealous in
Damasco, etc. Many a wicked man is big, and full of sinful corruption, but
shows it not for want of occasion; but that man is surely good, who in his
course will not be bad, though tempted by occasions; a Christlesse soul is so
far from refusing occasions when they come in his way, that he looks and longs
after them, and rather then he will go without them, he will buy them not only
with love or money, but also with the loss of his soul; nothing but grace can
fence a man against the occasions of sin, when he is strongly tempted
thereunto; therefore as you would cherrish a precious evidence in your own
bosoms, of the truth and strength of your graces, shun all sinful occasions.

The eight Device that Satan has to 8 Device.
draw the soul to sin, is, by presenting 'Twas a weighty saying of Seneca
(Nihil est infelicius eo, cui nil nunqua^ contigit advers^; there is nothing
more unhappy, then he who never felt adversity.
to the soul the outward mercies, that vain men enjoy, and the outward
miseries, that they are freed from, whilst they have walked in the ways of
sin. Says Satan, do thou not see oh soul! the many mercies, that such and
such enjoy, that walk in those very ways, that thy soul startles to think of,
and the many crosses that* they are delivered from, even such as makes other
men (that say they dare not walk in such ways) to spend their days in
sighing, weeping, groaning, and mourning, and therefore says Satan, if ever
thou would be freed from the dark night of adversity, and enjoy the
sunshine of prosperity, thou must walk in their ways: by this stratagem the
Devil took those in the 44 Jeremiah, 16, 17, 18. As for the word that thou have
spoken unto us, in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee; but we
will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth of our mouth, to burn Incense
unto the Queen of Heaven, and to pour Some of the Heathens would be wicked as
their Gods were, counting it a dishonor to their God, to be unlike to him.
Lactan tius.
out drink-offrings unto her, as we have done, we and our Fathers, our Kings,
and our Princes in the Cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem: for
then had we plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw no evil. But since we
left off to burn Incense to the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out
drink offerings unto her, we have wanted all things, and have been consumed by
the sword, and by the famine. This is just the language of a world of ignorant,
profane, and superstitious souls in London, and England, that would have made
them a Captain It Is said of one of the Emperors, that Rome had no war in his
daves, because 'twas plague eno^gh to have such an Emperor; you are wise, and
know how to apply it.
to return to bondage, yea to that bondage that was worse then that the
Israelites groaned under. Oh, say they, since such and such persons have been
put down, and left off, we have had nothing but plundering and taxing, and
butchering of men, etc. and therefore we will do, as we and our Kings and
Nobles, and Fathers have formerly done; for then had we plenty at home, and
peace abroad, etc. and there was none to make us afraid.

Now the Remedies against this Device of Satan, are these that follow.
THe first Remedy is, solemnly to consider, 1 Remedy.
that no man knows how the heart of God stands by his hand, his hand of mercy
may be toward a man, when his heart may be set against that man; as you may
see in Saul, and Tully judged the Jews Religion to be naught, because they were
so often overcome, and impoverished, and afflicted; and the Religion of Rome to
be right, because the Romans prospered, and became Lords of the world; and yet
though the Romans had his hand, the Jews had his heart; for they were dearly
beloved, though sorely afflicted.
others; and the hand of God may be set against a man, when the heart of God is
dearly set upon a man, as you may see in Job and Ephraim; the hand of God was
sorely set against them, and yet the heart and bowels of God were strongly
working toward them; no man knows either love or hatred, by outward mercy or
misery; for all things come alike to all, to the righteous, and to the
unrighteous; to the good, and to the bad, to the clean, and to the unclean,
etc. The sun of prosperity shines as well upon brambles of the Wilderness, as
fruit trees of the Orchard; the snow and hail of adversity lights upon the
best gardens, as well as the stinking dunghills, or the wild waste. Ahabs and
Josiah's ends concur in the very circumstances. Saul and Jonathan, though
different in their natures, deserts, and deportments, yet in their deaths they
were not divided. Health, wealth, honors, etc. crosses, sicknesses, losses,
etc. are cast upon good men, and bad men promiscuously. The whole Turkish
Empire is Nihil est nisi mica panis. Luther.
nothing else but a crust, cast by Heavens great Housekeeper to his dogs.
Moses dies in the Wilderness, as well as those that murmured; Nabal is rich,
as well as Abraham; Achitophell wise, as well as Solomon; and Doeg honored by
Soul, as well as Joseph was by Pharaoh. Usually the worst of men have most of
these outward things, and the best of men have least of Earth, though most of
Heaven.

The second Remedy against this Device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, That there is nothing in the world that
does so provoke God to be wrath, and angry, as men's taking encouragement from
Gods goodness, and mercy, to do wickedly; this you may see by that wrath that
fell upon the old world, and by Gods raining hell out of Heaven upon Such
souls make God a God of clouts, one that will not do as he says, but they
shall find God to be as severe in punishing, as he is to others gracious in
pardoning. Good turns aggravate unkindnesses, and our guilt is increased by
our obligations.
Sodom and Gomorah. This is clear in that 44 of Jeremiah, from the 20 verse,
to the 28 verse, the words are worthy of your best meditation; oh that they
were engraven in all your hearts, and constant in all your thoughts! though
they are too large for me to transcribe them, yet they are not too large for
you to remember them: To argue from mercy to sinful liberty, is the Devils
Logic, and such Logicians do ever walk, as upon a mine of Gunpowder, ready
to be blown up; no such souls can ever avert, or avoid the wrath of God. This
is wickedness at the height, for a man to be very bad, because God is very
good, a worse spirit then this is not in hell; ah Lord! does not wrath, yea the
greatest wrath, lie at this man's door? Are not the strongest chains of darkness
prepared for such a soul? To sin against mercy, is to sin against humanity, it
is bestiall, nay it is worse. To render good for evil, is Divine, to render
good for good, is humane, to render evil for evil, is brutish; but to render
evil for good, is devilish; and from this evil deliver my soul oh God.

The third Remedy against this Device 3 Remdy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that there is no greater misery in this
life, then not to be in misery; no greater Religio peperit divitias and filia
devoravit matrem. Religion brought forth Riches, and the daughter soon devoured
the Mother, says Augustine.
affliction, then not to be afflicted; woe, woe to that soul that God will not
spend a rod upon; this is the saddest stroke of all, when God refuses to strike
at all. Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone. Why should you be smitten
any more, you will revolt more and more. When the Physician gives over the
Patient, you say ring out his knell, the man is dead: so when God gives over a
soul to sin, without control, you may truly say, this soul is lost; you may
ring out his knel, for he is twice dead, and plucked up by the roots. Freedom
from punishment is the mother of security, the stepmother of virtue, the
poison of Religion, the moth of holiness, and the introducer of wickedness;
nothing said one, seems more unhappy to me, then he to whom no adversity has
happened. Outward mercies oft-times prove a snare to our souls. I will lay a
stumbling block, Ezekiel. 3. 20. Vatablus his note there is Faciam, ut omnia
habeant prospera; calamitatibus eum a peccato non revocabo.
I will prosper him in all things, and not by affliction, restrain him from
sin. Prosperity has been a stumbling block, at which millions have stumbled,
and fallen, and broke the neck of their souls for ever.

The fourth Remedy against this device 4 Remedy.
of Satan, is seriously to consider, that the wants of wicked men under all
their outward mercy, and freedom from adversity, is far greater then al their
outward enjoyments. They have many mercies, yet they want more then they enjoy;
the mercies which they enjoy are nothing to the mercies they want; It Is true,
they have honors, and riches, and pleasures and friends, and are mighty in
power, their seed is established in their sight with them, and their offspring
before their eyes; their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God
upon them; They send forth their little ones like a flock, and their children
dance. They take the Timbrell and Harp, and rejoice at the Men that enjoy all
worldly comforts, may truly say, Omnes humanae conjolationes sunt desolationes.
sound of the Organ; they spend their days in wealth, their eyes stand out
with fatness, they have more then heart can wish: And they have no bands in
their death, but their strength is firm; They are not in trouble as other men;
as David and Job speak; yet all this is nothing to what they want; they want
interest in God, Christ, the Spirit, the Promises, the Covenant of Grace, and
everlasting Glory. They want acceptance and reconciliation with God; They want
Righteousness, Justification, Sanctification, Adoption, and Redemption. They
want the pardon of sin, and power against sin, and freedom from the dominion
of sin: They want that favor that is better then life, and that joy that is
unspeakable and full of glory; and that peace that passes understanding; and
that Nec Christus nec coelum pati* tur hyperbolen, Neither Christ, nor Heaven,
can be hyperbolized.
grace, the least spark of which, is more worth then Heaven and Earth. They
want a House that has foundations, whose builder and maker is God; they want
those riches that perish not; that glory that fades not, that Kingdom that
shakes not. Wicked men are the most needy men in the world, yea, they want
those two things that should render their mercies sweet, viz. The blessing of
God, and content with their condition; and without which, their Heaven is but
Hell, on this side Hell: When their hearts are lifted up, and grown big upon
the thoughts of their abundance; if conscience does but put A crown of gold
cannot cu^e the head ach, nor a velvet slipper cannot ease the Gout, no mo^e
can honor or riches, etc. quiet and still the Conscience. The heart of man is
a three square triangle, which the whole round circle of the world cannot fill
(as Mathematicians say) but all the corners will complain of ^mptines and
hunger for som^hing else.
in a word, and say, it is true, here is this and that outward mercy, oh! but
where is an interest in Christ? Where is the favor of God? Where are the
comforts of the holy Ghost? Where are thy evidences for Heaven, etc.? This word
from Conscience makes the man's countenance to change, his thoughts to be
troubled, his heart to be amazed, and all his mercies on the right hand, and
left, to be as dead and withered. Ah! were but the eyes of wicked men open to
see their wants, under their abundance, they would cry out, and say as Absalom
did, What are all these to me, so long as I cannot see the Kings face? What Is
honor, and riches, and the favor of Creatures, so long as I want the favor
of God, the pardon of my sins, an interestin Christ, and the hopes of glory. O
Iod, give me these, or I dye, give me these, or else I shall eternally dye.

The fifth Remedy against this Device 5 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to confider, that outward things are not as they seem,
and are esteemed; they have indeed a glorious outside, but if you view their
insides, you will easily find that they fill the head full of cares, and the
heart full of fears; what if the fire should consume one part of my estate,
and the sea should be a grave to swallow up another part of my estate; what if
my servants should be unfaithful abroad, and my children should be deceitful
at home? ah the secret fretting, vexing, and gnawing, that does daily, yea
hourly, attend those men's souls, whose hands are full of worldly goods. 'Twas a
good speech of an Emperor, you (said he) gaze on my purple Robe, and golden
Crown, but did you know what cares are under it, you would not take it up from
the ground to have it. 'Twas a true saying of Augustine on the 26 Psalm, many
are Multi amando res noxias sunt miseri, habendo miseriores. August.
miserable by loving hurtful things, but they are more miserable by having
them. It is not what men enjoy, but the principle from whence it comes, that
makes men happy; much of these outward things do usually cause great
distraction, great vexation, and great condemnation at last, to the posessors
of them; if God gives them in his wrath, and do not sanctify them in his love,
they will at last be witnesses against a man, and racks to torture and torment
a man, and milstones for ever to sink a man, in that day, when God shall call
men to an account, not for the use, but for the abuse of mercy.

The sixth Remedy against this Device 6 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider the end and the design of God, in heaping
up mercy upon the heads of the wicked, and in giving them (a quietus est) rest
Valerian the Roman Emperor, fell from being an Emperor, to be a footstool to
Sapor, King of Persia. Dionysius King of Sicily, fell from his Kingly glory, to
be a Schoolmaster. The brave Queen Zenobia was brought to Rome in golden
chains.
and quiet from those sorrows and sufferings that others sigh under. David in
that 73 Psalm. 17, 18, 19, 20 verses, shows the end and design of God in this,
says he, When I went into the Sanctuary of God, then I understood their end:
Surely thou did set them in slippery places: thou castedst them down into
destruction. How are they brought into desolation as in a moment, they are
utterly consumed with terrors. As a dream when one awaketh, so, O Lord, when
thou awakest: thou shall despise their image. So in the 92 Psalm. 7. When the
wicked spring as grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish, it
is that they shall be destroyed for ever. Gods setting them up, is but in order
to his casting them down; his raising them high, is but in order to his
bringing them low. Exodus 9. 16. And in very deed, for this cause have I raised
thee up, for to show in thee my power, and that my name may Valens an Emperor,
Belisarius a famous general, Henry the 4th, Bajazeth, Pythias, Great Pompey,
and William the Conqueror; these from being very high, were brought very low;
they all fell from great glory and majesty, to great poverty and misery Da
Domine ut sic possideamus temporalia ut non perdamus aeterna. Bern. Grant us
Lord that we may so partake of temporal felicity, that we may not lose
eternal.
be declared throughout all the earth. I have constituted and set thee up as a
But-mark, that I may let fly at thee, and follow thee close with plague upon
plague, till I have beaten the very breath out of thy body, and got my self a
name, in setting my feet upon the neck of all thy pride, power, pomp, and
glory. Ah souls! what man in his wits would be lifted up, that he might be
cast down, would be set higher then others, when it is but in order to his being
brought down lower then others. There is not a wicked man in the world, that
is set up with Lucifer, as high as Heaven, but shall with Lucifer be brought
down as low as Hell. Can thou think seriously of this oh soul? and not say, O
Lord, I humbly crave that thou will let me be little in this world, that I may
be great in another world; and low here, that I may be high for ever hereafter:
Let me be low, and feed low, and live low, so I may live with thee for ever;
let me now be clothed with rags, so thou will cloth me at last with thy
Robes; let me now be set upon a dunghill, so I may at last be advanced to sit
with the^ upon thy Throne; Lord, make me rather gracious, then great; inwardly
holy, then outwardly happy; and rather turn me into my first nothing, yea, make
me worse then nothing, rather then set me up for a time, that thou may bring
me low for ever.

The seventh Remedy against this Device 7 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that God does often most plague and punish
those, whom others think he does most spare and love; that is, God does plague
and punish them most with spiritual judgments (which are the greatest, the
sorest, and the heaviest) whom he least punishes with temporal punishments;
there are no men on earth Psalm. 81. 12. Psalm. 78. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. Psalm.
106. 15. He gave them their request, but sent leanness into their soul. It Is
a heavy plague to have a fat body, and a lean soul; a house full of gold, and a
heart full of sin.
so internally plagued, as those that meet with least external plagues. Oh!
the blindness of mind, the hardness of heart, the searednesse of Conscience,
that those souls are given up to, who in the eye of the world, are reputed the
most happy men, because they are not outwardly afflicted and plagued as other
men. Ah souls! 'twere better that all the temporal plagues that ever befell
the children of men since the fall of Adam, should at once meet upon your
souls, then that you should be given up to the least spiritual plague, to the
least measure of spiritual blindness, or spiritual hardness of heart, etc.
nothing will better that man, nor move that man, that is given up to spiritual
judgments; let God smile or frown, stroke, or strike, cut or kill, he minds
it It Is better to have a sore, then a seared conscience. It Is better to have no
heart then a hard heart; no mind, then a blind mind.
not, he regards it not; let life, or death, heaven, or hell, be set before
him, it stirs him not, he is made up on his sin, and God is fully set to do
Justice upon his soul; this man's preservation, is but a reservation unto a
greater condemnation. This man can set no bounds to himself, he is become a
brat of fathomlesse perdition. He has guilt in his bosom, and vengeance at
his back, wherever he goes; neither ministry, nor misery, neither miracle, nor
mercy, can mollify his heart; and if this soul be not in hell on this side
hell, who is? who is? 8 Remedy.


The eigth Remedy against this Device of Satan, is, to dwell more upon that
strict account that vain men must make for all that good that they do enjoy,
In this day men shall give an account ( De bonis commissis, de bonis dimissis,
de malis commissis, de malis permissis) of good things committed unto them, of
good things neglected by them, of evils committed by them, and of evils
suffered by them.
then upon the outward good they do enjoy. Ah! did men dwell more upon that
account, that they must ere long give for all the mercies that they have
enjoyed, and for all the favors that they have abused, and for all the sins
they have committed, would make their hearts to tremble, and their lips to
quiver, rottenness to enter into their bones; it would cause their souls to
cry out, and say, oh! that our mercies had been fewer, and lesser, that our
account might have been easier, and our torment and misery (for our abuse of so
great mercy) not greater then we are able to bear. O cursed be the day wherein
the Crown of honor was set upon our heads, and the treasures of this world
were cast into our laps; O cursed be the day wherein the sun of prosperity
shined so strong upon us, and this flattering world smiled so much upon us, as
to occasion us to forget God, to slight Jesus Christ, to neglect our souls, and
to put far from us the day of our account. Philip the third of Spain, whose
life was free from gross evils, professed, that he would rather loose all his
Kingdom, then offend God willingly; yet being in the Agony of death, and
considering more thoroughly of his In die judicii plus valebit conscientia pura,
quam marsupia plena. Bernard. Then shall a good conscience be more worth then
all the worlds good.
account he was to give to God, fear struck into him, and these words brake
from him; Oh! would to God I had never reigned; oh that those years I have
spent in my Kingdom, I had lived a life in the wilderness! oh that I had
lived a solitary life with God! how much more securely should I now have dyed?
how much more confidently should I have gone to the Throne of God? What does
all my glory profit me, but that I have so much the more torment in my death.
God keeps an exact account of every penny that is laid out upon him, and his,
and that is laid out against him, and his; and this in the day of account, men
shall know and feel, though now they wink, and Hierome still thought that that
voice was in his ears ( Surgite mortui and venite ad judicium) Arise you dead,
and come to judgment. As often as I think on that day, how does my whole body
quake, and my heart within me tremble?
will not understand. The sleeping of vengeance, causes the overflowing of
sin, and the overflow of sin causes the awaking of vengeance; abused mercy
will certainly turn into fury; Gods forbearance is no quittance; the day is at
hand, when he will pay wicked men for the abuse of new and old mercies; if he
seem to be slow, yet he is sure: he has leaden heels, but iron hands; the
farther he fetches his blow, or draws his arrow, the deeper he will wound in
the day of vengeance. Men's actions are all in print in heaven, and God will, in
the day of account, read them aloud, in the ears of all the world, that they
may all say amen to that righteous sentence that he shall pass upon all the
despisers and abusers of mercy.

The ninth Device that Satan has to 9 Device.
draw the soul to sin, is, by presenting to the soul, the crosses, losses,
reproaches, sorrows, and sufferings, that do daily attend those that walk in
the ways of holiness. Says Satan, do not you see that there are none in the
world that are so vexed, afflicted, and tossed, as those that walk more
circumspectly, and holily then their neighbors; they are a byword at home,
and a reproach abroad; their miseries come in upon them, like Job's messengers,
one upon the neck of another; and there is no end of their sorrows and
troubles; therefore says Satan, you were better walk in ways that are less
troublesome, and less afflicted, though they be more sinful; for who but a
mad man would spend his days in sorrow, vexation, and affliction, when it may
be prevented, by walking in the ways that I set before him.

Now the Remedies against this device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this Device 1 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that all the afflictions that do attend
the people of God, are such, as shall turn to the profit, and glorious
advantage of the people of God; they shall discover that filthiness and
vileness in sin, that yet the soul has never seen. It was a speech of a
Germane Divine, in his sickness; In this Disease Guspar Olevianus.
I have learned how great God is, and what the evil of sin is; I never knew to
purpose what God was before, nor what sin meant till now. Afflictions are a
crystal glass, wherein the soul has the clearest sight of the ugly face of
sin; in this glass the soul comes to see sin to be but a bitter-sweet; yea, in
this glass the soul comes to see sin, not only to be an evil, but to be the
greatest evil in the world, to be an evil far worse then hell

Again, they shall contribute to the Isa. 1. 25. c. 27. 8, 9.
mortifying and purging away of their sins; afflictions are Gods furnace, by
which he cleanses his people from their dross; affliction is a fire, to purge
out In times of peace our Armer is rusty, in time of war it is bright.
our dross, and to make virtue shine; it is a potion to carry away ill
humors; better then all the Benedicta Medicamentum, as Physicians call them.
Aloes kills worms, colds and frosts do destroy Vermin: so do afflictions the
corruptions that be in our hearts. The Jews under all the Prophets thundering,
retained their Idols; but after their babylonish captivity, it is observed,
there have been no Idols found amongst them.

Again, afflictions are sweet preservatives to keep the Saints from sin, which
is a greater evil then hell it self: as Job spoke, Surely it is meet to be
said unto God, Job 34. 31, 32
I have borne chastisement, I will not offend any more. That which I see not,
teach thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will do no more. Once have I spoken
foolishly, yea, Salt brine preserves from put^efaction, and salt marshes keep
the sheep from the rot: so do afflictions, the Saints from sin.
twice, but I will do so no more, says Job. The burnt child dreads the fire;
ah! says the soul, under the rod, sin is but a bitter-sweet, and for the
future I intend by the strength of Christ, that I will not buy Repentance at so
dear a rate. The Rabbis to scare their scholars from sin, were wont to tell
them, that sin made Gods head ache; and Saints under the rod have found by
woeful experience, that sin makes, not only their heads, but their hearts ache
also. Augustine by wandering out of his way, escaped one that lay in weight to
mischief him; if afflictions did not put us out of our way, we should many
times meet with some sin or other, that would mischief our precious souls.

Again, they will work the Saints to be more fruitful in holiness, Heb. 12.
10, 11. But he afflicts us for our profit, that The b^ll in the emblem^ says,
Percussa Su^go, the harder you beat me down in affliction, the higher I shall
bound in affection toward heaven and heavenly things.
we might be partakers of his holiness. The flowers smell sweetest after a
shower; Vines bear the better for bleeding, the Walnut-tree is most fruitful,
when most beaten; Saints spring and thrive most internally, when they are most
externally afflicted; afflictions are called by some, the mother of virtue.
Manasses his chain was more profitable to him, then his Crown. Luther could not
understand some Scriptures, till he was in affliction; the Chris-crosse is no
letter, and yet that taught him more then all the letters in the row; Gods
house of Schola crucis Schola lucis.
correction, is his school of instruction; all the stones that came about
Stevens ^ars, did but knock him closer to Christ the cornerstone. The waves
did but lift Noah's Ark nearer to Heaven, and the higher the waters grew, the
more near the Ark was lifted up to Heaven; afflictions do lift up the soul to
more rich, clear, and full enjoyments of God, Hosea 2. 14. Behold, I will
allure her into the wilderness, and speak comfortably to her (or rather, as
the Hebraw has it) I (...) Vedib bartignal-libbab.
will ^arnestly, or vehemently speak to her heart. God makes afflictions to be
but inlets to the soul, more sweet and full enjoyment of his blessed self. When
was it that Steven saw the Heavens open, and Christ standing at the right hand
of God? but when the stones were about It is reported of Tiberius (the
Emperor) that passing by a place where he saw a Cross lying in the ground
upon a marble stone, and causing the stone to be ^ di^ged up, ^ound a great
deal of treasure under the Cross. So many a precious Saint, has sound much
spiritual and heavenly treasure under the crosses ^hey have met withal.
his ears, and there was but a short step betwixt him and eternity; and when
did God appear in his glory to Jacob? but in the day of his troubles, when the
stones were his pillows, and the ground his bed, and the hedges his curtains,
and the Heavens his Canopie; Then he saw the Angels of God ascending and
descending in their glistering robes. The plant in Nazianzen grows with
cutting, being cut, it flourishes; it contends with the axe, it lives by
dying, and by cutting it grows: so do Saints by their afflictions that do
befall them. They gain more experience of the power of God supporting them, of
the wisdom of God directing them, of the grace of God refreshing, and cheering
them, and of the goodness of God quieting and quickening of them, to a greater
love to holiness, and to a greater delight in holiness, and to a more
vehement pursuing after holiness. I have read of a Fountain, that at noon day
is cold, and at midnight it grows warm: so many a precious Saint is cold
God-wards, and Heaven-wards, and Holinesse-wards, in the day of prosperity,
that grow warm God-wards, and Heaven-wards, and Holinesse-wards, in the
midnight of adversity.

Again, afflictions serve to keep the hearts of the Saints humble and tender,
Lam. 3. 19, 20. Remembering my affliction, and my misery, the wormwood, and the
gall; My soul has them still in remembrance, (...) from (...)
and is humbled in me, or bowed down in me, as the Original has it. So
David, when he was under the rod, could say, I was dumb, I opened not my mouth,
because thou did it; I have read of one, who when any thing fell out
prosperously, would read over the Lamentations of Jeremiah, Gregory Nazianzen.
and that kept his heart tender, humble and low; prosperity does not contribute
more to the puffing up of the soul, then adversity does to the bowing down of
the soul; this the Saints by experience find, and therefore they can kiss,
and embrace the Cross, as others do the worlds Crown.

Again, they serve to bring the Saints nearer to God, and to make them more
importunate and earnest in prayer with God; Before I was afflicted, I went
astray, Psalm 119. 67. 71. Hos. 5. 14, 15. Chapter 6. 1. 2.
but now have I kept thy word. It is good for me that I have been afflicted,
that I might learn thy statutes. I will be to Ephraim as a Lion, and as a
young Lion to the house of The more precious odours, and the purest spices are
beaten and bruised, the sweeter sent and savor they send abroad: so do Saints
when they a^^ afflicted.
Judah. I, even I will tear, and go away, I will take away, and none shall
rescue him; I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their
offense, and seek my face; in their affliction they will seek me early: and so
they did, Come (say they) and let us return unto the Lord; for he has torn,
and he will heal us, he has smitten, and he will bind us up. After two days
he will revive us, in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in
his sight. So when God had hedged up their way with thorns, then they say, I
will go and return Hes. 2. 6, 7.
to my first husband, for then was it with me better then now. Ah the joy, the
peace, the comfort, the delight, and content that did attend us, when we kept
close communion with God, does bespeak our return to God. We will return to
our first Husband, for then was it with us better then now.

When Tiribazus a noble Persian, was arrested, he drew out his sword, and
defended himself, but when they told Most men are like atop, that will not go
unless you whip it, and the more you whip it, the better it goes you know how
to apply it They tha^ are in advers^^y, says* Luther, do better understand
Scripture; but those that are in prosperity read them as a verse in Ovid. Bees
are killed with hon^y* but quickened with vinegar: The honey of prosperity kills
our graces, but the vinegar of adversity quickens our graces.
him that they came to carry him to the King, he willingly yielded; so, though
a Saint may at first stand a little out, yet when he remembers, that
afflictions are to carry him nearer God, he yields, and kisses the rod.
Afflictions are like the prick at the Nightingales breast, that awakes her, and
puts her upon her sweet and delightful singings.

Again, afflictions they serve to revive and recover decayed graces, they
infame that love that is cold, and they quicken that faith that is decaying, and
they put life into those hopes that are withering, and spirits into those joys
and comforts that are languishing. Musk (says one) when it has lost its
sweetness, if it be put into the sink amongst filth, it recovers it: so do
afflictions recover and revive decayed graces. The more Saints be beaten with
the hammer of afflictions, the more they are made the Trumpets of Gods praises,
and the more are their graces revived and quickened. Adversity abases the
loveliness of the world, that might entice us; it abates the Iustinesse of the
flesh within, that might incite us to folly and vanity, and it abets the spirit
in his quarrel, to the two former, which tends much to the reviving and
recovering decayed graces. Now suppose afflictions, and troubles do attend the
ways of holiness, yet seeing that they all work for the great profit, and
singular advantage of the Saints, let no soul be so mad, as to leave an
afflicted way of holiness, to walk in a smooth path of wickedness.

The second Remedy against this Device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that all the afflictions that do befall
The Christian soldier shall ever be master of the day ( Mori posse vinci non
posse, said Cyprian to Cornelius) he may suffer death, but never conquest.
the Saints, do only reach their worser part; they reach not, they hurt not
their noble part, their best part, all the arrows stick in the Target, they
reach not the Conscience. And who shall harm you, if you be followers of that
which is good, (says the Apostle) that is, none shall harm you; they may thus
and thus afflict you, but they shall never harm you.

It was the speech of a Heathen, when as by the Tyrant he was commanded to be
put into a mortar, and be beaten to pieces with an iron pestell, he cries out
to his persecutors, you do but beat the vessel, the case, the ^usk of
Anaxarchus, you do not beat me; his body was to him but as a case, a husk; he
counted his soul himself, which they could not reach; you are wise, and know
how to apply it. Socrates said of his enemies, they may kill me, but they
cannot hurt me: so afflictions may kill us, but they cannot hurt us; they may
take away my life, but they cannot take away my God, my Christ, my Crown.

The ^^ird Remedy against this Devi^^ 3 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that the afflictions that do attend the
Saints in the ways of holiness, are but short, and momentary; Sorrow may
abide for a night, but joy comes in the morning; There are none of Gods
afflicted ones that have not their ( lucida intervalla) intermissions, respits,
and breathing whiles, under their short and momen^^^^ afflictions. When Gods
hand is on thy back, let thy hand be on thy mouth; for though the affliction be
sharp, it shall be but short.
this short storm will end in an everlasting calm; this short night will end in
a glorious day, that shall never have end. It Is but a very short time between
grace and glory, between our title to the Crown, and our wearing the Crown,
between our right to the heavenly inheritance, and our possessing of the
heavenly inheritance. Fourteen thousand years to the Lord, is but as one day,
what is our life, but a shadow, a bubble, a flower, a post, a span, a dream,
etc. yea, so small a while does the hand of the Lord rest upon us, that Luther
cannot get diminutives enough to extenuate it; for he calls it a very little
little cross that we bear. The Prophet in Isaiah 26. 20. (to pikron mikron)
says the indignation does not ( transire) pass, but ( pertransire) overpasse.
The sharpness, shortness, and suddenness of it is set forth by the travel
of a woman, John 16. 21. And that is a John 16. 21. Heb. 10. 36, 37.
sweet Scripture, For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the
will of God, ye might receive the promise: For yet a little while, and he that
shall come, will come, and will not tarry. (Tantillum, tantillum (...).
adhuc pusillum) A little, little, little while. When Athanasius friends came
to bewail him because of his misery and banishment, he said, It is but a
little cloud, and will quickly be gone. 'Twill be but as a day before God will
give his Nebecula est cito transibit. Athanasius.
afflicted ones beauty for ashes, the oil of gladness, for the spirit of
heaviness; before he will turn all your sighing into singing, all your
lamentations, to consolations, your sackcloath into silks, ashes into
ointments, and your fasts into 4 Remedy.
^verlasting feasts, etc.

The fourth Remedy against this Device of Satan, is, seriously to confider,
that the afflictions that do befall the Saints, are such as proceed from Gods
dearest love. As many as I love I rebuke Austine asks ( Si amatur quomedo
infirmatur) if he were beloved, how came he to be sick? So are wicked men apt
to say, because they know not that corrections are pledges of our adoption, and
badges of our Son ship. God had one Son without sin, but none without sorrow.
and chasten; be zealous therefore, and repent. Saints says God, think not
that I hate you, because I thus chide you; he that escapes reprehension, may
suspect his adoption; God had one Son without corruption, but no Son without
correction. A gracious soul may look through the darkest cloud, and see a God
smiling on him. We must look through the anger of his correction, to the
sweetness of his countenance, and as by a Rainbow, we see the beautiful
image of the Suns light, in the midst of a dark, and waterish cloud. When
Munster lay sick, and his friends asked him how he did, and how he felt
himself, he pointed to his sores and ulcers (whereof he was full) and said,
these are Gods Gems, and Jewels, wherewith he decketh his best friends, and to
me they are more precious then all the gold and silver in the world. A soul at
first conversion is but ruf cast, but God by afflictions does square and fit,
and fashion it for that glory above, which does speak them out, to flow from
precious love; therefore the afflictions that do attend the people of God,
should be no bar to holiness, nor no motive to draw the soul to ways of
wickedness.

The fifth Remedy against this Device 5 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that it is our duty, and glory, not to
measure afflictions by the smart, but by the end. When Israel was dismisled out
of Exodus 11.
Egypt, 'twas with gold, and earrings. So the Jews were dismissed out of
Babylon, with gifts, jewels, and all necessary utensils. Look more at the
latter end of a Ezra 1.
Christian, then the beginning of his affliction; consider the patience of Job,
and what end the Lord made with him. Look not upon Lazarus lying at Dives
Afflictions they are but our fathers Gold Smiths, who are working to add
pearls to our Crowns.
door, but lying in Abraham's bosom; look not to the beginning of Joseph, who
was so far from his dream, that the Sun and Moon should reverence him, that for
two years he was cast where he could see neither Sun, Moon, nor Stars; but
behold him at the last made Ruler over Egypt. Look not upon David, as there
was but a step between him and Tiburtius saw paradise, when he walked upon hot
burning coals. Heredotus said of the Assyrians, let them drink nothing but
wormwood all, their life long; when they dye, they shall swim in honey; you
are wise and know how to apply it. 6. Remedy.
death, nor as he was envied by some, and slighted and despised by others, but
behold him seated in his Royal Throne, and dying in his bed of honor, and his
Son Solomon, and all his glistering Nobles about him. Afflictions they are but
as a dark entry into your Fathers house, they are but as a dirty lane to a
Royal Palace. Now tell me souls, whether it be not very great madness to
shun the ways of holiness, and to walk in the ways of wickedness, because
of those afflictions that do attend the ways of holiness.

The sixth Remedy against this device of Satan, is seriously to consider, that
the design of God in all the afflictions that do befall them, is only to try
them; it is not to wrong them, nor to ruin them, as ignorant souls are apt to
think. He knows the way that I take, and when he has tried me, I shall come
forth as gold, says patient Job So in that 8. Dan. 2. And thou shall remember
all the way which the Lord thy God l^d thee, these forty years in the
willdernesse, to humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in thy heart,
whether thou The King of Aracum in Scaliger tries her whom he means to marry,
by sweating; if they be sweet, then he marries them, if not, he rejects them;
you may easily make the application.
would keep his Commandments or no. God afflicted them thus, that he might
make known to themselves, and others, what was in their hearts. When fire is
put to green wood, there comes out abundance of watery stuff that before
appeared not; when the pond is empty, the mud, filth, and toads come to light.
The snow covers many a dunghill; so does prosperity many a rotten heart. It is
easy to wade in a warme-bath, and every bird can sing in a sun-shine-day, etc.
Hard weather tries what health we have; afflictions try what sap we have, what
grace we have. Weathered leaves soon fall off in windy weather; Rotten boughs
quickly break with heavy weights, etc. you are wise, and know how to apply it.

Afflictions are like pinching frosts, Dunghills raked send out a filthy
steame, ointment a sweet persume; this is applicable to sinners, and Saints
under the rod.
that will search us; where we are most unsound, we shall soonest complain,
and where most corruptions lie, we shall most shrink; We try metal by
knocking, if it sound well, then we like it: so God ^^ies his by knocking, and
if under knocks they yield a pleasant sound, God will turn their night into
day, and their bitter into sweet, and their Cross into a Crown; and they shall
hear that voice, arise and shine, for the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee,
and the favors of the Lord are flowing in on thee.

The seventh, and last Remedy against 7. Remedy.
this device of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that the afflictions, wrath,
and misery that do attend the ways of wickedness, are far greater, and
heavier then those are, that do attend the ways of holiness. Oh! the
gauling, girding, lashing, and gnawings of Conscience, that do attend souls
in a way of wickedness* The wicked (says Isaiah) are like the troubled sea,
when it cannot rest, whose waters Sin oftentimes makes men insensible of the
wrath of the Almighty; Sin transformes many a man, as it were into those beats
in Pliny, that could not be stirred with the sharpest prickles; or those fishes
in Aristotle, that though they have spears thrust into their sides, yet they
awake not.
cast up mire and dirt. There is no peace to the wicked, says my God. There
are snares in all their mercies; and curses, and crosses do attend all their
comforts, both at home, and abroad; what is a fine suit of clothes with the
plague in it? and what is a golden cup* when there is poison at the bottom? or
what is a silken stocking with a broken leg in it? the curse of God, the wrath of
God, the hatred of God, and the fierce indignation of God do always attend
sinners, walking in a way of wickedness. Turn to that 28. of Deuteronomie,
and read from the 15. verse, to the end of that chapter, and turn to the 26.
chapter of Leviticus, and read from the 14. verse, to the end of that chapter,
and then you shall see, how the curse of God haunts the wicked (as it were a
fury) in all his ways; In the City it attends him, Sin brings in sorrow, and
sickness, etc. The Rabbis say, that when Adam tasted the forbidden frui^, his
head a^ed.
in the Country it hovers over him; coming in, it accompanies him; going forth,
it follows him; and is travel it is his Comrade, it fills his store with
strife, and mingles the wrath of God with his sweetest morsel; It is a moth in
his wardrope, murren among his cattle, mildew in his field, rot among sheep,
and ofttimes makes the fruit of his loins his greatest vexation, and
confusion. There is no solid joy, nor lasting peace, nor Sirens are said to
sing curiously while they live, but to rore horribly when they dye; So do the
wicked.
pure comfort, that does attend sinners in their sinful ways. There is a
sword of vengeance, that does every moment hang over their heads, by a small
thread; and what joy and content can attend such souls, if the eye of
Conscience be but so far open, as to see the sword? ah! the horrors, and
terrors, the tremblings, and shakings that attend their souls.

The tenth Device that Satan has, 10. Device.
to draw the souls of men to sin, is, by working them to be frequent, in Non
vulnera sed munera ostendit. He shows not his want, but his worth, and stands
not only upon his conparisons, but upon his disparisons; I am not as this
Publican. They are very good, that are not very bad; and they that are very
bad, do always prize themselves above the market.
comparing themselves, and their ways with those, that are reputed, or
reported to be worse then themselves. By this device, the devil drew the proud
Pharisee to bless himself, in a cursed condition. God, I thank thee that I
am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this
Publican etc. Why says Satan, you swear but petty oaths, as by your faith,
and troth, etc. but such, and such swear by wounds and blood; you are now and
then a little wanton; but such and such do daily defile, and pollute
themselves, by actual uncleanness, and filthiness; you deceive, and
overreach your neighbors, in things that are but as toys, and trifles; but
such and such deceive, and overreach others in things of greatest concernment,
even to their ruin and undoings; you do but sit, and chat, and sip with the
drunkard; but such, and such sit, and drink drunk with the drunkard; you are
only a little proud in heart, and habit, in looks, and words, etc.

Now the Remedies against this Device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this device 1. Remepy.
of Satan, is solemnly to consider this, that there is not a greater, nor a
clearer argument to prove a man an History speaks of a kind of witches, that
stirrin abroad would put on their eyes, b^t returning home, they boxed them up
again. So do Hypocrites.
hypocrite, then to be quick-sighted abroad, and blind at home; then to see a
mote in another man's eye, and not a beam in his own eye, then to use
spectacles to behold other men's sins, rather then looking-glasses to behold his
own; then to be always holding his finger upon other men's sores; then to be
amplifying, and aggravating other men's sins, and mitigating of his own, etc.

The second Remedy against this device. 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to spend more time The nearer we draw to God, and his word, the
more rottenness we shall find in our bones. The more any man looks into the
body of the S^n, the less he sees when he looks down again. It is said of
the Basilisk, that if he look into a glass, he presently dies: so will sin,
and a sinner (in a spiritual sense) when the soul look; into the word which
is Gods glass, etc.
in comparing of your internal, and external actions with the Rule, with that
word, by which you must be judged at last, then in comparing of your selves
with those, that are worse then your selves; that man that comparing his self
with others, that are worse then himself, may seem, (to himself and others)
to be an Angel; yet comparing himself with the word, may see himself to be
like the devil, yea, a very devil. Have not I chosen twelve, and one of you
is a Devil. Such men are as like him, as if they were spit out of his mouth.
Satan is called the God of this world, because, as God at first did but speak
the word, and it was done: so, if the Devil does but hold up his finger, give
the least hint, they will do his will, though they undo their souls for
ever. Ah! what monsters would these men appear to be, did they but compare
themselves with a righteous Rule, and not with the most unrighteous men; they
would appear to be as black as Hell it self.

The third Remedy against this device 3. Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that though thy sins be not as great as
others, yet without sound repentance on thy side, and pardoning mercy on Gods,
thou will be as certainly damned As in Heaven one is more glorious then
another; so in Hell, one shall be more miserable then another. Augustine.
as others, though not equally tormented with others; what though hell shall
not be so hot to thee as to others, yet thou must as certainly to hell as
others, unless the glorious grace of God shines forth upon thee in the face of
Christ. God will suit men's punishments to their sins; the greatest sins shall be
attended with the greatest punishments, and lesser sins with lesser
punishments; alas! what a poor comfort will this be to thee, when thou come
to die, to consider, that thou shall not be equally tormented with others, and
yet must be for ever shut out from the glorious presence of God, Christ,
Angels, and Saints, and from those good things of eternal life, that are so
many, that they exceed number, The gate of Indulgence, the gate of hope the
gate of mercy, the gate of glory, the gate of consolation, and the gate of
salvation, will be for ever shu^ against them, Mat. 25. 10.
so great, that they exceed measure, so precious, that they exceed estimation,
Sure it is, that the tears of hell are not sufficient to bewail the loss of
heaven, the worm of grief gnawes as painful, as the fire burns; if those
souls, Acts 20. wept, because they should see Paul's face no more? How
deplorable is the eternal deprivation of the beatificallvision. But this not
all, thou shall not be only shut out of heaven, but shut up in hell for ever,
not only shut out from the presence of God and Angels, etc. but shut up with
devils, and damned spirit, for ever, not only shut out from 'Twas a good
saying of Chrysostom, speaking of Hell ( Ne quaeramu^ ubi sit, sed quomodo
illam fugiamus) let us not seek where it is, but how we shall escape it.
those sweet surpassing, unexpressabl, and everlasting pleasures that be at
Gods right hand, but shut up for ever under those torments, that are easelesse,
remediless, and endless. Ah souls! were it not ten thousand times better for
ye to break off your sins by repentance, then to go on in your sins, till you
feel the truth of what now you hear. The God of Israel is very merciful; ah
that you would repent, and return, that your souls might live for ever.
Remember this, grievous is the torment of the damned, for the bitterness of
the punishments; but most grievous for the eternity of the punishments. For to
be tormented without end, this is Surely, one good means to escape Hell, is to
take a turn or two in Hell, by our daily meditations.
that which goes beyond all the bounds of desperation; ah! how do the thoughts
of this make the damned to roar, and cry out for disquietnesse of heart, and
tear their hair, and gnash their teeth, and rage for madness, that they must
dwell in everlasting burnings for ever?

The eleventh Device that Satan has 11 Device.
to draw the soul to sin, is, by polluting and defiling the souls and
judgments of men with such dangerous errors, that do in their proper tendency
tend to carry the souls of men to all loosnesse and wickedness, as woeful
experience does abundantly evidence. Ah! how many are there filled with these,
and such like Christ-dishonouring, and soule-undoing opinions, viz. That
Ordinances are poor, low, carnal things, and not only to be lived above, but
without also. That the Scriptures are full of fallasies and uncertainties, and
no further to be heeded, then they agree with that spirit that is in them. That
it is a poor low thing, if not idolatry too, to worship God in a Mediator. That
the Resurrection is already past. That there was never any such man or person,
as Jesus Christ; but that all is an Allegory, and it signifies nothing but
light and love, and such good frames borne in men. That there is no God, nor
Devil, Heaven, nor Hell, but what is within us. That there is no sin in the
Saints, they are under no Law, but that of the spirit, which is all freedom.
That sin and grace are equally of God, and agrees to his will: with a hundred
other horrid opinions, which has caused wickedness to break in as a flood
among us, etc.

Now the general Remedies against this Device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this Device 1 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that an erroneous vain mind is as odious A
blind eye is worse then a lame foot. Lev. 13. 44.
to God, as a vicious life; he that had the leprosy in his head, was to be
pronounced utterly unclean. Gross errors make the heart foolish, and render
the life loose, and the soul light in the eye of God. Error spreads, and frets
The breath of the erroneous is infectious, and like the dogs of Cong^, they
bite though they bark not.
like a Gangreen, and renders the soul a leoper in the sight of God. It was
Gods heavy and dreadful plague upon the Gentiles, to be given up to a mind
void of Judgment, or an injudicious mind, or a mind rejected, disallowed,
abhorred of God, or a mind that none have cause to glory in, but rather to be
ashamed Through animosity to persist in error, is diabolical; it were best
that we never erred, next to that that we amended our error.
of. I think that in these days God does punish many men's former wickednesses,
by giving them up to soule-ruining errors. Ah Lord! this mercy I humbly beg,
that thou would rather take me into thine own hand, and do any thing with
me, then to give me up to those sad errors, to which thousands have married
their souls, and are in a way of perishing for ever.

The second Remedy against this Device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to receive the truth affectionately, and let it dwell in your
souls plenteously; when men stand out against the truth, when truth would
enter, The greatest sinners are sure to be the greatest sufferers.
and men bar the door of their souls against truth, God in justice gives up
such souls to be deluded, and deceived by error, to their eternal undoing* 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12. Because they received not the love of the truth that they
might be saved: God shall send them strong delusions (...).
(or as the Greek has it, the efficacy of error) that they should believe a
lie. That they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness. Ah sirs! as you love your souls, do not tempt
God, do not provoke God by your withstanding truth, and out-facing truth, to
give you up to believe a lie, that you may be damned. There are no men on earth
so fenced against error, as those are that receive the truth in the love of
it. Such souls Ephesians. 4. 14. (...). Gr. signifies cogging with a dye; such
slights as cheaters and false gamesters use at D^c^.
are not easily tossed too and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the slight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in
wait to deceive. It Is not he that receives most of the truth into his head, but
he that receives most of the truth affectionately into his heart, that shall
enjoy the happiness of having his judgment sound, and clear, when others
shall be deluded, and deceived by them, who make it their business to infect
the judgments and to undo the souls of men.

Ah souls! as you would not have your judgments polluted, and defiled Col. 3.
16. (...). i. e. indwell in you, as an ingrafted word, incorporated into your
souls, so concocted, and digested by you, as that you turn it into a part of
your selves. They must needs err that know not Gods way^s, yet can they not
wander so wide, as to miss of hell. Veritas vincit truth (at last) triumphs.
with error, let the word of the Lord that is more precious then gold, yea,
then fine gold, dwell plenteously in you. It Is not the hearing of truth, nor
the knowing of truth, nor the commending of truth, nor the talking of truth,
but the indwelling of truth in your souls, that will keep your judgments
chaste and sound, in the midst of all those glistering errors, that betray
many souls into his hands, that can easily transform himself into an Angel of
light, that he may draw others to lie in chains of darkness with him for
ever. Oh! let not the word be a stranger, but make it your choicest familiar;
then will you be able to stand in the day, wherein many shall fall on your
right hand, and on your left, by the subtilty of those that shall say, lo here
is Christ, and lo there is Christ. There was more wit, then grace, in his
speech, that counseled his friend, not to come too nigh unto truth, least his
teeth should be beaten out with its heels. Ah souls! if truth dwell plenteously
in Veritas stat in aperto campo. Truth stands in the open fields, I, and it
makes those souls stand, in whom it dwells, when others ^all as stats from
Heaven. 3 Remedy.
you, you are happy, if not, you are unhappy under all your greatest felicity.
It is with truth, says Melancton, as it is with holy water, every one praised
it, and thought it had some rare virtue in it, but offer to sprinkle them with
it, and they will shut their eyes, and turn away their faces from it.

The third Remedy against this Device of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that
error makes the owner to suffer loss! All the pains and labou^ that men take,
to defend and maintain their errors, to spread abroad, and infect the world
with their errors, shall bring no profit, nor no comfort to them in that day,
wherein every man's Error as a glass, is bright, but ^rittle, and cannot ind^r^
the ham^er, or fire, as go^d can which though (...) or melted, remains (...)
and o^ient.
work shall be made manifest, and the fire shall try it, of what sort it is, as
the Apostle shows, in that remarkable Scripture, the 1 Cor. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14,
15. Ah that all those that rise early, and go to bed late, that spend their
time, their strength, their spirits, their all, to advance and spread abroad
God-dishonouring, and soul undoing opinions, would seriously consider of this,
that they shall loose all the pains, cost, and charge, that they have bin or
shall be at, for the propagating of error; and if they are ever s^ved, it
shall be by fire, as the Apostle there shows. Ah sirs! is it nothing to lay
out your money for that which is not bread? and your strength for that, which
will not, which cannot profit you in the day that you must make up your
accounts, and all your works must be tried by fire? Ah! that such souls would
now at last, buy the truth, and sell it not; Remember, you can never over buy
it; whatsoever you give for it, you can never sufficiently sell it, if you
should have all the world in exchange for it. It is said of Caesar, Major fuit
cura Caesari libellorum quam purpurae.
that he had greater care of his Books, then of his royal Robes; for swimming
thorough the waters, to escape his enemies, he carried his books in his hand
above the waters, but lost his Robes; ah! what are Caesar's books to Gods
books? well, remember this, that one day, yea, one hour spent in the study of
truth, or spreading abroad of truth, will yield the soul more comfort, and
profit, then many thousand years spent in the study, and spreading abroad of
corrupt and vain opinions, that have their rice from Hell, and not from
Heaven; from the God of this world, and not from that God, that shall at last
judge this world, and all the corrupt opinions of men.

The fourth Kemedie against this device 4. Remedy.
of Satan, is, to hate, reject, and abominate all those doctrines, and
opinions, that are contrary to godliness, and that open a door to
profaneness; One old piece of Gold is worth a thousand new counters, and one
old truth of God is m^re worth then a thousand new errors. True hatred is
((...)) to the whole kind: it is sad to frown upon one error, and smile upon
another. Gideon had seventy sons, and but one ^astard, and ^e^ that ^astard
dest^oyed all the rest. Judge 8. 13. one tur^e may ^ri^g a man quite out of the
(...).
and all such doctrines and opinions, that require men to hold forth a
strictness, above what the Scripture requires; And all such Doctrines and
opinions, that do advance, and lift up corrupted nature, to the doing of
supernatural things, which none can do, but by that supernatural power, that
raised Christ from the grave; And all such opinions, that do lift up our own
Righteousness, in the Room of Christ's Righteousness, that place good works
in the Throne of Christ, and makes them copartners with Christ, etc. And all
those opinions, and Doctrines, that do so set up, and cry up Christ and his
Righteousness, as to cry down all Duties of Holiness, and Righteousness; And
all those Doctrines and opinions, that do make the glorious and blessed
privileges of believers in the days of the Gospel, to be lesser, fewer, and
weaker, then they were in the time of the Law. Ah! did your souls arise with a
holy hatred, and a strong indignation against such Doctrines and opinions, you
would st^nd when others fall, and you would shine as the Sun in her glory, when
many, that were once as shining stars, may go forth as stinking snufs

The fifth Remedy against this device 5. Remedy.
of Satan, is, to hold fast the truth; as men take no hold on the arm of
flesh, till they have let go their hold on Jer. 17. 5. v,
the arm of God: so men take no hold on error, till they have let go their
hold of truth; therefore hold fast the truth, truth is thy Crown, hold fast thy
Crown, and let no man take thy Crown from thee; has not God made 2 Timothy 1. 13.
1 Titus 9. The Priests of Mercury when they eat their figs, and honey, cried
ou^ ((...)) sweet is truth.
truth sweet to thy soul? yea, sweeter then the honey, or the honey comb, and
will thou not go on ^o Heaven, feeding upon truth, that heavenly honeycomb, as
Samson did of his honeycomb. Ah souls! have you not found truth sweetning your
spirits, and cheering your spirits, and warming your spirits, and raising your
spirits, and corroborating your spirits; have you not found truth a guide to
lead you, a staff to uphold you, a cordial to strengthen you, and a plaster
to heal you? and will you not hold fast the truth? has not truth been your
best friend in your worst days? has not truth stood by you, when friends have
forsaken you? has not truth done more for you, then all the world could do
against you, and will you not hold fast the truth? is not truth your right eye,
without which you cannot see for Christ? and your right hand, without which you
cannot do for Christ? and your right foot, without which you cannot walk with
Christ? and will you not hold fast truth? oh! hold fast the truth in your
judgments, and understandings, in your wills and affections, in your
profession, It is with truth, as with some plants, which live, and thrive not,
but in warm climates.
and conversation. Truth is more precious then gold, or Rub^es; and all the
things thou can desire, are not to be compared to her. Truth is that heavenly
glass, wherein we may see the luster, and glory of divine wisdom, power,
greatness, love, and mercifulness. In this glass, you may see the face of
Christ, the favor of Christ, the riches of Christ, and the heart of Christ,
beating and working sweetly toward your souls. Oh! let your souls cleave to
truth, as Ruth Ruth 1. v. 15, 16, 17. Though I cannot dispute for the truth,
yet I can die for the truth, said that blessed Ma^^yr.
did to Naomi, and say, I will not leave truth, nor return from following
after truth, but where truth goes, I will go, and where truth lodges I will
lodge, and nothing but death shall part truth and my soul. What John said to
the Church of Philadelphia, I may say to you; Hold th^^ fast which thou have,
that no man take thy Crown, the Crown is the top of royalties; such a thing
is truth; let Tit. 1. v. 9. (...).
no man take thy Crown; Hold fast the faithful word, as Titus speaks; you were
better let go any thing then truth; you were better let go your Hold fast as
with tooth, and nail, against those that would snatch it from us.
honors, and riches, your friends, and pleasures, and the worlds favors; yea,
your nearest, and dearest relations, I, your very lives, then to let go truth.
Oh! keep the truth, and truth will keep you safe, and happy for 6. Remedy. I
have read of one, who seeing in a vision, many snares of the devil spread upon
the earth, he sat down mourning, and said, within himself ( Quis periransiet
ista) who shall pass thorough these? whereunto he he^d a voice answering (
humilitas* periransiet) humility shall pass thorough them.
ever, blessed are those souls that are kept by truth.

The sixth Remedy against this device of Satan, is, to keep humble; humility
will keep the soul free from many darts of Satan's casting, and erroneous
snares of his spreading. As low trees and shrubs are free from many violent
gusts, and blasts of wind, which shake and rend the taller trees; so humble
souls are free from those gusts, and blasts of error, that rend, and tear
proud lofty souls; Satan and the world has least power, to fasten errors
upon humble souls. The God of light and truth delights to dwell with the
humble; and the more light and truth dwells in the soul, the further off
darkness and error will stand from the soul. The God of grace poures in
grace into humble souls, as men pour liquor into empty vessels, and the more
grace is poured into the soul, the less error shall be able to overpower
the soul, or to infect the soul That Is a sweet word in the Psa. 25. v. 9. a
(...) Gnanavim from gnanah, which signifies, the humble, or afflicted. The high
tide quickly ebs, and the highest Sun is presently declining; you know how to
apply it.
25. Psalm. 9. v. The meek (or the humble) will he guide in judgment, and the
meek will he teach his way; and certainly souls guided by God, and taught by
God, are not easily drawn aside, into ways of error. Oh! take heed of
spiritual pride; pride fills our fancies, and weakens our graces, and makes
room in our hearts for error; there are no men on earth so soon entangled,
and so easily conquered by error, as proud souls. Oh! it is dangerous, to love
to be wise above what is written; to be curious, and unsober in your desire of
knowledge, and to The proud soul is like him that gazed upon the Moon, but
fell into the pit.
trust to your own capacities and abilities, to undertake to pry into all
secrets, and to be puffed up with a carnal mind; souls that are thus a
soaring up, above the bounds and limits of humility, usually fall into the very
worst of errors, as experience does daily evidence.

The seventh Remedy against this device 7. Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, the great evils that errors have
produced; error is a fruitful mother, and has brought forth such monstrous
Errors in conscience produce many great evils, not only ( ad intra) in men's
own souls, but also ( ad extra) in humane affairs.
children, as has set Towns, Cities, and Nations on fire. Error is that
whorish woman, that has cast down many, wounded many, yea, slain many strong
men, and many great men, and many learned men, and many professing men in
former times, and in our own time, as is too evident to all, that are not much
left of God, destitute of the truth, and blinded by Satan. Oh the graces that
error has weakened, and the sweet joys and comforts that error has clouded,
if not buried; oh! the hands that error has weakened; the eyes that error
has blinded; the judgments of men that error has perverted; the minds that
error has darkened; the hearts that error has hardened; the affections that
error has cooled; the Consciences that error has s^ared; and the lives of
men, that error has polluted; ah souls! can you solemnly consider of this?
and not tremble more at error then at hell it self, etc.

The twel^th Device that Satan has 12. Device.
to draw the soul to sin, is, to affect wicked company, to keep wicked
society, and oh! the horrid impieties and wickednesses that Satan has drawn
men to sin by working them, to sit, and associate themselves with vain persons.

Now the Remedies against this device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this device 1. Remedy.
of Satan, is, to dwell (till your hearts be affected) upon those commands of
God, that do expressly require us, to shun the society of the wicked, Ephesians.
5. 11. And have no fellowship Non paerentum aut majorum authoritas sed Dei
docentis imperium, Jerome. The commands of God must ou^-weigh all authority, and
example of men.
with the unfruit fud works of darkness, but rather reprove them. Prove. 4. 14,
15, 16. Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil
men. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away. 1 Cor. 5. 9, 10,
11. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. Prove. 1. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. turn to these Scriptures,
and let your souls dwell upon them, till a holy indignation be raised in your
souls, against fellowship with vain men. God will not take the wicked by the
hand, as Job speaks, why then should you? Gods commands are not like those that
are easily reversed; but they are like those of the Medes, that cannot be
changed; if these commands be not now observed by thee, they will at last be
witnesses against thee, and milstones to sink thee, in that day, that Christ
shall judge thee.

The second Remedy against this device 2. Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that their company is very infectious,
Eusebius reports of John the Evangelist, that he would not suffer Cerinthus the
heretic, in the same bath him, left some judgment should abide them both.
Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 25. A man that keeps ill company, is like him that
walks in the Sun, tanned insensibly.
and dangerous, as is clear from the Scriptures above mentioned. Ah! how many
have lost their names, and lost their estates, and strength, and God, and
Heaven, and souls, by society with wicked men? As ye shun a stinking carcass;
as the Seaman shuns sands, and rocks, and shelves; As ye shun those, that have
the plague sore running upon them: so should you shun the society of wicked
men. As weeds endanger the corn, as bad humors endanger the blood, or as an
infected house the neighborhood: so does wicked company the soul. Bias a
heathen man, being at Sea in a great storm, and perceiving many wicked men
with him in the ship, calling upon the Gods; oh says he, forbear prayer, hold
your tongues, I would not have the Gods take notice that you are here, they
will sure drown us all; if they should. Ah sirs! could a heathen Prove. 13. 20.
v.
see so much danger in the society of wicked men, and can you see none?

The third Remedy against this device 3. Remedy. 2 Timothy 4. 17. Isa. 11. 7. 29.
Ezekiel. 3. 10. Mat. 16. 9. Revel. 3. 5. 10. Mat. 3. 7. Isa 10. 17. 27. ch 4. 55.
13. Ezekiel 26. Judge. 9. 14. Job 21. 18. Psalm. 18. 42. Psa. 14. 18. Psa. 42. Ezekiel.
22. 18, 19. 65. Esa. 5. Ezekiel 24. 6. Lactantius says of Lucian (nec diis, nec
hominibus pepercit) he spared neither God, nor man; such monsters are wicked
men, which should render their company to all that have tasted of the
sweetness of divine love, a burden and not a delight.
of Satan, is, to look always upon wicked men, under those names and notions,
that the Scripture sets them out under. The Scripture calls them Lions for
their fierceness, and Bears for their cruelty, and Dragons for their
hideousness, and Dogs for their filthiness, and Wolves for their subtilnesse.
The Scripture styles them Scorpions, Vipers, Thorns, Briars, Thistles,
Brambles, stubble, dirt, chafe, dust, dross, smoke, scumme; as you may see in
the margent. It Is not safe to look upon wicked men, under those names, and
notions, that they set out themselves by, or that flatterers sets them out by;
this may delude the soul; but the looking upon them under those names, and
notions, that the Scripture sets out by, may preserve the soul from
frequenting their company, and delighting in their society. Do not tell me
what this man calls them, or how such and such count them; but tell me, how
does the Scripture call them? how does the Scripture count them. As Naballs
name was, so was his nature; and as wicked men's names are, so are their
natures; you may know well enough what is within them, by the apt names that
the Holy Ghost has given them.

The fourth and last Remedy against 4. Remedy. O Lord, let me not go to hell,
where the wicked are, for Lord, thou know, I never loved their company here,
said a gracious gentlewoman, when she was to die, being in much trouble of
conscience.
this device of Satan, is, to consider, that the society and company of wicked
men, have been a great grief and burden, to those precious souls, that were
once glorious on earth, and are now triumphing in heaven. Psalm. 120. ver. 5, 6.
Woe is me that I dwell in Mesech; that I sojourne in the tents of Kedar. My
soul has long dwelt with him that hates peace. So Jeremiah, Oh that I had in
the wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring men, that I might leave my people,
and go from them; for they be all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men,
Jer. 9. ver. 2. So they vexed Lots 2 Pet. 2. c. ver. 7, 8 Vide Bezam.
righteous soul by their filthy conversation; they made his life a burden,
they made death more desirable to him then life; yea, they made his life a
lingering death. Guilt, or grief is all the good, souls get by conversing with
wicked men.

The second thing to be showed is, the several Devices that Satan has (as to
draw souls to sin, so) to keep souls from holy duties, to hinder souls in
holy Services, and to keep them off from Religious performances.
And he showed me Joshua the high Priest, standing before the Angel of the
Lord, and Satan standing at his righthand to resist him. Zach. 3. 1.
The truth of this I shall show you in the following particulars.

The first device that Satan 1. Device.
has to draw souls from holy duties, and to keep them off from religious
services is,
BY presenting the world in such a dress, and in such a garb to the soul, as
to ensnare the soul, and to winn upon the affections of the soul; The beauty
of the world soils a Christian more then the strength; the flattering Sun sh^ne
more then the blustering storm; in storms, we keep our garments close about
us.
he represents the world to them in its beauty, and bravery, which proves a
bewitching sight to a world of men. It Is true, this took not Christ, because
Satan could find no matter in him for his temptation to work upon; but Satan
finds matter in us, for this temptation to work upon: so that he can no
sooner cast out his golden bait, but we are ready to play with it, and to
nibble at it; he can no sooner throw out his golden ball, but men are apt to
run after it, though they loose God, and their souls in the pursuit. Ah! how
many Professors in these days, have for a time followed hard after God,
Christ, and The inhabitants of Nilus are deaf by the noise of the waters: so
the world makes such a noise in men's ears, that they cannot hear the things
of Heaven. The world is like the swallows dung, that put out Tobias eyes.
Ordinances, till the Devil has set before them the world, in all its beauty,
and bravery, which has so bewitched their so^les, that they have grown to have
low thoughts of holy things, and then to be cold in their affections to holy
things, and then to slight them, and at last, with the young man in the Gospel
to turn their backs upon them; ah the time! the thoughts, the spirits, the
hearts, the souls, the duties, the services, that the inordinate love of this
wicked world does eat up, and destroy, and has eat up, and destroyed; where
one thousand is destroyed The champions could ^or wring an Apple out o^ M^l^'s
ha (...) by strong hand, but a fair maid by fair means got it presently.
by the worlds frowns, ten thousands are destroyed by the worlds smiles. The
world Siren-like, it sings us, and sinks us; it kisses us, and betraies us,
like Judas; it kisses us, and imites us under the fifth rib, like Joab. The
honors, splendour, and all the glory of this world are but sweet poisons, that
will much endanger us, if they do not eternally destroy us. Ah! the multitude
of souls that have surseited of these sweet baits, and died for ever.

Now the Remedies against this device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this device 1 Remedy. The Prior in Melancton (...)
his hands up and down in a ba^^n full of ^^^ells, thinking thereby to have
charmed (...) gour, but (...) would not ^oe.
of Satan, is to dwell upon the impotency, and weakness of all these things
below; they are not able to secure you from the least evil. They are not able
to procure you the least desirable good. The Crown of Gold cannot cure the
headache; nor the velvet slipper ease the gout; nor the Jewel about the n^ck
cannot take away the pain of the teeth. The F^ogs of Egypt entered into the
rich men's houses of Egypt, as well as the poor; our daily experience does
Nugas the Scythian despiseing the rich presents, and ornaments that were sent
unto him by the Emperor of Constantinople, asked whether* those things could
drive away calamities, diseases, or death.
evidence this, that all the honors, and riches, etc. That men enjoy cannot
free them from the colic, the fever, or lesser diseases. Nay, that which may
seem most strange is, that a great deal of wealth cannot keep men from falling
into extreme poverty. In the first of Judges 6. ver. you shall find seventy
Kings with their fingers and toes cut off, glad like whelps to lick up crummes
under another Kings table; and shortly after, the same King that brought them
to this penury, is reduced to the same poverty and misery; Why then should that
be a bar to keep thee out of Heaven, that cannot give thee the least ease on
earth?

The second Remedy against this device 2. Remedy.
of Satan, is, to dwell upon the vanity of them, as well as upon the impotencie
of all worldly good. This is the sum of Solomon's sermon; Vanity of vanity,
and all is vanity. This Gilimex King of Vanda^^s, led in triumph, by
Bellisarius, cried out, Vanity of vanity, all is vanity.
our first parents found, and therefore named their second Abell, or vanity.
Solomon that had tried these things, and could best tell the vanity of them, he
preaches this sermon over, again, and again; Vanity of vanity, and all is
vanity. It Is sad to think, how many thousands there be, that can say with the
preacher, vanity of vanity, all is vanity, The fancy of Lucian, who places
Charon on the top of an high hill, viewing all the affairs of men living, and
looking on their greatest Cities as little birds nests, is very pleasant.
nay, swear it, and yet follow after these things, as if there were no other
glory, nor selicity; but what is to be found in those things, they call vanity.
Such men will sell Christ, Heaven, and their souls for a trifle, that call
these things vanity, but do not cordially believe them to be vanity, but set
their hearts upon them, as if they were their Crown, the top of all their
Royalty, and glory. Oh! let your souls dwell upon the vanity of all things
here below, till your hearts be so thoroughly convinced, and persuaded of the
vanity of them, as to trample upon them, and make them a a footstool for
Christ to get np, and ride in a holy triumph in your hearts. Oh the
imperfection, the ingratitude, the le^ity, the inconstancy, the perfidiousnesse
of those creatures* we most servilly affect.
Chrysostom said once, that if he were the fittest in the world, to preach a
Sermon to the whole world, gathered together in one Congregation, and had some
high Mountain for his Pulpit, from whence he might have a prospect of all the
world in his view, and were furnished with a voice of brass, a voice as loud
as the Trumpet of the Arch-Angell, that all the world might hear him, he would
choose to preach upon no other text, then that in the Psaln^es, O mortal men
how long will ye love vanity, and follow after leasing. Ah! did we but weigh
man's pain with his payment, his crosses, with his mercies; his miseries with
his pleasures; we should then see that there is nothing got by the bargain,
and conclude, Vanity of vanity, all is vanity.
Tell me, you that say all things under the Sun is vanity, if you do really
believe what you say, why do you spend more though^^, and time on the world,
then you do on Christ, Heaven, and your immortal souls? Why do you then
neglect your duty toward God, to get the world? Why do you then so eagerly
pursue after the world? and are so cold in your pursuing after God, Christ, and
holiness? Why then are your hearts so exceedingly raised, when the world comes
in, and smiles upon you, and so much dejected, and castdown, when the world
frowns upon you, and with Jonah's Gourd withers before you?

The third Remedy against this device 3. Remedy.
of Satan, is, to dwell much upon the uncertainty, the mutabilitie, and
inconstancy of all things under the Sun. Riches were never true to any, that
trusted to them; they have deceived men, as Jobs brook did the poor traveller,
in the Summer season.
Man himself is but the dream of a dream, but the generation of a fancy,
but an empty vanity, but the curious picture of nothing, a poor, feeble,
dying flash. All temporalls are as transitory, as a hasty, headlong torrent,
a shadow, a ship, a bird, an arrow, a post that passes by; why should thou
set thine eyes upon that which is not, says Solomon: and says the Apostle,
the fashion of this world passes away. Heaven 1 Cor. 7. 31. (...) intimates,
that there is nothing of any firmness, or solid consistence in the creature.
only has a foundation, earth has none, but is hanged upon nothing, as Job
speaks. The Apostle willed Tymothie, to charge rich men that they be not high
minded, nor put their trust in uncertain riches. They are like bad servants,
whose shoes are made of running leather, and will never tarry long with one
Master; as a bird hoppeth from tree to tree, so do the honors and riches of
this world, from man to man; let Job and Nebuchadnezzar testify this truth,
who fell The most renowned Frederick lost all, and sued to be made but Sexton
of the Church, that himself had built. I have re^d of a poor fisherman, who
while his nets were ad^ying, sl^pt upon the Rock, and dreamed that he was made
a King, on a sudden starts up, and leaping for joy, falls down f^o^ the Rock,
and in the place of his imagina^y felicities, loses his little portion of
pleasures.
from great wealth, to great want. No man can promise himself to be wealthy
till night; one storm at Sea, one coal of fire, one false friend, one
unadvised word, one false witness may make thee a beggar, and a prisoner all
at once. All the riches and glory of this world is but as smoke, and chaff that
vanishes; as a dream, and vision in the night that tarrieth not; as if an
hungry man dreameth, and thinks that he eats, and when he awaketh, his
soul is empty; and like a thirsty man, which thinks he drinks, and
behold when he is awaked, his soul is faint, as the Prophet Esaias says. Where
is the glory of Solomon? the sumptuous buildings of Nebuchadnezzar? the nine
hundred Chariots of Sisera? the power of Alexander? the authority of Augustus,
that commanded the whole world to be taxed? Those that have been the most
glorious, in what men generally account glorious and excellent, have had
inglorious ends; As Sampson for strength; Absalom for beauty; Achitophel for
policy; Hamon for favor; Asael for swiftness; Alexander for great conquest,
and yet after twelve years poisoned; the same you may see in the mighty four
Kingdoms. The Caldean, Persian, Grecian, and Roman, The pomp of this world
John compares to the Moon, which ( crescit and decrescit) increases, and
decreaseth. Apoc. 12. v. 1.
how soon were they gone, and forgotten. Now rich, now poor, now full, now
empty, now in favor, anon out of favor, now honorable, now despised, now
health, now sickness, now strength, now weakness. Oh! let not these
uncertain things keep thee from those holy services, and heavenly employments,
that may make thee happy for ever, and render thy soul eternally blessed, and
at ease, when all these transitory things shall bid thy soul an everlasting
farewell.

The fourth Remedy against this Device 4. Remedy.
of Satan, is, to consider, that the great things of this world are very
hurtful, and dangerous to the outward and inward man, thorough the Henry the
second hearing Menz his chief City to be taken, used this blasphemous speech,
I shall never (says he) love God any more, that suffered a City so dear to
me, to be taken from me. When one presented Antipater King of Macedonia, with
a book, treating of happiness, his answer ( ou scholazo) I have no leisure.
corruptions that be in the hearts of men; oh! the rest, the peace, the
comfort, the content that the things of this world do strip many men off. Oh
the fears, the cares, the envy, the malice, the dangers, the mischiefs, that
they subject men to. They oftentimes make men carnally confident. The rich man's
riches are a strong tower in his imagination. I said in my prosperity I should
never be moved. They often swell the heart with pride, and make men forget God,
and neglect God, and despise the Rock of their salvation; when Jesurum waxed
fat, and was grown thick, and covered with fatness, then he forgot God, and
forsook God that made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation, as
Moses spoke; ah the time! the thoughts, the spirits, that the things of the
world consumes and spends. Oh! how do they hinder the actings of faith upon
God? how do they interrupt our sweet communion with God? how do they abate
our love to the people of God, and cool our love to the things of God, and
work us to act like those, that are most unlike to God? oh! the deadness, the
dullness, the barrenness, that does attend (...)n under great outward mercies.
Oh! the riches of the world chokes That four good mothers beget four bad
daughters; great familiarity begets contempt; truth hatred; virtue envy;
riches ignonorance; is a french Proverb. Genesis 13. 2. (...) Policrates bestowed
five talents for a gift, upon one Anacrion, who for two nights after was so
troubled with care, how to keep them, and how to bestow them, as he carried
them back again to Policrates, saying, they were not worth the pains which he
had already taken for them
the word, that men live under the most soule-searching, and soul in riching
means with lean souls; though they have full purses, though their chests are
full of silver, yet their hearts are empty of grace. In the 13. Genesis 2. It is
said that Abraham was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold, according
to the Hebrew ( Chabbedh) it is Abraham was very heavy, to show that riches are
a heavy burden, and a hinderance many times to heaven, and happiness. King
Henry the fourth asked the Duke of Alva, if he had observed the great Eclipse
of the Sun, which had lately happened, no (said the Duke) I have so much to do
on earth, that I have no leisure to look up to Heaven; ah! that this were not
true of most Professors in these days; it is very sad to think, how their
hearts and time is so much taken up with earthly things, that they have scarce
any leisure to look up to Heaven, or to look after Christ, and the things
that belong to their everlasting peace.

Riches, though well got, yet are but like to Manna, those that gathered less
bad no want, and those that gathered more, 'twas but a trouble, and annoyance
to them. The world is troublesome, and yet it is loved; what would it be, if it
were peaceable? you embrace it, though it be filthy; what would you do, if it
were beautiful? you cannot keep your hands from the thorns; how earnest would
you be then in gathering the flowers? The world may be fitly likened to the
Serpent Scytale, whereof it is reported, that Sicily is so full of sweet
flowers, that dogs cannot hunt there; and what do all the sweet contents of
this world, but make us loose the sent of Heaven.
when she cannot overtake the flying passengers, she does with her beautiful
colors so astonish, and amaze them, that they have no power to pass away,
till she have stung them. Ah! how many thousands are there now on earth, that
have found this true by experience; that have spun a fair thread to strangle
themselves, both temporally and eternally, by being bewitch't by the beauty,
and braverie of this enticeing world.

The fifth Remedy against this Device of 5. Remedy.
Satan, is, to consider, that all the felicity of this world is mixed; our light
is mixed with darkness, our joy with sorrow, our pleasures with pain, our
honor with dishonor, our riches with wants. If our fight be spiritual,
clear, and quick; we may see in the felicity of this world, our wine mixed with
water, our honey with gall, our sugar with wormwood, and our roses with
prickles. Sorrow attends worldy joy, Hark scholar, said the Harlot to
Apuleius; it is but a bitter sweet, that you are so fond off. Surely, all the
things of this world are but bitter sweets.
danger attends worldly safety, loss attends worldly labors, tears attend
worldly purposes. As to these things, men's hopes are vain, their sorrow
certain, and joy fained. The Apostle calls this world a sea of glass; a sea
for the troubles of it, and glass for the brittlenesse and bitterness of it.
The honors, profits, pleasures, and delights of this world are true gardens of
Adonis, where we can gather nothing but trivial flowers, surrounded with many
briars.

The sixth Remedy against this Device 6. Remedy.
of Satan, is, to get better acquaintance, and better assurance of more
blessed, and glorious things. That Let Heaven be a man's object, and earth will
soon be his abject.
which raised up their spirits, in the t^nth and 11th of the Hebrews, to
tr^mple upon all the beauty, bravery, and glory of the world, was their
acquaintance with, and assurance of better and more durable things. They took
joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing in themselves, that they had in
Heaven a better, and a more durable substance. They Luther being at one time in
some wants, it happened that a good sum of money was unexpectedly sent him, by
a Noble man of Germany, at which being something amazed, he said, I sear that
God will give me my reward here; but I protest, I will not be so satisfied.
looked for a house that had foundations, whose builder and maker was God; And
they looked for another Country, even an heavenly. They saw him that was
invisible, and had an eye to the recompense of reward; And this made them count
all the glory and bravery of this world, to be poor, and contemptible for
them, to set their hearts upon. The maine reason why men dote upon the world,
and damn their souls to get the world, is, because they are not acquainted
with a greater glory. Men ate Acorns, till they were acquainted with the use of
wheat. Ah! were men more acquainted with what union and communion with God
means; what it is to have a new name, and a new stone, that none knows, but he
that has it; did they but taste more of Heaven, and live more in Heaven, and
had more glorious hopes of going to Heaven; ah! how easily would they have the
Moon under their feet. It was an excellent saying of Lewis of Bavyer, Emperor
of Germany, Hujusmodi comparandae sunt opes quae cum naufragio simul enatent.
such goods are worth getting, and owning as will not sink, or wash away, if a
shipwreck happen, but will wade and swim out with us. It is recorded of
Lazarus, that after his resurrection from the dead, he was never seen to laugh,
his thoughts and affections were so fixed in Heaven, though his body was on
earth; and therefore he could not but slight temporal things, There is says
Augustine (bona Throni) goods of the throne; and there are ( bona Scabelli)
goods of the footestool.
his heart being so bent, and set upon eternalls. There are goods of the throne
of grace; as God, Christ, the Spirit, Adoption, Justification, remission of sin
peace with God, and peace with Conscience; and there are goods of the
footstool, as honors, riches, the favor of creatures, and other comforts,
and accommodations of this life; Now he that has acquaintance with, and
assurance of the goods of the Throne, will easily trample upon the goods of the
footstool. Ah! that you would make it your business, your work, to mind
more, and make sure more to your own souls, the great When Basil was tempted
with money, and preferment; says he, give me money that may last for ever, and
glory that may eternally flourish; for the fashion of this world passes away,
as the waters of a river that runs by a City.
things of eternity, that will yield you joy in life, and peace in death, and a
Crown of Righteousness in the day of Christ's appearing; And that will lift up
your souls above all the beauty, and bravery of this bewitching world; that
will raise your feet above other men's heads. When a man comes to be assured of
a Crown, a Scepter, the Royal Robes, etc. he then begins to have low, mean,
and contemptible thoughts of those things, that before he highly prized: so
will assurance of more, great, and glorious things breed in the soul a holy
scorn, and contempt of all these poor, mean things, which the soul before
did value above God, Christ, and Heaven, etc.

The seventh Remedy against this device of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, 7
Remedy.
that true hahpinesse and satisfaction, is not to be had in the enjoyment of
any worldly good; true happiness is too big, and too glorious a thing, to be
True happiness lies only in our enjoyment of a suitable good, a pure good, a
total good, and an eternal good; and God is only such a good, and such a
good can only satisfy the soul of man.
found in any thing below that God, who is a Christians ( summum bonum)
chiefest good. The blessed Angels, those glistering Courtiers have all
felicities, and blessednesses; and yet they have neither gold, nor silver, nor
jewels, nor none of the beauty, and bravery of this world; certainly, if
happiness was to be found in these things, the Lord Jesus, who is the right
and Royal Heir of all things, would have exchanged his cradle for a Crown, his
Birthcham-ber (a stable) for a Royal Palace; his poverty for plenty; his
despised followers, for shining Courtiers; and his mean provisions, for the
choicest delicates, etc. Certainly, happiness lies not in those things, that a
man Philosophers could say, that he was never a happy man that might
afterward become miserable.
may enjoy, and yet be miserable for ever; now a man may be great, and
graceless with Pharaoh; honorable, and damnable with Saul; rich, and
miserable with Dives, etc. therefore happiness lies not in these things.
Certainly happiness lies not in those things that cannot comfort a man upon a
dying bed; Is it honors, riches, or friends, etc. that can comfort thee when
thou come to die? or is it not rather faith in the blood of Christ? the
witness of the Gregory the great used to say, he is poor, whose soul is void
of grace, not whose cofers are empty of money.
spirit of Christ; the sense and feeling of the love, and favor of Christ, and
the hopes of eternal reigning with Christ? Can happiness lie in those things
that cannot give us health, or strength, or ease, or a good nights rest, or an
hours sleep, or a good stomach? why all the honors, riches, and delights of
this world cannot give these poor things to us; therefore certainly, happiness
lies not in the enjoyment of them, etc. And surely happiness is not to be
found in those things, that cannot satisfy the souls of men; now none of
these things can satisfy the soul of man. He that loves silver shall not be
satisfied with silver, nor he that loves abundance Anima rationalis caeteris
omnibus occupari potest impleri non potest. The reasonable soul may be busied
about other things, but it cannot be filled with them.
with increase; this is also vanity, says the wise man. The barren womb, the
Horse-leeches daughter, the grave and Hell will as soon be satisfied, as the
soul of man will by the enjoyment of any worldly good. Some one thing, or
other will be for ever wanting to that soul that has none, but outward good
to live upon. You may as soon fill a bag with wisdom, a chest with virtue, or
a circle with a triangle, as the heart of man with any thing here below? A man
may have enough of the world to sink him, but he can never have enough to
satisfy him, etc.

The eighth Remedy against this device 8. Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider of the dignity of the soul; oh! the soul
of man is more wotrh then a thousand worlds; it is the greatest abasing of it
Plutarch tells of Themistocles, that he accounted it not to stand with his
state, to stoop down to take up the spoils the enemies had scattered in
flight, but says to one of his followers. ((...)) you may, for you are not
Themistocles. Oh what a sad thing is it, that a Heathen should set his feet
upon those very things that most Professors set their hearts, and for the gain
of which with Balaam, many run the hazard of sing their immortal souls for
ever.
that can be, to let it dote upon a little shining earth, upon a little painted
beauty, and fading glory, when it is capable of union with Christ, of communion
with God, and of enjoying the eternal vision of God. Seneca could say, I am
too great, and born to greater things, then that I should be a slave to my
body; oh! do you say, my soul is too great, and born to greater things, then
that I should confine it to a heap of white and yellow clay. I have been the
longer upon the Remedies, that may help us against this dangerous device of
Satan, because he does usually more hurt to the souls of men, by this device,
then he does by all other devices; for a close, I wish, as once Chrysostom
did, that that sentence, Eccles. 2. v. 11. (Then I looked on all the works
that my hands had wrought, and on the labor that I had labored to do, and
behold all was vanity and vexation of Spirit, and there was no profit under the
Sun) were engraven on the door posts, into which you enter; on the tables,
where you sit; on the dishes out of which you eat; on the cups, out of which
you drink; on the bedsteads, where you lie; on the walls of the houses, where
you dwell; on the garments, which you wear; on the heads of the horses, on
which you ride, and on the foreheads of all them whom you meet; that your
souls may not by the beauty, and braverie of the world be kept off from those
holy, and heavenly services, that may render you blessed, while you live, and
happy when you die; that you may breath out your last into his bosom, who
lives for ever, and who will make them happy for ever, that prefers Christ's
spiritualls and eternals above all temporal, transitory things.

The second Device that Satan has to draw souls from holy duties, and to
keep them off from religious services, is,
BY presenting to them the danger, 2 Device.
the losses, and the sufferings that do attend the performance of such and such
religious services; by this device Satan kept close those that believed on
Christ, from confessing of Christ, in that 12. John 42. Nevertheless, among
the chief Rulers also, many believed on him; but because of the Pharisees, they
did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue. I would
walk in all the ways of God, I would give up my self to the strictest ways
of holiness; but I am afraid dangers will attend me on the one hand; and
losses, and happily such, and such sufferings on the other hand, says many a
man. Oh! how should we help our selves against this temptation, and device of
Satan.

Now the Remedies against this device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this Device 1 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to consider, that all the troubles and afflictions that you meet
with in a way of righteousness, shall never hurt you; they shall never harm
you. And who is he that shall harm Nemo proprie l^d^ur nisi^ a seipso. No body
is properly hurt, but by himself, and his own fault.
you, if you be followers of that which is good, says the Apostle, i. e. none
shall harm you; natural conscience cannot but do homage to the image of God,
stamped upon the natures, words, works, and lives of the godly; as we may see
in the carriage of Nebuchadnezzar, and Gordius that blessed Martyr accounted it
a loss to him, not to suffer many kinds of tortures; he says, tortures are
but tradings with God for glory. The greater the combat is, the greater is the
following reward.
Darius toward Daniel. All the afflictions and troubles that do attend men in
a way of righteousness, can never rob them of their treasure, of their jewels;
they may rob them of some light, slight things; as the sword that is by their
side, or the stick that is in their hand, or of the flowers, or ribbons that be
in their hats; The treasures of a Saint is the presence of God, the favor of
God, union and communion with God; the pardon of sin, the joy of the spirit,
the peace of Conscience, which are Jewels that none can give, but Christ, nor
none can take away, but Christ. Now, why should a gracious soul keep off from
a way of holiness? because of afflictions, etc. when no afflictions can strip
a man of his heavenly jewels, which are his ornaments, and his safety here, and
will be his happiness and glory hereafter. Why should that man be afraid, or
troubled for That was a notable speech of Luther, let him that dyed for my
soul, see to the salvation of it.
storms at Sea, whose treasures are sure in a friends hand upon land? why, a
believers treasure is always safe in the hands of Christ; his life is safe, his
soul is safe, his grace is safe, his comfort is safe, and his Crown is safe in
the hand of Christ. I know him in 2 Timothy 1. 12.
whom I have believed, and that he is able to keep that which I have committed
unto him, until that day, says the Apostle. The childs most precious things
are most secure in his Fathers hands; so are our souls, our graces, and our
comforts, in the hand of Christ.

The second Remedy against this device 2. Remedy.
of Satan, is, to consider, that other precious Saints, that were shining Will:
Flower (Martyr) said, that heaven should as soon fall, as I will forsake my
profession, or budge in the least degree from it. So Santus being under as
great torment as you have read of, cries out ( Christianus sum) I am a
Christian; no torment could work him to decline the service of his God. I
might produce a cloud of witnesses; but if these do not work you to be noble
and brave, I am afraid more will not.
lights on earth, and are now triumphing in Heaven, have held on in religious
services, notwithstanding all the troubles and dangers that have surrounded
them; Nehemiah, and Ezra were surrounded with dangers on the left hand, and on
the right; and yet in the face of all, they hold on building the Temple, and
the wall of Jerusalem: so Daniel, and those precious worthies, in the 44 Psalm.
under want of outward encouragements, and in the face of a world of very great
discouragements, their souls clave to God, and his ways; Though they were sore
broken in the place of dragons, and covered with the shadow of death; yea,
though they were all the day long counted as sheep for the slaughter, yet their
hearts were not turned back, neither did their steps decline from his ways.
Though bonds and imprisonment did attend Paul, and the rest of the Apostles in
every place; yet they held on in the work, and service of the Lord; and why
then should you degenerate from their worthy examples, which is your duty, and
your glory to follow.

The third Remedy against this device 3. Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that all the troubles, and dangers that
do attend the performance of holy duties, and heavenly services, are but
temporal, and momentary; but the neglect of them may lay thee open, to all
temporal, spiritual, and eternal dangers. How shall we escape, if we neglect
so great salvation? He says not, if we reject, or renounce so great salvation;
but if we neglect, or shift off (as the word is) so (...). Dis-regard, not
care for it.
great salvation; he does not say, how shall we escape, if we oppose, or
persecute so great salvation? no, but if we let slip, or neglect so great
salvation, how shall we escape? that is, we cannot by any way, or means, or
device in the world, escape; divine Justice will be above us, in spite of our
very souls. The doing of such, and such heavenly services may lay you open to
the frowns of men; but the neglect of them will lay you open to the frowns of
God; the doing of them may render you contemptible in the eyes of men; Francis
Xaverius counseled John the third, King of Portugal, to meditate every day a
quarter of an hour upon that Text, What shall it profit a man to gain the whole
world, and loose his soul.
but the neglect of them may render you contemptible in the eyes of God; the
doing of them may be the loss of thy estate; but the neglect of them may be
the loss of God, Christ, Heaven, and thy soul for ever; the doing of them may
shut thee out from some outward, temporal contents; the neglect of them may
shut thee out from that excellent, matchless glory, that eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive.
Remember this, there is no man that breaths, but shall suffer more, by
neglecting those holy, and heavenly services that God commands, commends, and
rewards, then possibly he can suffer by doing of them, etc.

The fourth Remedy against this device 4 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to consider this, that God knows how to deliver from troubles,
by troubles; from afflictions, by afflictions; from dangers, by dangers; God by
lesser troubles and afflictions does oftentimes deliver his people from
greater: So that they shall say, we had perished, if we had not perished; we
had been undone, if we had not been P^riissem nisi periissem.
undone; we had been in danger, if we had not been in danger; God will so
order all the afflictions that befall you in the way of righteousness, that
your Non essem ego salvus nisi istae periissent. Anaxagoras, had not these
things perished, I could not have been safe, said this Philosopher, when he saw
great possessions that he had lost.
souls shall say, we would not for all the world, but that we had met with
such, and such troubles, and afflictions; for surely, had not these befallen
us, it would have been worse, and worse with us; Oh! the carnal security,
pride, formality, dead-heartednesse, lukewarmnesse, censoriousnesse, and
earthlinesse, that God has cured us of, by the troubles and dangers that we
have met with, in the ways and services of the Lord. I remember a story of a
godly man, that as he was going to take shipping for France, he broke his leg,
and it pleased Providence so to order it, that the ship that he should have
gone in, at that very time, was cast away, and not a man saved; so by breaking
a bone, his life was saved. So the Lord many times breaks our bones, but it is
in order to the saving of our lives, and our souls for ever; he gives us a
potion that makes us heart-sick, but it is in order to the making us perfectly
well, and to the purging of us from those ill humors, that have made our heads
ache, and Gods heart ache, and our souls sick, and heavy to the death, etc. Oh!
therefore, let no danger, or misery hinder thee from thy duty.

The fifth Remedy against this device of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that
you shall gain more in the service of God, and by walking in righteous, and
holy ways, though troubles and afflictions should attend you, then you can
possibly suffer, or loose, by your being found in the service of God.
Godliness is great gain; Oh the joy, the peace, Tertullian in in his book to
the Martyrs, has an apt saying ( Negotiatio est aliquid amittere ut majora
lucreris) i. e. that's right, and good merchandise when something is parted with
to gain more, he applies it to their sufferings, wherein, though the flesh lost
something, yet the spirit got much more.
the comfort, the rest, that Saints meet with in the ways and service of God;
they find that Religious services are not empty things, but things, in which
God is pleased to discover his beauty and glory to their souls. My soul
thirsts for God (says David) that I might see thy beauty, and thy glory, as I
have seen thee in thy Sanctuary. Oh! the sweet looks, the sweet words, the
sweet hints, the sweet joggings, the sweet influences, the sweet love letters,
that gracious souls have from Heaven, when they wait upon God, in holy and
heavenly services, the least of which will darken, and outweigh all the bravery
and glory of this world, and richly recompense the soul for all the troubles,
afflictions, and dangers, that have attended it in the service of God; oh! the
Saints can say under all their troubles, and afflictions, that they have meat
to eat, and drink to When the Moble General Ze^slaus had lost his hand in
the Wars of the K. of Poland, the King sent him a golden hand for it; what we
lose in Christ's service, he will make up, by giving in some golden mercies.
drink, that the world knows not of; that they have such incomes, such
refreshments, such warmings, etc. that they would not exchange for all the
honors, riches, and dainties of this world: Ah! let but a Christian compare
his external losses with his spiritual, internal, and eternal gain, and he
shall find, that for every penny that he loses in the service of God, he gains
a pound; and for every pound that he looses, he gains a hundred; for every
hundred lost, he gains a thousand; we loose pins in his service, and find
pearls; we loose the favor of the creature, and peace with the creature, and
happily the comforts and contents of the creature; and we gain the favor of
God, peace with conscience, and the comforts and contents of a better life; Ah!
did the men of this world know the sweet that Saints enjoy in afflictions, they
would rather choose Manasses iron chain, then his golden Crown; They would
rather be Paul a prisoner, then Paul raped up in the third Heaven; for light
afflictions, they shall have a Though the Cross be bitter, yet it is but short,
a little storm, as one said of Julians persecution, and an e^e^nall calm
follows.
weight of glory; for a few afflictions, they shall have those joys,
pleasures, and contents, that are as the stars of heaven, or as the sands of
the sea, that cannot be numbered; for momentany afflictions, they shall have an
eternal Crown of glory; it is but winking, and thou shall be in heaven
presently, said the Martyr; oh! therefore, let no afflictions, nor troubles
work thee to shun the ways of God, or to quit that service, that should be
dearer to thee then a world, yea then thy very life, etc.

The third Device that Satan 3. Device.
has to hinder souls from holy and heavenly services, from gracious, and
religious performances, is,
BY presenting to the soul the difficulty of performing them; says Satan,
it is so hard and difficult a thing to pray as thou should, and to wait on God
as thou should, and to walk with God as thou should, and to be lively,
warm, and active in the communion of Saints, as thou should, that you were
better ten thousand times to neglect them, then to meddle with them; and
doubtless by this Device Satan has, and does keep off thousands from waiting
on God, and from giving to him that service that is due to his name, etc.

Now the remedies against this Device are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this device 1. Remedy.
of Satan, is, to dwell more upon the necessity of the service, and duty, then
on the difficulty that does attend the duty; you should reason thus with your
souls; oh! our souls, though such and such duties and services be hard, and
difficult, yet are they not exceeding necessary for the honor of God, and the
keeping up of his name in The necessity of doing your duty, appears by this,
that you are his servants by a threefold right; you are his servants ( jure
creationis, jure sustentationis, jure redemptionis) by right of creation, and
by right of sustentation, and by right of redemption.
the world? and the keeping under of sin, and the keeping under of weak graces,
and for the reviving of languishing comforts, and for the keeping clear and
bright your blessed evidences, and for the scattering of your fears, and for
the raising of your hopes, and for the gladding the hearts of the righteous,
and stopping the mouths of unrighteous souls, who are ready to take all
advantages, to blaspheme the name of God, and throw dirt and contempt upon his
people, and ways? oh! never leave thinking on the necessity of this, and that
duty, till your souls be lifted up far above all the difficulties that do
attend religious duties.

The second Remedy against this device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that the Lord Jesus will make his services
easy to you, by the sweet discovery of himself to your souls, whilst you are
in his service. Thou meetest him that rejoices, and works righteousness,
those that remember thee in thy ways, as the Prophet Isaiah says; if meeting
with Isa. 64. v. 5. (...) Paganta is diversely taken; but most take the word
here, to meet a soul with those bowels of love and tenderness as the Father
of the Prodigal met the Prodigal with. God is pater miserationum, he is all
bowels, he is as swift to show mercy, as he is slow to anger.
God, who is goodness it self, sweetness it self, beauty it self, strength
it self, glory it self, will not sweeten his service to thy soul, nothing in
Heaven or Earth will. Jacob's meeting with Rachel, and enjoying of Rachell,
made his hard service to be easy, and delightful to him; and will not the
souls enjoying of God, and meeting with God, render his service to be much
more easy and delightful? doubtless it will. The Lord will give that sweet
assistance, by his Spirit and grace, as shall make his service joyous, and not
grievous, a delight, and not a burden; a Heaven, and not a Hell to believing
souls; the confidence of this divine assistance raised up Nehemiah's spirit,
far above all those difficulties, and discouragements that did attend him in
the work and service of the Lord, as you may see in that 2 Nehemiah, verse. 19,
20. But when Sanballat Luther spoke excellently to Melancthon, who was apt to
be disconraged with doubts and difficulties, and fears from foes, and so ^ease
the service they had undertaken; if the work be not good, why did we ever own
it; if it be good? why should we ever decline it? why says he, should we
fear the conquered world that have Christ the Conqueror on our side? Isa. 40.
ult. 3. Remedy. It is not fit since the head was crowned with thorns, that the
members should be crowned with rose-buds, says Zanch.
the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, and Geshem the Arabian
heard it, they laughed us to scorn, and despised us, and said, what is this
thing that ye do? will ye rebel against the King? Then answered I them, and
said unto them, the God of heaven he will prosper us, therefore we his servants
will arise, and build: but you have no right, nor portion, nor memorial in
Jerusalem. Ah souls! while you are in the very service of the Lord, you shall
find by experience, that the God of Heaven will prosper you, and support you,
and encourage, and strengthen you, and carry you through the hardest service,
with the greatest sweetness and cheerfulness that can be. Remember this, that
God will suit your strength to your work, and in the hardest service you shall
have the choicest assistance.

The third Remedy against this device of Satan, is, to dwell upon the hard and
difficult things that the Lord Jesus Christ has past through, for your
temporal, spiritual, and eternal good. Ah! what a sea of blood? a sea of
wrath? of sin, of sorrow, and misery did the Lord Jesus wade through, for
your internal and eternal good? Christ did not plead, this Cross is too heavy
for me to bear, this wrath is too great for me to lie under, this Cup (which
has in it all the ingredients of divine displeasure) is too bitter for me to
sip off, how much more to drink the very dregs of it? no, Christ stands not
upon this; he pleads not the difficulty of the service, but resolutely, and
bravely wades through all, as the Prophet Isa shows: The Lord God has opened
my ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned away back. I gave my back to
the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair; I hid not my
face from shame and spitting. Christ makes nothing of his Fathers wrath, the
burden of your sins, the malice Godfrey of Bullen first K. of Jerusalem,
refused to be crowned with a crown of gold, saying, it became not a Christian
there to wear a crown of gold, where Christ for our salvation had sometime were
a crown of thorns.
of Satan, and the rage of the world, but sweetly and triumphantly passes
through all. Ah souls! if this consideration will not raise up your spirits,
above all the discouragements that you meet with, to own Christ and his
service, and to stick, and cleave to Christ, and his service; I am afraid
nothing will. A soul not stirred by this, not raised, and lifted up by this, to
be resolute and brave in the service of God, notwithstanding all dangers and
difficulties, is a soul left of God to much blindness, and hardness.

The 4. Remedy against this Device of 4. Remedy.
Satan, is, to consider, that religious duties, holy and heavenly exercises are
only difficult to the worser, to the ignoble part of a Saint; they are not to
the noble, and better part of a Saint, to the noble part, the soul, and the
renewed affections of a Saint; holy exercises are a heavenly pleasure, and
recreation, as the Apostle speaks, I delight in the Law of God, after the
inward As every flowr has its sweet savor, so every good duty carries meat in
the mouth, comfort in the performance of it. (...) i. e. my yoke is a benign,
a gracious, a pleasant, a good, and a gainful yoke, opposed to (...),
painful, tedious.
man. With my mind I serve the Law of God, though with my flesh the law of
sin. To the noble part of a Saint, Christ's yoke is easy, and his burden is
light; all the commands and ways of Christ (even those that tend to the
pulling out of right eyes, and cutting off of right hands) are joyous, and not
grievous to the noble part of a Saint; all the ways and services of Christ are
pleasantness (in the abstract) to the better part of a Saint; a Saint, so far
as he is renewed, is always best, when he sees most of God, when he tastes most
of God, when he is highest in his enjoyments of God, and most warm, and lively
in the service of God; oh! says the noble part of a Saint, that it might be
always thus; oh! that my strength were the strength of stones, and my flesh as
brass, that my worser part might be more serviceable to my noble part, that I
might act by an untired power in that service, that is a pleasure, a Paradise
to me.

The fifth Remedy against this Device 5 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that great reward, and glorious recompense
that does attend those that cleave to the service of the Lord, in the Basil
speaks of some Martyrs that were cast out all night naked, in a cold frosty
time, and were to be burned the next day, how they comforted themselves in this
manner; The winter is sharp, but Paradise is sweet; here we shiver for cold,
but the bosom of Abraham will make amends for all.
face of all difficulties, and discouragements; though the work be hard, yet
the wag^s is great, Heaven will make amends for all, I, one hours being in
heaven will abundantly recompense you for cleaving to the Lord, and his ways,
in the face of all difficulties. This carried the Apostle through the greatest
difficulties; he had an eye to the recompense of reward; he looked for a house
that had foundations, whose builder and maker was God, and for a heavenly
country; yea, this bore up the Spirit of Christ, in the face of all
difficulties and discouragements: Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of
our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross,
despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Throne of God.

Christians that would hold on in the service of the Lord, must look more upon
the Crown, then upon the Cross; more upon their future glory, then their
present misery; more upon their encouragements, then upon their
discouragements. Gods very service is wages, his ways are strewed with roses,
and paved with joy that is unspeakable, This is praemium ante praemium, a sure
reward of well doing, in doing thereof (not only for doing thereof) there is
great reward, Psalm. 19. v. 11.
and full of glory, and with peace that passes understanding. Some degree of
comfort follows every good action; as heat accompanies fire, as beams and
influences issue from the Sun. Moreover by them is thy servant warned, and in
keeping of them there is great reward; not only for keeping, but in keeping of
them, there is great reward; the joy, the rest, the refreshing, the comforts,
the contents, the smiles, the incomes that Saints now enjoy in the ways of
God, are so precious and glorious in their eyes, that they would not exchange
them for ten thousand worlds; Ah! if the vailes be thus sweet and glorious
before pay-day comes, what will be that glory, that Christ will crown his
Saints with, for cleaving to his service in the face of all difficulties: When
he shall say to his father, Lo here am I, and the children which thou have
given me; if there be so much to be had in a wilderness, what then shall be
had in Paradise? etc.

The fourth Device that Satan 4 Device.
has to keep souls off from holy exercises, from religious services, is,
BY working them to make false inferences, from those blessed and glorious
things that Christ has done; As that Jesus Christ has done all for us;
therefore there is nothing for us to do, but to joy, and rejoice, he has
perfectly justified us, and fulfilled the Law, and satisfied divine Justice,
and pacified his Fathers wrath, and is gone to Heaven to prepare a place for
us, and in the mean time, to intercede for us; and therefore away with praying,
and mourning, and hearing, etc. Ah! what a world of Professors has Satan drawn
in these days, from religious services, by working them to make such sad,
wild, and strange inferences, from the sweet and excellent things, that the
Lord Jesus has done for his beloved ones.

Now the Remedies against this device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this device 1. Remedy.
of Satan, is, to dwell as much on those Scriptures that show you the duties
and services that Christ requires of you, as upon those Scriptures that declare
Tertullian has this expression of the fullness of the Scriptures ( Adoro
plenitudinem Scripturarum) I adore the fullness of the Scripture. Gregory calls
the Scripture ( cor and animam Dei: the heart and soul of God and who will not
then dwell on it?
to you, the precious and glorious things that Christ has done for you. It Is a
sad, and a dangerous thing, to have two eyes to behold our dignity, and
privileges, and not one eye to see our duties, and services. I should look
with one eye upon the choice and excellent things that Christ has done for me,
to raise up my heart, to love Christ with the purest love, and to joy in
Christ, with the strongest joy, and to lift up Christ above all, who has made
himself to be my all. And I should look with the other eye upon those services
and duties, that the Scriptures require of those, for whom Christ has done
such blessed things, as upon that of the Apostle; What, know ye not that your
body 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20.
is the Temple of the holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye
are not your own? For ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify God in
your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods. And that 1 Cor. 15. 58.
therefore my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding
in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.
And that, And let us not be weary in well doing, for in due Gal. 6. 9. 2.
season we shall reap, if we faint not. And that of the Apostle, rejoice
always, and pray without ceasing; and that in the Philippians: Work out your
salvation with Phil. 2 12, 13 1 Cor. 11. 26. Heb 10. 24, 25.
fear and trembling; and that, This do till I come; and that, Let us consider
one another, to provoke one another to love, and to good works; not forsaking
the assembling of our selves together, as the manor of some The Jews were much
in turning over the leaves of the Scripture; but they did not weigh the matter
of them, John 5. 39. You search the Scripture, Gr. there seems to be
indicative, rather then imperative.
is, but exhorting one another, and so much the more, as you see the day
approaching. Now a soul that would not be drawn away by this device of Satan,
he must not look with a squint eye upon these blessed Scriptures, and
abundance more of like import; but he must dwell upon them, he must make these
Scriptures to be his chiefest, and his choicest companions, and this will be a
happy means to keep him close to Christ, and his service in these times,
wherein many turn their backs upon Christ, under pretense of being highly
interested in the great and glorious things that have been acted by Christ, etc.

The second Remedy against this Device 2. Remedy.
of Satan, is, to consider, that the great and glorious things that Jesus
Christ has done, and is a doing for us, should be so far from taking us off
from religious services, and pious performances, that they should be the
greatest motives and encouragements to the performance of them that may be, as
the Scriptures do abundantly evidence. I 1 Pet. 2. 9. Luke 1. 74, 75. This I am
sure of, that all man's happiness here is his holiness, and his holiness shall
hereafter be his happiness, Christ has therefore broke the Devils yoke from
off our necks, that his Father might have better service from our hearts. 2
Cor. 6. 6. 17, 18. chapter 7. 1. compared.
will only instance in some, as that, That we being delivered out of the hands
of our Enemies, might serve him without fear; in holiness and righteousness
before him all the days of our lives; Christ has freed you from all your
Enemies, from the curse of the Law, the predominant damnatory power of sin, the
wrath of God, the sting of death, and the torments of hell; but what is the end
and design of Christ in doing these great and mavelous things for his people?
it is not that they should throw off duties of righteousness and holiness, but
that their hearts may be the more free, and sweet in all holy duties, and
heavenly services: So the Apostle; I will be their God, and they shall be my
people: And I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and
daughters, says the Lord Almighty (mark what follows) Having therefore these
promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the
flesh, and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord. And again,
The grace of God that Yet. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14.
brings salvation has appeared to all men. Teaching us, that denying all
ungodlinsse, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world; Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious Tace
lingua loquere vita, talk not of a good life, but let thy life speak. Your
actions in passi^g pass not away; for every good work is a grain of seed for
eternal life.
appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave him self
for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works. Ah souls! I know no such arguments to
work you to a lively and constant performance of all heavenly services, like
those that are drawn from the consideration of the great and glorious things
that Christ has done for you; and if such arguments will not take ye, and win
upon ye, I do^ think the throwing of hell fire in your faces will never do it.

The third Remedy against this device 3. Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that those precious souls which Jesus
Christ The Saints Motto in all ages has been ( Laboremus) let us be doing.
has done, and suffered as much for, as he has for you, have been exceeding
active and lively in all religious services, and heavenly performances; he did
as much, and suffered as much for David, God loves ( curristas, not quaristas)
the runner, not the questioner, or disputer, says Luther.
a^ for you, and yet, who more in praying, and praising God then David? seven
times a day will I praise the Lord; who more in the studying, and meditating on
the word, then David. Thy law is my meditation day and night. The same truth
you may run, and read in Jacob, Moses. Job, Daniel, and in the rest of the holy
Prophets, and Apostles, for whom Christ has done as much for, as for you; ah!
how have all those Worthies abounded in works of righteousness, and holiness,
to the praise of free grace? Certainly Satan has got the upper hand of those
souls, that do argue thus; The day is at hand when God will require of men non
quid legerint, sed quid egerint, nec quid dixerint, sed quomodo vixerin^. He
that talks of heaven, but does not the will of God, is like him that gazed upon
the Moon, but fell into the pit.
Christ has done such and such glorious things for us: therefore we need not
make any care or conscience of d^ing such and such religious services, as men
say the word calls for; if this Logic be not from Hell, what is? ah! were the
holy Prophets and Apostles alive, to hear such Logic come out of the mouths
of such as profess themselves to be interested in the great and glorious
things that Jesus Christ has done for his chosen ones; how would they blush to
look upon such souls? and how would their hearts grieve, and break within them,
to hear the language, and to observe the actings of such souls.

The fourth Remedy against this device 4. Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider this, that those that do not walk in ways
of righteousness and holiness (that do not wait upon God in the several duties
and services that are commanded by him) cannot have that evidence to their own
souls of their righteousness before God, of their fellowship and communion
Certainly it is one thing to judge by our graces, another thing to rest, or put
our trust in them. There is a great deal of difference betwixt declaring and
deserving.
on with God, of their blessedness here, and their happiness hereafter, as
those souls have, that love and delight in the ways of the Lord, that are
always best, when they are most in the works and service of the Lord. Little
children (says the Apostle) let no man deceive you; he that does
righteousness, is righteous even as he is righteous. In this (says the same
Apostle) the children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil;
whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither he As David's
daughters were known by their garments of diverse colors, so are Gods children
by their piety and sanctity.
that loves not his brother. If ye know that he is righteous (says the same
Apostle) ye know that every one that does righteousnes^ is born of him. He that
says I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth
is not in him. But whosoever keeps his word, in him verily is the love of
God perfected, hereby know we that we are in him. He that says he abides in
him, ought himself also to walk, even as he A Christians emblem should be an
house walking toward Heaven* High words surely make a man neither holy, nor
just; but a virtuous life, a circumspect walking makes him dear to God. A tree
that is not fruitful is for the fire. Christianity is not a talking, but a
walking with God, who will not be put off with words, if he miss of fruit, he
will take up his axe, and then the soul is cut off for ever.
walked. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk i^ darkness, we
lie, and do not the truth; but if we walk in the light as he is in the light,
we have fellowship one with another; and the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses
us from all sin, says the same Apostle. So James in his second chapter; What
does it profit, my brethren, though a man say he has faith, and have no
works, can faith save him? i. e. it cannot; for as the body without the spirit
is dead, so faith without works is dead. To look after holy and heavenly
works, is the best way to preserve the soul from being deceived, and deluded
by Satan's delusions, and by sudden flashes of joy and comfort, holy works being
a more sensible and constant pledge of the precious spirit, begetting and
maintaining in the soul more solid, pure, clear, strong and lasting joy. Ah
souls! as you would have in your selves a constant, and blessed evidence of
your fellowship with the Father, and the Son; and of the truth of grace, and
of your future happiness; look that you cleave close to holy services, and
that you turn not your backs upon religious duties.

The fifth Remedy against this device 5 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that It Is a precious truth never to be
forgotten ( Quod non actibus, sed finibus pensantur officia) that duties are
esteemed not by their acts, but by their ends.
there are other choice and glorious ends for the Saints performance of
religious duties, then for the justifying of their persons before God, or for
their satisfying of the Law, or justice of God, or for the purchasing of the
pardon of sin, etc. viz. to testify their justification; a good tree cannot
but bring forth good fruit, to testify their love to God, and their sincere
obedience to the commands of God, to testify their deliverance from spiritual
bondage, to evidence the indwellings Finis move^ ad agendum, the end moves to
doing.
of the spirit, to stop the mouths of the worst of men, and to glad those
righteous souls, that God would not have sadded. These, and abundance of other
choice ends there be, why those that have an interest in the glorious doings of
Christ, should notwithstanding that, keep close to the holy duties, and
religious services that are commanded Tene mensuram and respice sinem, keep thy
self within compass, and have an eye always to the end of thy life and
actions was Maximimilians the Emperors Motto.
by Christ. And if these considerations will not prevail with you, to wait upon
God in holy and heavenly duties, I am afraid, if one should rise from the dead,
his arguments would not win upon you, but you would hold on in your sins, and
neglect his service, though you lost your souls for ever, etc.

The fifth Device that Satan 5. Device.
has to draw souls off from religious services, and to keep souls off from
holy duties, and heavenly performances, is,
BY presenting to them the paucity, and poverty of those that walk in the ways
of God, that hold on in religious practices; says Satan, do not you see that
those that walk in such and such religious ways, are the poorest, the John 47,
48, 49. verses.
meanest, and the most despicable persons in the world; this took with them in
that seventh of John. Then answered the Pharisees, are ye also deceived? Have
any of the rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? But this people who
knows not the law are cursed.

Now the Remedies against this device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this Device 1. Remedy. Do you not see (says
Chrysostom) the places where treasures are hid, are rough, and overgrown with
thorns. Do not the naturallists tell you, that the mountains that are big with
gold within, are bare of grass without. Saints have as Scholars, poor commons
here, because they must study hard to go to heaven.
of Satan, is, to consider, that though they are outwardly poor, yet they are
inwardly rich; though they are poor in temporalls, yet they are rich in
spiritualls; the worth and riches of the Saints is inward: The Kings daughter
is all glorious within. Hearken my beloved brethren, has not God chosen the
poor of this world rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which he has
promised to them that love him, says James. I know thy poverty, but thou art
rich, says John to the Church of Smyrna. What though they have little in
possession, yet they have a glorious Kingdom in reversion. Fear not little
flock, it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom. Though Saints have
little in hand, yet they have much in hope; you count those happy in a worldly
sense, that have much in reversion, though they have but little in possession;
and will you count the Saints miserable, because they have little in hand?
little in possession? though they have a glorious Kingdom in reversion of
this. I am sure, the poorest Saint that breaths will not exchange (were it in
his power) that which he has in hope, and in reversion, for the possession of
as many worlds, as there be stars in Heaven, or sands in the Sea, etc.

The second Remedy against this device 2. Remedy.
of Satan, is, to consider, that in all ages God has had some that have been
great, rich, wise, and honorable, that have chosen his ways, and cleaved to
his service in the face of all difficulties, Good Nobles (says one) are like
black swans, and thinly scattered in the firmament of a state, even like stars
in the first m^gnitude, yet some God has had in all ages, as might be showed
out of Histories.
though not many wise men, yet some wise men have; and though not many mighty,
yet some mighty have; and though not many noble, yet some noble have; witness
Abraham, and Jacob, and Job, and several Kings, and others that the Scriptures
speak of; and ah! how many have we among our selves, whose souls have cleaved
to the Lord, and who have swum to his service, through the blood of the slain,
and who have counted their lives dear unto them, that they and others might
enjoy the holy things of Christ, according to the mind and heart of Christ, etc.

The third Remedy against this device 3 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that the spiritual riches of the poorest
Saints do infinitely transcend the temporal riches of all the wicked men in
the Alexanders vast mind enquired, if there were any more worlds to conquer.
world; their spiritual riches do satisfy them, they can sit down satisfied
with the riches of grace that be in Christ; without honors, and without
riches, etc. He that drinks of that water that I shall give him, shall thirst
no more. The riches of poor Saints are durable, they will bed and board with
them, they Crassus was so rich, that he maintained an Army with his own
revenues, yet he, his great Army, with his son and heir sell together, and
left his great estate to others.
will go to the Prison, to a sick bed, to a grave, yea to Heaven with them.
The spiritual riches of poor Saints are as wine, to cheer them; and as bread
to strengthen them, and as clothes to warm them, and as Armor to protect
them. Now all you that know any thing, do know, that the riches of this world
cannot satisfy the souls of men, and they are as fading as a flower, or as
the owners of them are, etc.

The fourth Remedy against this device 4 Remedy.
is, seriously to consider, that though the Saints considered comparatively are
few, though they be a little, little flock, a Luke 12. 32.
remnant, a garden enclosed, a spring shut up, Cant. 4. 12.
a fountain sealed; though they are as the Summer gleanings, though they are
one of a City, and two of a Tribe; though they be Ier. 3. 14.
but a handful to a house-full; a spark to a flame, a drop to the Ocean; yet
consider them simply in themselves, and so they are an innumerable number that
cannot be numbered, as John speaks. After this I beheld, and lo a great
multitude which no man could number, of all Nations, Rev. 7. 9.
and kindred, and people, and tongues, stood before the Throne, and before the
Lamb clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands. So Matthew. speaks;
And I say Mat. 8. 11. Hebr. 12. 22, 23. When Fulgentius saw the Nobility of
Rome sit mounted in their bravery, it mounted his meditation to the heavenly
Jerusalem.
unto you, that many shall come from the East, and West, and shall sit down
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven. So Paul: But ye are
come unto mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels. To the general assembly,
and Church of the first borne, which are written in Heaven, and to God the
judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect.

The fifth Remedy against this device 5 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that 'twill be but as a day, before these
poor despised Saints shall shine brighter then the Sun in her glory; 'twill not
be long before you will wish, oh! that we were now among the poor, mean,
despised ones, in the day that God comes to make up his jewels. 'Twill not be
long before these poor few Saints shall be lifted up upon their Thrones to
judge the multitude, the world, as the Apostle speaks: Know ye not that the
Saints shall judge the world? and in that day? oh! how will the great, and the
rich, the Mr. Fox being once asked whether he knew a certain poor man, who had
received succor of him in time of trouble, he answered, I remember him well, I
tell you I forget Lords and Ladies to remember such. So will the Lord deal by
his poor Sts. he will forget the great and mighty ones of the world, to
remember his few, poor, despised ones. Though John was poor in the world, yet*
the holy ghost calls him the greatest that was born of women; ah poor Saints!
men that know not your worth cannot have such low thoughts of you, but the Lord
will have a^ high.
learned, and the noble wish, that they had lived, and spent their days with
these few, poor, contemptible creatures in the service of the Lord? oh! how will
this wicked world curse the day, that ever they had such base thoughts of the
poor, mean Saints, and that their poverty became a stumbling block, to keep
them off from the ways of sanctity. I have read of Ingo an ancient King of the
Draves, who making a stately feast, appointed his Nobles, at that time Pagans,
to sit in the Hall below, and commanded certain poor Christians, to be
brought up into his Presence Chamber, to sit with him at his Table, to eat and
drink of his Kingly cheer; at which many wondering, he said, he accounted
Christians, though never so poor, a greater ornament at his Table, and more
worthy of his company, then the greatest Peers unconverted to the Christian
faith; for when these might be thrust down to Hell, those might be his
Consorts, and fellow Princes in Heaven; you know how to apply it. Although you
see the stars sometimes by their reflictions, in a puddle, or in the bottom of
a Well, I in a stinking ditch, yet the stars have their situation in Heaven:
So, though you see a godly man in a poor, miserable, low, despised condition,
for the things of this world, yet he is fixed in Heaven, in the Region of
Heaven. Who has raised us up (says the Apostle) and made us sit together in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus. Oh! therefore, say to your own souls (when
they begin to decline the ways of Zion, because of the poverty and paucity of
those that walk in them) the day is at hand, when these few, poor, despised
Saints shall shine in glory, when they shall judge this world, and when all the
wicked of the world will wish that they were in their condion, and would give
ten thousand worlds (were it in their power) that they might but have the
honor, and happiness to wait upon those, whom for their poverty and paucity
they have neglected and despised in this world.

The sixth and last Remedy against this 6 Remedy.
device of Satan, is, solemnly to consider that there will come a time even in
this These following Scriptures do abundantly confirm this truth. Ier. 31. 12.
Isa. 30. 23. Isa. 62. 8, 9. Joel 2. 23, 24. Mica 4. 6. Amos 9. 13, 14. Zech. 8.
12. Isa. 41. 18, 19. Isa. 55. 13. Isa. 66. 6, 7. Isa. 65. 21, 22. Isa. 61. 4.
Isa. 60. 10. Ezekiel. 36. 10.
life, in this world, when the reproach and contempt that is now cast upon the
ways of God, by reason of the poverty and paucity of those that walk in those
ways, shall be quite taken away, by his making them the head, that have days
without number been the tail, and by his raising them up to much outward
riches, prosperity, and glory, who have been as the outcast, because of their
poverty and paucity. John speaking of the glory of the Church, the new
Jerusalem that came down from Heaven, in that 21. of the Revelation, tells us,
That the Nations of them which are saved, shall walk in the light of it, and
the Kings of the earth do bring their glory into it. So the Prophet Isaiah:
They shall bring their sons from far, and their silver and their gold with Only
take these 2 cautions. First, that in these times the Saints chiefest comforts,
delights, and contents will consist in their more clear, full, and constant
enjoyments of God. 2. That they sha^ have such an abundant ^easure of he spirit
poured out upon them, that their riches and outward glory shall not be s^ares
to them, but golden steps to lead them to a richer living in God.
them, verse. 9. For brass I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver,
and for wood brass, and for stones Iron, verse. 19. And so the Prophet
Zechariah speaks, Chap. 14. v. 14. And the wealth of all the heathen round
about shall be gathered together, gold, and silver, and apparel in great
abundance. The Lord has promised that the meek shall inherit the earth: And
heaven and earth shall pass away, before one jot or tittle of his word shall
pass unfulfilled; Ah poor Saints! now some thrust sore at you, others look a
squint upon you, others shut the door against you, others turn their backs
upon you; and most of men (except it be a few that live much in God, and are
filled with the riches of Christ) do either neglect you, or despise you,
because of your poverty; but the day is coming, when you shall be lifted up
above the dunghill, when you shall change p^v^rty for riches, your rags for
robes, your reproach for a crown of honor, your infamy for glory, even in
this world.

And this is not all, but God will also mightily increase the number of his
chosen ones; multitudes shall be converted to him. Who has heard such a Isa.
66. 8.
thing? who has seen such things? shall the earth be made to bring forth in
one day? or shall a Nation be borne at once? for as soon as Zion traveled, she
brought forth children. And they shall bring all your brethren for an offering
unto the Lord out of all Nations, upon Verse. 19, 20.
horses, and in Chariots, in Litters, and upon Mules, and upon swift beasts to
my holy mountain Jerusalem, says the Lord; as the children of Israel bring an
offering in a clean vessel into the house of the Lord. Does not the Scripture
say, that the Kingdoms of Revel. 11. 15.
this world must become the Kingdoms of our Lord? Has not God given to Christ
the heathen? and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possessions? Has not
the Lord said, that in the last days, the mountain of the Lords Psalm. 2. 8.
house shall be lifted up above the hills, and shall be established in the top
of the mountains, and all Nations shall flow unto it. Pray read Isa. 2. 2. Isa.
54. 14. and Isa. 61. 9.
and meditate upon the sixty chapter of Isaiah, and the sixty sixth chapter,
and the five first verses of the second chapter of Isaiah, and there you shall
find the multitudes that shall be converted to Christ; and oh! that you would
be mighty in believing, and in wrestling with God, that he would hasten the day
of his glory, that the reproach that is now upon his people and ways, may
cease.

The sixth Device that Satan 6 Device.
has to keep souls off from religious services, is,
BY presenting before them the examples John 4. 12. 7. Chap. 48, 49. 1* Cor. 1.
26, 27. Mica 7. 2, 3, 4.
of the greatest part of the world that walk in the ways of their own hearts,
and that make light and slight of the ways of the Lord; why says Satan, do
not you see, that the great, and the rich, the noble and the honorable, the
learned and the wise, even the greatest number of men never trouble themselves
about such and such ways, and why then should you be singular and nice* you
were far better do as the most do, etc.

Now the remedies against this Device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this device 1 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider of those Scriptures that make directly
against following the sinful examples of men; as that in Exodus, Thou shall
not The way to hell is broad, and well beaten, the way* to be undone for ever,
is to do as the most do, ( argumentum turpissimum est turba) the multitude is
the weakest and worst argument, says Seneca.
follow a multitude to do evil, neither shall thou speak in a cause to
decline after many to wrest judgment. The multitude generally are ignorant,
and know not the way of the Lord: therefore they speak evil of that they know
not, they are envious, and maliciously bent against the service and way of God,
and therefore they cannot speak well of the ways of God. This way is every
where spoken against, said they: so in that Numb. 16. Separate from them, and
come out from among them. So the Apostle; Have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness. So Solomon, Enter not into the way Prove. 4.
14. ch 9. v. 6.
of the wicked, for sake the foolish, and live. They that walk with the most,
shall p^rish with the most. They that do as the most, shall ere long suffer
with the most; they that live as the most, must dye with the most, and to hell
with the most.

The second Remedy against this device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that if you will sin with the multitude,
all the Angels in heaven, and men on earth cannot keep you from suffering Sin
and punishment are linked together with chains of adamant of sin; we may say
as Isidore does of the serpent ( Tot dolores, quot colores,) so many colors,
so many dolours.
with the multitude; if you will be wicked with them, you must unavoidably be
miserable with them; say to thy soul, oh my soul! if thou will sin with the
multitude, thou must be shut out of heaven with the multitude, thou must be
cast down to hell with the multitude, etc. And I heard another voice from
Heaven, saying, come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her
sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. Come out in affection, in action,
and in habitation; for else the infection of sin will bring upon you the
infliction of punishment. So says the wise man; He that walks with wise men
shall be wise, but a companion of fools shall be destroyed, or as the Hebrew
(...) a Ieroange, from ruange, to be naught.
has it, shall be broken in pieces. Multitudes may help thee into sin; yea,
one may draw thee into sin, but it is not multitudes that can help thee to
escape punishments: As you may see in Moses and Aaron, that were provoked to
sin by the multitude; but were shut out of the pleasant Land, and fell by a
hand of Justice as well as others.

The third Remedy against this device 3. Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider the worth and excellency of thy immortal
soul. Thy soul is a jewel more worth What wise man would fetch gold out of a
fie^y crucible, hazard his immortal soul (to gain the world) by following a
multitude in those steps that lead to the chambers of death and darkness.
then heaven and earth: The loss of thy soul is incomparable, irreparable,
and irrecoverable; if that be lost, all is lost, and thou art undone for ever.
Is it madness and folly in a man to kill himself for company? and is it not
greater madness or folly to break the neck of thy soul, and to damn it for
company? Suspect that way wherein thou see multitudes to walk, the multitude
being a stream that thou must row hard against, or thou will be carried into
that gulf, out of which Angels cannot deliver thee. Is it not better to walk
in a strait way alone, then to wander into crooked ways with company? sure
it is better to go to Heaven alone, then to Hell with company. I might add
other things, but these may suffice for the present; and I am afraid if these
arguments do not stir you, other arguments will work but little upon you.

The seventh Device that Satan 7 Device
has to keep souls from holy and heavenly services, is,
BY casting in a multitude of vain thoughts, whilst the soul is in seeking of
God, or in waiting on God, and by this device he has cooled some men's spirits
in heavenly services, and taken off (at least for a time) many precious Vellem
servire Domine sed cogitationes non patiuntur, Lord now how fain would I serve
thee, and vain thoughts will not suffer me.
souls from religious performances. I have no heart to hear, nor no heart to
pray, nor no delight in reading, nor in the society of the Saints, etc. Satan
does so dog, and follow my soul, and is still a casting in such a multitude of
vain thoughts concerning God, the world, and my own soul, etc. that I even
tremble to think of waiting upon God in any religious service; oh! the vain
thoughts that Satan casts in, do so distaste my soul, and so grieve, vex,
perplex, and distract my soul, that they even make me weary of holy duties,
yea, of m^ very life; oh! I cannot be so raised and ravished, so heated and
melted, so quickened and enlarged, so comforted and refreshed as I should be, as
I might be, and as I would be in religious services, by reason of that
multitude of vain thoughts that Satan is injecting, or casting into my soul,
etc.

Now the Remedies against this device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this device 1 Remedy. When Pompey could not keep
his soldiers in the camp by persuasion, he cast himself all along in the
narrow passage that lead out of it, and then bid them go if you will, but you
shall first trample upon your General, and the thoughts of this overcame them;
you are wise, and know how to apply it to the point in hand.
of Satan, is, to have your hearts strongly affected with the greatness,
holiness, Majesty, and glory of that God, before whom you stand, and with whom
your souls do converse in religious services; Oh! let your souls be greatly
affected with the presence, purity, and majesty of that God before whom thou
stand. A man would be afraid of playing with a feather, when he is speaking
to a King; ah! when men have poor, low, light, slight, etc. thoughts of God, in
their drawing near to God, they tempt the Devil to bestir himself, and to
cast in a multitude of vain thoughts to disturb and distract the soul in its
waiting on God. There is nothing that will contribute so much to the keeping
out of vain thoughts, as to look upon God as an omniscient God, an
omnipresent God, an omnipotent God, a God full of all glorious perfections; a
God, whose Majesty, purity, and glory will not suffer him to behold the least
iniquity. The reason why the blessed Saints, and glorious Angels in Heaven
have not so much as one vain thought, is, because they are greatly affected
with the greatness, holiness, majesty, purity, and glory of God.

The second Remedy against this Device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to be peremptory in religious services, notwithstanding all
those wandering thoughts the soul It is a rule in the civil Law, ( nec videtur
actum, siquid supersit quod agatur) nothing seems to be done, if there remains
ought to be done.
is troubled with. This will be a sweet help against them for the soul to be
resolute in waiting on God, whether it be troubled with vain thoughts, or not;
to say, well, I will pray still, and hear still, and meditate still, and keep
fellowship with the Saints still; many precious souls can say from experience,
that when their souls have been peremptory in their waiting on God, that Satan
has left them, and has not been so busy in vexing their souls with vain
thoughts; when Satan perceives that all Si dixisti suffisit periisti, i^ once
thou say it is enough, thou art undone, says Augustine.
those trifling vain thoughts that he casts into the soul, do but vex the
soul into greater diligence, carfulness, watchfulness, and peremptorinesse
in holy and heavenly services, and that the soul looses nothing of his zeal,
piety, and devotion, but doubles his care, diligence, and earnestness; he
often ceases to interpose his triflles, and vain thoughts as he ceased to tempt
Christ, when Christ was peremptory in resisting his temptations.

The third Remedy against this device 3. Remedy.
of Satan, is, to consider this, that those vain and trifling thoughts that
are cast It Is not Satan's casting in of vain thoughts that can keep mercy
from the soul, or undo the soul, but the lodging, and cherishing of vain
thoughts; oh Jerusalem! how long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee ( ^er 4.
14.) Heb. in the midst of thee; they pass through the best hearts, they are
lodged and cherished only in the worst hearts.
into our souls, when we are waiting upon God in this or that religious
service, if they are not cherished, and indulged, but abhorred, resisted, and
disclaimed; they are not sins upon our souls, though they may be troubles to
our minds, they shall not be put upon our accounts, nor keep mercies and
blessings from being enjoyed by us; when a soul in uprightness can look God
in the face, and say, Lord, when I approach near unto thee, there be a world of
vain thoughts crowd in upon me, that do disturb my soul, and weaken my faith,
and lessen my comfort, and spiritual strength; oh! these are my clog, my
burden, my torment, my hell; oh! do justice upon these; free me from these that
I may serve thee with more freeness, singleness, spiritualnesse, and
sweetness of spirit. These thoughts may vex that soul, but they shall not
harm that soul, nor keep a blessing from that soul; If vain thoughts resisted
and lamented, could stop the current of mercy, and render a soul unhappy,
there would be none on earth that should ever taste of mercy, or be
everlastingly happy, etc.

The fourth Remedy against this device 4 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that watching against sinful thoughts,
resisting of sinful thoughts, lamenting and weeping over sinful thoughts,
carries Psalm. 139. 23. Thoughts are the first born, the blossoms of the soul,
the beginning of our strength, whether for good or evil, and they are the
greatest evidence for, or against a man that can be.
with it the sweetest, and strongest evidence of the truth, and power of grace,
and of the sincerity of your hearts, and is the readiest and the surest way to
be rid of them; many low and carnal considerations may work men to watch their
words, their lives, their actions; As hope of gain, or to please friends, or
to get a name in the world, and many other such like considerations; oh! but to
watch our thoughts, to weep and lament over them, etc. this must needs be from
some noble, spiritual, and internal principle, as love to God, a holy fear of
God, a holy care and delight to please the Lord, etc. The Schools do well
observe, that outward sins are of greater Majoris infamiae. Majoris reatus.
infamy; but inward heart sins are of greater guilt, as we see in the
Devils. There is nothing that speaks out a man to be thoroughly, and kindly
wrought upon, as his having his thoughts to be 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.
brought into obedience, as the Apostle speaks, Grace is grown up to a very
great height in that soul, where it prevails, to the subduing of those vain
thoughts that walk up and down in the the soul; well, though you cannot be
Psalm. 139. 2. Isa. 59. 7. chapter 66. 18. Mat. 9. 4. chapter 12. 25. Zen^ a wise
heathen affirmed, that God even beheld the thoughts, Mat. 15. 15, 16, 17, 18,
19.
rid of them, yet make resistance and opposition against the first risings of
them; when sinful thoughts arise, then think thus; the Lord takes notice of
these thoughts, he knows them afar off, as the Psalmist speaks; he knew Herod's
bloody thoughts, and Judas his betraying thoughts, and the Pharisees cruel and
blasphemous thoughts afar off; oh! think thus, all these sinful thoughts,
they defile and pollute the soul, they deface and spoil much of the inward
beauty, and glory of the soul; if I commit this or that sin, to which my
thoughts incline me, then either I must Tears in stead of Gems were the
ornaments of David's bed, when he had sinned, and so they m^st be thine, or else
thou must lie down in a bed of sorrow forever.
repent, or not repent; if I repent, it will c^st me more grief, sorrow,
shame, heartbreaking, and soul-bleeding, before my conscience will be quieted,
divine Justice pacified, my comfort and joy restored, my evidences cleared, and
my pardon in the Court of Conscience sealed, then the imagined profit, or
seeming sensual pleasure can be worth; What fruit had you in those things
whereof you are now ashamed?

If I never repent, oh then my sinful Inward bleeding kills many a man; so will
sinful thoughts, if not repented of.
thoughts will be the Scorpions that will eternally vex me; the rods that will
eternally lash me; the thorns that will everlastingly prick me; the dagger that
will be eternally a stabbing me; the worm that will be for ever a gnawing me;
oh! therefore watch against them, be constant in resisting them, an^ in
lamenting and weeping over them, and then they shall not hurt thee, though they
may for a time trouble thee, and remember this; he that does this, does more
then the most glistering and blustering Hypocrite in the world does.

The fifth Remedy against this device 5. Remedy. Ephesians. 3. 19. The words are
an hebraisme; the Hebrews when they would set out many excellent things, they
add the name of God to it, City of God, Cedars of God, wrestlings of God, so
here, that ye may be filled with the fullness of God.
of Satan, is, to labor more and more to be filled with the fullness of God,
and to be enriched with all spiritual and heavenly things; what is the reason
that the Angels in heaven have not so much as an idle thought? it is because
they are filled with the fullness of God; take it for an experienced truth, the
more the soul is filled with the fullness of God, and enriched with spiritual
and heavenly things, the less room there is in that soul for vain thoughts.
The fuller the vessel is of wine, the less room there is for water; Oh! lay up
much of God, of Christ, of precious promises, and choice experiences in your
hearts, and then you will be less troubled with vain thoughts; A good man out
of the good treasure Mat. 12. 3.
of his heart brings forth good things. 6. Remedy.


The sixth Remedy against this device of Satan, is, to keep up holy and
spiritual affections; for such as your affections are, such will be your
thoughts; Oh! Psalm. 119. 97. Psalm. 139. 8.
how I love thy law, it is my meditation all the day; what we love most, we most
muse upon; when I awake, I am still with thee. That which we much like, we
shall much mind; them that are frequent in their love to God and his law, will
be frequent in thinking of God, and his Simile.
law; a child will not forget his mother.

The seventh Remedy against this device 7. Remedy. 2 Timothy 2. 4. (...), is
entangled, it is a comparison which St Paul borrows from the custom of the
Roman Empire, wherein soldiers were forbidden to be proctors of other men's
causes, to undertake husbandry or Merchandise.
of Satan, is, to avoid multiplicity of wordly business; oh! let not the world
take up your hearts and thoughts at other times; souls that are torn In
pieces with the cares of the world, will be always vexed and tormented with
vain thoughts in all their approaches to God; vain thoughts will be still
crouding in upon him that lives in a crowd of business. The stars which have
least circuit, are nearest the Pole; and men that are least perplexed with
business, are commonly nearest to God.

The eighth Device that Satan 8 Device.
has to keep souls from religious services, from holy performances, is,
BY working them to rest in their performances, to rest in prayer, and to rest
in hearing, reading, and the communion Isa. 58. 1, 2, 3. Zech. 7. 4, 5, 6. Mat
6. 2. Romans 17.
of Saints, etc. and when Satan has drawn the soul to rest upon the service
done; then he will help the soul to reason thus; why, thou were as good never
pray, as to pray, and rest in prayer; as good never hear, as to hear, and
rest in hearing; as good never be in the communion of Saints, as to rest in the
communion of Saints; and by this device he stops many souls in their heavenly
race, and takes off poor souls from those services that should be their joy
and Crown.

Now the Remedies against this device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this device 1 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to dwell much upon the imperfections, and weaknesses that Pride
and high confidence is most apt to creep in upon duties well done, says one.
do attend your choicest services; oh the spots! the blots! the blemishes,
that are to be seen upon the face of our fairest duties! when thou have done
all thou can, thou have need to close up all with this; Oh! enter not into
judgment with thy servant oh Lord; for the weaknesses that cleave to my best
services, we may all Isa. 64. 6.
say with the Church; All our righteousnesses are as a menstruous cloth. If
God should be strict to mark what is done amiss in our best actions, we were
undone. Oh! the water that is mingled with our wine, the dross that cleaves
unto our Gold.

The second Remedy against this device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to consider the impotency, and inability of any of your b^st
services, divinely to comfort, refresh, and bear your souls up from fainting,
and sinking in the days of troubles, when darkness is round about you; when
God shall say to you, as he did 10. 14.
once to the Israelites, Go, and cry unto the gods that you have chosen, let
them save you in the time of your tribulation: So when God shall say in the day
of your troubles, go to your prayers, to your hearing, and to your fasting,
etc. and see, if they can help you, if they can support you, if they can
deliver you; if God in that day does but withold the influence of his grace
from thee, thy former services will be but poor cordiall^ to comfort thee; and
then thou must, and wilt cry out, oh! none but Christ, none Omne bonum in summo
bono, all good is in the chiefest good. Nec Christus nec coelum patitur
hyperbolen.
but Christ; oh! my prayers are not Christ, my hearing is not Christ, my
fasting is not Christ, etc. oh! one smile of Christ, one glimps of Christ, one
good word from Christ, on nod of love from Christ in the day of trouble and
darkness, will more revive, and refresh the soul, then all your former
services, in which your souls rested, as if they were the bosom of Christ,
which should be the only center of our souls. Christ is the Crown of Crowns,
the glory of glories, and the heaven of heaven.

The third Remedy against this device 3 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that good things rested upon, will as
certainly undo us, and everlastingly destroy us, as the greatest enormities
that can be committed by us; those souls that after they have done all, do
not look up so high as a Christ, and rest, and center alone in Christ, laying
down their services at the footstool of Christ, must lie down in sorrow,
their bed is prepared for them in hell. Behold, all Isa. 50. ult.
ye that kindle a fire, and compass your selves with the sparks, and walk in
the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled, this ye shall
have at mine hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow; Is it good dwelling with
everlasting burnings? with a devouring fire? if it be, why then rest in your
duties still; if otherwise, then see that you center only in the bosom of
Christ.

The fourth and last Remedy against 4 Remedy.
this device of Satan, is, to dwell much upon the necessity and excellency of
that resting place that God has provided for you, above all other resting
places; himself is your resting place, his free mercy and love is your resting
place; the pure, glorious, matchless, and spotless righteousness of Christ is
your resting place; ah! it is sadd to think, that most men have forgotten their
resting place, as the Lord complains; My people have been as lost sheep, their
shepherds have caused them Jer. 50. 6.
to go astray, and have turned them away to the mountains, they have gone
from mountain to hill and forgotten their resting place. So poor souls that
see not the excellency of that resting place that God has appointed for their
souls to lie down in; they wander ftom mountain to hill, from one duty to
another, and here they will rest, and there they will rest; but souls that see
the excellency of that resting place that God has provided for them, they will
say, farewell prayer, farewell hearing, farewell fasting, etc. I will rest no more
in you, but now will rest only in the bosom of Christ, the love of Christ, the
righteousness of Christ.

The third thing to be showed, is the several Devices that Satan has to keep
souls in a sad, doubting, questioning, and uncomfortable condition. Blessed
Bradford in one of his Epistles says thus; O Lord, sometimes me thinks I feel
it so with me, as if there were no difference between my heart and the wicked,
I have a blind mind, as they, a stout, stubborn, rebellious, hard heart as
they, and so he goes on, etc.

THough he can never rob a Believer of his Crown, yet such is his malice and
envy, that he will leave no stone unturned, no means unattempted to rob them of
their comfort, and peace, to make their life a burden, and a hell unto them, to
cause them to spend their days in sorrow and mourning, in sighing and
complaining, in doubting and questioning; surely we have no interest in Christ,
our graces are not true, our hopes are the hopes of hypocrites; our confidence
is but presumption; our enjoyments are but delusions, etc.

I shall show you this in some particulars.

The first Device that Satan 1 Device.
has to keep souls in a sad, doubting, and questioning condition, and so
making their life a hell, is,
BY causing them to be still poring, A Christan should wear Christ in his
bosom as a flower of de light, for he is a whole paradise of delight; he that
minds not Christ more then his sin, can never be thankful and fruitful as he
should.
and musing upon sin, to mind their sins more then their Savior, yea, so to
mind their sins, as to forget, yea, to neglect their Savior, that as the
Psalmist speaks; The Lord is not in all their thoughts; their eyes are so fixed
upon their disease, that they cannot see the Remedy, though it be near; and
they do so muse upon their debts, that they have neither mind nor heart to
think of their surety, etc.

Now the first Remedy against 1 Remedy.
this device of Satan, is,
FOr weak believers to consider, that though Jesus Christ has not freed them
from the presence of sin, yet he Peccata enim non nocent, si non placent, my
sins hurt me not, if they like me not. Sin is like that wild figtree, or Ivy
in the wall, cu^ off stump, body, bough, and branches; yet some strings or
other will sprout out again till the wall be plucked down. Romans 8. 1.
has freed them from the damnatory power of sin. It Is most true, that sin
and grace were never borne together, neither shall sin and grace dye together;
yet while a believer breaths in this world, they must live together, they must
keep house together. Christ in this life will not free any believer from the
presence of any one sin, though he does free every believer from the damning
power of every sin; There Is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. The Law cannot condemn a
believer, for Christ has fulfilled it for him; divine Justice cannot condemn
him, for that Christ has satisfied; his sins cannot condem him, for they in
the blood of Christ are pardoned; and his own conscience (upon righteous
grounds) cannot condemn him, because Christ, that is greater then his
conscience, has acquitted him, etc.

The second Remedy against this device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to consider, that though Jesus Christ has not freed you from
the molesting, and vexing power of sin, yet he has freed you from the reign
and The primitive Christians chose rather to be thrown to lions without, then
left to lusts within Ad leonem magis quam leonem, says Tertullian. Romans 6. 14.
dominion of sin. Thou say that sin does so molest and vex thee, that thou
can not think of God, nor go to God, nor speak with God; oh! but remember,
it is one thing for sin to molest and vex thee, and another thing for sin to
reign, and have dominion over thee. For sin shall not have dominion over
you; for ye are not under the law, but under grace. Sin may rebel, but it
shall never reign in any Saint; it fares with sin in the regenerate, as with
those Beasts that Daniel speaks of, That had their dominion taken Dan. 7. 12.
away, yet their lives were prolonged for a season, and a time.

Now sin reigns in the soul, when the soul willingly and readily obeys it, and
subjects to its commands, as Subjects do actively obey, and embrace the
commands of their Prince. The commands It Is a sign that sin has not gained
your consent, but committed a rape upon your souls, when you cry out ^o God; if
the ravished Virgin under the Law cried out, she was guiltless* Deuteronomy. 22. 27.
So when sin plays the Tyrant over the soul, and the soul cries out it is
guiltless, those sins shall not be charged upon the soul.
of a K. are readily embraced and obeyed by his Subjects; but the commands of a
Tyrant are embraced and obeyed unwillingly. All the service that is done to a
Tyrant, is out of violence, and not out of obedience; A free and willing
subjection to the commands of sin, speaks out the soul to be under the reign
and dominion of sin; but from this plague, this hell, Christ frees all
Believers: Sin cannot say of a believer, as the Centurion said of his servant;
I bid one go, and be goes, and to another come, and he comes, and to another
do this, and he does it. No, the heart of a St. rises against the commands of
sin; and when sin would carry his soul to the Devil, he hales his sin before
the Lord, and cries out for Justice, Lord, says the believing soul, sin
plays the Tyrant, the Devil in me, it would have me to do that which makes
against thy holiness, as well as against my happiness; against thy honor and
glory, as my comfort and peace; therefore do me justice, thou righteous Judge
of Heaven and Earth, and let this tyrant sin die for it, etc.

The third Remedy against this device 3 Remedy.
of Satan, is, constantly to keep one eye upon the promises of remission of
sin, Isa. 44, 22. Mica 7. 18, 19. Coloss. 2. 13, 14. The promises of God are
a precious book, every leaf drops myrthe and mercy.
as well as the other eye upon the inward operations of sin. This is most
certain truth, that God will graciously pardon those sins to his people, that
he will not in this life fully subdue in his people. Paul prays thrice, i. e.
often to be delivered from the thorn in the flesh, all he can get is, my grace
is sufficient for thee; I will graciously pardon that to thee, that I will not
conquer in thee, Though the weak Christian cannot open, read, and apply them,
Christ can, and will apply them to their souls. Ier. 33. 8. Isa. 43. 25. (...)
An Hebrew participle, and notes a constant, a continued act of God; I, I am he,
blotting out thy transgressions, to day, and to morrow, etc. 4 Remedy.
says God. And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby they have
sinned against me, and I will pardon all their iniquities whereby they have
sinned against me, and whereby they have transgressed against me. I, even I am
he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own sake, and will not
remember thy sins. Ah! you lamenting souls, that spend your days in sighing
and groaning under the sense and burden of your sins; why do you deal so
unkindly with God, and so injuriously with your own souls, as not to cast an
eye upon those precious promises of remission of sin, which may bear up, and
refresh your spirits in the darkest night, and under the heaviest burden of sin.

The fourth Remedy against this device of Satan, is, to look upon all your
sins, as charged upon the account of Christ, as debts which the Lord Jesus has
fully satisfied; and indeed were there but one farthing of that debt unpaid,
that Christ was engaged to satisfy, it would not have stood with the unspotted
justice of God, to have let him come into Heaven, and sit down at his own
right hand; but all our debts by his death being discharged, we are freed, and
he is exalted to sit down at the right hand of his Father, which is the top of
his glory, and the greatest pledge of our felicity; For he has made him to be
sin for 2 Cor. 5. 21. Christ was ( peccatorum maximus) the greatest of sinners
by imputation, and reputation. Isa. 53. 5, 6.
us that knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him,
says the Apostle: All our sins were made to meet upon Christ, as that
Evangelicall Prophet has it. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was
bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and
with his stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray, we have
turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of
us all; or as the Hebrew has it, he has made the iniquity of us all to meet
in him. In Law we know, that all the debts of the Wife are charged upon the
Husband; says the Wife to one, and to another, if Christ has the greatest
worth and wealth in him, as the worth and value of many pieces of silver is in
one piece of gold, so all the excellencies scattered abroad in the creatures,
are united to Christ.
I owe you any thing, go to my husband; so may a believer say to the Law, and
to the justice of God; if I owe you any thing, go to my Christ, who has
undertaken for me; I must not sit down discouraged under the apprehensions of
those debts, that Christ to the utmost farthing has fully satisfied; would it
not argue much weakness, I had almost said much madness, for a debtor to sit
down discouraged, upon his looking over those debts, that his surety has
readily, freely, and fully satisfied; the sense of his great love should engage
a man for All the whole volume of perfections, which is spread through Heaven
and earth, is epitomized in him.
ever to love, and honor his surety, and to bless that hand that has paid
the debt, and crossed the books, etc. but to sit down discouraged when the debt
is satisfied, is a sinnne that bespeaks Repentance, etc.

Christ has cleared all reckonings betwixt God and us; you remember the
Scape-goate, upon his head all the iniquities Levit. 16. 21.
of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all their sins
were confessed Christ is ( Canalis gratiae) the channel of grace from God.
and put, and the Goat did bear upon him all their iniquities, etc. Why, the
Lord Jesus is that blessed Scape-Goate, upon whom all our sins were laid, and
who alone has carried our sins away into the Land of forget fullness, where
they shall never, never be remembered more; a believer under the guilt of his
sin may look the Lord in the face, and sweetly plead thus with him; It Is true
Lord, I owed thee The bloods of Abel, for so the Hebrew has it (as if the
blood of one Abel had so many tongues as drops) cried for vengeance against
sin; b^t the blood of Christ cries louder for the p^rdon of sin.
much, but thy Son was my Ransom, my Redemption; his blood was the price, he
was my surety, and undertook to answer for my sins; I know thou must be
satisfied, and Christ has satisfied thee to the utmost farthing, not for
himself, for what sins had he of his own? but for me, they were my debts that
he satisfied for; be pleased to look over the book, and thou shall find that
it is crossed by thy own hand, upon this very account that Christ has suffered,
and satisfied for them.

The fifth Remedy against this device 5 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider of the reasons, why the Lord is pleased to
have his people exercised, troubled, and vexed with the operations of sinful
corruptions, Augustine says, that the first, second, and third virtue of a
Christian is humility.
and they are these; partly to keep them humble, and low in their own eyes;
and partly to put them upon the use of all divine helps, whereby sin may be
subdued and mortified; And partly, that they may live upon Christ for the
perfecting the work of Sanctification; Lilmod lelammed, we therefore learn,
that we may teach, is a proverb among the Rabbis. After the Trojans had been
wandering, and tossing up and down the Mediterranean Sea; as soon as they
espied Italy, they cried out with exulting joy, Italy, Italy: so will Saints
when they come to Heaven.
and partly, to weane them from things below, and to make them heart-sick of
their absence from Christ, and to maintain in them bowels of compassion toward
others, that are subject to the same infirmities with them; and that they may
distinguish between a state of grace, and a state of glory, and that Heaven may
be more sweet to them in the close. Now does the Lord upon these weighty
reasons suffer his people to be exercised, and molested with the operations of
sinful corruptions; oh! then let no believer speak, write, or conclude bitter
things against his own soul, and comforts; because that sin troubles and
vexes his righteous soul, etc. but lay his hand upon his mouth, and be silent,
because the Lord will have it so, upon such weighty grounds, as the soul is
not able to withstand.

The sixth Remedy against this Device 6. Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that Believers must repent for their being
God never g^ve a Believer a new heart, that it should always li^ a bleeding,
and that it should always be rent and torn in pieces with discouragements.
discouraged by their sins. Their being discouraged by their sins will cost
them many a prayer, many a tear, and many a groan: And that, because their
discouragements under sin flows from ignorance and unbelief; it springs from
their ignorance of the riches, freeness, fullness, and everlastingnesse of
Gods love; and from their ignorance of the power, glory, sufficiency, and
efficacy of the death and sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ: And from their
ignorance of the worth, glory, fullness, largeness, and compleatnesse of the
righteousness of Jesus Christ: And from their ignorance of that real, close,
spiritual, glorious, and inseparable union that is betwixt Christ, and their
precious soul: Ah! did precious souls know, and believe the truth of these
things, as they should, they would not sit down dejected, and overwhelmed
under the sense and operations of sin, etc.

The second Device that Satan 2 Device.
has to keep souls in a sad, doubting, and questioning condition, is,
BY working them to make false definitions of their graces: Satan knows, that
as false definitions of sin wrong the soul one way, so false definitions of
grace wrong the soul another way.

I will instance only in faith; oh! how does Satan labor might and main to
work men to make false definitions of faith; Some he works to define faith too
high, as that it is a full assurance of the love of God to a man's soul in
particular, or a full persuasion of the pardon, and remission of a man's own
sins in particular; says Satan, what do thou talk of faith? faith is an
assurance of the love of God, and of the pardon of sin, and this thou have not;
thou know thou art far off from this, therefore thou have no faith; and by
drawing men to make such a false definition of faith, he keeps them in a sad,
doubting, and questioning condition, and makes them spend their days in sorrow
and sighing, so that tears are their drink, and sorrow is their meat, and
sighing is their work all the day long, etc.

The Philosophers say there are eight d^grees of heat; we discern three; now i^
a m^n should define heat only by the highest degree, then all other degrees
will be cast out from being heat: so if men shall define faith only by the
highest degrees, by assurance of the love of God, and of the pardon of his sins
in particular, what will become of lesser degrees of faith?

If a man should define a man to be a living man, only by the highest and
st^ongest demonstrations of life, as laughing, leaping, running, working,
walking, etc. would not many thousands that groan under internal, and external
weaknesses, and that cannot laugh, nor leap, nor run, nor work, nor walk, be
found dead men by such a definition, that yet we know to be alive; it is so
here, and you know how to apply it, etc.

Now the Remedies against this device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this Device 1. Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly ^o consider, that there may be true faith, yea, great
measures of faith, where there is no assurance. The Canaanite woman in the
Gospel had strong faith, yet no assurance that we read of. These things have I
written unto you (says John) that believe on the name of the Son of God, that
ye may know, that ye have eternal life,, and that ye may believe on the name
of the Son of God; In these words you see that they did believe, and had
eternal life, in respect of the purpose and promise of God, and in respect of
the seeds, and beginnings of it in their souls; and in respect of Christ their
head, who sits in Heaven as a public person, representing all his chosen
ones; Who has raised us up together, Ephesians. 2. 6.
and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus; and yet they did
not know that they had eternal life. It Is one thing to have a right to heaven,
and another thing to know it; It Is one thing to be beloved, and another thing
for a man to know that he is beloved. It Is one thing for God to write a man's
name in the book of life, and another thing for God to tell a man, that his
name is written in the book of life, and to say to him, rejoice, because thy
name is written in heaven.

So Paul: In whom ye also trusted after Ephesians 1. 13. So those in ^ha^ Isa. 50.
10 had faith, though they had no assurance. Mica 7. 8, 9.
ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your salvation, in whom also after
that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy spirit of promise.

So Micha, Rejoice not against me oh my enemy, when I shall fall, I shall
rise; when I shall sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me. I will
bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned, etc. or the sad
countenance of God, as the Hebrew has it. This soul had no assurance, for he
sits in darkness, and was under the sad countenance of God, and yet had strong
faith: As appears in those words, when I fall, I shall arise: when I sit in
darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me. He will bring me forth to the
light, and I shall behold his righteousness, and let this suffice for the
first answer.

The second Remedy against this Device 2. Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that God in the Scriptures does define
John 1. 12.
faith otherwise; God defines faith to be a ^^ceiving of Christ; As many as
received him, to them he gave this privilege to be Act. 11. 23.
the sons of God, to as many as believed on his name; to be a cleaving of the
soul unto God, though no joy but afflictions attend the soul. Yea, the Lord
defines faith to be a coming to God in Christ, Mat. 11. 28. John 6. 37. Heb. 7.
25. 26. Isa. 3. 4, etc.
and often to a resting, and staying, or rouling of the soul upon Christ. It Is
safest, and sweetest to define as God defines, both vices and graces; this is
the only way to settle the soul, and to secure it against all the wiles of men
and devils, who labor by false definitions of grace to keep precious souls
in a doubting, staggering, and languishing condition, and so make their lives a
burden, a hell unto them.

The third Remedy against this device 3 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider this, that there may be true faith, where
there Mat. 6. 30. chap. 14. 31. and chap. 16. 8.
is much doubtings; witness those frequent sayings of Christ to his Disciples,
Why are ye afraid oh ye of little faith? Luke 12. 28.
Persons may be truly believing, who nevertheless are sometimes doubting; in
the same persons (that the forementioned Scriptures speak of) you may see
their faith commended, and their doubts condemned, which does necessarily
suppose a presence of both.

The fourth Remedy against this device 4 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that assurance is an effect of faith;
therefore it cannot be faith. The cause cannot be the effect, nor the root the
fruit; as the effect slowes from the cause, the fruit from the root, the stream
from the fountain, so does the assurance flow from faith; this truth I shall
make good thus.

The assurance of our salvation, and pardon of sin does primarily arise from
the witness of the spirit of God, that Ephesians. 1. 13. Gal. 5. 6.
we are the children of God: And the spirit never witnesses this, till we are
believers; for we are sons by faith in Gal. 4 6.
Christ Jesus: therefore assurance is not faith, but follows it, as the effect
follows the cause.

Again, no man can be assured, and persuaded of his salvation, till he be
united to Christ, till he be ingrafted into Christ; and a man cannot be
ingrafted into Christ, till he has faith; he must first be ingrafted into
Christ by faith, before he can have assurance of his salvation, which does
clearly evidence, that assurance is not faith, but an effect and fruit of
faith, etc.

Again, faith cannot be lost, but assurance may; therefore assurance is not
faith. Though assurance be a precious Psalm. 51. 12. Psalm. 30. 6, 7.
flower in the garden of a Saint, and is more infinitely sweet, and delightful
to the soul, then all outward comforts, Cant. 5. 6. Isa. 8. 17.
and contents; yet it is but a flower that is subject to fade, and to loose its
freshness, There is many thousand precious souls, of whom this world is not
worthy, that have the ^aith of reliance, and yet want assurance, and the
effects of it; as high joy, glorious peace, and vehement longings after the
coming of Christ.
and beauty, as Saints by sad experience find, etc.

Again, a man must first have faith, before he can have assurance, therefore
assurance is not faith; and that a man must first have faith, before he can
have assurance, is clear; by this a man must first be saved, before he can be
assured of his salvation, for he cannot be assured of that which is not; and a
man must first have a saving faith, before he can be saved by faith; for he
cannot be saved by that which he has not; therefore a man must first have
faith, before he can have assurance, and so it roundly follows, that assurance
is not faith, etc.

The third Device that Satan 3 Device.
has to keep the soul in a sad, doubting, and questioning condition, is,
BY working the soul to make false Psalm. 77. 7. 11. Psalm. 88. 1. ult. Psalm.
73. 2. 23.
inferences from the cross actings of providence; says Satan, do thou not
see how Providence crosses thy prayers, and crosses thy desires, thy tears,
thy hopes, thy endeavors; surely, if his love were toward thee, if his soul
did delight and take pleasure in thee, he would not deal thus with thee, etc.

Now the remedies against this Device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this device 1 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider that many things may be cross to our
desires, that are not cross to our good; Abraham, Jacob, David, Job, Moses,
Jeremiah, The Circumcellians being not able to withstand the preaching, and
writing of Augustine, sought his destruction, having beset the way he was to
go his visitation, but by Gods providence, he missing his way, escaped the
danger.
Jonah, Paul, etc. met with many things that were contrary to their de fires,
and endeavors, that were not contrary to their good, as all know, that have
wisely compared their desires and endeavors, and Gods actings together.
Physic often works contrary to the Patients desires, when it does not work
contrary to their good. I remember a story of a godly man, who had a great
desire to go to France, and as he was going to take shipping, he broke his
leg, and it pleased providence so to order it, that the ship that he should
have gone in, at that very same time was cast away, and not a man saved, and so
by breaking a bone, his life was saved. Though Providence did work cross to
his desires, yet it did not work cross to his good, etc.

The second Remedy against this device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that the hand of God may be against a man,
when the love and heart of God is much set upon a man; No man can conclude how
the heart of God stands by his hand. The hand of God was against Ephraim, and
yet his love, his heart was Ier. 31. 18, 19, 20. Gods providentiall hand may be
with persons, when his heart is set against them; Gods providentiall hand was
for a time with Saul, Haman, Ashur, and Iehu, and yet his heart was set against
them. No man knows love or hatred by all that is before them. Eccles. 9. 1, 2.
dearly set upon Ephraim. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus;
thou have chastised me, and I was chastised as a bullock unaccustomed to the
yoke: turn thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God. Surely
after that I was turned, I repented; and after that I was instructed, I smote
upon my thigh; I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the
reproach of my youth. Ephraim is my dear son, he is a pleasant child; for
since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my
bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord.

God can look sowrly, and chide bitterly, and strike heavily, even where, and
when he loves dearly. The hand of God was very much against Job, and yet his
love, his heart was very much set upon Job, as you may see by comparing the 2.
first chap. of Job with the two last. The hand of God was sore against David,
and Jonah, when his heart was much set upon them. He that shall conclude, that
the heart of God is against those that his hand is against, will condemn the
generation of the just, whom God unjustly would not have condemned.

The third Remedy against this device 3 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to consider, that all the cross providence that befall the
Saints, are but in order to some noble good, that God does intend to confer
upon them. Providence wrote cross to David's desire, in taking away the child
sinfully begotten, but yet not cross to a more noble good; for was it not
far better for David to have such a legitimate Heir as Solomon was, then
that a Bastard should wear the Crown, and sway the Scepter?

Joseph you know, was sold into a far Country by the envy and malice of his
brethren, and afterward imprisoned, because he would not be a prisoner to his
Mistrisses lusts; yet all these cross providence did wonderfully conduce to
his advancement, and the preservation of his Fathers family, which was then the
visible Church of Christ. It was so ordered by a noble hand of providence, that
what they sought to decline, they did promote; Joseph was therefore sold by his
brethren, that he might not be worshipped, and yet he was therefore worshipped,
because he was sold.

David was designed to a Kingdom; but oh the straits, troubles, and deaths,
that he run through, before he feels the weight of the Crown; and all this was
but in order to the sweetning of his Crown, and to the settling of it more
firmly and gloriously upon his head; God did so contrive it, that Jonah's
offense, and those cross actings of his that did attend it, should advantage
that end which they seemed most directly The motions of divine providence are
so dark, so deep, so changeable, that the wisest and noblest souls cannot tell
what conclusions to make.
to oppose; Jonah he flies to Tanshish, then cast into the Sea, then saved by a
miracle: Then the Mariners, as is very probable, who cast Jonah into the Sea,
declared to the Ninivites what had happened; therefore he must be a man sent of
God, and that his threatenings must be believed, and hearkened to, and therefore
they must repent, and humble themselves, that the wrath threatened might not be
executed, etc.

The fourth Remedy against this device 4 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that all the strange, dark, deep, and
changeable providence that Believers meet with, shall further them in their
way to heaven, in their journey to happiness; divine wisdom and love will so
order all things here below, that they shall work for the real, internal, and
eternal good of them that love him. All the rugged providence that David met
with, did contribute to the Orosius speaking of Valentinian, says, he that for
Christ's name sake had lost a Tribune ship, within a while after succeeded his
persecutor in the Empire.
bringing of him to the Throne; and all the rugged promises that Daniel, and
the three children met with, did contribute to their great advancement; So all
the rugged providence that Believers meet with, they shall all contribute to
the lifting up of their souls, above all things below God. As the waters
lifted up Noah's Ark nearer Heaven: and as all the stones that were about
Stevens ears, did but knock him the closer to Christ, the cornerstone, so all
the strange rugged providence that we meet with, they shall raise us nearer
Heaven, and knock us nearer to Christ, that precious cornerstone, etc.

The fourth Device that Satan 4 Device.
has to keep the soul in a sad, doubting, and questioning condition, is,
BY suggesting to them, that their graces are not true, but counterfeit; says
Satan, all is not gold that glisters, all is not grace that you count grace,
that you call grace; that which Yet it must be granted, that many a fair flower
may grow out of a stinking root, and many sweet dispositions, and fair actions
may be where there is only the corrupt root of nature.
you call faith is but a fancy, and that which you call zeal, is but unnatural
heat and passion; and that light you have, it is but common, it is short to what
many have attained to, that are now in hell, etc. Satan does not labor more
mightily to persuade hypocrites that their graces are true, when they are
counterfeit, then he does to persuade precious souls that their graces are
counterfeit, when indeed they are true, and such as will abide the touchstone
of Christ, etc.

Now the Remedies against this device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this device of Satan, is, seriously to consider,
that grace is taken two ways.

First, it is taken for the gracious good will and favor of God, whereby he is
pleased of his own free love, to accept of some in Christ for his own. This
some call the first grace, because it is the fountain of all other graces, and
the Spring from whence they flow; and it is therefore called grace, because it
makes a man gracious with God, but this is only in God.

Secondly, grace is taken for the gifts of grace, and they are of two sorts,
common, or special.

Some are common to Believers, and hypocrites, as a gift of knowledge, a gift
of prayer, etc. Gal. 5. 22, 23.


Some are special graces, and they are proper, and peculiar to the Saints, as
faith, humility, meekness, love, patience, etc.

The second Remedy against this device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is, wisely to consider the differences betwixt renewing grace, and
God brings not a pair of scales to weigh our graces, but a touchstone to try
our graces. Purity, preciousness, and holiness is stamped upon all saving graces.
Acts 15. 9. 2 Pet. 1. 1. Jude 20.
restraining grace; betwixt sanctifyng grace, and temporary grace, and this I
shall show you in these following particulars

1. True grace makes all glorious within and without. The Kings daughter is all
glorious within, her raiment is of wrought gold. True grace makes the
underastanding glorious, the will glorious, the affections glorious, it casts a
general glory upon all the noble parts of the soul; The Kings daughter is all
glorious within: And as it makes the inside glorious, so it makes the outside
glorious; Her clothing is of wrought gold; it makes men look gloriously, and
speak gloriously, and walk, and act gloriously: so that vain souls shall be
Acts 4. verse. 8. to verse. 15.
forced to say, that these are they that have seen Jesus; as grace is a fire to
burn up, and consume the dross, and filth of the soul, so it is an ornament
to 2 Cor. 5. 17. (...), a new creation, new Adam, new Covenant, new Paradise,
new Creation, new Lord, new Law, new hearts, and new natures go together*
beautify and adorn the soul. True grace makes all new, the inside new, and
the outside new; If any man be in Christ he is a new creature; but temporary
grace does not this. True grace changes the very nature of a man, moral virtue
does only restrain, or chain up the outward man; it does not change the whole
man; a Lion in a grate is a Lion still, he is restrained, but not changed; for
he retains his Lion-like nature still: so temporary graces restrain many men
from this and that wickedness, but it does not change and turn their hearts
from wickedness; but now true grace, that turns a Lion into a Lamb, as you
may see in Paul, Acts 9.
and a notorious strumpet, into a blessed and glorious Penitent, as you may see
in Mary Magdalen, etc. Luke 7.


2. The objects of true grace are supernatural; true grace is conversant about
the choicest, and the highest objects, 2 Cor. 4. 18. chap. 11. Hebr. 15. Prove.
14. A Saint has his feet where other men's heads are. Matthew. 6.
about the most soul-enobling, and soul-greatning objects, as God, Christ,
precious promises, that are more worth then a world; and a Kingdom that shakes
not, a Crown of glory that withers not, and Heavenly treasures that rust not.
The objects of temporary grace are low, and poor, and always within the
compass of reasons reach.

3. True grace inables a Christian (when he is himself) to do spiritual
actions with real pleasure and delight. To souls truly gracious, Christ's yoke
is Mat. 11. 30. 1 John 5. 3. Romans 7. 22.
easy, and his burden is light, his commandments are not grievous, but
joyous; I delight in the law of God after the inward man, says Paul; the
blessed man is described by this, that he delights in the law Psalm. 1. 2.
of the Lord; It Is joy to the just to do judgment, Prove. 21. 15.
says Solomon; To a gracious soul all the ways of the Lord are pleasantness,
and his paths are peace. But to souls that have but temporary grace, but moral
virtues, religious services, are a toil, not a pleasure; a burden, and not a
delight: Wherefore have we fasted say they, Isa. 58. 3.
and thou see not? wherefore have we afflicted Mal. 3. 14.
our souls, and thou take no knowledge, etc. Ye have said (say those in
Malachi) it is vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his
Ordinances, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts? When
will the new Moon be gone (say those in Amos) that Amos 8. 5.
we may sell corn? and the Sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, making the
Epha small, and the shekell great, and falsifying the balances by deceit.

Fourthly, True grace makes a man most careful, and most fearful of his own
heart; it makes him most studious about his own heart, informing that,
examining that, and P(...). 51. 10. Psalm. 119. 36. 80. Psalm. 139. 23. Psalm. 86.
11. Matthew. 23.
watching over that; but temporary grace, moral virtues, make men more
mindful, and careful of others to instruct them, and counsel them, and stir
up them, and watch over them, etc. which does with open mouth demonstrate, that
their graces are not saving, and peculiar to Saints; but that they are
temporary, and no more then what Judus, Demas, and the Pharisees had, etc.

5. Grace will work a man's heart to love, and cleave to the strictest, and
h^liest ways and things of God, for their purity and sanctity, in the face of
all dangers and hardships; Thy word is very Psalm. 119. 140.
pure, therefore thy servant loves it; others love it, and like it, and follow
it, for the credit, the honor, the advantage that they get by it; but I love
it for the spiritual beauty and purity of it. So the Psalmist, All this is
come upon us, Psalm. 44. 17, 18, 19. Grace is a panoply against all troubles,
and a paradise of all pleasures.
yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant.
Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy way.
Though thou have sore broken us in the place of Dragons, and covered us with
the shadows of death. But temporary grace that will not bear up the soul
against all oppositions and discouragements in the ways of God, as is clear
by their apostacy in that sixth Mat. 13. 20, 21.
of John, and by the stony grounds falling away, etc.

6. True grace will enable a man to step over the worlds Crown, to take up
Christ's Cross, to prefer the cross of Christ above the glory and bravery of
this world. It enabled Abraham, and Moses, and Daniel, with those other Heb. 11.
Worthies in the 11. of the Hebrews to do so.

Godfrey of Bullen, first King of Jerusalem, refused to be crowned with a Crown
of Gold, saying, that it became Few are of Hieroms mind, that had rather have
St. Paul's coat with his heavenly graces, then the purple of Kings with their
Kingdoms. 2 Timothy 4. 10. Mat. 19. 20, 21, 22. The King of Navarr told Beza, that
in the cause of Religion he would launch no further into the Sea, then he
might be sure to return safe to the Haven.
not a Christian to wear a Crown of Gold, where Christ had wore a Crown of
thorns; oh! but temporary grace cannot work the soul, to prefer Christ's cross
above the worlds Crown; but when these two meet, a temporary Christian steps
over Christ's cross, to take up, and keep up the worlds crown. Demas has for
saken us to embrace this present world. So the young man in the Gospel had many
good things in him, he bid fair for Heaven, and came near to Heaven; but when
Christ set his Cross before him, he steps over that to enjoy the worlds Crown.
When Christ bid him go, and sell all that he had and give to the poor, etc. He
went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions. If Heaven be to be had upon
no other terms, Christ may keep his Heaven to himself, he will have none, etc.

Then in the seventh place, consider this, that sanctifying grace, renewing
grace puts the soul upon spiritual duties, from spiritual and intrinsical
motives, as from the sense of divine love, that does constrain the soul to wait
on As what I have, if offered to thee, pleases not thee, oh Lord without my
self, so the good things we have from thee, though they may refresh us, yet
they satisfy us not without thy self. Ber. It is an excellent speech of
Bernard (bonus es domine, animae quaerenti; quid invenienti?) Good art thou oh
Lord to the soul that seeks thee, what art thou then to the soul that finds
thee.
God, and to act for God, and the sense of the excellency and sweetness of
communion with God, and the choice and precious discoveries that the soul has
formerly had of the beauty and glory of God, whilst it has been in the service
of God. The good looks, the good words, the blessed love letters, the glorious
kisses, and the sweet embraces that gracious souls have had from Christ in his
service, do provoke and move them to wait upon him in holy duties; ah but
restraining grace, temporal grace that puts men upon religious duties, only
from external motives, as the ear of the creature, the eye of the creature,
the rewards of the creature, and the keeping up of a name amongst the
creatures, and a thousand such like considerations, as you may see in Saul,
Jehu, Judas, Demas, and the Scribes and Pharisees, etc.

The Abbot in Melancton lived strictly, and walked demurely, and looked humbly,
so long as he was but a Monk; but when by his seeming extraordinary sanctity,
he got to be Abbot, he grew intolerable proud and insolent; and being asked
the reason of it, confessed, that his former lowly look was, but to see, if he
could find the keys of the Abbie. Such poor, low, vain motives work
temporary souls to all the service they do perform, etc.

8. Saving grace, renewing grace will cause a man to follow the Lord fully in
the desertion of all ^in, and in the observation of all Gods precepts. Joshua
and Numb. 14. 2. (...) has fulfilled after me; a metaphor taken from a ship
under sail, that is strongly carried with the wind, as fearing neither rocks,
nor sands. Luke 1. 5, 6. Rev. 14. 4. Mat. 23. 23.
Caleb followed the Lord fully; Zacharias and Elizabeth were righteous before
God, and walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord
blameless. The Saints in the Revelation are described by this, that they
follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes; but restraining grace, temporary grace
cannot enable a man to follow the Lord fully; all that temporary grace can
enable a man to do, is to follow the Lord partially, unevenly, and haltingly,
as you may see in Jehu, Herod, Judas, and the Scribes and Pharisees, who paid
tithe of Mint, and Anise, and Cumming, but omittted the weighty matters of the
Law, Judgment, Mercy, and faith, etc.

True grace works the heart to the Psalm. 119. 104. 128. I had rather go to
hell pure from sin, then to Heaven polluted with that filth, says Anselm.
hatred of all sin, and to the love of all truth; it works a man to the hatred
of those sins, that for his blood he cannot conquer, and to loath those sins,
that he would give all the world to overcome: So that a soul truly gracious
can say, though there be no one sin mortified, and subdued in me, as it
should, and as I would, yet every sin is hated, and loathed by me. So a soul
truly gracious can say, though I do not obey any one command as I should, and
as I would, yet every word is sweet, every command of God is precious; dearly
prize, and greatly love those Da quod jubes and jube qu^d vis, give what thou
command, and command what thou will. Psalm. 119. 119. 127. 167. verses.
commands that I cannot obey, though there be many commands that I cannot in a
strict sense fulfill, yet there is no command I would not fulfill, that I do
not exceedingly love. I love thy commandments above gold, above fine gold. My
soul has kept thy testimonies, and I love them exceedingly.

9. True grace leads the soul to rest in Christ, as in his ( summum bonum)
chiefest good; it works the soul to center in Christ, as in his highest and
ultimate end; Whether should we go, thou have (...) 6. 68. Cant. 5. 10. Cant.
3. 4. Grace is that star that leads to Christ, it is that cloud and pillar^ of
fire that leads the soul to that heavenly Canaan, where Christ si^s chief.
the worlds of eternal life. My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest of
ten thousand. I found him whom my soul loved, I held him and would not let him
go.

That wisdom a Believer has from Christ, it leads him to center in the
wisdom of Christ; and that love the soul has from Christ, it leads the soul
to center in the love of Christ; and that Righteousness the soul has from
Christ, it leads the soul to rest, and center in the Righteousness of Christ;
1 Cor. 1. 30. Phil. 3. 9.
True grace is a beam of Christ, and where it is, it will naturally lead the
soul to rest in Christ: The stream does not more naturally lead to the
fountain, nor the effect to the cause, then true grace leads the soul to
Christ. But restraining grace, temporary grace works the soul to center, and
rest in things below Christ; Sometimes it works the soul to center in the
praises of the creature, sometimes to rest in Mat. 6. 1, 2. Zach. 7. 5, 6.
the rewards of the creature; verily they have their reward says Christ, and
so in a hundred other things, etc.

10. True grace will enable a soul to sit down satisfied, and contented with
the naked enjoyments of Christ. The Cui cum paupertate been convenit, pauper
non est, says Seneca. A contented man cannot be a poor man.
enjoyment of Christ without honor will satisfy the soul; the enjoyment of
Christ without riches, the enjoyments of Christ without pleasures, and without
the smiles of creatures, will content and satisfy the soul. It Is enough,
Joseph is alive. So says a gracious soul, though honor is not, and riches
are not, and health is not, and Charles the great his Motto was, Christus
regnat, vincit, triumphat. And so it is the Saints.
friends are not, etc. It is enough that Christ is, that he reigns, conquers,
and triumphs; Christ is the pot of Mannah, the cruice of oil, a bottomless
ocean of all comfort, content, and satisfaction; he that has him wants
nothing; he that wants him enjoys nothing, having nothing (says Paul) and yet
possessing 2 Cor. 6. 10. Saint Austine upon Psalm. 12. brings in God rebuking a
discontented Christian thus; what is thy faith? have I promised thee these
things? what, were thou made a Christian that thou should flourish here in
this world?
all things. Oh! but a man that has but temporary grace, that has but
restraining grace, cannot sit down satisfied and contented under the wan^ of
outward comforts; Christ is good with honors, says such a soul; and Christ
is good with riches, and Christ is good with pleasures, and he is good with
such and such outward contents. I must have Christ, and the world, or else with
the young man in the Gospel (in soight of my soul) I shall forsake Christ to
follow the world. Ah! how many shining Professors be there in the world, that
cannot sit down satisfied, and contented under the want of this, or that
outward comfort and content, but are like Bedlams, fretting and vexing, raging,
and madding, as if there were no God, no Heaven, no Hell, nor no Christ to make
up all such outward wants to souls. I but a soul truly gracious can Content
is the deputy of outward felicity, and supplies the place where its absent. As
the Jews throw the book of Hester to the ground before they read it, because
the name of God is not in it, as the Rabbis have observed: So do Saints in
some sense, those mercies wherein they do not read Christ's name, and see
Christ's heart. Luther said, he had rather be in hell with Christ, then in
heaven without him.
say, In having nothing, I have all things, because I have Christ; having
therefore all things in him, I seek no other reward, for he is the universal
reward; such a soul can say, nothing is sweet to me without the enjoyment of
Christ in it; honors, nor riches, nor the smiles of creatures are not sweet to
me, no further then I see Christ, and taste Christ in them; the confluence of
all outward good cannot make a Heaven of glory in my soul, if Christ who is
the top of my glory be absent. As Absalom said, What is all this to me, so
long as I cannot see the Kings face? so says the soul, what do you tell me of
this, and that outward comfort, when I cannot see his face whom my soul loves?
why, my honor is not my Christ, nor riches is not Christ, nor the favor of
the creature is not Christ; let me have him, and let the men of this world take
the world and divide it amongst themselves, I prize my Christ above all; I
would enjoy my Christ before all other things in the world; his presence will
make up the absence of all other comforts, and his absence will darken, and
embitter all my comforts; so that my comforts will neither taste like comforts,
nor look like comforts, nor warm like comforts, etc. when he that should Lam.
1. 16.
comfort my soul stands a far off, etc. Christ is all, and in all to souls
truly gracious; we have all things in Christ, and Christ is all things to a
Christian; Coloss. 3. 11. None but Christ, none but Christ, said Lambers,
listing up his hands, and his singers ends flaming.
if we be sick, he is a Physician; if we thirst, he is a fountain; if our
sins trouble us, he is righteousness; if we stand in need of help, he is
mighty to save; if we fear death, he is life; if we be in darkness, he is
light; if we be weak, he is strength; if we be in poverty, he is plenty; if we
desire Heaven, he is the way. The soul cannot say, this I would have, and that
I would have; but says Christ, it is in me, it is in me, eminently, perfectly,
eternally.

The fifth Device that Satan 5 Device.
has to keep souls in a sad, doubting, and questioning condition, is,
BY suggesting to them, that that condict John 8. 44. The Devil is a liar, and
^he Father of it. The Devils breasts says Luther, ^re very fruitful with lies.
that is in them, is not a conflict that is only in Saints; but such a
conflict that is to be found in hypocrites, and profane souls; when the truth
is, there is as much difference betwixt the conflict that is in them, and that
which is in wicked men, as there is betwixt light and darkness, betwixt Heaven
and H^ll. And the truth of this I shall evidence to you in the following
particulars.

1. The whole frame of a B^leevers soul is against sin; understanding, will,
and affections, all the powers and faculties 'Twas a good prayer of him that
said ( Domine libera me a malo homine meipso.) Lord deliver me from an ill man
my self. Austine complains, that men do not tame the beasts in their own
bosoms. Romans 2. 21, 22, 23.
of the soul are in arms against sin. A covetous man may condemn
covetousness, and yet the frame and bent of his heart may be to it; a proud
person may condemn pride, and yet the frame of his spirit may be to it; and the
drunkard may condemn drunkenness, and yet the frame of his spirit may be to
it; a man may condemn stealing and lying, and yet the frame of his heart may be
to it. Thou that preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that
say a man should not commit Adultery, do thou commit Adultery? Thou that
ab^orrest idols, do thou commit sacriledg? Thou that make thy boast of the
Law, through breaking the law, dishonourest thou God? But a Saints will is
against it. The evil that I would not do, I do; and his affections are
against Romans 7. 19. 17.
it, what I hate, I do.

2. A Saint conflicts against sin universally, Psalm. 119. 104. I hate every
false way, Sanethi from (...) which signifies to hate with a deadlyly and
irreconciliable hatred.
the least as well as the greatest, the most profitable, and the most pleasing
sin, as well as against those that are less pleasing and profitable; he will
combat with all, though he cannot conquer one as he should, and as he would;
he knows that all sin strikes at Gods holiness, as well as his own happiness;
at Gods glory, as well as at his souls comfort and peace.

He knows that all sin is hateful to God, and that all sins are Traitors to
the Crown and dignity of the Lord Jesus. He looks upon one sin, and sees He
knows that all the parts of the old man has, and does play the part of a
treacherous friend, and a friendly traitor; therefore his heart strikes at all.
The greater the combat is, the greater shall be the following rewards, says
Tertullian.
that that threw down Noah, the most righteous man in the world; and he looks
upon another sin, and sees that that cast down Abraham, the greatest believer
in the world; and he looks upon another sin, and sees that that threw down
David, the best King in the world; and he looks upon another sin, and sees that
that cast down Paul, the greatest Apostle in the world. He sees that one sin
threw down Sampson, the strongest man in the world; another cast down Solomon,
the wisest man in the world; and another Moses, the meekest man in the world;
and another sin cast down Job, the patientest man in the world, and this
raises a holy indignation in his soul against all: so that nothing can
satisfy, and content True hatred is (...) against the whole kind. Plutarch
reports of one who would not be resolved of his doubts, because he would not
loose the pleasure in seeking for resolution. So wicked men will not be rid of
some sins, because they would not loose the seeming pleasure of sinning.
his soul, but a destruction of all those lusts and vermin, that vex and rack
his righteous heart; it will not satisfy a gracious soul to see Justice done
upon one sin, but he cries out for Justice upon all; he would not have some
crucified, and others spared, but cries out, Lord, crucify them all, crucify
them all. Oh! but now the conflict that is in wicked men is partial; they
frown upon one fin, and smile upon another; they strike at some sins, but
stroke others; they thrust some out of doors, but keep others close in their
bosoms, as you may see in Iehu, Herod, Judas, Simon Magus, and Demas. Wicked
men strike at gtosse sins, such as are not only against the law of God, but
against the Laws of nature and Nations; but make nothing of less sins, as
vain thoughts, idle words, sinful motions, John 3. 20.
petty oaths, etc. They fight against those sins that fight against their
honor, profits, pleasures, etc. but make truce with those that are as right
hands, and as right eyes to them, etc.

3. The conflict that is in a Saint against sin, is maintained by spiritual
Arguments, by arguments drawn from Though to be kept from sin brings comfort to
us, yet for us to oppose sin from spiritual, and heavenly arguments, and God
to pardon sin, that brings most glory to God. 2. Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9.
the love of God, the honor of God, the sweetness of communion with God, and
from the spiritual and heavenly blessings, and privileges that are conferred
upon them by God, and from Arguments drawn from the blood of Christ, the glory
of Christ, the eye of Christ, the kisses of Christ, and the intercession of
Christ: And from Arguments drawn from the earnest of the Spirit, the seal of
the Spirit, the witness of the Spirit, the comforts of the Spirit. Oh! but the
conflict that is in wicked men, is from low, earnall, and legal Arguments
drawn from the eye, ear, or hand of the creature, or drawn from shame, hell,
curses of the Law, etc

4. The conflict that is in Saints is a 'Twas an excellent saying of Eusebius
Emesenus; Our fathers overcome the torments of the flames, let us overcome the
fiery darts of vices. Consider that the pleasure and sweetness that follows
victory over sin, is a thousand times beyond that seeming sweetness that is in
sin.
constant conflict; though sin and grace were not born in the heart of a St.
together, and though they shall not die together, yet whilst a Beeleever lives
they must conflict together; Paul had been about fourteen years converted, when
he cried out, I have a law in my members rebelling against the law of my mind,
and leading me captive to the law of sin.

Pietro Candiano, one of the Dukes of Venice, died fighting against the
Nauratines, with the weapons in his hands: so a Saint lives fighting, and dies
fighting, he stands fighting, and falls fighting, with his spiritual weapons
in his hands. But the conflict that is in wicked men is inconstant; now they
fall out with sin, and anon they fall in with sin; now it is bitter, anon it is
sweet; now the sinner turns from his sin, and anon he turns to the wallowing in
sin, as the swine does to the wallowing in the mire; one hour you shall have
him 2 Pet. 2. 19, 20.
praying against sin, as if he feared it more then hell, and the next hour you
shall have him pursuing after sin, as if there were no God to punish him, no
justice to damn him, no hell to torment him.

The conflict that is in the Saints, is A Heathen could say, their soul is in
a mutiny; a wicked man is not friends with himself, he and his conscience are
at difference. Arist.
that is, the regenerate part against the unregenerate part, in all the parts
of the soul; but now in wicked men, the conflict is not in the same faculties,
but between the conscience and the will; the will of a sinner is bent strongly
to such and such sins; but conscience puts in, and tells the sinner God has
made me his Deputy, he has given me a power to hang and draw, to examine,
scourge, judge, and condemn, and if thou do such and such wickedness, I
shall be thy Jay^or, and thy tormentor; I do not bear the rod, nor the sword
in vain, says Conscience; if thou sinnest I shall do my office, and then thy
life will be a hell, and this raises a tumult in the soul.

6. The conflict that is in the Saints, is a more blessed successful, and
prevailing conflict; a Saint by his conflict with sin, gains ground upon his
sin. They that are Christ's (says the Apostle) have These two, Grace and Sin,
are like two Buckets at a well, when one is up, the other is down, they are like
the two Laurels at Rome, when one flourishes, the other withers. The more grace
thrives in the soul, the more fin dies in the soul. 2 Timothy 3. 13. From naught
they gro^ to be very naught, and from very naught, to be stark naught.
Lactantius says of Lucian, Nec diis nec hominibus pepercit, hespared neither
God nor man. Mortification is a continued act, it is a daily dying to sin. I dye
daily. A crucified man will strive and struggle, yet in the eyes of the Law,
and in the account of all that see him, he is dead; it is just so with sin.
Psalm. 58. 11. There is no such pleasure (says Cyprian) as to have overcome an
offered pleasure, neither is there any greater conquest, then that that is
gotten over a man's corruptions.
crucified the world with the affections, and lusts. Christ puts to his hand,
and helps them to lead captivity captive, and to set their feet upon the necks
of those lusts that have formerly trampled upon their souls and their comforts.
As the house of Saul grew weaker and weaker, and the house of David grew
stronger and stronger, so the Lord by the discoveries of his love, and by the
influences of his spirit, he causes grace, the noble part of a Saint, to grow
stronger and stronger, and corruption like the house of Saul, to grow weaker
and weaker. But sin in a wicked heart gets ground, and grows stronger and
stronger; notwithstanding all his conflicts, his heart is more encouraged,
emboldened, and hardened in a way of sin, as you may see in the Israelites,
Pharaoh, Jehu, and Judas; who doubtless found many strange conflicts, ^umults,
and mutinies in their souls, when God spoke such bitter things against them,
and did such justice upon them.

But remember this by way of Caution, though Christ has given sin its deaths
wound (by his power, spirit, death, and resurrection) yet it will die but a
lingering death: As a man that is mortally wounded, dies by little and little,
so does sin in the heart of a Saint. The death of Christ on the Cross was a
lingering death, so the death of sin in the soul, is a lingering death, now it
dies a little, and anon it dies a little, etc. as the Psalmist speaks, Slay
them not least my people forget, scatter them by thy power, and bring them
down oh Lord our shield. He would not have them utterly destroyed, but some
relics preserved as a memorial: so God deals in respect of sin, it is
wounded and brought down, but not wholly slain, something is still left as a
monument of the Divine grace, and to keep us humble, wakefull, and watchful,
and that our armor may be still kept on, and our weapons always in our hands.
The best men's souls in this life hangs between the flesh and the spirit, as it
were like Mahomets Tomb at Aleppo, between two load-stones; like Erasmus, as
the Papists paint him, betwixt The Romans lost many a battle, and yet in the
issue were Conquerors in all their wars; it is just so with the Saints.
Heaven and Hell; like the Tribe of Manasseh, half on this side Jordan, in the
Land of the Amorites, and half on that side in the Holy Land; yet in the issue
they shall overcome the flesh, and trample upon the necks of their spiritual
enemies.

The Sixth Device that Satan has to keep a poor soul in a sad, doubting, and
questioning condition, is,
BY suggesting to the soul, that surely 6 Device.
his estate is not good, because he cannot joy and rejoice in Christ, as once
he could, because he has lost that comfort and joy that once was in his
spirit. Says Satan, thou know the time was, when thy heart was much carried
out to joying and rejoicing in Christ; thou do not forget the time when thy
heart used to be full of joy and comfort; but now, how art thou fallen in thy
joys and comforts? Therefore thy estate is not good, thou do but deceive
thy self, to think that ever it was good, for surely if it had, thy joy and
comfort would have continued. And hereupon the soul is apt to take part with
Satan, and say, it is even so, I see all is naught, and I have but deceived my
own soul, etc.

Now the Remedies against this device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this Device 1 Remedy.
of Satan, is to consider, that the loss of comfort is a separable adjunct
from grace; the soul may be f^ll of holy affections, when it is empty of Divine
consolations. There may be, and often Ps. 63. 1, 2, 8. Isa. 50. 10. 7. Mic. 7.
8, 9. Psalm. 42. 5,
is true grace, yea, much grace, where there is not a drop of comfort, nor a
dram of joy. Comfort is not of the being, but of the wel-being of a Christian.
God has not so linked these 2 choice lovers together, but that they may be
Spiritual joy is a Sun that is often clouded* though it be as precious a
flower as most Paradise affords, ye^ it is subject to side and w^^ther.
put asunder. That wisdom that is from above, will never work a man to reason
thus, I have no comfort, therefore I have no grace, I have lost that joy that
once I had, therefore my condition is not good, was never good, etc. but 'twill
enable a man to reason thus, tho my comfort is gone, yet the God of my comfort
abides; though my joy is lost, yet the seeds of grace remain. The best men's
joys are as glass, bright and brittle, and evermore in danger of breaking.

The second Remedy against this Device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that the precious things that thou still
injoyest, are far better then the joys and comforts that thou have lost. Thy
union with Christ, thy communion with Christ, thy sonship, thy saint-ship, thy
heir-ship, thou still injoyest by Christ, is far better then the comforts thou
have lost by sin; what though thy comforts be gone, yet thy union and communion
with Christ remains, though thy comforts be gone; yet thou art a Son, tho Jer.
31. 18, 19, 20.
a comfortless Son; an heir, though a comfortless heir; a Saint, though a
comfortless Saint. Though the bag of silver (thy comforts) be lost, yet the
When one objected to Faninus, his chearfullnesse to Christ's Agony and sadness,
he answered, Christ was sad, that I might bemerry, he had my sins, and I have
his righteousness.
box of Jewels (thy union with Christ, thy communion with Christ, thy Sonship,
thy Saint-ship, thy Heir-ship) which thou still injoyest, is far better then the
bag of silver thou have lost; yea, the least of those precious Jewels is more
worth, then all the comforts in the world; well, let this be a cordial to
comfort thee, a star to lead thee, and a staff to support thee, that thy box
of Jewels are safe, though thy bag of silver be lost.

The third Remedy against this Device 3 Remedy.
of Satan, is to consider, that thy condition is no other then what has been
the condition of those precious Psalm. 51. 12. Psalm. 30. 6, 7. Job 23. 6 8 9.
30. 31. Lam. 1. 16. Mat. 27. 46.
souls whose names were written upon the heart of Christ, and who are now at
rest in the bosom of Christ. One day you shall have them praising and
rejoicing, the next day a mourning and weeping: one day you shall have them a
singing, Psalm. 42. 5.
The Lord is our portion, the next day a sighing and expostulating with
themselves, Lam. 5. 15.
Why are ye cast down oh our souls? Why is our Harp turned to mourning? And
our Organ into the voice of them that weep? etc.

The fourth Remedy against this Device 4 Remedy.
of Satan, is solemnly to consider, that the causes of joy and comfort are not
always the same. Happily thy former joy and comfort did spring from The spirit
does not every day make a feast in the soul, he does not make every day to be a
day of wearing the wedding robes.
the witness of the spirit, he bearing witness to thy soul that thy nature
was changed, thy sins pardoned, thy soul reconciled, etc. Now the Spirit may
upon some special occasion, bear witness to the soul, that the heart of God
is dearly set upon him, that he loves him with an everlasting love, etc. and
yet the soul may never enjoy such a testimony all the days of his life again:
Though the spirit be a witnessing spirit, it is not his office every day to
witness to believers their interest in God, Christ, Heaven, etc.

Or happily thy former joy and comfort, did spring from the newness and
suddenness of the change of thy condition; for a man in one hour to have A
pardon given unexpectedly into the hand of a malefactor, when he is on the last
st^p of the ladder, ready to be turned off, will cause much joy and rejoicing;
the newness and suddenness of the change of his condition, will cause his
heart to leap and rejoice; yet in process of time much of his joy will ^e
aba^ed, tho his li^e be as d^a^ to him still, as ever it was.
his night turned into day, his darkness turned into light, his bitter into
sweet, Gods frowns into smiles, his hatred into love, his hell into a Heaven,
must greatly joy and comfort him. It cannot but make his heart to leap, and
dance in him, who in one hour shall see Satan accusing him, his own heart
condemning him, the eternal God frowning upon him, the gates of Heaven barred
against him, all the creation standing armed at the least beck of God, to
execute vengeance on him, and the mouth of the infernal pit open to receive
him. Now in this hour, for Christ to come to the amazed soul, and say to it, I
have trod the Win^-presse of my Fathers wrath for thee, I have laid down my
life a ransom for thee, by my blood I have satisfied my Fathers Justice, and
pacified his anger, and procured his love for thee; by my blood I have
purchased the pardon of thy sins, thy freedom from hell, and thy right to
Heaven, etc. Oh! how wonderfully will this cause the soul to leap for joy?

The fifth Remedy against this Device 5 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to consider, that God will restore and make up the comforts of
his people; though thy candle be put out, Hudson the Martyr deserted at the
stake, went from under his chain, and having prayed earnestly, was comforted
immediately, and suffered valiantly. So Mr. Glover, when he was within sight of
the stake, cried out to his friend, he is come, he is come, meaning the
comforter that Christ promised to send.
yet God will light it again, and make it burn more light then ever; though
thy sun for the present be clouded, yet he that rides upon the clouds, shall
scatter those clouds, and cause the sun to shine, and warm thy heart, as in
form^r days, as the Psalmist speaks, Ps. 71. 20, 21.
Thou which have showed me great and s^re troubles, shall quicken me again,
and shall bring me up again from the depths of the earth. Thou shall increase
my greatness, and comfort me on every side. God takes away a little comfort,
that he may make room in the soul for a greater degree of comfort. This the
Prophet Isaiah sweetly shows, Isa. 57. 18.
I have seen his ways, and will heal him, I will lead him also, and rest^re
comforts unto him, and to his mourners. Bear up sweetly oh precious soul! thy
storm shall end in a calm; and thy dark night in a sunshine day; thy mourning
shall be turned into rejoicing, and the waters of consolation shall be sweeter
and higher in thy soul, then See also the 126 Psalm. 6. v. and the 42 Psalm. 7,
8.
ever; the m^rcy is surely thine, but the time of giving it is the Lords: wait
but a little, and thou shall find the Lord comforting thee on every side.

The seventh Device that Satan has to keep souls in a doubting and questioning
condition, is,
BY suggesting to the soul his often 7 Device.
relapses into the same sin which formerly he has pursued with particular
sorrow, grief, shame and tears, and prayed, complained, and resolved against.
Says Satan, thy heart is not right with God, surely thy estate is not good,
thou do but flatter thy self, to think that ever God will eternally own,
and embrace such a one as thou art, who complainest against sin, and yet
relapsest into the same sin, who with tears and groans confessest thy sin,
and yet ever and anon art fallen into the same sin, etc.

I confess this is a very sad condition for a soul, after he has obtained
mercy and pity from the Lord, after God has spoken peace and pardon to him,
and wiped the tears from his eyes, and set him upon his legs, to return to
folly; ah! how do relapses lay men open to the greatest afflictions, and worst
A backslider may say ( opera and impensa periit) all my pains and charge is
lost.
temptations? How do they make the wound to bleed afresh? How do they darken
and cloud former assurances and evidence^ for Heaven? How do they put a sword
into the hand of conscience to cut and slash the soul? They raise such fears,
terrors, horrors, and doubts in the soul, that the soul cannot be so
frequent in duty, as formerly, nor so fervent in duty as formerly, nor so
confident in duty as formerly, nor so bold, familiar, and delightful with God
in duty as formerly; nor so constant in duty as formerly: they give Satan an
advantage to triumph over Christ; they make the work of repentance mo^e
difficult; they make a man's life a burden, and they render death to be very
terrible unto the soul, etc.

Now the Remedies against this device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this device 1 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that there are many Scriptures that do
clearly evidence a possibility of the St. falling into the same sins, whereof
they have formerly repented. Hos. 14. 4.
I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely, for mine anger is
turned away from them, says the Lord by the Prophet Hosea, so the Prophet
Jeremiah speaks, Ier. 3. 12. 14.
Go and proclaim these words toward the North* and say, return thou
backsliding Israel* says the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to fall
upon you: for I am merciful* says the The sin of backsliding is a
soul-wounding sin. I will heal their backsliding: you read of no arms for the
back, though you do for the breast.
Lord, and I will not keep anger for ever. Turn, oh backsliding Israel, says
the Lord, for I am married unto you: And I will take you one of a City, and two
of a family, and I will bring you to Zion: So the Psalmist, They turned back
and dealt unfaithfully like their Fathers, they were turned aside like a
deceitful bow. And no wonder, for tho their repentance be never so sincere and
sound, yet their graces are but weak, and their mortification imperfect in When
a soldier bragged too much of a great scar in his forehead, Augustus Caesar
(in whose time Christ was borne) asked him if he did not get it when he looked
back as he fled.
this life; though by grace they are freed from the dominion of sin, and from
the damnatory power of every sin, and from the love of all sin, yet grace does
not free them from the seed of any one sin; and therefore it is possible for a
soul to fall again and again into the same sin; if the fire be not wholly
put out, who would think it impossible that it should catch and burn again
and again?

The second Remedy against this Device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is seriously to consider, that God has no where engaged himself by
any particular promise, that souls converted and united to Christ, shall not
fall again and again into the same sins after conversion. I cannot find in
the whole Book of God, where he In some cases the Saints have found God better
then his word; he prom^sed the Children of Israel only the Land of Canaan, but
besides that he gave them two other Kingdoms, which he never promised. And to
Zachary he promised to give him his speech at the birth of the child, but
besides that, he gave him the gift of Prophecy.
has promised any such strength or power against this or that particular sin,
as that the soul shall be for ever (in this life) put out of a possibility of
falling again and again into the same sins; and where God has not a mouth to
s^eak, I must not have a heart to believe. God will graciously pardon those
sins to his people, that he will not in this life effectually subdue in his
people. I would go far to speak with that soul that can show a promise, that
when our sorrow and grief has been so great, or so much, for this or that sin,
that then God will preserve us from ever falling into the same sin; the sight
of such a promise would be as life from the dead, to many a precious soul, who
desires nothing more then to keep close to Christ, and fears nothing more
then backsliding from Christ.

The third Remedy against this Device 3 Remedy.
of Satan, is seriously to consider, that the most renowned, and now crowned
Saints, have in the days of their being on earth, relapsed into one and the A
sheep may often slip into a slough, as well as a swine.
same sin. Lot was twice overcome with wine; John twice worshipped the Angel;
Abraham did often dissemble, and Iay his wife open to adultery, to save his
own life, which some Heathens would not have done. And it came to Genesis 20. 13.
^h. 12.
pass, when God caused me to wander from my Fathers house, that I said unto
her, this is thy kindness which thou shall show unto me, at every place
whether we shall come, say of me, he is my brother. David in his Perhaps the
Prodigal sets out unto us, a Christian relapst; for he was a son before, and
with his Father, and then went away from him and spent all, and yet he was not
quite undone, but returned again.
wrath was resolved, if ever man was, that he would be the death of Nabal, and
all his innocent Family, and after this he fell into the foul murder of
Vriah. Though Christ told his Disciples that his Kingdom was not of this
world, yet again, and again, and again, three several times, they would
needs be on horseback, they would feign be high, great, and glorious in this
world; their pride and ambitious humor put them (that were but as so many
baggars) upon striving for pre-eminence, and greatness in the world, when
their Lord and Master told them 3 several times of his sufferings in the
world, and of his going out of the world. Jehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 18. chapter 1. 2.
3. 30, 31.
though a godly man, yet joins affinity with wicked Ahab, and though he was
saved by a miracle, yet soon after he falls into the same sin, and joins
himself with chapter 20. 35. 36, 37.
Ahaziah, King of Israel, who did very wickedly. Sampson i^ by the Spirit of
the Lord numbered among the faithful worthies, Heb. 11. 32.
and yet he fell often into one gross sin, as is evident in the book of Judges;
Jud. 14. 15. 16. chapter
Peter you know relapst often, and so did Jonah; and this comes to pass, that
they may see their own inability to stand, to resist, or overcome any
temptation, or corruption. And that they may be taken off from all false
confidences, and rest wholly upon God, and only upon God, and always upon God;
and for the praise and honor of the power, wisdom, skill, mercy, and The
Prodigal saw the compassion of his Father, the greater in receiving him, after
he had run away from him.
goodness of the Physician of our souls, that can heal, help, and cure, when
the disease is most dangerous, when the soul is relapst, and grows worse and
worse, and when others say there is no help for him in his God, and when his
own heart and hopes are dying.

The fourth Remedy against this Device 4 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to consider, that ther^ are relapses into enormities, and there
are relapses into infirmities; now it is not usual with God to leave his people
Relapses into enormities are ( peccata vulnerantia and divistantia) wounding
and wasting sins. Therefore the Lord is graciously pleased to put under his
everlasting arms, and stay his chosen ones from frequent falling into them.
frequently to relapse into enormities, for by his spirit and grace, by his
smiles and frowns, by his word and rod, he does usually preserve his people
from a frequent relapsing into enormities; yet he does leave his choicest ones
frequently to relapse into infirmities (and of his grace he pardons them in
course) as idle words, passion, vain thoughts, etc. Though gracious souls
strive against these, and complain of these, and weep over these, yet the Lord
to keep them humble, leaves them frequently to relapse into these; and these
frequent relapses into infirmities shall never be their bane, because they be
their burden

The fifth Remedy against this Device 5 Remedy.
of Satan, is to consider, that there are There is a great difference between a
sheep that by weakness falls into the mire, and a swine, that delights to
wallow in the mire; between a woman that is forced, though she strives, and
cries out, and and an alluring adultress.
involuntary relapses, and there are voluntary relapses; involuntary relapses
are, when the resolution and full bent of the heart is against sin, when the
soul strives with all its might against sin, by sighs and groans, by prayers
and tears, and yet out of weakness, is forced to fall back into sin, because
there is not spiritual strength enough to overcome; Now though involuntary
relapses must humble us, yet they must never discourage, nor deject us, for God
will freely and readily pardon those in course. Voluntary relapses are, when
the soul longs, and loves to return to the fleshpots of Egypt; when it is a
pleasure, and a pastime to a man to return to his old courses; such voluntary
relapses speak out the man blinded, hardened, and ripened for rulne, etc.

The sixth Remedy against this Device 6 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to consider, that there is no such power, or infinite virtue in
the Christ upbraded his Disciples for their unbelief, and hardness of heart,
who had seen his glory, as the glory of the only begotten son of God, full of
grace and truth. 1 John 14.
greatest horror, or sorrow the soul can be under for sin, nor in the sweetest,
or chosest discoveries of Gods grace, and love to the soul; as for ever to
fence, and secure the soul from relapsing into the same sin; Grace is but a
created habit, that may be prevailed against by the secret, subtle, and
strong workings of sin in our hearts: And those discoveries that God makes of
his love, beauty, and glory to the soul, do not always abide in their
freshness, and power upon the heart; but by degrees they fade, and wear off,
and then the soul may return again to folly; As we see in Peter, who after he
had a glorious testimony Mat. 16. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. 22, 23, 24.
from Christ his own mouth, of his blessedness and happiness, labors to
prevent Christ from going up to Jerusalem to suffer out of base slavish fears,
that he and his fellows could not be secure, if his Master should be brought to
suffer. And again, after this, Christ had him up into the Mount, and there
Mat. 7. 1, 2, 3.
showed him his beauty, and glory, to strengthen him against the hour of
tentation that was a coming upon him; and yet soon after he had the honor,
and happiness of seeing the glory of the Lord (which most of the Disciples had
not) he basely, and most shamefully denies the Lord of glory, thinking Mat. 26.
69. ult.
by that means to provide for his own safety: And yet again, after Christ had
broke his heart with a look of love, for his most unlovely dealings, and bade
them that were first acquainted with his resurrection, to go and tell Peter
that he was risen; I say, after all this, slavish fears prevail upon him, and
he basely dissembles, and plays ehe Jew with the Jews, and the Gentile with
the Gentiles, to the seducing of Barnabas, Gal 2. 11, 12, 13.
etc.

Yet by way of caution, know it is very rare, that God does leave his beloved
ones frequently, to relapse into one and the same gross sin; for the law of
nature is in arms against gross sins, as well as the law of grace; so that a
gracious soul cannot, dares not, will not frequently return to gross folly.
And God has made even his dearest ones dearly smart for their relapses, as may
be seen by his dealings with Samson, Iehosaphat, and Peter; Ah Lord! what a
hard heart has that man, that can see thee stripping and whipping thy dearest
ones for their relapses, and yet make nothing of returning to folly, etc.

The eighth Device that Satan 8 Device.
has to keep souls in a doubting, and questioning condition, is,
BY persuading them that these estate is not good, their hearts are not
upright, their graces are not sound, because they are so followed, vexed, and
tormented with 'temptations; it is his method, first to vex, and weary the soul
with temptations, and then to tempt the soul, that surely it is not beloved, He
may so tempt, as to make a Saint weary of his life. Job 10. 1. My soul is
weary of my life.
because it is so much tempted; and by this stratagem he keeps many precious
souls in a sad, doubting, and mourning temper many years, as many of the
precious sons of Sion have found by woeful experience, etc.

Now the remedies against this Device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this Device 1 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that those that have been best, and most
beloved, have been most tempted by Satan. Though Satan can never rob a
Christian of his Crown, yet such is his malice, that he will therefore tempt,
that he may spoil them of their comforts; such is his enmity to the Father,
that the nearer and dearer any child is to him, the more will Satan trouble
him, and vex him with temptations; Pirates do not use to set upon poor, empty
vessels; and beggars need not fear the thiese; those that have most of God,
and most rich in grace, shall be most set upon by Satan, who is the greatest
and wisest Pirate in the world.
Christ himself was most near, and most dear, most innocent, and most
excellent, and yet none so much tempted as Christ; David was dearly beloved,
and yet by Satan tempted to number the people; Job was highly praised by God
himself, and yet much tempted, witness those sad things that fell from his
mouth, when he was wet to the skin; Peter was much prized by Christ, witness
that choice testimony that Christ gave of his faith and happiness, and his
showing him his glory in the Mount, and that eye of pity that he cast upon him
after his fearful fall, etc. and yet tempted by Satan. And the Lord said, Luke
22. 31, 32.
Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as
wheat: But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail thee not, etc.

Paul had the honor of being exalted as high as high as heaven, and of seeing
that glory that could not be expressed; and yet he was no sooner stepped out of
Heaven, but he is buffetted by Satan, lest he should be exalted above measure.
If 2 Cor. 12. 2. 7.
these that were so really, so gloriously, so eminently beloved of God; if
these that have lived in Heaven, and set their feet upon the stars, have been
tempted, let no Saints judge themselves not to be beloved, because they are
tempted.

It is as natural for Saints to be tempted that are dearly beloved, as it is for
the Sun to shine, or a bird to sing; the E^gle complains not of her wings, nor
the Peacock of his train, nor the Nightingale of her voice, because these are
natural to them; no more should Sts. of their temptations, because they are
natural to them; For we wrestle not against Ephesians. 6. 12.
flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the
Rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high
places.

The second Remedy against this Device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to consider, that all the temptations that befall the Saints,
shall be sanctified to them by a hand of love; ah! the choice experiences that
the Saints get of the power of God, supporting them, of the wisdom of God
directing them (so to handle their spiritual weapons, their graces, as not
only to resist, but to overcome) of the mercy and goodness of the Lord,
pardoning and succouring of them. And therefore says Paul, I received the
messenger 2 Cor. 12. 7. Vi^e B^zam, (...), and (...) Lather said there were
three things this made a P^eacher; M^^itation, prayer, and temptation.
Satan for to buffet me, lest I should be exalted, lest I should be exalted
above measure, it is twice in that verse he begins with it, and ends with it; if
he had not been buffeted, who knows how his heart would have swelled; he might
have been carried higher in conceit, then before he was in his extacie. The
school of temptation is a choice school, a school wherein God gives his people
the clearest, and the sweetest discoveries of his love; a school wherein God
teaches his people to be more frequent, and fervent in duty; when Paul was
buffeted, then he prayed thrice, that is, frequently, and fervently; A school
wherein God teaches his people to be more tender, meek, and compassionate to
other poor tempted souls then ever; A school wherein God teaches his people to
see a greater evil in sin then ever, and a greater emptiness in the creature
then ever, and a greater need of Christ, and free grace then ever; A school
wherein God will teach his people, that all temptations are but his
Goldsmiths, by which he will try, and refine, and make his people more bright
and glorious. The issue of all temptations shall be the good of the Saints; as
you may see by the temptations that Adam, and Eve, and Christ, and David, and
Job, and Peter, and Paul met with. Those hands of power, and love that bring
light out of darkness, good out of evil, sweet out of bitter, life out of
death, Heaven out of Hell, will bring much sweet and good to his people, out of
all the temptations that come upon them.

The third Remedy against this Device 3 Remedy.
of Satan is, wisely to consider, that no temptations don't hurt nor harm the
Saints, so long as they are not resisted by them, and prove the greatest
affliction that can befall them; it is not Satan's tempting, but your assenting;
not his enticing, but your yielding, that makes temptations hurtful to your
souls; if the soul when it is tempted, resists the temptation, and says with
Christ, get thee behind me Satan; and with that young Convert, I am not the
man that I Ego non sum ego.
was; or as Luther counsels all men, to answer all temptations with these
words ( Christianus sum) I am a Christian; if a man's temptations be his
greatest affliction, then is the temptation no sin upon his soul, though it be
a trouble upon his mind: when a soul can look the Lord in the face, and say,
ah Lord! I have many outward troubles now upon me, I have lost such and such a
near mercy, and such and such dear desirable mercies, and yet thou that
know the heart, thou know that all my crosses and losses do not make so
many wounds in my soul, nor fetch so many sighs from my heart, nor tears
from my eyes, as those temptations do, that Satan follows my soul with: when
it is thus with the soul, then temptations are only the souls trouble, they are
not the souls sin.

Satan is a malious and envious enemy; ^^metime^ he ^hewes his malice, by
letting those things abide by the soul, as may most vex, and plague the soul,
as Gregory observes in his leaving of Jobs wife, which was not out of his
forgetfulness, carelessness, or any love, or pity to Job, but to vex, and
torment him, etc. and to work him to blaspheme God, despair, and die, etc.
as his names are, so is he; his names are all names of enmity; the Accuser,
the Tempter, the Destroyer, the Devourer, the envious Man; and this malice, and
envy of his, he shows sometimes by tempting men to such sins as are quite
contrary to the temperature of their bodies, as he did Vespasian and Julian,
men of sweet and excellent natures to be most bloody murderers; and sometimes
he shows his malice, by tempting men to such things as shall bring hi^ no
honor, nor profit, etc. fall down and worship me, to blasphemy, and
Atheism, etc. the thoughts and first motions whereof cause the beart and the
flesh to tremble; And sometimes he shows his malice, by tempting them to those
sins, which they have not found their natures prone to, and which they abhor in
others, etc.

Now if the soul resists these, and complains of these, and groans and mourns
under these, and looks up to the Lord Jesus to be delivered from these, then
shall they not be put down to the souls account, but to Satan's, who shall be
so much the more tormented, by how much the more the Saints have been by him
maliciously tempted, etc.

Make present and peremptory resistance against Satan's temptations, bid
defiance to the temptation at first sight; When Constantine the Emperor was
told that there was no means to cure his leprosy, but by bathing his body in
the blood of Infants, he presently answered ( malo jemper aegrotare quam tali
remedio convalescere) I had rather not be cured, then use such a remedy.
it is safe to resist, it is dangerous to dispute; Eve lost her self, and her
posterity, by falling into the lists of dispute, when she should have resisted,
and stood upon terms of defiance with Satan; he that would stand in the hour of
temptation, must plead with Christ, it is written; he that would triumph over
temptations, must plead still, it is written. Satan is bold and impudent, and if
you are not peremptory in your resistance, he will give you fresh onsets. It Is
your greatest honor, and your highest wisdom, peremptorily to with-stand the
beginnings of a temptation, for an after remedy comes often too late.

Mistress Katherine Bretterge, once, after a great conflict with Satan, said,
Reason not with me, I am but a weak woman; if thou have any thing to say, say
it to my Christ, he is my Advocate, my strength, and my redeemer, and he shall
plead for me.

Men must not seek to resist Satan's craft with craft ( sed per apertum martem)
but by open defiance; he shoots with Satan in his own bow; who thinks by
disputing and reasoning to put him off. As soon as a temptation shows its
face, say to the temptation, as Ephraim to his idols; get you hence, what have
I any Hosea 14.
more to do with you? oh! say to the temptation, as David said to the sons
of Zerviah; What have I to do with you? 2 Samuel 16. 10.
you will be too hard for me. He that does thus resist temptations, shall never
be undone by temptation, etc.

Make strong and constant resistance I have read of one who being tempted with
offers of money to desert Christ, gave this excellent answer, let not any man
think, that he will embrace other men's goods to forsake Christ, who has
forsaken his own proper goods to follow Christ.
against Satan's temptations, make resistance against temptations by arguments
drawn from the honor of God, the love of God, your union and communion with
God; and from the blood of Christ, the death of Christ, the kindness of Christ,
the intercession of Christ, and the glory of Christ; and from the voice of the
Spirit, the counsel of the Spirit, the comforts of the Spirit, the presence of
the Spirit, the seal of the Spirit, the whisperings of the Spirit, the
commands of the Spirit, the assistance of the Spirit, the witness of the
Spirit; and from the glory of Heaven, the excellency of grace, the beauty of
holiness, the worth of the soul, and the vildnesse or bitterness, and evil
of sin, the least sin being a greater evil, then the greatest temptation in
the world.

And look that you make constant resistance, as well as strong resistance; be
constant in arms, Satan will come on with new temptations; when old Luke 4.
14. And when the Devil had ended all the temptation, he departed from him for a
season. Christ had no rest until he was exactly tried with all kinds of
temtations. Calvin.
ones are too weak in a calm, prepare for a storm; the temper is restless,
impudent, and subtle; he will suit his temptations to your constitutions, and
inclinations; Satan loves to sail with the wind; if your knowledge be weak,
he will tempt you to error; if your consciences be tender, he will tempt you
to scrupulosity, and too much preciseness, as to do nothing but hear, pray,
read, etc. If your consciences be wide and large, he will tempt you to carnal
security; if you are bold spirited, he will tempt you to presumption; if
timorous, to desperation; if flexible, to inconstancy; if proud and stiff, to
gross folly, therefore still fit for fresh assaults; make one victory a step
to another. When you have overcome a temptation, take heed of unbending your
bow, and look well to it, that your bow be always bent, and that it remains in
strength; when you have overcome one temptation, you must Be ready to enter the
list with another; as distrust (in some sense) is the mother of safety, so
security is the gate of danger; a man had need to fear this most of all, that
he fears not all; if Satan be always a roaring, we should be always a
watching, and resisting of him; and certainly, he that makes strong and
constant resistance of Satan's temptations, shall in the end get above his
temptations, and for the present is secure enough from being ruined by his
temptations, etc.

For a close of this, remember that it is He that will yield to sin, to be rid of
temptation, will be so much the more tempted, and the less able to withstand
temptations.
dangerous, to yield to the least sin, to be rid of the greatest temptation. To
take this course were, as if a man should think to wash himself clean in
Ink; or as if a man should exchange a light cross made of paper, for an Iron
cross which is heavy, toilesome, and bloody, the least sin set home upon the
conscience, will more, wound, vex, and oppress the soul, then all the
temptations in the world can; therefore never yield to the least sin, to be rid
of the greatest temptation. Sidonius Apolinaris relates, how a certain man
named Maximus, arriving at the top of honor, by indirect means, was the first
day very much wearied, and fetching a deep sigh, said, Oh Damocles! how happy
do I esteem thee, for having been a King but the space of a dinner, I have
been one a wholeday, and can bear it no longer. I will leave you to make the
Application.

The fourth thing to be showed, is, the several ways and devices that Satan
has to destroy and ensnare all sorts and ranks of men in the world.
I Shall begin with the honorable and the great, and show you the Devices that
Satan has to destroy them; I will only instance in those that are most
considerable.

His first Device to destroy the 1 Device.
great, and honorable of the earth, is,
BY working them, to make it their business to seek themselves, to seek how to
greaten themselves, to raise Selfe-seeking ^^ke the deluge overflowes the whole
world.
themselves, to enrich themselves, to secure themselves, etc. As you may see in
Pharaoh, Ahab, Rehoboam, Jeroboam, Absalom, Joab, Haman, etc. But were the
Scripture silent, our own experiences do abundantly evidence this way and
method of Satan, to destroy the great, and the honorable, to bury their names
in the dust, and their souls in Hell, by drawing them wholly to mind
themselves, and only to mind themselves, and in all things to mind
themselves, and always to mind themselves. All (says the Apostle) mind Phil.
2. 21.
themselves, all comparatively, in respect of the paucity of others, that let
fall their private interests, and drown all self-respects in the glory of God,
and the public good, etc.

Now the Remedies against this Device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this Device 1 Remedy.
of Satan is, solemnly to consider, Self-love is the root of the hatred of
others. 2 Timothy 3. 2. First, lovers of themselves, and then fierce, etc.
that selfe-seeking is a sin that will put men upon a world of sin; upon sins
not only against the Law of God, the rules of the Gospel, but that are against
the very laws of Nature, that are so much darkened by the fall of man; It put
the Pharisees upon opposing Christ, and Judas upon betraying Christ, and Pilate
The Naturalist observes, that those beasts which are most cruel to others, are
most loving to their own.
upon condemning Christ. It put Gehezi upon lying, and Balaam upon cursing, and
Saul and Absalom upon plotting David's ruin. It put Pharaoh and Haman upon
contriving ways to destroy those Jews, that God did purpose to save by his
mighty arm. It puts men upon using wicked balances, and the bag of deceitful
weights. It puts m^n upon ways of oppression, and selling Amos 2. 6.
the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes, etc. I know not
any sin in the world, but this sin of selfe-seeking will put men upon it,
though it be their eternal loss.

The second Remedy against this Device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that self-seeking does exceedingly abase
A self-seeker is a Cato without, but a Nero within. Domitian would seem to love
them best, whom he willed least should live, and that is the very temper of
selfe-seekers.
a man; it strips him of all his royalty, and glory; of a Lord, it makes a man
become a servant to the creature, I often to the worst of creatures; yea, a
slave to slaves, as you may see in Judas, Demas, Balaam, and the Scribes and
Pharisees. Selfe-seekers bow down to the creatures; as Gideons many thousands
bowed down to the waters; self-seeking will make a man say any thing, do any
thing, and be any thing, to please the lusts of others, and to get advantages
upon others; self-seeking transforms a man into all shapes, and forms; now It
was death in Moses Rites to counterset that Ceremonial, and figurative
ointment, Exodus 30. what shall it then be to counterseit the spirit of life and
holiness.
it makes a man appear as an Angel of light, anon as an Angel of darkness;
now selfe-seekers are seemingly for God, anon they are openly against God; now
you shall have them crying Hosanna in the highest, and anon crucicifie him,
crucify him; now you shall have them build with the Saints, and anon you shall
have them plotting the overthrow of the Saints, as those selfeseekers did in
Ezra, and Nehemiah's time. Self-seekers are the basest of all persons; there is
no service so base, so poor, so low, but they will bow to it. They cannot look
neither above, nor beyond their own lusts, and the enjoyment Romans 1. 25.
of the creature, these are the prime and ultimate objects of their intendments.

It Is said of Tiberius, that whilst Augustus ruled, he was no ways tainted in
his reputation; and that whilst Drusus and Germanicus were alive, he feigned
those virtues which he had not, to maintain a good opinion of himself in the
hearts of the people; but after he had got himself out of the reach of
contradiction, and controulment, there was no fact in which he was not faulty,
no crime to which he was not accessory. My prayer shall be, that Tiberius his
spirit may not be found in any of our Rulers, left it prove their ruin, as it
did his; and that where ever it is, it may be detected, loathed, and ejected,
that so neither the State, nor souls may be ruined by it, etc.

The third Remedy against this Device 3 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to dwell upon those dreadful curses, and woes that are
from heaven denounced against selfe-seekers. Woe unto them that join Isa. 5. 8.
house to house, that lay field to field, till there be no place, that they may
be placed alone in the midst of the earth. So Habakkuk, Hab. 6. 9, 10, 11, 12.
Crassus a very rich Roman, and a great self-seeker, for greedy desire of Gold,
he managed war against the Parthians, by whom both he and 30000. Romans were
slain: and because the Barbarians conjectured that he made this assault upon
them for their gold; therefore they melted gold, and poured it into his dead
body, saying ( satura de auro) satisfy thy self with gold. Isa. 15. 1, 2.
Woe to him that increases that which is not his, and to him that ladeth
himself with thick clay. Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to
his house, that he may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the
power of evil. Thou have consulted shame to thy house by cutting off many
people, and have sinned against thy soul. For the stone shall cry out of the
wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it. Woe to him that builds
a Town with blood, and stablisheth a City by iniquity. The materials of the
house built up by oppression, shall come as joynt-witnesses; The stones of the
wall shall cry, Lord, we were built up by blood and violence; and the beam
shall answer, True Lord, even so it is; The stones shall cry vengeance Lord
upon these self-seekers, and the beam shall answer, woe to him, because he
built his house with blood. So Isaiah, Woe unto them that decree unrighteous
decrees, and that write grievousnesse which they have prescribed. To turn
aside the needy from judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of my
people; that widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless.
So Amos, Woe Amos 6. 1. 7.
unto them that are at ease in Zion, and trust in the mountain of Samaria,
which are named chief of the Nations, to whom the house of Israel came. That
put far away the evil day, and cause the seat of violence to come near. That
lie upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the
Lambs out of the flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the stall. That
drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments, but
they are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph. So Micah, woe to them that
devise iniquity, Mica 2. 1, 2. Tacitus the Roman Emperors word was ( fibi
bonus aliis malus) he that is too much for himself, fails to be good to
others.
and work evil upon their beds: when the morning is light they practice it,
because it is in the power of their hand. And they covet fields, and take them
by violence, and houses, and take them away: so they oppress a man and his
house, even a man and his heritage.

By these Scriptures, you see, that selfe-seekers labor like a woman in
travel, but their birth proves their death, their pleasure their pain; their
comfort, their torment; their glory, their shame; their exaltation, their
desolation. Loss, disgrace, trouble, and shame, vexation and confusion will be
the certain portion of selfeseekers. When the Tartarians had taken in battle
the Duke of Muscovia, they made a cup of his skull, with this inscription, All
covet, all loose.

The fourth Remedy against this device 4 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that self-seekers are selfe-loosers, and
Adam seeks himself, and looses himself, Paradise, and that blessed Image that
God had ^amp't upon him. Lot seeks himself, Genesis 13. 10, ^^. and looses
himself, and ^is goods, etc. Peter seeks to save himself, and miserably loose
himself. Hezekiah in the business of the Ambassadors seeks himself, and
looses himself, and his life too, had not God saved him by a Miracle.
self-destroyers. Absalom and Judas seek themselves, and hang themselves. Saul
seeks himself, and kills himself; Ahab seeks himself, and looses himself, his
Crown and Kingdom. Pharaoh seeks himself, and overthrows himself and his
mighty Army in the red sea. Cain sought himself, and slew two at once, his
brother, and his own soul. Gehazi sought change of raiment, but God changed his
raiment into a leprous skin. Haman sought himself, and lost himself. The
Princes and the Presidents sought themselves (in the ruin of Daniel) but
ruined themselves, their wives and children. That which selfeseekers think
should be a staff to support them, becomes (by the hand of

Justice) an iron rod to break them; that which they would have as springs to
refresh them, becomes a gulf utterly to consume them; the crosses of
selfeseekers shall always exceed their mercies, their pain, their pleasure,
their torments, their comforts; every selfeseeker is a selfe-tormenter, a
selfe-destroyer; he carries a hell, an executioner in his own bosom, etc.

The fifth Remedy against this Device 5 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to dwell much upon the famous examples of those worthy Saints
that have denied themselves, and preferred the public good before their own
particular advantage: As Moses; And the Lord said unto Moses, let me alone that
I may destroy them, and blot out their name from under Heaven, and I will make
of thee a Nation mig^^ter, and greater then they; oh! but this offer would not
It Is good to be of his opinion and mind, who was rather willing to beautify
Italy then his own house.
take with Moses, he being a man of a brave public spirit, is hot in his
desires and prayers that the people might be spared and pardoned; says he,
pardon I beseech thee the iniquity of this people, according unto the
greatness of thy mercy, and as thou have forgiven this people from Egypt
until now. And the Lord said, I have pardoned according to thy word. A^^^hould
God make such an offer to many that write themselves Moses, and are called by
many, Moses, I am afraid they would prefer their own advantage above the The
Ancients were wont to place the Statues of their Princes by their fountains,
intimating they were (or at least should be) fountains of the public good.
public good; they would not care what become of the people, so they and
theirs might be made great and glorious in the world; they would not care so
they might have a Babell built for them, though it was upon the ashes, and
ruin of the people; baser spirits then these are not in hell, no, not in hell,
and I am sure there are no such spirits in Heaven; such men's hearts and
principles must be changed, or they will be undone for ever. Nehemiah was a A
certain great Emperor coming into Egypt, to show the zeal he had for the
public good, says to the Egyptians, draw from me as from your river Nilus.
choice soul, a man of a brave public spirit, a man that spent his time, his
strength, and his estate for the good and ease of his people. Moreover (says
he) from the time that I was appointed to be their Governor in the Land of
Judah, from the twentieth year, even unto the two and thirtieth year of
Artaxerxes the King, that is, twelve years; I and my brethren have not eaten
the bread of the Governor. Yea, also I continued in the work of this wall,
neither bought we any land, and all my servants were gathered thither unto the
work. Moreover, there were at my table an hundred and fifty of the Jews and
Rulers, besides those that came unto us from among the Heathen that are about
us. Now that which was prepared for me daily, was one Ox, and six choice
sheep: also fowls were prepared for me, and once in ten days store of all
sorts of wine; yet for all this required not I the bread of the Governor,
because the bondage was heavy upon the people. Think upon me, my God, for
good, according to all that I have done for this people. So Daniel was a man of
a brave public spirit; Then the Presidents and Princes The Counselor says a
Statesman should be thus tripartited, his will to God, his love to his Master,
his heart to his Country, his secret to his friend, his time to busisinesse.
sought to find occasion against Daniel, concerning the Kingdom, but they
could find no occasion nor fault, for as much as he was faithful, neither was
there any error, or fault found in him. Then said these men, we shall not
find any occasion against this Daniel, except we find it against him,
concerning the law of his God.

Christ had a public spirit, he laid out himself, and laid down himself for
a public good. Oh! never leave looking and meditating upon these precious and
sweet examples, till your souls are quickened, and raised up, to act for the
public good, more then for your own particular advantage; many Solomon's
Tribunal was underpropt with Lions, to show what spirit, and metal a
Magistrate should be made of.
Heathens have been excellent at this. Macrobius writes of Augustus Caesar (in
whose time Christ was borne) that he carried such an entire and fatherly
affection to the Commonwealth, that he called it ( filiam suam) his own
daughter, and therefore refused to be called ( Dominus) the Lord or Master of
his Country, and would only be called ( pater patriae) Father of his Country,
because he governed it not by fear ( per timorem sed per amorem) but by love;
the Senate and the people of Rome jointly saluting him, by the name of ( pater
patriae) Father of his Country. The people very much lamented his death, using
that speech, Would he had Vtinam aut non nasceretur, aut non moreretur.
never been borne, or never dyed. So Marcus Regulus, to save his Country from
ruin, exposed himself to the greatest sufferings that the malice and rage of
his Enemies could inflict. So Titus and Aristides, and many others have been
famous for their preferring the public good above their own advantage. My
prayer is, and shall be, that all our Rulers may be so spirited by God, that
they may be willing to be any thing, to be nothing, to deny themselves, and to
trample their sinful selves under feet, in order to the honor of God, and a
public good, that so neither Saints nor Heathens may be witnesses against them
in that day, wherein the hearts and practices of all the Rulers in the world
shall be open, and bare before him that shall judge the world in Righteousness,
and Judgment, etc.

The sixth Remedy against this Device 6 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that self is a great let to divine
things, therefore the Prophets and Apostles were usually carried out of
themselves, when they had the clearest, choicest, highest, and most glorious
visions. Self-seeking blinds the soul, that it cannot see a beauty in Christ,
nor an excellency in holiness; it distempers the palate, that a man cannot
taste sweetness in the word of God, nor in the ways of God, nor in the society
of the people of God; it shuts the hand against all the soule-enriching offers
of Christ; it hardens the heart aganst all the knocks and entreaties of Christ;
it makes the soul as an empty vine, and as a barren wilderness. Israel is an
empty Hosea 10. 1.
vine, he brings forth fruit to himself. There is nothing that speaks a man to
be more empty, and void of God, Christ, and grace, then self-seeking. The
Pharisees Selfe-see^ers with Esau, prefer a mess of pottage above their
birthright, and with the men of Shechem, esteem the bramble above the Vine,
the Olive, and the figtree, yea empty things above a full Christ* and base
things above a glorious Christ.
were great self-seekers, and great undervaluers of Christ his word and spirit.
There is not a greater hindrance to all the duties of piety, then self-seeking;
oh! this is that that keeps many a soul from looking after God, and the
precious things of eternity; they cannot wait on GOD, nor act for God, nor
abide in those ways wherein they might meet with God, by reason of self;
self-seeking is that which puts many a man upon neglecting, and slighting the
things of his peace; self-seekers will neither go into Heaven themselves, nor
suffer others to enter, that are ready to take the Kingdom by violence, as you
may see in the Scribes and Pharisees. Oh! but a gracious spirit is acted quite
otherwise, as you may see in that sweet Scripture, Cant. 7. 13. At our gates
are all manner of pleasant fruits, new Cant. 7. 13.
and old, which I have laid up for thee oh my beloved. All the Church has and
is, is The Saints Motto is, Propter te, Domine, propter te.
only for him; let others bear fruit to themselves, and lay up for themselves;
gracious spirits will hide for Christ, and lay up for Christ; all the divine
endeavors, and productions of Saints fall into Gods bosom, and empty
themselves into his lap. As Christ lays up his merits for them, his graces for
them, his comforts for them, his Crown for them: so they lay up all their
fruits, and all their loves, all their graces, and The Saints Motto is, non
nobis Domine.
all their experience, and all their services, only for him, who is the soul
of their comforts, and the crown, and top of all their royalty, and glory, etc.

The second Device that Satan 2 Device.
has to ensnare, and destroy the great and honorable of the earth, is,
BY engaging them against the people of the most high, against those that are
his jewels, his pleasant portion, the delight of his eye, and the joy of his
heart, etc. Thus he drew Pharaoh to engage Exodus 14.
against the children of Israel, and that was his overthrow. So he engaged
Hester 7.
Haman against the Jews, and so brought him to hang upon that gallows that he
had made for Mordecai. So he engaged Dan. 6.
those Princes and Presidents against Daniel, which was the utter ruin of them
and their relations. So in Revel. 20. Revel. 20. 7, 8, 9.
7, 8, 9. And when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out
of his prison. And he shall go out to deceive the Nations which are in the
four quarters of the earth* Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle:
whose number is as the sand of the Sea. And they went up upon the breadth of
the earth, and compassed the camp of the Saints about, and the beloved City:
and fire came down from God out of Heaven, and consumed them.

Now the Remedies against this device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this Device 1 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that none have engaged against the As they
said once of the Grecians in the Epigram, whom they thought invulnerable; we
shoot at them, but they fall not down, we wound them, and not kill them, etc.
Saints, but have been ruined by the God of Saints; divine justice has been
too hard for all that have opposed and engaged against the Saints, as is
evident in Saul, Pharaoh, Haman, etc. He reproved Kings for their sakes,
saying, Touch not mine anointed, nor do my Prophets no harm; when men of
Balaams spirit tnd principles have been engaged against the Saints, how has
the Angel of the Lord met them in the way, and jusled their bones against the
wall? how has he broke their backs, and necks, and by his drawn sword cut
them off in the prime of their days, and in the height of their sins? Ah! what
a harvest has hell had Tanto plas gloriae referemus quoniam eo plures
superabimus, the number of opposers makes the Christians conquest the more
illustrious, said Paedarelus in Erasmus.
in our days, of those who have engaged against the Lamb, and those that are
called chosen and faithful? ah how has divine Justice powered out their blood
as water upon the ground? how has he laid their honor and glory in the dust?
who in the pride, and madness of their hearts said, as Pharaoh, we will
pursue, we will overtake, we will divide the spoil, our lusts shall be
satisfied upon them: we will draw our sword, our hand shall destroy them; in
the things wherein they have spoken and done proudly, Justice has been above
them. History abounds in nothing more then in instances of this kind, etc.

The second Remedy against this Device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is to dwell sometime every morning upon these following Scriptures,
wherein God has engaged himself to stand by his people, and for his people,
and to make them victorious over the greatest, and wisest of their enemies.
Isa. 8. 9, 10.
Associate your selves (says the Lord by the Prophet) oh ye people, and
Occidit poterant sed vinci non poterant, said Cyprian of the Christians in his
time.
and ye shall be broken in pieces, and give ear, all ye of far Countries:
gird your selves and ye shall be broken in pieces gird your selves and ye shall
be broken in pieces. Take counsel together, and it shall come to nougbt:
speak the word, and it shall not stand, for God is with us. Fear not thou
worm Jacob, Isa. 41. 14, 15.
and ye men of Israel, I will help thee says the Lord, and thy Redemer the
holy one of Israel. Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument
having teeth, thou shall thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shall
make the hills as chaff. Verse 16.
Thou shall fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the
whirle-winde shall scatter them, and thou shall rejoice in the Lord, and shall
glory in the holy one of Israel. No weapon that is formed against Isa. 54. 17.
thee shall prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against thee in
judgment, thou shall condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the
Lord, and their righteousness is of me says the Lord. Now also many Mica 4.
11.
Nations are gathered together against thee, that say, let her be defiled, and
let our eye look upon Zion. But they know not Verse 12.
the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they his counsel; for he shall
gather them as the sheaves into the floor. Arise and thresh Verse 13.
oh daughter of Zion, for I will make thy horn iron, and I will make thy hoofs
brass, and thou shall beat in pieces many people, and I will consecrate their
gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto the Lord of the Zach. 12. 2, 3.
whole earth. Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto all the
people round about, when they shall be in the siege both against Judah and
against Jerusalem. And in that day will I make Jerusalem a burden some stone
for all people, all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces,
though all the people of the earth be gathered together against it.

The 3. Remedy against this device of 3 Remedy.
Satan, is, to consider, that you cannot engage against the Saints, but you
must Acts 5. 39. It seems to be drawn from the sable of the Giants, which were
said to make War with the Gods.
engage against God himself, by reason of that near, and blessed union that is
between God and them; you cannot be fighters against the Saints, but you will
be found in the casting up of the account, to be fighters against God himself;
and what greater madness, then for weakness it self to engage against an
almighty strength; the near union that is between the Lord and Believers, is
set forth by that near union that is betwixt a husband and his Wife. The souls
happiness consists not in any thing but in its union with God; nor its misery
lies not so much in any thing, as in its disunion from God.
(They two shall be one flesh; This is a great Mystery, but I speak concerning
Christ and the Church) We are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his
bones, says the Apostle: This near union is set forth by that union that is
between the head and the members, which make up one body, and by that union
that is betwixt the graft and the stock, which are made one by inscition. The
union between the Lord and a Believer is so near, that you cannot strike a
Believer, but the Lord is sensible of it, and takes it as done to himself,
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Acts 9. 4. Isa. 63. 9.
me? And in all their afflictions he was afflicted, etc. Ah souls! who ever
engaged against God, and prospered? who ever took up the sword against him, but
perished by it? God can speak you to hell, and nod you to hell at pleasure; it is
your greatest concernment to lay down your weapons at his feet, and to Psalm.
2. 12.
kiss the son lest he be angry, and you perish in the midway.

The 4th Remedy against this Device 4 Remedy.
of Satan is, solemnly to consider, that Hic homo potuit apud Deum quod voluit.
Said one concerning Luther, he could have what he would of God.
you are much engaged to the Saints (as instruments) for the mercies that you
do enjoy, and for the preventing and removing of many a judgment, that
otherwise might have been your ruin, before this day; were it not for the
Saints sake, God would quickly make the Heavens to be as brass, and the Earth
as iron, God would quickly strip thee of thy Robes, and glory, and set thee
upon the dunghill with Job: They are the props that bear the world from falling
about thy ears, and that keep the iron rod from breaking of thy bones.
Therefore he said that he would Psalm. 106. 23.
destroy them, had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn
away Prayer is ( porta coeli, clavis Paradisi) the gate of Heaven, a key to let
us into Paradise.
his wrath, lest he should destroy them.

Ah! had not the Saints many a time cast themselves into the breach, betwixt
Gods wrath and you, you had been cut off from the land of the living, and have
had your portion with those, whose names are written in the dust; When the
danger is over the Saint is forgotten, is a French Proverb, and that which many
Saints in England have found by experience.
many a Nation, many a City, and many a Family is surrounded with blessings for
the Joseph's sakes that live therein, and are preserved from many calamities and
miseries, for the Moseses, the Daniels, the Noah's, and the Jobs sakes, that
dwell amongst them. That Is a sweet word, Prove. 10. 25. As the whirlewinde
passes, so is the wicked no more: but the (...) Jesodh gnolam from Josadh.
righteous is an everlasting foundation, or is the foundation of the world; the
righteous is the foundation of the world, which but for their sakes would soon
shatter, and fall to ruin: so the Psalmist, Psalm. 75. 3. The earth and all the
inhabitants thereof are dissolved, I bear up the pillars of it. Selah. Mary
Queen of Scots, that was Mother to King James, was wont to say, that she feared
Mr. Knoxes prayer more then an Army of ten thousand men.


The Emperor Marcus Antonius, being in Almany with his Army, was enclosed in a
dry Country by his enemies, who so stopped all the passages, that he and his
Army were like to perish for want of water; the Emperors Lieutenant seeing him
so distressed, told him that he had heard, that the Christians could obtain
any thing of their God, by their prayers; whereupon the Emperor having a
legion of Christians in his Army, desired them to pray to their God, for his
and the Armies delivery out of that danger; which they presently did, and
presently a great Thunder fell amongst the enemies, and abundance of water upon
the Romans, whereby their thirst was quenched, and the enemies overthrown
without any fight. I shall close up this last Remedy, with those sweet words of
the Psalmist. In Judah is God known, his name is great Ps. 76. 1, 2, 3.
in Israel: In Salem also is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion.
There brake he the arrows of the bow, the shield, and the sword, and the
bettell. Selah.

Secondly, Satan has his Devices to ensnare and destroy the Learned and the
Wise, and that sometimes
BY working them to pride themselves John 5. ^4.
in their parts and abilities; 1 Kings 22. 22, 23, 24, 25. 1 Cor. 1. 18. to 29.
and sometimes by drawing them to rest upon their parts and abilities, and
sometimes by causing them to make light and slight of those that want their
parts The truth of this you may see in the learned Scribes and Pharisees.
and abilities, though they excel them in grace and holiness; and sometimes
by drawing them to engage their parts and abilities, in those ways and things
that make against the honor of Christ, the joy of the spirit, the advancement
of the Gospel, and the liberty of the Saints, etc.

Now the Remedies against this Device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this Device 1 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that you have nothing but what you have
received; Christ being as well the fountain of common gifts, as of saving 1
Cor. 4. 7. Quicquid es debes creanti, Quicquid potes debes redimenti, said
Bern. Whatsoever thou art, thou owe to him that made thee, and whatever thou
have, thou owe to him that redeemed thee.
grace. What have thou (says the Apostle) that thou have not received? And if
thou have received it, why do thou glory as though thou had not received
it? There are those that would hammer out their own happiness, like the
Spider climbing up by the thread of her own weaving; of all the parts and
abilities that be in you, you may well say, as the young man did of his
Hatchet, Alas Master! it was but borrowed; Alas Lord! all I have is but
borrowed from that Fountain that fills all the Vessel in Heaven, and on Earth,
and it overflowes; my gifts are not so much mine, 1 Chro. 29. 14.
as thine: Of thine own have we offered unto thee, said that Princely Prophet,
etc.

The second Remedy against this Device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that men's leaning and trusting to their
own wits, parts, and abilities, have been their utter overthrow, and ruin;
General counsels were seldom succesfull, because men came with confidence,
leaning to their own understanding, and seeking for victory rather then
verity, says one.
as you may see in Achitophel, and those Presidents and Princes that engaged
against Daniel, and in the Scribes and Pharisees; God loves to confute men in
their Confidences; he that stands upon his parts and abilities, does but stand
upon a quick-sand, that will certainly fail him. There is nothing in the world
that provokes God more to withdraw from the soul, then this, and how can the
soul stand when his strength is departed from him? Every thing that a man
leanes upon, but God, will be a dart that will certainly pierce his heart
through and through; ah! how many in these days have lost their estates? their
friends? their lives? their souls? by leaning upon their admired parts and
abilities? The Saints are described Cant. 8. 5.
by their leaning upon their beloved the Lord Jesus; he that leanes only upon
the bosom of Christ, lives the highest, choycest, safest, and sweetest life;
miseries always lie at that man's door, that leans upon any thing below the
precious bosom of Christ. Such a man is most in danger, and this is none of
his least plagues, that he thinks himself secure. It Is the greatest wisdom in
the world, to take the wise man's counsel. Trust in the Lord with all thy Prove.
3. 5.
heart, and lean not to thine own understanding.

The third Remedy against this Device 3 Remedy.
of Satan, is to consider, that you do not transcend others, more in parts and
abilities, then they do you in Judas and the Scribes and Pharisees, had great
parts, but no grace, the Disciples had grace, but weak parts.
grace and holiness, there may be, and often is great parts and abilities
where there is but little grace, yea no grace; and there may be, and often is,
a great deal of grace, where there is but weak parts and abilities; you may be
higher then others in gifts of knowledge, utterance, learning, etc. and those
very souls may be higher then you in their communion with God, in their
delighting Luke 11. 1. Mark 8. 31, 32, 33. Luke 24. 19. to 28.
in God, in their dependence upon God, in their affections to God, and in their
humble, holy, and unblamable walking before God; Is it folly and madness in a
man, to make light and slight of another, because he is not so rich in lead, or
iron, as he, when he is a thousand thousand times richer in silver and in gold,
in Jewels, and in Pearls, then he? And is it not madness and folly with a
witness, in those that have greater parts and abilities then others, ^o slight
them upon that account, when that those very persons, that they make light and
slight of, have a thousand times more grace then they? And yet ah! how does
this evil spirit prevail in the world? 'Twas the sad complaint of Austin in
his time, The unlearned (said Surgeant indocti and rapiunt coelum and nos cum
doctrinis nostris detrudimur in gehenna^.
he) rise up, and take Heaven by violence, and we with all our learning are
thrust down to hell; it is sad to see, how many of the Rabbis of these times,
do make an Idol of their parts and abilities; and with what an eye of pride,
scorn, and contempt do they look upon those that want their parts, and that
do not worship the idol that they have set up in their own hearts. Paul who
was the great Doctor of the Gentiles, did wonderfully transcend in all parts
and abilities, the Doctors and Rabbis of our times, and yet ah! how humbly,
how tenderly, how sweetly does he carry himself toward the meanest and the 1
Cor 9. 22. 2 Cor. 11. 29.
weakest; To the weak I became as weak, that I might win the weak; I am made
all things to all men, that I might by all means save some. Who is weak, and I
am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? Wherefore, if meat make my
brother to offend, I will ea^ no flesh while the World stands, least I make
my brother to offend. But ah! how little of this sweet spirit is to be found in
the Doctors of our age, who look sowrely, and speak bitterly against those that
do not see as they see, nor cannot speak as they speak. Sirs, the spirit of
Isa. 60. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
the Lord (even in despised Saints) will be too hard for you, and his
appearances in them, in these latter days, will be so full of spiritual
beauty and glory, as that they will darken that, that you are too apt to count
and call your glory; the spirit of the Lord will not suffer his choycest jewel
grace, to be always buried under the straw, and stubble of parts and gifts.

The fourth Remedy against this Device 4 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to consider, that there Becanus says, that the tree of
Knowledge bears many leaves, and little fruit; ah! that it were not so with
many in these days, who once did outshine the stars, etc.
is no such way for men to have their gifts and parts blasted, and withered, as
to pride themselves in them, as to rest upon them, as to make light and slight
of those that want them, as to engage them against those persons, ways, and
things that Jesus Christ has set his heart upon. Ah! how has God blasted, and
withered the parts and abilities of many among us, that have once been famous
shining lights, how is their sun darkened, and their glory clouded? How Zech.
11. 17.
is the sword of the Lord upon their arm, and upon their right eye? How is
their arm clean dried up, and their right eye utterly darkened? as the Prophet
speaks. This is matter of humiliation and lamentation; many precious discerning
Saints do see this, and in secret mourn for it; and oh! that they were kindly
sensible of Gods withdrawing from them, that they may repent, keep humble, and
carry it sweetly toward Gods Jewels, and lean only upon the Lord, and not upon
their parts and understanding, that so the Lord may delight to visit them with
his grace, at such a rate, as that their faces may shine more gloriously then
ever, and they may be more serviceable to the honor of Christ, and the faith
of the Saints, then formerly they have been, etc.

Thirdly, Satan has his Devices to destroy the Saints, and one great Device
that he has to destroy the Saints, is,
BY working them first to be strange, Gal 5. 15. If we knock, we break*
dissolution is the d^^ghter of d^ssen^ion.
and then to divide, and then to be bi^er and jealous, and then to bite and
devour one another; our own woeful experi^nce is too great a proof of this.
The Israelites in Egypt did not more vex one another, then Christians in these
days have done, which occasioned a deadly consumption to fall upon some.

Now the remedies against this Device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this Device 1 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to dwell more upon one another graces, then upon one another
weaknesses and infirmities: it is sad to consider, that Saints should have
Flavius Vespasianus (the Emperor) was more ready to conceal the vices of his
friends, then their virtues; can you think seriously of this Christians (that a
Heathen should excel you) and not blush? 2 Cor. 2. 7, 8.
many eyes to behold one another infirmities, and not one eye to see each
others graces; that they should use spectacles to behold one another
weaknesses, rather then looking glasses to behold one another graces. Erasmus
tells of one, who collected all the lame and defective Verses in Homers works,
but passed over all that were excellent; ah! that this were not the practice of
many that shall at last meet in Heaven, that they were not careful and
skillfull to collect all the weaknesses of others, and to pass over all those
things that are excellent in them. The Corinthians did eye more the incestuous
persons sin, then his sorrow, which was like to have drowned him in sorrow.

Tell me Saints, is it not a more sweet, comfortable, and delightful thing, to
look more upon one another graces, then upon one another infirmities? Tell
me, what pleasure, what delight, what comfort is there in looking upon the
enemies, the wounds, the sores, the sicknesses, the diseases, the nakedness of
our friends? Now sin you know, is the souls enemy, the souls wound, the souls
sores, the souls sickness, the souls Non Gens, sed men's, non Genus sed Genius,
Not race, or place, but grace, truly sets forth a m^n.
disease, the souls nakedness; and ah! what a heart has that man that loves
thus to look? Grace is the choicest flower in all a Christians garden, it is the
richest Jewel in all his Crown, it is his Princely Robes, it is the top of
Royalty, and therefore must needs be the most pleasing, sweet, and delightful
object for a gracious eye to be fixed upon. Sin is darkness, grace is light,
sin is hell, grace is Heaven; and what madness is it, to look more at
darkness, then at light; more at hell, then at Heaven? Jam. 5. 11. 2. 25. 1
Pet. 2. 6. vide. Sin is Satan's work, Grace is Gods work^ and is it not most
^^^et that the child should eye most, and mind most his Fathers work, etc.


T^ll me Saints, does not God look more upon his people graces, then upon their
weaknesses, surely he does; he looks more at David's and Asa's uprightness,
then upon their infirmities, though they were great and many; he eyes more
Job's patience, then his passion, Remember the patience of Job, not a word of
his impatience, etc. He that drew Alexander whilst he had a scar upon his
face, drew him with his finger upon the scar; God puts his finger upon his
peoples scars, that no blemish may appear; ah Saints! that you would make it
the top of your glory in this, to be like your heavenly Father; by so doing,
much sin would be prevented, the designs of wicked men frustrated, Satan
outwitted, many wounds healed, many sad hearts cheared, and God more
abundantly honored, etc.

The second Remedy against this Device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, i^, solemnly to consider, that love and unity makes most for your
own safety, and security. We shall There was a Temple of Concord amongst the
Heathens, and shall it not be found among Christians, that are Temples of the
holy Ghost.
be insuperabiles, if we be inseperabiles, invincible, if we be inseparable.
The world may frown upon you, and plot against you, but they cannot hurt you;
unity is the best bond of safety, in every Church and Commonwealth. And this
did that Scythian King in Plutark, represent lively to his 80 Sons, when being
ready to dye, he commanded a bundle of Arrows fast bound together, to be given
to his Sons to break, they all tried to break them, but being bound fast
together, they could not, then he caused the band to be cut, and then they
Pancirollus says, that the most precious pearl among the Romans was called
unio union.
broke them with ease: he applied it thus; My Sons, so long as you keep
together, you will be invincible, but if the band of union be broke betwixt
you, you will easily be broken in ^ieces. Pliny writes of a stone in the
Island of Scyrus, that if it be whole, though a large and heavy one, it swims
above water, but being broken, it sinks: so long as Saints keep whole, nothing
shall sink them, but if they break, they are in danger of sinking and drowning,
etc.

The third Remedy against this Device 3 Remedy.
of Satan, is to dwell upon those commands of God that do require you To act,
or run cross to Gods express command, though under pretense of Revelation
from God, is as much as a man's life is worth, as you may see in that sad story,
1 Kings 13. 24.
to love one another; oh! when your hearts begin to rise against each other,
charge the Commands of God upon your hearts, and say to your souls, oh our
souls! has not the eternal God commanded you to love them that love the Lord?
And is it not life to obey, and death to rebel? Therefore look that you
fulfill the commands of the Lord, for his commands are not like those that are
easily reversed, but they are like those of the Medes that cannot be changed.
Oh! be much in pondering upon these Commands of God; A new Commandment I give
unto you, that ye John 13. 34.
love one another as I have loved you; that ye also love one another. It Is
called a new Some conceive it to be an Hebraisme, in which language, new, rare,
and most excellent are Synonima's. John 15. 12. 17.
commandment, because it is renewed in the Gospel, and set home by Christ's
example, and because it is rare, choice, special, and remarkable above all
others. This is my commandment, that ye love one another as I have loved you.
These things I command you, that ye love one another. Owe no man any thing, but
love one another; for he that loves another, has Romans 13. 8.
fulfilled the Law. Let brotherly love continue. Heb. 13. 1.
Love one another, for love is of 1 John. 4. 7.
God: And every one that loves is borne of 1 Pet. 1. 22.
God, and knows God. See that ye love Chap. 3. v. 8.
one another with a pure heart fervently. Finally, be ye all of one mind,
having compassion one of another. Love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous.
For this is the message 1 John 3. 11.
that ye heard from the beginning, that we should love one another. And this is
his Verse 23.
Commandment, that we should believe on the name of his son Jesus Christ,
and love one another as he gave us commandment. Beloved, if God so loved us,
we ought to love Chap. 4. v. 11.
one another.

Oh! dwell much upon these precious commands, that your love may be The
Ancients use to say commonly that Alexander and Ephestion had but one soul in
two distinct bodies, because their joy and sorrow, glory, and disgrace was
mutual to them both.
inflamed one to another. In the primitive times it was much taken notice of by
the Heathens, that in the depth of misery, when fathers and mothers forsook
their children, Christians (otherwise strangers) stuck one to another, whose
love of Religion proved firmer then that of nature. Ah! that there were more of
that spirit among the Saints in these days. The world was once destroyed with
water, for the heat of lusts, and it is thought it will be again destroyed with
fire, for the coldness of love.

The fourth Remedy against this Device 4 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to dwell more upon those choice and sweet things, wherein you
agree, then upon those things wherein you differ; ah! did you but thus, how
would sinful heats be abated, and your love raised, and your spirits sweetened
one to another; you agree in most, you differ but in a few; you agree in the
greatest, and weightiest; as concerning God, Christ, the spirit, the Scripture,
etc. you differ only in those points that have been long disputable amongst men
of greatest piety, and parts; you agree to own the Scripture, to hold to Christ
the Head, and to walk What a sad thing was it that a Heathen should say, No
beasts are so mischievous to men, as Christians are one to another.
according to the laws of the new creature. Shall Herod and Pilate agree?
shall Turks and Pagans agree? shall Bears and Lions, Tigers and Wolves, yea,
shall a legion of Devils agree in one body? and shall not Saints agree, who
differ only in such things as have least of the heart of God in them? and that
shall never hinder your meeting in heaven, etc.

The fifth Remedy against this Device 5 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that God delights to be styled (Deus
pacis) the God of peace; and Christ to be styled 2 Cor. 13. 11. Isa. 9. 6. Vbi
pax ibi Christus, quia Christus pax, where peace is, there is Christ, because
Christ is peace.
(Princeps pacis) the Prince of peace; and King of Salem, that is, King of
Peace; and the Spirit is a spirit of Peace. The fruit of the spirit is love,
joy, peace, Gal. 5. 22. Oh! why then should not the Saints be children of
peace? Certainly men of froward, unquiet, fiery spirits cannot have that sweet
evidence of their interest in the God of Peace, and in the Prince of Peace, and
in the spirit of Peace, as those precious souls have that follow after the
things that make for love and peace. The very name of peace Dulce nomen pacis
said the Orator. The Grecians had the statue of peace with Pluto, the god of
Riches in her Arms.
is sweet and comfortable; the fruit and effect thereof pleasant, and
profitable, more to be desired then innumerable Triumphs; It Is a blessing that
ushers in a multitude of other blessings. The Ancients were wont to paint Peace
in the form of a Woman, with a horn of plenty in her hand. Ah! peace and love
among the Saints is that which will secure them, and their mercies at home;
yea, it will multiply their mercies, it will engage the God of mercy to crown
them with the choicest mercies, and it is that will render them most terrible,
invincible, and successful abroad; love and peace among the Saints, is that
which puts the counsels of their Enemies to a stand, and renders all their
enterprises abortive; it is that which does most weaken their hands, wound their
hopes, and kill their hearts, etc.

The sixth Remedy against this Device 6 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to make more care and conscience of keeping up your peace There
is no fear of knowing too much, but there is much fear in practicing too
little.
with God; ah Christians! I am afraid, that your remisness herein is that which
has occasioned much of that sowrenesse, bitterness, and divisions that be
among you; ah! you have not as you should kep't up your peace with God; and
therefore it is that you do so dreadfully break the peace among your selves.
The Lord has promised, That Prove. 16. 7.
when a man's ways please him, he will make his enemies to be at peace with
him; ah! Pharnaces sent a Crown to Caesar at the same time he rebelled against
him* but he returned the Crown, and this message back ( faceret imperata prius)
let him return to his obedience first; there is no sound peace to be had with
God or man, but in a way of obedience.
how much more then would God make the children of peace to keep the Peace
among themselves, if their ways did but please him? All creatures are at his
beck and check. Laban followed Jacob with one Troup, Esau met him with another,
both with hostile intentions; but Jacobs ways pleasing the Lord, God by his
mighty power so works, that Laban leaves him with a kiss, and Esau meets him
with a kiss; he has an oath of one, tears of the other, and peace with both;
if we make it our business to keep up our league with God, God will make it
his work, and his glory to maintain our peace with men; but if men make light
of keeping up their peace with God, it is just with God to leave them to a
spirit of pride, envy, passion, contention, division, and confusion, to leave
them to bite and devour one another, till they be consumed one of another, etc.

The seventh Remedy against this Device 7 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to dwell much upon that near relation, and union that is between
you; this consideration had a sweet influence upon Abraham's heart. And Abraham
said unto Lot, Let there be Genesis 13. 8. (...) Oh let there be no bitterness
between us, for we are brethren.
no strife I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my herdmen, and thy
herdmen, for we be brethren. That is a sweet word in the Psalmist; Behold, how
good, and how pleasant it is for brethren to live together in unity. It is not
good, and not pleasant; The party colored coats were characters of the Kings
children, so is following after peace now.
or pleasant and not good, but good and pleasant; there be some things that be
( bona sed non jucunda) good, and not pleasant, as patience and discipline; and
there be some things that are pleasant, but not good, as carnal pleasures,
voluptuousness, etc. and there are some things that are neither good, nor
pleasant, as malice, envy, worldly sorrow, etc. and there are some things that
are both good and pleasant, as piety, charity, peace and union among brethren;
and oh! that we could see more of this among those that shall one day meet (in
their Fathers Kingdom) and never part, etc. And as they are brethren, so they
are all fellow members. Now ye are the body of 1 Cor. 12. 27.
Christ, and members in particular.

And again, We are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. Shall
Ephesians. 5. 30.
the members of the natural body be serviceable, and useful to one another,
and shall the members of this spiritual body cut, and destroy one another? Is
it against the Law of Nature for the natural members to cut, and slash one
another? and is it not much more against the Law of Nature, and of grace, for
the members of Christ's glorious body to do so? And as you are all
fellowmembers, so you are all fellow soldiers Revel. 12 7, 8. Heb. 2. 10.
under the same Captain of salvation, the Lord Jesus, fighting against the
world, the flesh, and the Devil. And as you are all fellow soldiers, so are
you all fellow sufferers under the same enemies, the Devil, and the Revel. 2.
10.
world. And as you are all fellow sufferers, John 15. 19* 20. Heb. 13. 1^. Heb.
1^. ^^.
so are you fellow-travellers toward the Land of Canaan, the new Jerusalem
that is above. Here we have no abiding City, but we look for one to come; the
heirs of Heaven are strangers on earth. And as you are all fellow* travelers,
so are you all fellow-heirs of Romans 8. 17.
the same Crown and inheritance.

The eighth Remedy against this Device 8 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to dwell upon the miseries of discord; dissolution is the Our
dissentions are one of the Jews greatest stumbling blocks; can you think of
it, and your hearts not bleed?
daughter of dissension; ah! how does the name of Christ, and the way of Christ
suffer by the discord of Saints? how are many that are entering upon the ways
of God hindered, and sadded, and the mouths of the wicked opened, and their
hearts hardened against God, and his ways, by the discord of his people?
Remember this, the disagreement of Christians is the Devils triumph; and what
a sad thing is this, that Christians should give Satan cause to triumph. 'Twas
a notable saying of one, take away strife, and call back peace, lest thou
loose a man thy friend, and the Devil an enemy joy over you both, etc.

The ninth Remedy against this Device 9 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that it is no disparagement to you to be
first in seeking peace, and reconcilement, but rather an honor to you, They
shall both have the name, and the note, the comfort, and the credit of being
most like unto God, who first begin to pursue after peace.
that you have begun to seek peace. Abraham was the elder, and more worthy then
Lot, both in respect of grace, and nature also (for he was uncle unto Lot) and
yet he first seeks peace of his inferior, which God has recorded as his
honor. Ah! how does the God of peace by his spirit, and messengers pursue
after peace with poor creatures. God first makes offers of peace to us. Now
then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as 2 Cor. 5. 20.
though God did beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled to God Gods grace first kneels to us, and who can turn their backs
upon such blessed, and bleeding embracements; but soul^, in whom Satan the God
of this world kings it? God is the party wronged, and yet he sues for peace
with us at first. I said, Isa. 65. 1.
behold me, behold me, unto a Nation that was not called by my name; ah! how
does Behold me, behold me, it is geminated to show Gods exceeding forwardness
to show savor and mercy to them.
the sweetness, the freeness, and the riches of his grace break forth, and
shine upon poor souls. When a man goes from the sun, yet the sunbeams follow
him: so when we go from the Sun of Righteousness, yet then the beams of his
love and mercy follow us. Christ first sent to Peter that had denied him, and
the rest that had forsaken him; Go your ways, and tell his Disciples and
Peter, that he goes before you into Galilee, Mark 16. 7.
there shall ye see him, as he said unto you.

Ah souls! it is not a base, low thing, but a God-like thing, though we are
wronged by others, yet to be the first in seeking after peace, such actings
will speak out much of God with a man's spirit, etc.

Christians! it is not matter of liberty, whether you will, or you will not
pursue after peace; but it is matter of duty that lies upon you, you are bound
by express precepts to follow after peace; and though it may seem to fly from
you, yet you must pursue after it. Follow Heb. 12. 14. (...), it signifies to
follow after peace, as the persecutor does him whom he persecuteth. Psalm. 34.
14.
peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.
Peace and holiness is to be pursued after with the greatest eagerness that can
be imagined: So the Psalmist, Depart from evil, and do good, seek peace, and
pursue it; the Hebrew word that is here rendered seek is in Pihil, and it
signifies to seek earnestly, vehemently, affectionately, (...)
studiously, industriously, and pursue it: that Hebrew word signifies earnestly
(...)
to pursue, being a Metaphor taken from the eagerness of wild Beasts, or
ravenous (...)
Fowls, which will run, or fly both fast, and far, rather then be
disappointed of their prey. So the Apostle presses the same duty upon the
Romans, Let us follow after the things that make for Romans 14. 19.
peace, and things wherewith one may edefie another.

Ah! you froward, sower, dogged Christians, can you look upon these commands
of God without tears, and blushing? I have read a remarkable story of
Aristippus, though but a Heathen, Plutarch.
who went of his own accord to Aeschines his enemy, and said, shall we never
be reconciled, till we become a Table-talk to all the Country? And when
Eschines answered, he would most gladly be at peace with him; Remember then
said Aristippus, that though I were the elder and better man, yet I sought
first unto thee. Thou art indeed said Aeschines, a far better man then I; for I
began the quarrel, but thou the reconcilement. My prayer shall be, that this
Heathen may not rise in judgment against the flourishing Professors of our
times; Who whet their tongues like Psalm. 64. 3.
a sword, and bend their bows to shoot their arrows, even bitter words.

The tenth Remedy against this device 10 Remedy.
of Satan, is, for Saints to join together, and walk together in the ways of
grace and holiness, so far as they do agree, making the word the only
touchstone, and judge of their actions. That is sweet advice that the Apostle
gves; I press toward the mark for the price of the Phil. 3. 14.
high calling of God, in Christ Jesus. Let Verse 15.
us therefore as many as be perfect (comparatively, or conceitedly so) be thus
minded: and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this
unto you. Nevertherlesse, whereto we have already attained, Verse 16.
let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing.

Ah Christians! God looses much, and you loose much, and Satan gains much by
this, that you do not, that you will not walk lovingly together, so far as
your ways lie together; It Is your sin and shame that you do not, that you
will not pray together, and hear together, and conferr together, and mourn
together, etc. because that Great is the power of joynt-prayer. Mary Queen of
Scots, said, she seared more the prayers of Mr. Knox, and his accomplices, then
an Army of 30000. men.
in some far lesser things you are not agreed together; what folly and madness
is it in those, whose way of a hundred miles lies fourscore and nineteen
together, yet will not walk so far together, because that they cannot go the
other mile together; yet such is the folly and madness of many Christians in
these days, who will not do many things they may do, because they cannot do
every thing they should do. I fear God will whip them into a better temper
before he has done with them; He will break their bones, and pierce their
hearts; but he will cure them of this malady, etc.

And be sure you make the word the only Touchstone, and Judge of all persons
and actions. To the Law and to Isa. 8. 20.
the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there
is no light in them. It Is best and safest, to make that to be the judge of all
men, and things now, that all shall be judged by in the latter day. The word
(says Christ) John 12. 48.
that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day. Make not your dim
light, your notions, your fancies, your opinions, the Judge of men's actions,
but still judge by rule, and plead, it is written, when a vain, importunate
soul cried out in contest with a holy man, hear me, hear me; the holy man
answered, Neither hear me, nor I thee, but Nec ego te, nec tu me, sed ambo
audiamus Apostulum.
let us both hear the Apostle.

Constantine in all the disputes before him with the Arrians, would still call
for the word of God, as the only way, if not to convert, yet to stop their
mouths, etc.

The 11. Remedy against this Device 11 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to be much in self-judging. 1 Cor. 11. 31.
Judge your selves, and you shall not be judged of the Lord: ah! were
Christians Its storied of Nero himself, being unclean, he did think there was
no man chaste.
hearts more taken up in judging themselves, and condemning themseves, they
would not be so apt to judge and censure others, and to carry it sowrly, and
bitterly toward others that differ from them. There are no souls in the world,
that are so fearful to judge others, as In the Olympic games, the wrestlers
did not put their Crowns upon their own heads, but upon the heads of others;
it is so with souls, that are good at selfejudging.
those that do most judge themselves, nor so careful to make a righteous
judgment of men, or things, as those that are most careful to judge
themselves. There are none in the world that tremble to think evil of others,
to speak evil of others, or to do evil to others, as those that make it their
business to judge themselves; there are none that make such sweet
constructions, and charitable interpretations of men, and things, as those that
are best, and most in judging themselves. One request I have to you, that are
much in judging others, and little in judging your selves; to you that are so
apt, and prone to judge rashly, falsely, and unrighteously, and that is, that
you will every morning dwell a little upon these Scriptures.

Judge not that ye be not judged. For Math. 7. 1.
with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measures ye
meet, it Verse 2.
shall be measured to you again. Judge not according John 7. 24.
to appearance, but judge righteous judgment. Let not him that eats not, judge
Romans 14. 3.
him that eats, for God has received him. Why do thou judge thy brother?
or why do Verse 10.
thou set at naught thy brother? we shall all stand before the judgment seat
of Christ. Let us not judge one another any more, but Versa 13.
judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall
in his brothers way. Judge nothing before the time, 1 Cor. 4. 5.
until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and will manifest the counsels of the hearts, and then shall every
man have praise of God. Speak not evil one of another (brethren) Iam. 4. 11.
he that speaks evil of his brother, and judges his brother, speaks evil
of the Law, and judges the Law; but if thou judge the Law, thou art not a
doer of the law, but a Judge. There is one Lawgiver, who Verse 12.
is able to save, and to destroy: who art thou that judge another? who art
thou that judge Romans 14. 4.
another man's servant? to his own Master he stands or falls: yea, he shall
be holden up, for God is able to make him stand.

One Delphidius accusing another before Julian, about that which he could not
prove; the party denying the fact, Delphidius answers, if it be sufficient to
deny what is laid to ones charge, who shall be found guilty? Julian answers,
and if it be sufficient to be accused, who can be innocent? You are wise, and
know how to apply it.

The 12. Remedy against this Device 12 Remedy.
of Satan is this. Above all, labor to be 1 Pet. 5. 5.
clothed with humility. Humility makes a man peaceable among brethren,
fruitful in well doing, cheerful in suffering, and constant in holy walking;
humility fits for the highest services we owe to Christ, and yet will not
neglect John 13. 5.
the lowest service to the meanest Saint. Humility can feed upon the meanest
dish, and yet it is maintained by the choicest delicates, as God, Christ, and
glory; Humility will make a man bless him, that curses him, and pray for those
that persecute him. An humble heart is a habitation for God, a scholar Humility
is ( conservatrix vir virtutum) says Bernard, that which keeps all graces
together.
for Christ, a companion for Angels, a preserver of grace, and a fitter for
glory. Humility is the nurse of our graces, the preserver of our mercies, and
the great promoter of holy duties. Humility cannot find three things on this
side Heaven; it cannot find fullness in the creature, nor sweetness in sin,
nor life in an Ordinance without Christ. An humble soul always finds three
things on this side Heaven; the soul to be empty, Christ to be full, and every
mercy and duty to be sweet, wherein God is enjoyed. Humility can weep over
other men's weaknesses, and joy, and rejoice over their graces. Humility will
make a man 1 These. 1. 2, 3.
quiet, and contented in the meanest condition, and 'twill preserve a man from
envying others prosperous condition. Humility honors those that are strong in
grace, and puts two hands Ephesians. 3. 8.
under those that are weak in grace. Humility makes a man richer then other
men, and it makes a man judge himself the poorest among men. Humility will see
much good abroad, when it can see but little at home; Ah Christians! though
faith be the champion of grace, and love thee nurse of grace, yet humility is
the beautifier of grace; it casts a general glory upon all the graces in the
soul; ah! did Christians more abound in humility, The humble soul is like the
violet, which grows low, hangs the head downwards, and hides it self with his
own leaves, and were it not that the fragrant smell of his many virtues discover
him to the world, he would choose to live and die in his self contenting
secrecy.
they would be less bitter, froward, and sower; and they would be more gentle,
meek, and sweet in their spirits and practices. Humility will make a man have
high thoughts of others, and low thoughts of a man's self; it will make a man
see much glory and excellency in others, and much baseness and sinfulness in
a man's self; it will make a man see others rich, and himself poor; others
strong, and himself weak; others wise, and himself foolish. Humility will make
a man excellent at covering others infirmities, and at recording their gracious
services, and at delighting in the^^ graces; it makes a man joy in every light
that out-shines his own, and in every wind that blows others good; Humility
is better at believing, then it is at questioning other men's happiness. I
judge, says an humble soul, it is well with these Christians now, but it will
be far better with them hereafter; they are now upon the borders of the new
Jerusalem, and 'twill be but as a day before they slide into Jerusalem. An
humble soul is willinger to say, Heaven is that man's, then mine, and Christ is
that Christians, then mine, and God is their God in Covenant, then mine; ah!
were Christians more humble, there would be less fire, and more love among
them then now is, etc.

Lastly, as Satan has his Devices Last Device.
to destroy gracious souls, so he has his devices to destroy poor ignorant
souls, and that sometimes
BY drawing them to affect ignorance, and to neglect, slight, and Hos 4. 6.
Prove. 22. 29.
despise the means of knowledge; ignorance is the mother of mistake, the of
trouble, error, and of terror Mat. 22. 29.
it is the high way to hell, and it makes a man both a prisoner and a slave to
the Devil at once. Ignorance unmans a Ignorants have this advantage ( ut
mitius ardeant) they have a cooler hell.
man, it makes a man a beast, yea, it makes him more miserable then the beast
that perishes; there are none so easily, nor so frequently taken in Satan's
snare, as ignorant souls; they are easily drawn to dance with the Devil all
day, and to dream of supping with Christ at night, etc.

Now the Remedies against this device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this Device 1 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that an ignorant heart is an evil heart;
without knowledge, the mind is not good. Prove. 19. 2.


As an ignorant heart is a naughty heart, it is a heart in the dark, and no
Ign^^at sane improbus omnis, says Ariris^otle. M^^. 6. 22.
good can come into a dark heart, but it must pass through the understanding;
and if the eye be dark, all the body is dark. A leprous head, and a leprous
heart are inseparable companions; ignorant hearts are so evil, that they let
fly on all hands, and spare not to spit their venone in the very face of God,
as Pharaoh did, when thick darkness was upon him.

The second Remedy against this Device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is to consider, that ignorance is the deformity of the soul; As
blindness is the deformity of the face, so is ignorance the deformity of the
soul; as the want of fleshly eyes spoils the beauty of the face, so the want
of spiritual eyes spoils the beauty of the soul. A man without knowledge, is
as a workman without his hands, as a painter without his eyes, as a traveller
without his legs, or as a ship without sails, or a bird without Wings, or like
a body without a soul.

The third Remedy against this Device 3 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that ignorance makes men the objects of
Gods hatred and wrath. It is a people Heb. 3. 10, 11. They must needs e^re that
know not Gods ways, yet cannot they wander so wide as to miss of hell. Isa.
27. 11. 2 These. 1. 8.
that do err in their hearts, and have not known my ways; Wherefore I swear
in my wrath, they should never enter into my rest. My people are a people of no
understanding, therefore he that made them, will have no mercy on them Christ
has said, that he will come in flaming fire to render vengeance on them that
know not God. Ignorance will end in vengeance: When you see a poor blind man
here, you do not loath him, nor hate him, but you pity him; oh! but
soul-blindness makes you abominable in the sight of God; God has sworn that
ignorant persons shall never come into Heaven, Heaven Hos. 4. 6. (...) cut off.
Rome says Ignorance, is the mother of devotion; but the Scripture faith, it is
the mother of destruction. 4 Remedy.
it self would be a hell to ignorant souls. My people are destroyed for want
of knowledge; because thou have rejected knowledge, I will reject thee.

Chilo one of the seven Sages, being asked what God had done, answered, he
exalted humble men, and suppressed proud, ignorant fools.

The fourth Remedy against this device of Satan, is, to consider, that
ignorance is a sin that leads to all sins. All sins are seminally in ignorance:
You do Mat. 22. 29.
err, not knowing the Scriptures; It puts men upon hating and persecuting the
Saints. They shall hate you, and put you John 16. 2, 3.
out of the Synagogues, yea, the time comes, that whosoever kills you, will
think that Aristotle makes ignorance the mother of all the misrule in the
world. 1 Timothy 1. 13.
he does God service. And these things will they do unto you, because they
have not known the Father nor me. Paul thanks his ignorance for all his
cruelties to Christians. I was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious,
but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly; 'twas ignorance that put
the Jews upon crucifying Christ; Eather forgive them, says Christ of his
murderers, for they know 1 Co^. 2. 8.
not what they do; for if the Princes of this world had known, they would not
have crucified the Lord of glory. Sin at the first was the cause of
ignorance, but now ignorance is the cause of all sin: swearing, They did like
Oedipus, who killed his father Laius, K. of Thebes, and thought he killed his
enemy.
and lying, and killing, and stealing and whoring abound, says the Prophet,
because there is no knowledge of God in the Land. There are none so frequent,
and so impudent in the ways of sin, as ignorant souls; they care not, nor
mind not what they do, nor what they say against God, Christ, Heaven,
holiness, and their own souls. Our tongues Hosea 4. 1, 2. Psalm. 73. 8, 9.
are our own, who shall control us? They are corrupt, and speak wickedly,
concerning oppression, they speak loftily. They set their mouth against the
Heavens, and their tongue walks through the earth. Have all the Psalm. 14. 4.
workers of iniquity no knowledge? who eat up my people as they eat bread,
and call not upon the Lord.

And now to prevent Objections, I shall lay down some Propositions, or
Conclusions concerning Satan and his Devices, and then give you the Reasons of
the Point, and so come to make some Use and Application of the whole to our
selves.

The first Proposition or Conclusion I shall lay down is this.
THat though Satan has his Devices 1 Proposition.
to draw souls to sin, yet we must be careful, that we do not lay all our
temptations upon Satan, that we do not wrong the Devil, and father that upon
him, that is to be fathered upon our own base hearts; I think that oftentimes
men charge that upon the Devil, that is to be charged upon their own hearts.
And the Lord said unto the Genesis 3. 13.
woman, What is this that thou have done? and the woman said, the Serpent
beguiled me, and I did eat. Sin and shifting came into the world together.
This is no small baseness of our hearts, that they will be naught, I very
naught, and yet will father that naughtiness upon Satan. Man has an evil
root within him; that were there no Devil to tempt him, nor no wicked men in
the world to entice him, yet that root of bitterness, that cursed sinful
nature that is in him, would draw him to sin, though he knows before hand, that
the wages of sin is eternal death. For out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, Romans 6. ult. Mat. 5. 19.
fornications, thefts, false witnesses, blasphemies. The whole frame of man is
Cum primum nascimur in omnt continuo pravitate versamur; we are no sooner borne
then buried in a bog of wickedness, Tully.
out of frame, the understanding is dark; the will cross, the memory slippery,
the affections crooked, the conscience corrupted, the tongue poisoned, and the
heart wholly evil, only evil, and continually evil. Should God chain up
Satan, and give him no liberty to tempt, or entice the sons of men to vanity,
and folly; yet they would not, yet they could not but sin against him, by
reason of that cursed nature that is in them, that will still be a provoking
Jude 15, 16.
them to those sins, that will provoke and stir up the anger and wrath of God
against them. Satan has only a persuading slight, not an enforcing might; he
may tempt us, but without our selves, he cannot conquer us; he James 1. 4.
may entice us, but without our selves, he cannot hurt us; our hearts carries
the greatest stroke in every sin. Satan (...). The fire is our wood, though it
be the Devils flame, Nazianzen.
can never undo a man without himself, but a man may easily undo himself
without Satan. Satan can only present the golden cup, but he has no power to
force us to drink the poison that is in the cup; he can only present to us the
glory of the world, he cannot force us to fall down and worship him, to enjoy
the world, he can only spread his snares; he has no power to force us to walk
in the mid'd of his snares; therefore do the Devil so much right, as not to
excuse your selves, by your accusing him, and laying that load upon him, that
you should lay upon your own hearts.

The second Proposition is this.
2 Proposition.
That Satan has a great hand, and stroke in most sins. 'Twas Satan that Genesis
3. 1. 4, 5.
tempted our first Parents to Rebellion. 'Twas Satan that provoked David to 1 Chronicles. 21. 1.
number the people. 'Twas Satan that put Peter upon rebuking Christ; therefore
says Christ, Get thee behind me, Satan. Mat. 16. 22, 23.
'Twas Satan that put Cain upon murdering of righteous Abel: therefore it is
that he is called a murderer from John 8. 44.
the beginning. 'Twas Satan that put treason into the heart of Judas, against
Christ. And supper being ended, the Devil John 13. 2.
having put it into the heart of Judas Iscatiot, Simons son, to betray him.
'Twas Satan that pu^ Ananias upon lying: Peter said, Acts 5. 3.
Ananias, why has Satan filled thine heart to lie to the holy Ghost? As the
hand of Ioab was in the tale of the woman of Tekoah, so Satan's hand is usually
in all the sins that men commit; such is Satan's malice against God, and his
envy Diaholus tendat deus orobat. Tertul.
against man, that he will have a hand one way or another in all their finnes,
though ke knows that all the sins that he provokes others to, shall be charged
upon him to his greater woe, and eternal torment. Ambrose brings in the Devil
boasting against Christ, and chalenging Judas as his own; he is not thine
Lord Jesus, he is mine; his thoughts beat for me; he eats with thee, but is
fed by me; he takes bread from thee, but money from me; he drinks wine with
thee, and sells thy blood to me; such is his malice against Christ, and his
wrath and rage against man, that he will take all advantages to draw men to
that, that may give him advantage to triumph over Christ, and men's souls for
ever.

The third Proposition is this.
That Satan must have a double leave, 3 Proposition.
before he can do any thing against us; he must have leave from God, and leave
from our selves, before he can act any thing against our happiness; he must
have his commission from God, as you may see in the example of Job; though Job
1. 11, 12. Chap. 2 v 3, 4, 5.
the Devil had malice enough to destroy him, yet he had not so much as power to
touch him, till God gave him a Commission.

They could not so much as enter into Luke 8. 32.
the swine without leave from Christ; Satan would feign have combated with
Peter; but this could not he do without leave; Satan has desired to have you,
Luke 22. 13.
to winnow you: So Satan could never have overthrown Ahab and Saul, but by 1
Kings 22.
a commission from God; Ah! what a cordial, what a comfort should this be to
the Saints, that their greatest, subtilest, and watchfullest enemy cannot
hurt, nor harm them without leave from him, who is their sweetest Savior,
their dearest husband, and their choysest friend.

And as Satan must have leave from Adversaria po^e(...) non habet vim c^gendi,
sed persuadendi Is^do^e.
God, so he must have leave of us: when he tempts, we must assent; when he
makes offers, we must hearken; when he commands, we must obey, or else all his
labor and temptations will be frustrate; and the evil that he tempts us to,
shall be put down only to his account; that is a remarkable passage of the
Apostle in Acts 5. 3. Why has Satan Acts 5. 3.
filled thy heart to lie to the holy Ghost? etc.

He does not expostulate the matter with Satan, he does not say, Satan, why
They are the wor^^, and grossest liars, who pretend Re^igion, and the Spirit,
and yet are acted onley by carnal principles to carnal ends.
host thou filled Ananias heart to make him lie to the holy Ghost? but he
expostulates the case with Ananias; Peter said, Ananias, why has Satan filled
thine heart to lie to the holy Ghost? Why have thou given him an advantage to
fill thy heart with infidelity, hypocrisy, and obstinate audacity, to lie to
the holy Ghost? as If he had said, Satan could never have done this in thee
(which will now for ever undo thee) unless thou had first given him leave.
If when a temptation comes, a man cries out, and says; ah Lord! here is a
temptation that would force me, that would deflowr my soul, and I have no
strength to with-stand it; oh! help, help, for thy honors sake, for thy Sons
sake, for thy promise sake, it is a sign that Satan has not gained your
consent, but committed a rape upon your souls, which he shall dearly pay for.

The fourth Proposition is this.
That no weapons, but spiritual 4 Proposition.
weapons will be useful and serviceable to the soul in fighting, and
combating with the Devil; this the Apostle shows, Wherefore take unto you
(says Ephesians. 6. 13.
he) the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand in the evil day,
and having done all, to stand. So the same Apostle tells you, that the weapons
of your warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to 2 Cor. 10. 4.
the casting down of strong bolds; you have not to do with a weak, but with a
mighty We read of many that out of greatness of spirit could offer violence to
nature, but were at a loss when they come to deal with a corruption, or a
temptation.
enemy; and therefore you had need look to it, that your weapons are mighty,
and that they cannot be, unless they are spiritual; carnal weapons have no
might, nor spirit in them toward the making of a conquest upon Satan. 'Twas
not David's sling, nor stone that gave him the honor, and advantage of setting
his feet upon Goliath, but his faith in the name of the Lord of Hosts. Thou
come 1 Samuel 17. 45.
to me with a sword, with a spear, and with a shield: but I am come to thee in
the name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of the Armies of Israel, whom thou have
defied. He that Heraclius his Motto was (a Deo victoria) it is God that gives
victories, and that should be every Christians Motto.)
fights against Satan, in the strength of his own resolutions, constitution,
or education, will certainly fly and fall before him; Satan will be too hard
for such a soul, and lead him captive at his pleasure. The only way to stand,
conquer, and triumph, is still to plead, it is written, as Christ did. There is
no sword, but the two-edged sword of the Mat. 4. 10.
Spirit; that will be found to be mettle of proof, when a soul comes to
engage against Satan: Therefore when you are tempted to uncleanness, plead,
it is written, Be ye holy as I am holy. And 1 Pet. 15. 16^ 2 Cor. 5. 7. Chap. 1.
let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in the ^eare of the Lord. If he tempts^ you to distrust
Gods providence, and fatherly care of you, plead, it is written, They Psalm. 34.
9.
that fear the Lord shall want nothing that is good. It Is written, The Lord
will give Psalm. 84. 11.
grace and glory, and no good thing will he withold from them that purlely
live. If he tempt you to fear, that you shall faint, and fall, and never be
able to run to the end of the race that is set before Job 17. 9.
you, plead, it is written, The righteous shall hold on his way, and he that
has clean hands shall be stronger, and stronger. It Is written, I will make an
everlasting covevenant with them, that I will not turn away Ier. 32. 40.
from them, to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they
shall not depart from me. It Is written, They that wait upon the Lord, they
shall renew their Isa. 40. 31.
strength: they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run, and not be
weary, and they shall walk, and not ^aint. If Satan tempt you to think, that
because your sun for the present is set in a cloud, that therefore 'twill
rise no more, and that the face of God will shine no more upon you? that your
best days are now at an end, and that you must spend all your time in sorrow,
and fighing? plead, it is written, He will turn again, he Mica. 7. 19.
will have compassion upon us, and cast all our sins into the depths of the
sea. It Is written, For a small moment have I forsaken Isa. 54. 7.
thee, but with great mercies will I gather Verse 8.
thee. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with
everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer.
It Is written, The mountains shall depart, and the hills be Verse 10.
removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the
Covenant of my peace be removed, says the Lord, that has mercy on thee. It Is
written, Can a woman Isa. 49. 15.
forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of
her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will not I forget thee. Behold, I have
graven thee upon the Verse 16.
palms of my bands, thy walls are continually before me. If ever you would be
too hard for Satan, and after all your assaults have your bow abide in
strength, then take to you the word of God, which is the two-edged sword of the
Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 1.
and the shield of faith, whereby you shall be able to quench all the fiery
darts of the Devil. It Is not spitting at Satan's name, nor crossing your
selves, nor leaning to your own resolutions, that will get you the victory.

Luther reports of Staupicius a German Minister, that he acknowledged himself,
that before he came to understand aright the free and powerful grace of God,
that he vowed, and resolved an hundred times against some particular sin, and
never could get power over it; at last he saw the reason, to be his trusting to
his own resolution; therefore be skillful in the word of righteousness, and in
the actings of faith upon Christ, and his victory, and that Crown of glory that
is set before you, and Satan will certainly fly from you, James 4. 7.
etc.

The fifth Proposition is this.
That we may read much of Satan's 5 Proposition.
nature, and disposition, by the diverse names and Epithites, that are given him
in the Scriptures. Sometimes he is called Behemoth, which is bruta, whereby Job
40. 15.
the greatness, and brutishness of the Devil is figured. Those evil spirits
are sometimes called (...), Accusers, for their calumnies and slanders; and
(...) evil ones for their malice: Satan is Adversarius, an adversary that
troubles Revel 9.
and molesteth: Abaddon is a destroyer. They are called Tempters for their
suggestion, Lions for their devouring, Dragons for their cruelty, and Serpents
for their subtlety, etc. As his names are, so is he; as face answers to face,
so do Satan's names answer to his nature; he has the worst names, and the
worst nature of all created creatures, etc.

The sixth and last Proposition is this.
That God will shortly tread down 6 Proposition. Romans 16. 20. (...) suntripsei
from suntribo, the Greek word signifies to break, or crush a thing to pieces,
being applied to the feet; it notes that breaking or crushing, which is by
stamping upon a thing.
Satan under the Saints feet. Christ our Champion has already won the Field,
and will shortly set our feet upon the necks of our spiritual enemies. Satan
is a foiled Adversary, Christ has led him captive, and triumph't over him upon
the Cross. Christ has already overcome him, and put weapons into your hands,
that you may overcome him also, and set your feet upon his neck. Though Satan
be a roaring Lion, yet Christ, who is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah will make
Satan fly, and fall before you. Let Satan do his worst, yet you shall have
the honor and the happiness to triumph over him. Cheer up, you precious sons
of Sion, for the certainty and sweetness of Victory will abundantly recompense
you, for all the pains you have taken, in making resistance against Satan's
temptations. The broken horns of Satan shall be Trumpets of our triumph, and
the Cornets of our joy, etc.

Now I shall come to the Reasons of the Point, and so draw to a close, etc.
THe first Reason is, that their hearts 1 Reason.
may be kept in an humble, praying, The Philosopher had a ball of brass in his
hand, which if he chanced to sleep with, the fall into a basin awaked him to
his studies; You are wise: and know how to apply it.
watching frame; oh! has Satan so many devices to ensnare, and undo the
souls of men? how should this awaken dull, drowsy souls, and make them stand
upon their watch? A Saint should be like a Seraphim, beset all over with eyes
and lights, that he may avoid Satan's snares, and stand fast in the hour of
temptation. The Lord has in the Scripture discovered the several snares,
plots, and devices that the Delill has to undo the souls of men, that so
being forwarn'd, they may be forearm'd, that they may be always upon their
watchtower, and hold their weapons in their hands, as the Jews did in
N^hemiah's time, etc.

The second Reason is, from that malice, 2 Reason.
envy, and enmity that is in Satan, Malice cares not what it says, or does, it
may kill or gall.
against the souls of men; Satan is full of envy and enmity, and that makes him
very studious, to suit his snares and plots to the tempers, constitutions,
fancies, and callings of men, that so he may make them as miserable as
himself. The Russians are so malicious, that you shall have a man hide some of
his own goods in the house of him, whom he hates, and then accuse him for the
stealth of them: so does Satan out of malice to An envious heart and a plotting
head are inseparable companions.
the souls of men, hide his goods, his wares, as I may say, in the souls of
men, and then go, and accuse them before the Lord, and a thousand, thousand
other ways Satan's malice, envy, and enmity puts him upon, eternally to undo
the precious souls of men, etc.

The third Reason is drawn from that 3 Reason.
long experience that Satan has had, he is a spirit of mighty abilities, and
his abilities to lay snares before us, are mightily increased by that long
standing of his; he is a spirit of above five thousand years standing; he
has had time enough to study all those ways, and methods, which tend most to
ensnare, and undo the souls of men: And as he has time enough, so he has made
it his whole study, his only study, his constant study to find out snares,
depths and stratagems, to entangle, and overthrow the souls of men; when he
was but a young Serpent, he did easily deceive, and out-wit our first Parents,
but now he is grown that Old Serpent, as Genesis 3.
John speaks, He is as old as the world, Revel. 12. 9.
and is grown uery cunning by experience.

The fourth Reason is, in Judgment 4 Reason.
to the men of the world, that they may stumble, and fall, and be ensnared for
ever; wicked men that withstand the offers of mercy, and despise the spirit of
grace; that will not open, though God knocks never so hard by his word, and
rod; by his Spirit, and consceience, are given up by a hand of Justice, to be 1
King. 22. 22.
hardened, deceived, and ensnared by Satan to their everlasting ruin; and what
can be more just, then that they should be taken, and charmed with Satan's
wiles, who have frequently refused to be charmed by the Spirit of grace, though
he has charmed never so wisely, and never so sweetly, etc.

The fifth Reason is, That the excellency, 5 Reason.
and power of Gods grace may be the more illustrated, and manifested, by making
man able to grapple with this mighty Adversary, and that notwithstanding all
the plots, devices, and stratagems of Satan; yet he will make them victorious
here, and crown them with glory hereafter; the greater, and the subtiler the
enemies of the children of Israel were, the more did divine power, wisdom, and
goodness sparkle, and shine; that notwithstanding, all their power, plots, and
stratagems, etc. yet to Canan he would bring them at last. When Paul had well
weighed this, he sits down, and glories in his infirmities, 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9.
and distresses, and Satan's buffetings, that the power of Christ might rest
upon him.

The use of the Point.
IF Satan has such a world of devices, Use.
and stratagems to ensnare, and undo the souls of men, then instead of
wondering that so few are saved, set down, and wonder that any are saved, that
any escape the snares of this cunning fowler, who spreads his nets, and casts
forth his baits in all places, and in all cases and companies, etc.

But this is not the main thing that I intend to speak to; my main business
shall be, to set before you some special Rules, and helps against all his
Devices, and the first is this.

If you would not be taken by any of Prove. 12. 28. Gal. 6. 16. Prove. 15. 24.
he that walks by rule, walks most honorably; he that walk by rule, walks
most sweetly; when men throw off the word, then God throws off them, and then
Satan takes them by the hand, and leads them into snares at his pleasure; he
that thinks himself too good to be ruled by the word, will be found too bad to
be owned by God; and if God do not, nor will not own him, Satan will by his
stratagems overthrow him. Them that keep to the rule, they shall be kept in the
hour of temptation. Because Revel. 10. 3.
thou have kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of
temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon
the earth.

2. As you would not be taken with any of Satan's devices, take heed of vexing,
Spiritus Sanctus est res delicata, the divine spirit is a very tender thing; if
you grieve him, he will certainly grieve and vex your precious souls. Lam. 1.
16.
and grieving the holy Spirit of God; it is the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ
that is best able to discover Satan's snar'e unto us; it is only he that can
point out all his plots, and discover all his methods, and enable men to escape
those pits that he has dug for their precious souls; Ah souls! if you set
that sweet and blessed spirit a mourning, that alone can secure you from Satan's
depths by whom will you be secured? man is a weak creature, and no way able to
discover Satan's snares, nor to avoid them, unles the spirit of the Lord gives
skill and power; therefore who ever be grieved, be sure the spirit be not grieved
by your enormities, nor by your refusing Isa 63. 10. Psalm. 73. 2, 3.
the cordials, and comforts that he sets before you; nor by slighting, and
dispising his gracious actings in others, 1 These. 5. 19. Acts 2. 13.
nor by calling sincerity, hypocrisy; faith, fancy, etc. nor by fathering
those things upon the spirit, that are the brats, and fruits of your own
hearts. The spirit of the Lord is your counselor, your comforter, your
upholder, your strengthner. It Is only the spirit that makes a man too great
for Satan to conquer. Greater is he that is in you, 1 John 4. 4.
then he that is in the world.

Thirdly, if you would not be taken with any of Satan's devices, then labor for
more heavenly wisdom: Ah souls! If men could but see the fair face of wisdom
with morta^l eyes, they would be in love with her, says Pla^^.
you are much in the dark, you have but a little to that others have, and to
that you might have had, had you not been wanting to your selves. There are
many knowing souls, but there are but a few wise souls; there is oftentimes a
great deal of knowledge, where there is but a little wisdom to improve that
knowledge; knowledge without wisdom Sine prudentia simplicitas stul^^tia est,
Dru^ius.
is like mettle in a blind horse, which is often an occasion of the Riders
fall, and of his bones being justled against the walls. It Is not the most
knowing Christian, but the most wise Christian, that sees, avoids, and escapes
Satan's snares. The way of life is above to Prove. 15. 24.
the wise (says Solomon) that he may depart from hell beneath. Heavenly
wisdom makes a man delight to fly high; and the higher any man flies, the
more he is out of the reach of Satan's snares; Ah souls! you had need of a
great deal Malim prudentiae guttam quam foecandioris fortunae pelagas, said
Nazianzen. A Serpents eye is a singular ornament in a doves head.
of heavenly wisdom, to see where, and how Satan lays his baits, and snares;
and wisdom to find out proper Remedies against his Devices, and wisdom to
apply those Remedies seasonably, inwardly, and effectually to your own hearts,
that so you may avoid the snares which that evil one has laid for your
precious souls.

4. If you would not be taken with any of Satan's devices, then make present
resistance against Satan's first motions; it is safe to resist, it is dangerous to
dispute; Eve disputes, and falls in Paradise; Genesis 3.
Job resi^te, and conquers upon the dunghill. He that will play with Satan's
bait, will quickly be taken with Satan's hook. The promise of conquest is made
over to resisting, not to disputing; Resist the Devil, and he shall file Iam.
4. 7.
from you. Ah souls! were you better at resisting, then at disputing (though
happily you are not very expert at either) your temptations would be fewer, and
your strength to stand would be greater then now it is, etc.

Fifthly, if you would not be taken with any of Satan's Devices, then labor to
be filled with the spirit; the spirit of the Lord is a spirit of light and
power, and what can a soul do without light, and power against spiritual
wickednesses Ephesians. 6. 12.
in high places. It Is not enough that you have the spirit, but you must be
filled with the spirit, or else ( Satan) that evil spirit will be too hard for
you, and his plots will prosper against you. That Is a sweet word of the
Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 18. (...). To be filled with the spirit, as the sails of a
ship is filled with wind. Luther says, a ho^y gluttony is to lay on, to seed
hard, and to fetch hearty draughts, till they be even drunk with loves, and
with the abundance of the Spirit; and oh! that there were more of such holy
gluttony in the world.
be filled with the Spirit, i. e. labor for abundance of the spirit; he that
thinks he has enough of the holy Spirit, will quickly find himself vanquished
by the evil spirit. Satan has his snares to take you in prosperity and
adversity, in health and sickness, in strength and weakness; when you are
alone, and when you are in company; when you come on to spiritual duties, and
when you come off from spiritual duties, and if you are not filled with the
Spirit, Satan will be too hard, and too crafty for you, and will easily, and
frequently take you in his snares, and make a prey of you in spite of your
souls; therefore labor more to have your hearts filled with the Spirit, then
to have your heads filled with notions, your shops with wares, your chests with
silver, or your bags with gold, so shall you escape the snares of this fowler,
and triumph over all his plots, etc.

Sixthly, if you would not be taken in any of Satan's snares, then keep humble;
It Is reported of Satan, that he should s^y thus of a lea^ned man ( tu me semper
vincis) chou do^t always overcome me; when I would exalt, and promote thee,
thou keep thy self in humility; and when I would throw thee dawne, thou
liftest up thy self in assurance of faith.
An humble heart will rather lie in the dust, then rise by wickedness; and
sooner part with all, then the peace of a good conscience. Humility keeps the
soul free from many darts of Satan's casting, and snares of his spreading; as
the low shrubs are free from many violent gusts, and blasts of wind, which
shake and rend the taller trees. The Devil has least power to fasten a
temptation on him, that is most humble; he that has a gracious measure of
humility, is neither affected with Satan's profers, nor terrified with his
threatenings. I have read of one, who seeing in a vision many snares of the
Devil spread upon the earth, he sat down, and mourned, and said in himself (
Q^is pertransiet ista) who shall pass through these? whereunto he heard a voice
answering ( humilitas pertransiet) humility shall; God has said, that he will
teach the humble, Psalm. 25. 9. Isa. 57. 15. James 4. 6.
and that he will dwell with the humble, and that he will fill and satisfy the
humble; And if the teachings of God, the in-dwellings of God, if the pourings
in of God will not keep the soul from falling into Satan's snares, I do not
know what will: And therefore as you would be happy in resisting Satan, and
blessed in triumphing over Satan, and all his snares keep humble, I say again,
keep humble, etc.

7. If you would not be taken in any of Satan's snares, then keep a strong,
close, and constant watch; a secure 1 These. 5 6. We must not be like Agrippas
dormouse, that would (...) awake, till cast into boiling lead* but effectually
mind these following Scriptures, wherein this duty of watchfulness (...)
strict^y enjoined.
soul is already an ensnared soul: That soul that will not watch against
temptations, will certainly fall before the power of temptations; Satan works
most strongly on the fancy, when the soul is drowsy. The souls security is
Satan's opportunity to fall upon the soul, and to spoil the soul, as Joshua
did the men of Ai. The best way to be safe and secure from all Satan's assaults,
is with Nehemiah, and the Jews, to watch and pray, and pray, and watch; by this
means they became too hard for their enemies, and the work of the Lord did
prosper sweetly in their hands. Remember how Christ chid his sluggish
Disciples, what, could you not watch with Mat. 24. 42. Chap. 26. 41. Mar. 1^.
33, 34, 35. 37* Luke 21. 36.
me one hour? what, cannot you watch with me? how will you then dye with me?
If you cannot endure words, how will you endure wounds, etc. Satan always keeps
a crafty, and malicious watch, seeking whom he may devour (katapie) or 1 Cor.
16. 13.
whom he may drink, or sip up, as the Coloss. 4. 2.
Apostle speaks in that 1 Pet. 5. 8. Satan 1 Pet. 4. 7. Revel. 3. 3.
is very envious at our condition, that we should enjoy that Paradise out of
which he is cast, and out of which he shall be for ever kept.

Shall Satan keep a crafty watch, and Anniball never rested whether he did
conquer, or was conquered. It Is so with Satan, Learn for shame of the Devil,
said blessed Latimer, to watch, seeing the Devil is so watchful.
shall not Christians keep a holy spiritual watch? our whole life is beset
with temptations, Satan watches all opportunities to break our peace, to wound
our consciences, to lessen our comforts, to impair our graces, to slur our
evidences, and to damp our assurances, etc. Oh! what need then have we to be
always upon our Watchtower, lest we be surprised by this subtle Serpent.
Watchfulness includes a waking, a rousing up of the soul; It Is a continual,
careful observing of our hearts and ways, in all the turnings of our lives,
that we still keep close to God, and his word.

Watchfulness is nothing else but the soul running up and down, too and fro,
busy every where; it is the heart busied, and employed with diligent
observation of ( Quid inde) what comes from within us, and of ( Quid unde) what
comes from without us, and into us. Ah souls! you are no longer safe and
secure, then when you are upon your watch; while Antipater kept the watch,
Alexander was safe, and while we keep a st^^ct watch, we are safe; a watchful
soul is a soul upon the wing, a soul out of gunshot, a soul upon a rock, a
soul in a Castle, a soul above the clouds, a soul held fast in everlasting
arms.

I shall conclude this 7th head with this advice: Remember the Dragon is
subtle, and bites the Elephants ear, and then sucks his blood, because he knows
that to be the only place which the Elephant cannot reach with his trunck to
defend; so our enemies are so subtle, that they will bite us, and strike us,
where they may most mischief us, and therefore it does very much concern us
to stand always upon our guard.

Eighthly, if you would not be taken with any of Satan's snares, and devices,
then keep up your communion with God; your strength to stand, and withstand 2
Cor. 6. 16. The words are very significant in the original, there are two ins,
as if God could never have near enough communion with them.
Satan's fiery darts, is from your communion with God; a soul high in communion
with God may be tempted, but will not easily be conqu^red, such a soul will
fight it out to the death; Communion with God furnishes the soul with the
greatest, and the choicest arguments to withstand Satan's temptations; Communion
is the result of union; communion is a reciprocal exchange between Christ, and
a gracious soul; Communion is Jacobs ladder, where you have Christ sweetly
coming down into the soul, and the soul by divine influences sweetly ascending
up to Christ. Communion with Christ is very inflaming, raising, and
strengthening; while Sampson kept up his communion The sea ebbs and flows, the
Moon increases, and decreases, so it is with Saints in their communion with God.
with God, no enemy could stand before him, but he goes on conquering, and to
conquer; but when he was fallen in his communion with God, he quickly falls
before the plots of his enemies; 'twil be so with your souls, so long as your
communion with God is kept up, you will be too hard for spiritual wickednesses
in high places; but if you fall from your Plutarch tells of Eudoxus, that he
would be willing to be burnt up presently by the Sun, so he might be admitted
to come so near it, as to learn the nature of it; what should not we be
content to suffer for the keeping up of commuion with Christ?
communion with God, you will fall as others before the face of every
temptation. David, so long as he kept up his communion with God, he stands, and
triumphs over all his enemies; but when he was fallen in his communion with
God, then he falls before the enemies, that were in his own bosom, and flies
before those that pursued after his life; 'Twil be so with your souls, if you
do not keep up your communion with God. Job keeps up his communion with God,
and conquers Satan upon the dunghill. Adam looses his communion with God, and
is conquered by Satan in Paradise. Communion with God is a shield upon land, as
well as an anchor at sea; it is a sword to defend you, as well as a staff to
support you; therefore keep up your communion.

9. If you would not be taken in any of Satan's snares, then engage not against
Satan in your own strength, but That is a remarkable saying of Moses, Exodus 15.
God is fortitudo mea, and Laus mea, and salus mea, my strength, and my praise,
and my salvation, all in the abstract.
be every day drawing new virtue, and strength from the Lord Jesus; certainly,
that soul that engages against any old or new temptation, without new
strength, new influences from on high, will fall before the power of the
temptation; you may see this in Peter, he rested upon some old received
strength ( Though all men should deny thee, yet will not I) and therefore he
falls sadly before a new temptation; he curses, and Mat. 26.
swears, and denies him thrice, that had thrice appeared gloriously to him; ah
souls! when the snare is spread, look up to Jesus Christ, who is lifted up in
the Gospel, as the brazen Serpent was It Is but look up, and live, look unto me
and be saved from the ends of the earth, (...) 45. 2^.
in the wilderness, and say to him, Dear Lord, here is a new snare laid to
catch my soul, and grace formerly received without fresh supplies from thy
blessed bosom, will not deliver me from this snare; oh! give me new strength,
new power, new influences, new measures of grace, that so I may escape this
snare. Ah souls! remember this, that your John 15. 5. (...) is seorsim a me
separat, from me, or apart from me, ye can do nothing.
strength to stand, and overcome, must not be expected from graces received,
but from the fresh, and renewed influences of Heaven; you must lean more upon
Christ then upon your duties, you must lean more upon Christ, then upon
spiritual taft^ and discoveries; you must lean more upon Christ, then upon
your graces, or else Satan will lead you into captivity, etc.

Tenthly, and lastly, If you would not be taken in any of Satan's snares, then
be much in prayer; prayer is a shelter to the soul, a sacrifice to God, and a
scourge to the Devil; David's heart was often more out of tune, then his Harp; he
prays, and then, in spite Of Carolus Magnus it was spoken, Carolus plus cum
Deo quam cum hominibus loquitur, that he spoke more with God then with men; ah!
that I could say so of the Christians in our days.
of the Devil, cries, return unto thy rest oh my soul. Prayer is ( Porta
coeli, clavis Paradisi) the gate of Heaven, a key to let us into Paradise;
there is nothing that renders plots fruitless like prayer, therefore says
Christ, watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation; you must watch and
pray, and pray, and watch, if you would not enter into temptation. When
Sennacherib and Haman had laid plots and snares to have destroyed the Jews,
they prayed, and their souls were delivered, and Sennacherib and H^man
destroyed. David had many snares laid for him, and this put^ him upon prayer;
Keep me (says he) from the snare which they have laid for me, Psalm. 141. 9,
10.
and the grins of the workers of iniquity. Let the wicked fall into their own
nets, whilst that I escape. The proud says he, has hid a snare for me, and
cords, they have spread a net by the way side, they have set grins Psalm. 140.
5, 6.
for me, Selab. I said unto the Lord, thou art my God, hear the voice of my
supplication Nunquam abs te, absque te recedo, Bern. Oh Lord, says he, I never
go away from thee, without thee.
oh Lord. Saul and many others had laid snares for David, and this puts him
upon prayer, and so the snares are broken, and he is d^lived; ah souls! take
words to your selves, and tell God that Satan has spread his snares in all
places, and in all companies; tell God that he digs deep, and that he has plot
upon plot, and device upon device, and all to Let us says Basil, with a holy
impudence, make God ashamed that he cannot look us in the face, if he do deny
our importunity, Jacob like, I will not let thee go, unless thou bless me.
undo you; tell God, that you have neither skill, nor power to escape his
snares; tell God, that it is a work too high, and too hard for any created
creature to work your deliverance, unless he puts under his own everlasting
arms; tell God how his honor is engaged to stand by you, and to bring you off,
that you be not ruined by his plots; tell God how the wicked would triumph, if
you should fall into Satan's snares; tell God of the love of Christ, of the
blood of Christ, and of the intercession of Christ for you, that away may be
found for your escape; tell God, if he will make it his honor to save you from
falling into Satan's snares, you will make it your glory to speak of his
goodness, and to live out his kindness. Christians must do a^ Ded^lus, that
when he could not escape by a way upon earth, went by a way of heaven, and
that is, the way of prayer, which is the only way left to escape Satan's snares,
etc.

The next Use is a use of thankfulness, Use.
to those that escape Satan's snares, that are not taken by him at his will; ah
Christians! it stands you upon with that Princely Prophet David, to call upon
your souls, and say, Bless the Psalm. 103. 1, 2.
Lord oh our souls, and all that is within us, bless his holy name; Bless
the Lord oh our souls, and forget not all his benefits; who has not given us
to be a prey to Satan, and to be ensnared by those snares that he has laid for
our souls; the sense of this great favor did work up David's heart to praises;
Blessed be the Lord (says Psalm 144. 6, 7.
he) who has not given us as a prey to their teeth, our soul is escaped as a
bird out of the snares of the Fowlers, the snare is broken, and we are escaped:
Ah Christians! Remember, that the greatest part of the world, yea, the greatest
part of Professors are taken in Satan's snares; can you think seriously of this,
and not The Ancients use to say, ingratum dixeris omnia dixeris, say a man is
unthankful, and say he is any thing.
blush to be unthankful; what are you better then others? and what have you
deserved of God, or done for God more then other^? that you should by the help
of a Divine hand escape the snares, when others are taken, and held in the
snares of the Devil, to their eternal Psalm. 71. 14. I will yet praise thee
more and more; in the Original it is* I will add to thy praise.
overthrow, etc.

Will you be thankful for the escaping the snares that men spread for your
lives, or estates, etc? and will you not be much more thankful for escaping
those snares that Satan has laid for your precious souls?

Remember this, that deliverance The Stork is said to leave one of her young
ones where she hatcheth them; and the Elephant to turn up the first sprig
toward Heaven, when he comes to feed, out of some instinct of gratitude; ah
souls! that these may not bear witness against you in the day of Christ.
from Satan's snares does carry with it the clearest, and the greatest evidence
of the soul and heart of God to be toward you. Many a man by a common hand of
Providence escapes many a snare that man has laid for him, but yet escapes not
the snares that Satan has laid for him. Saul, and Judas, and Demas, doubtless
escaped many snares, that men had laid for them, but none of them escaped the
snares that the Devil had laid for them. Many men are lifted up above the
snares of men, by a common hand of providence, that are left to fall into the
snares of the Devil, by a hand of Justice; your deliverance from Satan's snares
is a fruit of special love; can you thus look upon it, and not be thankful,
oh precious souls? I judge not.

The last use of this point is to bespeak Use.
Christians to long to be at home; oh! long to be in the bosom of Christ, long
to be in the Land of Canaan; for Austin wished that he might have seen 3.
things, Rome flourishing, Paul preaching, and Christ conversing with men upon
the earth. Bid comes after, and correcting this last wish, faith, yea, but let
me see the King in his beauty, Christ in his heavenly Kingdom.
this world, this wilderness is full of snares, and all employments are full
of snares, and all enjoyments are full of snares; in civil things, Satan has
his snares to entrapus; and in all spiritual things, Satan has his snares to
catch us. All places are full of snares, City and Country, shop, and closet,
Sea, and Land, and all our mercies are surrounded with snares; there are snares
about our tables, and snares about our beds, etc. yea, Satan is so powerful,
and sub^il, that he will oftentimes make our greatest, nearest, and dearest
mercies to become our greatest snares; sometimes he will make the wife that
lies in the bosom, to be a snare to a man, as Sampsons was, and as Jobs was;
sometimes he will make the child to be a snare, as Absalom was, and Elies sons
were; and sometimes he will make the servant to be a snare, as Joseph was to
his Mistress; ah souls! Satan is so cunning, and artificial, that he can turn
your cups into snares, and your cloths into snares, and your houses into
snares, and your gardens into snares, and all your recreations into snares,
etc. And oh! how should the consideration of these things work all your souls
to say with the Church, Make have my Cant. 8. ult. (...) Berahh dodi flee away
speedily my beloved.
beloved, and be like to a Roe, or a young Heart upon the mountains of spices,
and to love, and look, and long for the coming of Christ; shall the espoused
Maid long for the marriage day? the servant for his freedom? the captive for
his ransom? the Traveller for his Inn? the Phil. 1 23. 2 Cor. 5. 2. 4:
Mariner for his Harbor? and shall not the people of the Lord long much more
to be in the bosom of Christ? there being nothing below the bosom of Christ,
that is not surrounded with Satan's snares.

What Paul once spoke of bonds and Acts 20. 23.
afflictions, that they attended him in every place; that may all the Saints
say of Satan's snares, that they attend them in every place, which should cause
them to cry out ( migremus hinc, migr^mus hinc) let us go hence, let us go
hence; and to say with Monica, Austins mother, Quid hic faciemus? cur non ocyus
migramus? cur non hinc avolamus?
what do we here? why depart we not hence? why fly we no swifter? Ah souls!
till you are taken up into the bosom of Christ, your comforts will not be full,
pure, and constant till then; Satan will still be tempting you, and spreading
snares to entangle you, therefore you should always be crying out with the
Church, Come Lord Rev. 22. 20. It is as easy to compass the Heavens with a
span, and contain the Sea in a nut-shel, as to relate fully Christ's
excellencies, or heavens happiness.
Jesus. Is not Christ that star of Jacob, that gives light to them that are in
darkness? that Prince of Peace, who brings the Olive Branch of Peace to souls
that are perplexed? Is not the greatest worth and wealth in him? Is not all the
petty excellencies and perfections of all created creatures epitomized in him?
Is not he the Crown of Crowns, the glory of glories, and the Heaven of Heavens?
Oh then! be still a longing after a full, clear, and constant enjoyment of
Christ in Heaven; for till then, Satan will still have plots and designs upon
you; he acts by an untired power, and will never let you rest, till you are
taken up to an everlasting rest in the bosom of Christ.

An Appendix touching five more several Devices that Satan has to keep poor
souls from believing in Christ, from receiving of Christ, from embracing of
Christ, from resting, leaning, or relying upon Christ for everlasting
happiness, and blessedness, according to the Gospel; and Remedies against
those Devices.
Now the first Device that Satan has to keep the soul off from believing in
Christ, from closing with Christ, etc. is,
BY suggesting to the soul the 1 Device.
greatness and vileness of his sins: what, says Satan, do thou think
that thou shall ever obtain mercy by Christ, that have sinned with so high a
hand against Christ? that have slighted the tenders of grace? that have grieved
the spirit of grace? that have despised the word of grace? that have trampled
under feet the blood of the Covenant, by which thou might have been
pardoned, purged, justified, and saved? that have spoken and done all the evil
that thou could? No, no, says Satan, he has mercy for others, Ierem. 3. 5.
but not for thee; pardon for others, but not for thee; righteousness for
others, but not for thee, etc. therefore it is in vain for thee to think of
believing in Christ, or resting and leaning thy guilty soul upon Christ.

Now the remedies against this Device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this Device Remedy.
of Satan, is, to consider, that the greater your sins are, the more you
stand in need of a Savior; the greater your burden is, the more you stand in
need of one to help to bear it: the deeper the wound is, the more need there
is of the Surgeon; the more dangerous the disease is, the more need there is of
the Physician. Who but mad men will argue thus; my burden is great, there-I'le
not call out for help; my wound is Mad Logic.
deep, therefore I Will not call out for balm; my disease is dangerous,
therefore I Will not go to the Physician. Ah! it is spiritua^ ^adnesse; it is the
Devils Logic to argue thus: My sins are great, therefore I Will not go to
Christ; I dare not rest nor lean on Christ, etc. whereas the soul should
reason thus; the greater my sins are, the more I stand in need of mercy, of
pardon, and therefore I will go to Christ, who delights Mica. 7. 18.
in mercy, who pardons sin for his own name sake; who is as able and as Isa.
43. 25.
willing to forgive pounds, as pence, thousands, as hundreds.

The second Remedy against this Device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to consider, that the promise of grace and mercy is to
returning souls: and therefore though thou art never so wicked, yet if thou will return, God will be thine, mercy shall be thine, and pardon thine, etc. 2 Chronicles. 30. 9. For if you turn again 2 Chronicles. 30. 9.
unto the Lord, your brethren, and your children shall find compassion before
them that lead them captive, so that they shall come again into this land; for
the Lord your God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn away his face
from you, if ye return unto him. So Jer. 3. 12. Go, and proclaim Jer. 3. 12.
these words toward the North, and say, return thou backsliding Israel,
says the Lord, and I will not cause my anger to fall upon you; for I am
merciful says the Lord, and I will not keep ang(...) for ever. So Joel 2.
13. And rent you^ ^^rts, and not Joel 2. 13.
your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God, for he is gracious and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the
evil. So Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man
his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon
him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon; or as the Hebrew read^ it,
he will multiply pardons. So Ezekiel. Ezekiel. chapter 18.
Chap. 18.

Ah sinner! it is not thy great transgressions that shall exclude thee from
mercy; if thou will break off thy sins by repentance, and return to the
fountain of mercy. Christ's heart, Christ's arms are wide open to embrace the
returning Prodigal. It Is not simply the greatest of thy sins, but thy
peremptory persisting in sin that will be thy eternal overthrow.

The third Remedy against this Device 3 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that the greatest sinners have obtained
mercy, and therefore all the Angels in heaven, all the men on earth, and all
the Devils in hell, cannot tell to the contrary, but that thou may obtain
mercy. Manasseh was a notorious sinner, 2 King. Chap. 21.
he erected Altars for Baal, he worshipped and served all the host of Heaven;
He caused his sons to pass through the fire; he gave himself to witchcraft
and sorcerie; he made Judah to sin more wickedly then the heathen did, whom
the Lord destroyed before the children of Israel; he The Hebrew Doctors write
that he slew Isaiah the Prophet, who was his father in law.
caused the streets of Jerusalem to run down with innocent blood, etc. Ah!
what a devil incarnate was he in his actings; and yet when he humbled
himself, and sought the Lord, the Lord was entreated of him, and heard his
supplication, and brought him to Jerusalem, and made himself known unto him,
and crowned him with mercy and loving kindness, as you may see in 2 Chronicles. 2 Chronicles. chap. 33.
chap. 33. So Paul was once a blasphemer, a persecutor, and injurious, yet he
obtained 1 Timothy 1. 13.
mercy. So Mary Magdalen was a Luke 7.
notorious strumpet, a common whore, one out of whom Christ cast seven
Devils, yet she is pardoned by Christ, and dearly beloved of Christ, Luke 7.
So Mar. 16. 9.
in Mar. 16. v. 9. Now when Jesus was risen early, the first day of the week,
he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven Devils.
Jansenius on the place says, it is very observable that our Savior after his
resurrection first appeared to Mary Magdalen, and Peter, that had been grievous
sinners; that even the worst of sinners may be comforted and encouraged to come
to Christ, to believe in Christ, to rest and stay their souls upon Christ for
mercy here, and glory hereafter; that is a very precious word for the worst of
sinners, to hang upon Psalm. 68. v. 18. The Psalm. 68. 18.
Psalmist speaking of Christ, says, Thou have ascended on high, thou have led
captivity captive, thou have received gifts for men, yea for the rebellious
also, that the Lord God might dwell among them.

What though thou art a rebellious child, or a rebellious servant? what though
thou art a rebellious swearer, a rebellious drunkard, a rebellious
Sabbath-breaker, etc. yet Christ has received gifts for thee, even for the
rebellious. He has received the gift of pardon, the gift of righteousness;
yea all the gifts of the spirit for thee, that thy heart may be made a
delightful house for God to dwell in.

Bodin has a story concerning a great Rebel that had made a great strong
party against a Roman Emperor; the Emperor makes Proclamation, that who-ever
could bring the Rebel dead or alive, he should have such a great sum of
money; The Rebel hearing of this, comes and presents himself before the
Emperor, and demands the sum of money; now says the Emperor, if I should
put him to death, the world would say, I did it to save my money, and so he
pardons the Rebel, and gives him the money. Ah sinners! shall a Heathen do
this, that had but a drop of mercy and compassion in him? and will not Christ
do much more, Coloss. 1. 19. Chap. 2, 3, 4.
that has all fullness of grace, mercy, and glory in himself? Surely his
bowels do yerne toward the worst of Rebels. Ah! if you will but come in, you
will find him ready to pardon, yea one Nehem. 9. 17. Heb. but thou a god of
pardons.
made up of pardoning mercy: Oh! the readiness and willingness of Jesus
Christ to receive to favor the greatest Rebels.

The father of mercies did meet, embrace, and kiss that prodigal mouth which
came from feeding with swine, and kissing of Harlots. Ephraim had Hos. 4. 17.
5. 3. 6. 8. 11, 12. 12. 14. 13. 12. vide.
committed Idolatry, and was backsliden from God; he was guilty of
lukewarmnesse and unbelief, etc. yet says God, Ephraim is my dear son, he
is a Jer. 31. 20.
pleasant child, my bowels are troubled for him; I will have mercy (or rather
as it is in the Original, I will have mercy, mercy) upon him says the Lord.
Well says God, Though Ephraim be guilty of crimson sins, yet he is a son,
a dear son, a precious son, a pleasant child: Though he be black with
filth, and red with guilt, yet my bowels are troubled for him, I will have
mercy, mercy upon him. Ah sinners! if these bowels of mercy do not melt, win,
and draw you, Justice will be a swift witness against you, and make you lie
down in eternal misery, for kicking against the bowels of mercy.

Christ hangs out still, as once that warlike Seythian did, a white flag of
grace and mercy to returning sinners that humble themselves at his feet for
favor; but if sinners stand out, Christ will put forth his red flag, his
bloody flag, and then they shall dye for ever by a hand of Justice. Sinners,
there is no way to avoid perishing by Christ's iron rod, but by kissing his
golden Scepter.

The fourth Remedy against this Device 4 Remedy.
of Satan i^, to consider, that Jesus Christ has no where in all the Scripture
excepted against the worst of sinners that are willing to receive him, to
belive in him, and to rest upon him, for happiness, and blessedness: Ah
sinners! why should you be more cruel and unmercifull to your own souls, then
Christ is. Christ has not excluded you from mercy, why should you exclude your
own souls from mercy? Oh that you would dwell often upon that choice
Scripture, John 6. 37. All John 6. 37.
that the Father gives me, shall come to me, and him that comes to me, I will
in no wise cast out (or as the Original has it) I will not cast out. Well
says Christ, if any man will come, or is coming to me, let him be more
sinful, or less; more unworthy, or less; let him be never so guilty, never
so filthy, never so rebellious, never so leprous, etc. yet if he will but
come, I will not, not, not cast him off. So much is held forth in that 1 Cor.
6. 9, 10, 11. Know ye not that the unrighteous 1 Cor! 6. 9. 10, 11.
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived: Neither fornicators,
nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with
mankind. Nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And such were some of you:
but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God.

Ah sinners! do not think that he that has received such notorious sinners
to mercy, will reject you; He is Heb. 13. 8.
yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever.

Christ was borne in an Inn, to show that he receives all comers; his
garments were divided into four parts, to show, that out of what part of the
world soever we come, we shall be received; If we be naked, Christ has Robes
to cloth us; if we be harbourless, Christ has room to lodge us. That is a
choice Scripture, Acts 10. 34, 35. Acts 10. 34, 35.
Then Peter opened his mouth, and said, of a truth I perceive that God is no
respecter of persons. But in every Nation, he that fears him, and works
righteousness, is accepted with him.

The three Tongues that were written upon the Cross in Greek, Latin, and
Hebrew, to witness Christ to be John 19. 19, 20.
the King of the Jews, do each of them in their several Idiom avouch this
singular Axiom, that Christ is an all sufficient Savior, and a threefold
cord is not easily broken. The Apostle puts this out of doubt in that Heb. 7.
v. 25. Heb. 7. 25.
Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by
him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. Now he were not an
All-sufficient Savior, if he were not as able to save the greatest, as the
least of sinners. Ah sinners, tell Jesus Christ that he has not excluded you
from mercy, and therefore you are resolved that you will sit, wait, weep, and
knock at the door of mercy, til he shall say, souls be of good cheer, your
sins are forgiven, your persons are justified, and your souls shall be saved.

The fifth Remedy against this Device 5 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to consider, that the greater sinner thou art, the dearer thou
will be to Christ, when he shall behold thee as the travel of his soul. Isa
53. 11. Isa. 53. 11.
He shall see of the travel of his soul, and be satisfied. The dearer we pay
for any thing, the dearer that thing is to us; Christ has paid most, and
prayed most, and sighed most, and wept most, and bled most for the greatest
sinners, and therefore they are dearer to Christ then others that are less
sinful. Rachel was Genesis 29. 30.
dearer to Jacob then Leah, because she cost him more; he obeyed, endured, and
suffered more by day and by night for her, then for Leah. Ah sinners! the
greatness of your sins does but set off the freeness and riches of Christ's
grace, and the freeness of his love, this makes Heaven and Earth to ring of
his praise, that he loves those that are most unlovely; that he shows most
favor to them that has sinned most highly against him, as might be showed by
several instances in Scripture, as Paul, Mary Magdalene, and others, who
sinned more against Christ then these? and who had sweeter, and choicer
manifestations of divine love and favor then these?

The sixth Remedy against this Device 6 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that the longer you keep off from
Christ, the greater and stronger your sins will grow. All divine power and
strength against sin flows from the souls union Romans 8. 10. 1 John 1. 6, 7.
and communion with Christ; while you keep off from Christ, you keep off from
that strength and power which is only able to make you trample down strength,
lead captivity captive, and slay the Goliah's that bids defiance to Christ.
It Is only faith in Christ that makes a 1 John 5. 4.
man triumph over sin, Satan, Hell, and the world. It Is only faith in Christ
Mar. 5. 25-35.
that binds the strong man hand and foot; that stops the issue of blood; that
makes a man strong in resisting, and happy in conquering. Sin always dies most,
where faith lives most; the most believing soul, is the most mortifyed soul.
Ah sinner! remember this, there is no way on earth, effectually to be rid of
the guilt, filth, and power of sin, but by believing in a Savior. It Is not
resolving, it is not complaining, it is not mourning, but believing that will
make thee divinely victorious over that body of sin that to this day is too
strong for thee, and that will certainly be thy ruin, if it be not ruined by a
hand of faith.

The seventh Remedy against this Device 7 Remedy.
of Satan's, is, wisely to consider, that as there is nothing in Christ to
discourage the greatest sinners from believing in him, so there is every thing
in Christ that may encourage the greatest sinners to believe in him, to rest
and lean upon him for all happiness, and blessedness: If you look upon his
nature, his disposition, his names, his titles, his offices, as King, Priest,
and Cant. 1. 3.
Prophet, you shall find nothing to discourage the greatest sinners to receive
Coloss. 1. 19. Chap. 2. 3. Cant. 5. 10.
him, to believe on him. Christ is the greatest good, the choicest good, the
chiefest good, the most suitable good, the most necessary good; he is a pure
good, a real good, a total good, an eternal good, and a soul-satisfying
good. Sinners, are you poor? Christ Rev. 3. 17* 18.
has gold to enrich you; are you naked? Christ has royal robes, he has
white raiment to cloth you; are you blind? Christ has eye salve to enlighten
you; are you hungry? Christ will be Manna to feed you; are you thirsty? John 6.
48. John 7. 38.
he will be a Well of living water to refresh you; are you wounded? he has
balm under his wings to heal you; are Mal. 4. 2. Mat. 4. 23. Mat. 20. 28.
you sick? he is a Physician to cure you; are you prisoners? he has laid down
a ran some for you. Ah sinners! tell me, tell me, is there any thing in Christ
to keep you off from believing? No, is there not every thing in Christ that may
encourage you to believe in him? Yes: O then believe in him, and then though
your sins be as searlet, they be as Isa. 1. 18.
white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. Nay
then your iniquities shall be forgotten, as well as Isa. 43. 25. Isa. 38. 17.
Micha 1. 19.
forgiven, they shall be remembered no more; God will cast them behind his
back, he will hurl them into the bottom of the Sea.

The 8. and last Remedy against this 8 Remedy.
Device of Satan is, seriously to consider the absolute necessity of believing
in Christ. Heaven is too holy, and too hot to hold unbelievers, their lodging
is prepared in hell Revel. 21. 8. But Revel. 21. 8.
the fear full and unbelieving, etc. shall have their part in the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. If ye believe not
that I am he (says Christ) John 8. 24.
you shall die in your sins: And he that dies in his sins, must to judgment,
and to hell in his sins. Every unbeliever is a condemned man: He that believes
not (says John) is condemned already, because John 3. 18.
he has not believed in the name of the only begotten son of God. And he
that Verse. 36.
believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on
him. Ah sinners! the Law, the Gospel, and your own Consciences has passed the
sentence of condemnation upon you, and there is no way to reverse the sentence
but by believing in Christ; and therefore my counsel is this: Stir up your
Isa. 64. 7.
selves to lay hold on the Lord Jesus, and look up to him, and wait on him from
whom every good and perfect James 1. 17. Isa. 62. 7.
gift comes, and give him no rest till he has given thee that Jewel Faith,
that is more worth then Heaven and Earth; and that will make thee happy in
life, joyful in death, and glorious in the day of Christ. And thus much for
the Remedies against this first Device of Satan's, whereby he keeps off
thousands from believing in Christ.

The second Device that Satan has to keep poor sinners from believing, from
closing with a Savior, is,
BY suggesting to them their unworthiness. 2 Device.
Ah says Satan! as thou art worthy of the greatest misery, so thou art
unworthy of the least crum of mercy; what, do thou think says Satan, that
ever Christ will own, receive, or embrace such an unworthy wretch as thou art?
no, no, if there were any worthiness in thee, then indeed Christ might be
willing to be entertained by thee; thou art unworthy to entertain Christ into
thy house, how much more unworthy art thou to entertain Christ into thy heart,
etc.

Now the Remedies against this device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this Device 1 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that God has no where in the Scripture
required any worthiness in the creature before believing in Christ. If you
make a diligent search through all the Scripture, you shall not find from John
5. 29.
the first line in Genesis, to the last line in the Revelation, one word that
speaks Mat. 19. 8.
out Gods requiring any worthiness in the creature before the souls believing
in Christ, before the souls leaning and resting upon Christ for happiness, and
blessedness; and why then should that be a bar and hinderance to thy faith,
which God does no where require of thee before thou come to Christ, that thou
may have life. Ah sinners! remember Satan objects your unworthiness against
you, only out of a Design to keep Christ and your souls asunder for ever; and
therefore in the face of all your unworthiness rest upon Christ, come to
Christ, believe in John 6. 40. 47.
Christ, and you are happy for ever.

The second Remedy against this Device 2 Remedy.
of Satan's is, wisely to consider, that none never received Christ, embraced
Christ, obtained mercy and pardon from Christ, but unworthy souls. Pray what
worthiness was in Matthew, Zacheus, Mary Magdalen, Manasseh, Paul and Sydia,
before their coming to Christ? before their faith in Christ? surely none. Ah
sinners! you should reason thus, Christ has bestowed the choicest mercies, the
greatest favors, the highest dignities, the sweetest privileges upon unworthy
sinners; and therefore O our souls do not you faint, do not you despair, but
patiently and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord; who can tell but that
free grace and mercy may shine forth upon us, though we are unworthy, and give
us a portion among those Worthies that are now triumphing in Heaven.

The third Remedy against this Device 3 Remedy.
of Satan's is, that if the soul will keep off from Christ till it be worthy,
it will never close with Christ, it will never embrace Christ, 'twill never be
one with Christ, it must lie down in everlasting Isa. 50. ult.
sorrow. God has laid up all worthiness in Christ, that the creature may know
where to find it, and may make out after it. There is no way on earth to make
unworthy souls worthy, but by believing in Christ: Believing in Christ, of
slaves, 'twill make (...) 1. 12.
you worthy sons; of enemies, 'twill James 2. 23.
make you worthy friends, etc. God will count none worthy, nor call none worthy,
nor carry it toward none as worthy but Believers, who are made Revel. 3. 4.
worthy by the worthiness of Christ's person, righteousness, satisfaction, and
intercession, etc.

The fourth and last Remedy against 4 Remedy.
this Device of Satan's is, solemnly to consider, that if you make a diligent
search into your own hearts, you shall find that it is the pride and folly of
your own hearts that puts you upon bringing of a worthiness to Christ. Oh you
would feign bring something to Christ that might render you acceptable to him,
you are loft to come empty handed. The Lord cries out, Ho Isa 55. 1, 2.
every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money:
come ye, buy, and eat, come buy wine and milk without money, and without
price.

Wherefore do you spend your money upon Verse 2.
that which is not bread? and your labor for that which satisfies not?

Here the Lord calls upon money less souls, upon penni-lesse souls, upon
unworthy souls, to come and partake of his precious favors freely: but
sinners are proud and foolish, and because they have no money, no worthiness to
bring, they will not come, though he sweetly invites them. Ah sinners! what is
more just then that you should perish for ever, that prefer husks among
swine before the milk and wine, the sweet and precious things of the Gospel
that are freely and sweetly offered to you, etc. Well sinners, remember this;
it is not so much the sense of thy unworthiness, as thy pride that keeps thee
off from a blessed closing with the Lord Jesus.

The third Device that Satan has to keep poor sinners from believing in
Christ, from closing with Christ, from resting on Christ, etc. is,
BY suggesting to them the want of 3 Device.
such and such preparations, and qualifications: says Satan, thou art not
prepared to entertain Christ; thou art not thus and thus humbled and justified;
thou art not heart-sick of sin* thou have not been under horrors and terrors
as such and such, thou must stay till thou art prepared, and qu^lified to
receive the Lord Jesus, etc.

Now the remedies against this Device of Satan are these that follow.
THe first Remedy against this Device 1 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that such as have not been so and so
prepared and qualified, as Satan suggests have received Christ, believed in
Christ, and being saved by Christ. Matthew Mat. 9. 9.
was called, sitting at the receipt of custom, and there was such power went
along with Christ's call, that made him to follow. We read not of any horrors or
terrors, etc. that he was under before his being called by Christ. Pray what
preparations and qualifications were found in Zacheus, Paul, the Luke 19. 9.
Acts 16. chap.
Jailer, and Lydia, before their conversion. God brings in some by the sweet
and still voice of the Gospel, and usually such that are thus brought in to
Christ, are the sweetest, humblest, (...) isest, and fruitfullest Christians.
God is a free agent to work by Law or Gospel; by smiles or frowns; by
presenting hell or heaven to sinners souls God thunders from Mount-Sinai upon
some souls, and conquers them by thundering God speaks to others in a still
voice, and by that conquers them. You that are brought to Christ by the Law, do
not you judge and condemn them that are brought to Christ by the Romans 14.
Gospel: and you that are brought to Christ by the Gospel, do not you despise
those that are brought to Christ by the Law. Some are brought to Christ by
fire, storms, and tempests, others by more easy and gentle gales of the
Spirit. The Spirit is free in the works of John 3. 8.
conversion, and as the wind, it blows when, where, and how it pleases. Thrice
happy are those souls that are brought to Christ, whether it be in a winters
night, or in a summers day.

The second Remedy against this Device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is, solemnly to dwell upon these following Scriptures which do
clearly evidence, that poor sinners which are not so and so prepared, and
qualified to meet with Christ, to receive and embrace the Lord Jesus Christ,
may notwithstanding that believe in Christ, and rest and lean upon him for
happiness and blessedness, according to the Gospel. Read the first of the
Proverbs, from verse. 20. to the end, and the 11. first verses of the 8. of the
Proverbs, and the six first verses of the 9. of the Proverbs, and the 14. first
verses of Ezekiel. chap. 16. and the 3. of John 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. 36. verses,
and the 3. of the Revelations, verse. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Here the Lord
Jesus Christ stands knocking at the Laodiceans door, he would feign have them
to sup with him, and that he might sup with them; that is, that they might have
intimate communion and fellowship one with another.

Now pray tell me, what preparations or qualifications had these Laodiceans to
entertain Christ? surely none; for they were lukewarm, they were neither cold
nor hot; they were wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked;
and yet Christ to show his free grace, and his condescending love, invites the
very worst of sinners to open to him, though they were no ways so or so
prepared or qualified to entertain him, etc.

The third Remedy against this Device 3 Remedy.
of Satan, is, seriously to consider, that the Lord does not in all the
Scripture require such and such preparations Romans 4. 5. God justifies the
ungodly.
and qualifications before men come to Christ, before they believe in Christ,
or entertain, or embrace the Lord Jesus Christ. Believing, believing in Christ
is the great thing that God presses upon sinners throughout the Scripture, as
all know, that know any thing of Scripture.

Obj. But does not Christ say, Come Mat. 11. 28.
unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest? To
this I shall give these three Answers.

1. That though the invitation be to such that labor and are heavy laden, yet
the promise of giving rest, its made over to coming to believing.

2. I answer, that all that this Scripture proves and shows, is, that such as
labor under sin as under a heavy burden, Math. 11. 28. opened and cleared.
and that are laden with the guilt of sin, and sense of Gods displeasure, ought
to come to Christ for rest; but it does not prove that only such must come to
Christ, nor that all men must be thus burdened, and laden with the sense of
their sins, and the wrath of God before they come to Christ. Poor sinners,
when they are under the sense of sin, and wrath of God, they are prone to run
from creature to creature, and from duty to duty, and from Ordinance to
Ordinance, to find rest; and if they could find it in any thing, or creature,
Christ should never hear of them. But here the Lord sweetly invites them, and
to encourage them, he engages himself to give them rest. Come (says Christ)
and I will give you rest. I Will not show you rest, nor barely tell you of rest,
but I will give you rest. I am faithfulness it self, and cannot lie, I will
give you rest. I that have the greatest power to give it, the greatest will to
give it, the greatest right to give it, come laden sinners, and I will give you
rest. Rest is the most desirable good, the most suitable good, and to you the
greatest good. Come says Christ, that is, Believe in me and I will give you
rest. I will give you peace with God, and peace with conscience, I will turn
your storm into an everlasting calm: I will give you such rest, that the
world can neither give to you, nor take from you.

3. I answer, no one Scripture speaks out the whole mind of Christ; therefore
do but compare this one Scripture with those several Scriptures that are laid
down in the second Remedy last mentioned, and it will clearly appear, that
though men are not thus and thus burdened and laden with their sins, and filled
with horror and terror, if they may come to Christ, they may receive and
embrace the Lord Jesus Christ.

The 4. and last Remedy against this 4 Remedy.
Device of Satan is, to consider, that all that trouble for him, all that
sorrow, shame, and mourning, etc. which is acceptable to God, and delightful
to God, and prevalent with God, flows from faith in Christ, as the stream does
from the fountain, as the branch does from the root, as the effect does from
the cause. Zech. 12. 10. They shall look on Zach. 12. 10.
him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him. All Gospel-mourning
Romans 14. 23.
flows from believing; they shall first look, and then mourn. All that know any
thing, knows this, that what ever is not of faith is sin. Till men have faith
in Christ, their best services are but glorious sins.

The fourth Device that Satan has to keep Christ and a sinner asunder, to keep
a poor sinner from believing in Christ, from embracing of Christ, etc. is,
BY suggesting to the sinner Christ's 4 Device.
unwillingnesse to save; it is true, says Satan; Christ is able to save thee,
but is he willing surely? though he be able, yet he is not willing to save
such a wretch as thou art, that have trampled his blood under thy feet, and
that have been in open rebellion against him all thy daye^, etc.

The Remedy against this Device of Satan's is briefly to consider these few
things.
1. THe great journey that he has 1 Remedy.
taken from heaven to earth, on purpose to save sinners, does strongly
demonstrate his willingness to save them. Math. 9. 13. I came not to call the
Mat. 9. 13.
righteous, but sinners to repentance. 1 Timothy 1. 15. This is a faithful
saying, and worthy 1 Timothy 1. 15.
of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, of
whom I am chief.

2. His divesting himself of his glory in order to sinners salvation, speaks
out his willingness to save them; he leaves his Fathers bosom, he puts off
his glorious robes, and lays aside his glorious Crown, and bids adie^ to his
glistering Courtiers the Angels, and all this he does, that he may accomplish
sinners salvation.

3. That sea of sin, that sea of wrath, that sea of trouble, that sea of blood
From the Cradle to the Cross, his whole life was a life of sufferings.
that Jesus Christ waded through, that sinners might be pardoned, justified,
reconciled, and saved, does strongly evidence his willingness to save sinners.

4. His sending his Ambassadors early and late to woo and entreat sinners 2
Cor. 5. 19, 20.
to be reconciled to him, does with open mouth show his readiness, and
willingness to save sinners.

5. His complaints against such as refuse him, and that turn their backs upon
him, and that will not be saved by him, does strongly declare his willingness
to save them. He came to his own, 1 John 11.
and his own received him not. So in that 5. of John, v. 40. But ye will not
come John 5. 40.
to me, that ye may have life.

6. The joy and delight that he takes at the conversion of sinners, does
demonstrate his willingness, that they should be saved. Luke 15. 7. I say unto
Luke 15. 7.
you, that likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repents, more
then over ninety and nine just persons which need no repentance. God the Father
rejoices at the return of his prodigal Son. Christ rejoices to see the
travel of Isa. 53. 11.
his soul: the Spirit rejoices that he has another Temple to dwell in, and
the Angels rejoice that they have another Brother to delight in, etc.

The fifth Device that Satan has to keep a sinner and Christ asunder, is,
BY working a sinner to mind more 5 Device.
the secret decrease and counsels of God, then his own duty. What need thou
to busy thy self about receiving, embracing, and entertaining of Christ?
Says Satan, if thou art elected, thou shall be saved; if not, all that thou
can do will do thee no good. Nay, he will work the soul not only to doubt
of its election, but to conclude that he is not elected, and therefore let him
do what he can he shall never be saved.

Now the Remedies against this Device of Satan are these.
THe first Remedy is, seriously to consider, 1 Remedy
that all the Angels in heaven, nor all the men on earth, nor all the Devils
in hell cannot tell to the contrary, but that thou may be an elect person, a
chosen vessel. Thou may be confident of this, that God never made Satan one
of his Privy Council, God never acquainted him with the names or persons of
such that he has set his love upon to eternity, etc.

The second Remedy against this Device 2 Remedy.
of Satan, is, to meddle with that which thou have to do; secret things
belongs to the Lord, but revealed Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
things belongs to thee; thy work sinner, is to be peremptory in believing,
and in returning to the Lord; thy work is to cast thy self upon Christ, lie
at his feet, to wait on him in his ways, and to give him no rest till he
shall say, Sinner, I am thy portion, I am thy salvation, and nothing shall
separate between thee and me.

FINIS.
A TABLE Showing the principal things in this Treatise.
THE words opened, and the Point proved, from page 1. to page 7. In the next
place is showed, the several Devices that Satan has to draw souls to sin.
Satan's first Device to draw the soul to sin, is, to present the bait, and
hide the hook, etc. four Remedies against this Device, from page 7. to page
14. His second Device to draw the soul to sin, is, by painting sin with
virtues colors, 4. Remedies against this Device, from page 14. to p. 21. The
third Device Satan has to draw the soul to sin, is, by extenuating, and
lessening of sin, etc. seven Remedies against this Device of Satan, from page
21. to page 32. The fourth Device that Satan has to draw the soul to sin, is,
by prsenting to the soul the best men's sins, and by hiding from the soul
their virtues, etc. four Remedies against this Device of Satan, from p. 32. to
p. 40. The fifth Device that Satan has to draw the soul to sin, is, by
presenting God to the soul, as one made up all of mercy, etc. five Remedies
against this Device, from pa. 40. to page 49. The sixth Device that Satan has
to draw the soul to sin, is, by persuading the soul, that the work of
Repentance is an easy work, etc. six Remedies against this device, from page
49. to 65. The seventh Device that Satan has to draw the soul to sin, is, by
making the soul bold to venture upon the occasions of sin, etc. four Remedies
against this Device, from p. 65. to page 73. The eighth Device that Satan has
to draw the soul to sin, is, by presenting to the soul the outward mercies,
that vain men enjoy, and the outward miseries that they are freed from, whilst
they have walked in the ways of sin, etc. Eight Remedies against this Device,
from page 73. to page 87. The ninth Device that Satan has to draw the soul to
sin, is, by presenting to the soul the crosses, the losses, reproaches,
sorrows, and sufferings that daily attend those that walk in the ways of
holiness, etc. seven Remedies against this Device, from p. 87. to p. 103. The
tenth Device that Satan has to draw the souls of men to sin, is, by working
them to be frequent in comparing themselves and their ways with those that are
reputed to be worse then themselves, etc. three Remedies against this Device,
from p. 103. to p. 107. The eleventh Device that Satan has to draw the soul
to sin, is, by polluting and defiling the souls and judgments of men with such
dangerous errors, that do in their proper tendency tend to carry the souls of
men to all looseness, and wickedness, etc. seven Remedies against this Device,
from p. 107. to p. 119. The 12. Device that Satan has to draw the soul to
sin, is, to work it to affect wicked company, etc. four Remedies against
this Device, from p. 119. to p. 124.
Secondly, as Satan has his several devices to draw souls to sin, so he has
his several devices to keep souls from holy duties, to keep them off from
religious services, and they are these that follow. The first Device that Satan
has to draw souls from holy duties, and to keep them off from religious
services, is, by presenting the world in such a dress, and in such a garb to
the soul, as to ensnare the soul, and to win upon the affections of the soul,
he presents the world to them in its beauty, and bravery, which proves a
bewitching sight to a world of men; Eight Remedies against this Device, from p.
124. to p. 141. The second Device that Satan has to draw souls from the
Ordinances, or holy duties, is, by presenting to them the dangers, the losses,
and the sufferings that do attend the performance of such, and such religious
services; five Remedies against this Device, from p. 141. to p. 152. The third
Device that Satan has to d^^w souls from holy duties, and to keep them off
from Religious services, is, by presenting to the soul the difficulty of
performing them, etc. five Remedies against this device from p. 152. to p. 160.
The fourth Device that Satan has to draw the soul off from holy exercises,
from religious exercises, is, by working them to make false inferences, from
those blessed and glorious things that Christ has done, etc. five Remedies
against this Device, from p. 160. to p. 169. The fifth Device that Satan has
to draw souls off from Religious services, and to keep souls off from holy,
and heavenly performances, is, by presenting to them the paucity and poverty of
those that walk in the ways of God, etc. six Romedies against this Device,
from p. 169. to p. 178. The sixth Device that Satan has to keep souls off
from Religious servivices, is, by presenting before them the examples of the
greatest part of the world, that walk in the ways of their own hearts, and
that make light and slight of the ways of God, etc. three Remedies against
this device, from pa. 178. to pa. 182. The seventh Device that Satan has to
keep souls from holy and heavenly services, is, by casting in a multitude of
vain thoughts, whilst the soul is in waiting on God, etc. six Remedies
against this device, from p. 182. to p. 190. The eighth Device of Satan to
keep souls from holy and heavenly services, is, by working them to rest in
their holy performances, etc. four remedies against this device, from p. 190.
to p. 195.
In the third place is showed the several Devices Satan has to keep souls in
a sad, doubting, and questioning condition, and they are these that follow,
etc. The first Device that Satan has to keep souls in a sad, doubting, and
questioning condition, is, by causing them to pore more, and mind more their
sins, then their Savior, etc. six Remedies against this device, from p. 196.
to p. 205. The second Device that Satan has to keep souls in a sad, doubting,
and questioning condition, is, by working them to make false definitions of
their graces, etc. four Remedies against this device, from p. 205. to p. 211.
The third Device that Satan has to keep souls in a sad, doubting, and
questioning condition, is, by working the soul to make false inferenrences,
from the cross actings of Providence, etc. four Remedies against this device,
from p. 211. to p. 217. The fourth Device that Satan has to keep poor souls
in a sad, doubting, and questioning condition, is, by suggesting that their
graces are not true, but counterfeit; two Remedies again this, and in the
handling of the two Remedies, ten differences are showed betwixt renewing
grace, and restraining grace, betwixt sanctifying grace, and temporary grace,
from p. 217. to page 230. The fifth Device that Satan has to keep souls in a
sad, doubting, and questioning condition, is, by suggesting to them, that that
conflict that is in them, is not a conflict that is only in Saints, but such a
conflict, that is to be found in the hearts of hypocrites, and profane souls,
etc. six Remedies against this device, from page 230. to p. 238. The sixth
Device that Satan has to keep poor souls in a sad, doubting, and
questioning condition, is by suggesting to the soul, that certainly the
condition of the soul is not good, because the soul cannot joy and rejoice in
Christ, etc. as once it could, etc. five Remedies against this device, from p.
238. to p. 244. The seventh Device that Satan has to keep poor souls in a
sad, doubting, and questioning condition, is, by suggesting to the soul its
often Relapses into the same sin, which formerly he has pursued with
particular sorrow, grief, shame, and tears, and prayed, and resolved against;
six Remedies against this device, from p. 244. to p. 253. The eighth Device
that Satan has to keep poor souls in a sad, doubting, and questioning
condition, is, by persuading them, that their estate is not good, their hearts
are not upright, their graces are not sound, because they are so followed,
vexed, and tormented with temptations; several Remedies against this device,
from p. 253. to p. 264.
In the fourth place is showed the several ways and devices that Satan has
to destroy all sorts, and ranks of men in the world. First, he has his Devices
to destroy the great and honorable of the earth; And that First, by working
them to make it their business to seek how to greaten themselves, to enrich
themselves, to secure themselves, etc. six Remedies against this device, from
p. 264. to p. 277. The second grand Device that Satan has to destroy the
great, and honorable of the earth, is, by engaging them against the people of
the most high; four Remedies against this device, from p. 277. to p. 284.
Secondly, Satan has his Devices to destroy the learned, and the wise, and
that sometimes, by working them to pride themselves in their parts, and
abilities; and sometimes by drawing them to rest upon their parts and
abilities; and sometimes by working them to make light and slight of those that
want iheir parts and abilities, though they excel them in grace and holiness,
etc. four Remedies against this device, from p. 284. to p. 290. Thirdly, Satan
has his Devices to ensnare and destroy the Saints, and that by working them,
first to be strange, and then to be bitter, and jealous, and then to divide,
etc. twelve remedies against this device, from p. 290. to p. 311. Fourthly,
Satan has his Devices to destroy poor ignorant souls, and that sometimes, by
drawing them to affect ignorance, and to neglect, slight, and despise the means
of Knowledge, etc. Four Remedies against this device, from p. 311. to p. 316.
To prevent some objections, six Propositions, or Conclusions concerning Satan,
and his devices are laid down, from p. 316. to page 327. Five Reasons of the
Point are laid down, from p. 327. to p. 330. Several sweet and profitable
Uses of the Point, from p. 330. to p. 347. To this second Impression is added
an Appendix touching five more several Devices that Satan has to keep poor
souls from believing in Christ, from receiving of Christ, from embracing of
Christ, from resting, leaning, or relying upon Christ for everlasting
happiness, and blessedness, according to the Gospel, and Remedies against
those Devices, from page 349. to the end of the Book.
Imprimatur,

Joseph Caryll.

A Catalogue of the Names of several Books printed, and to be sold by John
Hancocke in Popeshead Alley.
A Book of Short-writing, the most easy, exact, and speedy Method, by
Theophilus Medcalf, with a Schoolmaster to explain it.

Another Book of Shorthand, written by Thomas Cross. You may buy Shelton, or
any other sort of him also.

A Copie-booke teaching to write several hands.

A Treatise of Christ's personal reign on earth 1000. years, written by Mr.
Robert Maton, showing the manner and beginning of his Reign.

Also another Treatise of Christ's personal Reign, by Mr. Farmer.

The Covenant of Gods free Grace unfolded, by that worthy Minister Mr. John
Cotton of New Engl.

A description of the State of Great Britain, written 1100. years since, by
that famous Author Gildas treating of its Situation, Disobedience, Subjection,
Religion, etc.

Spiritual Intervalls, or the Souls Exercise in Meditations on several
Occasions, written by Lancelot Reynolds.

States Policy, written by Robert Sprye, setting forth Rules of Civil
Government.

Satan's Stratagems, or the Devils Cabinet-Councell discovered: Showing an
easy way to end Controversies in matters of Religion; written by Jacobus
Accontius, translated into English, 1648.

Recreations for ingenuous Head-pieces, containing several witty Poems,
Epigrams, Epi^aphs, etc. 1650.

The famous History of Edward the fourth, King of England, written by William
Babington, Esquire;

A Treatise of Church Government approved by many godly and learned Ministers,
1644.

A Glass for the Times, confuting diverse Errors in Religion briefly.

A Sermon before the Parliament, 1645. by Samuel Gibson, called The ruin of
the Authors and fomenters of Civil War.

Cases considered, and resolved, touching Baptism of Infants, and the Lords
Supper, wherein all godly conscientious Ministers in England, whether
Congregationall, or Presbyteriall, are concerned; by Mr. Brooks, 1653.

A Sermon preached by Mr. Brooks at the Funeral of the renowned Colonel
Reinsborough, called, The glorious day of the Saints appearance, calling for a
glorious Conversation, etc. 1648.

A Sermon preached by Mr. Brooks at Christ-Church, at the Funeral of Mrs.
Martha Randol, 1651. Entitled, A Believers last day is his best day.

Two other Sermons preached by Mr. Brooks before the Parliament, one in December.
6. 1648. the other in September. 3. 1650. both printed by their order, but not to
be had now.

All the former Books mentioned, you may have of John Hancock in Pope's Head
Alley.

Christian Reader, be pleased to pass by of course, some mistakes in pointing,
and some lesser literal faults, and to correct with thy pen grosser Errata's
before thou readst the Book, as being occasioned by the Authors absence from
the Press.


