THE ORGANS FUNERAL OR THE QUIRISTERS LAMENTATION FOR THE ABOLISHMENT Of
Superstition and Superstitious Ceremonies.

In a Dialogicall Discourse between a Quirister and an Organist, An. Dom. 1642.

London, printed for George Kirby.

The Qreristers Lamentation for the Abolishment of Superstition and
s^p^rstitious Ceremonies.
Querister. WOe and alas, the day of absolution is at hand whereby we shall be
freed from our sins of superstition and worshipping of God in his Service
with superfluous Ceremonies, which now is termed by many Idolatrous rags of
Popery, the original whereof they say came from the Pope, which is called
Antichrist, and introduced into our Church by the great Patriarch at Lambeth,
which if a Parliament had not happened in the Climactericall year of his fall,
and that he had but obtained the dignity of a Cardinal, we might then have
been sure of protection from his little Grace, and have been by him defended,
and maintained our means and revenues, augmented not diminished, and might
have risen to great preferment; but now all these our hopes are frustrate, our
grand Patron of our infirm^ies is in Limbo, his little honor is now coverted
to great disgrace, which if he had had but the knowledge to predicted his fate,
he would have endeavored to have prevented it. But he was it seems so
confident of his power and safety in his place of dignity, that if Augustus
Caesar had been now to war against him, he could not be vanquished. But we
may see how vain a thing it is to trust in riches, in fri^nds, or in the
favor of princes in the time of danger, for nothing is able to defend from the
just vengeance of God, against heinous transgressors and offenders: And if we
had but thought in the least manner of these times, we would have been more
cautious in seeking the favor of great men, and submitting our selves to their
wills be they never so refractory from that which is good, for hopes of a
little preferment, but truly I thought as I was taught that it was no sin to
use Ceremonies, but that they were things of an indifferent quallity, and might
be used without offense, but one comfort is I could not be brought to conceive
the exercise of them to be of absolute necessity to salvation, as some of the
learned prelates would have it, but a thing that might be as well refused as
used, yet I could never have the power to refuse the use of them, for that
preferment had the predominance in my brain, and I ^onceived it better to live
in some good fashion, pleasing to men, then in disg^ace and disfavour of the
higher powers, daily in danger by them to be questioned and sentenced to be
pillored and lose my ears, nay and per^hance fined and banished, or perpetual
impris^nment, in goo^-sooth I loved my reputation, ears, money and liberty
better then so. But now the current of the stream runs in another channel,
I must go with the tide, least now on the other side I may be in as much
danger as I was before, for using these Ceremonies in the exercise of Religion
is the best way to save my place, or to have some means allowed me for the
mrintenance of my self, wife, and children, for which purpose I might have in
the time I have been preferred to this place, furnished my self with
sufficient moneys which I have gotten by the by besides my yearly pension for
singing; as for teaching to sing young Artists in that Science, and other
ways, but that I was too much given to the Tavern and Alehouse, yea, and to
play now and then at Venus Game with loving Citizens wives, whom I would almost
persuade I could procure pardon for that offense But those joys are gone, I
must now betake my self to another course of life, or else I doubt I shall
fare as those do in the Catehouse: But what think you, will Organs and
finging be put down as well as Ceremonies.

Organist. Truly I have heard there are many enemies toward us as to you, and
strive hard to bring us to destruction, so that our Ancient and famous Sound
may be no more heard in this famous Island of England, which has been
glorious for Zeal and Devotion in religion all over Europe: But yet we hold up
and use our profession without contradiction, which I hope will still be
continued as a decent and comely thing in the Church, and a remembrance of the
Ordinances of the Law, and serves fitly to show that we acknowledge in our
religion as well the Law as the Gospel, and agrees well to the retunying of both
Testaments in print in this Kingdom, and that we este me not one above the
other, which is contrains; and I think Brother singer your profession will
hold still.

^^erist. If that continues I care not, for let them do what they will with
Ceremonies, I can as well sing without a Surplice or black Hood and Tippet, or
Cope, or any other Implement whatsoever, if it shall be so thought fit and
commanded, for I am of the same religion with the Parliament and the State; If
they command I will obey; and if there were no Parliament, then the greatest in
Authority in the State I would obey right or wrong, it is the best policy to
serve the times, and change with the wind, for by that means I may be safe
when others are questioned, at home in peace and security when others for their
Constancy are one time or another, be they in the true or false way, troubled
and oppressed, therefore my study and endeavor shall be to keep my self as
much as I can, at all times, and upon all occasions from danger.


Organs. Well Brother we will talk more concerning this business at this time,
but refer the same till we hear more, and then we will advise with our
best wits what course will be best for us to take.


Q^erist. Let us then so do. Farewell.


We may (...) abjure our singing,
For Ceremonies bringing
Into the Church, and ringing
For the downfall of the Org^ns,
Alas poor Organs.
A Quirister may hang himself,
For wanting his diviner self,
He Is taken now for a Clergy Elfe,
Being drowned in Superstition,
Alas fond superstition.
The Wren is now defiled in's nest,
And signed with the mark o'th Beast,
And powdered now for a Lent Feast,
Which made him seem a regulus.
Alas poor regulus.
Let Ceremonies then deplore
Their Fortune greater then before,
Down Idols, Crosses, Ceremonies,
Alas poor Ceremonies.
FINIS.

