SACRED PRINCIPLES, SERVICES, and SOLILOQUIES: OR, A Manual of Devotions Made
up of Three Parts: I. The Grounds of Christian Religion, and the Doctrine of
the Church of England, as differing from the Now-Roman. II. Daily, and Weekly
Forms of Prayers fortified with Holy Scriptures, Meditations and Rules to keep
the Soul from the Common Roads of Sin, and carry it on in a mortified Course.
III. Seven Charges to Conscience, Delivering (if not the whole Body) the main
Limbs of Divinity, which is the Art not of Disputing, but Living Well.


Grande est esse Christianum, non videri. Hier. LONDON, Printed by J. G. for
JOHN CLARK, and are to be sold at his Shop under Saint Peter's Church in
Cornhill. 1650.

To the Reader.
TO thy Conscience (not wit) are these Devotions written. And (if so read) thy
Soul may grow (if not wiser) better by them. The Author looks at Heat in
Devotion as metle in a blind steed, his first care therefore is, to help thee
to a good Sight in Religion, and that he does by the light of his Principles.
But because most miscarry by going and running against their light in wicked
and erroneous ways, more pains are taken to prevent and rectify such
miscarriages. To Elevate thy Soul and Aid it in good Desires and Endeavors
for Grace, against Sin, thou have his Prayers and Services. And to awake thy
Conscience and warm thy Heart to all Duty Desired and Directed to, is the
Cry, and work of the Soliloquies.

And albeit he will prohibit none to read the Book (though for Curiosity more
then Conscience) and rather as a New, then Prayer-booke, because even so they
may take benefit by it, as Saint Austin did by Saint Ambrose's Sermon) yet he
would have thee know that it is Calculated chiefly for the Meridian of their
minds who fall to their Prayers not by fits, but Courses; and read Books, not
to pass the time away, but well. Taking them in hand, not as Recreations of
their thoughts, but Business of the mind. And usiing them not as good
Companions in Solitude but Guides and Helps to Heaven-wards.

That this may be so to thee is his Aim. Thank God if it be thy Issue. He
prays that for thee whosoever thou art. Having an Amen, for Nazianzens Vote.
Utinam nemo pereat! and a Heart for the Prayer his Mother has taught him: That
it may please God to have mercy on all men! And if for his Name that Charracter
please thee, much good do it thee. So he is, and hopes he ever shall be,

Thine in the Common Savior, Philo-Christianus.

THE Particulars contained in this Manual of Devotions.
OF Religion in General. page 1. The Grounds of Christian Religion, page 2 The
Grounds of Protestant Religion. 6 How to be satisfied, and settled amidst the
Doubts and Divisions about Religion, 6
Rules of Devotion and Prayers
for Morning, 20 for Evening, 21
1. Daily Prayers, 23
Prayer For Grace, 28, 39 Prayer For Peace, 28, 39 Prayer For Health, 29, 40
Prayer For Friends, 30, 40 Prayer For Kingdom, 31, 41 Prayer For Church, 33, 43
Prayer For Catho: Church, 33, 43
Particular Prayers.
Prayer Of a Husband, 45 Prayer Of a Wife, 46 Prayer Of a Parent, 47 Prayer Of
a Child, 48 Prayer For a Family, 49 Prayer For Issue, 50 For Women with Child,
51 Against Miscarriage, 52 For a Women in Travail, 52 After Deliverance, 53
After Christning, 54
Prayer For Birth day, 55 Prayer For New-years-day, 56 Prayer Of a Widow, 56
Prayer For the Fatherless, 57 Prayer Against sudden Death, 59 Prayer For a
Voyage by Sea, 60 After it, 60 At Return to Sea, 61 At Return Home, 62 After a
Storm, 63
Prayer For one in a Journey, 65 After it, 65
Prayer For a Soldier, 66 Morning, 67 Evening, 68 Before Fight, 68 After
Fight, 69 For one Wounded, 69
Prayer For the Sick. 73 For Deliverance, 73 For Patience, 74 Against the
Plague, 76 For one Infected, 77 For one Recovered, 78
Prayer For one Dying, 80. 81
Rules of Devotion, and Prayers for Sunday,
Morning, 110 Evening, 111
Weekly Prayers for Several Days,
Sunday Prayer against The Flesh, 89 Monday Prayer against The Devil, 92
Tuesday Prayer against The World, 95 Wednesday Prayer against Sudden Death, 97
Thursday Prayer against Hypocrisy, 99 Friday Prayer against Inconstancy, 101
Saturday Prayer against Impenitence, 104
3. Monthly Prayers for the several Days of the Week, for four Weeks.
1. First Weeks Prayers. Sunday Prayer On the Joys of Heaven, 11^ Monday
Prayer Upon the Miseries of Earth, 116 Tuesday Prayer Against the Vanities of
it, 119 Wednesday Prayer Against Villainies of it. 132 Thursday Prayer About
Death. 126 Friday Prayer About Judgment 130 Saturday Prayer Against Hell. 134
2. Second Weeks Prayers, against seven common Sins. Sunday Prayer against
Neglect of Gods Service. 138 Monday Prayer against Procrastination. 140 Tuesday
Prayer against Presumption. 143 Wednesday Prayer against Desperation. 145
Thursday Prayer against Swearing. 149 Friday Prayer against Lying. 152 Saturday
Prayer against Slandering. 155
3. Third Weeks Prayers against the Seven (commonly called) Deadly Sins.
Sunday Prayer against Ildenesse. 158 Monday Prayer against Covetousness. 161
Tuesday Prayer against Gluttony. 168 Wednesday Prayer against Luxuy. 175
Thursday Prayer against Pride. 178 Friday Prayer against Anger. 182 Saturday
Prayer against Envy. 185
4. Fourth Weeks Prayers, against seven Vanities of the most valued things in
the World. Sunday Prayer against the Vanity of Pleasures. 188 Monday Prayer
against the Vanity of Honors. 190 Tuesday Prayer against the Vanity of Riches.
192 Wednesd. Prayer against the Vanity of Beauty 194 Thursday Prayer against
the Vanity of Strength. 196 Friday Prayer against the Vanity of Wit. 198
Saturday Prayer against the Vanity of Friends and favor. 200

Prayers in eight other Services.
Prayer For Pleasures of Piety. 203 Prayer Against Malice. 209 Prayer Against
Revenge. 212 Prayer For a Penitent. 215, 216 220 Prayer Against Impatience.
223. 225 Prayer On the Passion. 230 Prayer For the H. Communion. Before it.
251. 253 At it. 255 After it. 257. 259
Prayer Deprecating Judgments. 295 Prayer For an end of War. 297 Prayer For
blessing on those who seek Peace. 297 Prayer For Friends in Danger, and
Distress. 298 Prayer For Conversion of one in an ill Course. 299 Prayer For
preservation of the Church. 299 Prayer For Mercy to the Nation. 302 A
Charitable Prayer for these Miserable Times. 35 Prayer A Prayer against the
Temptations of the Times. 37
Thanksgivings.
General for Gods Mercies. 84 Deliveranees. 87
Particular Thanksgivings. For Recoveries of Sickness. 75 Particular
Thanksgivings. After a Journey. 65 Particular Thanksgivings. After a Storm.
62, 63 Particular Thanksgivings. After Childbirth. 53 Particular
Thanksgivings. For Birth day. 55 Particular Thanksgivings. For a Friend
Preserved. 88 Particular Thanksgivings. For Recovery of the Plague. 78
Particular Thanksgivings. For one Departed. 82
Meditations upon Ten several Subjects, viz.
1. Of the Joys of Heaven. 113 2. Of the Miseries of the World. 117 3. Of the
Vanities of it. 120 4. Of the Villainies of it. 124 5. Of Death. 127 6. Of
Judgment. 130 7. Of Hell. 134 8. Of the Pleasures of Piety. 205 9. Of the
Passion of Christ. 231 10. Of the Holy Cummunion. 262
The Services in this Book for the several Days of the Weeks.
1. Weeks Services of seven Subjects fit to Excite to a love of Godliness.
Sunday Service Of the Joys of Heaven. 112 Monday Service Of the Miseries of
Earth. 116 Tuesday Service Of the Vanities of it. 119 Wednesday Service Of the
Villainies of it. 122 Thursday Service Of Death. 126 Friday Service Of Judgment.
130 Saturday Service Of Hell. 134
2. Weeks Services against the seven Common Sins. Sunday Service against
Neglect of Gods Service. 138 Monday Service against Procrastination. 140
Tuesday Service against Presumption. 143 Wednesd. Service against Desperation.
145 Thursday Service against Swearing. 149 Friday Service against Lying. 152
Saturday Service against Slandering. 155
3. Weeks Services against the seven Deadly Sins. Sunday Service against
Idleness. 158 Monday Service against Covetousness. 161 Tuesday Service against
Gluttony. 168 Wednesday Service against Luxury. 175 Thursday Service against
Pride. 178 Friday Service against Anger. 182 Saturday Service against Envy. 185
4. Weeks Services Against Seven Vanities of the most valued things of the
world. Sunday Service against Pleasures. 188 Monday Service against Honeurs.
190 Tuesday Service against Riches. 192 Wednesday Service against Beauty. 194
Thursday Service against Strength. 196 Friday Service against Wit. 198 Saturday
Service against Friends and Favor. 200

Services upon other Particular Subjects, and Occasions.
A Service Of the Pleasures of Piety. 203 A Service Against Malice. 209 A
Service Against Revenge. 212 A Service Penitential. 215 A Service Against
Impatience. 223 A Service Of the Passion. 230 A Service For the Holy Communion.
251 A Service For sad Times. 295
The Sins against which Prayers and Rules are made, Alphabetically disposed.
Anger. Remedies of it. 183 Covetuousnesse. Remedies of it. 163 Desperation.
Remedies of it. 147 Detraction. Remedies of it. 156 Envy. Remedies of it. 186
Gluttony. Remedies of it. 170 Idleness. Remedies of it. 159 Impatience.
Remedies of it. 2^6 Lying. Remedies of it. 153 Luxury. Remedies of it. 176
Malice. Remedies of it. 210 Neglect of Gods Service. Remedies of it. 139
Presumption. Remedies of it. 144 Pride. Remedies of it. 179 Procrastination.
Remedies of it. 141 Revenge. Remedies of it. 213 Slander. See Detraction.
Sloth. See Idleness. Swearing and Taking Gods Name in Vain, Remedies of it.
150
The Use of the Services, Delivered in Four Rules.
Rule. 1. When you would strengthen in you the Grace, 1. Of Fear. Use the
Service, of Death, Judgment, Hell. 2. Of Hope. Use the Service of the Passion,
The Joys of Heaven Against Desperation. 3. Of Charity. Use the Service against
Malice, Anger, Revenge, Envy, Detraction, etc. 4. Of the Contempt of the World.
Use the Service against the Vanities of it. Of Honors, Riches, Pleasures,
Beauty, Wit, Favor, or of the Miseries of it, Villainies of it, Of Death, Of
the Joys of Heaven. 5. Of any Virtue, which you would strengthen in you, Read
the Service against the Contrary Vice. As For Chastity. The Service against
Lust. For Truth. The Service against Lying. For Humility. The Service against
Pride. For Meekness. The Service against Anger. For Patience. The Service
against Impatience, etc.

Rule 2. When you would strengthen your self against any of the Sins
abovenamed, Read the Service against that Particular Sin for that Day. Rule
3. When you read one Service, you may use (besides the Collect for it) the
Collects for another. As for the Service against Pride, That against the
Vanities of the World. In the Service against the Vanity of Pleasure, That for
the Pleasures of Piety, etc. Rule 4. When you see cause, you may make use of
the Collects, or Prayers, and Meditations, and say fewer or more of them
without the Services.
The several Soliloquies. 367
1. The Nobility of Piety. 311 2. Domesticall-Devotion. 325 3. Church Duty. 332
4. Perpetual Service. 351 5. Remora's in Religion. 367 6. Helps to Heaven. 389
7. Remedies of Humane Frailty. 411
The Particulars contained in these Soliloquies.
Absolution, if it encourage Sin, is the Bond, not Acquittance of a Sinner. 371
Abstinence from ill, makes not good. 360 Accessory to others Sins why not, how
not. 450 Actions helping to Heaven. 439 Alms, see Charity. Assurance, not
Essence of faith. 426 Attempting good things, overcomes them, 445 Belief Right
makes not Perfect. 375 Cautions good Helps to Heaven. 447 Charity, all
goodness. 362 Church, best place, 336. For most Reverence, 345
Church-rudenesse an Affront to Heaven. 347 Christ all in all. 435 Company ill,
way to Hell. 375 Communion. Neglect of it, a Sin against Christ and the Soul,
343 Confession how abused, 371 Covetousness, a Meditation destroying it, 403
Credit Christian how to be maintained, 449 Days to be numbered, 384 Deeds good,
what, which best, 360, 362 Delays of Repentance. Dangerous, 414 To Death,
Desperate, 415 Common pleas for it poor, 421
Excellency of Soul, 311 Everlasting Sinning, 451 Eucharist, see Lords Table,
Meat for Heaven, 447 Faith The Grace in Chief, 434 A Cordial, 423. The
Ingredients Rare, Christ Chief, 424 Virtues Sovereign, 425 Five Counterfeits of
it, Delusion, Blind Resignation, Idle Speculation, Great Confidence, Good
Opinion of our selves, Boldness to Sin, 426
Grief for Sin, not Repentance enough, 413 Habits ill, dangerous, 373 Hand to
be looked to, see Deeds. Heart Spring of action, all care of it, 352 Honest not
enough without life, 369
Hearing, a good help to Heaven, 439 Helps to Heaven, 309 Hours set to be kept,
327 Eleventh Hours call, no cause to delay Repentance, 420 Idleness an enemy
to Godliness, 348 Innocence from ill, not enough, 360 At the day of Judgment
how precious? 394
Integrity, all not saving, 430 Intentions not sufficient, though good, 369
Lords Day how to be kept, 341 Table how to be frequented, Reverenced, 342, 349
Lust, what Meditation kills it, 304 Meditations advancing piety. Of Death, 391
Judgment. 393. Heaven. 396. Hell. 400 Of Christ His Birth, Life, Death,
Sovereign against Pride, Covetousness Lust. 402 403 404
Morning and Evening, best Times for Devotion. 329 Motions of God, How known,
406 Angels, 406 From Heaven, To it, 407 Dangerously refused, 408
New Obedience, the Souls Preservative, 428 What? Wherein? How? Counterfeits
of it, 430 Obedience, see new. Prastice of Good, makes it easy, 445 Prayers
Man's Helps. 446 Gods Visits, 327
Private. When, where, how to be made, 329, 330 Public. In Church, Best, 334
At Home, when we should be there, Ill 334 To be made by all, The Greatest 336
Pride. Meditation destroying it, 402 Principles pernicious to Piety, 368
Public Service, Pillar of Religion, 340 Pulpit makes not a Sermon, 439 Reading
Scripture, a Help to Heaven, 440 Of power to Convert, 443
Religious Course. Bars to it, 367 Not for Cloister only, 372
Repentance, Sins Remedy, 411 Requisites, Virtues of it, 411, 412 Not to be
done by Halves, 414 Not to be Delayed, 414 A Time set for it, 420
Resolution will do much to Mortification, 443 Remedies of Frailty to be used
duly, 433 Scandal not to be given, 448 Hinders others, keeps our selves from
Heaven, ibid.
Sermon, and Gods Word, two things often, 439 Scruples, Satan's Policies, The
Souls Bane, 377 For Comforts, and Duty, 378 End in Carelessness, 380
Scriptures, plain in Necessaries, 440 Senses, Cinqueports to be looked to, 354
Service of God due from all. Private, 325 Public, 323 Perpetual, 351
Sins Baseness, in ten Particulars, 313 Souls Worth in ten Excellencies, 312
Theif on Cross, how to be looked at, 417 No Encouragement to Delay Repentance,
419
Thoughts how to be Governed, and why? 353 Tongue, how to be Ruled, and why?
355 Tongue Murders, 358 Tongues Bridle, how made, 355 To be kept as Life, Not
without Care of Heart, 357 and Gods Watch, 359

Trials of Repentance. Faith, Obedience, 432 Time precious. Of what value with
God, 383 With the Damned, 384
Vows to be Rare. 444 Works, Good to be done, 361 Charities their Chief, 362
Words v. Tongue,
ERRATA.
PAge 15. line 5. read Clement 8. p. 41. l. 17. r. Distractions. p. 44. l. 5.
add [For thy Christ his sake] l. 7. r. and perfect. p. 45. l. 2. r. Prayer. p.
48. l. 24. r. Joy. p. 56 l. 12. r. with thee. p. 51. l. 22. r. Glory. p. 52. l.
30. r. mine. p. 53. l. 10. r. first. p. 63. l. 19. r. earth. l. 9. r. upon it.
p. 75. l. 22. r. health. p. 77. l. 4. r. mortal. p. 117. l. 1. r. wein. p.
118. l. 18. r. arhest. p. 121. l. 30. dele revised. p. 125. l. 6. r. Sinners.
p. 127. l. 21. r. or field. p. 128. l. 19. r. shall. p. 135. l. 17. r.
Interests. l. 21. r. horrors. p. 144. l. 1. r. preserve me. p. 154. l. 4. r.
filed. l. 14. r. to leave it. p. 161. l. 2. r. swet. and l. 3. r. sweat. p.
163. l. 2. r. duty. p 167. l. 6. r. thrift. p. 169. l. 18. dele both. p. 170.
l. 24. r. deadly. p. 249. l. 6. r. to see. p. 251. l. 18. r. more. p. 265. l.
21. r. and thy self. p. 275. l. 15. and 16. r. thee. p. 288. l. 25. r. Cassand.
p. 304. l. 8. r. ask. p. 315. l. 19. r. abominable. p. 327. l. 24. r. and keep.
p. 359. l. 16. r. stored. p. 362. l. In Margent, r. (...). p. 373. l. 13. r.
awry. p. 382. l. 14. r. Corruption. p. 400. l. 3. r. things. p. 420 l. 23. r.
that he. p. 433. l. 26. r. Savior. p. 435. l. 15. r. rather then. p. 447. l.
9. r. most. p. 450. l. 15. r. sins.

Mistakes of Figures in the Marginall Notes
PAge 2. l. 12. for, 278. p. 29. Act. 17. 24. Isa. 38. 5. p. Jer: 8. 22. p. 32.
Act. 2. 37. p. 46. Ephesians. 5. 22. 29. p. 47. Genesis 9 1. p. 49. Genesis 18, 19. p.
68. Psalm. 25. p. 73. l. 20. deest. Isa. 11. 1. p. 141. Isa. 19. 18. p. 142. 1
Pet. 2. 11. p. 144. Mat. 27. 5. Prove. 1. 22. Isa. 1. 2. p. 145. Mica. 7. p.
152. Apoc. 22. p. 156 Jam. 4. 11. p. 160. Mat. 3. 9. p. 161. Phil. 4. p. 164.
Mat. 26. 23. p. 165. Luke 12. 20. deest. l. 3. p. 168. Psalm. 106. Jude Epistle
p. 181. Dan. 4. 51. Prove. 3. p. 206. 1 Pet. 1. 8. p. 312. Joh 6. p. 327. Psalm.
7. p. 320 Psalm. 18. p. 321. Mat. 26. 27. p. 355. Act. 26. p. 336. Isa 60. p.
426. Ephesians. p. 387. p. 354. 2 Samuel 11. 2 p. 357. Prove. 18. 8. p. 358 Romans 2. 1,
2. p. 359. Psa. 141. p. 360 Exodus 20. p. 376. l. 14. deest Jude v. 23. Psa. 1.
1. p. 377. Exodus 24. p. 380. Isa. 50. 4. 9. p. 390. Psa. 119. 165. p. 392. 2
Cor. 3. 4. p. 400. Mar. 9. 43. p. 408. Cant. 2. 3. Luke 22. 3. p. 412. Isa. 51
48. p. 428. 2 John v. 11. p. 432. Romans 14. 23. p. 433. Heb. 10. 39 p. 439. 2
Cor. 4. 4. 5. p. 440. 1 John 4. p. 445. Judge. 14. 9. p. 446 Ezekiel. 11. 19. 36.
27. p. 456. Mat. 6. 7.

Note Reader, that the second part of the sixth Soliloquie is Printed after the
Seventh, but the proper place is before it, and so thou art to read it.

Of Religion in general.
Of Religion: and how this Manual is made to serve the Soul in it.

REligion is the Worship or Service of God. Joh. 9. 31.


The parts of it are two. Faith, and Life Act. 24. 14.
; or the Knowledge and Practice of it 1. Chron. 28. 9.
.

1. There is a threefold Knowledge of Religion. Of Foundations, or Grounds of
it: Of Superstructions, or what is built on those Grounds: Or of Pinacles or
Punctilio's, high and curious points in the building.

The first of these is necessary for a Christian Pro. 19. 2 Luc. 12. 47.
: the second, for a Divine Tit. 1. 9.
: the third for no man 1 Timothy 6. 20.
. The first, is necessary and profitable: the second profitable, not necessary:
The third is neither. The first is the minds life Prove. 3. 18. 22.
, the second health 2 Timothy 1. 7.
, the third, the souls disease or itch Tim. 4. 3.
.

The Grounds of Religion necessary to be known: See page 2. And what profits
may be made of those Grounds, page 4.

2. The Practice of Religion consists in three things.

1. Invocation Genesis 4. 26.
. For that see the Prayers.

2. Mortification Gal. 5. 24. Col. 3. 5.
. For that see the weekly Services against Vanities and Sins, and their
Remedies. And the Soliloquies.

3. Celebration of the Holy Eucharist. For that see the Particular Directions,
page 12. and Meditations in the Service for it.

The Grounds of Christian Religion.
Qu. WHat is the End for which Eccl. 7. 29.
God made Man in this world?

Ans. To live happy with himself in To. 6. 22. 1 Pet. 1. 9.
another world.

Qu. What is the Means to be so happy?

Ans. To serve God according to Heb. 11. 16.
true Religion.

Qu. Which Religion is the True?

Ans. The Christian. Joh. 17. 3.


Qu. What is required of the true Christian?

Ans. To Believe, Do, and Pray aright Joh. 6. 29. 1 Pet. 3. 6. Mat. 6. 9.
according to the Rules of his Religion.

Qu. 1. What is it to Believe aright?

Ans. Largely, all which God says in his Word, briefly summed up in the
Apostles Creed, which all Christians receive as the Rule of their Faith.

Qu. 2. What is it to Do aright?

Ans. All which God wills in his Law, summed up in the Decalogue: by whose ten
Commands we are to govern all our actions, as the great Rule of our life.

Qu. How are we to understand and observe those Commandments?

Ans. We must understand, 1. That Mat. 5. 28.
they bind our hearts and thoughts, as well as our hands and tongues in
outward works and words. 2. To do 1 Pet. 3. 11.
the contrary good to what they forbid for ill, and to shun the contrary ill
where they command good. 3. And Mat. 5. 22, 1 These. 5. 22.
to shun all kinds and causes, and occasions of ill, and to use all means and
opportunities of good. And,

2. We may, and must observe all this. Eccl. 7. 29 Heb. 4. 15 Jam. 3. 2 1 John
3. 4 To. 6. 12 Heb. 13. 18 Act. 24. 16 Jer. 8. 6 To. 13. 8 Luke 1. 6. Heb. 12.
28
Not Exactly and Absolutely, as Adam might, and Christ did; for we offend and
sin all, and so break the Law: but yet Uprightly and Evangelically; that is,
We must keep our selves from greater sins, and heartily endeavor, and pray
against all, and grieve and repent when we do any. And thus by Gods grace we
may do, and this for Christ's merits, God accepts, and accounts for keeping of
the Law, without which we cannot do aright.

Qu. 3. What is it to Pray aright? Mat. 6. 9


Ans. According to the Pattern of Devotion summed up in the Lords Prayer, the
Rule of our D^sires.

1. For Gods glory before our good; the Churches before my own; and my soul
before my body (for matter and order.) And this in love and lowliness, with
faith and assurance, for the manner.

2. And that either to the Sense, or according to the Words of the Pattern.

Qu. What assurances has the true Christian, that believing, doing, and
praying aright in this world, he shall be happy in another?

Ans. Two great Assurances, Gods Tit. 1. 2. Mar. 16. 16. Joh. 3. 15. Heb. 5. 9.
Romans 2. 7. Act. 2. 21. Heb. 6. 17. 18. Heb. 8. 6. Heb. 9. 15. Heb. 9. 18. 26.
Heb. 10. 20.
Word and Seal.

1. Besides Gods Word, his Bond, (which by his power he can, and for his truth,
he will make good.)

It is in a Covenant confirmed with Gods Oath, which cannot change; by
Testament ratified in Christ blood, which must not alter. And to this Covenant
and Testament are put,

2. Gods Broad Seals of man's Salvation, the Two Sacraments of Christ;
Baptism, the Seal of my Birthright to Heaven, and the Holy Eucharist, the Seal
of my Inheritance in it.

Qu. Are the Sacraments only Signs and Seals?

Ans. No. As they are Christ's Assurances, so they are his Conveyances Romans 4.
11. Tit. 4. 5. Joh. 3. 5. 1 Cor. 10. 16.
too, and Means as well as Signs of grace: Baptism, of my Spiritual Birth
and life; and the Holy Eucharist, of my Growth, and nourishment to that which
is eternal.

Qu. What is to be gathered from all these Grounds?

Ans. Two Good Resolves for two Important Inquiries.

1. Who is the best Christian? He that most carefully keeps his Rules and
Seals.

2. Which is the Best Church? That which is made up of such Christians.

MAT. 18. 20. Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there I am
in the midst amongst them.

[There then Devout Soul be thou One, in Christ's Name, and rest confident to be
saved since thy Savior is with thee there.]

Grounds of Protestant Religion: How a devout Christian Soul in the midst of
the manifold Distractions, and Divisions about Religion, and Pretensions, and
Claims to the Church, may upon These Grounds, against all seruples, rest
satisfied, and settled in mind, and cheerfully go on in Gods Service, to
Salvation?
1. IF he that Believes, Lives, and Prays according to Christ's Rules be the
True Christian, and by all Gods Assurances shall be the Happy Man; The next way
to Heaven, is not to look after Controversy, but Conscience; and to spend my
Zeal and Time, not in being Contentious, but Religious: Since, wheresoever I
live, or am in the Christian World (West or East, in what Church or Country
soever) it is not my being a Good Scholar that must save me; but a Good
Christian; Not a learned Disputant for Christ, but a Devout Servant to him: Nor
being of such or such a Party or Side in the Church, but a true Member of his
Body.

And even upon These Grounds I may see and discern enough about the present
Controversies and Debates, in and concerning the Church. For,

1. I would ask this;

Whether I, being borne again, and made a Christian by true Baptism,

1. Believing the Scriptures, shall be damned for not equally believing
Traditions? Whether believing the Apostels Creed, I shall be damned for not
believing as my Creed, the Popes to be as infallible as the Apostles?

2. Whether making conscience to serve and worship God, I shall be damned for
not worshipping Images?

3. Whether praying to God as Christ taught, Our Father; I shall be damned for
not Invocating Saints and Angels, and saying, Our Friend which art in Heaven?

4. Whether Receiving the Holy Sacrament in both kinds, confessedly according
to Christ's Institution, I shall be damned because the Cup is taken away by a
Council? And whether, if the Blood be said to be in the Body, it be not so to
the Priest too; and so by that reason neither People nor Priest are to have the
Cup?

These being Points of Chiefest Difference in Religion betwixt Protetants and
Papists, an ordinary and indifferent understanding may easily judge by the
evidence of Those Christian Grounds, whether the Protestant is a damnable
Christian.

2. Nay, secondly, I would ask further,

1. Whether to give an equal faith to Tradition as Scripture, and to a Pope,
as Christ or an Apostle of Christ, be not to incur the great Curse for
Additions? Rev. 22. 18


2. Whether Worshipping of Crucifixes and Images be not Idolatry damned in
Scripture, against Gods Second Commandment? Whether the doing it but
Relatively; save it according to the Distinction of the School, in the
ignorant people? Or learned either, if the Israelites Exodus 32. 4, 5, 8.
were Idolaters for worshipping God in and before the Golden Calfe, which was
but a Relative worship?

3. Whether Praying to Saints (confessed to be an Unstatutable worship) be not
a sin of Superstition against God? and praying to be heard and helped for
their Merits sake, a Great injury to Christ?

4. Whether to give the Sacrament without the Cup, be not (as Pope Gelasius
said) A grand Sacrilege; and so to take it, to receive but half the
Communion. And whether the people may not justly doubt; and fear, they Receive
None, if but Half?

These being the Points and practices of the Roman Church, the unprejudiced
may judge whether the Papists, be not the more dangerous Religion.

2. If it be said there is but One, Ancient, Visible, Catholic Church of
Christ, out of which to depart by Schism, is to go from Salvation: And that
is the now-Romane Church; and this now does the Reformed: I satisfy my self
on my former grounds thus;

1. Out of the Catholic Church is Universa^ity.
no salvation, because that is the Congregation of Christian men all over the
World, and none can be saved but a Christian: But, Is the West all the World?
Are there not Christians in the East? Or do Papists take up all the West? Are
there no Christians there but Papists? I ask then; Can I not be saved, because
I am not of such a Particular Church in the West? Nor a Papist then; because He
is not of the Church of the East. I may be saved then, if I be a
Christan-Catholique, though not a Roman; because, I am saved by being of the
Catholic Church of Christ; that is, by being a Christian.

2. If they say my Church is New; I Antiquity.
ask, what makes One Old? Are not the Apostles more ancient then their
Successors? And the Bishops of Rome of the 400 years next after them, then
those who came some 100 years after those Bishops? And is that Church then New,
which professes Christian Religion according to the Apostles Doctrine and
Primitive Times? And particularly I ask, if these be not New points in the
Roman Church:

Is not worshipping Images New established Council. ^. Nic. 2. Ann. 787. Conc.
Later Ann. 1215. Conc. Flor. 1438. v. ^ Conc. Constable. An. Conc. Trid. Ann. 1563.
about 800 years ago? And Transubstantiation New, defined about 400? And
Purgatory New which came in a little after? And Communion in one kind more New,
decreed about 200? And all that most New, which came in but about 100?

Yea and for the great point of Supremacy, was not Gregory L. 4. Epist. 36.
the First who proclaimed it Antichristian at Constantinople; (Ann. 600.) And
all the Bishops before him, of whom not one ever challenged it, before the
Succeeding Popes in the last thousand years, who laid claim to it after them?

3. If they say, We are but lately Visible? Visibility.
I ask; Whether As a Man, So, a Church may not be visible in several forms,
foul and fair? And whether a Church be worse for growing visibly fair, that
was foul? Then I demand, Whether, if the Roman Church should Reform, what
many of themselves as well as we confess to be foul, it should be said
thenceforth to be a Visible Church? And why then others who have done so, are
denied before to be visible? And whether visibility of the Church of Rome may
not as well be denied, because, as now it appears, it was not allwaies visible?

4. And since, if another tear my Schism.
Coat, it is not I, but He that makes the Rent; I ask, whether are they the
Schismatics, that cause, or suffer the Schism? Whether Dangerous Corruptions
being discovered, and a Reformation desired and sought to prevent, and cure a
growing Schism; they which Decline, and Detest, and oppose all Reformation, or
they who Protest thereupon against them for it, are more the cause? And again,
May the Roman Church depart from the purity of the Primitive Church to
corruptions and Innovations without Schism? And cannot the Reformed return
from those corruptions and Innovations to that Ancient puriety, but with it?

5. And since Unity in Opinion, is the Unity.
privilege of Minds Triumphant above, of which the Churches of the Apostles
themselves on earth were not free; but some of Paul, some of Apollos, and some
of Cephas; Is not Unity in Foundation, in the Reformed as well as the Roman?
And Diversity and Contrariety of opinions in the Roman, as well as the
Reformed? Yea in high points of their faith as well as opinions? I ask then

1. Touching the Immaculate conception of the Blessed Virgin,

Whether the Dominicans be not as hot against it as the Franciscans are for it?
(both famous Orders of Roman Catholics.)

2. Touching the Aids Operations of Grace, etc.

Whether the Lutheran be more fiery against the Calvinist, then the Jesuit is
against Dominican? And whether even in the horrid point of Absolute Reprobation
it self, Bannes do not outgoe Calvin, and Lessius go along with Luther? (Both
Famous Roman Catholics of their orders.)

3. Touching the Popes Supremacy.

Whether the Doctors of Sorbon stand not as much against it, as the Doctors of
Lovaine are for it? (Both Romane-Catholick Universities and Schools.) Whether
Venice be as much for the Popes power and Prerogative as Rome? (Both Roman
Catholic Cities and States) Whether the French Papist profess and give as
much Subjection to the Pope as the Spanish, (Both Roman Catholic Countries
and Churches.) Nay, whether Gregory the first (the Saint) was not as fierce to
condemn, as Gregory the 7. was furious to maintain it? (Both Roman Catholic
Bishops and Popes.)

4. Touching the Popes Infallibility.

Whether some place it, Not in a Council, but the Pope; some not in the Pope,
but a Council; Some in both Council and Pope? All Catholics, Doctors, and
Champions in their several Countries.

5. Touching the Bible it self of the Vulgar Translation;

Whether Sixtus the fifth having damned all that use other, or vary but a
syllable from his: Gregory the 8. did not put out another, and curse all that
use any other but it? So that according to their Rules of Infallibility in the
Pope, the Papist must be damned that makes use of any Bible: For both these
were Bishops of Rome, and Popes?

2. And for Unity in affection and Spirit. Do our foulest-mouth'd Sectaries
rail more at Churchmen and Orders, than the Secular Priests at the Jesuits,
and they at the Seculars? both of them Papists? did ever, or do the Cruellest
of their Faction, show more inhumane rage against their Opposites, then Sergius
As Luitprandus, Baronius says Beniface.
did against his Predecessor Formosus, Damning all that he had done before,
(as he did by Stephanus) and raising him out of his Grave, and setting him up
in his Pontifical habit to damn him, and wreak his barbarous spite and
malice upon him Cut off his three fingers, and cast him into Tyber, etc. See
Baronius,
, and these also were Popes of Rome. Are these signs of all Unity amongst them?

3. If they trouble me lastly with their trivial and frighting argument to weak
and tender Souls, saying, By our Confession some may be saved in their Church;
but say they, None can be saved in Ours. Theirs therefore is the safer
Religion; I ask, whether they mistake not us, and know, what themselves say:
For all ours say not so; and did they all, it were nothing. For

1. When we say, some of them may be saved holding to the Christianity, amongst
them, and groaning under the Corruption (as no doubt some do:) Is not this in
effect to say, None are saved in the Roman Church but Protestants in heart?
For sure, He that is Detestant of the corruption in it, had he liberty, would
be Protestant against it? Do we say that any are saved by or for their
Corruptions; that is, as merepure-Papists holding and doing all things in
opposition to us, and not because of the Common Christianity betwixt us? Do we
not say of those Corruptions, that Salvation is absolutely impossible by them,
and exceedingly difficult and dangerous for them, because the Christianity
which should Save, is so incorporated and mixed with the Corruptions that
Destroy: But with us no such danger and difficulty, because our Christianity is
purged from such corruptions? Then I ask, If he be mad, that being to pass
over a deep River, will leave a Bridge for a narrow Planke; Is he wise, that
in the Great Case of Eternal life and Salvation, will put his Soul on a
perplexed and perilous way, when he may go a plain and a safe one?

2. And by that Argument, should not every Papist turn Protestant? Believe,
Worship, Pray, Come to Service, and Sacrament with us? For

1. They confess with us, Scripture is infallible, but we say, not the Pope.
The Rule of Faith say both, but not Tradition say we. Safe to believe the Old
Creed, both grant; but, a New One, we deny. To trust to Christ's Merits, sure
with both; but not to ours, with us. Both believe Heaven and Hell, but we have
no faith for Purgatory. The Protestants then is the safer Faith.

2. And to worship God they say (with us) is safe and profitable piety; but to
worship Images we say, is damnable Idolatry: Ours therefore is the safer
Worshipping.

3. And to pray to God in Christ's Name, both grant good Religion; but to call
to Saints for help, or to God in their Name, we say, gross Superstition. That
therefore is the safer Praying.

4. And in the Sacrament of the Eucharist a Sacrifice Commemorative both grant;
but a Propitiatory, we disclaim. A Real Presence, both allow, but the way of
Transubstantiation we reject. The Cup by Institution and Primitive Observation,
we and they confess; A power of Alienation we abhor. This therefore is the
safer Receiving.

5. Lastly, in our Liturgy is no error (some of them say;) but in their
Missall are many, say we. Service in a Known Tongue is not sinful (with them)
but in an unknown, unwarantable and against Scripture, with us. Therefore it is
best to come to our Church to Service and Prayers. And so ours, by their
Confession and Reason, is the best Religion.

To conclude. Upon my Grounds before, I build all this. The True Christian has
Gods Word and Seal for his Salvation: He that Believes, Does, and Prays
aright, is the True Christian. 1. Such a one is a member in, and of the
Catholic Church, though not of the Roman. 2. Such Christians the Primitive
Times had, therefore he is no new, but an ancient Christian. 3. Where Gods Word
and Sacraments are professed and used, by such there is a Church of Christ, and
visible Christianity. 4. And from any Church in the world that is such, I will
not; From the Roman as such, I do not separate: So I am no Schismatic
Christian. 5. And in these Grounds all agree, and so there is Unity. And this
is the only plain Christian way to Heaven, and so it is safest to be Reformed,
not Corrupted; a Catholic Christian, not a Particular Roman.

GAL. 6. 16. And as many as walk according to this Rule, Peace be on them, and
mercy, and upon the Israel os God.
Rules of Devotion for Morning.
IN the Morning when you first awake, What to do when you awake.
lift up your eyes to God, and say,

I lift up mine eyes to the Hills, from whence comes my help.

Then lift up your heart to God and pray.

Lord keep me from all sin and danger this day for Jesus Christ his sake!

When you are up, kneel down and say What to do when you are first up.
this prayer.

Almighty God, who have touched my heart with a sense of thy fear, and holy
dread of thy Majesty: I beseech Let this never be omitted.
thee give me thy grace so to govern my thoughts, and look to my words and
ways this day, that I may avoid all sins; Especially those to which I am
most inclined, or may be most provoked: That so my soul and body may be kept
pure and unspotted before thee; and whenever the hour of their separation
shall come, may be ready and prepared for thee; through the merits and mercies
of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

When you are ready for your Morning Prayers, use every day one of the
following Services.

Rules for the Evening.
BEfore you go into your Bed, kneel and say this short Prayer,

O God, who have made the day for labor, and the night for rest, let thy Sons
Blood cleanse me from this days guilt, that I may sleep in thy peace, and rise
again refreshed, and preserved by thy favor, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

And this Thanksgiving and Prayer.

Almighty God, who have preserved me this day from many sins and dangers: I
do humbly magnify thy Name for thy Grace and Goodness toward me. Beseeching
thee to forgive me all the errors of this day, whereof my conscience does, or
may accuse me. And grant that those sins which by my frailty I have committed,
may by the help of thy Spirit, be more carefully avoided; That I may ever stand
in thy favor, walk under thy protection, and now rest and lie down in thy
peace, and at last come to thy heavenly Kingdom: through the Merits and
Mediation of Jesus Christ. Amen!

When you lie down, say,

I will lay down my ^head in peace and take my rest, for thou only O Lord
make me to dwell in safety.

Then pray thus:

Lighten mine eyes O Lord, that I sleep not in death! I commit my soul and
body to thee, Keep me for thy mercies sake!

PSALM. 55. 18. In the Evening and Morning, and at Noone day will I pray, and
that instantly; and he shall hear my voice.
Daily Prayers.
Here begin the Daily Prayers, saying first, some of these Sentences.
PSALM. 66. 2. O Thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come. PSALM.
123. 125. 1. Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwell in the
Heavens! Unto thee, O Lord, will I lift up my soul! PSALM. 66. 16. If I incline
to wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. JOHN 16. 23. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, whatsoever you shall ask the Fatherin my name, he will
give it to you. JAM. 1. 6. But let him ask in faith, nothing doubtin: for let
not that man think, he shall receive any thing of the Lord. [that is wavering;
and without Faith.] 1 JOHN 3. 22. And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him,
because we keep his Commandments, and do the things that are pleasing in his
sight. JAM. 4. 3. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may
spend it on your lusts. 1 TIMOTHY 2. 8. I will therefore, that men pray every
where lifting up holy bands, without wrath, without doubting.
Preparatory Prayer.
BReath on me with thy holy Spirit, O God, that the Breath of mine may now
please thee, and my Prayers come up as sweet smelling odours before thee,
Through the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen!

Or This,
PRevent me O Lord in all my doings with thy most gracious favor, and further
me with thy continual help, that in all my works, begun, continued and ended
in thee, I may glorify thy holy name, and finally by thy mercy obtain
everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Confession.
ALmighty and most merciful Father, I have erred and strayed from thy ways
like a lost Sheep: I have followed too much the devices and desires of my own
heart: I have offended against thy holy laws: I have left undone those things
which I ought to have done, and I have done those things which I ought not to
have done; and there is no health in me. But thou O Lord, have mercy upon me
miserable Offendour. Spare thou me, O God, which confess my faults. Restore
thou me that am penitent; According to thy promises declared unto mankind, in
Christ Jesu our Lord; and grant O most merciful Father for his sake, that I
may hereafter live a godly, righteous and sober life, to the glory of thy holy
name. Amen.

Prayer for Pardon.
ALmighty God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who desire not the death
of a Sinner, but that he may turn from his wickedness and live; and have
promised pardon to them that truly repent, and unfeignedly believe thy holy
Gospel; of thy mercy, I beseech thee, to grant me true repentance and thy holy
Spirit, that those things may please thee which I do at this present, and the
rest of my life hereafter may be pure and holy, so that at the last I may come
to thine eternal joy, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Lords Prayer.
OUr Father which art in Heaven. Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, etc.

The Versicles.
Verse. O Lord open thou my lips!

Resp. And my mouth shall show forth thy praise.

Verse. O God make speed to save me.

Resp. O Lord make have to help me.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Alleluiah. Praise the Lord.

Read the Psalms for the Service of that day. Then the Lessons appointed for
it. After say the Creed, etc. Then, the Daily Prayers. Animadversions to the
devout Reader, touching these Daily Prayers.
IF thou would have reason, why these Prayers are so short, and in several,
which use to make a long one all put together; that thy Devotion may be
quicker, they are so short (a little space being run with a greater speed) and
that thy Spirit may hold out fresher in severalls, (as so many rests all the
way it runs.)

If thou be a Man of another Spirit, take that course of prayer, wherein thy
soul speeds best. This is propounded, not prescribed to every Devotion, and
intended for help, not the hinderance of any,

Morning Prayers.
1. Collect for Grace.
O God! I can ask no greater gift than thy Glory; and therefore beg no better
gift than thy Grace; yea, even this consummate, is nothing else but 1 Cor. 13.
10.
that, nor can I come at it but by the way of grace. I do therefore, for Jesus
Christ his sake beseech thee, bestow on me that blessed gift, Grace, to do
thee service on earth, that thou may give me thy salvation in heaven,
through the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

2. Collect, for Peace.
MY poor Soul is an humble Suitor for peace, O God! the Col. 1. 20.
blood of Jesus, is my plea; thy Spirit, my Advocate: I deserve by my sins
eternal enmity; but for thy dear 2 Cor. 5. 19.
Sons sake have favor for me, by whom the world is attoned: O let me be
reconciled to thee. I know not how Romans 8. 26.
to pray this as I ought, but thy Spirit can make effectual Intercession for
me. Lord! let thy Spirit move, and thy Son make my peace. Subdue my lusts,
conquer Satan for me, that my conscience may have peace with thee, and I in it:
By thy grace, through the mediation of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

3. Collect, for Health.
O Lord! when I am sick; let me think I may die; when I am in health, that I
may be sick; that I may not mispend the stock of my life, but do thee honor
with my health; and thou may give me comfort for it, in my sickness. Even
this, that sin has not bound me to my bed, but thy providence have cast me
down, which can and will lift me up, or to health in this world, or to
happiness in a better: such an enjoyment of health, give me I beseech thee for
Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

4. Collect, for Safety.
O Lord! so many days as I live, so Act. 10. 28.
many lives I owe thee; thou renewest my lease every day; a poor Tenant at thy
will I am, and a frail Isa. 28. 5.
cotage of clay, by thy power, I keep. Job 4. 19. Deuteronomy. 10. 12.
Lord! that have hitherto spared me, still preserve me; and let me pay (as I
can) what I owe, of service, the only rent thou requirest for tenement and
appurtenances, (life, health, wealth, and all the good things I have of thee,
for which thou both grantest term of life, and give eternity.) This, to
that, continue I beseech thee, for his sake, who was surety, and is sole
Purchaser for me, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

5. Collect, for Friends.
FOr all my Kindred and Friends, Lord receive my prayers! Do thou good unto
them all, O God! To those that err, show thy truth; and those that see it,
keep from error; to those that do amiss, give grace to do better; and those
that do well, continue in so doing: to those that are afflicted, give comfort
and deliverance; to those that prosper, humility and temperance: bless the
sick with health, and the healthy from sickness; supply those in want, and let
those that want not give supply: to all grant thy grace, O God! and show thy
mercy: let love bind us one to another, and Religion knit us all to thee; that
all who are of natural kindred may meet in heavenly consanguinity: Even so
Esth. 2. 31. Job 1. 13.
Lord! let the blood of Jesus run through all our veins, and the Spirit of
Jesus go along with the blood, that the glory of Jesus may be the end of us
all. And how ever we suffer, and scatter on earth, we may live and joy together
in the bliss of Heaven. By the Union of that holy Spirit, and communion of
that blessed blood. Amen, Amen.

6. Collect, for the Kingdom.
O Lord! we were the mirror of the world for mercy; we are, for misery! a
people woefully torn, divided, distressed, distracted; a multitude of headless,
heartlesse, disordered men, ready to be destroyed. O thou great Physician that
can as easily cure Jer. 4. 22.
a Kingdom as a Man, heal our Land for thy tender pities sake! Lord, have
mercy on us, and heal us! In the blood of Jesus, purge our sins, the cause of
all our maladies: whether ours or of the Ages before us, from their guilt and
curse of them all, good Lord deliver us. Deliver us from blood, O God; from all
the innocent and precious blood, which lies upon us! From our sins of peace,
which brought the war; and the sins of war, which brought and left us in
that guilt of blood. O Jesus! that had mercy even for those that shed thine,
and Act. 2. 27.
made the matter of their sin, the means of their salvation; let the
virtue of thy blood expiate the guilt of all shed amongst us, and the voice of
Heb. 12. 24
it out-crie all the clamours which it makes in Heaven against us! And by the
grace of thy Spirit make our hearts bleed for our sins, that it may cry so for
us.

With our sins, remove our woes. Piece our rents, and close our wounds with
thy heavenly hands, O God of peace, that we perish not under them! let us not
make our selves a prey to foraigne force; nor fall by an intestine fury. Meet
Body and Head in common safety; mean while look upon our languishings, and
keep life in the Body. Lord! who delightest not in the death of one Sinner,
pity millions of poor sinful, miserable souls, at the very point to perish:
pity us, good Lord! and preserve us for thy great mercies sake, in Christ
Jesus. Amen, Amen.

7. Collect, for the Church. 1 Cor. 11. 2.

FOr thy dear Spouse, and my best Mother, I thy poor Child and Hers, on
bended knees, hold up my hands, and humbly pray, all thy Goodness, O God!
Truth, Love, and Peace be with her: For error, truth; for schism, love; for
persecution, peace: Behold O Lord, not what She is, but was! and not what She
was for sin, but thy Service! And Hear, Lord, not the cries of her sins, but
groans of her miseries. And make her to be as Good as She was; yea Lord! make
her be as Good, as She should be: Beautiful in Her self, Unblemished in her
Children; Shining in truth, Comely in order, Holy in life, Repaired in her
ruins; Restored in her Rights, Relieved in her injuries. To Thy glory, Her
honor, and the happiness of us all, through the Grace and Worthiness of
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

8. Collect, for the Catholic Church.
O God of peace, send Unity amongst all that profess thy Name! As they have
but one Head, Ephesians. 4. 1, 4, etc.
let them be but one Body; as they are but one Body, let them have but one
Spirit; the Spirit of truth and holiness, in doctrine and life, be in all:
Cease schisms and wars in the Christian world. Let not them spill one
another blood for whom thy Son shed His. Let there not be many Hearts under
one Head, nor more Heads with it, lest they make a Massacre in thy Body, or a
Monster of it. O let thy Scepter have obedience, and thine Orders Observance
every where! Suffer none by delusion or depravation of mind, or ambition of
Spirit, to pull down thy Throne, whilst they pretend for thy Scepter, and let
confusion and tyranny into the Church whilst they profess to bring in liberty
and order, and pull down thy House, to set up thy Glory. From Violence,
avarice, sacrilege, schism, heresy, Anarchy, tyranny; King of the Church
keep us: Do Thou govern us, and let us obey thee; do Thou save us, and let us
serve thee; Even all Christian souls, save through, out the world, Dear Jesus.
Amen.

Concluding Prayer.
IT is thy promise to grant whatsoever I ask in thy Sons name; Lord, thou will
not perform less, because I Breviariu^ totius Evangelii. Tert.
ask so in his Words: In His blessed Breviary therefore, I Sum and offer up
all, and say, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

The Blessing.
God the Father bless me, God the Son defend me, God the holy Ghost preserve
me, and all mine, and His, now, and evermore. Amen.

So ends Morning Prayer.
A Charitable Prayer for these Miserable Times.
O Lord, that do not willingly afflict the Children of Men; Behold from thy
Holy Habitation of Heaven, the Multitudes of miserable Souls, and Lives amongst
us, and have mercy upon us.

Have mercy on all Ignorant Souls, and instruct them! On all Deluded Minds,
and Enlighten them! On all seducing, and seduced Spirits, and Convert them.
Have mercy on all broken Hearts, and Heal them, all struggling with Temptation,
and Rescue them! All Languishing in Spiritual Desertion, and Revive them. Have
mercy on all that stagger in Faith, and establish them! That are fallen from
Thee, and Raise them! That stand with Thee, and Confirm them! Have mercy on
all that groan under their Sins, and Ease them! that bless themselves, and
go on in their wickedness, and curb, and stop them! Jesus! that did shed
thy Blood for all Souls to save them, shed thy Holy Spirit on all, and heal
them!

And Lord, have mercy on all miserable Bodies! Those that are ready to Famish
for want, Feed them! Those that are Bound to Beds of pain, Loose them! Those
that are in Prison, and Bonds, Release them! Those that are under the fury of
Persecution, and cry under the yoke of Oppression, Relieve them! Those that lie
smarting in their Pains and Wounds, Cure them! Th^se that are Distracted in
their Thoughts and Wits, Settle them! Those that are in Perils of their Lives,
Preserve them! Jesus! that did freely Distribute thy Comforts, and Cures, to
all Miseries and Maladies of Men, when thou wast on Earth! Have mercy on all,
and Help them. Far or near, with us, or from us, Lord have mercy on all. Even
every Son and Daughter of Adam at this time in pain and anguish upon the
face of the Earth; where ever they are, whosoever they be, what help I would
pray for my self from thee, or Comfort from Man, in their condition; I beseech
thee, the God of all Help, and Comfort, to give it to them. Take them to thy
Care, and Tender them: Supply them, and Succor them; have Compassion on them,
and Heal them.

Jesus that did give thy Blood for them, deny not thy bowels to them. Thou
that did Redeem them all, preserve them. Even all Miserable Souls and
Bodies, I beseech thee, for thine Infinite mercies sake. Amen.

A Prayer against the Temptations of the Time.
O God, Who wilt not suffer us to be tempted above what we are 1 Cor. 10. 13.
able to bear! Succor me, that the Temptations of the Time do not overwhelme
me! Discover to me the ways of thy Providence so far, that I may see, why I
should neither deny it, or doubt it. And make me know Thy Judgments Job. 11.
6. Romans 11. 33. Job. 40. 4. and 41. 3. Jer. 12. 1.
to be so unsearchable, and thy ways past finding out, that I may humbly
submit my wit to thy Wisdom and admire and adore the Justice which I do not
see.

Let me not be of so narrow a mind, as to confine thy Work to one World, which
thou do not finish but in Two. Nor let me be such a Creature of Sense, as to
believe thou have no other reward, or punishment then what I see, and feel.

O let my Eyes look to the end of all, (Heaven or Hell) and let me envy no ill
man's happiness, who shall end in Hell; Nor bewail any good man's
wretchedness, who shall have Heaven for his end. And let me understand, that
Prosperity of Psalm. 92. 7.
Sinners is a heavy Plague, because their Prove. 1. 32
spur to Hell, (the greatest punishment:) and Adversity of Saints a happy
Mercy, Psalm. 94. 12
because thy Rod to beat them into Heaven, (the Best Reward.)

Mean while, let me not give a Breast Psalm. 4. 8.
full of thy Peace, for an Armefull of that wealth which breeds nests of Vipers
and Adders in their Hearts, and continual Job. 20. 14. 16.
stings in their Bosoms; let me prefer the sufferings of Innocence before the
Spoils and Triumphs of Violence.

O God, since a guilty Conscience is the greatest punishment on Earth, (because
next to Hell;) And Accusing and Condemning thy Providence, and forsaking Mal.
2. 17. and 3. 13, 14, 15.
my Innocence the greatest Guilt! To that Extremity, let no Temptation ever
lead me! Jesus Keep me from it by thy Grace, and Mercy. Amen.

Evening Prayers.
1. Collect, for Grace.
THou that have promised Thy Holy Spirit to those that ask, Luke 11. 13.
it, give me Thy Grace O God with courage and constancy so to fight, and subdue
my flesh, and ghostly enemy; that I may pass my Pilgrimage in thy fear, and at
last receive my Triumphs in thy Glory, Apoc. 3. 21
through the Merits of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

2. Collect, for Peace.
O God of peace, who art Incomprehensible, give me thy peace, Phil. 4. 7.
which passes all understanding: Let me so live according to thy Rule, that
Gal. 6. 16.
I may have peace with my Conscience. Let me be so ruled by thy Will and Word,
that my Conscience may have peace with Thee. Lord! make an everlasting Jer. 6.
16.
peace with me: and let me never do what will break that league with Thee.
Dear Jesus, treat it for me in thy Blood, and maintain it in me by thy Spirit.
Amen, Amen.

3. Collect, for Health.
IT is the wonder of thy providence O Lord, that a body subject to thousands of
Frailties and casualties every day, should enjoy health or life an hour; yet
through thy mercy I have both, at this instant. Lord continue to me what I
have; and let me so improve it to thy honor, that thou may continue it; and
for Christ his sake, do not for any wickedness, smite me with sickness.
Amen, Amen.

4. Collect, for Safety.
FOrgive O Lord, the forfeitures I Psalm. 19. 11.
have made of thy protection, by the wanderings of my life.

And though I have not been (as I should) a dutiful Child: yet be Thou, O
Lord, (as thou ever art) a merciful Isa. 63. 16.
Father. Forget not thy fatherly goodness to me, who pray thy pardon for
offending Thee, thy Grace to serve Thee, and thy Providence to preserve me,
this night, and evermore, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

5. Collect, for Friends.
O Lord, it is joyful for Friends to Psalm. 3. 3. 1. Heb. 12. 22, 23.
love, and live together on earth, but the joy of joys, all, to live with thee
in Heaven. I beseech thee, let this happiness be the portion of all, whom thou
have made more nearly, and dearly mine. Let us so live in thy service, that we
may die with thy Salvation: Mean while, what wants of earthly good to any, give
us: what is amiss, and offensive to thy Heavenly Majesty in any, forgive us:
what is requisite to make us so to serve thee now, as thou may save us then;
in thy bounty bestow upon us, Truth and Grace aright to see, and seek thy face,
in Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

6. Collect, for the Kingdom.
O Lord, we lie all in broil and blood, Pity us! Our distraction threaten
desolation to us; Preserve us! Our sins cry loud for thy vengeance upon us;
Pardon us! Thy mercies have been great to this Nation, Lord remember them! Thy
deliverances of us have been many, Lord renew them! That iniquity be not our
ruin, let us repent, and ruin it! The guilt and blood Ezekiel. 18. 13.
upon us, forgive; our Breaches, repair. The order which may bring peace,
establish! The Government thou have established, maintain! what is just and
right in thine eyes set up! what thou see evil, cast down! what makes the
Nation miserable, remove; what may make it happy, restore; Lord! for thy
mercies sake, say we have been miserable enough, and make us more happy! Let
the light of thy countenance shine again upon us, and grant us peace; the
Power, and Authority which may procure it, preserve; and those to whom thou
have given that power, bless them to us, and us in them, and all in thee; for
Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

7. Collect, for the Church Catholic.
BEhold O God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; I a Christian, and child of
his true Catholic Church, pray thy mercies on my Good and Great Mother, and
all my Brethren, and her Children in thee, and thy Son. For Errors amongst
them, send them Truth! For Schism, Unity! For Superstition, warrantable
worship! For Confusion, Order! For Profaneness, Piety! For Variance, Concord!
For War, Peace! that all may, as one Body, with one mind, and heart, and mouth,
and knee, believe, love, confess, adore; and so serve thee, and him, whom thou
have sent, Jesus Christ, (the Great Lord, and common Savior of us all) as thou
may save us all in the world to come! O thou Head of the Church, fave thy
Body! By thy Blood, cleanse it! By thy Spirit, sanctify it! By thy Power,
preserve it; and every Limb of it dear Jesus! Amen.

8. Collect, for the Church.
O Christ, Head of thy Body, the Ephesians. 1. 22
Church! Let not this poor Member of it amongst us, perish: What it is thou
see; Lord! with pity behold us! What it was, thou know; O Lord, in mercy
restore us.

Thy Primitive Order in Christian Truth and Worship for the saving of Souls
cast down, set up! The present Confusions, Distractions, Innovations, Errors,
which are got up, cast down! Set up thy Glory, O Lord, amongst us: and what is
set apart to support it, do thou maintain, and continue to us, and our
Posterities after us, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen, Amen.

Concluding Prayer.
BEhold Lord, I have prayed, thy Grace and Peace, with Health, and Protection,
for my Friends, the Kingdom, and this, and thy Church! Grant good God, all the
requests I have prayed of thee; or what more, I should have prayed from thee:
or, what any else, have prayed with me: In whose name I have presented; with
whose words I desire to perfume, perfect my Prayers: Beseeching, thee that his
Spirit may breathe in those words, in which I know I pray both what, and as I
ought; And therefore as devoutly, confidently, say, Our Father which art in
Heaven, etc.

The Blessing.
THe God of Mercy and Peace, be with me (Body and Soul) and bless me, and all
mine; and those that need his Mercy, this night, and evermore. Amen.

So ends the Evening Prayer.
Particular Prayers.
Prayer of a Husband for a Wife.
O Lord! Thou have made the 1 Pet. 3. 2.
Wife the weaker Vessel, yet a necessary one: Man the nobler Genesis 2. 18. 1 Cor.
11. 3, 9. Prove. 12. 4. 1 Pet. 3. 7.
of the two, yet the Woman next the Man. He is her Head, but she is his Crown!
let me then tender her as weaker, and honor her as a Vessel of worth. So weak
let me never be, as to give her my Power: nor so wicked, as to make her the
Mistress of my Conscience. So tyrannous 1 Kings 21. 9. Col. 2. 19. Genesis 21. 12.
let me never be, as to make her my Slave: nor so imperious, as not to allow
her of my Counsel. Let me value her well, but my self better; and love her
much, but thee more! If she Mat. 19. 21.
play Eve, let not me be Adam, (take the forbidden fruit from her hand) lest I
give her ruin for respect: let me not make her my Foot, nor let her be my
Head: Thine Authority in me, let me maintain with love, and (hers under me)
with zeal; that the yoke 1 Cor. 6. 14.
which lies on both, may be carried with more comfort, and drawn on with more
bliss, to me, and her, and all that is ours. As thou love thy Spouse, Lord
Ephesians. 29. 22.
let me love mine! And as thy Church does, love, reverence, and obey thee; let
her love, honor and observe me; in thee, and for thee, Dear Jesus! Amen.

Prayer of a Wife, for her Husband.
FOr him I pray, to thee O God, Genesis 2. 23, 24.
whom thou by thy providence and Ordinance, have made most mine, of all mankind
(my Husband and Head) That, I may pay him the Duty, which (by thy command) I
owe him with such conscience as thou may acquit me: and he behold me not as
his Cross, but his Crown. That he may Ephesians. 5. 22, 25.
return me that love and respect which by thy Law is due from him to me, that I
may embrace him as my Refuge (not my storm.) Lord let me study, by all 1 Pet.
3. 1.
love and lowliness, to make him mine; and let him seek in all wisdom and
kindness to make me his: And let both unite Prayers and endeavors to make our
selves, and all ours, thine. That being espoused to thee on Earth, we may at
last be Married with thee in Heaven, and dwell together in those mansions of
bliss; where is neither sin, nor sorrow, nor care, nor discontent, nor any
distress: but a dower of Immortality and Joy, and Glory for Body and Soul:
with felicity, to all eternity, even for ever, and ever: So be it dear Jesus!
Amen, Amen.

Prayer of a Parent, for Children.
O Lord! who by thy favor, have given me Issue; and in thy name, Genesis 27. 4.
29. 1.
power to bless my Children: Set thy seal, I beseech thee, to my Blessing!
Bless them with grace to be thy Children, and me with grace by good example
and education, to keep them thine. Bless them with health, and long, and good
life, (if thy blessed will) and me with providence, and due care, by all right
ways to advance their good! let me not allow my Children to be thy rebels, and
abhor to make them so! Let me not so distract my soul with care for them, or
load my Conscience with guilt, as to convey thy Curse on me and them! Let my
care be Fatherly for their Lives, and Christian for their Souls. Believing,
all Psalm. 127.
care to be vain without thy blessing, and Carking the way unto thy curse! All
blessings of this world so far good, as they serve, and help on to a better,
and unreasonable coveting of them, a bar to that bliss. O Lord! my Children
are more thine than mine: (Thou art Father of their Spirits, I Heb. 12. 9.
but of their Flesh) Let me therefore trust thee for them as their best Father,
and my self with them (as thy good Child) taking care to do our duty to 1 Pet.
5. 7.
thee, and casting all farther care upon thee: So be it dear Father, for thy
dear Sons sake Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Prayer of a Child for Parents.
O Lord, who have made my Parents as Gods in thy stead, (under thee) the Makers
and Preservers of my life; let me look at thy power and goodness in them, and
(as thee) love, serve, and obey them; that I may give, die Ephesians. 6. 1.
to their life, and length to their days! And Lord, who have given them power
to convey blessing on me, give me leave from thee (the Father of all) to pray
blessing on them! And (to my power) to be ever dutiful, and helpful to them.
That so I may be (as the Child of their love, so the Heir of their blessing,
(the blessing thou have promised to loving and obedient Children (theirs and
thine) give it me good Lord; for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Prayer for a Family.
THat I have a Family to govern, it is thy mercy O God; but rule it aright, I
shall not without thy grace. That grace Lord give me! Wisdom to know what I am
to do; and ability to do according to my knowledge, by my instruction to lead
it in thy fear, Genesis 19. Deuteronomy. 6. 4.
by my example to draw it, by my Admonition to drive it on: By my Providence to
do it right, by my Protection to keep it from wrong: As careful to give to
all their dues, as to receive their duty: Let me remember, Ephesians. 6. 7. 9. Job.
31. 13. 14. Col. 4. 1.
that (as my self) my Servants are thine, fashioned by thy hands, and bought
alike by thy Blood, that I may not despise them, lest I despise thee: Let me
consider, that my Children (as mine) are thine; made after thine Image, and
born again of thy Spirit; that I may not neglect them, lest I neglect thee.
And let them remember and consider, that I stand in thy stead, that (as thy
self) they may serve and obey me, and thine Authority in me: And let me, and
them both be mindful, that I am thy Deputy. I, that I must account for my
Charge; and they, that they must come to a reckning for their carriage; both to
thee, the Sovereign Judge, and Lord of all. That so I may so rule, and they
obey, as all may be done in thee, and for thee; and all may reign at last in
thee, through the merits of him, of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth
is named, the great and gracious Master of us all Jesus Christ our Lord. Ephesians.
3. 13
Amen.

A Prayer for Issue.
O Lord, who have ordained Marriage, the means to propagate Mankind, and make
it fruitful to that purpose, by thy providence, at thy pleasure: I beseech
thee, as that is my state, let this be my bliss. Give me the blessings of the
Womb, a healthy and holy seed; which may be Heirs of thy blessings on earth
after us, and at last inheritance of thy eternal blessedness in heaven with
us: even for the sake of thy only begotten Son my dear and only Savior,
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

1. Prayer, for a Woman with Child.
LOrd! who have blessed me with a hopeful Conception, crown thy mercy in me
with a happy Deliverance: From all frights and harms which may cause
miscarriage to me, let thy providence shield me: From all errors and ills which
may draw thy displeasure upon me, let thy grace preserve me: And for all my
faults and failings past, let thy mercy pardon me: And Lord! let not the Child
for the Parents sake be any way unhappy: The blessing of shape, and
perfectness of Body and mind be upon it I beseech thee: so shall the Church
have a Child, and thou a Servant; my Family a pillar, and thy kingdom an
heir: mine shall be the comfort, but thine shall be the gain. O thou that thy
self wast once enclosed in a Mothers womb, conceived, bred, and born; show
this mercy to me: do it for me dear Jesus thou holy Son of God. Amen, Amen.

Prayer against Miscarriage.
LOrd keep me from all harms and frights this day, At Evening, say, this Night.
and that my Womb by no ill acccident may miscarry within me, let not my heart
by any ill act miscarry before thee: Body and Soul, let thy mercy and grace
preserve me, now and ever dear Jesus. Amen, Amen.

Prayer for a Woman in Travail.
Lo! this is the fruit of the forbidden Tree: our first Mother brought forth
sin, and we bring forth in pain for it: justly O Lord! for I am the Daughter
of my Mother: as I sinned in her loins, so since I came into the world I have
justified often what she did once. I have sinned, O Lord! I have sinned! O how
often have I coveted, what thou have forbidden! done ill in thy eyes, to do
what was pleasing to my own: and been both tempted and Tempter unto evil.

By inheritance therefore and purchase wrath is my due, misery my portion, and
this pain my proper lot: and thy great mercy it is in Christ my Savior that
the pangs of everlasting death, are not my! but O thou Judge of the world,
remember that thou art the Preserver of men, preserve me in it, support me
under it; make haste, make haste good Lord to deliver me from it, and comfort
me after it. O remember not what the first Adam has done, but the second
suffered! and by his immaculate Conception, and holy Birth and Life; by the
bitter passion, and pangs, and death of the holy Child Jesus; deliver me dear
Father, in this my extremity. Let the pains of my Travail end in the joies of
a blessed Birth, that may (to the comfort of my soul) live and be made an
Heir of thy kingdom. Amen, Amen.

Prayer, after Deliverance of Child.
LOrd! that have looked down on thy poor hand maid in her great distress, I
look up unto thee and bless thy Name for my happy deliverance, that thou have
made me the joyful Mother of a hopeful Child, without visible infirmity or
deformity, which might take from my joy! Go on good God in mercy to me and it.
Support me on my bed of weakness, and in thy due time raise me from it with
strength. Let my Child live till thou by holy Baptism have made it thy Heir,
and in that holy and happy state of soul preserve it to thy kingdom: and let
it be my continual care by all good means to preserve it. And good Lord! from
the pangs of eternal death and pains of Hell keep me and it for ever. And
whatsoever burden of woe I shall travail under on earth, let me not despair
of merciful deliverance, whom thou have so graciously eased of my late pain
and burden.

Thy power and mercy is the same for ever, O Lord let it be showed to thy
Servant in all her extremity, according as her hope and trust is in thee, by
the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Prayer after Christening the Child.
WHat an honor have thou done unto thy Servant, O Lord* thou have given me a
natural birth, and my Child a new one: what came polluted into the world, is
washed clean in thy laver; for the rags of Adam, thou have put on it thy
Sons robes. My Child is made thy heir, and what was borne by me to a Cross,
thou have begotten again to a Crown of glory. O Lord! let it be my care to
keep my Child thine; thy Sons righteousness on him, and Spirit in him: and
my ambition so to be thy Child, that I may with it, be Inheritor of thy Crown.
By the merits of him, who is the firstborn of his Brethren, thy Son, and
Heir of all things, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer and Thanksgiving for our Birthday.
I Thank thee O Lord for my Birth this day, but especially for my newbirth: By
that I was made a Man, by this a Christian; from that I have a natural life,
from this a spiritual: that was to live on earth, this in heaven, (nor was
that to live for ever, but a time on earth.) Lord! let me not frustrate the end
of my Birth, nor apostate from the bliss of my Baptism. The state of grace in
which this set me, let me ever maintain: And if by sin I ever fall from it,
let me by a true and timely repentance rise again and recover it; that when I
shall go from earth, I may come to heaven; and when leave to live with men,
live with thee and thy Angels for ever, for which end I am created, redeemed,
and preserved in this world. Lord that gave my life this day to begin; let it
so end, for his sake, whose birth, life, and death, makes all ours blessed, who
is the beginning and end, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Prayer for New-years-day.
GOd of my life, who have given me this day to see a New-yeare begin, let me
live to see it at a happy end: and thou who have a New-heart in thy gift, O
give that to me, that according to all the good purposes of my soul I may
walk in good conscience before thee, and have thy peace within me, and thy
blessing all the year upon me, even for his sake who was content to be borne
at this time, and this day to be circumcised, and shed his just blood for me,
Jesus Christ thy Son my dear Savior and Lord. Amen.

Prayer for a Widow.
O Lord, that have taken my Head from me, be thou Husband to me; thou that
boughtest my Soul by thy blood, to be thy Spouse, do not lose me, do not
leave me: guide and govern in me in all my ways, in all my wants and straits
supply me: thou that art better than Friend, than Father, than Husband, than
all; be unto thy poor Child and Spouse who desires to love thee, O be thou
unto me all, yea more than all unto me: and that I may ever have thy love and
care, have thou mine ever I beseech thee, and let neither world woo, nor
Devil tempt, nor flesh yield it from thee: let no lust defile my heart (thy
bed) nor sin blemish my body (thy members:) let both be (as thine) undefiled
before thee. Where I have failed in either for time past, Lord forgive me! that
for time to come I may keep more truly thine, Lord strengthen me! Behold the
desires of my soul are after thee, dear Jesus accept me! let me live espoused
by thy grace, and at last be married to thy glory: to that blessed day dear
Savior bring me, and for it fit me and ever keep me dear Lord Jesus. Amen,
Amen.

A Prayer for Fatherlesse-Children.
THou that art the Widows Judge and Orphans Father, I commend to thy fatherly
care my self, and the Children thou have given me: Lord keep us from the evil
of this world, and bring us to the bliss of a better, I beseech thee.

Holy Father! take my Children to thy care, and teach them thy fear: be thou
Tutor to their souls, and Protector of their lives, that by thy grace and
mercy they may miscarry in neither: let me serve thee in them, and nurse them
up in both for thee.

Assist me with wisdom, and grace, and power to do it, and give them grace in
all duty and good obedience to suffer it: let not my affections be too fiery or
fond, let me not neglect them, nor distrust thee; the love and care which is
just let me give them, and so expect thy blessing upon them. And good Lord,
give it to them! let the Fathers blessing be on them who is dead; let a poor
Mothers blessing be on them who lives, let the blessing of their Friends be on
them even all that pray it for them; but above all, let thy Blessing, which is
above all, be upon them all, I beseech thee: Father of mercies, Helper of the
Fatherless, bless them: Son of God that had little ones in thy arms on
earth, lay thy hands on them and bless them: Holy Spirit, that did appear
in the shape of a Dove, behold their innocence, and bless them. Holy Father,
Son, and Spirit, bless them with thy grace, and bring them to thy glory; and
me with them, I beseech thee; even for thy mercies sake, for thy merits sake,
for thy goodness sake, thou dear Maker, Redeemer, and Sanctifier of us all
now and ever: say Amen to the humble prayers which I put up unto thee, in such
words as thou have taught me to say, Our Father, etc.

Prayer against sudden Death.
IF my repentance be daily, no Death can be sudden to my Soul, O Lord! to make
my Soul therefore surely thine, let me be every day at a certain with
repentance. And because the sums of my sins are vast, and I may forget my
debt and duty, in the daily discharges of my sins, and not repent for all, or
not enough; O therefore give me a fair summons to my last end, that I may die
with a clear soul, and make so good an account as thou may acquit me of
all my sins, for his sake who paid the price of all in his blood; even for the
dear merits of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Prayers for one going to Sea.
1. Prayer, for a Voyage.
SEal thou my Pass, O Lord! and then I shall go safe; yea, do thou according to
thy wonted goodness, go with me, good God! guide me, prosper me, and return
me: O let not my failings follow me, but thy mercy put them from me; and thy
grace in Jesus Christ accept me. And now save me and mine I beseech thee, and
all that by Land or Sea are in any extremity; for his sake who is the Savior
of us all, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

2. Prayer, Gratulatory, after a Voyage.
SAlvation is thine, O Lord! thine therefore be the glory; that the floods have
not swallowed me up, and the Deep shut her mouth upon me!

And now Lord! who in thy great mercy and goodness have been my Savior at
Sea, be my Guide at Land: lead me, and shield me, and bless me, that as I
desire, I may do; and in thy due time return to live and serve thee in the
place and way thou have appointed for me on earth, till I come to the place
prepared in heaven for all that love thee, through the merits of Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

3. Prayer, at return to Sea.
I Do again cast my self into thy arms; dear Father embrace me for thy
mercies sake, hold my life in thy hand till thou have brought me to the Haven
where I would be; and thence conduct me to the home where I should be: there
let me preserve the memory of thy mercies, that thou may continue the
possessions of thy goodness to me and mine, till thou shall please to
translate us from our earthly Tabernacles, to thy everlasting Habitations,
through the merits of Jesus Christ the blessed Purchaser of both; for which
ever fit us, and prepare us by thy grace, O God! Amen, Amen.

A Prayer, after return home from Sea.
O God, that have been with me in my going out, and coming in; my Pilot by
Sea, and Conduct by Land; receive therefore the humble praises of my grateful
soul, most sensible of thy goodness: And still, O Lord! bless me and mine;
and let thy holy Spirit so steare our course in the Sea of this sublunary
world, that we may escape those lusts which drown souls in perdition; and by
the blessed guidance and assistance of thy grace, arrive at last at the Land of
everlasting life, to live, and dwell, and love, and laud, adore, joy in thee,
and enjoy thee for ever, by the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Thanksgiving for deliverance from a Storm.
O Lord! thou have made me to see the great dreads and dangers of the Deep; and
I am alive at this day by thy gracious deliverance: O let this mercy be ever in
my memory! and let me never forget the service which I vowed, and owe unto thee
for that mercy. Make me so mindful of that Passe-over of the floods, that I
may better pass the time of my Pilgrimage in thy fear, till at last I come to
have a happy Passe-over to thy glory, even for his sake who is passed to heaven
before me and for me, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

2. Thanksgiving for deliverance from a Storm. With a holy Meditation against
perils.
O Lord! thy providence is above all perils, thy power above all storms, thy
mercy above all sins! I have seen, I have seen at once thy Greatness and
Goodness, O God! thou wast my Anchor, and I am saved; thou wast my Pilot, and
I am preserved: when no hope but to perish for wants, then I had it; and am
helped from heaven: praised for ever be thou the God of my help. Praised for
ever and every way be the God of my salvation; yea whilst I live will I praise
thee in this manner. For thy mercy, O Lord! thine infinite mercy it is, that I
am preserved and live! Lord, let those dangers never depart from my mind, that
thy deliverance may never go out of my heart, but that I may ever be mindful
and careful of thee, and thy service for it, all the days of my life.

O let me keep with joy the memory of those waves which came over, but went off
my head, as the great passover of my life. And let thy tempest be made a
Temple to me, to call me to pray unto thee and praise thee, the God of my life;
to teach me to fear, obey, and trust and serve thee better every where, whilst
thou shall continue to me those days.

1. Even thy Creatures, how terrible are they, O Lord! all hearts are afraid of
thy tempests, and melt at thy storms: O let me in this glass of their terror
see the dreadful face of thy angried Majesty! at which the depths themselves
do tremble, and the foundations of the world are discovered, even as the blast
of the breath of thy nostrils, O Lord! And let me never presume to exalt my
self against thee, but ever tremble before thy face.

2. At thy word the storms did cease their rage and lie still, O God! if any
tempest shall arise in my passions through my frailty, let it cease at thy
command: let not the Seas obey thee, and my Soul rebel against thee!

3. Thou have presented the horror of a tempest to my eyes and ears, O Lord
keep me that I never feel a tempest in my Conscience! let the raging Sea never
run in my Soul to raise up storms in me, more dreadful than death: And that
I may never be drowned in the depths of despair, Lord keep me from the
overflowing of wickedness. Let not presumptuous sins have any dominion over
me; let the conversation of the wicked never cleave unto me.

4. Thou have in this great extremity of danger manifested to my Soul thy
ready and mighty help for deliverance: even when the waves were about to
overwhelme me, then, even then, O blessed God, did thy goodness save me! O let
this experience of thy merciful power and aid, make me to trust and stay my
Soul upon thee in all distresses and dangers whatsoever shall hereafter befall
me!

5. O let not any temptations of the vanities of the Land drown in me the
memory of thy mercies at Sea! but against all temptings to offend thee, let
this tempest thus arm me: Had I bin in that hour tempted to sin, O God,
would I, durst I then have offended thee? And now that I am by thy mercy
delivered, shall I yield upon any temptation to sin against thee? and break
my great obligation and vow to serve thee?

6. O let those waters which did fright, but not drown me in the deep, be
apprehended as a new Baptism, in which thy hand was pleased at once to
sprinkle, and teach me, that my cheeks are to be wet daily with the brinish
tears of repentance for my sins, and the fresh springs of joy are to flow from
my eyes for the goodness of thy deliverance. Thy waters came over me, but
confusion did not cover me: my face felt the danger, but thou have saved my
head, O Lord my God!

O Lord I beseech thee, do thou thus sanctify these great passages of thy
providence to me; that whilst I live, thou may have from me a better
service; and when I die I may receive from thee a better salvation, even for
Jesus Christ's sake my dear and only Savior. Amen.

Prayer before, or in a Journey.
O Lord, who have set thy Angels to keep us in all our Psalm. 91. 11, Psalm. 94.
5.
ways; charge that Convoy with me, in whose heart they are: forgive me that I
have gone astray from thee, and give me grace to go no more astray; and be not
extreme to mark all errors and wanderings Ps. 130. 3.
from thee (who then, O Lord, shall be preserved on earth, or saved in heaven?)
let thy holy Spirit guide me this day and ever in the ways which please thee;
and thy blessed protection be over me, and all with me, for his sake who is the
Way, the Truth, and the Life, even for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Prayer (Gratulatory) after a Journey.
LOrd, thou have been with me in my Journey; and (as I prayed) I have passed
the perils of the way, by the conduct of thy providence; and where I would be,
I am by the favor of thy conduct: blessed be thy holy name, O Lord, for all
thy goodness!

How many have miscarried, and do daily many ways? and even so might I have
done, had it not been for thy favor; Blessed be thy name for it; yea, for all
the preservations of my life, and the mercy to which I owe those preservations;
Blessed for ever be thy holy name.

And still, O Lord! so magnify thy mercy in my protection on earth, that thou
may ever be blessed of me, till I am blessed with thee in Heaven; through
the merits of him, who by his blood bought that blessedness for us, and in our
flesh sits at the right hand to save us, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Prayers for a Soldier in a just War.
1. Morning Prayer, for one in War.
O LORD! in days of blood Read Psalm. 140.
there be many hours of Death, (what minute may not be that hour?) O let me
then think of mine! think of it, and prepare for it!

Thy grace give me so to do this day, and thy mercy for what has been misdone
before it; that when my life shall end on earth, it may begin where it shall
never have an end: Mean while, let me live to do thee more honor, (if it may
stand with thy pleasure) and see a happy peace to be the purchase of this
war, that I may so live, to my Prince, Nation, Church, Religion, me, mine,
every way happy. And do thou therefore guide my Soul this day, and guard my
life from all evil and danger, for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose words I
pray it, saying, Our Father, etc.

2. Evening Prayer, for one in War.
LOrd! who have been my shield this Read Psalm. 91.
day, be my watch this night; that I may be safe from the swords and hands of
all Enemies, and by the guard of thy goodness preserved to bless and serve
thee the next day; for, and in thy mercy, through the merits of Jesus Christ,
in whose words I pray it, saying, Our Father, etc.

3. Prayer, before Bataile.
O Thou shield of those that put Read Psalm. 143. 21, and 23.
their trust in thee! be his shield, whose hope is only in thee, and in thy
mercy only: Mercy Lord grant me for all my sins past, and pardon me! Mercy
grant me in my present perils, and preserve me! Mercy grant me good God in my
attempts this day, and prosper me.

O blessed Captain of my salvation, dear Jesus, who did shed thy blood for
me, shield me now that am to fight for thee, and all engaged with me: Have
mercy on us all, dear Jesus, and give us victory. Amen, Amen.

Our Father, etc.

4. Thanksgiving after Fight.
LOrd! that have been the shield of Ps. 28. 30. 124. 128. After Victory, 26. 98.
thy Servant, I give thee the glory of thy goodness: And still Lord, in all
dangers be my shield, that I may give thee yet more glory; for that thou have
given me to see many fall, and my self stand: that thou have showed me this
day many wounded, and kept me safe: Glory be to thee O Lord, for thy mercy for
ever, by Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

5. Prayer for one wounded in War.
O Lord! thou woundest and healest, 1 Samuel 2. 6.
thou killest and thou make alive! I do beseech thee therefore to heal him
in thy mercy, who is not wounded without thy providence.

Lord Jesu! thou good and great Physician of wounded bodies and souls; who
never failest to cure whom thou please to recover: take him to thy care who
is wounded in thy cause: and even for thy tender mercies sake I beseech thee,
heal his Soul of his sins, and his Body of his wounds.

O thou that thy self was wounded, and sheddest thy blood for him, and us all;
in this bleeding condition of his, let thy blood be his cordial; and thy
wounds, his remedies. And thou Lord of life, who on earth with thy Word made
the sick and wounded to recover; yea, the dead to live: say unto him from
Heaven, Live and Recover, that he may serve thee more, and better on Earth. And
now and ever fit and prepare him with thy grace, that when he dies, he may live
and reign with thee, in Heaven: through the blessed merits and mediation, who
wast wounded and slain, to heal and save us all; O Jesus Christ, our Lord,
our life, and only hope, and succor and Savior, in life and death. Amen.

Prayers for the Sick.
1. A Confession and Prayer for mercy and Deliverance.
O Lord! I do humbly confess to the glory of thy justice, that the sickness
which I suffer, is the fruit of my sin; the Root of Mankind was poisoned with
it, and I am a branch of it; yea, and am much and many ways polluted by it,
and so am (like my Root) a poisoned branch.

I am therefore a Child of Death, Romans 5. 12.
and Heir of the Grave (the issue of his sin) and sickness is my portion as I
am his Child.

But Lord! I am the seed of a second Adam, look at me not as I am in the
first, but thy Christ; a graft of that Isaiah.
holy stock, the root of Jesse, the branch of righteousness, the Holy One of
God; for his precious merits sake, forgive me my sin, and have mercy on me in
my sickness: And, O dear Jesus, Joh. 5. 14.
that did take flesh and blood for me, pity me poor flesh and blood groaning
before thee; comfort me, and succor me, help me and heal me, even by the
merits of thy precious blood, I beseech thee. Amen, Amen.

Prayer for Patience in Sickness.
I Am thy Prisoner, O Lord! chained by infirmity to a bed of pain; but let me
not fret, even because I am thine: Thine, whose chain I cannot break! Thine,
who do draw me to thee, by this chain! Thine, who for my sin, do justly
bind me! Thine, who know when it is best to loose me! Thine, who see what
lies upon me! Thine, who hear every groan within me! Thine, who for my
sins might^st bind me in everlasting chains, and sendest this sickness to
save me!

O Lord! since I am so many ways thine, let me submit to thy chain, and lie
(as thy prisoner, so) thy Patient before thee: and let thy pity in thy good
time release me, and charge not the errors of my infirmity upon me, for Jesus
Christ his sake. Amen.

A Thanksgiving for Recovery of Sickness.
WHat shall I render unto the Psalm. 116.
Lord for all his benefits done to me? the snares of death compassed me, and
the pains of Hell took hold upon me: I found woe and misery, then called I on
the name of the Lord, and he heard me; yea, thou Lord wast he that helped me!
Thou art my God, and I will praise thee: It was not Man, it was thou that healed
me: All Physicians are of no value, all Medicines vain without thee: Thy
Mercy, O Lord, was my Balm, and I will magnify it: Thou wast my Physician,
and I will praise thee: My heart in all extremity shall therefore trust in
thee: My lips shall speak of thy praise, and my life honor thee.

I will not be so wretched as to offend thee with the healthinesse thou have
given me; with the life anew bestowed on me. O Lord! keep that wretchedness
for ever from me, thy grace therefore ever give me to have in all my ways,
this mercy, and thy glory before me, even so be it I beseech thee, O Lord, for
Jesus Christ his sake. Amen, Amen.

Prayer against the Plague.
O Lord! Pestilence is thy Arrow, and my sins have made me thy mark; nor
can thou miss me in thy justice: But spare me, Lord spare me in thy mercy!
Though I deserve the stroke for my self, spare me for my Saviors sake; let
his innocence be my shield, and his blood my antidote: (O Lord, I have, I wish
no other antidote or shield!) By the sovereign and all-saving merits of his I
beseech thee, pardon my sin, and spare my life.

Spare my soul, that it may better serve thee: spare my body that it may
better serve my soul: spare my heart, that I may keep it more carefully for
thee: spare my blood, that my spirits may be more active to serve thee.

And as I pray Pestilence from my body, so I beseech thee keep it from my
soul. Preserve me from the house, and shield me from the chair of pestilence.
As from infected Bodies, so from Spirits, which breath errors and vices, pests
and plagues of souls: From all mutual diseases defend me, Body and Soul; but
from those fearful ones, above all, I beseech thee. And all those thou have
made near and dear unto me, dear Savior do it for thy mercies sake. Amen.

Prayer for one infected with the Plague.
I Am struck, O God, and by thy hand! I beseech thee let me bleed in thy Arms;
in thy Arms of mercy, let me depart if I must die; but Lord, embrace me with
thy favor, that I may live! live out this danger, and see thy deliverance;
outlive my sins, and do thee more service. Mean while, mercy, Lord, for
Jesus his sake; mercy to thy poor Servant: pardon to my sin, comfort to my
spirit, acceptance to my repentance, strength to my faith, life to my charity,
salvation to my soul; that whether I live, or die, I may be thine, O Lord! who
to redeem and save me, did both live, and die: in virtue of thy blood, that
sole and sovereign antidote and sanctuary of bleeding Sinners, thy dear and
precious blood, let my soul live, if my body die: but (if thy blessed will)
both live, to praise thy goodness to both. Lord cast my sins behind thy back,
and hold me in thy Arms. Into thy Arms of mercy I cast my self (Body and
Soul) my only hope, and refuge, and rock of my salvation, is in thy blessed
merits, and blood dear Jesus! take me, and keep me in thy Arms, now and ever,
and especially in my last hour and agony, have mercy on me I beseech thee.
Amen, Amen.

Thanksgiving for one recovered of the Plague.
THou have smitten, and thou have healed me, O my God! the blow was grievous,
thy help is greater: the blow was just, thy help more gracious: my sins
deserved death, thy mercy has spared my life. O Lord, with an humble,
thankful soul, I do acknowledge (as ever, so now especially) from thy good
hand my present life and health. And now I humbly beseech thee that my heart
may smite me that I have ever rebelled against so good a Majesty; and thy
grace keep me, that I never more lift up my hand against so great a goodness.
O let not the pestilence go from my body, to my soul! let not Satan and
corruption poison and persuade my spirit, to sit in the chair or stay in the
house of pestilence: Let not others be infected with sin by me, nor me by
them, lest thou be more provoked; and the plague gone, return in a greater
judgment. My God, my help, my health, my hope, my life and comfort, be thy Name
ever blessed that have spared my soul and life: O let it be no more
dishonored by me! that keeping from the infection of an evil world, I may
live in the bliss of a better; where is neither sin nor sickness to infect
soul or body, but perfect health, strength, grace, and glory in thee and with
thee to all eternity: O Jesus, my only refuge, and the horn of my salvation!
So be it, Amen, Amen,

Prayer for one at the Hour of Death, to be said by the Sick; or some for him,
altering the Person.
1. Prayer of one at the point of Death.
GOd the Father, his mercies be about me! God the Son, his merits be upon me!
God the Holy Ghost, his comforts be within me! Holy Trinity, preserve,
strengthen and support me; that my Death may be precious in the sight of the
Lord, and my Soul live with thee to all eternity. Amen, Amen.

2. Prayer for one at the point of Death.
FAther of mercies, let thy love be to him! Savior of the world, let thy
merits be on him! Comforter of departing Souls, let thy peace be in him!
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, defend a Child of thy Family: save a Lamb of
thy Flock, keep a member of thy Church; O thou One and only Lord God of
Heaven, command thy holy Angels to tender him, and forbid evil ones to trouble
him! Deliver his soul, discharge his sin, seal his pardon, heavenly Father,
by thy Holy Spirit in the blood of Jesus. Amen, Amen.

3. Prayer for one at the point of Death.
LOrd Jesus! Succor this Dying Soul, make passage for him by death, to a
better life; purge his sins in thy Blood; and prepare his Soul by thy Spirit,
and receive it to the glory of thy Father: Jesus, that did so deerly purchase
it, make haste to receive it, from the pangs of present, and pains of
everlasting death: Good Lord deliver it, deliver it for thy mercies sake. Amen,
Amen.

Thanksgiving after Death, for one Departed.
Say this Scripture, Psalm. 116. 7, 15. Return unto thy rest, o my Soul! for
the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee.

Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the Death of the Saints.

Apoc. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord: even so says the
Spirit, that they rest from their labors. Then Pray thus,

THou that have sent for this Soul, out of the Prison of his Body, to come to
the Palace of thy Bliss, receive our praises O Lord, for his happy
deliverance, from pangs to joys, from Trials to Triumphs, from Earth to
Heaven: O Lord, we beseech thee, admit our humble lauds to attend him into thy
presence, and with them let our prayers enter before thee; that as he, so we in
thy good time, may come and present our Halleluja's with our selves, in thy
sight. And mean time, lead a godly life, to have a blessed death.

Lord, let us not forsake thee now, that thou may not leave us then! in that
last and great hour (upon which follows an Eternity of weal, or woe) Lord
have mercy on us and do not forsake us, and therefore let us have the fear of
it and thee, now and ever before us; that as we believed our Brother departed,
is, we may be blessed in and by our death: grant we may dear Jesus. Amen, Amen.

A general Thanksgiving for Gods mercies.
O Thou high Majesty of Heaven! how have thou filled me with the favors of
thy bounty? how great have thou been in thy goodness and mercy? how gracious
in thy providence to me? thou have poured the blessings of heaven and earth
upon my head. Thou have laden me with thy gifts bestowed upon me, in Creating,
Redeeming, and in Preserving me.

In my Creation, thou gave me thine Image, and made me more noble than all
the Creatures of the earth. In my Redemption, thou gav'st me thy Son, and
made me more glorious than the Angels of Heaven. In my Baptism, and
Regeneration, thou gave me thy Spirit, and have made me more happy than
millions of men in the world.

Thou have given thy self to me, Lord! what could thou do more for me?
thrice blessed, yea for ever be thy glorious Name, for thine infinite grace,
mercy, and goodness to me.

And in thy providence for this life, how abundantly have thou blessed me! in
[health, wealth, body, mind, etc. and] many and many mercies, vouchsafed me. In
my weakness, thou have strengthened me: in my dangers, thou have delivered me:
in my distresses, thou have comforted me: in my prayers, thou have heard me: in
thy judgments, thou have spared me, to this day, preserving my life, and making
it many ways joyful to me.

And not for any good in me, O Lord, have thou been thus gracious toward me!
My ills on earth has been many, my ingratitudes great against thee. For them
thou might for ever banish me from heaven, and with my sins cast me into
hell, amongst those that offend thee: for thy own goodness, and great Names
sake, have thou been thus bountiful and merciful to me: O fill my heart with
thy love, that my mouth may pour ou^ praises to thee! Ravish my soul with thy
goodness, that my heart may ever love thee: Fill my life with thy fear, that
as my lips, my thoughts and deeds, may ever honor thee: let me not be so
wretched, as to forget thy mercy; so wicked, as to abuse thy blessings: let all
that I am, and have, serve thee, mind, body, state, health, friends, none be
abused to vanity in any way of sin to reproach thee; but all made to extol my
Makers praises, and my Redeemers glory.

Since I owe my self by so many bonds of blessings to thee (yea thousand lives
and souls, had I so many to serve thee) let me not deny the service of one
poor soul and body unto thee: O blessed Maker and Redeemer, and Preserver of
both! I have no more to give thee, my self therefore made of both, I present
unto thee: I give thee my self on earth, O Lord accept me, and receive me to
thy self in heaven! where, with thy Angels I shall give thee perfect praises,
singing Hallelujahs day and night, giving everlasting lauds unto thee; my great
Maker, my dear Redeemer, my holy Comforter, my good Preserver; O God, Father,
Son, and holy Ghost! O blessed and adored Trinity! to thee, and to thy goodness
alone; for what I am, and have, and hope of bliss, in this or a better world,
be all honor, praise, thanksgiving and glory for ever and ever. Amen, Amen.

A Gratulatory Commemoration of Gods mercies and deliverances.
REceive the sacrifice of my thankful soul, O Lord, for all thy mercies Here
think of particular*
and merciful deliverances of me and mine, from diseases and dangers; by Land,
or Water; in War, or Peace; of old, or late; for soul, or body.

O! what great dangers have thou showed me, and them, and yet have delivered us
from all our fears! they live, and I live, and all live; and why? but to
praise thee the God of our salvation and life: thou art my God, and I will
praise thee: thou art my God, and I will worship thee; yea, whilst I live, will
I magnify thee on this manner. And, O give me grace to give thee more, and
better glory. Glory from my lips, and glory from my life! Glory in my mind, by
a just sense and Meditation of thy mercy. And glory from my heart, in a true
love and joy of thy goodness: till thou do give me thy glory in heaven, Lord
let me ever give thee this glory on earth! even so Lord for all thy benefits
and blessings from any ill, or of any good, to me or any more nearly mine from
the hour of my birth to this day of my life, glory be to thee now and ever by
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Thanksgiving for a preserved [Friend] or others formerly Prayed for.
MY Heart is full of thy goodness O God! thou have delivered thy Servant from
his dangers, and me from my fears: O, what shall I render unto the Lord for all
his benefits to me! O my God! I give thee a thankful heart, and beseech thee
to give me a thankful life! Grace so to live, that my deeds as well as words,
may speak me thankful! O let me not pay thee with neglects for thy favors,
lest thou return me plagues for thy mercies! let me have care to serve thee in
and for thy goodness, that I may still rejoice in and for thy salvation; of
him, and me, and all who are more dearly mine, even so be it for Jesus Christ
his sake. Amen.

Prayers for every day in the Week.
SUNDAY. A Prayer against the flesh.
O Lord! deliver me from my self, my sinful, sensual, and carnal self;
ready to join with my foes, to ruin my soul by yiedling it up to the
temptations of sin. Let me watch it as my most mortal enemy, without which
all the Devils in hell cannot force, nor all the powers on earth fasten a sin
upon me! and yet a foe so inbred and Natural to me, as will lodge in me
whilst I live, and never leave me! Make me see what cause I have to keep a
strict and continual watch, and pray thy aid, when the Devil and the World
without beset me, and lead on Armies of Temptations against me; and the flesh
within is false and ever ready to betray me, and let them in upon me! From such
Enemies and Traitors, Lord deliver me! and as I love the eternal salvation of
my soul, let me not sleep in security, that have to do with such Enemies!

And since the flesh is my foe, let me not cherish it, and satisfy it, and
provide for it, and entertain it as a friend: but according to thy will and
the necessity of my soul, let me not spare to crucify and kill it as my
Enemy: which will torture me if I be not crucified, and kill me if I do not
kill it. And grant me Good God, the power of thy Spirit, to do thy will in
mortifying of the flesh, to the saving of my soul!

Let my life be a continual fight against the corruptions of my flesh, and
succor me with wisdom and grace to maintain that fight; let me watch, and
fast, and use all due means to beat down my body, if that give it strength.
Let me meditate and hear, and read, and pray, and weep, in all good ways
seeking to bear up my soul, to beat down that sinful body, and bring it to
death.

And because, though now beaten down, a new Temptation will raise it up; and
struck dead, it will revive again. Hasten my soul O Lord, out of these
endless Wars, where I may keep the triumphs of an eternal peace from earth
to heaven, and strengthen my soul to get those daily victories over my lusts,
that they bring me to those triumphs! O Christ, that had flesh and no
corruption, pity me that have both! Succor my double frailty, thou that
know the infirmity of the flesh! Assist me with thy holy Spirit, to stand:
Recover me when I fall, in these holy fights. Relieve my wants, forgive my
weakness^s close up my wounds by thy blood! Blessed Savior, the Captain of my
Salvation, who did fight and conquer all my foes, and now sit on thy
Throne in triumph in heaven; make me so to fight, that I may conquer on earth;
and having subdued the flesh, may sit with thee on the Throne. From their shame
keep me, that prefer the Subject before the Sovereign, Flesh before the
Spirit! From their loss keep me, that prefer a Toy to a Crown, a Lust to a
Kingdom! From their Cowardice keep me, that dare not fight for a Crown, but
yield their souls up to lust! From their woe ever keep me, that buy delights
with their death, for a little life after the flesh, dying eternally bodies and
souls! From such folly and misery, dear Jesus deliver me! Amen! Amen!

MONDAY. A Prayer against the Devil.
O Lord! how shall my poor soul stand against Temptation, it thou do not
assist me, who have as many Ghostly Enemies as Devils to tempt me; malicious,
crafty, busy, and mighty, all of them hating my soul to death, watching my
weaknesses, and continually seeking occasion to devour me! O my God without thy
strength I cannot stand, and by thy strength I shall not fall. For thou O God
art above the Devil, of more goodness, wisdom, care, and power to save, then
he is able to destroy. Thou can send more succors to me, then he can bring
forces against me; more holy Angels, then he has wicked Spirits; Lord give me
that strength! Lord send me those succors! Put upon me the armor of light, to
fight with the Rulers of darkness! Let the Helmet of hope be on my head, and
the brestplate of faith and love on my heart, that I be not mortally wounded in
the fight! In my extremity send thy Angels to succor me! And let thy holy
Spirit be my Leader, that the evil one may not be my Conqueror.

Lord Jesus that know what it was to be tempted, and did overcome the
Tempter for me, relieve my frailty when I am tempted, and suffer not Satan to
overcome me! And let me be sober and watch and pray that I enter not into
Temptation, that thou may relieve me! O Lord! How shall I not fall into the
hand of Hell, if I throw my self into Temptation! From such presumptions, O
Christ preserve me! How many souls have been left and lost in those bold
adventures of their strength, make me sadly to consider, that such a daring
Spirit may never possess me! Let me remember with fear and trembling, what
great Saints have fallen, that I may with an humble and holy care and fear,
seek for thy strength to stand, and being upheld by thy right hand, may never
fall. But let me not cast my self out of thine, into Satan's hand; for if thou
Lord do not uphold, and he pull down, how shall I stand? And let me keep my
ways, that I cast not my self out; for thou will not protect me but in thy
ways! And let me not run my self into temptation, for that is out of my
ways, and thy protection. Thou great Shepherd of the sheep, keep me, a poor
Lamb of thy fold! Thou Lion of the Tribe of Juda that have prevailed, save me
from the roaring Lion that he may never prevail! And in and from all his
Temptations deliver me in thy mercy, that he may not devour my soul for all
his roaring. Rescue me, thou that did redeem me; Preserve me, thou that
did create me, my Lord and my God, my strength and hope, dear Jesus! Amen.

TUESDAY. A Prayer against the World.
O Lord! The World is a strong Enemy to conquer, (The great Conquerors of the
powers, were Captives to the vanities of the World) yet by thy strength it may
be conquered, for thou art greater then he that is the world: Thou did O
Savior, conquer it for me; and by thy aid I may conquer it for my self. And
by thy will I must conquer it with thee on earth, if I will triumph with thee
in Heaven; O then, let me resolutely set and fit my self for the conquest of
the world! And to the forces of reason, Lord give me the powers of grace, by
which I may make a conquest.

This world is but for a time, and will end at last, and how soon to me, thou
Lord only know: and did it endure, what comfort or contentment can my
immortal soul receive in any, or all the good of the world? O let me not lose
my eternal inheritance in the world to come, for a poor portion in this
present world! Thou Lord have made me in it, but me for thy self, and it for
me. O then, let me never be of it, let my Spirit always be above it! Let me
not make my Servant my Sovereign good. Assist me by thy grace, that I may not,
O God! And because my senses are so natural and near unto me, and the world
takes my soul captive, by the power of my senses; O let me watch those gates
against the entries of Temptations! and look well to my sense, that I lose not
my soul. That I do not, Lord keep me from all evil, from the men, and from
the things of the world! From Companies and Counsels, and examples of the ill,
set on by the Devil, to woo for the world. Lord keep me as so many foes and
fiends to my soul, and let me rather suffer them as my sorrows, then take
solace in such men! From the Vanities of the world that they do not allure me,
and the miseries of it, that they may not deject me; The great powers by which
the world assaults me, defend me O Lord, that they do not overcome me, and let
me look well to my soul, because I am never free from such assaults! From the
Vanities of Riches, Honors, Pleasures, the prevailing goods of the world (the
Heaven she brings;) And from the miseries of wants, scorns, ignominies,
injuries, tortures, the powerful ills of the world (the Hell she has;) Lord
keep me, that they lead not my soul into the Captivity of sin, lest I feel a
worser Hell, and lose a better Heaven! Let me not lose thy favor for the
smiles, nor incur thy displeasure for the frowns of this world. Let neither
her Sorceries bewitch me to ill, nor her Tyrannies fright me from good. Let my
love and fear be both on thee, and the good and ill, not of this, but another
life! On that be my heart, on this my foot! Let me love and value and use this
world, only as it may help me to that! Not for the Throne of my Spirit, but
the footstool of my soul. By whose good my body may be better enabled to
serve my Spirit, and both to serve Thee, and come to the good of a better
world! For such a Conquest, Lord strengthen me, and to these Triumphs above
bring me, even for his sake, who has overcome the flesh, the Devil, and the
World for me, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

WEDNESDAY. A Prayer against sudden Death.
O Thou great Judge of the world, I am a child of death by the sentence of the
Law for Adams sin, and have deserved it at the hands of thy Justice for my
own; yet in thy mercy thou have not executed that sentence upon me, but to
this day have continued my life. Yea, most merciful God, when the fears and
snares of Death and Hell took hold on me, and my provocations were great
against thee; in those great distresses I called upon thee, and thou did
hear me and deliver me!

Lord! make me ever thankful for thy goodness, and take not away thy loving
kindness from me, though since I have not walked worthy of thy mercy. Save my
soul from the sins that trouble me! Save my body from the sicknesses that
fear me! And save my life from all ill accidents and disasters that may befall
me! If thou speak the word O Lord, I shall be safe, body and soul, and no ill
can touch me; Good Lord, speak that word, and save me? Pardon my sins that
they do not destroy me, and lengthen my days that I may better serve thee.
For a sudden death by a present repentance, and good life, Lord ever prepare
me. And from a sudden death, by thy good providence deliver me. That I may have
time with more comfort and contentment, and setlement of mind, to yield up my
life and soul unto thee.

Dear Savior hear me, that sheddest thy blood to save me, and sit in
Heaven, to preserve me! For my last hour fit me. From sudden surprizall of it,
keep me. To it, and in it, ever save me; and by thy grace and holy merits make
it a happy hour unto me, that I may then die in thy arms, and at the day of
Judgment rise and stand joyful before thee. Lord Jesus for thy mercies sake
grant all this to me. Amen! Amen!

THURSDAY. A Prayer against Hypocrisy.
O Lord! Make me abhor to be profane, and fear to be an Hypocrite! If I be
a notorious sinner, the world will condemn me; and if a close offender, Thou will not justify me: Let me therefore be a Saint in sincerity, that God and
man may approve and bless me!

O Lord God of truth that searchest the heart, what will it avail me to have
the world accquit me, when my conscience shall be a thousand witnesses against
me, and Thy self more then ten thousand consciences to condemn me! Keep me
therefore from the blot and folly of Hypocrisy.

And since Hypocrites are the firstborne of the damned, let me have no part in
that sin, that I may have no portion with such sinners! Let me be the same
wheresoever I am, in the Closet and Church, in secret and public, in the dark
and day; and let me be always what I should be, studying ever to approve my
heart and ways before thee, that thou who see in secret, may reward me
openly. O let me set Thee every where before my eyes, and my self before
thine; and accordingly walk uprightly before thee, till I come to rest
eternally with thee!

O Lord, since thou requirest no more, to have thy favor on Earth and glory in
Heaven, but a heart true unto thee, and do pardon and pass by many
infirmities, where thou see such a heart; Let me not give thee less, then a
sincerity in thy service. God of Truth, give me a single heart to serve thee,
and accept it from me: and a Monster of a double heart let Satan never make me.
From Hypocrisy and lies of life, Lord deliver me! Thou that had no gaul in
thy heart, nor guile in thy mouth, Blessed Son and Truth of God, let me be
Thine in truth sweet Jesus. Amen!

FRIDAY. Prayer against Inconstancy in good.
O Lord! Thou art immutable what thou art, let me be unchangeable what I should
be! never ceasing to be thy good Child and Servant, who ever continuest to be
my good Father and Lord!

O Lord! There is not one moment, in which I can be or live without thy
goodness, and shall there be many days wherein thou art without my service?
The glory with which thou rewardest it, is to all eternity, and shall the
duties of it fail and fall short of constancy? O my God! had I the age of
Angels to live, I owe the service of all that life unto thee; and now that I
have but a span of time, shall I keep away a great part of that from thee? O
Lord, let me not so much forget thee and my self, as to do thus by thee!

And should I so far forget my duty, let me remember my necessity. It is
constancy gets the Crown to thy service, and shall I fall off from it, and
lose my Crown? O Lord! In what a fearful condition would my soul be, if
death should seize me when I am fallen off, and take me away in that time of sin?
and have I any assurance this hour, the next not to see death? And were I sure
of life and time, should I so live, and divide it, best years to the devil,
and worst to my God? Months to vanity, and minute to piety? Day and night look
to this world, and not spare an hour for a better? Lord! Let not the Devil
and the World divide my time with thee, lest not giving thee all, thou take
none from me; or giving thee the least share, thou throwest it back upon me.

Fix my heart on thy fear, that no temptation of Devil or man may remove me;
Bind my soul with such resolutions to thee, that no strength of the flesh may
loose me. Since I cannot for my bodies frailty, serve thee as an Angel without
intermission, continually; let me as a Saint, without failing, constantly be
devoted to thee; not as a retainer, but daily servant attending upon thee.
Keeping carefully my hours of devotion, and consecrating all my days unto
thee, in a conscionable and constant endeavor in all places and things, and at
all times to shun all evil, and do what may please thee. O thou that art
without shadow of change, ever the same; settle my fickle soul in thy fear,
and establish thy holy Spirit in me, that I may serve thee on earth with
constancy, and in heaven to all eternity! By the grace and merits of him who
finished the work of Eternal Redemption for me, living and dying, to save me,
and now sits at thy right hand to uphold and keep me, Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

SATURDAY. Prayer against impenitence in ill.
LOrd keep me from the fearful sin and judgment of an impenitent heart:
Since repentance for sin is the only remedy appointed to save me, let me not
neglect it lest I die for it irrecoverably.

O Lord what shall become of my guilty soul, if thou do not pardon me? And
how should I hope thy pardon, if I go on to provoke thee? Give me therefore a
sorrow for my sins past, wherein I have offended thee, and if I fall by
frailty into sin, let me not lie without remorse, but rise by repentance, that
I may return again into favor with thee.

O my God, if now I will not, I shall repent in Hell, if not on Earth: if not
with timely tears in hope, in fires with everlasting horror. O let me weep
for a time, that I may not wail them for ever! Let me mourn for them unto
comfort; rather then rejoice into confusion.

From a heart hardened in sin, and a conscience seared with guilt, Lord keep me
as from the threshold of hell. And from continuance and custom in sin, keep
me, that I grow not senseless of it, and seared. And from multiplying, and
reiterating the acts of sin, keep me that I get not a custom. If I sin, let my
heart smite me, that thy hand of vengeance may not touch me.

And for that hardness and habit of ill which I have already got by any acts
of sin, Dear Savior help me, and heal me. Melt my heart in the fire of thy
love, to a tenderness of offending thee: and (O blessed scapegoat Levi^ 16.
21. Goats blood melts Adamant, Such is an hard heart, Zach. 7. 12.
) mollify my hardness by the virtue of thy blood, that I may not stand
stubborn against thee. Bow me with thy mercies, break me with thy judgments,
wound me with thy Word, move me with thy Spirit, and by all means mould me and
make my heart of that temper, that the least touch of sin may trouble me, that
I may not obstinately go on in a course of Rebellion against thee. Merciful
Father, let all thy crosses come rather upon me, then this curse befall me.
That I may rather grieve and groan with hope on earth, then wail and houle in
hell without remedy. A heart of flesh for stone, Lord give me, let thy holy
Spirit work and keep it in me. Do it dear Savior for me, I beseech the, in
thy mercy. Amen, Amen.

Animadversion to the Devout Reader touching these Services.
THe Author in these Services tenders thee some things new, and nothing (he
hopes) naught. There are extant, Books of Prayers, and Meditations, and
Directions apart, and those who join some of these together; but all (as in
his way) he knows none.

He conceives that the Soul engaged in a particular duty, will be much assisted
by so many helps at hand, and come off better with the Service. Vicissitudes
of Devotions (like changes of clothes) as they please the mind, because they
clog less; so they will advance her piety the more, when all (though they go
several ways) meet in one study, and care to work her Spiritual preferment.

Thy Spirit will not be less devoted to thy Prayers, for having breathed it in
holy Scriptures: Nor will thou take in that Holy air with less advantage to
thy Souls health, for going to it from thy Prayers: Nor will those Heavenly
refreshments profit or last less, for plying the Soul (at present) well-devoted
with proper and pious Meditations, and Instructions set and suteing to her
particular purposes. This will be as a Word in due season, fit, and good; and
serve as a little Sermon to nourish Holy Spirit so Divinely begot, which else
may starve before it can come to a greater; and perhaps, not have her
particular state, and case, much reached, and relieved neither, if she come.

The Closet, (the good man's Daily Sanctuary always Ezekiel. 11 16.
, and in persecution often his only Church) as it never wants Gods Spiritual
Altar, (a Devout heart) nor his Garden, (Gods Holy Book) in it; nor Gods Holy
Service (an Holy Prayer Book) for it: By this, shall have a little Pulpit too.
Necessary for those who have no other, and profitable for those who may want a
better.

And surely, the Soul which keeps her daily walks betwixt Gods Altar and
Garden (her Prayers, and his Scriptures) must needs grow, and go on in
Godliness. And faster, and firmer both for hearing every day a Sermon, when
Her self is the Preacher, Her state the Text, and God and Conscience the
Auditory.

Reader, He that is not for a Pulpit in the Chamber, would have this in thy
Closet, and thinks he shall do God and thee good Service in these
devote-lesse times, to furnish thy Closet with such a Pulpit. His Aim thou
see, His pattern thou may easily aim at, especially if a Child of that
Mother, whose wisdom taught him such Prayers; Though some things in the
Services be new, there are no novelties in them; but for thy singular use
compiled, and made a Handful of little Homilies and Prayers.

Rules for every Sundays Devotion.
Sunday-morning.
When you awake, lift up your heart, and say,

O Sun of Righteousness, which this day did rise for me, shine now, and ever,
with thy Grace, and Mercy upon me! Amen.

When you are up, kneel, and say this Prayer.

O Lord, Holiness becomes thy House; and Dutifulness becomes me to go to thy
Courts, and wait upon Thee: And this is the great day of thy Service. Thou that
have given me to see the light of this day, make me careful to do the duty of
it, timely to Present my self unto Thee; and reverently to behave my self
before Thee, that I may come with fruit, and favor from thee, for Jesus Christ
His sake. Amen.

Before you go to Church, say (if you have time) the Sunday-Service following:
Omit not to say the Collect for it, howsoever in the Afternoon say the
Evening-Service.

Sunday-night.
When you go to Bed, kneel, and say,

O Sun of Righteousness, keep me from utter darkness, let me so sleep in thy
Peace, that I may be every ready to arise, and meet thee in thy Glory. Amen,
Amen.

Seven Services, for the 1st. Week.
Services set to the Days of the Week, for four several Weeks.
Sunday-service. Of the joys of Heaven.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 36. 84. Lesson, Isa. 64. Mat. 5. to 13. or Mat. 17. to
14.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 15. and 16. Lesson, Isaiah 35. Apoc. 21.


Then this following Collect. After it, the Daily Prayers.

Sunday Collect, or Prayer, for the joys of Heaven.
Dear Savior! who have purchased lost Heaven for me by thy blood, and now
possessest it for me in my flesh; possess my soul, I beseech thee, with thy
holy Spirit; that my conversation now may be heavenly on earth, and my
habitation hereafter, happy in heaven.

O let me not for the perishing pleasures of this vain world, lose an eternity
of blessed joys in thy presence and Kingdom! Preserve me to it, (dear
Redeemer) who have prepared it for me, even for thy mercies sake, O Lord. Amen.

Daily Prayers.
1. Meditation, of the joys of Heaven.
WHat do I on earth, when God is in Heaven? Why are my Heart and Body in two
several worlds? And where but with Him, and on Him should be my Heart? Lord!
draw to thee what is made for thee; till Body can come, let my Spirit be with
thee; till my Soul depart from my Body, to dwell for ever with thee, let
Devotion carry my thoughts out of my Soul, and daily visit thee.

My help, my hope, my solace, my salvation; Father of my Spirit, Husband of my
Soul, Sovereign of my welfare, Author of my nature, End of my essence, Bliss
of my being, Satisfaction of my desires, Rest of my thoughts, Perfection of my
powers! my life is a banishment, imprisonment, punishment on earth, if thou be
in heaven! shun I never so much, I shall meet with nothing but sin and
misery; seek I never so much, I shall not find any thing of bliss below: had
I whole lands of wealth, with hills of honor upon them, and rivers of pleasure
about those, all were not a peble, a pile, a drop to my blessedness: my
avaritious, ambitious, voluptuous desires, are left dry on earth, only filled
and drowned in the paradise, crown, and kingdom of heaven: the ocean of
bliss runs about the good that is infinite, high, above change, great without
measure, full without want, long beyond time! away then my Soul, from thy
banishment, bondage, woe, and miserable vanity, to thy home, freedom, joy,
and true felicity; Dove of grace fly to the windows of glory; mount to those
Louvers on high, where the ravenous Bird of hell can neither seize, or fright
thee; nor the beasts of the earth devour, or disquiet thee.

Heaven on Earth is a monstrous confusion; if thou vainly seek it there, thou
may as soon find it in Hell (God is not in that heaven!) only seek, and
solace thy self in the ways of God; that is heaven on earth indeed: both a
glimpse of the glory above, and a light to find heaven where it is, in heaven!
and from the goods of the world, raise up thy thoughts to a better bliss. Say,
if so well on earth, how much better in heaven: so let it be not thy myrrour of
bliss but perspective; Not thy chair, but footstool, to take a better sight
and flight, to thy Throne: so thou shall at once walk on earth, and go to
heaven; yea, thou shall divide thy self betwixt both; Body to earth, and
Soul to heaven. And God will in that day blessedly unite, what thou do
devoutly divide; and keep with him in heaven for ever, both Body and Soul.

2. Meditation:
see Soliloquie, p.

Monday-Service. Of the Miseries of this World.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 120. 129. 137. Lesson, Genesis 47. or Job 14. Luke 21. or
Act. 20.
Evening Prayer. Ps. 39. 42. or 84. 102. Lesson. Lam. 3. Romans 7.


Then after this following Collect, the Daily Prayers.

Monday Collect, touching the Miseries of Earth.
O Lord! with us, is misery; with thee, is mercy! on earth; all ill; in
heaven, all good! O for thy mercies sake support me in all my miseries, and
deliver me from my sins the cause of them all! And of thy goodness (I beseech
thee) raise up my heart to covet and seek the good of heaven, that my hold and
hope of it, may comfort me against all the ills of the earth.

Let the bitterness which I feel below, win me from this evil world, and
whet in me a holy appetite to the pure sweets and joies which be above. And in
thy good time, fill my Soul with those blessed Solaces, I beseech thee, even
for his blessed merits and mediation sake, who is my only joy and hope in
heaven and earth, Jesus Christ my dear Redeemer and Advocate. Amen.

Meditation of the Miseries of the World.
WHy so much wedded to the world, when woe is her Dowry? entailed (as a
Portion) by God Genesis 3. 17.
on Adam, and thee (if his Son) since he forfeited (with his Allegiance) his
Paradise, and thine, by his default! Earth ever since brings forth woes, as Job
5. 7.
fire sparks. Within thee or without thee; for thy self, or others. In Body,
or Soul; woods will as soon want leaves, as the world fail thee of woes!
thou art heir to all; Inheritour (at least) of some; never secure from any,
because always in grief or fear of all. And least blessed too when most
secure; most unhappy, when least miserable; bliss in this life being the
greatest curse, because the portion of a man marked out for everlasting
unhappiness. Psalm. 17. 14.
Alas! what a purchase is a little fickle, worldly bliss, with woes, all, and
everlasting, after it, not without some in it!

My heart! if thou have so mis-caried in thy choice, let this divorce the
marriage; love earth when thou art fond of woe and not afraid of hell.

Thou will find good Alimonie after this divorce. Thou will live more well, and
die much better for it. Thou will entertain death as a deliverance from her
ills, whose goods thou scornest. And receive and read a Summons to thy end, not
as an Archest and call to judgment, but an Acquittance from calamity. Thou will eye heaven as thy harbor of rest, and be weary of the world as a sea of
trouble. Thou will study to steer thy course by the Card and Compass of the
Infallible word and rule, to know and go the right way to heaven.

So good is the Worlds wormwood (above her honey) for the souls health, if we
take and taste it right. And even our miseries are made great mercies, because
good medicines for that happy health! Did earth afford sinfulfalne man one
Paradise, he would scarce look for two. Now that he finds a Purgatory of it,
it drives him to the true Paradise, and bring him sooner to those joies, by the
hastening of those woes; which hie more to heaven, when most heavy on earth.

Tuesday-Service. Against the Vanities of the World.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 4. 39. or 37. 102. 104. Lessons. Eccl. 1. 2. or any
Chap. of it. Mat. 16. or Lu. 12.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 52. 62. Lessons. Eccles. 3. 4. etc. Hab. 2. 1 Timothy 6.


Then the Daily Prayers, (after this following)

Tuesday-Coll: against the vanities of the world.
O Lord! who have made this world for me, and me for another; let me not be
carried away with the vanities of that world which cannot content my Soul, and
will not continue with me! O! let my heart be fixed on higher things, never to
be moved with worldly vanities; that when this world shall end to me, or I to
it, I may enjoy those honors, and joys, and goods, which shall never end,
with thee, thy Angels and Saints in a better world, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Then Daily Prayers. Meditation of the Vanities of the World.
THe World is a shop of Vanities; Honors, Riches, Pleasures, the chief
Commodities: the Devil, Master of the shop; and Man his miserable Customer. The
common price, is our Souls, which we give him, to get them; and yet possess
nothing (less, worse than nothing, by all we get, which is the vainest of that
vanity of vanities!) O Man, be not thou so vile, and vain! why does
transitory good take thee, who have an Immortal Spirit? why does sensible joy
carry thee away, who have a faculty for the highest intellectual good;
capacity, of Eternity!

Alas! thou will as soon fill a sive with water, as thy Soul with the Isa.
55. 2.
world; and could thou give her a fill of it, a short time would (to thy
greater loss and grief) run it all out again. Let the world then be, not thy
Idol, but thy scorn. Believe it, if worldly good be thy Deity; her glory,
profit and delight, thy Trinity; they will not fill, but fail, and vex thy
heart; and so give thee for bliss, a triple infelicity: vexation is their
fullest satisfaction, and their end not thy content, but torment. It is
infinite and eternal goodness which must give man of an immortal Spirit,
content. In that Deity, is his rest; and his felicity in that only Trinity.

Let God then be (as he is) thy Throne; the world (as it should be) thy
footstool. By her good, climb up to God, get thus up: Abundance of good here
seems brave; what is all indeed in heaven? what is substance when the show is
such? what to have all things, when so valued to have nothing? what bliss is
to be found in the Trinity of uncreated goodness, when so much is fancied, in
the Three poorpetty created Goods of that revised, devised and fond-imagined
Godhead?

What, if thou have senses, by which they woo, and court thy love? Has not
thy Soul a power to guide and govern those Handmaids? O Man! thy senses are
in thy Soul: Monster! if thou put it in thy senses: Man of reason be not a
beast for sense! live and love above worldly vanity, look and long after
sure, solid, satisfying soule-felicity; else (saving thy self) nothing is, or
can be so vain.

Wednesday-Service. Against the Villainies of the World.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 12. 14. 120. Lessons, Genesis 6. or 19. Mat. 24.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 18. 55. Lessons, Jer. 5. or Isaiah 13. 2 Pet. 2. or 1 John 5.


Collect, against the villainies of the World.
O Lord! since the World is a Sodom, 2 Pet. 2. 8.
let me be a Lot; vexed, not delighted with her filthiness: Since it is a
Mesech, let me be a David; not taken, but tired with her Psalm. 120. 4
wretchedness: Lord! why should that have my joys, where my Soul is never
free from dangers, nor thy glory from wounds? where Blasphemy is as common as
the air, and Oppression as the earth; where Iniquity flows like water, and
lust flames as fire: why should I be in love with her, that is in hate with
thee? where, if I follow her course I go to the damnation of another world; and
if I cross it, meet with nothing but vexation all the way? O Lord! though I be
in it, let me not be of it: if it be wicked, let me be good; yea, the more
wicked it is, the better let me be, that thou may Apoc. 3. 12
take a more merciful notice of my goodness. And because it is hard to breath
the air of corruption, and take 2 Cor. 6. 17
no taint into conversation; let me be willing to get fairly from it, and come
to thee, where is bliss pure, without tear or taint. Take me from the Devils
of the world, to thy Angels O God! mean time, let me live a Saint even amongst
Devils, that I may (at last) be a Saint, amongst Angels: yea, as one of thy
Angels, in that world; where is no woe nor wickedness; Sinner, nor Satan; but
thy blessed unity, with holy and happy society of glorified Men, and Angels,
enjoying, adoring, lauding, and serving thee for ever and ever: so be it, for
Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Daily Prayers. Meditation of the Villainies of the World.
MOther of all misdeeds and mischiefs! when shall I be delivered from thee,
jail of my Soul, and wrack of my salvation? a hill of poor Pismires tossing
up and down, thou art at best; a hell of debauched and damned Spirits (at
worst!) Source of sin, forge of hell, and a field of all temptation!

If I love my God, I must hate thee, because an enemy to his honor; if I love
my self I must loath thee, because an adversary to my salvation; if I hate the
Devil, I must not love thee, because thou art his Sword to destroy; if I may
not love the flesh, I must not love thee, because her staff of support; if I
must not love vice, I must abhor thee because thou art the Mistress of
Vanity; if I must love grace I must detest thee, because the Step-dame of
Virtue.

Hagge of Satan, Hate of Heaven, Schole of Vice, Seminary of Error, Mother of
Sin, Step-dame of Saints, Pest of the Spirit, Nurse of the Flesh! who by thy
bad counsels and examples breedest the Brat of Sin in thy wicked womb, and then
sucklest and indearest it with thy profits and pleasures, thy wretched dugs!
woe is me that I must stay in thee! shame on me, if I love thee! thy best
things, are vanities of Earth; thy worst, villainies against Heaven! what in
thee can I love?

Though thou be a Whore, I will not be a Villain to my God; so much a
Villain, as to love such a Whore; so Jac. 4. 4. 1* Joh. 2. 14
much a Villain, as by any lust of mine to make thee more Strumpet; and by my
additions of particular ills, to increase thy whoredoms: I will have care
(what I can) not to be Partaker of thy guilts; but Ringleader I will never be
to thy rebellions; I would not come to thy end, and therefore will avoid thy
way. God I thank thee for thy good Spirit which carries me against the stream
of my corruption, and tide of the World: (I cannot go but in the strength of
that Spirit against such a tide and stream:) God, I pray thee! let me continue
my course, that I fall not at last into thy Sea of Wrath; and when the world of
nature shall end, be tormented with a world of sinners, world without end, for
ever, and ever.

Thursday-Service. About Death.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 39. 49. Lesson. Geu. 3. or 5. Luke 16.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 90. 23. Lesson. Eccles. 12. Romans 5.


Thursday-Collect, or Prayer, about Death.
O Lord, who have appointed all to die, make me ever mindful of my
dissolution, that I may less love the vanities of this, and more seek the
felicities of a better life; where death, and distresses are not; but we shall
be as the Angels of God, healthy, and vigorous, and happy for ever.

O let me every day so live, that I may come to that life when I die: And
because the best-led life, may have need of some time to prepare for death: Of
thy great mercy (I beseech thee) keep me from an unprepared heart, and
unexpected end. Even for his sake, who himself had the horror of death, Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Daily Prayers after it. Meditation of Death.
DIe I must, and after live in weal, or woe, for ever; and no time after to
recover the woe, if I lose the weal: As I tender then eternity, let me look to
my life.

Die, I must, and know not where; House, a Field, Land, or Water, Bed, or
Board; every where then let me look to it.

Die, I must, but know not how: By a violent, or natural course; casualty or
infirmity; lingringly, or speedily; every way then let me look for it.

Die, I must, but know not when: Day or night; this, or that day; next, or
this. This, or that hour; that, or this minute; this, or that time. Morn, Noon,
Even, ever then let me look after it.

And how look to it better then to find out the murderer, and doom him to
death: O Sin! shall thou lie in my bosom, that have laid all Mankind in a
grave? I will have thee to the cross Romans 5. 12
for that, yea, and for this too, lest thou add murder, to murder, and kill my
Soul after my Body. O what a sad hour of parting will that be, if when Soul
should leave the Body to death, God shall leave the soul to be damned! All full
of horror, and utterly comfortless, when it should be most the comforter of
the Body.

But strength thou have not to have death under foot, without a Christ in Luke
2. 28, 29.
thy Arms. Thou can not welcome it without fear, till thou embrace him in
thy Faith. To whom then should I look but to thee, O Lord, who art my Savior?
And for what, but thy mercy, which is my Salvation? And why, but for my sins,
my only destruction? And how, but by repentance, the only remedy of my sins?
And when, but in my life, the only time of my repentance? And this day, this
hour, this minute, which may be the last of my life. O Jesus, as I sin, let
me repent daily, that when I die (as I must) I may live eternally, with thee,
and by thee. Amen, Amen.

See more, Soliloquie, p. Friday-Service. Of Judgment to come.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 50. 143. Lesson. Dan. 12. Mat. 25. or Act. 17.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 98. 99. Lesson. Eccles. 11. 2 Cor. 5. or 2 These. 1.


Friday Collect, or Prayer, of Judgment to come.
O Lord Almighty! who have determined a day wherein thou will bring all Men,
and things to Judgment; make me to try my Soul daily at the bar of my
Conscience, that judging my self for my Sins, thou may not condemn me at
thy dreadful Tribunal.

And Lord, let that day be often in my thoughts, that the fear of it, and thee*
may be ever before my eyes; and my Conscience may be kept more clean by the
power of that fear. Even for his mercies sake, who was my Redeemer, shall be my
Judge, and is my Advocate, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Daily Prayers. Meditation of Judgment.
O Bar in the Clouds, I must appear 2 Cor. 5. 10. 1 These. 4. 17. Apoc. 6. 16
Joh. 12. 48.
before thee! woe to me then if found guilty; and now, if I beware not of all
Capital guilts: if I sin against the light of my mind, and Gods great grace
and goodness, for then I am a Capital Offender: If I Heb. 10. 26, 27. Romans 1.
29 Gal. 5. 19.
do, what upon pain of death God forbids me by his Heavenly Law; for that is a
Capital Offense. For that, and this, will not God judge me? Why? For this,
even the World; for Tit. 3. 111.
that, Conscience will condemn me: And God for more; for, if Conscience can
charge me with more then the World God can lay to my charge 1 John 3. 20 1 Cor.
4. 4.
more then my Conscience. To the world, Manifest, and Secret; are two things,
but to Conscience all one. To be, and be known, are two things to Conscience;
and to be remembered, and known; but what is seen to Providence, is never out of
memory, if once seen to hide guilt, then will not serve; to take no notice, or
forget it, not justify. To a circumstance, imagination, syllable, God does
observe, Psalm. 50. 21 Apoc. 20. 12. Eccles. 12. 14.
and enroll every act, thought, word, what ever I speak, conceive, or do, be
it never so close, or hid.

No way then to be saved, but to get a pardon before my Doom. No plea for
that, but Christ's Blood: no Mediator but Jesus. And no fees for that Advocate,
but my Tears: Not my Purse, but Heart, must bleed 1 John 2. 1. Luke 4. 8. Mat.
11. 28.
to move his mercy, and then he will undertake my peace, and Mediation;
Repentance, by the plea of his passion, and Intercession of himself, never
fails of Pardon, because he never in Promise. Those particular Sessions on my
self, prevent his general Assizes; my Penance, his Vengeance.

But delay not thy pardon, lest thou find thy doom before it. Have it not to
seek, when thou should have it to show: thy Petition to draw, when thy
execution begins: nor think with an half repentance to get a whole pardon.
Remorse for sin, without amendment Act. 3. 19. Heb. 9. 27.
is but half: And death is thy little Doomes-day, (no amending after it.)

O Lord! That I may be cleared by thy Sentence, let me be condemned by mine:
condemned in my Conscience, not by a constrained force, and fury of guilt, but
by a voluntary, and fair Penitential Process. Let thy Deputy 1 Cor. 11. 31.
thus doom me, that thou may not condemn me: Let me fall at my own Breast,
that I may stand before thy Bar, O Christ! Thy Pardon will raise me from such a
fall, and in that, strength of grace and mercy, even before thee shall I stand.
From being cast by thy mouth as low as Hell, from falling from thy Bar, to the
bottomless pit and prison, beware thou my soul, Deliver me, Dear Savior,
now and ever! Amen.

More of this: see Soliloquie, p. Saturday-Service. Of the pains of Hell.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 11. 2. Lesson. Isay 66. Luke 16. or Mar. 9. Mat. 24.
Even Prayer. Psalm. 9. Lesson. Deuteronomy. 32. or Isay 30. Jude 2. or 2 Pet. 2.


Saturday-Collect, or Prayer of the Pains of Hell.
O Dreadful Majesty, that have Earth for thy Footstool, and Hell for thy
Prison: Of thy mercy forgive me that guilt, which in thy justice would bring me
to that fearful Jail.

Lord, let me often think of Hell, that I may never come to it! And let me
seriously muse on those eternal fires, that I may carefully avoid them, and
Sin, the fuel of them, and way to it.

O suffer me not to buy any Sin so dear on Earth, as to lose Heaven by it, and
suffer in Hell eternally for it! Dear Savior! that have triumphed over it,
preserve me from it, by the merits of thy precious blood and passion, O Lord!
Amen.

Daily Prayers. Meditation of Hell.
-- NAy, but if one were sent Luke 16. 30*
from the dead, they would hear him! No! not a Preacher from the Grave, if
none in the Pulpit! Especially, in a point of so universal a belief, as has
not only a Church-full, but World-full of Preachers. A point of so clear and
convincing an evidence, as has even those who are most Infidels to it,
Prophets of it! What else do the Archests, and interest of Atheists and
Epicures preach? Hear they it not from Pulpits in their breasts, that heed
none in the Church? Their terrors in life, and honors at death, are they not
flashes of that infernal fire which they would extinguish? Prophecies of what
they would not have, Hell? Which, because their guilts condemn them to, they
therefore rather would not then cannot believe? Within thee, or without thee,
in Breast, or Book, Talmud, Alchoran, or Bible. Church, or World; Guilty one;
there is a Hell for thee. Therefore is thy torture in life, when distress sets
guilt on work, and Hell appears within thee; and dread, in death, when it
appears unto thee!

No wonder: for (if most credible) what more horrible? If Gods Palace be the
best place, (Heaven) his Prison is the worst, (Hell.) If the joys of that,
pass all understanding; the pains of this, are above our comprehension.
Discourse may make them great, but Experience makes that little. Sad thoughts
of this are good. To have the Mind on hell, is the way to keep the Soul out.
And have thought of it, for if once in, no coming out. O Epicure! whose art it
is to put all thoughts of Hell from thee, by so Isa. 28. 15.
much, it is nearer and heavier to thee! When thy Body (which thou pamperest)
shall die to feed worms; and thy soul (which thou would bury with it) live
to feast Fiends; That makes thee dread the sight of Death as Hell, and the
thoughts of it as Devils, because there are Devils, and Hell, which thou
deniest, but do dread: none has more horror for them, then thou who say
thou have no such Faith.

See more, Soliloquie, p. So end the Seven Services for the first Week.
Seven Services, for the 2d. Week.
Sunday-Service. Against neglect of Gods Service.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 5. 27. 42. Lesson. Genesis 28. or Jor. 7. to ver. 17. Mat.
11.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 95. 122. Lesson. Eccles. 5. 1 Cor. 11. or Heb. 6.


Collect or Prayer, against Neglect of Gods Service.
O Lord! Thou have devoted a Time and Place to thy worship, and holiness
becomes thy house for ever!

Make me ever careful to pay thee then, and there, the dues and duties of
Religion, which I owe thee. Solemnly waiting on thy Majesty amongst thy
S^rvants, in thy Court and Sanctuary. Let me be diligent in thy service and
r^verend at it! That as thy Saints and Angels in heaven incessantly serve thee,
I may with thy Saints on earth constantly worship thee, till we all come
together for ever to adore thee. Even for his sake whose meat and drink it was
to serve thee, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Daily Prayers. Remedies against Neglect of Gods Service.
1. GOd will find no time to save us, if we find no day to serve him Psalm. 2.
11, 12. Act. 26. 20.
. 2. Have we six in a Week, and shall not God have one day Exodus 20. 9.
? 3. Public worship is the Pillar of Religion, and high service of Almighty
God Genesis 4. 26.
. 4. If every one take away his stone, we shall pull down the Pillar, to the
ruin of Religion Lam. 2.
. 5. In the Church we are before Gods face, as well as Man's Psalm. 95.
. 6. It is both a Scandal to man 1 Cor. 11. 22.
, and Scorn to God Eccles. 5. 1, 2.
, to be irreverent in the Church; to dare, and jeer, God to his face. 7. The
truest Picture of the Saints with God in Heaven, is a Congregation, devout at
Gods Worship on Earth Apoc. 4. 10.
. 8. We cannot do better then to go to Heaven; nor worse, then to do any
thing ill, or unseemly in it Genesis 28. 17.
. 9. The Devils misbehaviour in Heaven, cast him into Hell Jud. v. 6.
. 10. He that laughs in the Church is tickled by the Devil Risus in Ecclesia
Diaboli opus est.
.
Monday-Service. Against Procrastination.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 95. 7. Lesson, Prove. 1. Mat. 25. to 14 or 24. to 36. or
Act. 24
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 4. 90. Lesson. Eccles. 8. Apoc. 21.


Prayer against Procrastination.
LOrd, keep me from the delays of holy and necessary duties! Make me to
consider, how many art now perishing in Hell, for neglecting the times of thy
gracious visitations on earth! That whilst the Spirit of grace and life blows
on me, I may improve that breath to purchase my self an estate in the life of
glory and immortality. Even for his sake who lingered no time to shed his blood
to save me, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen!

Remedies against Procrastination.
1. IT is unworthy God. He calls to day, Psalm. 95. 7.
and you will come to morrow? The Devil shall have the flower Levit. 2. 1.
of age, and God the bran? 2. It is unsafe for man. The Adventure of an
immortal soul, upon two great uncertainties to come; Having my breath Prove.
25. 1. James 4. 13.
and Gods Spirit Joh. 3. 8.
: If either fail, I am lost for ever. And God knows! Innumerable souls are
thus lost Coesarius (Inuumerabiles animoe si^ periere)
. 3. It is unwise. The house of my soul is set on fire Isa. 2. 18.
with guilt to day, and will quench it to morrow? I fall into the puddle 2 Pet.
2. 22.
of sin this week, and will rise the next? 4. It is uncomfortable. For the
longer I keep off from God, 1. Gods acceptance is more doubtful. He is for
first fruits Levit. 2. 12.
, and firstlings. 2. Man's performance, is more difficult. Because Satan has
the greater power over me 2 Timothy 2. 26.
, and sin in me Prove. 5. 22.
. By the strength of Custom Jer. 12. 23.
, which it is a miracle to conquer S. Bern.
. 3. Repentance has a greater task: more spots to wash Isa. 1. 16.
, knots to loose 2 Pet. 2. 20.
, roots to dig Jer. 4 5.
, foes to kill 1 Pet. 2. 21.
. Sin in time, of a Child grows a Giant for strength, and Lust spawnes like
a fi^h in number. If it be now ten strong, next year it will be an hundred,
and the next year a thousand, etc. 4. The best fruit of sin is repentance 2
Cor. 7. 8, 9.
, the rest is shame Romans 6. 21, 23.
, and death.
5. It is unprofitable at best. For the less seed the less harvest 2 Cor. 9.
6.
. The less good ^. the less glory Romans 2. 7.
. And the more Springs and opportunities I lose, the more seed-times of good
Gal. 6.
. So I reap less comfort of what is past Isa. 38. 3.
; and reward to come Luke 19. 16.
.
Tuesday-Service. Against Presumption.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 7. 19. Lesson, Deuteronomy. 29. or Levit. 26. Mat. 24.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 68. Lesson, Eccles. 8. 1 These. 5.


Collect, or Prayer, against Presumption.
Keep me O Lord from carnal security! If I fall into sin, let me not lie in
it out of a Presumption of thy mercy; but do thou awake me to repentance, and
raise me in thy goodness.

And since repentance is not in my power, make me fearful to fall into sin, in
hopes of thy grace and mercy; and more afraid to lie in it, if I fall; lest I
sleep without fear, till some Sudden judgment awake me, and present the
horror of eternal death before me!

From a lethargy in sin, O thou Holy Physician of souls preserve, now and ever
Dear Savior I beseech thee. Amen.

Daily Prayers. Remedies against Presumption.
1. IT is the Devils lullabie, to sleep out the time of Salvation, as did the
five foolish Virgins Matthew. 27. 7.
. 2. It is the Devils high way to desperation Prove. 1. 28.
. 3. None but a poisonous spirit, will suck the strength of sin, out of the
flower of mercy Eccles. 8. 11. Isa. 10. 2.
. 4. It is to make quarrels amongst Gods Attributes, in the confidence of
mercy, to put contempt on justice Romans 2. 4
. 5. It is to leave the soul at last without all hope of succor and sanctuary;
because guilt dares not fly to offended justice Gen 3. 10. Apoc. 6. 16.
, and has no refuge else, but abused mercy Romans 2. 4.
. 6. Gods best Saints have been fearing men, and shall sinners be presumers?
See it in Job Job. 9. 28.
, David Psalm. 119 20.
, Paul 1 Cor. 9. 27.
, and others. 7. I presume of that which is not mine, but Gods, life James 4.
14, 15.
and grace 2 Timothy 2. 25.
: without either of which I am undone for ever Ephesians. 2. 5
; and yet I provoke God, without whose mercy I can have neither Romans 2. 5
. 8. Who will give his head a mortal wound Isa. 1. 6.
, in hope to find a sovereign balm? yet I give my soul certain wounds, in
hope of uncertain remedies Jer. 51. 8, 9.
.
Wednesday-Service. Against Desperation.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 103. 44. Lesson. Jer. 3. or Mic. 27. Luke 7.
Evening-Prayer. Psalm. 130. 147. Lesson. 2 Chronicles. 33. 1 Timothy 1.


1. Prayer against Desperation.
LOrd keep me from despairing of thy mercy! Let me not seek at once to destroy
my soul, and my Savior, by believing my sins to be so great, as thy mercy
cannot pardon; or my conscience so foul, as his Blood will not purge!

Preserve me from all sins, O Lord! but from this above all, I beseech thee,
for his sake who is the hope of Israel, and of all that dwell in the ends of
the earth, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

2. Prayer, against Desperation.
O Lord! I have been a great offendour, but let me not be a d^sperate sinner! I
have most wickedly provoked the eyes of thy glory, but let me not more wickedly
shed the bowels of thy mercy! Thy Law has been cast behind my back, but O let
not thy blood be trampled under my foot.

Thou keep the gate of mercy open, let not me shut it upon me! Thou have not
yet cast me in, keep me from leaping into the pit of perdition! Though guilts
and stains have made me black as a fiend, yet am I not in hell, out of which
there is no Redemption. Dear Savior! with thee is mercy and plenty, for the
whole world of sinners; much more for one, though the greatest sinner of the
world. Revive that soul with thy grace, which thou did ransom with thy
blood! Rescue that poor soul by thy mercy, for which thou have satisfied in
thy justice! Wash off my stains, break off my bonds; pull off the chains of
Satan, deliver me from my sins. That I may live an Example of thy mercy, a
Comfort to poor penitents, a Joy to the Angels, a Companion to the Saints, and
Servant to thy Majesty. So be it dear Savior! Amen, Amen.

Letany. Daily Prayers. Remedies against Desperation.
1. THe sin of Hell. In the dead and damned, not fit for them that live on
earth Eccles. 9. 4. Psalm. 42. 11. Jer. 18. 12.
, who may be in a state damnable, but not condemned without hope to be saved:
then the Judge would not let them live Jud. 13. 23.
2. The sin against Heaven. Not a treason against God, but a murder of the
Godhead. In which Judas sinned more, then in his Treason Saint Hierome.
. 3. The sin on earth capable of a cure, two ways; by Consideration and
Caution. 1. Consider. 1. If I have a world of sin to damn me, God has a Sea of
mercy to drown it Mic. 7. 18.
. 2. No stains or guilts can make my Soul so much vile, but Christ's blood is
more precious To. 5. 9. Heb. 9. 13, 14 1 Pet. 1. 19. 1 John 1. 7. 9.
. 3. The Remedy of Repentance Isai. 1. 16. Acts. 2. 38.
, by the power of that mercy, and virtue of that blood, has cured most damned
and desperate sins and sinners. David's Psalm. 51. Psalm. 32. 5. 2 Samuel 12. 13.
, Peter's Mat. 26. 75.
. Manasseh 2 Chronicles. 33. 12.
, Magdalen Luke 8. 2. Luke 7. 37. 47.
, Paul 1 Timothy 1. 13.
, and others.
2. Beware, before, of the sin of -- 1. Presumption. From which precipice of
false hope, are the most fatal and fearful falls into despair Job 11. 10.
. 2. Under the temptation to despair, take heed of concealing the conflict;
for, woe to me, if when I have my self and the Devil my foe, I have no man of
God to friend. Violent ends and deaths, had been m Prove. 28. 13. Act. 16. 27
30.
cured by such confessions.


Thursday-Service. Against Swearing and Taking Gods Name in Vain.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 15. 99. Lessons, Zachary 5. or Mal. 3. Mat. 5. v. 33.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 50. 111. Lessons, Eccles. 9. James 5.


Collect or Prayer, against Swearing and taking Gods Name in vain.
O Lord! Holy and Reverend is thy Name, let me not dare to profane it! Angels
therefore dread and adore thee, and shall I despise thee! Thou Lord wilt take
an account of all idle words; if then thy Titles be prostituted at my vain
pleasure, and made to fill my idle discourses, how shall I answer thee? Keep my
tongue from such customs, O Lord! and let Care watch my lips, that I get not
such a tongue! And let thy Fear guard my heart, that no such words move thence
to my lips. What is past, pardon, I beseech thee in thy mercy; what is to come,
prevent in me by thy grace, for Jesus his sake. Amen.

Daily Prayers. Remedies against Swearing, and taking Gods Name in vain.
1. THere is much ill in this sin. 1. Against the Creator, GOD. It is 1.
Petty Blasphemy at least: The Jews stopped their ears at it, and dare
Christians open their mouths for it Act. 7. 55.
? 2. Petty Treason. A lifting up the tongue against Divine Majesty, and
wounding it, and bringing it to contempt 2 Kings 19. 22.
. 3. Grand ingratitude to God. For my tongue made for his glory Psalm. 55. 8.
, to do him dishonor. And the Names and Members of Christ, to be made
instruments of sin 1 Cor. 6. 15.
.
2. Against the Creature. 4. Grand rebellion. Man the tongue of the Creatures
to praise God, makes then Mutes to his Glory Psalm. 19. 1.
, and guilty of his despising and daring God; and himself worse then them all.
2. There is great danger in it. The Law says, it goes not guiltless Exodus 20.
7.
The Gospel says, of Condemnation Jam. 5. 12.
. 3. There is no profit, credit, or pleasure in it, a meer-pure sin, without
motive to excuse it. 4. Custom aggravates it. That I dare get, and keep an
habit against Heaven. 5. I may use means to lose, as well as get this custom
Socrates, by stones cured his ill speech.
. 1. For Gods Names, O Lord! Jesus! Christ! use other words, O strange! O rare!
O me! etc. with as good sense, and less sin. 2. Punish thy slips. Bite tongue.
Give an alms. Say Lords Prayer.



Friday-Service. Against Lying.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 34. 52. 63. Lesson. Prove. 6. or 12. Job. 8. Verse 44.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 59. 101. Lesson. Jer. 9. Col. 3. or Ephesians. 4 Apoc. 12.


Collect, or Prayer, against Lying.
O God of truth, keep me from the lip of Lying! Since the Devil is a lying
Spirit, let not my mouth be possessed with him. Since he is the Father, let not
me be a Child of falsehoods. Cause my heart to conceive things aright, and let
my tongue truly bring forth the conceptions of my heart. Suffer me not at the
price of any lust, to let out my tongue to serve the turns of Satan. As a
Prostitute to Malice, by lying to do mischief; or an Advocate to friendship,
by lying to do good, or excuse the shame of evil. Let me not commit an evil
to do a good, much less add sin to sin, word to deed, upon any
occasions. Especially upon small occasions, let not my mind and tongue be
filled with such blots. Blemishes both to Christian and Humane conversation!
Pes^s both to Church, and to mankind! And that I may abhor a lie, make me to
love truth and justice, even for his sake, in whose mouth was no guile. Jesus
Christ our Lord! Amen.

Daily Prayers. Remedies against Lying.
1. THe Devil first spoke Jo. 8 4^.
, and ever since taught this language 1 Kings 22. 22.
. 2. The Death of Mankind, was drawn in first, from that breath of the Serpent
Genesis 3. 4.
. 3. Speech brought forth with a lie, is conceived in adultery. 4. When I love
a lie, I divorce my soul from Truth, Gods daughter: and marry it to Falsehood,
the Devils. 5. The Devils daughter has damnation for her dowry: so has
lying, a sin of air, but ends in fire Apo. 21. 8
. 6. A Christian and a Liar, is a Monster. A new man with an old Tongue. The
Devils tongue in the head of a Christian Ephesians. 4. 24, 25.
. 7. A Liar is another Lucifer. He gives being to that which has none, and so
equals himself to God, who only can, and does. 8. The Primitive Christians
would rather die than Lie. Choosing rather the loss of life, then such a blot
on the Conscience.
These Considerations may make us loath it, and leave it.

1. Do nothing foul, to be blushed at, and we shall not need to lie for a mask
Genesis 18. 12.
. 2. If men's eyes do not, God sees the truth of things Jer. 5. 3. 1 King. 14 16.
. 3. Here the mask is fouler then the face (if not very foul:) at least, the
face is fouler for the ugly mask Sin added to sin.
. 4. A time will come, when God will pull all masks from al faces 1 Cor. 4. 5.
. And what good then in the Refuge of lies Isa. 28. 15 Isa. 59. 4.
?
Saturday-Service. Against Detraction, or Slandering.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 10. 15. 50. Lesson, Jer. 9. or Levit. 19. Verse 11. 2.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 64. 101. 140. Lesson. Jer. 9. Ja^. 4. or 1 Pet. 2. v.
21. 1 Pet. 3. to v. 14


Prayer against Detraction.
O Lord! Since the Detractor is a Devil, let not me be one! Let me not delight
to hear a slander, lest he sit in my ear; Let me not utter it, lest he walk on
my tongue; but above all, let me not devise it, lest he lie in my heart. Let
not my Ear, Tongue, and Heart, be a chair, house, and bed for the Devil. Let
thy holy Spirit of love wholly possess me, that he may have no part in me.
Thou would have my heart to be thy Temple, and my lips are the doors; Let me
not make thy Temple his Forge to frame, and thy Doors his Shop to vent his
mischiefs. Lest in thy justice thou give me my portion with railers, and
cursers, and blasphemers in his fiery furnace.

As I abhor to murder my neighbors life, make me afraid to destroy his fame and
reputation: lest I wound thereby, and kill at once his credit and my
conscience. Keep the sword of Calumny out of my mouth, I beseech thee, that I
kill not my slandred neighbor, and my self; and wound as many as hear and
believe me. From taking and giving these wounds, Lord shield me, and save me,
for his sake, who being reviled, yet reviled not: Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Remedies against Detraction.
1. IT makes a black mouth, and us spit ink in our Brothers face, or fire, like
Devils Ephesians. 4. 27 The Devil and slanderer all one.
. 2. As bloody as black. A Lev. 19. 16 Ezekiel. 22. 9
murder of what is more precious then life, another reputation Prove. 12. 1
. with the death of my conscience Jam. 4. 1
. 3. As abhorred as bloody. To God and Man. The Slanderer cries out on another
for slandering him, and therein condemns himself Romans 2. 1
as a vile man, for being a slanderer. 4. To wound a good man's fame, is most to
be abhorred, to cast filth at Gods eyes Zach. 2. 8
. He being sacred to God Psa. 105 19.
; this is a kind of sacrilege. 5. To wound a Man of God so, is yet worse 1 Timothy 5 19. 1 Timothy 3. 7 1 Samuel 3. 17
. To kill as many souls as believe the slanders. His Ministry lies a bleeding,
if his credit receive a wound.
Three fortifications are needful to defend the soul from this sin.

1. In the Ear. To keep it out of the tongue Psa. 15. 3
To be deaf to obloquy, is the way naturally to become dumb to it. 2. In the
Eye. To keep it out of the ear. Slander will not come where anger entertaines
it Prove. 25. 23.
. 3. In the Heart. To keep it out of all. The chief fort of all. In 1. Wisdom.
Not to believe ill reports Pro. 16. 21
. 2. Truth. Not to devise them Exo. 23. 1
. 3. Charity 1 Cor. 13. 5.
. If true to conceal, not to speak them. Another life being the forbidden
tree, which my tongue is not to touch.

Daily Prayers. Seven Services against Seven other, commonly called, Deadly
Sins.
Sonday-Service. Against Idleness.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 104. Lessons, Genesis 2. or Proverb. 6. Ezekiel. 16. Mat. 20.
to 17
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 147. 128. Lessons, Prove. 6. 2 These. 2. or 1 Timothy 5.


Collect or Prayer against Idleness.
O Lord! who have made all things for action, and Man above all to be employed
in holy and laudable doings; Keep me from the much evil of an idle life! Let
me not spend my precious days in vain, but improve them in such labors as
may be proper to my condition, profitable to others, and above all, suitable to
thy service, and available to my eternal salvation.

O let me redeem what is lost of my time, and spend the remains of that
precious treasure to the use for which thou give me to live in this world,
even to purchase my self happiness in the world to come: Through the merits of
him, whose life was a continual labor to do all good to mankind, Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Remedies against Idleness.
1. AGainst all Idleness. Consider, 1. To live an idle life, is to be buried
whilst we live Mat. 25. 30. 1 Timothy 5. 8, 13.
. 2. Time is a Treasure: for the wasting whereof, we must one day dearly answer
Ephesians. 5. 16.
. 3. If we be idle toward God, we shall be busy for the Devil. For man is of
an active spirit, and will not be every way idle Joh. 6. 27
.
2. Against Idleness in our vocation temporal. 1. It is the Devils cushion on
which he sits and shapes the Soul to all temptations 1 Timothy 5. 13.
. 2. It is the spawne of lust: as standing waters corrupt soonest, and swarm
with loath some creatures 2 Samuel 11. 2.
. 3. It is the shame of a man. A baseness below all creatures, from the Emmet
to the Angel. Man's nobleness in Paradise, admitted not of Idleness Genesis 2.
15.
. 4. It will be his woe. Often the mother of want in this world Prove. 24 34.
Mat. 25. 8.
, and always of everlasting beggerie in the world to come. No labor in the
Vineyard, no penny Mat. 20. 39.
. Hide the Talent; and lose all Mat. 25. 28.
.
3. Against Idleness in our Vocation Spiritual. 1. Heaven is worth our labor
Apoc. 3. 11
. (Eternity the expense of a little time Apoc. 2. 10.
.) 2. It is not to be had without it Phil. 2. 12. Apoc. 3. 21
. And woe to us if it be not had Mat. 26. 24.
. 3. Life is the time of labor Joh. 9. 4
, and God knows how long that will last Luke 12. 20.
. 4. The labor we spend to go to hell, will bring to heaven: as much in Gods
service, as on our own lusts and sins Pro. 4. 16
. 5. All sins are stops and stumbling blocks in our way to heaven, to remove
which, requires great labor Ezekiel. 7. 19.
. 6. Christ took pains to save thy soul Luke 2. 49 and Luke 22. 44.
, the Martyrs sweat and bled to save theirs Heb. 11. 33, 34.
, will thou not swet to save thine own? 7. The Devil is ever busy to destroy
thy soul 1 Pet. 5. 8
, will thou take no pains to save it?

Daily Prayers. Monday-Service. Against Covetousness.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 4. 34. 49. 52. Lesson, Genesis 14. or Ecc. 2. Hab. 2 Luke
12. or 16. Mat. 19
Evening Prayer. Psae. 37. 62. or 127. 145 Lesson, Isa. 15. or Job 1. Psa. 4 or
1 Timothy 6. Heb. 13.


Collect, or Prayer against Covetousness.
DEar Savior! who did covet nothing of this world, let not me covet much!
much, is more then my life needs! Much, makes but my trouble, and Luke 12. 15.
temptation more! Much, makes but my audit, and account greater! But Luke 12. 48
to covet much, makes me check at no sin, and swallow all temptation. 1 Timothy
6. 9 Mat. 4. 9.
The Devil would have me desire much in this world, to have nothing in another:
But thou, O Christ, who love my bliss, forbidst my avarice! Lord, Luke 12. 15
let me do, what thou (not he) loves! what will suffice me on earth to bring
me to Heaven, do thou give me; and more then that, let me not covet. Lord, if
I must be destitute in one world, (this, or that) let me rath^r be a beggar on
Earth, then a bankrupt in Hell; and suffer want for a time, then for ever: But
(if it be thy blessed will) let me want and beg in neither, but by the Prove.
30. 8
allowance of thy Providence have wherewith both to live, and relieve: and by
the grace of thy good Spirit, so Luke 6. 38.
enjoy, and dispense what I have on Earth, that I may receive it again of thee
in Heaven. And let me so look Mat. 6. 20.
after goodness, and lay out my goods, that I may gain a good measure of 1
Cor. 9. 12 1 Timothy 6. 19 John 5.
glory for thee, and from thee, through the purchase of thy merits (O Christ)
whose covetousness was only to serve God, and save Souls. From that which
will destroy thy Service, and my Mar. 12. 50 Luke 22. 15
Salvation, deliver me dear Jesus, for thy mercies sake. Amen.

Daily Prayers. Remedies against Covetousness.
MInd, and Heart, must be rectified, and so fortified against it. 1. The mind
must apprehend it aright; that is, for 1. Base, and below Man. Whose foot being
set on earth, cries him a Psalm. 8. 6.
Monster of baseness, if his heart be there. And, as 2. Banefull and against
him. In what he should propound, or does 1. Project, from God, or the world, It
being the bane 1. Of Man's salvation, (his end) 1 Timothy 6. 9
being perdition to him. And 2. Of Gods service, (the means) Mat. 6. 24.
it being impossible to give it to him, and Mammon. Paying one so much duly, as
robs the other in all his offices, and himself of those abilities. For 1. It
deafes the ear to Gods Luc. 16. 18
Word. Dumbs the mouth to Mar. 4. 19.
Prayer. Lames the hand to good works. Stiffes the knees to the holy Sacrament.
Increase Mat. 26. 32.
making his Eucharist. 2. It deads the Conscience to Zach. 11. 5
all sense, and the Heart to all duty. The Seminary of lust 1 Timothy 6. 10. 9.
Root of all ill, and Metropolis of all mischief. Turns Psa. 119. 36
the heart from Gods testimonies, and sets it (as lucre tempts) on all
ungodliness. To save a penny, it will break a Table, and sooner slight all
Gods Ten, then One of the Worlds Commandments. Further then stands with her
Thousands for profit, it cares for none of the Ten.

2. And (as impotent for the true end) so, insufficient for his own aims,
maintenance of his life, and Family: For 1. His life is not longer, (care 2
Cor. 7. 10
frets his thread) Nor safer, (it makes him grudged, if not robbed Psalm. 122. 3
of life) Nor, better, his mind has no rest, nor trouble, end for it. And
least at his end, because he has so much to go from; and so little to come
to. Death takes him from Paradise (all the Miser had) and hales him to a prison
far worse then his death. 2. And after him (his great project) the Family
falls, for want of a blessing to keep up the pillars. If the first Heir be not
Psa. 127. 1
a Scatter-good, the^ third is commonly a Lose-all. The curse Isa. 5. 9. Hab.
2. 10. Amos 4. 2
of God with one finger, pulling down, what he with his two hands (of
worldliness and wickedness) has so long bin building up.



This, as an Exorcisme, may serve (if Beelzebub be not there) to drive covetous
desires (though Legions) out of the mind: 1. And then, it will be easy, by
adding some more power of Thoughts and graces: 2. To cast them out of the
Heart. 1. To that end, it will be of some force, to think, 1. At death, all
leaves us. Why 1 Timothy 6, 7 Jam. 4 14. 1 Pet. 1. 17
so much cost on my Inn? 2. Life is short. Why such luggage for a little
journey? 3. Nature needs little. Why clog 1 Timothy 6. 8.
Conscience and it, with much? 4. My goods, are trusts. Why such Luke 16. 2.
care to have what is another? 5. I must reckon for all. Why Phil. 4. 17.
then such reckoning of any?
2. And effectually done, if I have grace, 1. To love the world less, (for 1 John 2. 15:
then I will not covet it much.) And value it low, (for then I will love it
less.) Did we prize Riches as strawes, we would not seek them as Pearls. 2.
To believe God better. Then Heb. 13. 5.
his Providence will moderate our care, and his Promise banish our
Covetousness. 3. To serve God more. For then Psalm 37. 3. 54. 9. of* St. Mat.
I shall believe him better, and challenge maintenance from him upon his Honor
and Word. 4. To be content with what I 1 Timothy 6. 6
have. For then I will not crave what I have not, and shall bring my mind to my
lot, if I Phil. 4. 11. 12.
cannot, it to my mind. 5. To be thrifty, (with content.) For he that is a
Prodigal to spend, is forced to be a Miser to get. Avarice never works more
then in the service of luxury. 6. To be covetous (with my thirst) Amos 4. 1.
to wit, of Heaven. He that loves true riches, scorns earthly. 1 Cor. 12. 1.
And will so get and use them, as they may increase 1 Timothy 6 19.
the heavenly. So he will be charitable, not miserable, thinking Act. 20. 35
it happier to be of the Giving than Receiving hand.



Tuesday-Service. Against Gluttony.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 17. 73. Lessons, Deuteronomy. 8. or 32. Amos 6. Luke 16. or 21.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 78. or 160. Lessons, Dan. 5. or Isaiah 22. Romans 13. or 1
Cor. 10. Phil. 3. Jude, or Epist.


Collect or Prayer, against Gluttony.
Dear Savior! that would have my Body a Temple for thy holy Spirit; thou will not have it a Sepulcher for Beasts. Thou that have done my lips Mat. 26.
^6.
the bliss and honor, to be made Doors for thy Holy Body to enter at, wilt
not have them gates for the unclean Spirit to pass, in, and out: if I so
pollute my body, will thou not desert me, and destroy me, if I dare so
profane, Thine? Lord! that I may not lose my Soul, let me not so abuse either
Body; and abhor gluttony which makes me do that abuse to both!

O Christ! it was thy meat and drink Joh. 4. 34.
to do thy Fathers will (and but for strength to that thou did not eat, and
drink!) O! let me not with Adam eat my self at oncc out of Obedience and
Paradise! Thou did fast, and feast (to teach me there is a Time for both) but
a Gluttons appetite was never in thy mouth. Nor let it ever be in mine, O God!
if I fast, let me not eat up my Body, by cruel abstinence! if I feast, let
me not devour my Soul, by intemperance! whether I abstain, or eat, or
drink, or whatsoever I 1 Cor. 10. 3
do, let all be to thy glory! that at death, when Epicures make their two
Feasts for Worms, and Fiends, with their Bodies, and Souls; thou may feast
and fill both mine, with thy One: Joys, which will fill, and not loathe;
Satisfy, and not Surfeit, for ever! To that glut of joys dear Jesus bring
me! From other gluttony, keep me! By the way of thy Blood, and work of thy
holy Spirit, O Lord! Amen, Amen.

Daily Prayers. Remedies against Gluttony.
A Sin; 1 Man is not made for; but is 2 undone by: yet may be 3 helped against.

1. Man's throat is narrow (not made to swallow) and short, not for delight to
gormandize. If he do, 2. Love he which World he will, it will be his ruin. 1
For a better. 1. It makes Man, Swine. His Belly, v. Apud. Tertul. Venture Deus,
etc.
God: and Paunch his Paradise. The Kitchen, his Church. First and second
courses, his Services. His hours of Devotion, Meal-times. His Creed is in his
Cook. His Decalogue in his Dishes. The company of Epicures his Communion of
Saints, and death everlasting his end. For by this means he eats and drinks
away his time in vanity; drownes his soul in sensuality, and destroys his
conscience Tert. Appendices, sc. gulae lascivia atque luxuria.
with guilt. It being (as one dead sin it self) always mother of another,
(luxury which never wants a womb, where gluttony has a belly.) And often
sister to many; as ill as 1 Cor. 10. 7
Sodomes, all (even the worst) though Idolatry, and Sodomie it self. And 2. It
makes him as much wretch, as Beast. For even here it bars him of the greatest
blessing (Health.) His chief boon (long Life;) and only bliss (Pleasure.)
For, fullness is the mother of Sickness; and that, the nurse of Death.
Temperance has the most delicious taste, and Hunger cooks all meats Prove.
27. 7
to Delicates; wh^reas his Appetite needs more whets then his Knife; with which
he does not so much cut his meat, as his throat. Even then digging his Pluris
necat crapula quam gladius.
grave with his teeth, when he most pampers his Palate. Before the Flood, Man's
life was longest, when food simplest. Their years (ten to one) longer, because
their diets (twenty to one) less.
3. For such a Malady, help were happy. And it has a double cure. 1. Perforce.
So sickness is the remedy, which disgusts the Palate, and make fasts
necessary, because meats unpleasant. So for the time, the Glutton is
abstemious; but, by disease, not virtue; not from good habit, but ill habitude.
Yet even thus (if wise) it may get the ill one off, and be cured. 2. By choice.
For, as his pleasures are none in sickness, they are short in health (whilst
the meats pass by the throat, from the mouth to the stomach, space and time
not long.) And, in death gone, past all recovery. Why then so much ill, for so
little good? This vanishing, and perishing in sickness, and death; That
hastening, and posting my Body unto sickness? I will none, if I weigh it well.
And less, if I do consider, and endeavor aright. 1. 1. There is a life after
death. Be not an Epicure in thy Creed, and thou will not be a Glutton 1 Cor.
15. 32, 33.
in thy life: Ede, bibe, lude, believes nothing beyond death. 2. Thou will be
arraigned then by thy Creator, for abusing his Workmanship, (thy self.)
Accused by the Creatures, for devouring his works (them.) Making thy soul and
body (instead of the Ark of his Testimonies and Tabernacle of his service) the
one a streiner for lusts, the other for meats: Romans 8. 20
The creature ravished by force to serve thee against his ends, as if made for
nothing but thy lust, and the dunghill. Thou will therefore be condemned for
thy injury, to him, thy self, and them. To a gluttony of torments, starved body
and soul, without crumb, or Luke 16. 23
drop of comfort for thy short pleasures, to pains long, and lasting for ever.
Consider this!
2. There is, a Cloth, a Meat, a Drink, an Art, an Office, that will help, if
thou have it. Do thou then endeavor it! 1. The Coat, is Christ. Of particular
Romans 13. 13, 14.
virtue to expel Gluttony. 2. The Meat, is his Word and Sacrament. To which,
to have an holy Appetite, is to lose the Job. 6. 27.
sensual; and to digest it, to loath it. 3. The Drink, is his Spirit, with
Ephesians. 5. 18.
which the soul drunk, keeps the body sober. The greater excesses of good, the
less of it surfets. 4. The Art, is his Pionry, to undermine Dan. 4. 27.
gluttony by works of Charity. Giving the maintenance of thy lust to the poor.
So thou shall at once starve thy Job. 29. 15 and 31. 16.
sin, and feast thy Conscience. And God, and Christ himself will come to the
feast. Mat. 15. 35 Luke 14. 13.
5. The Office, is to keep his Table. Which Frugality covers, and Temperance
takes away. His Example, and Command, will make thee able, and Prayer will get
the blessing of both. And sooner, if for his sake, thou eat, and delight in
sober company, and leave Gluttons, for Saints.



Wednesday-Service. Against Lasciviousness and Luxury.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 106. Lesson. Ezekiel. 16. or. 2 Samuel 12. Prove. 7. Joh. 8.
to v. 42
Evening-Prayer. Psalm. 51. Lesson. 2 Samuel 12. 1 Cor. 6. or Heb. 13.


Prayer against Lasciviousness.
LOrd, keep me from all filthiness of flesh and Spirit, that before men and
thee who discernest both, I may appear pure and undefiled: a chaste Spouse to
thee, not to be tempted to any acts or lusts of uncomelinesse, or
unworthiness, which be ill in thy eyes, that are ever upon me!

O let me be pure and holy in all manner of conversation as thou art holy, that
in the great day of trial thou may not disclaim me, but own me, and take
me to thy glory; for the merits of thy Holy One and Undefiled, Jesus Christ our
Lord! Amen.

Daily Prayers. Remedies against Lasciviousness.
1. GEnerally. The sin of unchastity is vain, foul, fearful, and
prevailing: For, 1. The more lust is served, the less satisfied Ezekiel. 16. 28.
2. It Is called particularly, filthiness, and uncleanness Apoc. 17 14.
It is sacrilegiously to make the Body 1 Cor. 6. 18, 19,
(Gods Temple) a Stews; and that is the vilest filthiness 1 Cor. 3. 17.
3. It is a short pleasure for everlasting pain Heb. 11. 24.
; yet this fire is the end of that fleshlinesse 1 Cor. 6. 9. Heb. 13. 4. Apoc.
21. 8.
Besides a foul conscience, it wounds health, honor, state; wasting the
balsame of life, blessing of wealth, and ointment of a good reputation Prove. 5.
8, 9, 10. Pro. 6. 26. 32. 33. Job. 31. 9, 10. etc.
4. It is a strong lust in the assault, and commonly gets the victory. Nature
concurring with the strength Pro. 7. 21 2 Samuel 11. 2
5. The holy Martyrs could no more be tempted by pleasures, then tortures. But,
2. Particularly. In a married condition it is every way worse. 1. Not only
Damnation, in another world Apoc. 21. 8.
; but present Death Joh. 8. 5. Levit. 20. 10.
in this, by the Law of God; and man too, in many places. 2. It tends to the
confusion of mankind. Incest, etc. Genesis 38. 16.
3. The dumb creatures are true to their Mates.
3. The cure of both is the same. To kill the sin. 1. In the Egg. Stifle the
first thoughts and motions of lust Mat. 5. 28.
(no Bird but was first an Egg.) 2. In the hatching. Take heed of the things
that beget and nourish lust. Covenant with the eyes Job. 31. 1
against lascivious Persons, Pictures, gestures: stop the Pro. 7. 21.
ears against lustful Songs, Discourses, Devices. Keep the heart Pro. 6. 255
from being idle, and the body from excessive sleeps, and meats, and drinks, or
such as are known to be provocative Pro. 23. 33.
Temperance and Sobriety are great friends; to Chastity. 3. Tempted. Think
that thy keepers eyes are upon thee; with Joseph, that God sees thee Genesis 39. 9.
, and will judge thee Prove. 5. 20, 21.
. Thou will blush if but a child behold thee.

Thursday-Service. Against Pride.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 73. 131. Lessons, Isa. 14. Luke 18. to v. 19* or Acts
12.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 86. 138. Lesson. J^r. 13. Jam. 4. or 1 Pet. 5.


Collect, or Prayer against Pride.
LOrd, keep me from the sin of Pride, which threw Angels out of Heaven, and
Man out of Paradise; lest it cast me headlong into the depths of thy
displeasure, and bar my soul of both!

O let me who am nothing but a miserable body and soul (a lump of sins and
woes) let me never exalt my self before, or against thee: Without whose
goodness (but one minute) my flesh would fall to the earth, and my spirit lie
in hell for ever, without thy mercy.

Preserve by these thoughts an humble spirit in me, such as thou may respect
on earth, and hereafter advance unto thy glory. Even for his sake who so abased
himself for my pride, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen!

Daily Prayers. Remedies against Pride.
1. KNow what Pride is. A sin abominable, as that which is 1. Gods hate.
Others sins fly God, but this flies at God S. Greg.
, and God at it 1 Pet. 5. 5.
. 2. Man's bane. It went before the fall of Angels Jude, v. 6. Isai. 14.
and Adam Genesis 3. 5, 6.
, and does go before destruction Prove. 16. 18.
. 3. Christ's scorn. In his birth, life, death; all humility, nothing of pride;
much against it.
2. Know what we are, and there is no cause of pride. 1. Not for our Ills. And
our 1. Bodies are Baggs of phlegm and choler, poor and vile Phil. 3. 21.
. 1. I am quickened dust, and shall be dead Genesis 3. 19.
. 2. One worm was my beginning, and many will be my end; and much woe between
Job 25. 6 Job 19. 26.
.
2. Souls be Cages of unclean lusts, and errors Genesis 6. 5
. Nests of Serpents and Vipers Isa. 49. 4, 5.
. 3. Bodies and Souls both, have what should humble us. 1. My body is subject
to a thousand sicknesses and sorrows, but my soul to ten thousand times more
sins, and wounds, and weaknesses, and falls Romans 7. 24. Psalm. 19. 12. Psalm. 40.
12
. 2. A Grave will be the end of my Body Psalm. 49. 14.
, and Hell (without pardon) the end of a sinning Soul Mat. 3. 7^ 8.
.

2. For goods or perfections of body or soul, no cause to be proud: because
they are all of them, 1. Gods gifts, (whether of nature, fortune, or grace Jam.
1. 17. 1 Cor. 4. 7.
) so they are my debt Luke 16. 2*
, for which I owe the Doner my thanks. (Pride pays my self the glory Act. 12.
23.
:) and they are my charge Mat. 25. 15. Mat. 18. 27.
, for which I owe God the use, and for that must be careful and fearful (not
proud.) 2. Pride is the way to lose the good I am proud of: honor, beauty,
eloquence, grace, etc. as we see in Nebuchadnezzar, Herod, Goliath, David,
Peter, etc. Dan. 4. 13. Act. 12. 23 1 Samuel 17. 42. Psalm. 30. 6, 7. Mat. 26. 33,
34.


3. Know what we are comparatively, with 1. Others. Our betters of more virtue,
if less beauty, glory. 2. God. Before whom Angels cover their feet and faces
Isay 6. 2. Genesis 18. 27. Job 40. 4.
.

Friday-Service. Against Anger.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 4. 103. 106. Verse 28. Lesson. Gen 4. Mat. 5. v. 21.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 2. 124. Lessons. Jona. 4. Ephesians. 4. or 1 Pet. 3. James
1.


Collect, or Prayer against Anger.
LOrd! keep all undue passions out of my mind and mouth! Make me to think, how
often thou do pardon those that provoke thee, that my anger may not forth
with burn against every one that does offend me: But that I may be like thee
my heavenly Father, in meekness and mercy: Even for his sake, who was the
great example of both, the Lamb of God, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Daily Prayers. Remedies against Anger.
1. TO loath it: Consider two things, point of 1. Honor. As, 1. Holy anger
makes a Saint Psalm. 106. 30. Number. 25. 8.
other, a beast and bedlam Prove. 27. 4.
. 2. Wrath shuts God out of the heart, and lets in the Devil. Ephesians. 4. 27.
30, 31.
3. To rule it, is to be above a Conqueror; to serve it, below a Slave Tit. 3.
2, 3. Pro. 14. 29

2. Danger. 1. It is against health Pro. 19. 19.
and grace Jam. 1. 20 Pro. 29. 22
; and so an enemy both to body and soul. 2. Kindling of it within is dangerous,
but flaming out in words and deeds, condemned by Christ the Judge to Hellfire
Mat. 5. 22. Gal. 5. 22.


2. To leave it: Endeavor 3. things. 1. Prevent it. 1. Expect injuries and
provocations. So they move less Mark 13 22.
2. Suspect reports. They make a little, more Prove. 26. 21, 22. and Pro. 16. 21.
; as Ziba did 2 Samuel 13. 3.
3. Value wrongs aright, as unfit, or not worthy anger; but scorn, if small;
and pity, if great; and if they come from men angry, take them as blows from
the hands of madmen. In comparison of injuries done to God, what are ours? and
who are we, if he were always angry Psalm. 7. 12. 130. 3.
4. Cut off occasions Pro. 22. 24. 1 These. 5. 22.
as Cotys brake his Venice-glasses. 5. Avoid self-love, which gives our wrongs
too great a value Genesis 4. 24.
.
2. Divert it. (As bleeding at nose, by opening a vein in the arm.) 1. To
another passion: as joy, pity, scorn Luke 9. 55.
. 2. To another occasion: set mind on something else. 3. To another injury:
against God, be angry at sin Mat. 6. 23
and particularly, at anger, so deformed a sin Irascor irae. Naz.
.
3. Delay it. Hold our selves in suspense, and silence, and do and say nothing
in anger.

This was Augustus his cure. Prescribed by the Philosopher. Atheno^^rus.
If you be angry, 1. Say over the Alphabet, before you speak or do any thing.
2. Say over the Lords Prayer, says the Divine, and mark the fifth Petition, or
some lesson of Scripture, as Mat. 5. 22.


Saturday-Service. Against Envy.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 37. Lesson, Pro. 24. or 14. Mat. 20. Verse 15.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 73. Lesson. Isa. 11. Gal. 5. or James. 3.


Collect, or Prayer against Envy.
O Lord! Because thine eye is good, let not mine eye be evil! And that the
Devils eye be not in my head, keep envy out of my heart. The eye, by which he
killed our first Parents, and would have us their progeny, to kill one
another! O let me not grudge another good! If a friends, because I love him;
if a foes, because he loves my grief. Whosoever it is, since it is the
Dispensation of thy Providence, let me not repine and quarrel at the acts of
thy Goodness!

And as for thy glory, so for my own comfort too, let not that Ulcer grow on
my heart, which will be as much my corrasive, as thy offense. Since I have
enough as a man, to grieve my own adversity, let me not be my own Devil so
much as to torture my self with another prosperity; lest on earth, a Hell of
perpetual torment seize upon me. From an eye so full of sin and pain, Lord
deliver me, even from envy, I beseech thee, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen!

Daily Prayers. Remedies against Envy.
1. A Snake in the heart, poisoning the fountain of action Jam. 3. 16.
, and stinging the mind, to the wasting of the spirits Prove. 15. 13.
, and weakening of the body Prove. 14. 30.
. 2. The heart will endure no such Snake in it, if it have 1. Faith. in Gods
Providence Psa. 75. 5
, whose orders and acts, envy quarrels Romans 9. 20.
. 2. Love To God and Heaven. For there, the more heirs, the more inheritance
S. Greg. Rule.
. And To Man on earth. For we do not grieve, but joy at their good who we love
Prove. 11. 10.
.
3. Lowliness. For Pride breeds this Snake Gal. 5. 26.
. 4. Pity. Eying men as mortal and mutable Psalm. 37. 1, 2.
. Dead Pompey made Caesar weep.

Seven Services, of the Vanities of the most valued things in the World.
Sonday-Service. Of the Vanity of Pleasures.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 17. 73. Lessons, Eccles. 2. and 11. or Isa. 47. Luke 12.
or. 16.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 35. 69. Lessons, Dan. 5. or Amos 6. Rev. 18.


Collect, or Prayer, against the Vanity of worldly Pleasures.
DEfend my soul, O Lord, from the Enchantments of the flesh, and save me from
vain pleasures, the great Witches of the world! Thou have made me with reason,
let me not live by sense. I am capable of thee as an Angel, let me not set my
self amongst beasts, making sensuality my chief good, which is but their
blessedness!

If my soul be sad, can worldly pleasures comfort me? and shall I be
everlastingly sorrowful for moments that delight me? Even the purest sweets of
the world, are mixed with bitterness, but the pleasures of sin, O, what gall
do they give the conscience? O Lord! To avoid the sting, let me loath the
honey of wicked delights! and because, under the flowers of pleasure, snakes of
guilt lie hid, let me beware of all! but O Lord! ever keep me from setting my
heart on any!

On thee be my soul ever fixed O God! In thee be the joy of my heart, even in
thee alone; and in other things only in thee and for thee! and let thy fear
be the matter or measure of all my pleasures, that they may be in thee; that
when the brook of earthly joys shall fail, I may drink of the river which
runs to all eternity!

O thou who art said to weep, not to laugh, strengthen me to see and overcome
this vanity; That I may joy in thee now, and with thee hereafter in endless
felicity. Dear Jesus; Amen!

Daily Prayers. Monday-Service. Of the Vanity of Honors.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 49. 82. Lesson, 1 Samuel 2. or Esth. 6. Dan. 4. Joh. 12.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 75. 83. Lesson, Isa. 3. or 5. or 23. or Jer. 5. 2 Cor.
1.


Prayer against the Vanity of Honors.
O Lord! Because thou have made me great, shall I not be good? Because my blood
is noble, shall my life be wicked? Because men do me honor, shall I do thee
shame? Lord, let such a spirit of baseness never possess me; let me know,
that the greater my honors are, the greater be my obligations to serve thee.
And let those parasites of greatness, appear as so many fiends of Hell unto
me, who would have me break those bonds, and flatter and nourish such a spirit
in me. Make me too wise to build my bliss on man's breath, that I be not
miserable at their pleasure, and happy when they list. Make me not so fond, as
to think, a glory so vain, can make me happy: So poor, as to think that
applause my blessedness, which goes and comes with a blast of man's.

Make me so wise as to know, that a holy spirit makes the noblest blood, and to
be thy child is the best descent; to bear thine image the best coat, to have
thine Angels, the best Ministers of honor, and thine eyes the best Judges! And
make me so good, as to do those noble acts of virtue and piety which may give
me this honor: let others court the vain, let me seek true glory! To scorn
earth, get heaven, shining as the Sun in the State of immortality: King of
Glory give this honor to me Sweet Jesus, I beseech thee. Amen, Amen.

Daily Prayers. Tuesday-Service. Against the Vanity of Riches.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 39. 49. Lessons, Deuteronomy. 8. 9. or Pro. 11. 23 Mat. 13. or
19. or Mar. 10
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 52. 62. Lessons, Job 31. or Eccles. 5. James 5.


Prayer against the Vanity of Riches.
KEep me, O Lord, from their madness who make riches their God, and poverty
their Devil! Let not that be my heaven, which is so near to hell; let me not
make that my bliss^, which earth has in her bowels! And let not that have my
heart, which is not my heaven! From immoderate desires to get or keep wealth,
keep me O Lord; and from sinful, defend me; that I may not covet much, to
spend more in the maintenance of lust, vice, and vanity; and have much to ruin
me!

Let me know, that riches are good as they come from thee, and give me a power
of greater piety, and charity, and alacrity to serve thee; and so let me value
them as acts of thy bounty! But as things unable to save, either soul from
hell, or body from death, in the day of distress, or to satisfy the soul in
any better day; let me despise them as poor and of no value! And as Means of
Sin, and Woe, Feeds of pride, luxury, and excess; let me abhor them as the
Fuel of wrath, and hell. Let me be rich in thee, and to thee! in baggs laid
up in heaven, laid out in earth, to man's Necessity, and thy Glory. Let the
riches of grace be my joy; others my use, and their love, my scorn. That when
the Worldly Rich shall be Beggars, bereaved of all comfort; I may be rich in
all abundance, in thee, and with thee, who art all in all, by the purchase of
the precious blood and passion of Him who became poor to make us rich, Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Daily Prayers. Wednesday-Service. Against the Vanity of Beauty.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 38, 39. 45. Lessons. 2 Samuel 14. or Pro. 31. or 11. or
Ezekiel. 28. Mat. 23
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 6. 96. 145. Lessons. Isay 3. or 28. Ezekiel. 16. 1 Cor. 11.


Collect, or Prayer, against the Vanity of Beauty.
O Lord! let me look at Beauty as thy blessing, but not make it my bliss! Let
not my care be more for my body, then my soul; and to have a fair face, then
conscience!

O let that which is thy face and Image, have the chiefest of my costs, and
care! Let the glass of thy Word be often before me to see it, and the waters
of repentance daily with me to wash it, and the fine linen of the Saints ever
by me to adorn it, that the King of Heaven may delight in my beauty; and not
Men, but Angels love me!

For beauty of the body; let it not be my sin, or another snare. Let me not
hate Deformity above Hell, and love Beauty before Heaven. Since age at last
will, and infirmity before may deface that beauty, and change it to a loathed
deformity. And Lord keep my looks from being lures of vanity. Let no guilts be
upon my eyes, of another iniquity. Let thy fear preserve me and them from
these guilts! Make it my care, to appear with a fair and clean conscience
before thee; and to Him whom thou have made the veil of my eyes, let me be joy
of his, That when humane beauty shall fail, an Angels may be given me; a body
and soul both fair without blot or blemish, to all eternity. To that beauty,
Lord Jesus bring me! Amen. Amen!

Daily Prayers. Thursday Service. Against the Vanity of Strength.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 22, 33. 38. 102. Lessons. Job 6. or 9. or 40. or 1 Samuel
17. Act. 3. or 5.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 86. 147. Lessons. Job 21. or Isay. 26. 1 John 2.


Collect, or Prayer, against the Vanity of Strength.
THat I have health, the Crown of earthly mercies, I thank thee, O God of my
strength! And I beseech thee continue it to me; without which, I cannot serve
thee, or enjoy any comfort from thee! And let me use it whilst it is with me,
to the end, for which thou give it me, to look, and seek after eternal life,
where is no sickness, nor infirmity.

Lord, make me know, that all other use is Vanity. To trust in strength,
idolatry; to turn it against thee, villainy; (To do more sin, because I have
more health from thee.) Let me therefore have care in the days of my youth,
and strength to remember thee, my Creator; that in the days of age, and
infirmity, thou may not forget thy Servant! Let my healthy body, make my
soul more cheerful to serve thee.

How unfit sickness is, to do thee service, and how many ways it may come,
let me sadly consider; that in my health I may go about my happiness, and in
my sickness have the comfort of a well-employed health; and at my death, the
assurance of eternal life, by that employment!

Lord! since thou give me the best of thy blessings, let me give thee the
first of my years, the strength of my youth, not my decrepite days; that come
sickness, or health, life or death, I may be Thine ever; a child of bliss,
and heir of immortality, by the merits of him who is the Son of thy Love,
Jesus Christ. Amen.

Daily Prayers. Friday-Service. Against the Vanity of Wit.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 36. 94. Lessons. 2 Samuel 17. or Prove. 3. Lukc 10.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 90. 111. 2. Lessons. Jer. 4. Ecclcs. 2. 1 Cor. 3 or 2 Timothy 3. Jam. 3.


Collect, or Prayer, against the Vanity of Wit.
I Thank thee O Lord, for the blessing of my Reason. For the power of it, by
which thou have made me a man, not a beast; and the use of it, by which thou
have made me, of understanding, not an idiot.

I beseech thee let me not mar what thou have made. My wit to delude my will,
and it to draw my soul from thee, lest I fool my self of the end for which I
was made, and an Idiot get to Heaven before me. As I have the wit, let me have
the wisdom, to know thee; and with my understanding, the conscience to fear
thee, without which the most wise is but a fool before thee! Ftom a wit to
contrive mischiefs, and to compass designs of vanity; from skill to use the
arts of sin, and find the ways of death and hell, Good Lord deliver me!
From an Atheists wit, to dispute against thee, and Religious acts which bind
the soul unto thee; and cunning to maintain acts of vice and villainy; Lord
keep me, that it find neither room nor favor in me, that such wickedness be
not charged upon me! Let me be a fool on earth, to be a Saint in Heaven! even
theirs, who think Sanctity a simpleness, Devotion a dullness, and thy Fear
a folly. And from pride of understanding, and scorn of the simple, who have
little to my much, let this preserve me; that thou can make my much to be
little, if I so provoke thee, bereaving me of my wits by a sickness or a
frenzy. Wisdom of God from all this save me, Dear Jesus. Amen!

Daily Prayers. Saturday-Service. Against the Vanity of Friends and Favor.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 38. 41. 11. 5. 39. Lessons. Esth. 6. or Job 6. or Pro.
19. Luke 1. Act. 7.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 88, 89. 106. Lessons. Micha. 7. Eccles. 9. James 1.


Collect, or Prayer, against the Vanity of Friends and Favor.
O Lord! Friends are Jewels, and so thou have taught us to value them; yet as
men that may be false, or will be fickle, our trust must not be in them. Some
are not more friends to my person, then my prosperity. And those that are now
most friends with me, may prove bitter enemies against me. Let me therefore
seek to have my Conscience, thy Angels, and Self, for friends that will never
fail me! and let thy will be mine, O God, that all these friendships may be
for me! O thou great Friend of mankind, who by thy blood did make fallen man
friends with God, by thy Holy Spirit make me fit for all these friendships! And
Lord, let me not value man's with thy favor! They can give me honor, but not a
Crown of Glory! Wealth, but not Heaven (Their hands are too short.) Yea, in
sickness and distress they cannot reach health, or quiet, to my body, or my
conscience. And though their power be ever less then my wants, it may be often
greater then their wills. O Thou Unchangeable Majesty, The everlasting lover
of them that fear thee, let me be one, that thou may ever favor me! Let me
not care for man's cloud, so the light of thy countenance shine upon me! Let my
sins never hide that light from my soul, I beseech thee; Sun of
righteousness, let some beam of thy love ever come unto me. Lord Jesus say,
Amen. Amen!

Daily Prayers. Services upon other subjects, and particular occasions.
Advertisement to the devout Reader, touching these Services.
FOr those services in the fourth Week, which may not be so proper for all (as
that of Honor, Beauty, Strength) those here which are of more Common
concernment may be used in their stead, as the Service against Malice, Revenge,
Impatience. The rest, as occasion and discretion guides thee, and devotion
finds most beneficial for thee. Wherein the Author gives thee, thou may
take thy choice. And if thou will, make these serve for a fifth Week, do as
shall most please and profit thee.

A Service of the pleasures of piety, for Sunday, or other day.
Morning Prayer. Ps. 4. 30. 32. or 33. 97. Lessons, Deuteronomy. 16. or Isa. 29. or
35. 61. 65. Joh. 16.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 16. 36. or 126. 132. Lessons, Heb. 3. or Mat. 3. or 8.
Phil. 4.


A Prayer to have the pleasures of Piety.
RAvish my heart O Lord with the joys of thy Saints, and cause me to see the
felicity of thy chosen! O! What are the pleasings of sense to the solaces of a
Soul? or the delights of the flesh to the raptures of Spirit? And in what but
in thee, O God, can my immortal Soul take repose, or my Spirit find relish!
thou art the Sovereign good. In thee is the Crown of joy. All in the world is
nothing to thee, woe without thee. And how can my Soul rejoice in thee, but in
the favor which thou have to those that fear thee; and those multitudes of
mercies which proceed from thy favor, to those that are in holy league and
peace with thee.

Lord! make me one of thy Saints, that I may have some of those joys, which
none but those that feel, know; and those that know, cannot utter! And give
me, I beseech thee, some taste of those holy pleasures, which may encourage me
more and more, to seek to be a Saint.

O Lord! of those shoures of hidden Manna which daily fall upon Souls greatly
devout indeed, let some crumbs and drops come to me, who truly desire to be so;
and whilst others take pleasure to swim in sensuality, let me be satisfied with
those drops.

Let sinful contents be my hate, because they banish them; and sensual, my
scorn, because below them! Let me joy in the goods of the earth as my common
portion, but triumph in thy favor, as my great Inheritance; and in the duties
of thy service and fear, as the ways to thy favor!

To the harvest of joy in Heaven, Lord at last bring me! and (to live more
comfortably on earth in thy fear) the First Fruits of thy Spirit give me! and
a love, and care, and conscience of thy fear increase ever in me, God of all
grace and comfort, I beseech thee, for his sake who came to save me, my Hope,
my Joy, my Jesus. Amen.

A Meditation of the pleasures of Piety.
ASsemble your selves you Epicures, Masters of delights, and Professors of all
the Arts of Pleasure; take Counsels, and make Musters of all your powers and
wits, with all your Students and Agents in delectable things and devices! One
Saint and Servant of God, is Commander and Possessour of more joys than you
all!

1. Joys of another Quality than yours; fair, and pure: even the poorest
extracted out of the grossest earthly goods, as Elixars, and Essences. Defecate
from your dregs of guilt, and stings of Conscience. A Tun-full of yours, is not
worth a Vial of theirs; Psalm. 4. 6. Eccles. 1, and 2. Prove. 14. 13
a whole Barrel of your Pitch, below a Box of their Balsome.

2. And contend you not in Quantity with them! their numbers exceed yours as
much as their excellencies. Their joys are

Two to one, to yours. Yours are Psalm. 4. 6. Jac. 1. 12.
for good of this life; theirs for ill, as well as good! And- Three to one, for
goods. Yours are for temporal (spiritual, you do not taste, eternal you
cannot hope!) they have Temporal, in hand; Spiritual in heart; Eternal, in
eye. Nay- Ten, hundreds, thousands to one. Yours is from Finite good; theirs
from Infinite. And (which multiplies that to ten thousand times ten thousands
of millions, and more) Yours, is for time; and theirs of that, Eternal.
You are then out-vied every way. Yours are the joys of Servants, (of Mat. 25.
13
Slaves.) Theirs, the Lords. Yours are Heb. 11. 25.
Drops; theirs, Oceans! yours, Moments; Isa. 12. 3
theirs, Eternities. Above them, Psalm. 36. 9.
is the spring of heavenly joys; within Isa. 30. 10. 1 Pet. 4. 8. Joh. 15. 11.
Deuteronomy. 12. 7. Jer. 11. 15.
them, seas of holy solaces; about them, rivers of Earthly pleasures; below
them, the pudles of your carnal contentments. They drink water pure from the
spring and rock; and therefore loathe your chanel joys! and even for that,
drink it in, both more pure, and more.

To all these Territories of joys have the Saints good rights, and it is Phil.
4. 4. Deuteronomy. 28. 47. Prove. 1^. 10 Psalm. 17. 14
both their shame, and sin if they do not take, and keep possession. Which
you cannot judge, who are strangers both to their joys and hearts! Nor, match;
who are pent up to your single sole poor pension of worldly-pettie, transitory
pittances!

Prince of Epicures, enter the lists now with a Prime Servant of Almighty God:
Sum up all thou can possess, or imagine, of joys, and give in thy total;
one of his least figures is more; the sum, infinitely. Have what Solomon's
brain and state can Eccles. 1, and 2.
command of delights; add what Cleopatra's wanton wits and friends can devise
of daliances; an Ephrem from his Cell, a Catherine from her Oratorie, shall
beat all your great Minions, and baffle all your multitudes of joies. You have
a sense-full of joys, they a soule-full. When your eyes run over with
laughter, your heart is not full; Prove. 14. 13.
their hearts are so full, that they run all over. Their Raptures are more
great than hearts can hold. One prays God to withdraw a while, his heart is
too Recede Domine, paru^per, quia vasculu^ cordis mei far nequit.
little a vessel to contain Him: the other cries out to Him, the multitude of
his joys, overwhelme her.

O Epicure! be a Saint, and thou shall find what thou do else in vain seek,
Obruor multitudine gaudiorum tuorum Domine.
(as thy chief good,) Joy above all thy joys; in quality, quantity, height,
depth, breadth, length; pure, as crystal; great, as God; high, as heaven;
deep, as the heart; broader than earth; long as eternity!

But O Saint! be not thou an Epicure! if delight draw thy heart, thou losest so
much in delectation, as Religion; and abatest thy Soul so much of solace, as
God of service! Believe it, if thou would have joy in life, and at death; for
the goods and ills of this life; both body and soule-goods; enough on earth,
and more, in heaven; the only way is, to be (as thou should be) and continue
as thou art, not an Epicure, but a Saint!

Service against Malicee, for Monday or other day.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 7. 10. Lesson. Prove. 24. Mat. 5. v. 43.
Evening-Prayer. Psalm. 35. 62. Lesson. Levit. 19. 1 Cor. 5. or Tit. 3. 1 Pet.
2.


Collect or Prayer, against Malice.
O Thou Divine Goodness, keep me from Malice, the very Soul of Satan, and
proper sin of the Devil!

Thou O God art Love: He then is Hatred; and if malice be in me, I shall be as
he is; one whom (unless thou hate thy self) thou can not love. From such
a detestable and damned disposition, Lord deliver me! Let not Satan's brand be
on my breast, and his soul in my body; lest being marked for him, he seize me
as his own, and take me, and carry me from thee, body and soul! Lord stamp
thy love on my heart, that I may be sealed for thee, and as thy own, claimed
by thee. And since this is the Cognizance of thine, to love one another, let me
not wear his Badge in a visible malice to any, that all may know that I am
thine: A Child of thy Family, a Dove of thy Flock, a Lamb of thy Fould, without
gaul, or mind to do mischief to any: Delighting like thee, to do good to all,
Even for his sake who did wish and do evil to none, Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Daily Prayers. Remedies against malice.
1. IT is a Toad swelling with venom in the heart: to God who is love 1 John
4. 8. 1 John 1. 12.
, more odious, because like the Devil, most abominable. (The Devils heart in
man's body.) 2. To cast and keep out this venom of the Serpent. 1. Consider, 1.
Men are mortal, their enmities therefore should not be immortal Ephesians. 4. 26.
. 2. Men are mutable. Whom now I hate, I may hereafter need; (as in Joseph Genesis
42. 6.
and Jeptha Jud. 11. 7.
.) 3. Men are amiable Prove. 8. 31.
: all after Gods image, and bought by Christ's blood Genesis 9. 6.
. 4. No man is the Christians enemy Heb. 2. 9. Romans 14. 15
: as God, he hates the sin, not the man Mat. 5. 44.
. 5. If there be antipathie in nature, it must be mastered by grace Gal. 5. 24.
, which must do miracles to nature.
2. Beware, 1. Of Anger. That if it kindle, it continue not to be wrath, and so
cool into malice Ephesians. 4. 26.
. 2. Of men of Malice, set upon mischief Prove. 4. 15. 16.
.


Service against Revenge, for Thursday or other day.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 94. Lessons, Deuteronomy. 32. verse. 35. or 1 Samuel 24. Luke 18.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 18. v. 47. Lessons, 1 Samuel 25. Romans 12. or Heb 10. v.
30.


Collect or Prayer, against Revenge.
O Thou to whom vengeance belongs, keep me from a revengefull spirit, that I
fall not into the hands of thy vengeance! And since my pity, and patience, and
pardon is thy will, let me not study revenges, and returns of injuries!

Thou (O meek and merciful Savior) did pray for thy bloody enemies! O let
me then forgive my greatest foes! Committing my cause to thee, who wilt do
justice for me on them, if I seek not revenge, and for thy self upon me, if I
do!

Thine O Lord, is the sword of vengeance, and thine is the sharpest sword! O
let me not dare to take it out of thy hand, lest whilst I strike others, I fall
justly by thy sword! Though flesh and blood provoke me to it, let thy holy
Spirit hold me from it; and cast and keep out of me that evil spirit by thy
power O good God and Savior, of thy mercy! Amen.

Daily Prayers. Remedies against Revenge.
1. THe sin of Revenge strikes at God, and Man. 1. It invades Gods
Prerogative, and takes his sword out of his hand. Romans 12. 19
2. It is many ways an injury to man. To his- 1. Nature. Borne without arms,
to live without revenge. And even armed Bruits agree with their kind, and
Devils avoid quarrels. 2. Glory. To pass by an injury: of Prove. 19, 11.
all, the most excellent victory; Caesar's noble memory to forget Pro. 16. 32.
To. 12. 22.
nothing but wrongs. 3. Peace. The mind is disturbed and takes no rest. Ester
5. 11, 12, 13. Prove. 12. 15
4. Justice. I am my own Judge, and another Executioner. 5. Wisdom. If my
revenge fall on a Just man, it touches God, his Zach. 2. 8.
friend. If he be unjust, my vengeance will make me so too.

2. Be a Christian and you cannot do this sin: contrary to the Holy life and
law of Christ; for when much provoked, Luke 9. 55.
1. He checked his Disciples for calling for it. 2. He commands Charity, to
pardon Joh. 15. 12 Luke 21. 19 To. 12. 20.
wrongs; Patience, to suffer them; and Kindness, to conquer them. 3. He
forbids Self-love, the mother, 2 Timothy 3. 2. Ephesians. 4. 31, 32.
and Wrath the father; both which, beget, and bring forth, revenge.

A Penitential Service, fit for a troubled Soul, fasting and praying for
mercy and grace, for Wednesday or other Day.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 6. 32. 38. or 51. 130. 143. Lesson, Isa. 1. Mat. 11. or
Act. 3.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 40. 42, 43. Lesson, Job 9. or Ezekiel. 18. or 33. 2 Cor. 7.


1. Collect or Prayer for a Penitent.
O Lord! I do here cast down my self before thee! O cast me not away from
thee! I cannot stand at the Bar of thy justice, I do therefore lie down at
the Footstool of thy mercy. I do condemn my self for my sins; Lord, do not
thou judge me! Cancel my sins in my Saviors blood, and wash my soul in the
streams of mercy! Though as red as crimson and scarlet, thou have promised the
penitent, they shall be white as snow; O acquit this pensive soul, of mine, I
beseech thee; let not my guilt be black, as Hell before thee. Wash me from it,
forgive it me!

And because forgiveness of what is past availes not, if I fall again into
former offenses; O God of all grace, I beseech thee, so to pardon me a sinner,
as to make me a Saint. Give me an holy strength to mortify my lusts, with an
holy care to watch and withstand all occasions and temptations to wickedness:
especially those that are by nature, custom, or condition of life, most ready
to surprise me; against them, make me to watch and ward, and pray, and strive
more diligently. And let thy Holy Spirit assist and strengthen me to a victory,
even for the blessed merits of him, who overcame the world for me, the Captain
of my salvation, thy Dear Son, Jesus Christ my Lord. Amen.

2. Collect, or Prayer, for a Penitent.
O God! with a prostrate body and bleeding heart, I do most humbly confess
and bewail my wretched nature, and wicked life before thee. For my thoughts,
my lusts, my deeds and words past, my conscience cries out against me Here
think of particulars when you say it.
; So vain, so vile, so foul, so ill, have they been before thee. And thou art
greater then my heart, and can lay more unto my charge, then conscience
knows about me!

O thou searcher of all hearts and ways, how often I have vowed thee better
service, thou know; and have shamefully violated my faith with thee! I have
sometimes begun to seek after thee, but soon lost my self again in the ways
of former vanity. As the hills, so has been my love to vain things; but my
goodness as the morning dew, which vanishes presently. And for this, even
from my own mouth, thou may again condemn me.

Yea, Lord! with grief of heart, and shame of face, I do yet further confess
and lament bitterly, that (as if it had been a light thing my self to be in
sins and arms against thee) I have been a Leader of others into Rebellion,
and so am both a Sinner and a Tempter before thee. I have countenanced in them,
what I should condemn; and encouraged, what I should abhor. And so as
principal to my own, have made my self accessory to other men's ills; and by
nursing the acts of their sins, have contracted their guilts, for which thou
may again condemn me, charging their wickedness and woes upon me. And
though I have been, and am at this day so guilty, unworthy and vile a wretch
against thee; O how good and gracious a God have thou been all my life, and at
this present art unto me! Though I deserve all vengeance, even to eternal
death, thy mercies have been, and are still great upon me!

O God of all pity and patience, I am confounded to consider thy great
goodness, and my wickedness against thee! Woe is me, that the bonds of thy
Laws, and thy mercies and my vows, should be all thus broken by me! For this
shame and confusion of face for ever might justly cover me!

But Lord! though I be every way a miserable Sinner, thou art infinitely more a
merciful God. Thou have a propitiatory for sin above all my provocations.
Mary Magdalene was foul with lust, yet forgiven: St. Peter perjured, but
pardoned: Saint Paul made others to blaspheme, yet found mercy: O Lord! for
thine infinite mercies sake, let my sins be forgiven me! even for my Saviors
sake punish not my guiltiness upon me. Seal to my soul thy pardon in his
blood, which was shed to save me.

And for time to come, let thy Holy Spirit assist me to live with more
conscience, and less sin before thee. Lighten my mind with a sight of thy
truth, and fire my heart with a love to thy majesty, that the vanities of the
earth may be my scorn, and the glory of heaven the only ambition that takes
me; and thy fear my only care, as the way to that glory.

In that way, guide me, keep me, and continue me, by thy holy Spirit, I beseech
thee; let me so use thy earthly blessings, that they may not hinder me. Father
of mercy, and God of grace, grant this I beseech thee: even by the blessed
Mediation and Merits of Jesus Christ. Amen.

3. Prayer for a Penitent Confessing Sins and Deprecating Judgments.
O Thou Holy and Dreadful Majesty! I am ashamed to lift up my eyes unto thee
for the sins I have committed against thee. Woe is me for the undue thoughts,
and lusts, and words, and deeds, of which I stand guilty before thee!

I have, like a prodigal Child, wasted those goods and days in the delights
of vanity, which thou O Father, did give me, not to sin with, but to serve
thee. And even for those few hours which I have spent best, privately in thy
service, and in thy Sanctuary, I have need to ask thy forgiveness and mercy;
So coldly, so carelessly, so distractedly, so irreverently, have I then, and
there, behaved my self before thee.

By thy holy laws, by thy many mercies, by my often vows and promises, I
stand at this day deeply obliged unto thee: But I have broken all those bonds,
and even to this hour am not free from rebelling against thee.

For this I do confess, thou might sentence me to as many judgments, as
the mercies are with which thou have blessed, and yet blessest me. Thou
might cast away that soul, which I have so much polluted with sin, and
smite that body which has been so much a servant to it in the acts of vanity.
Thou might take away all Hope and Comfort from me, and at once bereave me
both of Life and Soul.

Of all these plagues, O Lord, I am most guilty, by my sins; and if thou
should execute them all upon me, thou were but righteous in thy judgments.
But in judgment Lord, remember mercy! To thy poor servant, to thy penitent,
prostrate Child, grant thy pardon, Dear Father, and reach to my soul thy hand
of mercy! I have guilt, but thou have Blood, O Blessed Redeemer! I have
stains, but thou have Grace, O Holy Comforter! O Holy, blessed and glorious
Trinity, Spare my life, and save my soul, I beseech thee, who have condemned
my self for sinning so much, and resolve by thy grace to serve the more
conscionably!

And Lord! save thy poor distracted Church, O forgive her sins, and build up
her wal^s. And in Her, preserve all that are dutiful Children and faithful to
thee and her; especially those who are in Place and Power to preserve Her: Lord
do thou preserve Her, and Them; and all who are dear and near to me, and
Thee! Comfort all that are cast down, especially those whose souls bleed for
their sins, all poor-penitent-broken Spirits. Have mercy on them, O Lord, and
comfort for them, and heal them (thou good Physician, who alone can help
them) by the precious wounds and death, and bloody passion of Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Daily Prayers. Letanie. Ten Commandments. Epistle, 2 Cor. 11. 18. Gospel,
Mark 4. v. 35. Prayer for Catholic Church.
Service against Impatience, for Thursday, or other day.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 77. 37. Lessons. Job 2. or Prove. 25. Mat. 18.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 106. 145. Lessons. 2 Samuel 15. Romans 12. or Jame^ 5.


1. Collect or Prayer, against Impatience.
O Lord! let not a Spirit of impatience possess me, by which I do but provoke
thee, and advance not all, Jer. 7. 19.
above my misery. By it, I shall neither get thy blessing; nor ease my burden,
Isa. 45 9.
but draw thy curse, and double the cross upon me! Thou art my Maker! I may not
strive with Thee: And my misery, Psalm. 39. 10.
is thy work. I must not contest with it. I may struggle under the yoke; Lam.
3. 27
but what I shall gain but gaul and guilt by the strife? (Gaul, to my Jer.
28. 13.
neck; and Guilt to my conscience?) I will therefore kiss thy Rod, and bow to
what I cannot break, thy yoke: Under which I will draw on my course with more
humility, and care; Sad, for that I have offended; and careful, that I may not
offend; 1 Pet. 5. 6.
so shall my obedience be accepted, and my deliverance hastened. For, O Lord!
it is not my punishment, but amendment, which thou do seek, and therefore
sendest distress to drive me to Hos. 5. 15.
my duty. Which when I learn by thy rod and yoke, thou do lay them aside,
and appear in more comfortable shapes unto me: yea, and allowest my Apoc. 3.
10.
patience good recompense, for my better behavior, in the school of my
misery. Good Lord! let me learn what thou do teach, that I may receive what
thou do give, the honor of being held thy Faithful Servant under the
cross; and the glory of having Romans 8. 18.
a Crown for my service. Not for any merits of mine, or it, but for thine
infinite mercies sake; and the merits of Him who is the Great Master, Heb. 12.
3, 4.
and Pattern of Patience, and all perfection, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

2. Prayer against Impatience.
LOrd! keep me from Impatience, as much my pain, as sin. To thee (the wise
and just Disposer and Governor of Humane affairs) it is a sin; (a
quarrelling and fighting with thy Providence.) To me a poor frail Creature,
who cannot maintain contest Job 2. 10.
against my Maker, it will be but pain. If thy Hand lay the burden on, Isa.
49. 5.
I must submit; I cannot resist thee: Pray it off, I may; I cannot throw it
from me: yea, impatiently to seek to cast it off, is the way to overwhelme me.
O! let me not delight at once in thy displeasure, and my overthrow!

Thou art just: If evil be on me, it is what I deserve. Thou art good: If I
submit to thy will, thou will work my good, out of that evil. Thou art great:
If I will not by choice, I shall by force, submit to thy will. When therefore
evil (be it never so much, or great) is upon me, let me look up; (to thee) from
whom it flows! Let me look in; (to my sin) for which it comes! Let me look
on; (to my good) to which it tends! So shall I sit down in Patience under it,
and kneel down in prayer to be delivered from it; waiting humbly till thou
shall set me above it! Even so give me grace to do, and say, of my Cross and
Pain, as thou my Savior did of thy bitter Cup and Passion, Father! If it be
thy will, Let this Cup pass from me! if not; not my will, but thy will be
done. Amen, Amen.

Remedies against Impatience.
1. AN Insurrection against the Government of a Providence Almighty, and Good;
and therefore ever, fond, and foul. 2. A Sin, of an everlasting date;
because man is in the perpetual motion of misery, till at rest in heaven. 3. A
Sin, which keeps man from growing to the height of piety (to Su^ma
Philosophia, Chrysostom.
thank God for Adversity) making him as a Dwarf of Hell, giving Him, (if not
Bans and Blasphemies) Frets, for Thanks. 4. A Sin, which throws a man into
the Depths of iniquity. Tutor to despair, and Factor for Apostasy. Luke 8.
15. Heb. 12. 1. Lam. 5. 7, 8.
5. A Sin, which opens a gap to all Temptation, and Womb for all wickedness.
Mother of all man's miscarriage, Mat. 13. ^1. Malum impatientia est boni, Tert.
and mischief. An Enemy to Heaven, and Auxiliary to Hell. 6. A Sin, which
weakens and wast^s the Soul. Breaking down the Prove. 25. 28.
wall of her strength, Putting her shoulder out of joint, and body out of Luke
21. 19.
temper. 7. A Sin, which weakens and worries life. Depriving it of a Calm
Lam. 3. 26
of Conscience, in a Tempest of trouble: Making the shelter (that should be)
the more devouring storm: and man Prove. 18. 14
(flesh and spirit) swallowed up in the misery of both. 8. A Sin, so
forbidding man to improve life to the best (to die a Martyr) that it allows it
not well, to live Jam. 1. 20. ^
a Saint.
This Sin, of so execrable and formidable a quality, will be avoided, or
left, if we shall, 1. Know, and believe; Gods Providence Job 1. 21. Lam. 3. 39
Lam. 3. 22
governes all, and well: and our Sins, deserve all, ill, and worse. Sooner, if
we 2. See and Consider. Calamity, is a 1 Cor. 10. 13
Common lot: from which Saints Jam. 5. 10. Heb. 5. 8.
and Princes have no privilege. No not He that was King of Saints and Kings.
Especially, if we, 3. Mind, and study Christ's Cross. A Present Cure. No Water
so bitter, which this Wood will not sweeten Exo. 15. 23.
; no Meat which will not down with his Vinegar and Gall. No thing so hard,
which his Passion makes not easy Bern. nullus cibus tam amaris, qui si
recordatione aceti and fellis Christi temper^tur, non statim fiat dulcior.
. Greg. Nihil tam aurum etc. Luke 23, 41 Mat. 27. 46. Isa. 53. 5, 6 2 Pet. 2.
24 Mark. 12. 50.
Have in mind, Who? Suffered on it; an Innocent man, and God too (God-man?)
What? more than all Mankind ever did, or could bear! Why? for thy particular
Guilts in the generals of all Mankind! How? with a cheerful Spirit, and
submissive Soul! And if not for sin, for shame, thou will have out of heart,
Impatience. No such Physic to heal thy frets. No such Book to Teach; no such
Pulpit to Preach, Patience. Nor any Receipts, Lessons, Sermons more effectual,
than those in that Course, Book, and Pulpit. By the work of his Spirit, they
will be so, if thence we shall have grace to 4. Kill, and Preserve. What does
quicken and strengthen Impatiency in us. And will beget and nourish that life
which will not let it quicken. 1. Self-love, and Pride, give that Sin life
and strength. That Is the Womb; this Father of it. Deny my self and Mat. 16. 24.
I will take up my Cross: love my self and I shall not endure it. To cross
the flesh is the way to bear a Cross. And Humility will make me stoop and
take it on; Pride fume, and throw it off; or fret to Mat. 11. 29.
have it on. Not to be Proud, is the way to be Patient. And sooner 2. By
Innocence, Hope, and Love, which will give Patience a life. 1. Innocence makes
a quiet mind, Isa. 57. 21.
as Guilt a troubled. And Repentance helps to it, since man once cast out,
comes not to a perfect state of innocence. Martyrs therefore and Penitents are
the greatest Patients. Because, those are kept, these washed, innocent. 2. Hope
makes a strong heart. It Heb. 6. 19.
anchors it in the storm, and upholds it under evil: Else it would drown in
grief, or break and fall with misery. 3. Love of God, endures all for Him,
and much more especially from Him. It looks as at the Heb. 2. 9. Joh. 18. 11.
Scourge, the Hand, and takes the chastening quietly, because a Fathers rod.




Service of the Passion; fit for Friday, or Wednesday.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 22. Lessons, Isa. 53. or 63. Mat. 26. or Mark. 14. Luke
23. John 13.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 84. 112. Lessons, Zach. 11. and 12. Ephesians. 1. Col. 1.


Collect or Prayer, of the Passion.
O Incomprehensible Goodness and Mercy, who did send thy own Son to a
Cross, to bring me to thy Crown; and at the price of a most bloody Passion to
purchase my salvation: O let this love be ever in my heart, and the fruits of
it abound with me in all holy carriage and conversation! Make me therefore to
hate my sin more than death, which made thy Son to die; And let neither
goods, nor honors, nor liberty, nor life be dear unto me for my Saviors
sake, who made me so to live!

Lord! let me sacrifice all that I have and am to thee, who gave thy Dear
self, a Sacrifice for me! Let me thirst to shed my blood, and die for thy
truth; and let it be my meat and drink all my days, to do thy will, and live
to thy glory: That I may at last, by the merits of thy precious blood and
passion, dwell for ever with thee: with thy blessed Saints and Angels, giving
all lauds, and worship, and honor to thee, even for ever and ever. Amen.

Daily Prayers. Letanie. Ten Commandments. Epistle, Tit. 2. or Heb. 9. Gospel,
Mat. 26. or Joh. 3. Prayer for Catholic Church.
A Meditation of the Passion of Christ.
O Christ! Thy Passion makes me full of all Passions! I am in Love, and Hate; I
have my Longings and Loathings; I take Joy and Grief; I cherish Hope and Fear;
I am Incen'st and Ravished!

1. I am in love. And with whom but Thee, O Jesus! I am Enamoured Amor meus
crucifixus est, etc.
of thy Person! God-man! Son of God! The Beauty of Heaven and Earth! Center
of all Created, and Increated Excellency! Mirror of the Heb. 1. 2. Col. 2. 3.
9. 1 Pet. 1. 12. 1 Cor. 11. 3, 7.
Godhead! Wonder of Angels! Glory of Mankind! I am Enflamed with thy Love! why
so much (too much) O Lord! Was it not enough to leave a Throne for my sake, but
Thou must lie in a poor Cratch; stand at a base Nimius amor.
Pillar; hang on a Cursed Cross; not for thy self but me, (by my birth, lust,
life) a beast, a Villain, a Malefactor, to my God! Thou did write thy love
to Lazarus Legible in thy tears, shall I not read it in thy wounds? Saw they
Joh. 11. 36.
it in thy Dripping Eye, shall not I, in thy Bleeding Side? They, in the
Hot-water thou did bestow on his Dead Body; and not I, in thy Reaking Blood,
shed for my Damned Soul!

O duri and indurati, and obdurati, etc. quos non emollit tanta flamma, etc.
Bern.
O let my Heart never be so hard, as to see those Wounds of so great love to
me, and have no woundings of affection for Thee! for Thee? And all in heaven
and earth, that have Relation unto Thee, O Christ!

I am in love, with the Father of my Lord Jesus Christ, who would give His Joh.
3. 16. Romans 8. 32
only Son, so to suffer on earth for a time, that I might not fry in Hell
for ever!

And I have love t^ Thee, O Holy Spirit of God, who did Anoint Jesus, Isa.
61. 1.
to be my Christ; and give Him Inauguration to his Crown of Thorns, and
Blessed (though most bloody) Function!

O Holy Trinity! I do adore what I cannot comprehend, as your Heavenly 1 John
3. 7. Heb. 10. 7.
Persons, so your Counsels!

And with an humble love and holy reverence desire to behold and bless your
Design for the Salvation of one World, by the Passion of Him, who is more
worth than a Thousand! I see and admire, your wonderful Wisdom, Goodness,
and Power, that could, and did contrive, such a Decree! And (next to your
Persons) that Blessed Trinity of your Perfections, I will Ephesians. 3. 10, 11.
Col. 1. 27.
for ever, love, admire, and adore! And next God,

I have love for thee, O Man! Son of man, who ever thou art, by His flesh and
blood, and bloody Passion, made Gods Son and Brother of Christ. Thy Heb. 2. 10,
12, 14. Ephesians. 2. 13. 19.
Cross, O Jesus! shall make all Mankind my friends; and Thy Blood, glue my
heart to every man! O Christ! why should I hate any, when Thou did so love
all? How dare I slight any, when Thou gave thy Heartsblood for every one!
shall he that is Mat. 25. 40.
thy Brother, be my hate or scorn?

And of all Mankind, I love you, ye Saints, that are Twice his Brethren Romans
12. 5 1 Cor. 12. 27.
(in Spirit, and flesh) so near to Him in both, as makes you His Limbs, as well
as Brothers! And Thee, O Holy 2 Cor. 11. 2. Col. 1. 18. Ephesians. 5. 23.
Church! Spouse of Him, and Mother and Body of them; yea the Body, for which
(with specialty) He gave His Blood, and Self! I have Passionate Ephesians. 5. 25.
Act. 20. 28.
Love for thee, O thou Dearest Body of Christ! shall I think any thing too good
for thee, for whom He gave Himself? Preferring thee (His Mystical) before His
Natural Body? And shall I esteem, friend, or state, or liberty, or life, or
any thing, or all things before thee?

And (above all the world (though no worship) I have kindness for you, you
holy Angels of God: who though you have no Ransom because no need of a
Redeemers Blood; nor had wherwithall (as it needed not) to pay and contribute
at all to the Redemption) yet for your Zeal to God, and Love Luke 2. 13.
to Man, gave it the joy, as if it had been your Deliverance; and Christ the
Welcome, as if He had come to be your Savior! Messengers of His Birth,
Ministers in his life, Attendants at his Luke 2. 11. Mat. 4. 11. Joh. 20 12.
Luke 24. 6. Act. 1. 11.
Death, Heralds of his Resurrection, and Ascension; Giving to his Natural
Body, all Due Services on earth, and paying for him to his Mystical, your Heb.
1. 14.
Holy Ministeries, now he is in Heaven. O you Pure and Holy Spirits of God!
though you got not your Bliss, you lost not by Him! It is made more strong to
you, and you more High in Mediator Confirmationis.
it, by the Numbers of Glorified Bodies, filling the Rooms of Apostate Spirits,
to vour far greater joy, and Bliss. You love Him and His Passion for it, and
I you for that! You love Man, above your own Kind, for that, and I you for it!

Thus, Lord! I love all for Thee, and Thee, in all. And now I will love my self
amongst them! O Lord! I am One, in whom is thy flesh, (a Man.) I am One, in
whom is thy Spirit, (a Christian.) I am One, for whom thou did Heb. 2. 12.
Joh. 3. 5. Heb. 2. 9. Romans 5. 5. Isa. 43. 4.
shed thy Blood; On whom thou have shed thy Spirit; (A Redeemed, Esteemed Man,
by Thee.) And shall I be so poor as to value dirt to thy Blood? (the world
before thee?) Shall I quit Phil. 3. 8.
thy Spirit for lu^t? (value thee after the Flesh?) Shall I be tempted to give
my self from thee, to the Flesh and World? (love Thee less than the Devil?)
O Lord! I will value thy Blood more; I will keep thy Spirit, better. I will set
a higher price on my Self, than to sell thy Blessed Purchase, to the Devil,
for a Base piece of flesh, and small portion of the World. So am I, and let me
ever be in love with thee, O Lord!

2. But O Sin! I am in hate with thee; for my own, and for my Saviors sake.
That did pose Heaven it self, and put God to it, (one of the two) to damn
my Soul, or do thus to my Savior! O thou Enemy of God and Man! how execrable
art thou more than heart can think, that made Him Lamentable, more than Eye
saw! Lam. 1. 12.
And, O Devil! I hate thee, who did tempt man out of Paradise, and so draw
Christ to a Cross! And could thy Temptations have prevailed, and thy power
have matched thy malice, would have cast the Second Adam out too; that so nor
the First nor His Seed might ever have come in again.

And O World! I abhor thee, as the Imp of the Devil; who of His Jews and
Gentiles could find hands for such horrid acts; and Sins, that Act. 5. 27.
made those Bloody Passions! Sin! Devil! World! for the Death of my King, and
Lord, and Christ, Have (as you deserve) my hate!

3. I long for the Lord! My Soul longs for God, even the living God! Psalm.
42. 1.
(yea, even for the dying God!) when shall I come and appear in the presence
of God? God dying once, yet Apoc. 1. 18. Heb. 2. 8.
living-ever, when shall I come before the dying-living God!

I long for the Chariot which will bring me to Thee, and will Kiss it, 2 Timothy
2. 12.
though it be a Cross!

I long for the Inn which will lodge me near Thee, and will embrace Phil. 1.
23.
it, though it be a Grave!

I long for the Bed which will raise me to Thee, and will climb it, though Act.
21. 13.
it be a Gibbet!

O Cup of Salvation! I will not refuse Psalm 116. 12
thee! Though full (to Martyrs Mar. 10. 39
measure) of blood; if from Him, thou shall be drunk; and yet deemed nothing
to thy Saviors Blood!

And till my Soul can come to thy Glorified-Crucified Body, in Heaven; I long
after thy Courts, where Thou art present in Spirit, on earth! To be Psalm. 95.
6. Mat. 28. 20
in thy Holy Temple (which is the Chamber.) At the Altar and Table, (which is
the Chair of thy Presence.) Yea, where (in High and Ineffable Mystery) I find
a Presence of thy Body; and Keep both a Commemoration, 1 Cor. 10. 16.
and Communion of it, and thy Blood!

O Lord! Since I so much love thy Greg. Epistela Dci, etc.
Self, (till in thy sight!) how should I not long to see Thy Letters (the
Word:) and Thy Seal (the Sacrament:) and till in Beatificall presence, wear
that as a Ring in thy Remembrance!

4. I loathe the Life, in which I cannot See Thee! At best, an Exile; at 1 Cor.
5. 6.
worst, a Trouble to Thee. I loathe my self, for casting away love on so base,
and unworthy a life. Where I do, either Crucify Thee with my Sins; or Wound
thee with my Miseries! where Act. 9. 5.
(such is thy holy zeal to God, and sympathy, and tender mercy to my Soul.)
I renew thy Passion by my Guilts; or thine Agony by my Conflicts.

I loathe that Crucifix on my Breast, which encourages to trample Thee under
foot. I can endure O Christ to see Thee in Image (a Picture of my Dearest
Friend) but abhor to love it Eodem cultu Crux, quo Christus.
like thee; or, to pass so much time and devotion to that, as makes me more
forget my Lord, then dutifully remember me!

O Jesus! thy self shall be my Crucifix! Not hung at my Breast, but in my
Heart! No room but that is good Heb. 13. 13. 2 Timothy 2. 12. Heb. 12. 1.
enough for thee! That (next Martyrdom) hyes me most to thee! if I cannot fly
a Martyrs pace, I will run a Saints: And by the speed of a mortified course,
make more haste after thee!

5. I joy in thy Cross! not in thy Grief, O Christ! Can I see thy Body all
gore, and my heart not bleed? The Zach. 12. 10. Luke 23. 76.
Spear be in thy Heart, and no Sword at mine? I will not, I cannot endure it,
O Jesus! No! I joy in the Root! Thine infinite Mercy, O God! And in Luke 2. 78.
Col. 1. 20.
the fruit: The perfect Redemption of man! It is finished! Yes (blessed be Joh
19. 30.
the Blood that was the Price! Blessed the Body, that laid out that Blood!)
Heb. 10. 11. Heb. 7. 25. Joh. 16. 33.
The Satisfaction, is full! Salvation, is sure! Sin, is nailed! Hell, foiled!
Satan, chained! The World, baffled! The 1 Pet. 4. 2.
Flesh, wounded! Death, slain! The Grave, buried. Every adversary power, 1
Cor. 15. 54, 57.
is conquered by Christ, Triumphant in the Chariot of his Cross over all, Col.
2. 15.
All is finished!

O Dry Tree of more Blessed Fruit, O lignum faelix! etc. c. 1.
than ever Earth bare! No Rather, O Wet Body that made a Whole World, happy!
Sap and virtue of that Happy Tree! It was not the Wood, Col. 1. 20.
but Blood of the Cross that brought forth that fruit! (the Redemption of Man!)

And what good does not grow from, and upon that! Pulpit of Repentance! Pillar
of Faith! Anchor of Hope! Magazine of Charity! Armory of Mortification! School
of Patience! Mirror of Obedience! Rock of Constancy! Shop of Humility! (the
whole Duty of a Christian.) O blessed Root of Gods mercy, that bring forth
the happy fruit of Man's Grace and Glory! O Tree of Death, more Blessed then the
Tree of Life, that have such a Fruit and Root! Thus are my Joys triumphant in
thy Cross! But

6. I grieve to see thee Crucified again, O Christ! And my Soul is Crucified
for having a hand in thy Cross! Woe to the World for Offenses, which Heb. 6. 6.
make thee Bleed afresh, and bring thee to thy Cross again. Woe is me that
see thee daily Crucified, betwixt Heretics and Schismatics (Thieves of thy
Truth!) between Hypocrites and Profligates, (Thieves of thy Grace!) Amidst men
of intemperate Heats and cools in Religion: (Thieves of thy Honor!)

I grieve to see thee Crucified in vain. So much of the world lost, when 1
Cor. 1. 17.
all was paid for! A price sufficient to have ransomed not a World only, but a
Hell full of Devils, effectual only to a handful of men!

Yea, even within thy holy Pale, which should preserve thy Blood to a drop, woe
is me! How is it spilt to a stream! Whilst some give, others leave thee, or
themselves none! Making void by Gal. 2. 21. 2 Pet. 2. 1.
their Sins, the healing Virtues of thy Blood and Wounds! By Unbelief,
millions out of the Church; and by Mis-belief, thousands in it; and by
miscarriage of Life, Millions of thousands, both in and out. My heart bleeds to
see thy Creeds without Faith, thy Decalogue without Obedience; Thy Prayer
without Use; thy Sacraments without Reverence! Nay, to see it made Faith,
Conscience, Devotion, Zeal; to have no respect to Sacrament, Prayer, Decalogue,
or Creed! My Soul is troubled to see thy Holy Demeanes robbed, thy Mansions
ruined! Souls sold for Money, for which thou did pay Blood: And Lord! what
tears of Blood are sufficient to bewail it, that thy One, only Commandment
of Love, which cannot live at all out of thy Church; within it should be
slain, and buried all in Broile and Bloodshed! O Christ! can my Eyes see thee
thus Crucified again twice, and in vain once, and my Heart not grieve! Yet

7. I hope. And in Thee, and the Blood of thy Cross alone! I hope for Col. 2.
14.
Pardon, because I read it sealed in thy Blood! I hope for Salvation, because
Act. 20. 28.
I find it purchased under that Seal! Will thou not make good thy Seal? Will thou not preserve thy Purchase? Nor Sin, nor Devil then shall damn me, O
Christ: He shall not steal thy Romans 8. 34 35. 1 John 2. 1.
Purchase: It shall not void thy Seal. Thy Blood is my plea against both. In
it, I see my Pardon, and Salvation written; nor care I, so thou be my Advocate,
for Saint or Angel to set to 1 Timothy 2. 5
their Hands! I hope in thee for my Salvation. And so I do for my Mothers too.
The Spouse bought with thy Blood, and loved, as thy Body! O Lord, thou art (by
singular style) her Ephesians. 5. 24, 25.
Savior. And shall she want (what she so much needs) thy Salvation! She is on
the Cross; Dear Jesus deliver Her! Force without, and Fury within, Crucify
Her, Lord tender Her! Enemies and Children, both fall upon Her, O Christ rescue
Her! O let Her not want thy Bowels, for whom thou gave thy Blood! Behold Her
miseries! let Her not want a Bath, for whom thou yet have Blood; Forgive Her
sins! Till that has no Virtue, She is not without hope! By the Merits of thy
Golgotha, dry her Akeldama! By the passions of thy Calvari, take her off the
Cross! O Christ! Whilst thou have one drop of Blood, I will not Despair for
my self, or Her. Whilst that is warm, that chillness shall never seize my
Spirit! And I know thy streams of Blood are neither Drained, nor Cooled to
Earth, and the Seas of mercy run as fresh and full, as ever they did in Heaven!
Thence take I Hope. But,

8. I fear too! I Dread Temptation! Thy Cross was made of Adams Gal. 3. 13.
Tree! I fear, because he fell; Lord Deliver me! I Dread Desertion! Solomon's
Wisdom, and David's Grace I want. Yet had I both, should fall, if thou forsake
me! Lord! on the Cross thy Mat. 26. 56.
Disciples left thee; let me never! If Temptation carry me away, look after me,
do not leave me! I Dread Apostasy! O keep me from that Sin, from which, even
thy Blood, thy Cross cannot, or will not save me! How should it, when I
re-build thy Cross, Heb. 10. 26, 27.
and trample thy Blood?

I fear my self for all this. As my Sins nailed Thee to thy Cross,
Corruption 1 Pet. 2. 24.
rivets me in my Sins. The Devil never wants a Hammer, whilst Romans 7. 27
God has a World; nor has a Nail to seek, whilst Man has a Heart! O Lord! I
have one, and a Forge of Jer. 17. 9.
wicked devices and lusts in it, full of all damned cheats and deceits! From a
Tempest then of Temptation; From the Gulf of spiritual Desertion; From the
Precipice of final Apostasy; by the Virtue of thy Cross, Deliver me! And from
my self, above all; and my Heart (above all) in my self; Deliver me Good Lord!
I fear Precipice, Gulf, Tempest, but the Forge above all. Without whose work
and wiles, the Devil does in vain Tempt; God will not desert me, nor shall I
desert God. And Corruption and the Flesh that is there, I behold with most
horror, as the Anvile in the Forge: Upon which the Devil and it, Hammer,
fashion, and beat out all their Works! What will keep me from the Virtue of thy
Cross, and my Bliss Lord Jesus! That has (and ever let it have) my fear!

9. And how does my Blood boil in my Veins, to see thy Cross robbed of its
Virtue?

O Christ! My Spirit is at once, in Ird and dolor impleor pro Christo meo,
etc. Naz.
Grief and Rage for thee! Jesus! I am full of Indignation for the Affronts and
Injuries done unto thee! To see thy Blood spilt or scorned! To see thy Passion
forgot, or abused! Thy love, without Memory or Value! Thy Pains, without
Relief, or Remorse! Who can, who should endure, O Christ, to see thy Cross
made the Devils Standard! Without the Church, a Stumbling Block, and Rock of
Offense; 1 Cor. 1. 23
within, an Idol, and Tree of Superstition! To see thy Wounds (shelters for
Sinners) turned Cities of Refuge for Sins! Thy Merits, their Sanctuaries! Thy
Blood, their Life! Thy Self, their Patron! Thy Passion, the Nurse of
Presumption! Thy Mercy, the Milk of all Abomination! Thy good Theif made the
greatest Robber of Mankind; and thy Pity Principal to the Robbery!

And in the strength of these Villainconfidences, and Blasphemous Inferences
from thy Cross, who can consider without anger, what is done in thy Kingdom?
What Reeds are made thy Scepters? What Chaires, thy Thrones! What Tricks, thy
Orders? What Rudeness, thy Service? What Miscreants, thy Worshippers? What
Confusion, thy Religion? What Wildfire, thy Zeal? What Shames, thy Glory?
What Ends thy Services? What Lunacies, thy Revelations? What Prodigies, thy
Dictates? What Larguage, thy Word? What Prayers thy Breath? What Devilishnesse,
thy Spirit? What stirs, thy Motions?

All Wickedness done in thy Name; to thy Glory, by thy Warrant; and most under
the Seal of thy Cross. By those who wear thy Livery, pretend to thy Service,
and profess for thy Honor; seem to desire to know nothing but thee, and see
themselves Crucified, as mere mortified Men, who seek nothing less then
themselves; yet tear at once thy Laws and Limbs, pull down both thy Cross and
House, and lay together thy Worship, and Blood in the Dust! O Jesus! that did
whip the Buyers and Sellers out of thy Temple! Where is thy Zeal for thy
Church? for thy self? for thy Fathers sake? That can see, and yet suffer
these injuries to thy Honor and Blood! When Indignation kindles in thy poor
Servants Soul, at so great Indignities, how is it, that Wrath flames not out in
thine? How is it? Even so it is, bebecause thou art Jesus! love to Save, Joh.
12. 47. 2 Pet. 3. 9.
loath to Destroy! Waitest our Repentance, wavest thy Vengeance!

10. I am Ravished! with that good Spirit of thine O Christ! Thou had it on
the Cross, and keep'st it on the Throne! where it appears, it does ravish Luke
23. 34. Joh. 19. 28.
me. In thy lips! Prayest thou their Pardons that are shedding thy Blood!
Thirstest thou their Salvation, that are Butchering thy Body! In thy Arms!
stretched out to embrace all on Earth, and therefore strike not, though in all
the power of Heaven! In thy Eyes! As thou wast with one of my Mothers, Cant. 4.
9.
I am ravished with one of thine! Thy fury frights me, O Lord! Thy favor is
that One. The eye, with which thou did look at the poor Thief, and give him
both thy Pardon and Paradise! Luke 23. 43. Joh. 19. 26.
The Eye, by which thou did look at thy Dear Mother, and (amidst all thy
Wounds) choose her a Guardian, and have her in thy cares! The Eye, by which thou
did look at the dear Disciple, Joh. 19. 27.
and adopt him of thy Servant, thy Mothers Son! The Eye, by which thou did
look at poor Sinners to be saved, a Church to be Bought, Ephesians. 5. 25. Joh. 12.
42.
and World to be Ransomed! But in thy Heart, O! what an Apparition see I there?
Through the Bloody door of thy wounded Breast, a House full of nothing but
Goodness, Patience, Pity, Mercy! O what a Perspective is there by the way of
the Spear, to the Joh. 19. 24. 1 John 5. 6. 8.
Prospect of a poor Sinners sole Delight, a Heart full of all Grace and Favor,
in the Breast of a Jesus, (a Saviors Heart!) From that Heart, with that Eye, O
Christ, behold the Afflicted Mother, (thy Church) and thy dear Disciple (Her
Child!) Breath comfort to Her, for whom thou gave Blood! And to Him, who is
the Son of Her Comfort! Make peace betwixt Mother and Children, where there
should be Love! Let them live by one Spirit, that are bought with one Blood!
And no longer be one another Cross, but bear one another Burdens!

Dart, Lord, from that Blessed eye of Pity, these favors on the face of that
Bleeding Body! And with thy Arms (nailed once to a Cross, now extended on a
Throne) embrace Her, and uphold her in life! Advance her Throne, for whom thou
did endure thy Psalm. 8. 3. John 1. 3.
Cross! O thou, who did, with thy fingers work Heaven and Earth, and Heb. 1.
2.
upholdest all things by the Word of thy Power, whom the World treads under
foot, take thou into thy Arms! In thy blessed Arms, O thou Omnipotent, and
All-mercifull Maker, and Savior of the Word! In thy blessed Arms, I leave the
wounded Mother, and at thy Feet, I lay the Bleeding Child!

Jesus! nourish these Holy Passions in me, which my Heart has conceived, and
my Tongue now brought forth before thee! Let thy Holy Passion ever Breed them
in me, and thy Holy Spirit nurse them for thee! Even by the Merits of thy
Bloody Passion I beseech thee. Amen, Amen.

A Service Eucharisticall, or Preparatory to the Holy Communion, for Saturday,
or other Day.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 26. 74. 146. Lessons. 2 Chronicles. 30. Mat. 26. to Verse 46.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 55. 67. Lessons. Isay 55. 1 Cor. 11. or 10.


1. Prayer, before coming to the Holy Communion, Acknowledging, and
Deprecating our unworthincs.
O Lord! I am every where in thy Presence, and under thy Eye, and therefore
should be profanc no where: But thy Special Presence and Face is in thy
Temple, there therefore I should be most Holy. And thy Chair, and Seat, is at
thy Table, there then I should be most. Even the Angels are not pure enough for
such a Heavenly Presence, how then shall a poor sinful mortal Man appear at
so High, and Holy a Service? How shall I dare to Communicate with thee, that
deserve not to Come before thee?

Lord! Since I cannot come (as I should) Pure, I will endeavor by thy Grace to
come (as I may) Penitent! I will be more Humble, because less Holy; and more
Washed, because so Eilthy. And, O Lord, give me Grace so to come. Let me look
over my life in the Glass of thy Law, (let my Conscience help me look) and make
me wash with my Tears, what is polluted in my ways; and cleanse in Christ's
Blood, what I wash with my Tears! O Lord, in a Bath of this water warmed in
that Blood, flowing from a Sinners bleeding Heart, and Saviors bloody Side,
shall I not be clean if I wash? Pierce my Heart, O Lord, that I may Repent,
open my Heart, that I may Believe, that I may so wash, and be clean. Though I
did not live, let me believe aright: and let me love, whom I do believe. Thee.
O God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! who did send thy Son to shed his
Blood, and Redeem me! Thee, O Son of God, who did come, and shed thy Blood
to make a Bath, and heal me! Thee, O Holy Spirit of God! by whose Grace, and
Work, upon my heart, I come to have the benefits of that Blood! And whom I
love, let me not grieve! Lord, let me no more offend thee. Let my heart be set
to serve thee, resolved to please thee: And do thou accept me, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost. Amen.

2 Prayer, to be used before the Holy Communion, to be pardoned, and prepared
for it.
Dear Savior! that have given thy Flesh and Blood to be my meat and drink,
and now invitest me to those heavenly dainties: Who am I (woeful and wicked
wretch that I am) that I should dare with my unworthy hands to receive those
High and Holy Mysteries? Originally unclean; Actually defiled; and even since
my last coming and Communicating (for all my vows and protestations before
Thee) again and again polluted. In these straits and stresses of spirit, how
shall my soul be satisfied? If I come not at thy call, I rebel against thy
mercy: If I come, I trespass upon thy purity! O my God! I will not stand out
a Rebel, but rather fall down an humble Suppliant before thee. I am guilty,
Lord pardon me! I am polluted, Lord purge me! Though guilty, though polluted, I
am thy Ransomed soul, Dear Redeemer save me! Let the Merits of thy precious
blood, cleanse me from the guilts upon me! Let the graces of thy Holy Spirit,
Sanctify me from the stains within me! Let the sighs and tears which come
from my bleeding heart, wash off those blots by virtue of that precious blood!
Let the cries and prayers, which now come from my believing soul, obtain
those graces from thy Holy Spirit. True repentance and humility. A lively faith
and charity, with all those holy and heavenly thoughts and affections which may
dispose and prepare me for thee! By these, fit my soul for thy self, and my
body with my soul to be an holy house and habitation for thee. Let thy Holy
Spirit and Body enter into me! Come Dear Redeemer, come to the price of thy
blood, seize thine own and save me! Possess my soul, feed me and preserve
me! Hereafter, let me have more grace then to grieve thee. Give me care to
keep my body (thy Temple) more pure from sin, and holy to thee; and my
heart (thy Bed) more clean from lust, and undefiled before thee! In the
strength of thee the Living Bread, let me grow more able to serve thee! And by
virtue of so near an Union and Communion with thee, let not mine, but thy Holy
Spirit from henceforth lighten, lead, and enliven me! That I may shun sin
which thou hate, and daily do those duties of devotion and charity, which
please thee. So let this Holy Sacrament at once Seal to me thy mercy, and my
glory. Where I shall for ever communicate with thee, in perfect purity and
felicity! To that happy Communion, by thy grace, dear Savior ever prepare me!
and now for a Holy Communion with thee! Amen! Amen! Say Amen Lord Jesu!

3. Prayer, at our coming to the Holy Communion.
Did Thou not invite me to thy Holy Table, O Lord! I durst not come. Now thou
call me, I dare not keep away! And yet, when I do consider, Who, and what
is here, I fear and tremble to come. Thou O Lord! art a Holy and Dreadful
Majesty, and so Thy Mysteries be: Holy Bread, and Holy Wine; A most Holy Body,
and Blood. (No taint in His Blood who is God and Lord as Thy self) The Lamb of
God, Immaculate, Undefiled, without Spot, all-pure (most High and Holy!) But
alas! I am Unclean, Unclean, Unclean! Originally, Actually; (every way) In
Heart, Hand, Lips, (every part) Throughout, Childhood, Youth, Manhood (every
Age;) Most unworthy to approach a Presence so pure, who am so unholy!

True Lord! But I lament my Uncleanness. I renounce my own worthiness. I
come; not because worthy, but needy! I come to be made clean and worthy! That
Body and Blood can make me clean (It is my Saviors!) His Merits can make me
worthy. (They are thy Sons!) And here is a conveyance of that Blessed Body and
Blood (It is thy Sacrament!)

Lord! Think me worthy for his sake, and Make me worthy for thy Mercies sake,
by my coming! Give my Sins thy Pardon; my Soul thy Grace, My self thy
Acceptance, in thy Beloved. And what Thou do convey, Seal to me by what I am
to Receive from thee, The Blessed Body and Blood of Jesus Christ our Lord! Amen.

4. Prayer, and Thanksgiving after Receiving of the Holy Communion.
PArdon O Father, thy poor Child the errors and infirmities which have passed
in thy Holy Service, whether before, or in, or since the Sacrament. And in, and
for the precious Blood of thine Holy Child Jesus, of which I have had the Holy
Communion, Seal me my pardon! And behold and accept thy Servant from a heart
full of thy love, pouring out praises to thee, for the inestimable benefits
received in those High and Holy Mysteries! What am I O Lord! or what is in me,
that thou should do this great honor and favor to me? I am unworthy to
touch the thresholds of thy House, and thou have taken me to thy Table! I am
not worthy to stand amongst thy Saints, and thou have made me sit with my
Savior! I am not worthy to come before thee, and fall down before thy
Footstool; and thou have been pleased to come into me, and make my heart thy
Throne! I am not worthy to eat the bread of Men, and thou have given me the
bread of Angels! Yea Lord! The Angels hunger, but have not this bread! What
they admire, I have received: whom they adore, I have entertained. The Body and
Blood of Jesus, their Mirror, is my meat. Christ and they are Two; but I and
my Savior are One. Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone. One Blood, one
Body. O unspeakable Mystery! O incomparable Mercy!

Lord, I beseech thee, since of my self I cannot enough praise thee, make me
some way worthy of thee! Let my Hands which have received that Blessed Body and
Blood, be henceforth Sacred, and do no deeds that may offend thee! Let my Lips
which have touched those Holy Mysteries, be hallowed from all words that may
displease thee! And let my Heart, the Habitation of my Lord and Savior, be
hereafter holy, and no vain thoughts lodge within me! As I am one with Him in
Body and Blood, let me be one in Spirit. The spirit of Wisdom, Love, and
Holiness; truly to know Thee, serve Thee, and cleave unto Thee! By the blessed
Sacrament of his Body and Blood, Convey it to me! Confirm it in me! Let it be
to my soul the Signet of thy Love, and Seal of thy Glory. And even for the
Precious Merits of that Blood and Body, receive me to it, I beseech thee, that
I may be one in everlasting Union and Communion with Thee, for Jesus his sake.
Amen. Amen!

A Thanksgiving to be said after the Communinn, fit for one devoutly affected
at it.
THou that have given the Bread of Heaven to feed me, O give me the tongue of
an Angel to praise thee! O Lord! the very Angels are not blessed with such a
Bread. O! what an high Mystery and mercy is this, that my Savior is my
Sustenance, and their Maker my Meat! The Body and Blood of Christ the Eternal
Son of Gods to be in an holy Communion eaten and drunken by the mouth of a
mortal man! O the infinite condescending Goodness of a gracious God, to make my
humble heart the habitation of his Holiness! To come to me, enter in me, and
become one, not by Reconciliation only, but heavenly Union and Communion, with
me! O miraculous Union! O mysterious Incorporation! O happy Soul that art so
near to thy Savior! O blessed Savior, that art so near to my Soul! O
wretched Soul, if any thing be too dear with thee for such a Savior! That
would not give thy body and blood for his Truth; that wilt not give thy life
to his Glory! O Lord! let my Soul, which by thy Sacrament, is made so happy;
by my sin, be never made so wretched! Thou that have entered thy Body and
Blood into me, by thy Spirit take possession of me. Guide me, lead me command
me, rule me, move me: Be thou the Spirit of my Soul, and Soul of my Body. Let
not the Flesh, World, or Devil henceforth have any power in me! Live, O Live
Thou in me, O Christ, in thy earthly House, and let me live for ever with Thee
in thy Heavenly Habitation. Even by the Merits and virtues of thy precious Body
and Blood, Sweet Jesus, my Dear Lord and Savior; I beseech thee. Amen! Amen!

An Holy Rapture to be said by One, having Devoutly Communicated.
O Lord! Where thou do dwell, is Heaven: Heaven then is not this day more
Above me, then Within me: How then shall my Single Soul Honor thee, and my
Tongue extol Thee, who have made for thy Servant, a Double Heaven! O Lord! Let
all that is within me, and all that is without me (mind, heart, tongue, hand,
all) Savor of that Heaven that is within me, and set forth thy Glory! And do
Thou who this day have conveyed Heaven into me, at my last hour Convey my
Soul into Heaven. That what is here wanting in thy due Praises, I may pay
there in everlasting Halleluja's. Even so Lord Glory be to thee for ever, for
the Invaluable favor and honor thou have done to thy servant! For the
unsearchable Riches and Treasures Conveyed in thy Sacrament, even the Blessed
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, my dear Redeemer, and Lord, and Savior. Amen,
Amen.

Meditations for the Holy Communion, upon 1 Cor. 11. 24. and 25.
Do this in Remembrance of me.
D Oe!] but for thee Dear Jesus! I had been undone for ever! for thee then, and
for Mat. 18. 11
thy sake, what is it which I should not do?

2. Thy desires are my Commands: There is Authority enough in thy love, for me
to do what thou shall please. Speak Lord, then thy* Servant hears, what ever
thy will is, that will I do.

3. Since thou would have no flesh but my Bodies, I will have no will but
Heb. 10. 5.
thy Souls. What is thine, shall be my will O Lord, and done which thou will
have me do!

4. I dare not say so to any man, O Lord, (though never so Godly, so much thy
Man:) His will may have Error for Guide, and ill in Company: But, O thou Holy
one of God! Thy mind knows no Error; thy will no Obliquity. I dare do
whatsoever thou do will!

5. Dare do! Dare not but do it! If thy desire once come out in an
Injunction, and thy will be signified by Command; not only upon my Obligation
I ought; But must upon my Mat. 17. 5. Act. 3. 23. Act. 9. 6.
Allegiance to thee, the King of the Church, and Sovereign, as well as Savior
of my Soul; I must not dispute, nor delay, but do; and therefore ought, may,
must do,

This.] For Lord, what is it, thou would now have me do? Is it to climb a
Cross? to undergo a bitter Passion? Act. 21. 19
Even for thy sake, I should not think much to do that, who have done more for
mine. What then, when it is not so much as this? not to go to a Scaffold, but
come to thy Table? not to go to a Grave, but a Feast? not to Bleed or Burn,
but to to Eat and Drink? not to Suffer that, but to do this.

2. And what is that I am to Eat and Drink? Bread of Affliction, and Water of
Adversity, which flag my Spirits? No Dear Jesus, but Bread and Wine to
confirm, and comfort my Heart. Not a Confessors Bread, (Tears) nor a Martyrs
Cup (Blood) but a Saviors fare, (Blessed Wine and Bread) yea in them, (what
both is, and makes Blessed) The Body, and Blood of Bliss! Dear Jesus, Thy
Holy Body John 6. 48 53. 54.
and Blood! Meat and Drink that does both joy my heart, and save my Soul;
Bread of life, and Well of Life. Of that O Lord I eat in thy Bread and drink
of this in thy Cup, Because thee in both, who art, Lord and Bread; Well, and
Lord of Life! Was the Passover a feast, and is thy Supper none? Where no sower
herbs, but Natural and Celestial sweets are served in at the feast? If that be
thy Command O Christ, I am a rebel as much to my good as thy Law (a damned
rebel) if I do not this!

3. And a Wretch, if I do not all, but bate thee half of that, I am not Saved
but by thy Body, I shall be damned 1 Pet. 2. 24 Heb. 9. 12. 21.
without thy Blood; I can want neither Blood nor Body, for my Sacrifice, and
shall I not have them both, in thy Sacrament? Did thou offer thy Blood for me
on the Cross? and shall I not take the Pledge from thee at thy Supper? Do
thou give me a Title Mat. 26. 27. Mat. 26. 28. Ephesians. 1. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 19.
to thy Blood, and shall any keep me out of my Possession? Rob me of thy Mercy,
and my Right, of no less then the Price of my Redemption? Do thou give me
the Purchase in thy Blood, and shall any deny me the Seal in thy Church?
Thine? O Christ! how is that Church Thine, that dare be guilty of so great a
Rebellion and Robbery? To violate at once, thy Will, and Seal; To steal at
once, thy Cup and Scepter? Against thy Testament and Will, thy express Will
and Order, to do that, can there be a bolder, a greater Rebellion? To take the
Cup from thy People, and the Scepter out of thy hand, (to deprive their Souls
of thy Blood, Sine grandi Sacrilegio fieri non posse. Gelasi. Council. Constable.
thy Self, and of thine Authority) can there be a viler Robbery? And, to
Confess the Fact, and Justify what is done, (O thou King of Heaven, and the
Church!) can any Hand against thee be more High, or act more Vile? What then
shall I do, Dear Jesus, when, and where I cannot do this? Where, though I
beg, I cannot have thy Cup? Shall I take half, or none?

O Lord, that art not for Half a Service, thou art not for Half a Sacrament!
Thou that look at that as none, will thou accept this for any? And have not
they just ground to fear that do but half of this, that (when all is done)
they have done nothing? Because by thine Authority and Holy Institution, and
the Practice of Primitive, and Purest Church, it was not Ordained, nor Used so
to be done? Dear Jesus! P^ty the People that endure this Injury, and either
seek not, or find not ease, from so great a Tyranny!

And Justify thou their cause, O Christ! who for their Savior, and their
Souls sake, do not give the right hand of Fellowship to those, who thus rob
thee of thy Worship! Separate from their Service, who divide thy Sacrament:
Because they dare not own what those Usurp, a Power to alter what thou do
Institute. Nor Seal what they Decree, an Act confessed against thy Ordinance: Nor
do what they enjoyne, a Violation to thy Holy Seal and Sacrament! How shall I
Body with them, that keep thy Blood from me? How shall my Soul unite with them,
who exhibit to me but half a a Savior? Shall ^ not withdraw my self whole
from them, that will not give me the Sacrament entire, but half? If they deny
me thy Cup, shall they have my Communion?

O Lord! How should I Communicate with them, that take (as my understanding
from thy Service In an unknown Tongue.
, and thy Scripture from my Reading forbidden.
Eyes, so) thy Cup from my Lips.

If that thou Command upon my Obedience, without thy Curse, I cannot do
other. That is, not to do this!

4. Do this.] And see you do it not? what language is this? leave this half
undone! Who dares thus contradict thee O Christ! Is he thy Vicar, or Master,
that dare do thus? Is it the Pillar of Truth, which thus pulls down the Pillar
of a Sacrament, (a Pillar of Salvation?) Takes off thy Blood, the Cement of
that Holy Pillar? And so pulls (if not all, at least) half down?

Shall I satisfy my Conscience with Wit? And first Devise, then Believe, the
Blood is given in the Body? But in Per Conc^mitantiam.
the Eucharist, thy Blood is given as shed, not kept; Poured out, not contained
Mat. 26. 28.
in the Body! And why then should any have the Cup, since in the Body is a
Conveyance of the Blood? Did the Apostles only take the Cup? Then Laiety must
not eat the Bread; and so be cut out of the Sacrament of Salvation, both Body
and Blood? Did thou not foresee this, O Lord! and therefore say, of purpose,
not Eat Mat. 28. 26, 27. Non Edite omnes, Previdente Domino quod de calice.
etc. Bux. Hist. Dom Caenae. 15.
ye all, but Drink ye all of this, (to show that none are to be excluded from
the Cup? By thy Grace then I will never do that; As thou appointest, I will
observe, and do this.

5. This.] Not thus! It ties not to a Circumstance, but the Substance of the
Command. Nor Place, nor Time, nor Number (is confessed;) for then only Twelve
should Communicate in an upper Room, and at Night; nor Gesture, then if
accidental too, (though evident what it was) the Church has power to appoint
it, and I may with good Conscience observe her Appointment: and though neither
so, nor so, yet do this,

In Remembrance.] I blush Lord! to see my self need thy Memento for this. Have
I a Chest for the Trash of the World, and no room for thee, my Heavenly
Treasure? Memory for what I list, and none for what I should? Thou have so done
thy mavelous Works. that they ought to be had in Remembrance, O Lord! And O
thou, Psa. 114. 4. Isay 9. 6.
whose Name is Wonderful, and all thy Works as thy Name, and in this above
all thy Works, can I ever forget thee?

2. Can I forget my self so much? That do not breath a minute on Earth, or out
of Hell without thee? If I forget thee O Jesus! Let my tongue cleave to the
Roof of my Mouth! Let my right Hand forget her cunning! Surely that Harp had
never known the tune of Joy, nor Hand had ever to do with Harp, had not thou
put a World Ephesians. 1. 10 1 Cor. 5. 19
(all out) in order again, and set all in Tune?

3. And is that all, when I owe a thousand lives unto thee, to require not my
Body, but my Mind, to say, Remember? Not to suffer Death, and die for thee,
but to forbid thy Memory to die in me! Will I wear a Deathshead in a Ring to
preserve alive the memory of a Dead Friend? And (O thou Loving, and Blessed
above all Beloveds, when thy Passion is Engraven by thy own Hand in an Holy
Mystery, for my mind to wear, shall not the Ring be on my Finger? shall not my
Heart keep, and wear thy Ring?

4. But is that all Dear Jesus! Is that all I am to do, to give thee a Memory?
Surely then it must be the best of all. O thou Manna, that came Joh. 6. 32.
Heb. 9. 4.
down from Heaven, a Golden Pot must keep thee? My Soul must have most
Precious memory for thee! Quick, not Dull; Humble, not Bold; Tender, not Hard;
Active, not Contemplative; (that is Leaden, Brazen, Iron, but Silver (at best)
and reprobate (at worst:) The Memory which moves all good Affections to thee,
and Promoves all good Abilities for thee, that is the Golden pot must keep thee.
So thou would have this Memory, because it will mind, and do all Duty;
Admire, and Love thee; Obey, Endure, Do, and Suffer for thee. It will
establish Faith, excite Repentance, inflame Charity, maintain Constancy.

O thou Mirror of the Godhead, Heb. 1. 3. 4
Beauty of the World, Excellent above Angels, High above all; Lord of Lords,
King of Kings! Those are thy 1 Timothy 6. 15. Eccles. 12. 1.
Dues! And Holy Memory is a Storehouse, full and Rich to Pay all; therefore
thou say, Remember me! I cannot but Believe, Repent, and Love to the last,
if thou be in mind; If I Deuteronomy. 32. 18.
fail payment of any Duty to God, or Man, it is because thou art out of my
Memory! But to thy Memory Dear Jesus! what is it I should do? O Lord, thou
would have me do this,

In Remembrance of thee.] Thy Passion; that, that, must be in my Memory; and
Thee, I must Remember, in 1 Cor. 11. 26.
that. Thy Sacrament then is an Obelisk to the Eternal Memory of thy Passion.
A Pyramide of everlasting date, set up in the Church for a Solemn memorial of
thy Death. And Lord! So often as I neglect it, what do I but pull down thy
Pyramide? And Bury Thee and thy Merits, (as the Jews did thy Limbs) but in a
worser grave (not in a garden) but desert, (a grave of oblivion.)

2. And what Lord! Shall I Remember, of thy Passion? What? But that thou, the
Eternal Son of God, wast made Man to endure it: Moved Heb. 9. 14.
by mere Love, (Infinite Love) to undergo it: And I (wretched Creature)
Sinful Son of Man, the Man that caused it: who else, had been for ever a
Miserable and Damned Man? And thus, did Infinite Wisdom, Mercy, and Power in
God, wonderfully work the Salvation of Man! This ineffable Mystery of
Redemption, by the Miraculous Passion of the Son of God, which thou did
Suffer, thou would have me Remember! And thy Sacrament is a Monument to last
as long as thy Church; that whilst I have Life, and Soul, I should perpetuate,
and preserve, a Holy Memory of my Savior.

3. And what a Wretch am I, that have need of such a help to my Memory, and
Spur to my Duty, as both a Commandment and a Sacrament for both? It casts
reproaches on me, O Christ! That thou should give thy Body for me, and I scarce
give my mind to thee? That I should have so great a room in thy heart, and
thou so hardly get any in mine? That thou should be more ready to Bleed for me,
then I to Think of thee? Dear Jesus! That did empty all thy Veins for me,
shall I not find a vessel to Preserve thy Precious Blood! Do I not Spill
what thou did shed, if I let it run out of my Memory? Yet art Thou put to it,
to find me both Blood and Mind; And when thou have done all that out of
Remembrance of me, (lest it should be forgotten) ordainest a Sanction and
Sacrament, and say, Do this in Remembrance of me!

4. But more Wretch I, if I do not so do, and Remember! For Lord! If I do
thee Honor, do thou not do me favor for it? If I give thee glory, is it
more my Duty, then Felicity to do it! If thy Sacrament, is it not my
Emolument? Receive I not great Honors in it? Reap I not good Benefits by it?
Conveyes it not the Bloud-Royall Concorporei, Consanguinei. Basil.
of Heaven into me, and am I not Kinsman, Brother of God, an Heir and Prince
of Heaven, by virtue of that Blood? Is not the Godhead Bodily in Christ? And is
not his Body Col. 2. 9. 1 Cor. 10. 16.
Mystically in me? And I near Akinne to God by the Communion of that Body? And
can he want Demeans, that is such a Prince? Is not the Earth Psalm. 2. ^.
thy Gift, and Heaven in thy Power, Mat. 28. 18. Heb. 1. 2. Ephesians. 1. 7. 2 Cor.
1. 22. Romans 8. 32* 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23.
Jesus thou Son and Heir of all? And have I not thy Spirit, thy Flesh to
Pledge for all? The Conveyance Sealed in thy Blood, and thy Merits made over
and Assured in thy Body? O Lord! I am so much concerned in Honor and Estate,
to do what thou do command, that if I do consider my Self, I should do it
to thy Memory, in Remembrance of me, as well as Thee.

5. But what Lord! Must I so do? Mat. 26. 26. Credi salubriter posest,
investiga^i sa^ubr^iter non potest. Lumb.
Believe Thee Present in thy Holy Sacrament? Upon thy Word, I do. But,
Determined in a Natural and Corporeal way of pr^s^nce? for thy Word, I do not
Act. 3. 31
. So, thou art in Heaven, and wilt be to the great day; Not on Earth, So. This
Remembrance teaches me, that, Absence. If so present, I should see thee, not
Remember thee! Thou art Glorified in Heaven, Thou wast Crucified on earth; It Is
this, I remember.

I Remember, but do not Offer Heb. 9. 25, 26, 28. Heb. 9. 24. Col. 1. 20.
this. That thou did once; I Commemorate, not R^iterate often. The Propiatory
Sacrifice is Thine, the Eucharisticall, Mine. That was on the Cross, this is
in the Eucharist. This I 1 Cor. 11 26.
do, that I Remember. The Memory of that I offer, the Tragedy I do not act.
What was in Sacrifice, is here, in Sacrament. This is all that I do, and need
to do, and can do, if all, in Remembrance of thee!

6. So then My Soul and Body, have both to do in this Business of thine; But
my Soul, more then my Body. My Soul is Chief Minister to wait upon thee in
this Mystery; My senses but handmaids to wait upon my Soul. Sight, Touch,
Taste, Smell, all, to bring the more to my mind, and reach the better to my
Memory.

Thy Bodily Presence makes a True 1 Cor. 11. 29. 1 Cor. 1^. 30, 31.
Eucharist: Mine, (if mind be away) to me but a Mock-Sacrament; To thee but a
Mock-Service, and will convey to me a Real Judgment, but a Mock-Salvation.
What I do, is to no end, (without form, and void) if not with a Mind
devoutly busied, as a Body Well-devoted, and all done, in Remembrance of thee!
Naturally, I may do something and see some Body, but Sacramentally, nothing if
I discern not Thine!

7. Something then is to be done, before I do this. I must get an Holy
Appetite, before I Eat, and Drink, (which is by* Repentance) And bring Mat. 5.
6.
an Heavenly Mouth to the Meat, (which is my Faith.) And much, is to Joh. 6. 35.
be done after this. I must Digest it so in Conscience, as to get good Spirit
by it; and gain such strength by the Digestion, as to walk more ho^ly, and
grow Better, for it; Else, what do I, but Deforme thy Body, and Defile thy
Blood? That must raise my Thoughts and Afflictions to the Memory, This, keep
them up. As I must do this in Remembrance of Thee, I must do that, in
Remembrance of this; and what is done, not forget I have been doing; and put
thee after out of my Remembrance!

Jesus! Make me do what I should! Not neglect it, lest I neglect at once, my
Savior, and Soul! Not do it as an Act of Compliance with Time; or as a Due,
more to Custom then Conscience (which is as ill.) Nor in a rude, unhallowed,
unprepared, irreverent, bold Carriage, and Confidence, (which is worse then a
neglect.)

Jesus! Give me grace, so to do! So to Remember Thee on thy Cross, that thou
may not forget me in thy Kingdom! So to Remember thee, Luke 23. 42. Luke
22. 30.
at thy Table, that thou may Remember me, on thy Throne. Where Commemoration
shall be turned into Vision; Where I shall have not Sacramental, 1 Cor. 13. 12.
but Beatificall Communion; Where I shall not wear thy Ring, but see thy Face;
Not Remember thee, but Behold thee; Not in Faith, but clear and full Fruition!
Even so be it O Lord! Feed me to it, in Faith and Love; and Seal it to me, in
Spirit and Conscience! Lord! Thus have me, and let me have Thee, for ever in
Remembrance! Amen! Amen!

Directions about the Holy Communion, how to Prepare for it.
1. Touching Prayers Preparatory to it.
ON Wednesday before, Read the Penitential Service.

On Friday, the Service on the Passion.

On Saturday, the Service Preparatory to the Holy Communion.

On Sunday, some of the Scripture Lessons with the Prayers proper for it, and
Meditation upon it.

2. Touching Self examination, necessary before we Communicate.
YOu must Examine your self, 1. Cor. 11. 28.
touching your Faith, and Life.

1. Your Faith is Right, if you Believe concerning God and His Church,
according to the Rule of it, Comprised summarily in the Apostles Creed,
Received by all Christians. 2. Tim. 1. 13


2. Your Life is Right, if it agree with the Rule of it, The Law of God,
Comprehended in the Ten Commandments. For finding of which,

1. You are to Consider apart every Commandment, and the Contents * Juxta
ordinem Decalogi institutum. Mcl. l. com. de poenit. v. Partic. apud ipsu^. Rom
7. 7. Psa. 119. 15. Lam. 3. 40
of it; what Duties, it Requires, What Sins, it Forbids; and then ask your
Conscience, how you have Discharged your self therein.

2. Where you find upon Just Inquiry, that you have led your life according
to Gods Law, in Piety to God, or Charity to Man, Thank God for His Grace, where
you find that you have failed, Ask God for His Pardon.

3. And because none but Penitents can ask, and have Gods Pardon; and
Contrition is the Root, Confession the Branch, and Amendment of Life, the Fruit
of Repentance; look therefore carefully to all. And first,

1. Touching Contrition.
IT is the Bleeding of a Soul, touched Act. 2. 37.
with Remorse for Sin: And (if of the Bodies) much more care must be had of
the Souls Blood; That it Bleed

1. Wisely. For doing ill, not well. 2 Cor. 7. 10
(That were to let out good Blood, and keep in Ill.)

2. Kindly. Even for doing Ill, as an Psalm. 51. 4. Ezekiel. 7. 16
Offense to God chiefly. Not so much for the Dread of Damnation, as the
Displeasure of his Goodness.

3. Rightly. For the Sin which has done more Displeasure to God, and is
chief in me, most. That Is to strike the right Vein. Psa. 51. 14


4. Freely. The Heart must bleed for all, and that above all. Water must 1 Cor.
15. 9 Psalm. 66. Mat. 26. 75. Luke 7. 38.
not be wrung out of the Eye, like Fire out of a Flint; but (if nature stop not
the Course) flow as from a full Fountain, Naturally, and Plentifully out. Yet

5. Temperately too. Not bleeding Joel 2. 12, 13. Jer. 18. 11, 12.
to the Death of Despair, but so, as to keep in Heart, a Life of hope for
Mercy and Help. (The sorrow bebeing to drown Sin, and not the 2 Cor. 7. 5
Heart.)

To that end God has given the Soul, as the Eyes for Sluices, to Jer. 13. 17.
let out the Waters of Grief, when they swell about the Heart, and are ready
to overwhelme it; So, a Floodgate in the Mouth to void them, and prevent an
Inundation Psalm. 39. 4.
of Heaviness.

And as Tears spend Grief by the Eye, Confession puts it out at the Mouth. Of
which is the next Enquiry.

2. Touching Confession.
GOd being the Majesty, whom Sin Psa. 51. 13. Isay 43. 25 Prove. 28. 13. 1 John
1. 8. Lev. 5. 5. John 20. 23. 2 Cor. 20. Vice Dei qui thesaurum in ^s posuit
hominum. Luth. 1 Samuel 7. 6
offends, of him Pardon, is to be sought; and Confession, the way to find it,
without which we seem either to need no Pardon, or not to seek it. And God
being pleased, two ways, to give Pardon, Immediately, by a Power Imperial,
in, and of Himself; and Mediately, by the Ministry of Man, Delegated by him to
Seal Pardons in his Name, and the Souls Peace; Hence Man also has two ways
to make Confession, or speak his Guilt to God: One, is, to pour out the Soul
into Gods Bosom, by having an Immediate Recourse for mercy to God Himself. The
other is, into Gods Ear; Fiat pastori, vel potius Deo Coram pastore. Zanch. in
1 John 1.
Betaking our selves for Ghostly good, and Comfort, to some Man of God. And as
in some Cases, there is great need, ^o for sundry Causes, there may be much
profit of this.

1. In a storm of Conscience, it is not Job. 33. 23, 24. 37, 38. Isay 504. Jam.
5. 15, 16.
safe to be without a Spiritual Pilot; lest, for want of better Direction and
help, the Soul be Swallowed up in her own Deeps, or Sunk, under some Gust
of Temptation, As, God knows, many daily are Damnaberis tacitus, qni posses
liberari confessus. Aug.
.

2. Or, If the Mind Fluctuate, and cannot rest Satisfied in her Spiritual
Estate, it is dangerous not to seek a Guide of God, to lead us out of those
Ghostly straights and troubles; Si quis bujusmodi consolationis, and majoris
certitudinis causa, pastorem pium and doctum conveniat and suum in ejus sinum
exoneret, petatque absolutionem and Consolationem, rem utilissimam fecerit.
Zanch. in 1 John 1. Job 33. 23.
Some Divine Counselor to Examine our Estate; and (if cause be) Seal from
God our Evidence for Heaven, by giving his Pardon to that which threatens Hell.

For the Devil will be sure to set on the 1 Cor. 2. 11 1 Pet. 5. 8.
Soul which he finds in a straight and doubt, and may devour it, if it have
none, but its own relief. As God knows he daily does Tanquam portum and
Refugium illis quos Diabolus, etc. Luth. in Genesis 32.
.

3. And every man being favorable for Absolution, Quisque sibi benevolus judex
est. Basil.
if his own Judge; and no man able (without his Relation) to know, and help the
Maladies of another heart Prove. 14. 10. 2 Samuel 1. 13, 14, 15. 1 Cor. 2. 11.
Pulpit generals not coming home often to * Ne fingas tibi peculiarem
Confessionem Luth. in Genesis 32 Nemo sibi dicat, occulte ago poenitentiam, apud
Deu^ ago, ergo sine cause dictu^ est Quoru^ peecata, etc. Aug.
the Particulars of many Souls Melius in privata confessione, ubi morbos
aperit, quam in publica concione ubi qua re cuique privatim opus sit, pastor
ignorant. Zanch. in 1 John 1. 1. Bishop Andr. S. in Joh. 16. 7. p. 636.
Consolationem accipiunt, quam in publica concione, non possunt apprehendere.
Luth. in Genesis 32.
; nor of power (ordinarily) to make Entries and Discoveries of hearts, as when
the doors are set open of purpose; Hence, great profits may come upon pious
Confessions (even out of those cases.) My disease better remedied, because more
known Quod ignorant medicina, non curat Hier.
. My state more assured, because better Examined. My way Ob praedicationes
multas non eruditior, quod euique credendum agendum, etc. Haec inquisitio
docet, comm^dissime sic fit. Luth.
, better directed, because errors more Discerned. My piety more advanced,
because my Soul better Studied. My Repentance more perfected, because my self
more humbled Dan. 9. 7
. My Sins more abhorred, because I more confounded Magis coram Ipso and pastore
quam De^ solo. Zanc. in 1 John Jam. 5. 15, 15.
. My Spiritual wants better relieved, because more particularly known, and
recommended. And God knows, what losses many suffer for want of this.

4. Yea and Harms too (as well as losses) voidable by a seasonable use of such
Spiritual Counsels, Colloquu^ privatum. Melan In propria causa quisque
excaecatur, ut saepenumero quod malu^ est, benefactum judicet, vol saltem, quod
gravissimum, extenuet. Zanch. ib.
and Parlies, since many Acts pass for innocent and good, or not greatly bad,
which are truly, and very ill, Juvatur ad scelerum agnitionem and sui, a
pastore, non sic si solus, etc. Idem.
and would so appear if Cited and Questioned before a Judgment well exercised
in causes and cases of Conscience. So they lose the Advantages of keeping
themselves good and clear before God of such things as pollute them and
provoke him (because they knew neither) And run into hazards never to amend
them, because not considered as amiss, or very little (if any thing.) By which
means without a miraculous mercy Facit cognosci lapsus and morbos, and gradus
peccatorum. Mel. l. c. Erudit and docet nos defectus nostros. Luth.
of God) they Live in them without Regret, and Die in them without Repentance.
Flattered into a better Belief of themselves, and their state to God, then
either their Life can give good Evidence, or true Judgment, good Warrant, for.

And God knows how many Consciences (without Check) swallow down as harmless
acts; grievous Guilts (which at last swallow their Souls up) by not bringing
their ways to the Test, and Trial, v. Luth. S. de Euch.
which would discover them dangerous; and so make way to have them, at once,
both Abhorred, and Amended.

5. To these good ends and purposes, Constanter rotinemus. Conf. Sax.
Diligenter retinemus. Conf. Ausb.
Private Confession is retained in the Reformed Churches, and the Moderate, and
sober use as much Commended, as the Tyrannous and Superstitious abuse is
condemned in the Roman. With true and large praises Veris and amplissimis.
Conf. Ausb.
. For weighty causes Conf. Sax.
. As an Appointment of God Rom a Deo institutam ut salutariter ipsis inserviat.
Conf. Boh.

Non pugnat cum verbo Dei, imo conformis est. Zanch. in Joh. 1.

Officii sui esse meminerit, non negligendum quod a Domino offertur remedium,
ut ad se sublevandum, privata confessione apud pastorem suum utatur. Calv.
Instit. l. 3. c. 4. n. 12. and n. 13. Ut sistant se pastori oves, quoties
Sacram Coe^am participare volunt, adeo nou reclamo, ut maxim velim hoc ubique
observari. Idem.

Examina publica vel privata Communicantium minime improbamus, imo requirimus,
abfit vero tyrannis and superstitio. Pare. in 1 Cor. 11.


. And means of Remission Per Potestatem clavium, Evangelii Dispensatio fit non
solum omnibus in communi, sed singulis Conf. Ausp.

Medium remissionis (Externum, Privatum) Privata Confessio est in qua dicitur,
Remittuntur tibi, etc. Zanch. in 1 John 1.


. Most Comfortable Cum fiducia Remissione frui sc credant, secundum verbum, Cui
remiseritis, etc. Conf. Boh.

Non aliter quam si a Christo ipso perciperet cum hic illis, has tradid^rit,
neque ullo modo dubitet per ministerium hoc clavium virtute and potestate
Christi, peccata sua ci remitti juxta id, Cut peccata etc. Conf Boh.

Valde pl^na consolatione est ista confessio. Luth. de Euch.


. Profitable Res utilissima. Zanch. 1 John 1.

Sunt and aliae utilitates mul^ae. Mel. l de panit.


. Necessary Sentio vehementer necessariam. Hem. in 1 Cor. 11. Multas and
praeclaras res in sc complectitur. Luth. S. Euch. Est enim opus valde
praeclarum and pretiosum, quod non nisi a vero Christiano ficri potest, Lu^h.
ib.
. Desirable Hanc tam piam and utilem causam spero valituram apud multos, ut
morem p^tendae absolutionis, and magis ament, and libentius ret^u^re studeant.
Mel. l. c.
. For Spiritual Ease, Advice, better Assurance and Intelligence betwixt God
and the Soul, Greater Remonstrance and Assistance against Sin, and the
Consciences more Light, Purity and Peace: Of which their Churches, and Doctors,
are sufficient witnesses Mill mundos perdi mallet, etc. Luth. 1. Eccl. Angl.
Exhort 2. ad Euch. In visit. aegroti: Can. 1. 103. Dr. J. White, p. 122. Dr. F.
White page 188. Ag. Fisher. 2. Eccl. Lutheranorum, v. Conf. Ausb. etc. Et Quae
Calvinum sequitur. v. Ipsum and Alios (ut supra.) 1. De Romanae Ecclesiae
Corruptelis in Confessione audi conquerentem Cassandrum in Consult: (de
Confessione) p. 108. Salutaris haec confitendi medicina ab imperitis and
importunis medicis multis inutilibus traditiunculis infecta and contaminata
fuit, quibus Conscientiis quas extricare and levare debebant, laqueos
injecerunt, and tamquam tormentis quibusdam excarnificarunt. 2. De Angl. Eccl.
circae haec Judicio. Vide Cas ub. Epist. ad Front. p. 129. Cujus rigidam quidem
necessitatem quae apud vos obti^et, Ecclesia Anglicana molliendam sibi certo
consilioputavit, rem quidem ipsam neque sustulit ulla unquam lege, neque
damnavit. Ib.


.

5. But whether in or out of these cases, if I have any, Be sure my Pilot have
skill; My guide Goodness; My Judge ability; My Physician experience. I will
not put my Body into the hands of an Empirike; My State to an Ignorant at Law;
The Key of my House to a Varlets or Idiots hand; Take heed then to whose
Conduct and Judgment, and Counsel and Trust, I commit the Key of Heaven, and
my Heart.

2. Be my Confession made to the Coram ipsis confiteantur Dco. Conf. Boh. sie
Jos. 7. 19.
Supreme Judge, or His Delegate (God or his Deputy, to Him, or Before Him:) it
must be,

1. Humble. As the Publicans. Because I stand as a Prisoner before Luke 18. 13
the Judge of Heaven, and am Suppliant for His Mercy.

2. Hearty. As the Apostles. Because 1 Timothy 1 13
at Gods Bar, The Knower, and Tryer of the Heart.

3. Particular. As the Kings. Of Psa. 51. 14
what does, or should most disquiet the Conscience. Enumerationem qua
gravioraomnia peccata diligenter expenduntur, and tanquam Spiritualia vulnera
Spirituali Medico revelantur, retineudam esse dubium non est, and Protestants
non aspernantur hujusmodi enumerationem. Casaub. Consult. p. 108.


Such are Commonly Sins of a more grievous Nature either for their,

1. Matter. As Sins of a great Kind, which greatly wound and waste the
Conscience; As Perjury, Murder, Adultery, Blasphemy, etc. Romans 2. 29. Gal. 5.
21, 22.


2. Manner. As Sins against Vows and Promises Ezekiel. 16. 59. and 17, 18.
, and Mercies Hos. 7. 15 Isay 1. 2.
; or against Knowledge Jam. 4. 17. Joh. 9. 41.
, and and Conscience. Especially, Since we last Received the Holy Communion.

3. Touching Conversion, or Amendment of Life.
1. THis is the End and Complement Act. 26. 20 Mat. 3. 8. Act. 3. 19. Jer. 35.
15. Ezekiel. 18. 30. Dan. 4. 27
of Repentance, without which it is vain and fruitless to confess (as
touching our Souls health.) As to bleed is in vain, if we presently fall to
distemper our Blood again; and to vomit ill humors out of the Stomach, if we
avoid not those things which will fill it up again: So at present to be Sick
of Sin, and Bleed the Heart in Contrition; and to void it up in Confession
Quasi escam indigestam-Evomit peccata. Orig. in Psalm. 31. 2 Pet. 2. 22.
, if we amend not our Lives, but return to our old Vomit again. That were but
to abuse Gods Ordinances, and to make our Confession, and the Holy Sacrament it
self our Sin, if they serve only to encourage and strengthen our Souls in
Sin, and not (as God Institues them) to Arm, and Enable us against it.

2. And if the Amendment be not thorough, even this is but as withered Fruit,
and to no end, if it be not, Jer. 7. 5. Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26. Joel 2. 12. Romans 6.
17 1 King. 9. 4 Heb. 13. 18 Psalm. 139. 23, 24. 1 Timothy 1. 5. 9. Isay 39. 4.
Psalm. 32. 2. Psalm. 119. 165. Job 27. 6. 1 John 3. 21 Jam* 4. 8.


1. Upright. As well within as without, and reach not as well to the Heart, as
Life. 2. Absolute. Without exempting any Sin, or Lust whatsoever, whether in
Life, or Heart, (else indeed, it is not Upright.)
This makes a Pure Heart, and Quiet Breast, (Integrity of Life.) Which ensures
our Repentance, Seals our Pardon, and Pacifies our Conscience, and makes us
Approach Gods Holy Presence, and Table with confidence. Which is not to be done
without full purpose, and some measure of this Integrity.

2. How to Demean our selves at the Holy Communion.
WIth all Humble and Entire Devotion of Body and Soul.

1. The Body cannot be too Reverent, Eccl. 5. 2. Mic. 6. 6. Exodus 3. 5. Jam. 4.
8. Psa. 132. 7
because the Mysteries are so High, and Holy, in which we draw so near to God.

2. The Soul cannot be too Devout. Whose faculties are all to be improved to
the best, and uttermost, to discharge her Duty aright, in this Great and Holy
Service. Therefore

1. The Mind must be Elevated to Putasn in ter consis^^. Chrysostom.
Heavenly thoughts, and Contemplations. Of the Mystery of Man's Redemption. By
Gods Miraculous Incarnation. In a most Bitter, and Bloody Passion. Out of the
Bottomless Deep of Love and Goodness. Whereof we are to Receive his Precious
Pledges and ^okens. All this, of, and with, and in our Dying Lord, and Dear
Redeemer, we are to have in Actual Mind, and Memory. And Him in all, to Mat.
6. 26. 1 Cor. 11. 24.
Admire, and Adore. And 2. The Heart is to be Ravished with such Infinite mercy
in God to Sinful, miserable Man Vide quo modo his qui Christi co^memorant
passionem inter sacra officia quasi per qu^sdum can^les de interioribus
fontibus oriantur ^orrentes, and super om^es deli^ias, ^^^rymis nectarcis anima
delectetur, Cypr. de. c. D. Psa. 116. 11, 12.
. To contrive, and give so Glorious a Redeemer, and Redemption, to save his
Soul. And now to present him with such Gracious Seals of his Love, and Admit
him into so near and Holy Communion. And for this to be dissolved in love to
God and Christ, and Man, for His sake: Psalm. 116. 11, 12.
With resolute Vows of Life and Death to His Service. That we will give,
forgive, do, suffer, any thing for Him. And from that, to be filled with Holy
Rapts, and Joys, and Hopes Inde sequitur mentis jubilus and cbrietas. Haec non
accendit sed extinguit peccatum. Cum sopivit oblivio cuncta caernis ludibria,
mira sunt quae senti^, mira quae videt, inaudita quae loquitur. Cypr. Romans 8.
32. Romans 5. 9, 10.
, in so great a Goodness of so Good a God, who, having done this, will deny me
nothing. And (maugre the Rage and Malice of Hell) will not see my Soul lost,
for whom all this is done. And for those who need an aid, v. Meditation on the
Sacrament on the Passion.
Such Meditations will now be perused well, as they have found to move most, to
give more Heavenly light to their thoughts, and holy Fire to their Affections.
This Fire (like that of the Sanctuary) must not go out of the Heart, and
vanish like passions moved at a Play, (unless we will play away our Souls) we
must then see
3. How we are to Order our selves after the Holy Communion.
AS our care was before, how to 1 Cor. 11. 27. Ephesians. 4. 1. Heb. 2. 16.
Communicate, it must be now, how to Walk Worthily. As those who are Honored
by Christ above Angels, and therefore should be (at least) Saints. Made now One
with Christ Assistunt Cherubini Chys. Ut Christu^ gcrat in pectore, Ferat in
mente. Cypr. 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17.
, and so henceforth to live Two, from the Flesh, the World, and the Devil. His
Holy Body is in us, His Holy Spirit must not be from us. Else we Sin
grievously against His Blood and Body.

What Nebuchadnezzars was in Ephesians. 4. 4. Dan. 2. 32.
Dream, we make his Body indeed a Monster; because we of it, are such mungrill
Limbs. And as Belshazzar did at his Profane Banquet, we do by the Holy Supper.
Turn the Cup of 1 Cor. 11. 27
Blessing into Blasphemy, Carousing (as it were) Healths to our Idol-lusts in
Dan. 5. 4.
His Hallowed (both Wine and Blood.) So

1. We play Judas with Christ. Eat Joh. 13. 18, 26.
His Bread, and lift up the Heel against Him. Take the Sop, and betray our
Interests in Him.

2. We play Gadaren with Him, (and worse.) We do not Pray, but Mar. 5. 17.
cast Him out of our Coasts: and after we have received Him in,

3. We play Strumpet with Him. 1 Cor. 6. 15. Jam. 4. 4.
Our Members (which are his) are made the Worlds, which is an Harlots.)

4. And so we play Fools with our 1 Cor. 10. 22. Mat. 22. 11 1 Cor. 11. 29,
and 30.
own Souls. On which we draw heavy Wrath for our vile provocations, if not a
Plague and Stroke from Heaven on our Bodies, for doing such Injuries to our
Savior.

So end the Directions about the Holy Communion.
A Service fit for Sad Times, for Wednesday or Friday.
Morning Prayer. Psalm. 71, 73, 74. or 124, 125, 126, 129. Lessons. Dan. 9. or
Ezra. and 10. to v. 7. or 2 Chronicles. 36. Jer. 14. Luke 21.
Evening Prayer. Psalm. 44, 77, 78. or 83. 98, or 137. 140, 141. Lessons. 2 Chronicles. 13. or 20. 1 Cor. 10. or Jude Ep.


1. Collect, Confessing, and Depre^ating Judgments.
O Lord! Thou have given us to see Bitter and Bloody Times: Barbarous outrages
are done, and endured daily. Our Houses and Friends are full: Even thy Temples
are not free. Dear God! These be the Dues of our Sins; Thou art Just, but we
are Wicked!

Against the great Means of thy Grace, and Mercies of thy Goodness, for many,
and many years vouchsafed to us, and our Fathers, before us; we are
notwithstanding full of Hypocrisy, full of Profaneness, full of Lewdness;
most Ingratefully, and therefore most Aboimnably Wicked. And I, even I, have
contributed a great measure of my Sins to fill up those Woes!

But, O God! that art Merciful, as thou art Just (that delightest not so much
to appear just, as Merciful:) Pardon those Sins of ours, that cause those
Woes! Pardon those Sins of mine which concur to that cause!

And with the Pardon of our Sins, grant us a Release of our punishments! Let
civil broiles and bloodsheds cease, True Piety and Peace flourish again
amongst us! Thou that out of evil can work good, and out of Confusion did
set up the Order of the World, out of those evils and confusions that are upon
us, work good and establishment for us! O Thou that powerfully can,
Mercifully do this; To thy great Honor, and our great happiness; for the
comfort both in body and Soul, of us, and ours, and all that truly fear, and
love Thee and true Religion, in and for Thee!

Even for thy tender Pities sake, hear us! Even for the precious Blood and
Passion of Jesus help us! In whose Blessed, and Beloved Name, we put up our
Prayers, Saying. Our Father, etc. Amen.

2. Prayer for an End of War.
HAsten O God these Days of Blood and Woes, and give a happy and speedy end to
the Wars! O! Let unnatural Divisions cease, and the unhappy Separations of
Dearest friends, end amongst us! For these Times of wants, and wounds, and
bonds, and destructions, let the Days of Plenty, and Safety, and Liberty
return again unto us! O! Let it be enough, that for our sins, thou have so
long wounded us, and broken us; and now heal us, and bind us up, and Save us
for thy Mercies sake! Give us peace for the Sword, Thou God of peace, even for
his Sake who is the Prince of peace, Jesus Christ, our Lord! Amen!

3. Prayer for Blessing on those who seek peace.
O God of Peace, Bless those that seek it, that they may findit; and stop, and
turn those that fly it, and make them to seek it! Bow their hearts to it,
that have the power, and strengthen their hands for it, that have the Will! As
for those who set their hands, and hearts against it, we beseech thee turn
thine hand and face against them! O! Forgive us our Sins which threaten to
destroy us! and send us a peace, which may preserve us! And from more Blood and
Violence Deliver us! Deliver us for Jesus Christ his Sake. Amen!

4. Prayer for Friends, in Danger, and Distress.
O God of Power and Pity! preserve thou those that are in danger to die. Rescue
them from the rage of violence, and show thy self Merciful to them in saving
their lives (if it be thy blessed will) O thou preserver of men! Save them! If
not grant them all Graces and Mercies needful for the saving of their Souls!
Let them Glorify thee in life, and death; that thou may glorify them with
thy Eternal Life, Through the Merits of Jesus Christ our Lord. In whose name I
pray mercy for all that Suffer in these Times of extremity; Chiefly, the
Destitute, Widows, and Fatherless! Lord! Take them to thy care, and comfort
them; Have mercy on them, and help them! Supply them all, and Succor them,
for Jesus Christ his Sake. Amen.

5. Prayer for Conversion of one, in an Evil Course.
O Lord! That delightest not in the Death of a Sinner! I beseech thee by thy
Grace and-Providence to stay his Course, who is entered into a way of Vice, and
Vanity! O Let him not go on to bring an end of shame upon himself in this
World, and Confusion of face upon his Soul in the World to come: But (of thy
great Mercy) stop him, and turn him to a better Course; For Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.

6. Prayer for preservation of the Church.
O Lord! The Church is thy Body, and thou art H^ae Head! She is thy Spouse,
and thou art her Husband! O! Save thine own Body, Preserve thine own Spouse!
Protect her from all Enemies, Men and Devils! Keep her from all ills, Errors
and Dangers!

Thou did purchase thy self a Church, at the price of thy Blood, O! Let no
hand seize and Spoil so Dear a Purchase!

More particularly, Hear my Prayers for these persecuted parts, The Petition of
a poor Child, for a Dear Distressed Mother! Many O Lord are the Enemies to
destroy it, and few friends to preserve it! Strong are the Arms to pull it
down, and weak the Hands to hold it up! But O God! do not thou desert it,
uphold it with thy Holy Arm! Maintain the Religion Established amongst us,
and thy Holy Truth, and Worship in that Religion! Maintain a Clergy, that may
be able by Learning and Holy Life, to Defend thy Truth and Worship, and the
Means that may continue such a Clergy. Let not Error and Heresy corrupt it.
Ignorance blind it. Superstition infect it. Profanesse overgrow it. Schism
tear it. Sacrilege devour it. Atheism lay it waste. Persecution make it
desolate! Lord, make us as happy as we were, and more thankful, and less
sinful, that we may be so happy! Let Errors vanish, Sects cease, Fury leave
us, and the Spirit of Truth and love, again possess us! Let Confusions end,
and all Irreverences in thy Service be banished from us, and Holy Order and
Decency appear again amongst us! Let wars and Tumults, and Civil broiles and
bloudsheds depart, and the voice of joy and peace, return again unto us!
Lord! Let us have that Religion which may make us happy in Heaven, and that
peace which may give us Time and Leave to enjoy that Religion! And let those
that have the power, restore and preserve that Religion and Peace! And do thou
to that end mercifully maintain their Power and Them! O Thou by whom Kings
reign, who have promised to make them Nursing Fathers to thy Church, grant us
these blessings to the Glory of thy Name, the Quiet of our lives, and the
Saving of our Souls! Even for thy Dear Son our Saviors sake. Amen!

7. Prayer for Mercy to the Nation.
O Lord! we are a Nation, not to be Loved, ready to be Ruined, And for our
sins, thou may justly destroy us, Prince and People! But Spare us good Lord!
Spare us for thy mercy sake! let the Blood of Jesus expiate our guilts; and the
Spirit of Jesus amend our Misdoings. O Thou who would not have one Sinner
die! Suffer not Millions of poor Souls and Lives to perish! Be Reconciled to us
in a Mediators Blood, and be Reconciler of us, in a blessed peace. God of
pity and peace, be at peace with us, make it for us. O Thou Holy One of God
who came into the World to take away the Sins of it, and make peace for us!
Pity a poor Church and Nation ready to perish; Pity the Church that has so
long maintained thy Truth and worship in the Nation; Pity Them who are ready to
perish, for seeking to maintain thy Holy Truth, and Worship in the Church: And
do thou from Heaven Preserve, It, and us, and Them. Thou that have the power of
Heaven and Earth in thy hand, stir up thy strength, and come, and save us.
And in this low condition do not leave us but Deliver us, for thy Mercies
sake. Amen.

After these; Daily Prayers, for Grace, Peace, Health, Safety, Friends.

If it be made a Fasting Day, or of more Solemn Humiliation, and seeking God,
then

Say the Letany, and Ten Commandments.

Read for an Epistle, Joel 2. or Jona 3. Gospel, Luke 13. or Mat. 24.


After being at Church-Prayers (if to be had) forbear Dinner for that Day, and
in that time.

1. Read some Scriptures, which may put in mind of the Miseries of the Age. As
Deuteronomy. 28. Jos. 7. Iud. 20 or some of the Lessons not read, or some Godly
Books. 2. Meditate, and call to mind the most Memorable mercies of God to
you, in all your Life. 1. In Deliverances from Dangers, Sickness etc. 2. In
Blessings of Birth, Marriage, Condition, etc. (as fits your particular state.)
And lift up the heart to God for these in all humble Thankfulness. 3. Call to
mind the Greatest Sins of your life, and for them, as Pardon; and your
present wants, and for them, beg supplies.

Afternoon. After Psalms, and Lessons,

1. Private Prayers (as Before) 2. Public, (if any be.) 3. A less Supper then
Ordinary. 4. Some Alms to the poor. 5. At Bedtime, Ordinary Prayers.
Close all with this Prayer,
THou that markest those, who Ezekiel. 9. 4.
mourn for the Abominations of the Time! Take a Merciful notice (Good Lord)
of thy Servant, who have desired this day to humble my Soul before Thee. The
Abominations of the Time are many O Lord! And the more for mine, both of
heart, and life! Lord! Forgive all that mourn for offending thee. And spare
those that greive to see how thou art offended. Thou that would have saved
Sodom, if but Ten such had been found in it, save all such for thy Mercy
sake. Save a sinful Nation, for their sake! Save us all for Jesus his sake!
For his Infinite Merits, and thine Infinite Mercies Sake. Amen! Amen!

The Blessing.
BLessed are they that Mourn for Mat. 5. 4.
they shall be Comforted! The Blessing and Comfort of God be on me, and all
such sad and Sorrowful Souls with me; now and evermore, Amen!

Seven SOLILOQUIES SACRED. Set to the Seven Days of the Week, by so many
secret Sermons and Calls to Conscience; Inviting, and Directing the Soul to
Mind, and Do what will make Blessed. Not to pretend, but practice Piety, and to
be (not seem) Religious.
The Materials of the Soliloquies.
1. The Nobility of Piety. For Sunday. 2. Domestical Devotion. For Monday. 3.
Church-Duty, For Tuesday. 4. Perpetual Service. For Wednesday. 5. Remora's in
Religion. For Thursday. 6. Helps to Heaven and Happiness. For Friday. 7.
Remedies of Humane frailty. For Sarurday.
PSALM. 4. 4. Stand in awe, and sin not, Commune with your own Heart, and in
your Chamber, and be still.
The same, (altering their Number, and Order) may serve for two Weeks thus,
1st. Week. 1. Church-Duty 1. part. For Sunday. 2. Domestical Devotion. For
Monday. 3. Perpetual Service. For Tuesday. 4. Remora's Religion, 1. p. For
Wednesday 5. Remora's, 2d. part. For Thursday. 6. Helps to Heaven, first
division. For Friday. 7. Helps to Heaven 2d. div. For Saturday.
2d. Week. 1. Church-Duty, 2d. part. For Sunday. 2. Helps to Heaven. 3. div.
For Monday. 3. Helps to Heaven, 4. div. For Tuesday. 4. Remedies of Frailty,
first part. For Wednesday. 5. Remedies, etc. 2. part. For Thursday. 6.
Remedies, etc. 3. part. For Friday. 7. Nobility of Piety. For Saturday.

Animadversions touching the use of the Soliloquies.
SOliloquies are of Ancient and Excellent Use. With them the Fathers fed their
Souls high; and ours, at this Day, fare much better for them. They must be ill
Writ, and worse Read, if we thrive not in Piety, by such Holy Fare. Devotion
feeding more on one single Dish of those Wholesome, Home-selfe-Conferences,
than at many Feasts, and Gluts, of sha^per and nicer Disputations and
Discourses.

Reader, Thou have here, that which (the Author thinks) was never seen
before: All Divinity in Soliloquie; or (at least) the most Materials of all.
And sure, thy Appetite is not good to Heaven, if none of the Meat relish thee;
and thy Stomach ill, if Godliness digest worse with thee. Provision is here
made thee of Meals for Seven Days, sufficient to keep thy Soul in Health, if
Spiritual life be in thee, and Gods Blessing begged of thee; without which,
Preaching, Hearing, Writing, Reading, all, is but Breath, and Labor lost, and
does not solidly nourish, but vanish into air and emptiness.

The Author would have thy Soul Fed, not Cloid; and therefore breaks into
parts his longer Soliloquies, to prevent such Surfeits. D^votions please God
better by being quick, then long, and so by Man should be measured more by
their Spirit, then Length. Bar Idleness then, and he leaves thee (who
know thy strength best) to thy own measure. And when thou do Feed, and
ruminate on these Holy Repasts, He prays Gods Blessing on the Meat, and thy
Soul. Much Heavenly good may it do thee!

Sunday-Soliloquie. The Nobility of Piety: OR, A Soliloquie Discovering to the
Soul, How much Sin sets Her below, and besides Her self, and gives Ten deadly
Wounds to her Life and Honor.
O My Soul! Thou art Spirit Heb. 12. 23.
, thy Body is Flesh. Will thou then make Flesh of thy Spirit? Feeding on
corrupt lusts, turns it into the basest Flesh Romans 7. 5 Romans 8. 6.
. That of the Body is Natural and good; but this of the Soul, unnatural, and
ill Romans 8. 7.
. O! Do not make thy self a Monster, whom God has made his most Goodly
creature Genesis 1. 26. Psalm. 8. 5
! He that did so Dignifie thee in thy Beginning, did it to Glorify thee in the
End. But Carnality makes thee fall off, from thy Dignity; and short, of thy
Glory Psalm. 49. 12.
. With it, God will not own thee for his Jer. 2. 21.
, and then, tremble to think who will take thee! O! Do not commit so gross on
Apostasy! Maintain Primitive Spirit in thee, if thou have sense of honor, or
welfare; If it be lost by lust, let Grace make a Recovery Ephesians. 4. 15
.

O My Soul! The Immortal piece of Man Mat. 22. 32.
, why is the Mortal Genesis 4. 19
part preferred before thee? The Body will die, thou can not Eccles. 12 7
. Can thou not die, and carest not how to live? Has that which will die
(must die) all thy care? What a folly is this, to prefer a Lease to a
Perpetuity? a Moment to Eternity! The Satisfactions of a Body, to the
Salvation of a Soul! Nay, by Seeking for it, an unreasonable Welfare to bring
on both an Eternal ruin! For so the Immortal is made damnably Mortal, Ezekiel.
18. 4
, and dies to bliss; and the Mortal, Miserably Isa. 66. 24.
, Immortal ever living in woe! Be wiser and better O my Soul to thee and it!
Do thou so wait on God, and let it so wait on thee, in his Service, that when
thou shall be rewarded, it may share with thee, in his Salvation! By thee let
it be made Immortal in Glory Job. 6. 29.
! Be not thou by it, Immortal in Misery! For thy own sake suffer not this; For
thy Mark. 9. 48.
Bodies sake do that. If thou do love it indeed, Promote it to Heaven (to
raise it from a Grave to a Throne, is a friendly Promotion!) But do not kill
thy self for love of it! O what a Murder is this? O what a Murderer art thou
Pro. 6. 32 and 8. 38.
? My Soul! if thou be Murdered of eternal Life, the Body is both Romans 13.
14. Gal. 5. 21.
Quarrel and Sword, but thy self (wretched Spirit!) thy self art the Murderer
Hos. 13. 9
! O do not commit so Horrid an Homicide; look to thy Body as thy Life, and
fight against Sensuality, as for Eternity!

3. O my Soul! The Noble part of Humane nature; Remember thy Nobility! To love
Earth, and Earthly things, is infinitely below thee! Thy Mind and Will (thy
Arms) are made to embrace the Sovereign Truth, and Goodness of Heaven! Set
thy Foot (O my Soul!) Set thy Foot upon Earth Psalm. 8.
Thy Foot? yea let thy Servant and Subject, (the Body) set Foot on it. It does
by Nature set it Foot, to teach thee, not to set thy Heart upon it Psalm. 62. 10.
! O my Soul! if thou do, thou art not a Sinner more against Grace, than very
Nature; and art not less a Prodigy to Earth, than Heaven! O thou Noble of the
Almighties Making, be not so base a Creature of the Devils Joh. 8. 44
, as by him to be made at once a Miscreant, and the Abomination of the World.

4. O my Soul! Gods Image is in thee! What then does the Similitude of Beast
upon thee? Why does not Reason, but Sense govern thee Psalm. 49. 12.
? Why does not Rational will, but Brutish Appetite rule thee? This is to
outdoe the Devil in thy undoing! He took Shape of a Serpent for an ill turn,
and time; and thou appearest, and continuest in thy bestiall Shape. Nay, not
the Figure of Beast, but the very Form is in thee! Unreasonable Creature that
thou art, worse then the Brute that has no Understanding, because with Reason,
and against it. My Soul! Heaven has in it neither Beastly Bodies, nor Souls
Apoc. 21 27.
! And therefore, Act like Man, Appear like God, if thou would be there. If
then Ephesians. 4. 24.
Deformed by Wicked Spirit, be Transformed To. 12. 2.
by Holy one. Child of God, Maintain thy Fathers likeness, that thou may
inherit his happiness! Acts of Lust, and Brutishness 1 John 2. 16 Ephesians. 5. 5.
blot it out of thee, and thee out of Heaven!

5. O my Soul! Thou art the Spouse of God, no Creature is thy Match, or Mate,
(Thy Creator is thy Husband. Isa. 54. 5
) Where then is thy Honor, if the World have thy Love, and Earth thy Embraces?
O thou that hate Adultery with Man, how dare thou be Adulteress Jam. 4. 4.
to God? May not a Strumpet-Body stand in thy sight? and must a Whorish Ezekiel.
6. 9
heart lie in thy Bosom? Must not Man Court thee, and shall the Devil Woo
thee? Is thy Bed Clean, and God's Defiled? Instead of thy Lord, thy Slave (the
World) taken into his Bed? What is Gods Bed, but Man's Heart? Setting it on
other then him, but Strumpetting Ezekiel. 16. 30.
his Bed Consensisti, in cord tuo, concubuisti. Aug.
. And the Baser the good which steals Affections from him, the more Abonable
the Whorishnesse? O thou Beloved above all Creatures Prove. 8. 31.
that have God for thy Husband, Heaven for t^y Dower, and Earth for thy
Service! Let not Hell be thy Pander, to take the World for thy Love, have not
less in thy Heart, then thy God, and his Heaven!

6. O my Soul! Thou art the Bodies, Lord! Take then her Homage. Let her serve
thee, not undo thee! Do thou Act Gods Will, and let it execute thine Romans 6.
19.
. But do not thou its; (the Will of thy Handmaid, the Lust of the Flesh;) Let
not Her Senses woo thee to Vanities; To do pleasure to the Body, bring not
Pain on the Soul: Make not thy Body, thy God Phil. 3. 19.
, lest thou make thy Self a Devil; Damned for ever for not doing thy duty
better to Almighty God, and thy Self. O my Soul! An Angels Peer Psalm. 8. 5.
, make not thy self a Devils Fellow Joh. 6. 70
! Sell not thy Lordship for Slavery and Misery to Boot. If thou be not Lord,
but serve thy Servant, never Earth saw, none but Hell will harbor such a Slave!

7. O My Soul! Thou art Sovereign i Romans 6. 12. and 23.
in Man. Under God Supreme, over all that is in him! Will thou be thy Subjects
Subject? Shall the Law of the Members, be the Minds Law? Romans 6. 23
The Senses are thy handmaids, (O thou Princess of Heaven!) Shall they be the
Chief Commanders of thy Life? Will thou only move, go, run, refuse, choose,
(as they Command?) O what a basnesse is this, to be so unworthy to thy Maker
and Nature? And yet say (O my Soul!) Speak out of Conscience, and say; Is not
Sense the great Leader,, and Appetite Romans 8. 1
the Ruler of thy Life? whilst Reason and Diviner Understanding Lackie after
their Desires, and the Members are mere Drudges for them? O my Soul! The
Sovereign of God, be not so much Subject to the Devil, as to be led at his
lust Tim. 2. 26.
, by the Lure of Sense, to satisfy the Flesh against Gods Law, and thy Reason!
To a life which he himself (though most wicked) does not lead; For though
Spiritual wickedness abound in him Ephesians. 6. 12.
, the Bodily is below him. If thou wi^t be so base, be not more then the Devil.

8. O My Soul! Thou Freeborn Child of Eternity, Heir of Immensity, Daughter
of Him who is beyond all bounds of Time and Being! The Body, is but thy Prison.
Thou art shut up in o 1 Cor. 4. 2. 4.
Walls of mud within the Gates of sense, why then do thou delight in a Prison
before thy Palace? And choose a Bodily restraint before a Spirits Romans 8. 21.
Liberty? Is it bliss to be in bondage? Are Chains of Iron better then Gold?
Fetters, before Freedom? Even Earth is but a Jail to Heaven Romans 8. 23.
! What a Little ease then does the Spirit find in so little a spot of Earth! O
do not destroy thy Spiritual Liberty Romans 6. 16. Tit. 3. 2.
, by a Bodily Licentiousness! Love not thy Jail before thy Delivery; lest
thou be cast into that Jail, whence none is Delivered Mat. 5. 25.
. It Is just with God (most just) that the Soul which chooses the Devils
Chain before Gods Liberty, should have the Devils Prison for Gods Palace. And
be his slave in Hell for ever, that would not for a time, be Gods servant on
Earth. Dove of God, fly to Heaven: Spiritus quisque ales est Tert. Cant. 2. 14
Amor temporalium, viseus Spiritualium.
Belime not thy Spiritual wings in slime, and mud. Do not Crow-like, feed on
Carrion, and like a blind Beetle place thy bliss in dirt. Sell not thy Self
to buy a Jail, when thou give a Palace for the Purchase, and thy self to
the bargain, Mat. 16. 26.
and have nothing but Shackles, and Tortures to boot!

9. O My Soul! Thou art Gods Jewel Mal. 3. 17.
, the Body, thy Casket! Why then do thou prefer her good to thy welfare? Must
the jewel be burnt to Save the Casket from the Fire? Nay, w Mat. 5. 30.
it is not so much. It is at once to Fire casket and jewel (to cast both
together into Hell Fire) Sardanapalus-like, with all his bundles and heaps of
worldly Treasures, to make up one funeral pile, and perish together for ever,
(Body and Soul!) O Bright Diamond of Heaven, Divinae particulam aurae.
(Spark of the Divinity) Ray of Divinest Glory, Set in the foil of Flesh, for
a Time, till taken up, and kept in Gods own Cabinet for ever,) what do thou
on the Devils Finger! Why do thou do him, honor, and work Joh. 8. 44.
What do thou under the Bodies Foot?

O my Soul, look better to thy self! Burn the Casket if need be, to Save
the Jewel (the Body to save the Soul!) So Holy Martyrs Dan. 3. 28. Heb. 11.
34.
did. But not the Jewel to save the Casket (the Soul to save the Body) that
filthy Epicures do Luke 12. 19.
: And thy end (O my Soul) be a Saints, not an Epicures!

10. O My Soul! The Purchase of Christ Act. 20. 28. 1 Pet. 1. 19
. Bought with no less then Gods own Blood (the Blood of the Son of God!) Why
do thou Sell that so cheap Isa. 55. 2.
which cost thy Savior so Dear? For the World (which is Nothing Pro. 23. 5*
) for vanity which is less Psa. 39. 7. Eccl. 1. 2.
? For a little of that vanity, which is less yet, then what is less, then that
nothing Isa. 40. 17
.

Why has that which cost more 1 Timothy 2. 6.
then Ten Thousand worlds are worth, least of thy care and cost! If thy Body be
Sick, thou will have Physic; if wounded, Salve; if naked, Cloths; if hungry,
bread; no rate, no pain, is spared for it: But the precious Soul may lie Sick
of Sin Psa. 41. 4
, wounded by guilt Pro. 78. 14.
, stripped of innocence Ezekiel. 16. 22.
, starved for grace Amos 8. 11.
; and nothing is given or done, to help it. For my Soul! What is Gods price
for his help but man's Labor? Two mites worth of pains Due mi^uta carc and
anima. Ber.
is all (thy l Isa. 55. 2
own and thy Bodies) and yet thou will bate one, if not keep both from him?
Would thou lose a life that wilt not quit a state, an honor, a friendship
for him? Do thou give him thy Soul that wilt not leave a bad custom, or base
lust to serve him?

But O my Soul, no more of these neglects! I charge thee, by thy Heavenly
Birth and Parentage, by thy Immortal Substance, and Durance; by thy Precious
Ransom, the Dear Blood of God: Value thy welfare more, Seek the Bodies less;
think not Gods price too great (man's Labor) for his happiness; when the Son
of God thought not his Sweat too much, his Blood for the Price! O thou dear
and Precious Piece and Purchase of Divinest Architect, and device, Detect this
Serpentine Policy of the Devil, who, because he once got Eternity for an
Apple, thinks to Tempt away thy Salvation for nothing! And therefore would
have thee all for the Body, that nothing may be done for the Salvation of the
Soul! Dear one, thou wast not Ransomed, be not Ruined for nothing!

And now, O my Soul! Spiritual, Immortal, Intellectual; The lively Image,
The Dear Spouse of God; Lord Paramount, and Sovereign Power in Man; The Free
and High-borne Child, and Heir of Eternity, Delight, and Darling-Gemme of
Heaven, Most precious Purchase and Inheritance of the Son of God; Do not, O
do not abuse, and lose thy self in Bodily Sensualities, and for Half a
satisfaction, (scarce to the half of Man) and but a Moment on Earth, sell away
Salvation in full, of Soul and Body in Heaven for ever. For,

What shall it profit a man to gain the whole World, and lose his own Mat.
16. 27
Soul? or,

What shall a man give in exchange for his Soul.

The Sum of this Soliloquie is,
The Soul is Spirit, Sin turns it Flesh. The Soul is Immortal, Sin makes
it Die. The Soul is Noble, Sin makes it Base. The Soul is Lord, Sin makes
it Slave. The Soul is Sovereign, Sin makes it Subject. The Soul is God-like,
Sin make it Beast. The Soul is Gods Spouse, Sin makes it Strumpet. The Soul
is Gods Jewel, Sin casts it in Fire. The Soul is Freeborn, Sin keeps it
in Prison. The Soul is Gods Purchase, Sin m^kes it away,
Animadversion to the Devout Reader, Touching the second and third Soliloquies.
IF some things in them seem to be set more suitable for a Court, then Cotage;
and possible, in settled, then troubled times: (as supposing a greatness which
thou (perhaps) have not, and requiring a Church-Duty, which thou can not
do:) thou do not guess amiss at the Authors aim; nor does he think thee
to move and make thy Scruple amiss. For removal of which, (that no bar may
be from him betwixt thee, and thy Benefit) receive this satisfaction for both.

1. What is not proper, may be profitable for thee, and (if not directly)
concern thee by consequent. If the Great be disputed out of all their Excuses
and Customs, which are pleaded and practiced, to the neglect, or injury of
Gods Private, or Public Service; the mean, are thereby concluded (if so
faulty) to fail their Duty without all Apology o^ Plea.

2. What is not possible, does not concern thee: And what is unjustifiable,
should be impossible. Such is sometimes the Public Id possumus quod jure
possunus.
use of Religion in the Church. Take heed of the Principle (as both false and
perrilous) that whatsoever is in the Church, thou must be at it: So in Egypt,
thou might Worship a Crocodile, and at Rome must go to Mass. If without
Sin then I cannot, I must 1 Cor. 10. 20. 21.
not go. So to Separate, is not to be a Separatist, nor can such absence be
impious. Provided that the Judgment of Sin, and the Service be right, and
hate 2 Cor. 6. 17.
(not love) of Schism make the Separation.

Thus cautioned, thou may read even those Soliloquies without Scruples; and
for the rest, there is no cause of any, as fit (without Dispute) for all. Nor
do thou more in this, then in Reading King. David's Psalms, or Saint Austins
Soliloquies, Psalm. 42.
wherein all things are profitable; though not pertinent to every one. For one
particular Soliloquie will no more fit every Soul, then one Shoe any Foot. So
then, where it fits thy Soul, make it thy Soliloquie; where it does not, thy
History.

Monday-Soliloquie. Domesticall-Devotion. OR, A Soliloquie Inviting, and
Enabling the Soul to a Privacy of Piety, and Discharge of Daily Duty in Secret
and Closet Prayers.
Hear O my Soul! What is required to the Service of God. For, as thou do
know Joh. 13. 17
it in vain, if thou do not do it, So thou can not do it aright, Prove.
19. 2
if thou do not know it. Know then O my Soul,

As Thou art of thy self, One and One of the World, thou do owe, and must
pay Almighty God, the Maker of Thee and It, a Private, and a Public Service.
In the Closet God must see it, In the Church Man must behold it. There, Dear
Child! Speak freely for thy Self, to God, be thy own Priest and Mouth in
Secret; and doubt not but thy Heavenly Father will grant and Seal thy Suits:
But Here, let thy Mother The Church. Mal. 2. 7.
Speak for thee, and Her Priest (Gods lips) be thy Mouth unto Almighty God.
The Closet, is thy Particular Church, but the Church the Common Sanctuary. For
Gods Sake then be Reverend there; but here, both for Man's, and Gods.

Neglect not Dear Soul, neglect not thy Daily Sacrifice. Morning and Evening
offer up thy Service to Allmighty God.

Open the Day with this Holy Key, that the blessing of the light may be upon
thee; shut up the Night with the same Key, that the curse of Darkness do not
seize thee! Dare not to eat, nor stir, till thou have Prayed thy Pass from
Heaven, lest Mischief meet thee before night, and hale thee to thy Grave: Do
not dare to rest or sleep, till thou have begged thy Pardon for the guilts of
the day, least Judgewent surprise thy Soul before the Luke 12. 20
Morrow.

My Soul! These are thy Visits, and Entertainments of Almighty God; and do not
(O do not) to give Man his, neglect Gods Visits. He is the Greatest Person,
serve him therefore first. Be not guilty of that rudeness to thy Heavenly
Father, which thou abhorrest as uncivil to a Noble Person; Let Him stay and
wait for thee, whilst thou entertainest thy self, with some Sorry one.

Leave not a Prince to go to a Peasant. (Thy Prayers and Addresses to Almighty
God, to Entertain any earthly one whatsoever:) Alas! my Soul! In Comparison of
the Mighty God, the Greatest Man is not so much Isay 40. 17. Job 34. 19 Psalm.
91. 11.
as a Peasant to the Mightyest Prince!

When thou art with God, Angels are with thee (O my Soul!) And do not turn
thy back on Angels to go to Men, though Saints; and much less to such as
appear in sinful shape, like Devils!

And though thou be no Priest, nor Professed Recluse, bound by Canons to set
Hours; yet my Soul, thou shall do God and thy self but right, to set keep
some set times of Devotion.

Thou can do so much for thy Bodily Health, thou should for thy Souls!
Observing that Rule, brings better health for a Time; but keeping this Order
makes healthy and happy for ever! And if thou do (as thou may) observe thy
Physicians Prescripts, my Soul, thou must not neglect Diviner Directions. Their
best end is, that the Body may be more Serviceable to the Soul; But the aim of
those better, that the Soul may be most Serviceable to Almighty God.

And, if thou do resolutely set and observe thy Hours, who will disturb
thee? Even the most profane; will not for Civilities sake, and the Religious
will not be so Profane. And if any should offer such an Irreligious incivib^ty
to thee, do not thou, by suffering it, do as much to thy God! Cursed is he
that makes thee neglect thy Maker; Cursed thou, if any Person or Thing
whatsoever, make thee guilty of that neglect!

My Soul! For Honesties sake, thou will not break thy promised Time with Man;
For Religion sake, do not break thy Set-houres with God.

And though God tie thee not precisely to such set Hours of the Day, yet shall
thou do well to let Religion bind thee to the best times of his Service: And
the Morning, when thy Spirits are most Fresh, and unsullied with Worldly
thoughts and Affairs, (as for Studies, so) for Devotions, is doubtless Psalm.
63. 1.
best. And the more Early, the more Acceptably, do thou make thy Devout
Appearance before Almighty Psa. 130. 6
God.

But not so, if most Late at Night. Mal. 1. 14.
That, is to give God the Prime; this, the Dreg of the Day; if when thou art
sleepy, and should be in sleep, and have no more ways to spend and pass thy
Time, thou do give the Relikes to thy Ptayers, and bestow thy Broken Minutes
on thy God.

My Soul! The Religious King did rise at Midnight to say his Prayers to God;
But not did sit up till Midnight Psalm. 119. 62. Romans 13. 13.
ravelling out his Time on Toys, which should be wound up in his Prayers. To
be on thy Knees when others are in their Beds, to break Sleep for Devotion Luke
2. 37.
is Pious; but (if not so) it is good when others are, to be on thy Knees, that
thou may take strength to thine, by a concurrence of other Prayers!
Extraordinarily that, but Ordinarily, thou must do this. In the Evening, and
Morning, and at Noone will I Pray, and Psalm. 55. 17.
that instantly. Observe it my Soul! He does not make his Morning-Prayers at
Noone, and his Evening at Midnight; and instantly always, sleepily never: the
Time which God and Nature have set out for Bodily rest, is best for Sleep. Thou
stealest from it, if (due time neglected) thou take of that for Devotion.

Yea, thou do commit a double Robbery on God and Nature! Him thou robbest of
his Devotion in due Job 17. 12.
time; and Her, of her due time of rest, to pay God what thou owe Him. And
the Coin is scarce current in which thou make thy payment; because it wants
both Metal of Spirit, and Stamp of Gods allowed Time.

Be then Devout daily (Dear Soul!) and observe due Seasons and Hours for thy
Prayers to Him, to whom thou owe thy Self, and Life, every Act. 17. 28.
moment: and so thy Private Duty is Discharged to God. And the better the more
Private. Some affect Ostentation, and their Prayers in the Closet, look as
Public as a Pharisees in the Mat. 6. 5.
Marketplace; as if they did rather act, then say their Prayers; and rather
played, then performed a Part of Devotion: But so God see thine, no matter if
no Man know it. It looks more Sincere, if it be more Secret; and so much more
precious, as it is more sincere. What thou can then avoid that, let those,
who would have Man reward them, have Man see them,

But thou, when thou prayest, enter inter Mat. 6. 6.
into thy Closet, and when thou have shut thy door, pray to thy Father, which
is in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret shall reward thee openly.

The sum of this Soliloquie.
God is singularly God of me, as universally Psalm. 86. 7. Psalm. 50. 7. Psalm.
118. 28.
of the World. For this, I owe God a Particular Service. There must be some
time set for that Payment. Evening and Morning are best hours 1 Chro. 16. 40.
1 These. 5. 17. Psalm. 76. 11
to be set. Time set to God, must not be broken by Man. Noone and Midnight are
not Gods Morning and Evening.
Tuesday-Soliloquie. Church-Duty: OR, A Soliloquie, showing, that all owe a
Public Service to Almighty God, and where, and when, and how they are to pay
it.
MY Soul! Though one, and 1. Part.
entire of thy self, thou art but a Part of the Church; and (as a Member of it)
must do Romans 12. 12
Duty with the Body; In whose Common w^e and Welfare thou have thy proper
interest and part. Thou must be Jer. 29. 5.
One therefore at Common Prayers, when it is sought; and make One at
Publique-praises, when it is found; and (as in Private) must Attend God in^
Public. For since he is God of All, as well as One; He must be served by All,
as well as thee, and by thee. as much as 2 Samuel 12. 7, 8, 9.
any; and more, if thou be a Greater* One. For do thou my Soul, look for
least respect, where thou do most favor? Or, to receive less Rents, where
thou let most Lands? O my Soul! be not thou (of all, be not thou)
ungrateful to thy God, who has done thee favor above many Millions, in
making thee both One, and Great, and Deuteronomy. 10 12 Psalm. 116. 11
yet requires no more but thy Duty for his Rent? My Soul! obliged by so many
Bonds unto thy Maker, Detract not a Single Service, where thou Lev. 5. 6, 7
owe a Double Duty.

Upon thy solemne^ occasions thou will not excuse thy greatest Servants from
Attendance, because the greater they are, the greater is thy honor.

Thou can not excuse thy self to God, if thy Service Fail, when it is most
for his Glory.

And can any Service be Solemn without a Public Place? or Meeting in it
without an Appointed Time? Can any Place be so convenient as what is Consecrate
to his Honor? Or Time so fit, as what is Devoted to his Service? The Temple
then (the Lords House) that is the Place; and Sunday (...).
(the Lords Day) that is the Time. And what Days else Holy Church by Law and
Leave, from God, sets a part to his Worship.

Content not thy self (my Soul!) with a Common place, if thou can go to a
Consecrate. Where should thou Wait on the King but in his Court? The Church
is Gods Court, (my Soul!) Psa. 100. 3. Psalm. 65. 1. Psalm. 89. 5.
There Heavenly Majesty looks to be Waited on, and ever was by his Saints. For
the Body of them to be in one place, and thou in another, is Schism. Heb. 10.
25.
Be not thou at the Devils Chapel, when others are at Gods Church. A
Separatist, Jude v. 19.
how much Saint soever he seems, is no better then one of his Servants. To be
so out of a Mind, that all Places are alike (even the most Common as good as
the most Sacred) for Gods Service, is bestiall Heresy. The Devil himself
will not allow such a Chapel; Though he chose Swine for a House, yet never a
Stie to Mat. 8. 31.
be served in.

Nor let it suffice to keep Conscience quiet, that thou do serve God at home,
when others Worship him at Church! That Is good in it time (O my Soul!) when
Sickness, or Necessity confines thee to a House, a Sacrifice acceptable to
God; but else, an offering of an ill and offensive Savor to God and man, like
meat out of Season. At other timies, it looks like an Integrity and Holiness,
but now like a Singularity and boldness. Be not thou, no not in thy Closet
(Gods little Chapel) when others are at his Greater (the Church) Thou must
not put him to a Private Audience, when he has appointed thee a Public. But
for him to see thee in thy Bed, when he looks for thee in his Court? To Spy
thee at thy Glass, when thou should be looking in His Word? To be found at
thy Jam. 1. 23.
Dresses, when thou should be at thy Prayers? To be taking or giving
Addresses to man, when thou should be making them to God? O My Soul! When
thou would have God to loath thee, let such postures of Profaneness appear
in thee!

My Soul, My Soul! Believe thou God has his Day of Doom? I know thou
believe, I charge thee then (as thou will answer it at that Dreadful day) by
no means (unless the plea be just Heb. 10. 25
before God) by no means (for these or any such like ends) be bestowed in thy
Chamber, when others are assembled at Church. All excuses set aside which
Conscience dare not avow at that great Audit, behave thy self more like a
Saint and Servant of God; be found and seen, where they are, in the Sanctuary!

Dear Soul, If thou do otherways, where can thou be better found? Are
there better Companions, then Saints and Angels? Is any Greater then God? Any
Nobler Employment, then to wait on Divine Majesty? Any happier place, then
Heaven? Any weightier business, then Happiness? Lo! They, and This, are
here. Saints, Ministering; Psalm. 74. 7. House of Glory. Isay 6. 8. Genesis 28. 17.
Regia Dei ipsum coelii Chrysostom. Ezekiel. 46. 10. 2 Chro. 23 13. 2 Chro. 6. 13.
Angels, Assisting; God, Residing, Heaven, Appearing; Happiness, Working.
Heaven in figure is before thee, the Gate by thee; and where is happiness but
in Heaven?

What then? Think thou any too great to serve God? I know thou art too good
to think it, too wise to believe it. The Prince has his Pillar in Gods
Temple. There Great Solomon, Kneeles Eccl. Hist. Eus. de V. C. l. 4 c. 33.
Stans concionem audit alit^r renuit rogatus licet.
; Constantine, Stands before Him. Were thou Prince, King, Emperor, (never so
great a Man) Nay, Cherubim, Seraphim, Throne (never so great an Angel) it
would be thy Honor to be his Minister. And do thou, a Man, (no Angel) a
Worm, (no Man) do thou distaine on Earth what they do in Heaven? Do thou
Dan. 7. 10. Apoc. 4. 10 Job. 4. 18, 19. Psalm. 2^. 6.
despise what the greatest have done on Earth? Or do thou pretend affairs
when Crowns are noe Excuses? Nay therefore, My Soul, wait on God the rather,
that he (without whose blessing all Designs are vain) may Psalm. 127. 1. Prove.
19. 21. Prove. 16. 3.
speed thy Dispatches, and Prosper thy Affairs.!

But, If thou have either sense of thy Makers Honor, or thy own Salvation; If
any love to God or man be in thee; If any care of Piety or Prosperity; If not
given up to an utter neglect of thy own and others, wordly and heavenly
welfare; I charge thee, O My Soul, and recharge thee, Take heed and tremble to
keep others from Church, (unnecessarily) to wait upon thee at home, when thou
and they should be waiting on God in his Sanctuary. Art thou their God, that
to attend thy Will, they must neglect His Worship? Or art thou the Greater God,
that thou must be served before Him? An Idol thou may be, sure a God thou
art not. So Hic fur est and l^^ro, qui furari voluit gloriam ^uam. Deu^. 14. 26.
thou Robbest God of his Honor, and drawest thine into the Robbery. O my
Soul! Be not such a Theife to Heaven. Do but consider it, and thou will
condemn it, and never more be Guilty of such high dishonesty. Thou must have
care that thou, and thine Jos. 24. 15
House serve the Lord, not take course to keep thee, and them from his Service.
The King after Gods own Psalm. 42. 4.
Heart Went with a multitude into the House of God, (held not many from it.)
Was one of the Holy Round and Ring of Worshippers; not sitting in a Chair
Psalm. 26. 6.
when he should be standing before the Altar; not with them about him, that
should be with him about God! Dear Soul! Bring all to Heaven thou can, hinder
none from it. And though Atheism sit in the door of some Lips that dare say,
Religion is but Policy; let it not lurk in any corner of thy Mal. 3. 14.
Heart so much, as to think Piety an Impertinency. A Ceremony to be Exodus 5. 17
done when there is nothing else to do. No my Soul! There is no other Rom 6. 22
way to Heaven; and the Church is Isa. 35. 8.
Gods High way. What is done, and not in Religion, or Order to it, is
Impertinent Eccles. 5. 6
all. And the Lord keep thee, and thine, from their Death and Misery, whose 1
Cor. 10. 7 1 Pet. 1. 17.
Conversation is a mere Pastime, and their Life an Impertinency.

As therefore Philip had his Morning-Memento to tell him he was a Man, to keep
him from Pride, have thou some Evening-Remembrancer to mind thee, the Night
before, the next day is for God, to prevent such Profaneness. That by
disposing thy self to a Timely rest that Night, thou may have better time and
Spirit to serve God on his day. Look at late Companies then, as Vipers, and
shake them off as such. Wastes of time (especially Holy) work stings of
Conscience. It is thy Mothers Counsel, (The Churches use) Saturday is half
Holy Day, that Sunday may be whole And sure, the Devout Mother, that would have
God thought on that Afternoon, would not have him forgot that After-night;
much less neglected on the After-day. No my Soul! If thou do honor thy Lord
and Savior thou must not despise His Day, The day of the Lord.

Nay, if thou have any love to Religion, thou can not. For what is that, but
the Service of the Lord, and this but his Day? Nay, if thou have any care of
happiness: For what is this but thy Saviors Day? and how that, but because
set apart to seek Salvation? Thy Ld Christ rose this day out of his Grave to
save thee; and wilt not thou rise out of thy Bed to serve Him? Is that the way
to uphold an House, to pull down the Pillar? My Soul! If Piety have no set day
for her P^actise, Religion will soon fall to ruin. Without that, it will not
be visible, but vanish to nothing; and thy Bli^se with it. For surely, if thou
seek God no Day, thou will find him no where. And in Heaven every day is a like
Sabbath; on Earth, to make each day alike, is to seek God no day. Thou can
not be (as in Heaven) every day Holy; thou must not be (as in Hell) every day,
Profane, alike. One Day therefore in the Week is set, that Religion, and (with
it) thy Salvation be not lost. And the first of the Week is that One. As
Ancient as Apoc. 1. 10
the Apostles; as Catholic as the Church of Christ. Reverend for that, and to
be kept holy by thee, because observed by all; All that ever professed the Name
of Christ: And, my Soul, thou will not renounce him! not be Refractory to
Apostolic Order; not Contradictory to Christian Custom; not Singular to all
the Saints in the Catholic Christian World! This Day was ever kept by all. And
so let it be kept. And as they did, so do thou keep it. For (my Soul!) many do
not so. Not caring, or knowing how to keep the Day of the Lord. For

Some Observe it with great Superstition; Second. part. Col. 2. 16.
Others, shun that with gross Profanation: Some bind themselves to such a
strictness, as they neither do, nor can, nor need observe, because what God
requires not; Others leave themselves to such a loosnesse, as they take not
like Liberty, on another day. Betwixt these two Extremes, must thou walk
warily (O my Soul!) Keep it not, as the Jew, a Sabbath; nor as the Exodus 16.
23. Exodus 35. 3. 1 Pet. 4. 5. 2 Pet. 2. 13.
Heathen, ^ Bacchanal. Observe the Day with Devotion; Keep it, from
Superstition. Fly from an uncommanded strictness; but run not to an
unjustified loosnesse. Take this Rule for thy Guide. Let Church duties be duly
paid; and let not the House defrau^ the Church. Those are the Maine Service,
those must be Serviceable to the maine. For it is absurd (My Soul) to think
that on one and the same day, thou may appear Saint in Gods house, and in
thy own, a Devil. Be not Privately (though piously) employed when thou
should be at Public Service, but when publicly will-disposed, be not
privately- ill: This being more holy then another day, must not have less of
thy Service. House and Church then both look to this. What others days
confine to the House, this does in it; and what others do not, in Church.

So then, My Soul! In the Church (Gods House) on Sunday the Lords day; Where,
and when the King of heaven keeps his Court, and commands thy Attendance, fail
not upon any terms, (save just and necessary) fail not to present thy self in
the Holy Equipage of a Servant and Suppliant to the Majesty of Heaven. Believe
thy absence else an Offense to God thy Father; A Neglect to Christ thy Savior;
An Undutifulness to the Church thy Dear Mother; A Scandal to man thy
Christian Brother; And to those that know Thee, and it, an Example of ill, and
Encouragement to ungodliness.

But when God by his Ministers sends out summons to call thee to his House and
Table too; not only to Serve but Sup with thy Lord, O my 1 Cor. 11. 20.
Soul! How will thou answer it or to thy Self, or thy God, if thou do not
come? Love thou Eternity, and have no appetite to the Bread of Life? Can
Joh. 6. 48.
thou and Satan be too much two? Thou and thy Savior, too much One? And is not
this thy Communion with 1 Cor. 10. 16. 2 Cor. 8. 15. 1 Cor. 10. 21.
Christ? That thy Separation from Sin? And it, thy Disunion with Satan? Can
thy Pardon from Hell be so sure; or thy Assurance for Heaven too strong? And is
not this blessed Sacrament Sensum in minimis minuit, i^ gravoribus peccatis
consensum tollit. Bern. 1 Cor. 11. 31. Mat. 26. 28. (...). Damasc. Luke 22. 9.
the Seal of thy Pardon, and that Assurance? Can thou do thy Savior too
much Honor? Is a Commanded Commemoration of His love, too much? Is not a
neglect of that, a scorn? A sign of his vile neglect? Will thou shed thy
Blood for his sake, that wilt not drink His, to thy Salvation? Will thou
drink his Cup of gall, that do refuse his Wine? Will thou climb his Cross,
that do shun his Board? Die for him, that wilt not Sup with him? Be his
Sacrifice, that do decline his Sacrament? O My Soul! Where is thy love and
Duty to thy Christ, if at his call thou do not come? And what is it keeps
thee away? Does Malice glut thy Holy Appetite? 1 Cor. 10. 21. 1 John 3. 12.
This is to leave Gods, for the Devils Table! Is thy Stomach for some carnal
lusts and pleasures; and the Preparations for it slack that? This is to
prefer man's bread, to Angels. Nay, Psalm. 78. 25. 1 Pet. 1. 12 Cant. 5. 1.
a Sinners, which is worse, to the most Heavenly, which is better. O my Soul!
When God and the Devil, or God and Man at once invite thee to their Board, give
not Man (much less the Devil) thy Presence, and deny God thy Appearance. No
my Soul, without good Warrant from God under Seal of thy Conscience, Refuse not
his Invitations Luke 14. 17
to thy Eternal welfare, lest he Banish thee his Beatificall vision for such
inexcusable negligence; And keep thee Apoc. 19. 9
from the Supper of the Lamb, that have kept thy self from the Supper of the
Lord. O! woe to thee, my Soul, for ever, if he once say (as for like neglect)
he did; Thou shall not eat of Mat. 22. 8. Luke 14. 22 Psalm. 118. 19 Prove. 9. 2.
my Supper.

On Gods day then, when his Door is open, be with him, but especially when his
Table is Spread. Gods Ordinary is better then the Worlds Feast, because it
feeds to a better Life; But Joh. 6. 27.
here my Soul! are the Dainties of Heaven Omnium carnalium saporum and
dulcedinum voluptates exup^rat. Cypr. de C. D. Prove. 9. 2. 5.
What Infinite wisdom voluptates exuperat. Cypr. de C. D. Prove. and goodness
can provide to Feast thee, till thou art satisfied with his Psa. 17. 15.
Glory in his Presence, where is fullness of joy for Eternity. O my Soul! where
Chrysostom. Ubi omnes angeli cum sacerdoto. etc. Joh. 6. 51. Joh. 6. 41. (...).
Damasc. Animae vis, spes, salus, lux nostra. Chrysostom. Psa. 42. 1. 2. Psalm. 93. 6.
1 Cor. 11. 22. Eccl. 5. 1. Hab. 2. 20. Psa. 46. 10.
Angels are Ministers, be thou one of Gods Guests. Where Heaven is on the
Table, Kneel thou at the Board. Where Life is in the Bread, be thou at the
Table. Think it Death and Exile from God, and Heaven, to be kept from the
House, and Table, of the Lord.

But Presence is not enough, if Carriage be not Christian; Holiness becomes
Gods House, (Rudeness is unsuitable) Veil thy Eyes here with Holy Modesty! Tie
thy Lips with humble silence! shut thy Ears to all Earthly Audience. Fix thy
Feet to lowly quietness. Cover thy Body all over with Religious Reverence.
Yes, and shroud thy self under it too. For God sees thee, as well as Man sees
it. Here then thy thoughts must mind Heaven, and thy Affections not move
Earthward. On these Wings must Devotion Mount thee to the things above. Those
below are the business of Worldlings, not Ezekiel. 33. 31. 1 Timothy 5. 8. Eccl. 5*
1.
Saints. Admitted into the House, but banished the Church. Look to thy foot
When thou come to the House of God. Set it right toward Heaven, yea, and
keep it so, when thou art in the House; (let it not wander when it is well
set.) What is thy Foot (my Soul!) Sure thy self art one, the Body Gressum 1.
mentis, 2. Corporis. Olymp. per Synecd. partis.
is the other foot: Thou must look to both. Thoughts, and Gestures; Affections,
and Actions; Dispositions, and Demeanours; both must be looked to.

How dreadful is this place! If reverend, Genesis 28. 17.
dread to make it Ridiculous. Dare not Laugh in Gods Face. Do not then in Gods
Church. Do not 2 Chro. 7. 14. Psalm. 100. 1 2 Chro. 7. 16. Jer. 7. 10. Jam. 4.
8.
Chat in his Presence. Dare not then talk there. Dare not Gaze before Gods Eye.
Let not thine rove in his House. If vain thoughts, and foul lusts do come, bid
them be gone, They are no Objects for Gods Eye.

Here thy Ears must be shut to all Words but Gods. Thy Lips watched from all
speech but Prayers! Thy Eyes open to no fights but Angels. Thy Mind left to no
motions but for Heaven! God, and that, and they, are there, and thou must do
all reverence before the Majesty Levit. 19. 30. 1 Cor. 11. 10.
of Heaven. Reverence my Sanctuary. Yes, because thy self, O God! And thy
Angels are there with thy self O Lord! Rudeness is fitter for Ruffians then
Angels; no Demeanor for Saints. A rude Presence is worse then a plain
Absence: for that (my Soul!) is a neglect of God; this a Scorn upon Him. That
to Man seems an Offense, 1 Cor. 11. 17. 1 Cor. 14. 23. 25. 1 Cor. 14. 23. 1
Cor. 10. 32.
this is a Visible Scandal. Yea, to a Multitude. As many as be Congregated to
serve God, and see that Sauciness before Him! Better then, my Soul, not attend
God, then Affront him; and be out of Man's sight when he is before God, then a
Moat in his Eye, and when he is on his way to Heaven to lay a stumbling block
before him. Plead not Custom in Excuse! Saints Levit. 18. 30. 1 Cor. 10. 3^.
Jud. ver. 6.
never had it, and thou must not use the Haunts of Sinners. Gods Dues must not
be paid to the Devils Customs. Not keeping Order in Heaven made Angels Devils.
Not keeping Decorum in the Church will not make Men Angels. Before God they
Adore, and Tremble; Where shall they be that are so Bold before him? My Soul!
Isay 6. 2. Apoc. 4. 10. and 5. 14.
were it possible for thee to be a Saint, (an Angel) and Rude; thou should
either never come to, or never keep in Heaven.

Break then the Bands of such Customs as the Chains of Death. Go Prove. 5. 22
to Church. as to Heaven, and carry thy self there, as thou would keep in
it. Be Reverent, as thou wi^t be blessed. No Recusant to it, nor Miscreant in it.
If others be, have no more Fellowship with them that have no more fear of God.
That when they Psalm. 5. 7. Ezekiel. 28. 16.
go whither the Spirit of Profaneness leads them, thou may go to Heaven.

And when to appear at the Holy Eucharist, O my Soul, Array thy self 1 Cor. 10.
28, 29.
with all possible Reverence then! Body and Heart, let both Kneel, not to
Adora and Communica. Aug. 2 Samuel 9. 7, 8.
the Holy Elements, but thy Maker. For (my Soul) when thou, a poor miserable
wretched-sinfull Creature, art admitted to Communion; so near Communion with
the Eternal God, thy Almighty, and All holy Creator, can Psalm. 99. 5.
thou be too Humble? Did thy Face kiss the Earth, when thy Knee does touch it,
could thou go too low to a Majesty so High? And yet in this Holy Mystery as
low in Condescending 1 King. 7. 27.
Goodness to thee, as high above thee in infinite and incomprehensible
Greatness! My Soul! they are mad, who making themselves Coheires with Christ,
will therefore sit to keep Coequalls with Him. At lowest he is thy Lord. Man,
thy Brother; but Godman, thy Maker, and thy Father. Every Communicant is thy
Peer, but he 1 Cor. 10. 17. Apoc. 15. 3 1 Cor. 10. 21.
King of all. And his Table, not thy Fellows but the Lords. Worship, not
Fellowship, is fit for Gods Board. In his House, thou art in his Presence; but
here, before his Chair of Estate, the Mercy-seat of Almighty Majesty. Psa. 132.
7
What? a Man of Earth, and bold, so bold before the King of Heaven? Even
Celestial Spirits cast their Crowns Apoc. 4. 10
down before his Throne: shall Dust and Ashes car^y up his Crest before Genesis
18. 27.
Him? my Soul! Thou art better taught by an undoubted Divine.

God is greatly to be feared in the Psalm. 89. 8.
Council of his Saints; and to be had in reverence of all them that are about
him.

O come, let us, worship, and fall down, Psalm. 95. 6.
and kneel before the Lord our Maker.

The Sum of this Soliloquie is,
God, our Common Maker, must have a Public Service in Common Prayers and
Worship. Every Man must pay God this Homage, and the Greater he is, the greater
his Obligation to it. There must be a place set apart for that Service; and the
Church, for it is a sacred place. As for Holy Duty most fit, so for Heavenly
regards, no place out of Heaven is so lovely, and desirable as the Church.
There must be a time set for Holy Assemblies in it, and by Ancient and Vversall
use, that with Christians is the Lords Day. As Profanation, so Superstition
must be shunned in the due Observation of that Holy time. It Is ill to keep our
selves from Church, (unnecessarily) and worse to keep away others. If rude, and
irreverent there, as good keep away our selves. At Communion-times above all we
should be neither absent, nor rude.
VVednesd-Soliloquie. Perpetuall-Service. OR, A Soliloquie directing the Soul
in those Duties, which must never cease whilst we Live, if we will be happy
when we Die.
SEt Hours of Devotion do well (O my Soul) but that Service is not all. To
give God two a day, and Spend Ten at thy pleasure. The truth is, Two are set
apart to pray, that we may Spend all in his Service. Which if we do not as
well Endeavor, as pray, to do, we do but Mat. 7. 7. Prove. 28. 9
mispend those two. For, my Soul! Thy Prayers, are but Mockeries of Almighty
God, if thou have not care as well to Do, as Say thy Prayers! Observe then some
hours for thy Devotion, but all Time in thy Conversation. The Eternity which
God will give, and the Goodness which preserves thee every Psalm. 104. 13.
moment, will not abate a Minute of all; for this, thou owe him Service, all
Luke 1. 75.
the days of thy Life, every hour of the Act. 28. 7.
day, every Minute of the hour. Thou must do him Homage at Some Times; Deuteronomy.
19. 9.
Injury, at none. Kneel at Times before him, and pray, but Offend and provoke
Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10. 12. 2 Timothy 1. 5. Act. 24. 16. 2 Cor. 1. 12. Romans 12. 1
Deuteronomy. 8. 6. Psalm. 119. 5. Prove. 3. 6. Heb. 9. 14. Psalm. 119. 5. 6.
him never. My Soul! Keeping a good Conscience is doing Him this Service. In
all thy ways then study thou to keep a good Conscience; That is, a
Conformity betwixt his, and thy ways; His Will, and thy Life; His Laws, and
thy Cou^ses.

And since thy Thoughts, Words, and Deeds, are the Three Courses of thy Life,
how they are to be run, take Direction by his Laws.

And let Solomon (that great and Wise King) teach The Government of thy
Thoughts.

Keep thy Heart with all diligence.] Prove. 4. 23
A little will not serve: All is little enough. For thou can not keep hand, or
Tongue without this. Their courses being rivers that Spring in the Mat. 15. 19
Heart. Out of the Heart proceed evil thoughts, Murders, Adulteries,
Fornications, Thefts, False-witnesse, Blasphemies. Ill words, deeds, thoughts,
all flow from the heart; The Womb of Job. 15. 35 Psalm. 7. 14. Isa. 59. 4.
wickedness, the Nest of evil; No birth, no bird without it. With all
diligence then look to it. Since the Triplicitie of all ill is from it, a
Double, a Treble Watch be ever over it. Watch then My Soul that no ill
thoughts lodge in it. Come they may, they will, Jer. 4. 14.
(by force of Temptation or Corruption) but stay they must not. If the Gates of
Sense let them in upon thee, do not Board them, do not Bed them, Consent not
to them, Delight not in them. Thoughts are like Birds, they come as swift, and
fly as high; their hovering thou can not hinder. But their nestling thou
may; If of an ill feather, thou must. Suffer them, and Deuteronomy. 14. 11, 12.
they will hatch, fledge, and fly abroad out of tongue or hand, in words, or
deeds, of wickedness.

If then Flesh or Devil bring an ill thought into thy heart, Wandering or
wicked, to God, or Man (any way ill) do thou forthwith frown and turn it
out. Bid it not Welcome, but Avaunt. And if that will not put it, pray it away.
Groan to God under it that He may remove it. And if yet it will not go, call
in Help from God against it, seek Job. 33. 23
Ghostly Counsel about it. My Soul! If an Infant Thought grow too strong for
thee, if it grow man, how will it Master thee? Cry out then at first, and call
in more strength then thy own, to drive it from thee.

And because it is so hardly got out, if once let in, therefore watch what thou
can to keep it out. See to the Cinque Ports, and at every Gate of sense Mark.
13. 37. Psalm. 119. 37. Job. 31. 1. 7. Prove. 4. 25 and 17. 4. 2 Samuel 11. 8 Prove.
7. 21 Genesis 3. 1. 6 Nec potestarx mentis capi, nisi per portas bostiles irruat
exercitus.
set a Watch: And the Eyes and Ears, especially, as the Principal Gates.
David had never had so much as the thought of Adultery, had he looked better
to his Eyes. Nor would the Whorish woman have come into the Young man's heart,
had he kept her out of his Ears. At these two gates Adam was taken and Mankind
lost. Nor is the fort of the Heart (almost) Dow got till we give up those
Outwarks. Gazing on Temptation, and listening to the Devil is the overthrow of
Man. For if heart be gone all is lost. As the first thing which lives, it is the
last which dies, as well in Spiritual as Natural life. If that then be
departed, thou art a Child of death. For out of it are the issues of Life.
Above all keeping then Prove. 4. 23
Keep thy Heart.

Yes, and keep thy Tongue too. As thy Life, look to thy Tongue. It is S. Peter's
Transcript of King David's Proclamation, Who is the man that Psalm. 34. 13 1 Pet.
3. 10.
wouldlive long, and see good Days, let him keep his tongue from evil, and
his lips, that they speak no guile.

It is unruly, and apt to run to Evil; Jac. 3. 2. Jac. 1. 26.
a Bridle therefore thou must have for it. And what is that? Surely Gods Law is
a Bit; his Threat a Curb, thy Resolution a Rein, (all make a good Bridle.) The
Bit is in every Mouth, Prove. 4. 24 Psalm. 12. 3.
the Curb in every Ear, the Rein should be in every Heart. If the Tongue go
against Law, it must come unto Judgment. Even Words must be accounted Jude v.
15, 16.
for. If Vain, thou must answer for their Idleness. The Judge assures it. If
Vile, Mat. 12. 36
then thou must look to answer for their Ilness. The Judge pronounces it. For
by thy words thou shall be justified, Mat. 12. 37. Job 6. 26.
and by thy words thou shall be condemned. Though but wind (as they blow from
Holy or unholy Spirit) they waft to Heaven, or Hell. My Soul look to it: Life
and Death are in the power of the Tongue. This made David rein his in. I said I
will look to my ways, I Pro. 18. 21. Psalm. 39. 1.
will take heed that I offend not with my Tongue. He will keep it as with a
Bridle. He said he would, he resolved it should be so. He did not bite it out,
as the * Apud Hier.
Young man did his tongue, to save his Conscience, but in he did, and so must
thou. My Soul, thou need not be so severe. It Is the Trumpet of Gods Psa. 51.
15 Psalm. 71. 8.
honor; the Organ of his Praise; (his Servant and Sanctuary must not be mute)
do not then ruin, but rule thy Psalm. 29. 9.
tongue. Bite it then in; and (if need be) bite it, but not out. And the Rein
will be more easy, if the Heart be well Ruled. For out of the abundance of the
Mat. 12. 34, 35.
heart the mouth speaks [good or ill, as it is restored with grace or
wickedness.] Where no Restraint of ill thoughts, there will be liberty for ill
words. For what are words but born thoughts? and what are thoughts but
conceived words? Misconceptions make misshapen Births?

See thou not, O my Soul! How unchaste 2. Pet. 2. 18.
hearts have tongues full of Filthiness? And a stews is in the mouth when a
Whore is in the Heart? Have Jude v. 13.
not Profane Hearts tongues full of Ungodliness? A Hell in the Mouth, when
the Devil in the Heart? Have not Uncharitable Hearts Tongues full of Slanders,
and Censoriousnesse? A Knife in the Mouth, when a Butcher in Pro. 30. 14. Pro.
24. 2.
the Heart? Do not False Hearts fill Tongues with Lies, and Deceitfulness? A
Snare in the Mouth, when a Fowler Hos. 9. 8. Jer. 9. 5. 8.
is in the Heart? Do not Proud Hearts fraught Tongues with Scoffs, and
Disdainfulness? Isa. 57. 4.
An Ishmael in the Mouth, when Lucifer in the Mind.

No ruling thy Tongue then, without governing thy Heart. Yet thou art ruined if
it be not ruled. Wickedness Genesis 6. 12. 13. Jam. 3. 6. Psalm. 73. 9.
was the ruin of the World. And the Tongue (unrul'd) is a World of
wickedness. They set their mouth against Heaven, and their tongue walks
through the Earth. But do not thou thine. Blaspheme not, Curse not, Swear not,
Speak not what is ill, or mean, of God: that is to set thy Mouth against Heaven!
And thy Darts against it do 2 King. 19 22.
but fall on thy Head. Nor give thy Lips leave to do all Mischief to man Psalm.
52. 5.
That Is for thy Tongue like the Devil to run through the Earth. Mischieve
Ezekiel. 22. 8
not his Good Name; It Is to Murder more then his Life. Do thou cry out of a
wound in thine, that do Murder Prove. 18.
another? Does not that very Outcry condemn thee of that Murder? And is it not
justice (both Gods and Man's) that thou should suffer slander that do so
much? and for thy Murder go away with some wound? Murder not Jam. 4. 12.
another Soul, more dear then his Name. An unjust Condemnation makes a
Murder of the Execution. Keep Mat. 7. 2. To. 2. 1. 8.
then from Censure that thou commit not Murder. Be not thy Brothers Judge, lest
thou give thy own Doom. For (my Soul) if thou do the same or like to what
thou Condemnest, his Doom is thine. Nor will thou escape Romans 2. 3.
man's more then Gods. For observe it; Great Censurers are greatly censured.
Have then thy self to the Bar, before thou Sentence another; and thou will
acquit him to save thy self, or forbear him that thou may escape the Bar.

But do not Murder Mankind (if thou will man) Communication is the Band of
it, Truth the Tie; lies loose it: Lies are great wounds to Conscience Act. 5. 4.
(they rise directly against it) and the very Death of Society, They do
plainly overthrow it. The Bane and Blot of Hos. 4. 1, 2 John 8. 44.
man. They make his Mind Sermo concipitur in adulterio.
Adulteress. and his words Illegitimate; Bastards begot by the Devil, upon the
heart of man. He is their Father. Speech from the mind is the Natural issue
of words (Mind and Tongue are as Man and Wife for that issue) but against, is
a Child without a Husband, out of Marriage, Spurious. And therefore no heirs
Apoc. 22. 15. and 21. 8
(cast out of the City) except the Devils, to a Portion in his lake of fire.

And rightly that; In the fire, because a Firebrand. Yea, so my Soul, every
Jam. 3. 6.
ill tongue is, A firebrand of Satan in Man's Mouth, which sets all the Body
Psalm. 120. 3
on fire, and burns the Soul with it sets the little world on fire, yea, and
great one too. Kindled from Hell, and burning for it, and to it.

Dear Soul! save thy self from this Psalm. 41. 3
fire. Pray Gods watch over thee; Set a watch O Lord before the door of my
Lips! And do thou set a lock upon it, Hold it in. It will trip and fall if it
Psalm. 39. 12
do run out. Impossible it is, to Speak much, and well. A man full of words
Psalm. 140. 8 Prove. 10. 19
cannot prosper, because he will Err. If Dinah gad without wit she will not
return without shame. For the Tongue to be vagabond is the way to prove
Prostitute. Besides therefore Natures Bars, (Lips and Teeth) put on it the
lock of reason, and shut it up in Jam. 1. 19.
Silence. So shall it be kept from much ill; and let Grace keep the Key so it
will be kept from all. That will ^ac. 3. 2.
make it, and thee both perfect; Because, thy Tongues Rule argues thy Heart in
Obedience; and that, thee. The hand being more easy to rule, then the tongue.
And those three are all, Hand, Heart, and Tongue.

Hand then is One. My Soul! Thou must look to it too. And can Psalm. 37. 27.
Act. 24. 16 Mat. 22. 37, 38, 39, 40. Romans 13 10 Mat. 25. 45. Mat. 23. 25. Mat.
22. 21. Psalm. 50. 14. 16. Mat. 7. 23. Romans 2. 22 Jac. 2. 11. Heb. 13. 18. Act.
23. 1 Ezekiel. 18. 6. 8. Prove. 23. 29.
not better, then as David directs it; and that is, Eschew evil, and do good,
and dwell for evermore.

Do no impiety to God, nor injury to man; and thou do no ill: Do what he
Commands for himself first, and for man, next; And thou do good. Observe it
(my Soul) as a plausible, but damnable deceit; An innocence from ill will not
serve with a negligence of good. As thou may not be wicked, thou must be
godly. As no wrong, thou must do all right. And yet a Diligence in good will
not discharge without an Innocence to ill; A^ thou must be just and Religious,
thou must not be intemperate and Sacrilegious! Indeed thou art neither; if not
both. For the Law (Gods way) is for both; and Conscience (thy guide) looks at
his Law. Thou may no more steal thy Neighbors Bed, then his Cloak; nor take
away his Goods, then his Life,; Thou may no more kill thy self at a Table,
then a Duel; and main Plures necat crapul^.
as well kill, as starve thy self. Nor may thou more eat out of Time then
Measure; nor deny thy self due Repose then Repast; nor do it to others more
then thy self. For, this is all one, to distemper the Body, and to destroy it.
And though the Body be but thy Servant, it is too good for thee to kill it.
Indeed thou do so much wound thy self, and Lame thy business, as thou do
hurt it. Away then my Soul! Away, as with a Gluttons Board, and wantons Bed; so
with untimely foods and sleeps, if thou love either Health or Heaven: thy
Diseases become thy vices, by a wilful negligence, and Soul and Body, both
full of Diseases.

Nor may thou use God worse then thy self. Thou must no more rob him Mal. 3.
9. Psalm. 29. 2.
of his goods then his Glory; nor of his Service, then his Goods. Nor should
thou more Spaul on his Name, then Exodus 20. 7 Lev. 24. 16
Spit in his Face! In a word, To love, is to do all thy works. For then, thou will do God right first, and thy self Romans 13. 8 1 Timothy 1. 5
next; and thy Neighbor, next thy self, and that is all. All that either Law or
Gospel asks. For all is but,

To live godly, and righteously, and soberly Tit. 2. 12.
in this present world. And as love is (in sum) all that; so Charity is Mic.
6. 8. Romans 13. 10. Mat. 9. 13. Mat. 5. 23, 24. Heb. 13. 16.
(in short) all love. God himself makes it chief of all; He will have mercy,
and not Sacrifice. He gives it Place before Piety. He loves thy Alms before
his Offerings, and had rather see an Empty Altar, then an unreconciled Brother.
Nay, for Gods sake, to do man good, is to make a Sacrifice of mercy. A most
sweet and acceptable Sacrifice, Phil. 4. 18.
and most honored Piety. No marvel then, if it take place of justice.

The truth is, it is a Piece of it, and Prove. 3. 27 Deuteronomy. 15. 7 Psa. 112. 9.
so principal, that in the Holy Tongue, one word speaks both. Alms are debts
to the needy, by his Law who is Lord of thee and thine; and the payment (...)
Mat. 5. 7. Luke 11. 41. Dan. 4. 27. Mat. 25. 34, 35. Prove. 19. 17. Mat. 25. 40
so good, as procures from him a general Acquittance, though but a particular
Duty. Nay, not a Cancel only of the debt, but a Crown to the Debtour. And
wonder not at it, O my Soul, since it makes thee Creditour to thy God, and
Benefactour to thy Savior. As if (as all is nothing without) 1 Cor. 13. 23. 1 John 3. 17
nothing were all with charity, the chief of all.

As then it is in thy power, show it: 1 Cor. 16. 2
Abate something of Back and Belly, rather then have nothing in thy power. With
thy Superfluities provide the poor of necessaries Superflua divitu^ necessaria
pauperum. Ephesians. 4. 28. Ex. 32. 3. Job 31. 9.
. Did they give their Earrings to make a God? will thou quit nothing to save a
Man? shall all be Lavished away, that should Ezekiel. 16. 49.
be so laid out? All to Vanity, nothing for Mercy? O My Soul! Tremble to think
how such accounts will pass at the great Audit-Day. If thou can at Phil. 4.
17. Luke 16. 2
once Discharge thy self, and oblige thy God; why do thou bind over thy self
by such actions of wast, to answer Mat. 19. 21 Mat. 25. 42.
Divine Justice, at the Dreadful Day of Judgment? Dear Soul! Read, and avert
the Doom, thou can not answer it. Yea, see it in Execution, and quake to see
it. Dives, that would Luke 16. 21 24, 25.
not give a Crumb of Bread, has not a Drop of Comfort. How much better had it
been to have fed Lazarus, then fared so deliciously? To have given Alms, then
received Torments? not to have spent so much on the Flesh, rather then end in
Fire? Dear Soul, be thou more devoted to charity, let that never be thy End!
look to all, but to that above all thy works; as thou do unto thy words and
thoughts.

This, my Soul, makes thy Conscience Luke 1. 6.
good, and thy Service great, when it takes care to keep all thy ways right.
Indeed it is that (then which nothing is more precious) to give thy self a holy
1 Samuel 15. Romans 2. 12 Psa. 50. 23
Sacrifice unto his Service, nothing is desired more.

I beseech you therefore, by the mercies Romans 12. 1
of God, that ye present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto
God, which is your reasonable ervice.

The sum of this Soliloquie.
God being our God even unto death, must be served all our life. Psalm. 48. 13
Our Conscience of all our ways, is his perpetual Service. To look to our
thougbts, words, and deeds, is to have care of all our ways. 1. The Heart must
be strictly kept, because the Spring of all ill is in the Heart. First Motions
must be repelled, and the Senses well watched, if we will keep the Heart. Eyes
and Ears must be chiefly watched, of all the Senses.
2. The Tongue must be bridled, as we love our life. Gods Law and Threat, and
Man's Resolution make a strong Bridle. The Tongue will be easily rein'd, if the
Heart be ruled; and hardly else. It will fly out if God keep not the Door of
the lips. Taciturnity is a good lock to keep it in.
3. The Hand must be bound from ill, to good. To God and Man it must do no
Act. 24. 16
evil, but all good. True love performs all. Charity to Man, is by God
accounted as the Principal and total of Love. If we have to spare, we must
spend; if not, pinch rather then want to lay out on works of Charity.


Thursday-Soliloquie. Remora's in Religion. OR, A Soliloquie showing the Soul
the Errors and Dangers in the ways of Godliness, and how to avoid them.
MY Soul! To keep thy self continually Serviceable to thy God, is a great and
hard Government! More to Rule thy little, then the Greater, world: but Prove. 16.
32. and 25 28.
will be easied by some Helps which are to be had; If thou will Avoid what
Hinders, and Observe what Furthers thee in the way to Heaven. And if thou do
survey all, thou will see, that false Principles, Bad Customs, Vile Companies,
Vain Scruples, and Ghostly Negligences are Principal Bars and Hindrances.
Conscience is Gods clock, to teach thee how to know and Spend thy Time in his
Service, but given thee to Keep: If then the wheels be ill that move it; or
Dialls false that guide it; or it kept foul or thou forgetful of it, how
should the motion possibly be rectified, and it go right? And (My Soul)
Principles and Habits, are the Wheels; Examples, Dialls; Scruples, Dusts;
Rests, forgettings of it.

Mind and Will are the Wheels on which Humane Actions move; ill Principles,
and Habits Spoil the Wheels. And (of many) as the very Pests and Perversions
of all Regular life eye these: as,

1. Ill Principles.
To think thy self good, because thou see others worse. For so there shall
be but One man Bad in the world, to wit, the worst. Nay not One, because be he
never so bad, the Devil is worse. Ephesians. 3. 8
Rather, Judge thy self bad whilst thou ^eest a better, because, by the grace
of God, did thou equally pray and endeavor it alike, thou might be as
good: By leave of that thou may be very naught. That Principle therefore is
bad. And no better,

2. To think thy self not bad, because Particularly good.] So Abimelech had
been as good as Abraham. God Genesis 20. 6 Psalm. 119. 6
knows, he did not Adulterate Sarah, (act or thought) For that his heart was
upright. Yea but if it incline or lean to any ill, the heart is not upright:
for then (since there is some Sin which every 2 Kings. 10 31.
one hates, because a contrariety of Sins, and some he loves) the World (which
has many) would not have One Hypocrite: And since no man is universally ill,
there should not be one Sinner. I may walk in the dark by Mat. 5 46.
that, and therefore it is false light. So is it,

3. To think my life good, If my heart be honest. (If my life be not according
to my heart) Saul then needed not be 1 Timothy ^. 13. Act. 26. 9. 2 Chronicles. 13. 9,
10.
converted, for he did Blaspheme and Persecute from an honest heart. And Vzza
should not have been Smitten, for he meant well, when he did ill, in staying
the Arc. A wrong meaning mars a good Action; a Right, makes Isa. 10. 7.
not a good Conversation. Not to be Hypocrite, is good; and so is it, not to be
profane. Not to show more good then I am, is good; but not to be less good
then I should be, better. So then, if I think as I should, I must do as I
think. Else as doing contrary, is damnable Hypocrisy; so doing less, is
inexcusable negligence. Yea, a bad tongue or hand, where mind is good, Jam. 4.
17.
becomes more inexcusable. So then to think, is error. And so it is,

4. To think my self good, because Godly by fits. Why? Every man is So; When
the fit is on him, Pharaoh Exodus 8. 8. and 9. 27. and 10. 16. Exodus 14. 4
himself, is a Saint; will, confess, pray, promise any thing. Whilst the
plague is warm, his iron-heart melts; but if that be over, as hard iron as
ever. A 1 Pet. 1. 7.
Saint is gold for Substance, the same in, and out, of the fire. A Miscreant
sometimes will be Saint; a Saint, never Miscreant. Under the Cross, he may 2
Cor. 11. ^5.
be more tender; at a Communion, more devout; never debaucht and obstinate. A
Habit of strength (not a fit) makes a healthy man; a constancy of good
carriage (not an act now and then) makes a Holy one. We shall be judged by Act.
24. 16 Ezekiel. 7. 3.
our ways (not our steps) So to think then and do, is damnable error. And

5. To think my self good, because my Belief is Right. If so, the Devil
will not be wrong. He believes there is Jam. 2. 19. Luc. 4. 41. Mar 5. 7. Act.
16, 17
a God, and Christ his Son, and the Savior of the world, (so far a Christian,
most Orthodox in his faith) but has hate to God, and rage to Christ, and so 2
Pet. 2. 4
in an ever damned condition, because inveterate-ill in his course. A good
belief Apoc. 12. 9. 1 Timothy 1. 5. 19. Job. 1. 8. 2 Cor. 11. 14.
and life, both, make man good. A Rightnesse in Religion and Conversation,
perfect a good man. Believe my self a Cherubin, and live not a Saint, I am but
a Devil; to my Phancie an Angel, but in Gods Eye, a fiend. My own Elect, but
Gods Reprobate. The Principle Tit. 1. 16.
is damned which cheats the Soul of Heaven (if believed) And so it does
Thousands,

6. To think, the Soul well, if Absolved of her Sins. If I Sin in hope of
Pardon, and after fall again to Sin. My Soul! Where Confession is most
used, Souls are thus much abused. But bless thy self. from that error. Do
not thou so much abuse thy self. To Sin in a Presumption of mercy, is not the
way Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
to Pardon, but Judgment, Nay, cuts of all hopes of Pardon, because to be left
to the Judge without the plea of an Advocate. For that is mercy, which thou
have abused, and so thou will have justice without mercy to extremity; for
Offended Justice will punish nothing more, then abused Mercy. And if God do
not give the Pardon, the Priest cannot Seal it. For what he does is in the
Name, and by the Order of God, Joh. 20. 22 23. Mat. 16. 19
whose Keys he carries, not to do what he will, but should, in His House. My
Soul! When Gods Minister duly absolves thee, Himself pardons thee; but if
thou steal thy Pardon, thou gettest it not duly; and if thou Cancel it after
it is got, as good not get it. And to pretend ^enitence to such a purpose, and
presume to offend, before and after such a purchase, is first to steal a
pardon, and then Cancel it. To make Gods Pardon a Patent for Sin is ill. And

7. To think practice of Piety belongs to the Cloister and Clergy. Their
Obligations may be more, but thy Duties are no less. If a man, who ever, or
how or wherever thou^livest, thou owe thy God the essential Duties of B^ety
(as thy Maker, Preserver, and Redeemer too) by the greatest Obligations. And
for this (whosoever thou Apoc. 1. ^. ^ Per. 2. 5^. 2 Cor. 6. 17. Act. 2. 24.
Joh. 17. 15, 16. Joh 15. 19 Psalm. 3. 18. 20.
art) must be a Priest, (A Priest to offer God that Sacrifice:) And wherever
thou art, must have a Cloister, (Place and time to Sequester thy self) from
the World, to his Service. Though not Religious Votaries, all must be
Religious. That belongs to all. My Soul! Thou have seen Seven Guides which
mislead millions out of the way to Heaven. As thou hopest to be there, Know
them all, and shun them. For if Error Psalm. 95. 10 Mat. 15. 14.
be thy Leader, thou can not be in the right way. And as Principles,

2. Ill Habits,
They are to be avoided, My Soul! For these will carry thee wrong, though thy
guide be right. And this will wheel thy Heart, as the other do thy Mind
wrong. But the Soul goes woefully away, that is misled by both. An ill custom,
is a Second Nature. And that Genesis 6. 12.
was depraved enough at first to do ill (it needs not a Second.) An Inveterate
disease it is, which to keep is death; and to leave, impossible. O my Soul!
Sin is thy blackness, and vices thy Spots; but by continuance become not
accidental, but Natural; and what Laver will wash of an Ethiopian
blackness? Jer. 3. 23.
or Fuller, take out a Leopards Spots? Why cannot some Speak, but Swear? Why
do not some talk, but Lie? Why cannot some live more without drink, then
breath? And others, no more want their lust, then sleep? But because their
Tongues have got the custom to Speak; and these Bodies the habit, to do
evil? Live not then Romans 6. 6. Joh. 8. 21.
in Sin, as thou would not die in it. Naturalize it not, if thou will not
die for it. Reiterate not the acts of it, if Heb. 3. 11. 12.
thou would not naturalize it, What thou can, Commit not the first acts,
and thou shall not reiterate it. If thou have been overtaken with the first,
run Gal. 6. 1.
away from a Second, lest a Third overrun thee, and leave thee in the way of
death. Yea, at the very Door. For my Soul!

Hardness of heart, is the Threshold of Hell. And many strokes of guilt will
Obduratio animi, limen inferni
anvile it to hardness. And then as much Sense in that, as will be in thy
Conscience. And then, as much blushing Jer. 5. 3. Zach. 7. 12. 1 Timothy 4. 2 Jer.
8. 12. and 6. 15. Jer. 3. 3. Prove. 7. 21 Jer. 9. 12.
in brass, as will be in thy countenance. Entrance tears of the veil of
shame; but continuance whores the forhead; And so my Soul. it is with all Sin
as that One. Entrance conceives Continuance; This begets Custom; And That,
Impudence; And It, Vengeance. Say then my Soul! Say and do with Humble and
Holy Job,

Once have I Spoken, but I will not answer, Job. 40. 4. 5.
Yea twice, but I will proceed no further. No: Thrice may carry thee so far
from God, that either thou carest 2 Timothy 3. 3. Prove. 1. 24. 31. Apoc. 22. 11.
not, or can not Return, and so must on and Proceed. Proceed for want of a
Timely pause, till thou come to a fatal Period. Beware then of Bad Customs.
And so do by

3. Lewd Companies.
Indeed the way not to be struck with those, is to fence against these. For
they will both instill the one, and induce the other. That, as they are Schools
of Prove. 4. 14
error; and This, as they be forges of wickedness. Those within, these
without, both lead to Lewdness. According Hos. 7. 6. 7.
to the Dialls next us, our Watches go; and wrong, if they be set to
wickedness. When David therefore would have his go right, he bids these be
gone; Away from me ye wicked, for Psalm. 6. 8.
I will Keep the Commandments of my God. That is, His Conscience cannot Prove.
1. 10
go right, if their Company be not away. How should we go right, and be with
Mat. 26. 69.
them that are wrong? Saint Peter (though fully resolved and warned against it)
thus fell into his fearful error. The way of Christ lay not through the
Highpriests hall; nor will Devotion kindle but cool, at such a fire. A Spark
amongst live-coales holds its heat; amongst dead, it dies; My Soul! If thou
can not decline evil livers, delight not in them, they will damp and Prove.
13. 20. Prove. 6. 27. Col. 3. 12. 1 Cor. 5. 10. Ephesians. 5. 11. Mat. 8. 28. Ephesians.
2. 1. Mazentius.
dead thy Spark. Civility with all is good, Familiarity, dangerous. Thou may
live amonst Gods rebels, thou must not love them. If thou do, thou will in
time be like them. Dead (as they are) to all good; (As the living Bodies
chained by the Tyrant, to the Dead:) And Buried (as they are) in all ill; (As
sound Bodies living with the Pestilent catch their death.) And (without the
Preservative of Gods great mercy and grace) damned with them: for both (As
those that are found with Rioters) incur the same Doom: how Luc. 6. 25. Number.
16. 24. Apoc. 18. 4
do thou fear their Condemnation, and love their Company? How can thou
laugh with them in this World with whom thou would not houle in that other?
Why do thou dread a Plaguie Body, and sit with a Pestilent Psalm. 1. 4.
Cathedra Pestilentiae. 2 Cor. 11. 3. 2 Timothy 4. 3. Prove. 4. 15. Act. 2. 40.
Soul? Surely the Soul is better then thy Body, and her Plague, worse, and
that infection greater. Read, Lord have mercy on them, writ on a Sinners Door,
When thou do see in their lives, a Cross to all Gods Commandments. And my
Soul, say, Lord have mercy on thee, for dareing so much in Spiritual dangers,
and Lord have mercy on thee, that thou do not further dare so much. Shun
profane Companies: And as not go the way with these; So do not give way to,

4. Vain Scruples.
My Soul! Two things God desires, Thy Joy in his Service, and His Comfort in
thy Life; The Devil a friend to neither seeks to rob thee of both; And thy
Scruples are his Thieves. If they overtake and overcome thee, they will bind
thee from the One, and beat thee out of the other; Taking both thy heart from
all Duty, and all joy from thy heart! Believe it, they will give thy Spirit no
Freedom, and thy Conscience no rest.

For when thou should be doing good, thou will be disputing it; when at Gods
work, questioning thy Warrant; when acting and waiting on his Service,
entertaining arguments about it. Thus, when others are well on their journey,
thou art quarrelling thy Pass; and do, either with Balaams ass, stand,
Judge. 22. 27. Exodus 14
and not move at all; or with Pharaohs Chariots drive on heavily. And no
wonder; for the Wheels are of. The mind becomes dark, the heart dull, the
Spirit dead, the Conscience dared: nothing but weakness and wavering, and
trembling, and chillness, and confusion in the powers of action, and so either
none at all, or a stupid, trepid, troubled motion. These be the first fruits of
thy Scruples (fetters and Snares.)

And what then the Second, but Heart-gaules and Gripes? They will beat thee,
till they leave not one sound part of comfort in thee: Scourge thee with
thoughts, Saw thee with doubts, Rack thee with fears, Torture thee with
perplexities; till thou have neither joy of Duty, nor Life. Leaving thee in a
labyrinth of woe, doleful, dismal; full of nothing but Damps of joy, Dumps of
Spirit, and Distresses of Conscience.

And here My Soul! Take view and heed, of the Devils boundless craft, 1 Pet.
5. 8.
and rage. When he cannot make thee quick to ill, he will make thee dead to
goodness.

If not dissolute, irresolute; If not Debauched for Hell, Distracted
Heavenward. If loose of life, then Conscience it self is a Scruple: if
strict, then every Scruple, is a Conscience. First, he would have thee have no
conscience; and if not, It to be all Scruple. With the profane, even Careful
Piety goes for Holy lunacy; and Motions of holy Spirit, for fits of Ghostly
Frenzy. But to the Religious he persuades, what he can, what they do, and
are; all to be profane. So when he cannot make our hearts hard as flint, to bad
purposes, he makes them weak as water, to better.

And this is the Malice of the Devil. When he cannot have us in Hell, to have
it in us. To Torture us with our Scruples, when he cannot with his Torments.
Now, to have us without the Comfort of Heaven, because not ever without the
joys of it. He would have all like himself, if they will not go to it, carry
Hell with them.

But, Dear Soul, do thou defeat his 2 Cor. 2. 12
Devices! A Scrupulous Conscience is as unsafe as sad. Thy Scruples, as they
are thy Clogs, and Rods, so they will be his Skrewes, if they continue so.
Skrewes to wind thy thoughts up through doubts and fears, to the utmost pin
of Despair, and either leave thee there, or let thee down again, to as ill
(though a more merry Pin) of thy first estate in Presumption. They will hoist
thee up from Atheism, till they have thee to Superstition, and then let thee
fall to Atheism again. So niceness of life ends often in retchlesnesse of
Conversation. When Satan cannot make our hearts tough enough, he makes them
tender too much; and from that excess brings them again, and so makes them to
be tough.

My Soul! If well, and with wisdom, thou can not be enough; but if vain, and
ill, Conscience may be too much tender. And abundance of doubts and scruples
will make, and prove it so Vain; that is the Devils Design. But how then will thou Defeat him?

Sure, never without the Aids of God; and therefore thou must pray his help.
And often, not without the help of Man, and therefore thou must take his Aid.
If the Clock of Conscience stand, or go not even; it may be, because the
Wheels are foul, dust disorders the wheels. My Soul! what are thy Scruples but
those piles of dust (scarce visible to the Eye, yet hurtful to the Clock) and
who then must direct thee, Job 33. 29 Isay 50. 9.
but some skifull Master in the Art of Souls? some upright Judge in the Cases
of Conscience. If thou then can not (without danger to hurt it) let him clean
thy Watch, and clear thy Dust. Or go to some of Experience, Gal. 6. 1. Heb. 5.
14.
if thou want one of that Skill: But not to one Subject to like niceties,
for their Advice will but confirm and multiply thy Scruples. And thy self
may concur with thy Prayers, and their Counsels.

In the Name of God go on in thy good way, and against Common Errors and
frailties, Encourage thy self with Christ's merits, and Gods mercies. Act. 15.
11. Psa. 42. 14. 1 Kings 15. 5. Job. 42. 7. Phil. 3. 15.
Let known good be done, and ill shunned from an upright heart; and if any thing
fail, it will be pardoned, and (if necessary) shall be known. Kill Goliath with
his own Sword, Scruples by Scruples, make Satan's Scrues Gods Engines: Scrue up
thy self to a better, and greater care of Godliness, by the force of thy
Scruples. What they pretend, make them be Movers and Sollicitours for Gods
Service; And with one Scruple kill all: Have them in jealousy for naught;
Bauds of Satan, though in Virgins attire, and entertain none but one, to
Scruple all Scruples. Make not shie, (nay, make Conscience) of this; its the
way to clear all out of Conscience. Harder for the Soul, where the Body does
assist; and the humor of it is (as in Melancholic Tempers) to raise
jealousies and fears: (For that is to empty a Po^le when a Spring feeds it:)
yet even so, it may, and must be done; and because with greater difficulty,
with better acceptance. Look to thy self then, O my Soul! and cherish not, but
banish Scruples. And so thou must,

5. Ghostly Negligences.
Temptation and Corruptions are the Parents of man's Sin and Bane, (Father and
Mother of all mischief.) And Idleness is the Mother of both. It is Chrysostom. 1 Timothy 5. 13. Pulvinar Satanae.
the Sewer that takes in all Temptation, and the Pool that holds in all
Corruption. The Devils Pillow where he lies, and Sins Bed were she conceives,
and brings forth all Wickedness. O my Soul, lay not him a Pillow, that comes
for thy Death, and make not her a Bed that stays for thy Destruction! Believe
it, where thou do place the Bed of ease, he will set up the chair of Psalm.
1. 1. S. Hierome.
Pestilence. The Devout Saint did; Ever finding something to do, that the
Devil might never find him at leisure for his Service. If he do, even David
himself, he will put him on desperate and damnable employment. It Is said,
Better be idle then do nothing. But 2 Samuel 11. 2
surely, better be doing any thing (if not naught) then be Idle. Thou can not
Nihil agendo male agere discis. Praestat nihil quam male agere.
be idle, and do no ill. It puts thee into the School of vice, and the Devil
will be sure to teach thee. Better indeed do nothing then naught; for that is
worse then nothing, the worst of any thing: But as impossible for Waters to
stand, and not to stink; so it is, not to do Luk 12. 43
naught, if nothing. To be found then at the last day doing well, be seen in
this ever doing something. If not always Act. 9. 39.
at Spiritual work, at some Civil, and innocent employment. Though thou
needst not work (as most) for thy Psa. 69. 33 Momentum a quo pendet aeteruitas.
Living, thou have as much to do as any for thy Life. Eternity (my Soul)
that is thy Life; And thy life, that is the time to work for Eternity. Thou
came, and continuest in the world to do that work. How then dare thou
ravell away that precious thre^d? Trifle away that Time? O that God should set
so great a price upon it, and Man so mean! Man? Yes my Soul! But not every
man: Man in hell does not. O! If they had as many worlds as Shriekes, (ten
thousand thousand Worlds of Worlds) how willingly would they give them all, for
a little Time! Time on earth, to Repent, and escape the Damnation of hell: The
depth of whose woe, is wailing and wringing their hands, and hearts, for God
lost eternally, because time irrecoverably Luc. 13. 28.
gone, which well laid out in life, might have saved that loss. And O man on
earth will thou not be wise till in Hell? My Soul! Be not thou Psalm. 90. 12.
Psalm. 34. 5.
the man. Number thy days and apply thy heart unto wisdom. Pray God thou
may. Thou will not set it on folly; if thou number them, Thou will find
them few, and none to be Spared. Thou will find many Spent (Yea and misspent) of
those few. Thou will find Eternity to depend on those poor Remains; Thou will
find, as To. 2. 7, 8. 2 Timothy 2. 26. Act. 26. 18 Psalm. 89. 29.
those are past well or ill, a happy, or a miserable, Eternity, Thou will find,
that all ill-spent are the Devils (none of thy) days. And can thou look
that the Days of Heaven should be thine, when thine on earth are the Devils?
The Total is, Time is as precious as Bliss. He neither values God nor
himself, that accounts not of his time. He that will not lose Eternity, must
number his days. And so will thou, if wise, my Soul. Redeem what Ephesians. 5. 16.
2 Pet. 4. 3.
is lost, by a better thrift with what is left. Now lay out no more on vanity,
all for Eternity. Isa. 35. 2, 3


Does not thy Clock of Conscience tell this? Though Wheels good, Dial go
right, all kept clean, yet if not kept going, not daily wound up, but often hung
by, and forgotten, will it Romans 12. 14.
strike just? so sloth distimes the Conscience.

It is good, and goes well, when, as Gods Law sets it, it keeps due time for
good, and none for ill; (does this Gnomo^ ejus Decalogus. Heb. 13. 18
never, that in season:) As the point of that; there are not twelve, but ten
hours in this Clock.

And when it keeps Conformity with Luke 1. 6.
them, it points and strikes right; but without care to see, and have it go 2
Pet. 1. 10
right, it will not keep it. And that must be the more, because no clock so
soon out of Tune, if the care be not much. My Soul then, if thou would not
have Conscience ill, be not thou idle. Let the clock in thy Ears mind thee of
the Clock in thy Breast; as the Devout Man did, who was wont to say, O Lord
God! another Granat. De. peccat.
hour of my life is now past, and what account can I give thee of it? So said
he, (so say thou) so often as thou hear the Clock.

And so, my Soul, thou see the stops, and stumbling blocks in Gods service;
shun them, and thou will better walk on in his ways.

Wherefore lift up the hands that hang Heb. 12. 12.
down, and the feeble knees, lest that which is lame be turned out of the way.
And

Take he^d, lest there be in you an evil Heb. 3. 12.
heart of unbelief in departing from the living God.

The sum of this Soliloquie.
That God be duly and daily served, what hinders must be carefully shunned.
There be five great Impediments to true Piety, and the constant service of God.
1. Ill-Principles are great Impediments, viz. That I am good, and in good state
toward God. 1. Because others are worse. 2. Because particularly good. 3.
Because my Heart is honest, though not my life. 4. Because I am Godly by fits.
5. Because of right Religion, and Belief. 6. Because Ministerially absolved, if
not Penitent. 7. Because it is for Cloistered and Churchmen only, to be what
others need not, strictly Religious.
2. Bad Habits are great Bars to Religion, because they turn and confirm the
Soul against it. 3. Lewd Companies. Inconsistent with good Courses. Pests of
Souls, and to be shund as Plagues. 4. Vain Scruples, great Prejudices to Pious
Action, and Consolation. Acts of Satan's endless Artifice and malice to be
avoided, much, and how. 5. Ghostly Negligences, Mothers of Sin; Nurses of
Temptation; Satan's Advantages, and Agents; Under-values of precious Time;
Sellers-away of Eternity, which no Treasure else can redeem, and it self (if
gone on earth) past redemption in Hell, where Worlds would be given for a little
Time.

Friday-Soliloquie. Helps to Heaven and Happiness. OR, A Soliloquie,
Acquainting the Soul with such Holy Reliefs and Aides, as will much facilitate
and further Her Course and Progress in the ways of Piety: in Two Parts. First
Part. Holy Meditations and Motions, Great helps to Piety.
MY Soul! As those Avoidances 1. Division.
observed, thou can hardly be bad; so some Releifs being had, thou will be
more easily good. And, by the Grace of God, thou may receive all those
releifs. Thy own Thoughts and Endeavors may contribute all. If thou will
employ thy Mind and Parts to think and do, what may advance thee most. The
Aides are not small which may be brought in by both. And first Improve thy
Mind, for that may do much, by

Meditations, great Promoters of Piety.

A Power that can daily mount to Heaven, whither the Body, till the last day,
cannot come. And how that, but by Holy Motions? And what are they, but such as
either go to, or come from Heaven. When we Muse of it, they go; When moved
from it, they come. What are our Motions to it, but Heavenly Meditations? And
how so? But when some good thing of God or Christ, is and keeps in mind. Four
are made famous for that. Death, and Judgment; Heaven, and Hell. For, My Soul,
Remember thy end, and thou shall never do amiss.

And Death is thy first; Judgment Eccles. 7. 36. Quatour Novissima.
thy next; Heaven or Hell thy last end. These four, are thy last.

Nor will sin be in heart, whilst they are in mind. Nor any thing more move
to Duty then to have these in memory. Muse then often of those, O my Soul. And
of that first, which comes first; and how soon, who knows?

1. Death.
O Death! How bitter is thy Remembrance! Ecclus. 41. 1.
Yes to a Sinner, but most wholesome against Sin. My Soul! Die thou must. And
when thou shall, what will be thy Comfort? To have wallowed in worldly wealth?
Swome in sensual Solaces? Arrived at earthly Honors? Alas! No, This will be
thy Corrasive. Then all these gauds are gone. The flowers of thy Paradise all
fade, and nothing remains but the snake under them, guilt and woe. Luke 16. 26
manet turpitudo. Psalm. 17. 14 Saladini funus. Alex. Philosophus. Job 14. 17 and
24. 20. Joh. 11. 43
Woe to thee then, if that was thy Heaven, Death casts thee out of it. If thy
Hell, to want these, it throws thee into it: Then, a Sheet is all thy Goods; a
Grave all thy Land; a Coffin all thy House; Worms thy Companions; Corruption
all thy Kindred; Stench thy Perfumes; and thy Robes, rags of Rottenness. No,
the only Comfort then, is to have lived well; to have Isay 38. 3.
shunned ill, and so want the sting of the 1 Cor. 15. 56. 2 Pet. 3. 14. Luke 2.
29. Psalm. 119. 103. S. Ambros. Job. 19. 26.
Breast; To have done good, and so have the Peace of the Bosom. So to have
lived, as not to be ashamed to die. So to die, as to be assured for ever to
live. O my Soul! that would give Worlds to have a little such Comfort at that
hour, neglect not the provisions of Luke 19. 42.
that Peace in thy day. Believe it, to entertain Death with a Smile, and
Damnation without dread, is the sole effect and fruit of a life well led in
Gods fear according to good Conscience. Phil. 1. 23. Heb. 11. 35.


And can thou think of this, and not so live? That know (as surely as thou
liv'st) thou shall Die, and yet Eccl. 8. 8.
no more, where, or when, or how, then Eccl. 9. 12.
if thou did never live? That know, the time is past of doing good, if not
done before thou die; and thy Salvation gone, if that time be past? O dear
soul, Joh. 9. 4. Eccl. 9. 10.
look to the Body, that Death does not surprise both: look thou to thy God, let
it not look after the World, that, when its Death comes, thy Life may begin,
and it not fear the Prison 2 Cor. 5. 5.
of the grave, because it shall come out to a joyful day of Judgment. And
Joh. 5. 58.
of that, my Soul, have a serious Meditation, of

2. Judgment.
Sin will not be in thy hand, if that be in thy Eye. It is the Bridle of
vanity, and Curb of lust. Rejoice O Eccl. 11. 9.
young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy
youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thy eyes: but
know, that for all these things God will bring thee unto Judgment. See thou
not, my Soul, how this is Solomon's Bridle? To curb, and keep in the most Head
strong Age (youth) in his fullest Careere (the Heart) on his quickest spur (the
eye) Thou shall come to Judgment? Away Act. 17. 30, 31.
then with Sin to present execution. For how will guilt stand before it, and it
be without guilt? or thou without both? Can thou Cancel it, my Soul? Calcine
Jer. 17. 1. Romans 2. 15.
thy self sooner; and Conscience, which is the very Quintessence of thy self?
could thou anihilate it, thou can not Providence; the everlasting Monuments
and Records of all thy Sins. Apoc. 20. 12.
Thou must come to Trial for all. For all these things? Spare no Sin then,
away with all. All is book'd for the Bar. To an act, word, thought, all
Enrolled, though never so secret, all is Eccl. 12. 14. Romans 2. 16 1 Cor. 4. 5
seen, writ, kept; and for all these things God will bring thee to judgment.
God will? Away then, and away again with all Sin. Thou may shift, thou may
shuffle for thy self with man (bribe him, bleare him, move, make the Judge)
but God (the Allwise, and All-just God) thou can not delude nor deprave. My
Soul! Methinks 2 Cor. I. 11.
thou should not hear Solomon speak but Thunder and quake to Sin. Dan. 5. 6.
In the midst of all thy frolikes (like Belshazzars Handwriting) this should
make thee quake.

O Innocence! How precious will thou appear at that day! O the bliss Luc. 6.
23. and 21. 18. Mal. 3. 16. Mat. 25. 35.
of that breast, where thou art found! When all thy guilts are cancelled, and
thy good deeds chronicled, and all shall be read before men and Angels to thy
endless Glory, at those great Assizaes. O blessed Soul, that have the
Acquittance of thy ill deeds, and Assurance Act. 3. 19. Ephesians. 4. 30.
of thy good, now Sealed, and allowed then at that Dreadful day!

But Guilt! Where will thou hide Apoc. 6. 16. Apoc. 20. 13. 2 Cor. 5. 10.
thy head? Rocks are no shelters, they cleave; Nor Hills, they move; Nor Hell,
it opens before him. Appear thou must, endure thou can not. O the Dreadful
Sound, that gives the Summons! And Sights that usher in His Judgment, and thy
sad Appearance! 1 These. 4. 16. 1 Cor. 15. 52. 2 Pet. 3. 10 2 These. 1. 7 Mat. 25.
31
When his Trump shall blow, Earth burn, Heaven fould, Angels wait on him, and
Devils wait for thee, Hell gape, Paradise shut upon thee: And (which is the woe
of woes) besides all these Dreads that are without thee, the worst Devil and
fire shall be within, Conscience crying out upon thee, and condemning thee.

My Soul! If man's bar fright Apo. 6. 16.
from Capital Crimes, shall not Gods from Sinful courses? It should, it must,
2 Pet. 3. 11 Eccl. 12. 13 Joh. 12. 48
it will, make thee look to his Law, and thy life. For, if the end of all is
that we must be Judged, the Sum of all is to see that we be not condemned.
Let us hear the Sum of the whole matter, fear God and keep his
Commandments, for this is the whole Duty of man. For God will bring every
work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or whether it
be evil.

For My Soul! As thy works are now, thou will be found then, Acquitted Psalm.
50. 16. Mat. 25. 34. Romans 2. 6, 7, 8. Col. 1. 12.
or Condemned. Proclaimed Heir of Heaven or Hell. Blessed or Accursed for ever.
A Mate for Angels or Devils. In Light or Fire. And though it exexceed all,
entertain thy thoughts a little Man. 25. 41
what it is to be in

3. Heaven.
Surely my Soul! If thy thoughts be 2 Pet. 3. 14
in it, thy Endeavors will be after it. And all thy works on earth, but
studies for it. What thou seek here (Honor, Eccl. 1. 13, 14. Isay 55. 2.
Amos 5. 6. Prove. 1. 28. 32.
Pleasure, Wealth, or whatever good) and Iosest thy self in the seeking, is to
be found all, and only in Heaven. There Is Honor, To be a Grandee in Gods
Court Mat. 5. 19.
. To Sit on Christ's Throne Apoc. 3. 21.
: There Is Glory to shine as the Sun Mat. 13. 43.
. A Brother to all Saints, a Peer to all Angels Mat. 22. 30.
, a Spouse of the Son of God Apoc. 19. 9. Ephesians. 2. 6. 2 Cor. 11. 4. f 1 Cor. 13
4. g 2 Cor. 4. 15. h Heb. 12. 28.
. Honor and no envy; Glory and no vanity: State, and no change: O my Soul!
What Robe to Immortality 1 Cor. 15. 53.
? What Crown to Eternity 1 Cor. 9. 25.
? What Glory to Heaven 2 These. 1. 10.
. There Is Treasure Luke 18. 22. Heb. 10. 34.
, Substan^e indeed, and Supersufficient I^ay 64. 4.
. All good Mat 24. 47.
, and Superexcellent 2 Cor. 4. 17. 2 Pet. 1. 17.
, and Enduring ever. To which Gold is dirt; Gems pebles; Tissues rags; Lands,
Bogs; Palaces, piles of mud; Indies, beggeries; Goods which Scorn fire, and
thief, and moth, and rust Luke 11. 33.
, and those Millions of Misfortunes, and humane Casual^ies. There Is Pleasure.
At the Spring, Pure Psalm. 16. 12.
; In the River, abundant Psa. 36. 8
, Nay in the Ocean infinite Mat. 25. 21.
. Not as that on earth, momentanie Job 20. 5
, mixed (as of man's) nay foul (as of w Pro. 14. 13.
beasts 2 Pet. 2. 12, 13.
) but Eternal, Incomprehensible, clear in the Sovereign Beatificall good,
The joy of the Lord. All, only, rightly, and ever joy. There Is Company. y 1
Pet. 1. 8.
The worst Saints, Angels Heb. 12. 22.
; The best, the Trinities, Gods 1 These. 4 7.
Society, The Fathers, Sons, Holy Ghosts, in mutual, c 1 Cor. 1. 9 Phil. 2. 1.
1 John 1. 3.
Individual, ineffable Joh. 17. 22.
, indivisible Joh. 16. 20.
concord, and the Contentments of most intimate affections and unity Apoc. 15
3. Apoc. 5. 8. and 14. 2. and 18. 22.
. There Is Melody. The Songs of Saints to the Harps of Angels. A Quire of both,
chaunting Everlasting Anthems, with all heavenly harmony, to their Makers, and
thy Redeemers glory Apoc. 5. 9. 13. 2 Cor. r 2. 4 1 Cor. 2. 9
. O My Soul! If tongue cannot tell, what St. Paul heard, when but rapt into
this Paradise; how should mortal mind conceive the delights of Beatificall
Vision?

Dear Soul! Made, and Redeemed for those delights! Why do thou deigne Earth
any? Any but such as are Akin, or not Strange, to these? Phil. 4. 4.
Why seems any Duty difficult, that Heb. 12. 2. Jam. 1. 2. 12. Romans 8. 14
brings to them? Can thou do? Can thou Suffer too much for them? Is it
possible to be too much Saint, or Martyr, to get them? If thou give Skin,
flesh, blood, head, heart, life; to the Knife, Fire, Sword, Axe, Gibbet, Heb.
11. 34 35, 36, 37.
Saw, Rack, Caldron or what ever torture; comes it not cheap? If for a lustful
eye, or hand, or foot of offense Romans 8. 13 Mat. 5. 29. Heb. 11. 25
then, or denial of any Pleasure, is it then, Dear?

My Soul! The Saints and Martyrs Pro hac emenda Bartholomoeus propria^ pellem
dedit. Aug. Longo tempore tolerare. Aug. Gal. 5. 24. 2 Timothy 2. 12. Heb. 12. 3.
2 Cor. 4. 17 1 Cor. 10. 13 Heb. 2. 18. 1 Pet. 4. 14. Heb. 1. 14. 1 Cor. 15. 10.
thought themselves good Merchants, that bought them at these rates. Nay, if
thou should daily Suffer torments on earth, yea for a long time endure the
torments of Hell, the price would not be great for the purchase of Heaven. My
Soul! he that said so to his was a Saint. Be content then to Cross a lust, or
Carry a Cross for Heaven: For this thy Christ endured his Great Cross; wilt
not thou thy little one? That have his Shoulders to help thee to bear it too,
his Grace, his Spirit, his Angels for thy help?

My Soul, let not the Difficulties conceived in a Course of Religion discourage
thee from, or in the way: It is Man's Calumny, and the Devils Policy. To him
that loves God (as thou should) that has his Grace (as thou may) and his
Favor (as thou might:) all his Commands are easy, and 1 John 4. 3. Mat.
11. 29. 30.
his Yoke but light. For to him is given the staff of Peace Psalm. 119 165.
Phil. 4. 7.
, and stay of Hope To 15. 13
, and strength of Comfort Heb. 6. 18. Heb. 3. 6.
, which (besides the outward) are great helps to the carrying of that Yoke. And
(blind thoughts and affections set aside) the Sinner toiles more then the Saint
Ec. 2. 23. Joh. 6. 27. 1 Cor. 15. 58. Apoc. 14. 13. Aeterua quies aeterno
labor merito paratur.
, and drudges more for Hell, then he works for Heaven.

And did the Saint droile more; Heaven makes all nothing. For what are Moments
of pain and labor to Eternity of Joy and Rest, which were worth the while, if
attained with eternal work and labor? It Is a Slander then cast on the ways
of God. Yes my Soul, and a Stratagem too. A Fly from Beelzebub Deus muscae.
Prove. 26. 13. Romans 12. 11, 12. Heb. 6. 10. 11. Heb. 12. 3.
buzzing this into thy Ears, that he may keep Heaven better out of thy Eyes.
And hold thy foot (when he has thus slackt thy heart) from going, or from
coming thither.

My Soul, against all such fainting, take Saint Paul's Cordial, Whilst we not
at the things which are seen, but not 2 Cor. 4. 16. 18.
seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are
not seen are eternal.

And so there be Pains, as well as Joys: Think of that, O my Soul! For to
foresee, is the way to avoid those pains; and to Muse on it, the means to
escape

4. Hell.
Thou art not in love with Pain My Heb. 12. 11
Soul! Who is? All shun it. Why not then that most, which is greatest? Why in
Earth, more then Hell? Is Mat. 25. 30. Mat. 18. 34. Mar. 5. 43, 44. Apoc. 6. 16
17. and Apoc. 14. 10. Mat. 16. 25, 26. Mat. 25. 31. 41. Mat. 8. 12. Apoc. 14.
10, 11.
any Jail like that Dungeon? Any Keepers to Fiends? Any Burning like that
Fire? Any Biting like that worm? Any shame of face, to the Confusion before
men and Angels? Can any loss on earth, equal the loss of Heaven? Or Exile
from friends, a Banishment from God and Angels? To dwell in utter darkness (no
light) Amidst Infinite Tortures (and no ease) to all Eternity (no end?)
Tortures which make the Wheel a Sport; the Furnace, a Bower; and the Rack a
very Recreation?

My Soul! Are these but Godly frauds to fright tender hearts from wickedness?
If thou be a Christian thou do not believe so; nay if 2 Pet. 3. 3. Plato,
Plut, etc.
but a Heathen, thou will not. Endless and Extreme pains for evil deeds after
this life, even they believe. The very Devils do, though their torture Jam. 2.
19. Mat. 8. 29. Romans 2. 15, 16.
to do it. Conscience (which is in all men) is an Apostle of this to all
Nations. The joyful deaths of innocent men, and Dreads of Guilty ones in death
Preach it all the world over. For what are these but summons to the great
Bar, where according to their works all shall r^ceive the Sentence of
Judgment. O my Soul ponder this. Is it grievous to endure extreme pain for
an hour? Is it nothing to suffer Extremity for ever? So long as Omnipotency
can preserve; so much as Omniscience can devise, what infinite Justice does
require (Soul and body) to suffer for ever and ever? O My Soul! Could thy Mind
measure, nay, but sadly consider the length of Eternity! How millions of Ages
are not a Span to that time; not all since the World, an Inch of a Span: And
yet all the Tortures that Earth ever had, or wits of men and Angels could
imagine to have, are but ease to those pains, which are to endure to that
Eternal length; thou would as soon burn as lust, and take up a Serpent as
Sin. My Soul! To save Ecclus. 21. 2.
thy self, be serious and consider it. The greatest Temptation will not take,
if thou do but remember it. Thou will refuse the Apple for the worm in it;
The Sweets of Sin for the fire after it. The hardest Duty will down if thou
think of it. Thy Dear friend O my Soul! That gave his blood to save thee
from that death, His Counsel is, thus to avoid it: If thine eye offend Mar. 9.
43.
thee, pluck it out, etc. It Is better for thee having one eye, to go to
Heaven, then having both to be cast into hell, where the worm does not die,
and the fire is not quenched. Better a little pain for a Time, then all to
Eternity.

My Soul! These four are Cordial 2. Division. Isay 17. Verbum Incarnatum, est
verbum ad hominis naturam usque abbreviatum. Bern. Phil. 3. 14.
Considerations to carry thee to all Duty, from all ill; But the Royal one
remains. Thy Christ to be thy study, and thy Jesus to be thy Book; The Word
Abbreviate; Bible in Body; Scripture in flesh. Consider him, and all good is
done, for he did it; all ill is gone, for he fled it. All his Actions are thy
lessons, but my Soul! His Birth, Life, and Death, are the Chapters, I would
have thee Read. For the whole World of wickedness, is conquered by those
three. Pride, Avarice, and Luxury, 1 John 2. 16
the three parts of that world.

1. His Birth, is the Death of pride; Luke 2. 7.
His stable, the Grave. For if that was there, why is this any where? Or
wherefore this? For cloths, His clouts Purpurae mea panni Salvaetoris. Bern.
are best purple. For wealth, It Is his straw. For Retinue, Beasts are his. For
State, his Palace is an Inn. His bed a Manger. His Throne a Cratch. His
Canopy, none but Webbs which Spiders spin him. Is it for strength? then the Ox
is better. For Beauty? He lies in Soil and dust. For wit? It falls down at his
feet. Lo! whom a Star, and Angels, Mat. 2. 11. Mat. 2. 2. Luc. 2. 8, 9 2 Cor.
8. 9
and Sages proclaim Lord and King of Heaven and Earth, he is born thus poor
that thou should not be proud.

2. His life is like his Birth, to kill thy Covetousness; He had no Lands to
Lord, but to walk in. No Mounts to climb, but to kneel on. Mount Olivet Luc.
22. 39. Mat. 14. 13. 19.
was his Closet, and the Desert his House. His Table, the Grass; no Covering
but Heaven. His Provisions, not the purchase of Moneys, but Miracles; By them,
and Loanes he lives. If he ride, if he rest, if he feast with his Friends.
Beast, Bed, Room, all are borrowed. Birds and Beasts were provided Mat. 21. 3.
Luke 22. 11
better, they had their Nests and Holes. He not where to lay his Head. Mat. 8.
20. Mat. 27. 60. Mat. 3. 16, 17. Mat. 17. 5. Joh. 12. 29 Mat. 25. 14. 15. Luke
16. 2.
Nor House, nor Tomb, Dead, or Living. Not He! He whom Heaven owned by Voice
and Sign for the Beloved Son of God; the Lord of all would have nothing,
that thou should not gape for much, and Grasp at all. Thou that by his favor
do borrow all of Gods, and must account for all not laid out for him. And can
his Passion revive, and lust live? No, for

3. His Death is the Crucifixion of lust 1 Pet. 4. 1. and 2. 24. Romans 6. 16.
Gal. 2. 20.
. It crucified him as the cause Romans 4. 25. 1 Pet. 2. 22
; and thou must crucify it Gal. 5. 24
(that is the Consequent.) And as they him, thou it, that is the Pattern 2 Cor.
13. 4.
. And as he it, so thou, that is the Power Romans 6. 11.
. Come lustful thoughts? Clap his thorns to thy Head. Rise wanton Lusts?
Thrust his Spear to thy heart. Tempt fleshly Deeds? Strike his nails into thy
hands, and into thy feet, at such Motions. If to Drunkenness, put his Sponge
to thy mouth; If to Gluttony, bring his Gall to thy Palate. In short, whatever
the flesh lusts for, for his Deaths sake deny it; At Bed or Board let it no
where Obtain, let his Cross crucify it, Golgotha bury it. Let it not live,
the Lord of Life suffered Death for it. And for thee, that thou should not
let it Live, That thou die not for 1 Pet. 2. 14 Romans 8. 13
ever for it. Alas my Soul! If thy lust struck him (who had none of his own)
Dead; how should thou who have all, 2 Cor. 5. 21 Isa. 53. 45.
and of thy own, Live? How not be D^om'd, and damned, to eternal Death? Gal.
5. 21.


My Soul! If thou sadly think of God in those four and of Christ in these
three, these will be like wisdoms Seven Prove. 9. 1.
Pillars, to build up thy heart to all Godliness, And though such thoughts be
the Epicures Dreads, and Atheists follies, Believe thou God, who loves not thy
grief, and wishes thee no better wisdom. And despise not the Inspirations of
the Almighty, which are Gods Aids to advance that blessed work. My Soul! Make
much of them if they be Gods. For

2. Holy Motions are great helps to Piety.

Indeed when Holy Motions and Meditations meet (as most what they do) as they
make a blessed mixture and union of Holy Spirits (Gods and man's) So they give a
great strength by the juncture and concurrence of two such Holy Hands in one
and the same Soul (man's and Gods.) And the work will go on, that is
undertaken by such two. 1 John 4. 1. Ezekiel. 13. 3 Jer. 31. 33. Ezekiel. 11. 19.


But My Soul, It is as necessary, as worthy thy knowledge to discern, which be,
and which be not the Motions of the Holy Spirit. For, if another to it,
Delusion leads thee; and if it guide thou will follow it. The Trial of Spirits
is; That is not Gods which is not Holy, nor the Motions His, which are not
Heavenly.

For Gods Law is the way, when his Spirit is the Guide. Which did dictate, and
therefore will never drive Isa. 8. 20. Joh. 16. 13, 14, 15. Gal. 1. 8. 2 John
10. 2 Cor. 3. 6
from that way. As being ever the same, and never contrary to it self. Even
Gods Spirit in his Word makes this Trial.

And when the Spirit is found Right, make much of the Motions. They are Romans 8.
14 1 Cor. 11. 1.
from an High, my Soul! Thou must not bring and bow them to thy Mind, but it
to them. When God is leader, thou must not go before, but keep the place of a
follower. And follow after, in Gods name, for it Leads to Heaven. It is no
worse, nor less. A Messenger from it, a Guide to it.

All good and regular Motion, is from the first, and Best Mover. It is an
Angel, sent from Heaven; for Mal. 2. 1. ^ Angelus nuncius.
what is that more, then a Heavenly Messenger? Take heed then, Dear Soul! Thou
do not entertain bad, and neglect good motions (That Is to observe a Devil
before an Angel.) Give not Audience to the Devils Messenger before Gods
Ambassador. That is to be tied in too strict a league with Hell; too loose,
with Heaven! Believe it, there is as much difference betwixt a good and a bad
Motion, as a Cherub and a Fiend; and betwixt their Isa. 8. 19.
entertainments, as an Angels, and a Devils. And in their ends too. For the one
weighes to the Center below, the other lifts up, to the Circumference above. A
Seraphim, to fire the heart, and carry it up in the flame. That is a Hellish
Firebrand; this, the Heavenly Isa. 6. 6.
coal. Thou art in some error, and the light of this, is to lead thee right.
At a stand, and cool in good, and the heat of this, is to wa^me thee, and lead
thee on. Under a fall of grace, dead under the ashes of prevailing frailty; 1
These. 5. 19.
And this is to quicken thy spark, and stir it up. O my Soul! then Kindle not
the Hellish, Quench not the Heavenly coal. Quench not the Spirit. Cast not
water and Earth upon it: Drown not the Motions in Sensual and secular
pleasures and affairs. Thy heart is the hearth where it is to burn; but if
good acceptance and endeavors Ephesians. 4. 30. 2 Timothy 1. 6
do not blow and stir it up, it will go out. They make the Bellows for this
Holy fire.

O my Soul! Have dread of this. The Messenger often refused, will come Act. 13.
46. Luc. 13. 35. Cant. 5. 23 6, 7. Romans 1. 28 2 These. 2. 3 1 Samuel 16. 14. Luc.
12. 3. 1 Timothy 4. 1. Luc. 11. 26. Apoc. 3. 10.
no more; The Guide not followed, will be gone; The coal not kindled, will not
warm. And woe to thee, if the good Spirit leave thee, for then the Ill one
will lead thee. In stead of good Angels, ill thoughts will haunt thee. And thou
know, whither they go, whom he does lead. When God knock^ at thy heart, let
him not stay at the door, when his Enemy at the first Motion, is let in; Do
not that for shame: If so, know that to keep out Gods Spirit, is to shut door
on thy Bliss; and do not that for fear No My Soul! In Prosperity or
Adversity; At thy Devotions or other occasions; In Church or Closet; By Day or
night; Well, or Sick; If thy mind be moved to some known good, or against
some evil; God knocks, do thou open; His Angel is at door, take him in; His
Spirit would enter, bid him welcome. Welcome blessed Spirit that Luc. 13. 36.
Mat. 21. 19.
comes to carry me to Heaven: Welcome Holy Comforter, that come to keep me
from Hell. O come, and never go from me, Holy Spirit of God.

My Soul, thou have seen what Heavenly Helpers, Holy Meditations and Motions
be. Hear the God of all help, and he will assure thee so. If others Amos. 6. 3.
put off the evil day, it is wisdom for thee to have it before thee; If others
Act. 24. 25
put by good motions, it will be thy happiness to entertain them, believe
him, who says both.

O that they were wise, that they understood Deuteronomy. 32. 29.
this, that they would consider their latter end.

Wherefore Holy Brethren, Partakers Heb. 3. 1.
of the Heavenly calling consider the Apostle and High Priest of our
Profession, Christ Jesus.

For consider him that endured such Heb. 12. 3.
contradiction of Sinners, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. And,
Behold, I stand at the door and knock, Apoc. 3. 20.
if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come to him, and Sup with
him, and he with me.

The Sum of this Part is,
Good Meditations are great Nurses Psalm. 119. 15. Psalm. 1. 2. Genesis 24. 63.
of Gods fear. Serious thoughts, of Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell, are
Meditations good against all Sins in the World. Sober Considerations of Christ's
Birth, Life, Death, are destructive to Pride, Avarice, and Lust; which Three
make all, Holy Motions of God, great Aids to the Practice of Godliness. How
they may be known to be Gods. What good offices they have and do from him, to
us, as His Messengers and guides for our best good. Why, and how to be
entertained as suc^; and how foul and fearful it is, to neglect good, and
embrace Ill Motions.
Saturday-Soliloquie. Remedies of Humane Frailty. OR, A Soliloquie showing the
Soul, What Provisions of Grace and Mercy God has made, to support her weakness
in the way of Piety.
MY Soul! For all thy Cares 1. Part.
and Helps, thou will fail in Ephesians. 5. 17. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
thy Perpetual Service, so long as Flesh and Devil cease not their Perpetual
Motion. God Ez. 18. 23. Gal. 3. 11. Col. 2. 12. Romans 6. 19. Jam. 2. 26. Psalm.
41. 4.
therefore, in tenderness of mercy, has provided for thee Remedies of Grace.
Repentance, that thou do not die: Faith, to make thee, and it live: And New
Obedience to keep all alive.

Sin, my Soul! is ill humor to Heaven, a disorder of Holy Spirit, and just
temper in thee. For this Disease

Repentance is Gods Remedy Tert. de. paenit. (...). Naz.


And very sufficient to heal thee. For it will Bleed Act. 2. 37
thee in Contrition; Vomit thee in Confession Ezekiel. 18. 31. Orig.
; Purge thee by Conversion 1 Cor. 5. 9.
; Sweat thee with Guilt Act. 9. 10
; Bath thee in Tears Joel 2. 12.
; Diet thee from occasions of ill 2 Cor. 7. 11.
; Cauterize the corrupt part with Threats Jona. 3. 4, 5.
; and foment the weak with Promises Joel. 2. 13
; And Exercise all in Alms Dan. 4. 27.
, Fasts Joel 2. 12
, and Prayers Luke 18. 13.
.

And, of the healing virtues of all these, Penitent Souls have had Blessed
Experiments. For that Bleeding cured the Barbarous Jews Act. 2. 38.
. Vomiting, David 2 Samuel 12. 13.
. Purging, Ephraim Hos. 14. 8
. The Sweat did the Jailer good Act. 16. 29.
. The Bath helped Magdalen Luke 7. 38.
. The Cautery, Saul Act. 9. 16.
. Fomenting Hos. 6. 1, 2.
, Israel. The Exercise did Zacheus Luke 19. 8.
, Ahab 1 King. 21. 19.
, even the Publican Luke 18. 13.
, Ease.

O my Soul! Admire and Adore that Great and Good Physician that Isa. 57. 18.
Prescribes thee so fair, and yet so Sovereign Jer. 8. 6. Peccata commssa
plang^re, plangenda non committere.
a Medicine. To Grieve thou have done ill, and desire thou may do better. To
be sorry for what was amiss, and not do again what will make thee Sorry. When
I have wandered, to return: When I have been fooled, to Jer. 3. 22. (...), Mat.
3. 2. Joh. 12. 40 Isa. 1. 16. Paenitens fere innocens est. Eccl. 7. 29. Hos.
14. 4. Isa. 1. 18. Luke 15. 17 Ezekiel. 18. 30, 31. Luke 15. 22 24. 2 Cor. 7. 10
Luke 4. 18. Act. 11. 18.
grow wise: When I am sick, to be well: When I am foul, to wash: When I cannot
be a Saint (as good as Adam was) fully Innocent, to be as well as Enoch may be,
truly Penitent. Was ever Prescript so fair?

And, yet my Soul! this Heales Sin, (Guilt and Stain) Returns thee both to
God and thy self Recovers both Fall, and Wit. Restores both Tainted Blood and
Spirit. Reduces to a Paradise both of Joy and Innocence. Saves thee from Death,
sets thee in Health, Disposes thee to long, even everlasting life. Can any
Medicine be more Sovereign?

Take it then my Soul, if thou love thy self. And how, and when thy Physician
gives it. Not half, (for he appoints the whole.) Nor this hereafter, for he
wills it Now,

To Grieve for Sin, and do no more, Joel 2. 12.
is to see, not to lose thy Sickness. And to amend what is not first grieved,
to recover before thou art Sick. To be Compunct, and not Confess, is to bleed
inwardly. To Confess, but not be Contrite, to Vomit wantonly. To Confess, and
Pro. 28. 13
not Amend, to cast, and lick up the Vomit. To be Frighted for Sin, and not 2
Pet. 2. 22
bettered, is to Sweat, and take cold Joh. 5. 14.
after it. To weep for it, and commit it, 2 Pet. 2. 22
is, with the Sow, to wash, and wallow. To Abstain occasions, and not acts, is
to fast it into a better Stomach. To be Threatened into Despair, is, instead of
Genesis 4. 13.
Sin, to burn thy self. And to be fed with Promises unto Presumption, is not
to Cherish thy self, but thy Sickness. 2 Cor. 7. 1
To Renounce evil, and entertain occasions, is to send it away, and call it
again.

To Pray to God, and yet provoke Isa. 1. 12. 14. 1 Cor. 13. 3
him, is to make a play of our Prayers. To give Alms, and do ill, is to give
Sin not a Divorce, but a License. To fast from meat, and fall to Sin, is to
whet the knife, not to kill it, but feast Isa. 58. 4. Luke 18. 12
it. To pray, give, fast, and then take liberty to swear, and Sin, and Err
again, is not to make Health, but a Disease of the Exercise.

My Soul! This is to take the Medicine by halfes, and so thou shall never
Recover thy self, whole.

And if thou Delay it, that is the way never to recover. That takes strength
from the Medicine, and gives it to the Disease; for, so, it grows Inveterate,
and the Cure more Difficult, if not Desperate. Mat. 13. 15
More hard to be; A Sow is washed white, not a Blackamore. A young Profligate,
sooner then an old Obdurate Jer. 13. 23. Mat. 26. 73. Act. 8. 18. 2 Cor. 4. 4
Psalm. 7. 12. Jer. 4. 22.
Sinner. Simon Peter quickly, Simon Magus never. It Is more hard to do; Sin
has more efficacy, the Devil more Interest, God more Anger; Nature is
vanquished, Her Powers depraved, Her faculties infirm'd, decayed, deprived of
virtue for it. It Is more hard to Suffer. Sin is incorporate, the Humors
irradicate, Habituate and Naturalized; As soon pluck up an old tree, as Sin,
by the roots. As easily tear out thy heart as thy lust, and vomit bowels as
customs, Mat. 5. 29.
and quit Limbs as such vices. O My Soul! If Delay of Physic has killed
thousands of Bodies, it has ten thousands of Spirits. Defer not then thy help,
Delay not thy time. And especially, by the love thou have to Heaven,

Defer it not till Death. For what Inducias usque ad mane. apud Greg.
if that be Sudden, and give thee no Time? Or Distracted, and take away Wit?
Or cursed, and keep away Grace? And if it allow thee Space, and Sense, and
Succor, where will be thy Comfort? Backward? There Is nothing to be seen but
the sad Survey of a life full of Guilts, and stains. Forward? There Is the
Horrid Prospect of Hell and all Hideous Tortures of Damned Ghosts, the due
Deserts of those Guilts. Thou have no power to undo ill, no Time to do
better. What then? Will thou repent here, and Amend in the World to come? For
half thy work look for all thy wages? No, Thou do not half, if no more
repent. Will thou then look upward? Will a Miserere mei Deus! serve God, or a
Peccavi satisfy? All the three volumes of thy Sins, (Thoughts, Words and
Deeds) all the Scroles of thy Guilts be cancelled and blown away with a breath
of three Words or Syllables? Will a Groan expiate a Lifefull of Quantam
lacrymaru^ vim expendemus, ut cum Baptismi font exaequari possit? Naz.
guilt? A Tear (a Drop) wash a Heart full of filthiness? The Irkings of a
Moment undo the ills of all thy ages? Cast thou expect this from Him that is
Just, when thy whole life has been but an Abuse of his Grace; and Mercy? Can
thou promise it thy Self, and look Inward? That this is the fear of God, not
Death; not out of Self-love, but Gods? Not for hate of Pain, but Sin? Not by a
Force on Conscience, but Free? And if not thy Self; do thou look Outward,
who shall assure thee? Some Comforter may pronounce Mercy to thee, as
favorable Judgment, has been given of many, that have lived ill, and yet died
penitently. O my Soul^! In this case it is better to give then receive a
favorable Judgment. It Is my Charity, not thy Felicity, that it does suppose
thee happy, whom it knows not miserable; 1 Cor. 13. 5, 7.
but if it do not find thee, does not leave thee happy. What thou art, the
Judge of Hearts knows; what thou should be, the Judge of Charity hopes.
Because, when he sees not evidence to the contrary, he believes the best of
thee, with thy Great Judge. O my Soul then, leave not all to the last hour; when
thou art Isa. 38. 9. Psa. 126. 5 Luke 23. 43. Mat. 20. 9. Ezekiel. 18. 21, 22.
to reap, be not to sow thy Comfort.

Have thou President, Parable, Promise of Hope? The Converted Thief? The
Eleaventh Hours Call? In Liturgia sic vertitur.
At what time soever? O be not such a Spider'd Spirit, to suck Poison out of
sacred Flowers. Let not Antidotes of mercy be made Cordials for Presumption. If
thou do out of Gods Word draw ill Spirit, thou robbest it of its Holy Sense,
and wilt find no Promise of pardon. Nor Hope in any Parable, or President for
such a Thief. My Soul! then,

Look at the Thief on the Cross, as a 2 Pet
Child at the Font; Baptized from Sin, Confirmed by Christ, so Dying, and
Saved. What Is that to thee, who, as Copronymus Eccl. Hist.
in his Baptism, ever since thine, have done nothing but defile thy Font? A
Renegado in thy life to the 2 Pet. 2. 20 Heb. 6. 4.
Profession of thy Baptism?

Look at the Thief on the Cross, as a Martyr at the Stake; A Believer, a
Saint, a Confessor. All on holy flame Luke 23. 40, 41, 42.
for Christ. The New Disciple that hanged for Him, when none of the Old stood
to him. Senseless of pain, to spend his Breath, and serve him. As ready to Die
for him, as with him, and spend his Blood, as Breath, to honor him.

Look at the Theif on the Cross, as a Jonah in the Sea. A Miracle of Grace,
Jonah 2. 10.
A Prod^gie of Providence. Will thou therefore cast thy self into the Sea in
hope to be saved? Gods Mercy is an Ocean; yet if thou so leap into it, thou
Mic. 7. 19. Eccl. 8. 11, 12. To. 2. 4. 5 1 Timothy 1. 19
may be drowned. Thou that have left the ship of good life (the ordinary way)
how can thou look to be preserved by singular Privilege? A Monster of life,
to be saved in Death by a Miracle of mercy?

Look at the Thief on the Cross, as a Saint in Heaven. Make him not encourage
thee to rob God of his honor, and thy self of thy happiness, lest thou make
him to be a Thief in Paradise too. Canonize not thy self Saint by his Example,
lest thou stigmatize him Sinner for the President, and prove thy self a
Reprobate by the Presumption.

Think not then when thou have lived 2. Part. Mat. 20. 9. Ita patres aliqui.
It^ alii.
ill in the world, and art Crucified to leave it, by the staff of a good hope
to leap into Paradise, though before an utter stranger to Christ, with whom
thou have not the bliss to be Crucified. There is no Parity of reason to
argue, from his singular, thy same condition.

Nor from the Parable of the Eleaventh hour to thy Call at the last: For, what
if those Hours be the Ages of the world? then from Christ's first coming to his
second is the Eleventh. And what if the Ages of Man? Mind my Soul, who Mat. 20.
7.
was called? He that was not before Hired: But how often have thou had offers and
refused? Think then of the five Mat. 25. 12 Mat. 22. 7.
Virgins, as well as the five Laborers. And of the Kings Supper, as of the
Lords Penny. And for thy daily Recusancy, Luke 14. 28
look more to be excluded, then admitted Heaven. And to what? To work till the
time of wages? My Soul, death is the time to take the Penny. The night, in
which no man can, and Joh. 9. 4.
when it should end, have thou not begun thy work? And Whither? but into the
Vineyard of the Church? out of the Marketplace of the world? and thou do
nothing but stand idle, or do ill, in the Vineyard, ever since by Baptism
taken in? And Who calls but the Lord? And if thou do all thy life time refuse
his work, will he at death call thee to his Wages? The Eleventh hour of the day
then may be as well the Morn or Noon, as Night of thy life. No hope then, if
when called betimes, it is late ere thou will come.

Nor is that so Promising, At what Ezekiel, 18. 21. Aug.
time soever. It is that the Penitent shall have Pardon; but where, that tho
Sinner shall be Penitent? It is, If he be, it is not, that if he shall. And must
be from the bottom of the heart, not from Ita versio Liturgica.
a frighted Fancy, or quavering lip. My Soul! it is a great way from the Top
of the Heart to the Bottom: Jer. 17. 9. Psalm. 64. 6.
And is a turning from wickedness, not against it. That reaches to the life
from the Heart, but that the Deathbed cannot do. And though it be, when, it
is not howsoever: yea, and for all that, there are bounds to that when. A set
Place for Jezebel, a Day for Jerusalem, Apoc. 2. 21. Luke 19. 42 Genesis 6. 3.
a time for the world. Too late thou may repent, too soon thou can not. If
the Glass be run, the Sun Heb. 12. 17. Amos 8. 9 Eccl. 8. 12. Eccl. 9. 10.
Luke 13. 25, Pro. 1. 28.
set, (though Noon natural) woe to thee, it is too late. The Door of mercy,
though it stand long open, will at last be shut. Wisdom it self shuts the Door.
All these then plead little for thee. Nay does not every one much against thee?
For, my Soul! if of two Thieves one was damned, is it not an Eaven lay whether
thou be saved? whether thou shall die Repenting, or Blaspheming; the
Right Hand, or the Lefthand Thief? Is it not so by the President? If some be
called at the Eleaventh hour, but all before from the first to that; Is it not
ten to one ods, if ever thou be called, if thou neglect the work of thy
Salvation till the Eleaventh? Is it not so by the Parable? If when (and not
till when) I repent* I shall live; Is it not a hundred to one, nay, a hundred
thousand to one ods, if I defer it, I shall die? Is not this the straight gate,
which for want of mind. Mat. 7. 13.
or time, or grace, few find, because they seek it with Sin, which they are
loath Isa. 55. 6.
to lose, till life and Soul, and all be lost? S. Jerome says, my Soul! There
E centum millibus vix been moritur male qui vivit. Hier.
dies well, that lives ill, not one of a Hundred thousand. And to prove his
sum. From Adam to Christ, that have so lived and died, we read but of one,
but one of many Thousands of Millions. Without delay therefore, Joel 2. 12.
now also turn even to him with all thy Heart, with fasting, and with weeping,
and with mourning, and Rent thy Heart and not thy Garment, and turn to the
Lord. The Lord says it, who delights not in thy death, poor Sinner, whosoever
Ez. 33. 11.
thou art. And therefore would have thee, by a true and timely Repentance Act.
3. 19.
to recover thy health and life. For from Soul-sicknesse, that is Gods Recovery.
2 Timothy 2. 25.
Recovery.

My Soul! That may be a wholesome, but a wearisome course to plow up thy Jer. 4.
3. Hos. 10. 12.
Heart, and Harrow thy whole man with daily, and continual duty; will make
thee apt to faints, and perhaps some ground will pass untouched, and some clod
unbroke; and when all is done, Psalm. 19. 12
there will be failings, and need to repent 1 John 3. 20
thy very repenting; To Comfort and Confirm thee therefore against this,
provision is made by the mercy of God. And

Faith is the Cordial.
And for Materials and virtues (if 1 Timothy 1. 5 Job 28. 25 28.
true) a most Rare one; Gold, and Pearl, and Coral, are not Comparable to it.
Manus Christi is not, Sanguis Christi makes it. Nay, Blood and Spirit; Godhead
and Manhood, Virtues and Merits; what He did do, say, Suffer, all Christ, and
all Christ's, is it. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Mat. 11. 28 1 John 2. 1. Phil. 2. 9. Joh. 6.
50. Gal. 3. 27. Joh. 8. 36. 2 Cor. 8. 9. Phil. 4. 13. Isa 61. 1. 1 These. 1. 10.
Christ, the Only Cordial to a Sinful Soul. None to Him, None but Christ.
And Jesus. None to that. The Name above all names. Bread to the starved, Cloth
to the Naked, Freedom to the fettered, Wealth to the beggered, Strength to the
Faint, Light to the dark, Life to the dead, Deliverance to the damned; all is
in Jesus. My Soul! Christ is a Name of Medicine Anointed. Heb. 1. 9.
Jesus of Health Savior. Mat. 1. 21. Mal. 4. 1. 1. Tim. 1. 15. Heb. 9. 11, 12.
. There Is His Oil, but here thy Salvation. Gladness that thou have a Christ,
but thy happiness in Jesus. Healing is in his wings, Saving his Work, Health
in his Name, Redemption his Office: Against Sin, Hell, Guilt, Wrath, Devil,
Death, Woundings, Faintings, Swounings, no Remedies to Jesus.

And Faith makes the application *. (...) Chrysostom. Joh. 3. 14, 15. Joh. 6. 37.
Joh. 1. 12. Romans 7. 4. 2 Cor. 11. 12 Ephesians. 3. 17. Joh. 6. 47. Heb. 3. 18. Romans
13. 14 Gal. 2. 20. Joh. 14. 16
The eye by which I see Him. The foot, on which I come to Him. The hand, by
which I take Him. The Ring, by which I Marry Him. The House, in which I dwell
with Him. The Board, at which I feed on Him. The Bed, on which I rest in Him.
The Vest in which I wear Him. The Soul, by which I live in Him. The Body by
which he lives in me. What does thus unite to the Allsaving Comforter, must
needs be Cordial. And thence are in it those Spirits of Comfort. Hope against
the Heb. 11. 1. Romans 5. 1. Romans 15. 13.
faints of fear. Peace, against the troubles of Guilt, and Joy against the
Droopings of Spirit. My Soul! If with hard toil and abstinence, like
Jonathan, thy eyes begin to fail, and thy strength to faint, Joy is Honey to
clear them, 1 Samuel 14. 29. 2 Cor. 4. 16
and revive thee. If with Israel in this Wilderness of want and woe, thou art
ready to Sink and perish, Peace is Manna to feed and Sustain thee. If Apoc.
2. 15.
with David thy Bones are dried with heaviness of heart, this Joy is Marrow to
moysten them, and Strengthen Psalm. 63. 5. Isa. 66. 14.
thee.

But, if not True, thy Faith is none of this. And my Soul since all thy
Comfort depends on this, look to it, for All have not Faith, and few what is
true. Counterfeits of Faith, are not true Cordialls to Conscience. And there 2
These. 3. 2 1 Timothy 1. 5
be many Counterfeits.

1. A Vain Delusion. When what thou believe, is thy Fancy, not Gods Word.
Or a Revelation (as thou think) Isa. 8. 20. Ephesians. 1. 8.
New, but contrary to the Old. For if Faith be not Wedded to the Word Luth. 2
These. 2. 11.
, the Comfort it bears is Bastard. Delusion all,

2. A Blind Resignation is deceit too. Indeed to give up the Mind in absolute
Romans 4. 18, 19. Mal. 2. 7.
belief to what he says, be it above or against thy reason or sense, is
right; And to see Superfluities to Salvation (though Revealed Truths) with the
Churches eyes not ill. But Necessaries, Isa. 53. 11. Romans 1. 17
thou must see with thy own. And know what thou do believe, and not live by
another faith, If not have thy joy in another heart.

3. An Idle Speculation, it is not neither. It undertakes a great Work, and
employes at it, a great Workman. That Augean-stable to cleanse, the Heart; Act.
15. 19 1 Cor. 7. 19 Gal. 5. 6.
and Labor for the strength of Paradise, to Keep Gods Commandments, this it
undertakes. And which abhors no toil which wit can imagine possible, Cant. 8.
7.
Love, that it employes. It is but an idle Comfort, that is brought by a
Loytering Faith. And

4. A Great Confidence does not ever Mr. Banes in Ephesians. c 7 Helps, 93. Bifield
in 2 Pet. Romans 14. 1 (...).
make it good; for Assurance of Salvation may be without True Faith; and it
true without that assurance. That Is the effect of a strong one, not the essence
of all. Every man is not strong. Some points of wind may serve to make the way,
Every ship has not Saile-full. And if the ballast be not waighed and fraught,
with an humble and good Conscience, may as soon everturne 1 Timothy 1. 19.
as arrive the ship. If tender, it Sinks it in despair; if tough, Splits it on
Presumption; No comfort for many, but as a gulf and rock to the Mariner, if
full persuasion be, or there is no faith. And

A Good Opinion is less; Though others Apoc. 3. 17 18.
concurrent with my own, of my Self. What would I not be, could I be what I
would? I am not in Happy condition, because I think it; but must first be so,
and then I may believe it. If Groundless, if Word-lesse, A good belief is an
ill faith: Because thou would seek to have a better, did Mat. 25. 3.
thou not presume it to be so good. Apoc. 3. 17 18.
But

6. A Bad Dispensation (that is worst 2 Pet. 1. 10. Phil. 2. 12. To. 11. 20.
Romans 5. 1, 2
of all) To grow bold to Sin, because Sure of Heaven. As Faith is never without
hope, a Spur to good: So nor without fear, the Bridle of ill. Noah Heb. 11. 7.
was saved by Faith, but built an arc for fear. If thou plunge thy self into
Heb. 4. 1.
Seas of Sin, thou may perish for all thy Faith. If perfect, it has two
eyes; one for Promises, another for Precepts, Jonah 3. 5. Act. 24. 14
(Divine Word and Witness both:) An ill life can no more stand with good
Faith, then a great Sickness be with good health. Act. 15. 9.


None of those then, it is. No, A Trusting in God for Salvation by Christ, Act.
15. 11.
according to his Word, that is the Substantial Sovereign,
Cordiall-Healing-Saving Faith.

That there is none but by Christ, is Mar. 5. 7. Luke 4. 41. Act. 16. 17 Apoc.
13. 10.
the Devils; That none by Christ, but as he conditions, and wills, the Saints.

My Soul, though thy Repentance be right, and Faith sound, and both set thee
well, all will be but the worse, if thou do not keep so: For this Mercy has
made Remedy. And

New obedience is the Preservative.

In. Adam, my Soul, the Covenant 3. Part.
was, Do, or Die Gal. 3. 12
; All, or None Deuteronomy. 27 26.
; Exactly, or Nothing Gal. 3. 10 Jam. 2. 10. and 3. 2.
: but in Christ, who does consider Heb. 4. 15 and 2. 18.
, and succor thy frailties, with his Meritorious and Gracious Reliefs, the
Tenure runs Heb. 8. 6. and 9. 14, 15
, Endeavor to do all Act. 24. 16.
, be upright in thy Endeavor 1 Timothy 1. 5. Heb. 13. 18. 21.
. Hate great Sin, love none. Fly the worst, follow not any Romans 16 18. 2 John
9. 11
. Detest En^rmities Ephesians. 5. 3. 1 Cor. 6. 9. and 2 Cor. 7. 1. Romans 6. 12
, Delight not in Infirmities. This would not pass for Obedience of old, and
therefore it is called New Heb. 8. 13
.

And thy Health is happily maintained and preserved by it. It preserves thy
Repentance, and proves it sound Mat. 3. 8. 2 Cor. 7. 11
: It preserves thy Faith, and makes it saving Jam. 2. 14.
: It preserves thy self in both, and keeps thee living Ephesians. 2. 1. 2.
. S. John Baptist, S. James, S. Paul his Preservative. It preserves thee from
Apostasy, that thou fall not wide from God Psalm. 87. 38. Luc. 8. 13. 15.
: and from Despair Job. 8. 13. and 27. 8.
, that thou fall not short of Him; for sincerity is the Mother of Constancy
Jer. 32. 40. Act. 24. 14, 15.
, and the Nurse of Hope Isa. 33. 14
. Gilt wears off, Gold endures; the Guilty fears Judgment, the Honest heart
hopes 1 John 3. 21.
. S. Lukes, and S. John's Preservative.

It preserves thee, under the Cross Job 13. 15.
, the Burden of thy flesh Heb. 12. 11.
; and against Temptation Genesis 39. 10. Luke 8. 13.
, (the trouble of thy Spirit) the natural womb of Patience, and Stepmother to
the Devils issue. Guilt gauls the back, Innocence gives strength to bear a
Cross. Shallow Dan. 6. 22 1 Pet. 4. 16 2 These 2. 10 Psalm. 1. 4. Genesis 39. 10
Job 27. 6.
Trees are blown up with bitter Blasts; well-rooted stand against all Winds;
yea by them better rooted, and more strong to stand, Holy Jobes and Holy
Joseph's Preservative.

It Preserves against High Censure Romans 2. 13 2 Cor. 2. 7. Luke 18. 11. Mat.
26. 25. Job. 42. 7. 2 Chro. 28 10. 2 Chro. 30 18, 19. 1 John 3. 20, 21. Luc. 8.
15. Psalm. 66. 16. Prove. 4. 4. Luc. 2. 51. Prove. 2. 1. 2.
of others Infirmities (a great Block) and too deep a Sense of thy own (a sore
Rub) in the way to Heaven. Hypocrisy Judges others, Integrity it Self. It
Keeps the Heart against Maine Offenses, and God imputes not meaner trespasses.
The Sister of Charity, and Daughter of Mercy; Obeds and Hezekiahs Preservative.
It Preserv's Prayer in favor, and the Word in fruitfulness (The Key, and
Door of heaven.) That, clean; T^is, open. It gains that Audience of Gods
Ear, and gives this Entrance into man's heart. Gets prayer good respect; and
Provides the word Due entertainment; Prayers Advocate, and the Words Treasurer.
King David's, and King 1 Pet. 2. 1. 2 Luc. 2. 19.
Solomon's Preservative.

It Preserves against Sin (the Gate of Hell) and against the World (the Mat. 7.
13. Ephesians. 2. 2. Psalm. 23. 6. Job 31. 27 Ibi pecca, ubi Deus non videt. Bern.
Psalm. 119. 168. Genesis 29. 10. Romans 8. 35. Genesis 17. 1. Dan. 6. 5 10, 11.
Hinge of Sin) The Hollow-heart will not, in open; the upright, not in Secret.
He looks at man's eye, this at Gods. And therefore dare Sin no where, because he
sees God every where. The Chaste Body will neither be Courted, nor frighted to
ill. The Heart which has Singleness for God, looks at the World as the
Devils Wanton; and neither Lures, nor shackles, Bracelets nor Manicles, Golden
nor Iron-chaines, Gains nor Losses, Pleasures nor Tortures, Honors nor
Disgraces, can tempt it to be naught. Holy Abraham's and Holy Daniels
Preservative.

My Soul can thou perish and have such a Preservative? No, if it be of Gods
making. But for His Sugar, take not Satan's Mercury. 1. To be True to thy Side,
and Trusty to thy way with all thy heart and Soul; that is nothing, if it be
not right. Nay to own Act. 26. 10
truth and goodness; wheresoever thou see; and like, and love it, with thy
mind and heart, that is to be true to 2 King. 9. 32.
God, whosoever is on, or against the Side. If not thou art more for thy Side
then God. 2. To desire from thy 2 King. 10 30, 31.
heart to be what thou should, but yet not contribute more to it, then Prove.
21. 25.
mere desire, that is Somewhat of it in Conception, but nothing in Birth. Though
for Christ's sake thy Doing well, be abated to Endeavor, it comes Act. 24. 26.
Phil. 2. 13. Isa. 26. 8.
not to so little as Desire. If not effectual (which is all one with it) what
goes no further in thy account may come to much, but with God comes to Nothing.
3. Nor will hearty Endeavor, Number. 23 10.
and Deed too, pass for it, if only to Some good and against Some ill; or
Genesis 20. 3. Mar. 6. 20. Psalm. 119. 6.
for much, but not all. True Obedience will not give Dispensation from any Law.
Loyal Integrity dare never ask or take leave, and License at any Place 1 Samuel
26. 8, 9.
to rebel.

My Soul feed not Corrupted Nature with such Sweets as these. Though Job. 20.
12. Ezekiel. 13. 19.
they seem Sugars, they are mere Mercuries. Made not for thy health, but
bane; not Medicines, but Poisons of thy Life; not Preservative to it, but
Destructive; the ways to Hell and Death. As thou dreadest them, then look
well to thy Self. Mistake not Poison for thy Preservative. A Sound Heart (in
truth not error) is that whch Maintains thy Life.

And now my Soul, See at once all wht is required for thy Health. How to Try,
How to Take, How to Value all. One, by another, is their best way of Trial.
Forward, Repentance without Faith, is Desperate Sorrow. Faith 2 Cor. 7. 10. 2
Cor. 2. 7 Jam. 2. 14. 2 Pet. 1. 5. Romans 18. 23.
without Obedience, Blod Presumption. Backward, Obedience without Faith, Blind
and unjustified Service. Faith without Repentance, Weak and unwarranted
Belief.

To Repent and not Believe, is to 1 Timothy 1. 5 Heb. 6. 1. Jude 20. Luke 14. 20
Heb. 3. 6. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Mat. 3. 8, 9
lay a foundation, and not build. To Believe and not Obey, is to build without
a Roof. To obey, and not Believe, is to clap the roof on the Groundwork. To
Believe, and not Repent, is to build without foundation. Repentance alone is
Recovery without strength. Faith alone, strength without use. Obedience alone,
Darkness with strength. Turn then and take them as you will, this is the just
Trial. That Is Right Repentance, that has Faith and Obedience after it Act.
20. 21. and 26. 20.
That Is Sound Obedience, that has Faith and Repentance before it Romans 16. 26.
Heb. 6. 1.
That Is True Faith, that has Repentance before, and Obedience after it. My
Soul then, thou for thy health Mar. 1. 15. 1 Timothy 1. 5
must have all, if thou will have it true, sound and right.

And would thou know, how thou art to take all? Sure, til thou art in Heaven
with perfect cure, thou must use, on 1 Cor. 13. 9 Phil. 3. 13.
earth, continual Remedy. Repent every day, Believe every hour, Obey every
Moment. There is no day wherein thou do not Sin; no night therefore in
whichthou Mat. 6. 12. 2 Cor. 7. 1.
must not Repent. If foul, thou must wash; If guilty, ask pardon; If sick, seek
cure daily. Thou do never Sin, but need a Savior: Never well, but have need
of To. 6. 23. Neh. 13. 22.
favor: Of Blood to cleanse the guilts of thy ill: Of a Robe to cover the
blemishes of thy good. What Blood but Phil. 3. 9.
from his Side? What Robe but on his Romans 3. 25 Ephesians. 1. 7.
Back? Where else, my Soul! can thou heal thy wounds, or hide thy skars, but
under the Righteousness of his Innocent life, Purpled in his most precious
Apoc. 7. 14 Jer. 33. 16. Isa. 53. 11.
Blood? If thou then art not without Sin a day, thou can not be without
Christ an Hour; lest for want of a Savior thou be lost in the very minute Romans
6. 23 Heb. 4. 16. Phil. 3. 9.
of Sin. In his Blood then thou must wash; take Sanctuary in his Merits,
shroud thy self under his Robe, seek mercy for his sake, that is, Believe every
hour; And Obey him every moment. For sure, my Soul, of whom thou have
continual need, thou must offend him never. Find a Minute when thou would
not be in Hell without him, and take that time to offend him. Eternal
deliverance deserves continual gratitude. Unto him that has loved Apoc. 1. 5.
us, and washed us from our sins in his own Blood, and (of vassals and
slaves of Satan) has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father. To him
be Glory, and Dominion (and therefore from us Duty and Obedience) for ever and
ever. Amen.

3. So then, My Soul! Take them. And Can thou value them enough? Never too
much. Thy Bodies Health is worth all the World; but thy own worth more then
Ten Thousands of Worlds Ten Millions of Bodies. It Is worth as much as
Salvation, as Eternity comes to, beyond all value. As much as thy Christ, thy
Savior, thy God is worth: above Myriads of Salvation.

For Repentance Recovers thy Sickness Gods salve for every sore. Latimer. Tit.
1. 13. Col. 1. 11. Joh. 3. 15. Act. 16. 31
Faith sets thee Sound, Obedience keeps thee strong; all give a state of good
and perfect health; and so save from death. And my Soul! value faith above
all. So God does, and therefore ascribes thy health to it alone, to show it the
Chief: And so it is. Repentance is but a Preparative to it; Obedience a
Preservative of it: Faith is the Royal Grace, Repentance the Latimer Ser. 7.
before K. Ed,
Usher that goes before, Obedience that bears up the Train after it. The Queen
Mother of this, the Mistress to that, Regent to both.

O My Soul! The Cordial is above all, because Christ is all in all. The
Quintessence of Heavenly virtue, Col. 3. 11.
the Elixar of all Grace, the very Spirit of Goodness and the perfection of
all Col. 2. 9. Ephesians. 1. 23. Col. 1. 15.
Perfections both in Heaven, and Earth. Bear no Heart in thy Body, then not
this in thy heart. O let that precious Vial never want this Holy Essence.
Count worldly good grease to this Oil. All Delights death to this Glad Psalm.
4. 6. Phil. 3. 8. Col. 1. 27. Apoc. 2. 10 Apoc. 3. 11
nesse. All Honors shames to this Glory. Keep thy Christ as thy Crown, thy
Life, (as the Crown of Life) thy Immortal Crown, and Keep thy Faith as Him,
for thou have and hold Him in it. Keep Him as thy Savior and it as thy
Salvation. Him as thine Heb. 10 19 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4 Ephesians. 2. 18. Jam. 3. 2.
Inheritance, and this as thine Interest. Him as the only Sanctuary of a
troubled Spirit, and this as the only Access to Him. If Defects be in thy
Repentance, Errors in thy Obedience (as there may, there will be in both) fly
by Faith unto thy Sanctuary. Hide thy Self in his wounds; Hold by the Horns
of the Altar; Creep under his wings; Die within his Arms; go, run from the
Pursuer of blood, to this Heb. 3. 18. 19.
City of Refuge; Enter in by thy Faith.

And, My Soul! Keep the vial clean, that the Elixar go not out. Wash it with
Repentance, and Dry it with Obedience, that it be so kept; let them do that
Duty to it, that does so much good and help for them. And then, My Soul! thou
shall be healthy and strong, and happy in them all.

Of old all was not enough for thy health; but Christ has Mediated thy
Covenant thus New. And to do this Heb. 8. 6.
Duty, God for his sake will give thee Ability. Ability of Grace to do him
acceptable Service. Take his Word for it, he Promises, he will. And his
Command with it, for he Says thou must.

A New heart will I give you, and a Ezekiel. 36. 26.
new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart and
give you a heart of flesh. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you
to walk in my statutes, and you shall keep my judgments to do them.

Therefore says the Lord God, Repent Ezekiel. 18. 31, 32.
and turn your Selves from all your transgressions; So iniquity shall not be
your ruin.

Cast away all your transgressions whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a
new heart, and a new Spirit: For will ye die O House of Israel?

For, I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord God:
Wherefore turn your selves and live.

The Sum of this Soliloquie.
God has appointed Remedies against our failings in His Service. 2.
Repentance, is the Sinners first Remedy. And a most fair, and Sovereign
Remedy. Experiments of it. Taking it by Halves, or Deferring it too long,
makes it not to be Saving. To Delay it to future is dangerous; till death,
Desperate,
2. Faith is a Sinners Cordial, Most precious, because Christ is chief, yea
only Ingredient of it, and taken by it. Excellent Spirits begot by the
Cordial of true faith. Six counterfeits of faith, not truly cordial.
3. Obedience in the New Covenant, the Souls Preservative in ^ealth. Why it is
called New? and how it is Preservative of it? Some take Poison, instead of this
Preservative.

The Proofs of these three Remedies, and Prescripts how and when to take them,
and Pretiousnesse of all, and of Faith in Chief.
Helps to Heaven and Happiness. OR, A Soliloquie acquainting the Soul with
such Reliefs and Aids as will facilitate and further her Course and Progress
in the ways of Godliness. The second Part.
Holy Actions and Cautions, great Assistants to Piety.

MY Soul! If good Meditations 3. Division.
and Motions live in thee, the mind may do much. But when all that is done,
there must be more. And thy Ear, Eye, Heart, Hand, Mouth, every one must do
his Part: Hear, Read, Resolve, Practice, Pray, (all must be in Action) And
Conscience must keep a particular watch too, and have some things in Holy
Caution. This will complete all. And the Good is not mean which may be done by

The Ear.
For, my Soul! by this Door Gods Act. 14. 2^ and 16. 14. Joh. 3. 5. 1 Pet. 2.
2. Joh. 10. 27 Joh. 13. 17 Psalm. 109. 105. Jer. 23. 29. 2 Cor. 4. 45. Luke 24
42. 2 Timothy 4. 2 and 3. 16. Luke 11. 28. Heb. 5. 11. Isa. 28. 10. Heb. 6. 1, 2
Heb. 4. 12.
Word is received in. Baptism first sets thee, Preaching keeps thee on thy
feet. For what are they but to know and do? And in Gods Word is both light, and
heat; and both are Communicated by good Preaching. And observe that, my Soul!
to avoid common Error, The work of it is both on mind and heart, to inform
and inflame; Til thou do as well do good as know it, the Preacher has not
done his, nor thou thy work. He may tell thee that in an hour, which he can
scarce teach thee to do in a life. The Principles of Christianity are easy,
but the Practice is hard. And Efficacy, as well as Instruction, is the work of
the Word.

Even the Preached Word; So it be duly Preached. For that, my Soul! thou shall
do well to eye, as another prevailing but most pestilent error. The Pulpit
does not make the Word; nor Speaking from it, Preaching. But a Reverend
handling of Holy Scripture according to the Truth of Gods Sense, and to the
aims of Gods Spirit a, that's 2 Timothy 1. 19
the true Preaching of the Word. Tit. 1. 9. 2 Timothy 2. 15. Neh. 8. 8. 2 Chr^.
18. 21. 1 Timothy 4. 1 John 4. 1. 2 Pet. 2. 1. 10, 11. Mar. 4. 24. Apoc. 2. 11.
Act. 17. 11 Jam. 1. 21. Act. 10. 33 Mat. 13. 22 Heb. 4. 2.
Error, and Ill, are from the Devil, though out of a Pulpit. And if thou take
heed how thou hear this, and have care to harken to that, with an humble,
honest Heart prepossest with neither Error, nor Lust; thou can not choose but
be of better life, because well taught by Gods Word.

Nor will thou be worse, for giving thy self to Read it; For therefore it is
Writing, as well as Word, to have it in thy

Eye.
But, my Soul, avoid extremities. Theirs who forbid it as a Mote in the Mat.
22. 29.
Peoples Eye; And theirs, who abuse it as Dust under their Foot. What is
Sacred, must not be too Common; and Deat. 29. 9 2 Pet. 3. 16 Heb. 5. 12. Joh.
5. 39. 1 John 5. 13 Gal. 3. 2.
what is Secret, must not be Enquired. Mysteries are Labyrinths which every
Foot may not (must not) Tread: Necessaries, every mind ought, and may know. If
thou would not lose thy self then, walk not in the Woods, but Plains: If
thou will not drown thy 2 Pet. 1. 10 Heb. 5. 14. Pontifex ^nter Deu^ and
homines ^ons cst. ^ern.
self, Foard the shallowes, not the Deeps. And if thou can not give thy
self, take direction how, and where to go and walk: And so thou may advance
much in all Holy ways. The Pavement to Heaven is made there by Gods Phil. 2.
16. 2 Timothy 3. 15. Act. 18. 26. Act. 16. 17.
Hand; and thy Foot will not go more wrong, because thy Eye sees the pavement.
Nay, of that thou art more sure, when thou do Read then Hear: Man's Breath
comes in with Gods Word into 1 John 4. 1.
the Ear, but Gods Pure Word and Spirit into the Eye. Into the Eye? yes, and to
the Heart too, from it; and to the Life, from that. For, my Soul, as many
Saints have been made better, so some have been made Saints by the mere Reading
of the Word. And the Desk, as well as the Pulpit, has begot Converts; And sure
it is a good Nurse, if a happy Mother of Spiritual life. Toll, lege, made
Saint Augustine Saint. Mat. 19. 2^ Athanas.
And a Text read, turned Saint Antony Angel. My Soul, I would not have thee
make a Chapter keep thee from a Sermon; nor a Sermon make thee slight a
Chapter: Use both right, and thou will be much bettered by both. And if with
Eyes on Heaven, and Knees on Earth C. Boromaeus. sic, etc.
, and Heart on Book, thou do (at due times) turn the Sacred Volumes, thy
Reading will be right. Yea, though leaves not inspiredly Sacred. For when thy
self read Scriptures, the flowers of Grace, thou art the Be that gettest
the Honey by thy own Hand: but in Good and Godly Books, another has Gathered,
and thou have but, to Eat the Honey. Yea, what is far sweeter, and wholsomer to
Holy and Heavenly Taste, O my Soul! be given to read Gods, and Godly Comparate
vobis Biblia animae pharmaca. Chrysostom.
Books: Good Air breeds good Spirit; and Gods Air, Holy Breath. Where
Flowers of Grace, and Plants of Paradise grow, (as on Holy Grounds) the Air is
good. Nor is it ill to smell a Posie made of no worse Flowers. Gods Bible is a
Garden; a good Book a Posie. Take pleasure then, and take Psalm. 1. 2.
profit in both. And so thou will, if thou do digest what thou do see and
hear. For, my Soul, they bring meat into thy Mouth; but that does Prepare, 1
Pet. 2. 2.
and Distribute it to thy Nourishment. They Convey Gods Word to the Doors Romans
6. 17. Col. 3. 16.
of thy House, but thou must not let it lie there, but lodge it in thy Heart,
and make it Commander of thy life. And to entertain and observe it so, is the
work, which, without serious, and strong Resolutions will never be done, the
proper act of

The Heart.
It must resolve upon action, for which thou see reason, and determine a
Practice, when it knows Gods Will Act. 10. 30.
and Word. The Counsels of the mind do nothing without the Decrees of the will.
And Ear, and Eye can do no more in the Word of God, but furnish the mind with
good Counsels. Execution must come from the Heart, the Great Governor of the
little world of Man. To it therefore is given the power to make such Decrees.
And, my Soul, there is nothing which thou can not do by virtue of that
power. Its wonderful what has been done by a Roman Resolution: Miraculous, if
any thing were impossible to a Christian; not only to Scaevola. Dan. 3. 28
burn the Hand, and not shrink; but to set the Body on flames, and Smile at
it. And much more to quench the fire of burning lusts. Resolutions are Cords,
if then weak, Temptation, if Number. 30. 13. Judge. 15. 13
strong as Sampson, breaks them like Tow. But if well twist and made, will
bind, and hold any, though never so strong. It did David to a Regular life,
Psalm. 119 116.
to Gods Law, because so steadfastly purposed. Joshua from strange Gods. The
Jos. 24. 15 Dan. 3. 28
Three Children from the Image Worship. There is no good, or ill, which thou
may not do or shun, if thou resolve for, or against it. Have not some
suffered their Bodies to be Cut, their Limbs to be sawne, their Throats to be
parcht with thirst, and their Stomachs Gnawn with hunger, when no means else
were left for saving of their Lives? And might not the Intemperate do as much
for Sobriety and Abstinence? and the Incontinent against his lusts, if they did
see, and resolve this as necessary to save their Souls? Vows (my Soul) may be
snares, Eccles. 5. 2
if not considerately made; but Holy Purposes are innocent Bonds, into which
thou may more commonly enter; And bind thy self to better behavior with them
as well as vows; and in Psalm. 76. 11 Deuteronomy. 12. 11.
some cases with both. And surely God has given thee that power of will, and
thy will that power, that thou should (as a man made for God) move by it to
Godliness; and if dull, quicken thy self, and strengthen it more fastly and
firmly to move.

But when so set, it must go. Thou sal. 66. 12 sal. 116. 6.
must determine and do. Put to Practice what thou have in Purpose, and what
thy heart does resolve, that must be done by thy Hand.

My Soul, Experiments confirm Precepts much: and want of good Attempts, makes
brave Exploits be thought impossible and left, when else they might be done. Of
the Christian it is most true: what glorious Conquests might be got over our
lusts were they not thought Invincible? To what heights of Holy Perfection
might Flesh and Blood attain, were it not believed impossible? And why?
Practice begets experience, and that a mighty strength. Thus does he come to
draw the strongest So the Martyr puts his finger into the Candle, and after,
his Body in the Fire. Acts. Mon. 1 John 2. 12, 13.
bow, that began with a weaker; and carry an Ox at last, that has it of a
Calf on his shoulders. Thou have as many Presidents for this, as there be Great
Saints; which from an Infancy of goodness have grown by degrees to be fo
Great. Even the Giants of grace, were once no taller then Dwarfes in goodness.
Say not then My Soul, there is a Lion in the way: Thy Fancy is the Lion.
Enter, go Pro. 22. 13
on in the ways of God, thou shall find the Lion slain, and honey in the
Judge. 14. 1
Belly of the Lion. Even, what was bitter, will be sweet, what was hard will be
easy; what was terrible will be amiable, what was strange familiar, to Phil.
3. 7, 8.
him that being well-resolv'd, betakes himself to a good and righteous way. But
my Soul, thou can not stir, unless God strengthen; pray then his Ability,
that thou may go on, and let the hand have help from

The Mouth.
To speak (as it does to Man for the Body, so) to God for thee, for help. If
Psalm. 36. 9. Mat. 21. 22 1 John 4. 21 Ezekiel. 31. 39.
it speak from the Heart, much may be done by the Mouth. For as God is the
Fountain of Grace, Prayer is the Bucket of the Well. If then thou would have
it, thou must down, or rather (since the Well is above) up Joh. 14. 5. 1 Cor.
12. 3 Ezekiel. 36. 27. Romans 8. 4. 11. 14. Ezekiel. 16. 37. Luke 11. 13.
with the Bucket. My Soul, thou can no more do right without Gods Spirit,
then the Body live without thine: If that Holy Spirit lead thee, thou will not
go wrong. I will put my Spirit into you, and cause you to walk in my statutes,
and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them. Lo, there is the Power to do
right: And shall not your Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those that
ask it? (That Is the way to come by that power.) And, if thou Isa. 61. 3. Dan.
9. 9. Isa. 38. 3. Dan. 9. 3. Psalm. 6. 8.
do, for thy better speed and haste, mix thy Prayers with ashes and tears;
and weep and fast for their better fervency, thou will sooner get to the end of
that way. And if thou will for thy better progress, provide thy self with more
strength and store, be sure to be one at an Eucharist, if it come fairly John
6. 57 (...). Damasc. Viaticum. Joh. 6. 58. Jam. 5. 16. Luke 18. 1.
to thy hand. For, my Soul, nothing does more nourish Holy Spirit then an
Eucharist. The bread of life from Heaven, that thou faint not in the way.

And then Prayers must prevail, when we wax not weary, and grow faint.

My Soul, thou have been taught many helps to do well, but by two things wilt
be Cautioned to do yet better. If thou look to thy Christian Credit, and
Innocence, well. To keep that, without just blot; this, without greater guilt.
Lessons that are not commonly taught; and therefore to be more Singularly
learnt. Impair not thy Credit, Increase not thy guilt. Watch against both with
strict Conscience. Such

Holy Cautions help to Heaven much.

My Soul, there is a Reputation 4. Division. Phil. 4. 8. 3 John 12.
Christian; and if thou value the worldly before life, the Heavenly should be
dearer. It is, when thou give no just Scandal, and appearest, without due
blame and blemish in the Eye of the world. I say, scandal that is just, for if
the Offense be causlesse in thee, its taken, not given. And I say, appearing
without blemish, for thou must look as that it be not, that it do not appear.
Abstain from all appearance of Evil. 1 These. 5. 22.
Thy Conversation must have neither ill Heart, nor Face: Nor ill Prospect for 1
Cor. 10. 32.
Heaven, nor Aspect to Earth; Give no offense to any. That is, hurt not an
Honest Eye with a Glass of foul behavior; Heb. 12. 13
stumble not an upright foot, with a visible block of offense. Providing for
honest 2 Cor. 6. 3 2 Cor. 8. 21 Romans 12. 17. Mat. 18. 16
things, not only in the sight of the Lord, but in the sight of men; And of
the Good above all. For better a Millstone tied about thy Neck, and thou thrown
into the bottom of the Sea, then offend one of those little ones. What ever
they Seem, thy Sin is great. O then My Soul, shall they be scandalized, Phil.
1. 27. Phil. 4. 8. Ephesians. 4. 1. Col. 1. 10. Romans 15. 2
rather then great ones, bad ones be offended? This will hang about thy neck a
guilt heavier then a Millstone. Have Sense then (as of thy earthly) of thy
Christian Honor, my Soul; Say, do, nothing unworthy that Nobleness, thy
Goodness. Have care (as of thy Self) of another Satisfaction; and wound no
more thy Credit, then thy Conscience Qui conscientiam negligit crudelis est in
seipsum; qui famam negligit crudelis in proximum. Aug.
. Let not thy Brothers heart, more then thy own, take thy wound. Ill looks
wound good hearts; and if they infect, kill like the Basiliske. A good name is
a precious ointment; but an ill, a Deadly Perfume. And if thy Eccles. 7. 1
Carriage want a good Countenance, that is a dead fly, and makes it ill. Away
then with an Atheists heart, and look. Away with unchaste deeds and shows.
Away with Profane thoughts, and Signs. Away with an Epicures Spirit and
Habit: Away with a liars Soul, and Suspicion. What is ill, or looks ill, do
all away. For, Believe it, The way for thee to go to heaven, is not to lay a
stumbling block in thy Romans 14. 13. Psalm. 2. 15. Heb. 3. 12. 13. 2 These. 3. 15.
Gal. 6. 1. 2 Samuel 9. 12.
Brothers way. Build him a Bridge by thy good Example; and, by thy Counsel,
lead, and help him over; but, do not block up and Barricado his passage, and
by an ill Spectacle of Life (like Amasiahs bloody corpse) stop his better
course. Thou can not bring others on their way, and thy self be out for
heaven. No, but Company coming Jam. 5. 19. 20. Dan. 12. 3.
after thee, thou will be let sooner and higher in. Most do not mind this; but
do thou, my Soul! And Keep clear of others Guilts; Be sure to mind that. The
reason is as great as thine, and their Salvation.

My Soul! Is not thy own Proper guilt great enough, that thou must pile on
heaps of other men's to make the Psalm. 38. 8.
fire greater? David's Sins went over his head, and were a burden too heavy for
him to bear. My Soul! Do thou not shrink at this? He that had so good
shoulders, so great a strength to Act. 13. 22 1 King. 11 38.
bear, So little a load to carry; yet was his too heavy for him? And is thine
so light, to take others on? Art thou confounded to consider the vast sum of
thy Single Trespasses (though but Dan. 9. 8.
a Daniels debt) and will not the Scores of other men's Sins, bring on the
overwhelming Confusion? Art thou Principal to Innumerable ills, and will thou
Psalm. 40. 12.
be Accessory to Millions? My Soul! We must bear one another burdens: Gal. 6.
2.
But their Miseries, not their Sins. By charity not Copartnership. A fellowship
and feeling does well in woes, but woefully Heb. 13. 3. Ephel. 5. 7. 2 Cor. 6.
14 Act. 2. 40.
in Sin. Atlas was feigned to bear up Heaven; but none, Hell.

And could thou make shift for thy Self to be saved, would thou have
others by thy Default, to perish? Have the Curses of Hell with the joys of
Heaven? My Soul! So many Romans 14. 15 Ezekiel. 33. 6
as Sin by thee, are damned for thee: And can thou number how many? Number
then all that by thy Acts have been made Sinners, and by Gods Grace not made
Penitents. Thus when thou art dead, thy Errors may live, and thy guilts for
many ages lie. unburied like Cursed Parents, propagating ill 2 King. 13 2.
Issues Successively to Souls, throughout many Generations. And though thy
Natural Sins die with thee, the Adopted 2 King. 17 22. 2 King. 14 24. 1 Timothy
5. 22.
may live for ever.

My Soul, then, do what the Apostle says, Be not partaker of other men's Sins;
But more, then he means. He would have no hands laid on unworthy Persons; do
thou keep thine from unworthy actions. By any Deed of thine to Bane another
Soul, is of all most Apoc. 18. 4
unworthy; or by another to bane thine. And there are many ways to do both.
Nine are numbered. And very naught all. When thou can, not to hinder it; for
so thou art Assistant to it, and thy Hand does it help: When thou should,
not to Reprove it, for so thou art Advocate for it, and thy Tongue gives it
License. To Counsel Sin, for that is to conceive it in another, to give it womb
and be its Mother. To Command it; for that is to beget it, to give it Seed, and
be as Natural Father. To Consent to it; for that is to own and 2 John 11.
maintain it, and be Adopting Father to it, if not Natural. To Commend it;
for that is to give it dug and Suck, and to be Nurse to it at least, if not a
Mother. To Entertain the Actor of it, for that is to give it shoulders and
Support it; or Refuge, and to be Patron and Protector; and so Brother, if not
Parent to it: To Keep Silence, and be Mute at it; for that is, to give it hand,
and heart, and to be a friend, if not a Brother to it. To partake of it, for
that is to give it arm and face, and to be both Sworn Brother and friend, and
loving Benefactour of it.

In the Instance of one Sin, see all this, O My Soul! Let Blood be it, and
behold, how another may shed it and thou be guilty of the Blood. Joab 2 Samuel
18. 9 2 Samuel 16. 21.
killed Absalom; but Ahitophel Murdered him; Because his Counsel brought him
to his death. The Ammonite slew 2 Samuel 12. 9
Uriah; but David killed him; because he fell by his Command. The Jews Act. 7.
59. Act. 22. 20
stoned Stephen, Saul did not touch him, yet had hand in his death, because
with his Consent. Sons of Belial stoned Naboth, 1 King. 21 13. 19.
yet Ahab slew him, because, as he gave Countenance to the doing it with his
Seal, so he had Complacence in the deed, and so commended what was done. All
Benjamin did not ravish the Jud. 19. 22 and 20. 5. 13, 14.
Levites Concubin to death, but gave shield and shelter, to them that did, and
so the Bloody Rape became theirs, by Patronage. The Jews in Christ's time did
not s^ay the Prophets which were killed many hundred years before, yet by
Participation with their Fathers, Mat. 23. 31. Luc. 11. 48, 49. Pro. 31. 9.
became Heirs of their Murders. And if King Solomon open not his mouth for the
dumb in the cause of all such as are appointed for destruction, They may be the
Children, but he shall be the Father of it.

Scrangers cut of Jacob, Esau Sat still and looked but on, and he destroyed,
because he did not save. Though Ob. 1. 12. 1 Samuel 2. 22. 29. 33, 34. Levit. 19.
17.
Elies Sons fell by the Philistims, His hand gave them the fatal blow, because
he did not sufficiently reprehend that which was their ruin, their Sins.

O My Soul! Be for the Communion of Saints, not Sinners. Nor in blood, nor any
guilt do thou Communicate in another Sin. Advise from it, Forbid it, Dissent,
Dispraise, Disrespect, Disclaim, Proclaim against it, Resist it, Rebuke it.
Thou have guilts enough of thy own to multiply, thou need not add any
others to it.

My Soul, then, giving others Scandal, and partaking others guilt, are thy
Enemies, against which Conscience must be Charged to keep a strict watch: And
is thy great friend if it do. For surely not to hinder others from Heaven is
to further thy Self; not to be Laden with much guilt, gives an easier Passage
to heaven. And to be free of such blocks and fetters, makes the course of Piety
more easy. More easy, though to crazed and corrupted Nature hard, and not to
be compassed without our best thoughts and endeavors, even all that Mind, or
Man can do, though ear, and eye, and heart, and hand, and mouth, and
Conscience, improve all their arts and faculties to the full, and with united
forces, set on the good and great Employment of Gods Service, and our
Godliness. But so it will be. For my Soul wisdom assures thee Prove. 2. 1. 2, 3,
4, 5.


If thou will receive my Words, and hide my Commandments within thee, So that
thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, and apply thy heart to understanding: If
thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding: If
thou seek her as Silver, and Searchest for her, as for hid treasures. Then
shall thou understand the Fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God.

The Sum of this Part is.
1. Some Acts are great Assistances to Pious Life which by Gods blessing we may
do. 2. Hearing Gods Word, Reading, Resolving, Attempting Practice and Praying,
are those Acts. 3. Holy Cautions help much, as well as Actions. 4. It will
advance much to Heaven, to look carefully to a Christian Credit, and Innocence
on earth. 5. To have great Caution to avoid just Scandal and keep clear of
other men's guilt, is the way to maintain that good Credit and Innocence.
Animadversions touching the Daily use of what is directed throughout the whole
Manual.
IF all set, seem a great Days work of Devotion (though two hours will make
the long^st day) it is put into thy power to lessen it. The Authors Aim, is, to
be a Spiritual Helper, not a Ta^k-master. That Office he leaves to thee with
Discretion, and Conscience, to execut^. And thou will discharge it better, if
when thy thoughts are set to contrive, and lay out the Spirits work, flesh and
blood be not called in to the C^unsel.

As Bodies so Souls are not all of equal strength and speed; and as Days
differ in several Climates (yea in the same, often vary their length:) so days
of Devotion are not of a like length for all Spirits and Occasions.

Hezeki^h was not so long on his Knees as Solemon 2 King. 19. 5. 2 Chro. 6. 13.
, nor Ezra the Priest so long at his Prayers as the Levites Ezra. 9. 5 Neh. 9.
4.
. The Apostles did lengthen, and shorten theirs Act. 1. 24 and 4. 24.
. And our Lord kept not a punctual measure for His Mat. 26. 42. 44. John 17.
. A Man may pray much in little with the Publican Luke 18. 13.
; and little, in much, like a Pharisee Mat. 23. 14. and Mat. 6. 1
; and much, and not little, as the Centurion Act. 10. 2. 4.
. The heart is all in all. If that go along, thou may do well to travail
all the Book over; if not, better to cut off some Stages. There are that
measure Sermons by Glasses, and Orisons by Beads; but as the wise judge those
by brains (not lungs) so the Devout weigh these by their thoughts (not
fingers) Behold that pattern of all piety and perfection, Luke 6. 12.
Christ himself; He prayed whole nights (to teach us, we may pray long, and
well) yet taught us Mat. 6. 9.
a short form of Prayer, to show that (generally) it is not better for being
long. The life of Devotion lies in the Spirit, not Breath, and Prayers, must be
measured by the Heart, not the Hour-glasse.

FINIS.

