THE INTENTIONS OF THE ARMY:

Concerning The KINGS Majesty, for estating Him in His Rights.

Also their desires concerning the Queen, Prince Charles, and the Royal Issue,

And also for settling of the Parliament in their Privileges, and all Subjects
in their Liberties, and the Kingdom in PEACE.

Royal blazon, crowned English rose C R


Printed in the Year. 1647,

THE INTENTIONS OF THE ARMY Concerning The KINGS Majesty, for estating Him in
His Rights.
Right Honorable,
FRom what you may gather from the proceedings of the Army; and by weighing all
their Proposals, Desires, Motions, you may find the Intentions of this Army,
to be much tending to a hoped for peace, in regard that they aim not to bear
up any one party for sinister ends, but that every one may enjoy their just
Rights, Privileges, and the Liberties, and the kingdom, in a settled peace.

Nor can any say that they have sought, or do seek themselves in regard they
have so clearly manifested to the world the contrary, as may appear in many
particulars.

To instance only the great delay of moneys for their subsistence, though so
many months behind of pay, and are constrained to free quarter, and have
allowance so much as to buy them clothes, hose, shoes or any thing, though the
Winter so near approached.

They seek not places for themselves in the civil affairs of the Kingdom,
not to get the wealth of the Kingdom into their hands but only desire
subsistence, whilst they are in the Kingdoms service.

They desire that the King may have what is rightly his, and that we should do
one to another as we would be done by.

They would His Majesty to be allowed the benefit of enjoying His Wife, and
Children, and such other Rights as are truly His.

That the Parliament may enjoy all their just Privileges, freely, and such
power as of right belongs to them, to execute that trust reposed in them,

And that all Subjects may enjoy their just Liberties, and rights in freedom
and safety.

For Your Lordships further satisfaction, I have sent your Lordships these
following heads of their Intentions, which I have collected.

I.
That such things as are necessary for securing the Rights and Liberties of the
people; and the just privileges of a free Parliament, and for settling the
Militia, and peace of the Kingdom, may be presented to the King, by Bill, or
Ordinance of Parliament, for the Royal assent.

II.
That the said Propositions being tendered to his Majesty, and He shall have
given his concurrence for settling the Rights, Liberties, and Peace of the
Kingdom, that then the Rights, Liberties, and peace of the kingdom, That then
the Rights of the Kings Majesty, the Queen, the Prince, the Duke of York, and
the rest of the Royal posterity may be considered of.

III.
That the Rights of His Majesty, and His Posterity may be settled by Act of
Parliament, in all things, so far as may consist with the Right and Freedom
of the Subject, And with the security of the same for the future.

IIII.
That a general Act of Oblivion may be passed, for the pardoniong of all
persons for all acts or hostility, trespasses misdemenopurs and other actions
done ion prosecution of the late unhappy War, between the King and the
Parliament, and to free all persons (those expressed in the Propositions only
excepted) from all troubles, suites,; or prejudice which shall be brought
against them for the same; And to restore them to all Privileges, and Rights,
belonging to them as Subjectes, provided, that no Subjects that have been in
Hostility against the Parliament in the late War, shall be capable of
bearing any office of power, or public trust in the Commonwealth, during the
space of five years, without consent of Parliament, or such power as they shall
appoint.

V.
That His Majesty's person may be restored to a condition of safety, honor,
and freedom, without diminution to his personal Rights, or limitation beyond
the right exercise of the Regal power.

VI.
That the Queens Majesty may have liberty to come over into England, to enjoy
her personal Rights, with safety, honor, and freedom, provided, that nothing
be done to the prejudice of the Rights, Liberties, Peace, and safety of the
Kingdom.

VII.
That His Highness Prince Charles, and the rest of the Kings Children, may be
restored to all their personal rights in this Kingdom, in safety, honor, and
freedom.

VIII.
That his Majesty may return to London, and sit with his Parliament, fopr the
settling, and securing the Rights liberties, peace, and safety of the kingdom.

Putney the 21 of September. 1647.
FINIS.

