THE BROTHERS of the BLADE: Answerable to The Sisters of the Seaberd. OR, A
Dialogue between two Hot-spurres of the Times, Sergeant SLICE-MAN, alias
SMELL-SMOCK of Coney-Court in Chick-lane, and Corporal DAM-MEE of Bell-alley
near Pick-hatch. At their first meeting in the walks in Moorefields, upon the
Return of the one from the Leaguer in the Low Countries, and the late coming
to London of the other from the Camp in the North, at the disbanding of the
Army.

a man attempting to kiss a woman on a bed

Printed for Thomas Banks and John Thomas, 1641.

THE BROTHERS of the Blade.
Sergeant. DAmmee Jack, my brave Bilbo, and Brother of the Blade, well met.


Cor. What? Sergeant Sliceman, my quondam comrade, and old Smelsmock? By the
blood of Bacchus, J joy to see thee, stab me, if your nimble servant corporal
Nim, does not earnestly desire to be incorporated into your firm friendship.


Ser. By Styx and Acheron, I embrace thee in the arms of my love and
affection. But J prithee, what news from the North? For J suppose thou came
lately from thence.


Cor. Faith, very little news there, and that scarce worth relating: but the
newest novelty to me is at this time and in this place here to see thee, I
thought thou had bin dead 7. years ago, either by the bullet or gullet, the
lance or panch, the sword or surfeit, or by some such disaster as the halter.


Serj. Thanks to my stars, J have many a time escaped the former, and J must
confess ingenuosly, I have deserved the latter.


Cor. I make no question, but if thou had thy desert, thou had been nooz'd
many years ago at Gregory's Plumtree in Judge Richardsons days: I remember
his Lordship was on the bench at that time of thy trial (as he was always)
pleasantly disposed, and would have jeered thee to the gallows: but thou may
thank that good man, first in giving thee not a choke-line (as he might) but
the common Psalm of mercy, and next in saying for thee, Legit, my Lord, when
thou readst no more a letter in the black book, then J can now read Hebrew,
and that's nere a whit:


Serj. J must acknowledge my self over obliged to his goodness, having sent
to him the night before a good Angel, by the means whereof and favor of him
J had the law in my own hand: and now since thou art a chip of the old block,
a bird of the same feather, and one and the selfsame sneelegall as both, give
me thy wrist, and let me shake thee by the hand, being the most remarkable
place, where the Hangman has long since marked us for sheep for his own
slaughter.


Cor. Nay, hold there, my man of war and son of Mars: I must confess, thou
and I have bin in times past as arrant Rogues as ever Newgate harbored, as
daring in our attempts, and as desperate in our assaults, as the most resolute
Rascal whatsoever under the cope; but for my part recollecting my self of
late, and considering the vicissitude and revolution of the states and
conditions of men in these last days of the world, Ego non sum ego, I am not
the man I was, but am now reclaimed.


Serj. The Devil thou art, it is impossible that Damme Jack the little Furio,
and only Orlando Furioso of his age, should be metamorphos'd from what he was,
it is incredible, a paradox, and appears to me very strange.


Cor. Well, it is not so strange as true, take it as you will. But what course
do thou intend to take now thou art come over, at thy arrival here.


Serj. Faith, if all strings fail in the bow of my expectation, i will fall to my
old trade, turn highway Lawyer, or Padman.


Cor. Hanged, that's the way to be hanged indeed, to take a fair turn at the
Triple-tre. Thou had better turn Tapster, or if (being a Gentleman) thou
scornst to be subject to the imperious check and command of every sordid
mechanic, I would wish thee to haunt Bowling-allyes, and frequent
Gaming-houses, where you may live all day long upon the rooke on the Bankside,
or to play at Nine-pins, or Pigeon-holes in Lincolaes-Inne fields; These are
ordinary exercises, and (in my opinion) far better then your sometimes
walking in Westminster Hall, from 7. of the clock in the morning till 12. at
noone in the Term time.


Serj. Jack, thou art not of my mind: those were my golden days, for in those
Term times I could with dexterity in a crowd dive into a pocket, and fetch up
with the slight and activity of my hand, twenty or thirty Pieces at a time.
Indeed that way of getting money was more perilous, but most profitable; and
yet I lie, for according to the old saying, lightly come, lightly go; so it
fared with me, what J picked resolutely on a Monday morning from Country
clyents, was spent dissolutely before Sunday evening, among the Sisters of the
Scaberd.


Cor. Thou say true in that, for gains so unjustly gotten, seldom or never
prosper, when did you ever know a Cutpurse or pickpocket grow rich? If at any
time they get a booty, and are taken in the act, the^ their long durance and
captivity in the Jayle in a short time exhausts them of all.


Serj. Troth, that's the reason we two are such poor rogues as we are. I
prithee Jack how strong art thou? What munition have thou about thee? The
weathers extreme hot, and my wind-pipes are so dry and dusty, having travailed
lately many a long mile, and made many a short meal, that I begin to faint,
and would very feign repose my self with thee a while under the next
Jvie-bush; or let us entrench our selves within the limits of some red-Lattice,
where we may squench our thirst, drench our guts, drink one another healths,
and discourse of all our travailes. Therefore speak, what cash or store of
coin have thou?


Cor. By love not a deneere, not so much as a single cross to bless me with.
I have not seen the Kings picture in silver of my own, never since his
Majesty (heaven bless him) went into Scotland. At his departure, (half a
dozen joviall blades of us, each one with his female piece of iniquity, feeding
high, and drinking deep) all my money departed from me.


Serj. Alas poor lack, I perceive thy penury now was long of thy predigality
upon the lasses then, but let that pass. For the present I greeve as much for
thee as I do for my self, for by the beams of Phoebus I am in the same poor
praedicament, pennilesse as thou art: And without swearing, or lying i will tell
thee the true cause of my present indigency. On the second day of this month
of August, coming out of the Boares-head-Taverne near Fishstreet, as J was
making water in Doe-little-lane, a brace of merciless shoulder-clappers with
their griping-clawes seized upon my dody, disarmed me of my weapon (as Jews
pissing) and forthwith dragged me into the Paltry Counter.


Cor. But (by your favor, Sergeant Sliceman, were there no Brothers of the
Blade in your Company to slice those shoulder-clapping slaves to sippets, for
making such a dangerous assault and battery upon your body?


Serj. By Juno, not one. All our Brothers of the Blade went forth at the
fore-doore, and J with my madona Mrs. Luce Limetwigge came out at the back
door into the Lane, where those Tenter-hookes kept centry.


Cor. Do you know the varlets names, that I may know 'em to evade em lest I be
at any time invaded by 'em.


Serj. The Yeoman, or younger inferior Rogue J am ignorant of, but the old
cursed catchpole is sufficiently known, an inveterate curre-dogge they call
Tripes.


Cor. I have heard much of the Caterpiller: It Is reported he is the archest
Rascal of the whole Tribe.


Serj. Hell take 'em all, and him especially for me. But to be short, it is but
two days since I crept out of that hole, like a poor snake, all tottered and
torn as you see; so that these 18. days have I lamentably sung the Counter
tenor, and am in far worse case now I am out, then when I first came in.


Cor. But pray Sergeant Sliceman, let us know the cause of your first coming
in, and you being so stayed a man as you were.


Serj. Pox on it, the cause of my lying in there so long, was long of the pocky
whore Petronella Burnyard, that insatiate sister of our Scaband: This bold
Bronstrops then lay in, would have fathered her bastard upon me, and if I would
have married her, I had bin the next day out.


Cor. Who? not she that looks a squint, and makes strange faces when she
complements with a gentleman, she that has an Amazonian Spirit, and is
generally reputed the Metropolitan of all the Fructifers here about London?


Serj. The same: Do you know her that you so lively describe her.


Cor. Yes faith, I have known her in my time, (I will not say carnally) and I
well remember her, since the springs of her beautiful parts caught the
Woodcocks of your affection, and the Sunbeams of her reciprocal affections
did so reflect upon your abilities, that you melted in your own grease, till
you were so basted and roasted, that every one that beheld you, took you for
the two legged city Pigge.


Serj. Mum Jack mum, Rub not old soars, lest I harp upon the same string, and
touch you to the quick, you have forgot since the like Cocatrice of yours sent
you to the French Doctors, where you lay so long in Cornelius his tub to
pickle, that at last the hungry Neopolitan ate away a part of your right
tubified rose.


Cor. I smell your meaning (Sergeant Smell-smock) and know what mutton you best
affect by your gaping. But to return to your Lyndabrides: As you have many a
time and often conney caught her, so she wooed now in the conclusion conney,
catch you.


Serj. True, the old whore wooed if she coo'd.


Cor. But how got you clear off from her?


Serj. By the strength of my own Minerva: Indeed the old Justice laid the Law
very shtowdly to me, which his worship as well understood, as a Country Major
on the bench at an Assize. I thank his worship, he menaced me that I should
lie a whole twelvemoneth by the heels, or else allow the Tweake 5. pounds,
then which sum he should sooner have had 5. of my teeth, toes or fingers. But
in faith, I am much obliged to Dapper the Just asses Clerk, for if he had not
stood my close friend, I had been still close enough to this hour.


Cor. Well, now thou have thy heels at liberty, what course do thou intend
to steer?


Serj. Faith, even what the Fates please: And in my mind the old rode I have
formerly trod is the most pleasing.


Cor. I but the end of that way will be death, an infamous death here, and
without we mend our manners by a seasonable Repentance, Hell and damnation
hereafter. Then, when you are come to your journeyes end, you will be sorc'd to
sing that doleful ditty, Per varios casus, per tot discrimina rerum Tendeimus
in Laqueum.


Serj. Hanged, Finis and Funis are all one to me. Hem, grass, and hays (as my
host in the merry Devil of Edmonton says) we are all mortal, and fince we
must yield to nature, we know not the time when, nor the place where, for my
part it is no matter the manner how I dye. Still let me sing with the Epicure,
Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas.


Cor. I but there are intolerable torments to ensue an ill-lead-life: consider
of them to deter thee from these lewd ways of wickedness.


Serj. So I will, seven years hence.


Cor. But if you persist, I fear you will be cut off by the Sword of Justice
before one year goes about.


Serj. If I be, I Will make thee my executor, and in the mean time, I pity thy
ignorance, then son of simplicity, never endeavor to dissuade me from which
I am determined. It Is but labor in vain, and therefore it is and shall be my
resolution.

Hanged, lets be joviall, revell whilst we can,
What Is coin ordained for, but the life of man?
Have I spent all my time in bloody wars?
Been carbonado'd, and all-hackt to scarres,
Have I out-dar'd the Canons threatening death;
Been bullet-branded, gap't and gasp't for breath,
And others slept, have I watch't night by night,
Discharged from sleep, each minute for to fight:
Have I marched ore the hills, gone through the dirt,
Without either hat, or band, or shoe, or shirt:
And must I now be base; cringe, creep, and trot,
Beg, and entreat of every Peasant sot;
No by this Martial hand, I scorn it, I,
That man's not sit to live, that fears to dye:
To beg is baser then to pick a purse,
To cheat more base; of all thefts that is worse:
Nor beg, nor cheat will I, I scorn the same,
But whilst I live, maintain a soldiers name,
I Will purse it I, the highway is my hope,
His heart's not great, that fears a little rope.

Cor. I but that little rope will in the end be the breaking of your great
heart; For my own part, I am as poor a rogue as thou art, and would be as
glad to take any course of life, so J might put my self into present money;
but I do not approve of the Highway Law. Let me see, what means had I best
to use to get a little means, if it were but so much as to keept life and
soul together. I would I were in service (as I have been before I went into
the Northern parts) with some Curtizan, my mind gives me, and my mind prompts
me, I could serve her turn well for a gentleman Usher, or at a shift upon
occasion to be Pimpe for her Ladyship, I must confess it is base, but it is a
safer way of the two, and better and greater men then I or you do daily use
it, well to morrow morning I Will about it, for as I am, it is impossible J should
long subsist, I have long enough served under the colors of angry Mars, i will
now secure my self under the canopy of lovely Venus.


Serj. Well said Jack, in faith: I commend thee forthy resolution, pursue it with
endeavor, and let thy fancy's best effects follow with diligence. But all this
while we want (that I lately propounded) the blood of the Grape, or the juice
of Barley, to water our dry plants, to refresh our dull senses, and to revive
our decayed and stupid Spirits? Resolve, Jack, where shall's build a Sconce?


Cor. I wooed I coo'd as easily effect it, as we both desire it, yet now I
think on it, if you will perambulate with me toward Bishops-gate-street; there is
an Uncle of mine this week come to Town, who has more wealth then wit, in one
word, to speak his Character, he is a very gull, an essential Clown, and
simplicity in the Abstract: His Fathers a mere Coridon, and lives in Essex, a
rich Crummuchion of a vast estate, which this Calfe and Cockaloach his son
makes shift to consume as fast as the old fool scrapes. The young novice is so
taken with the name of a Gentleman, that he will have it, though he buys it,
and it cost him dearly: He usually comes up to London every Term to learn to
take Tobacco, and now he is come this week to see new motions and
Puppit-playes in Bartholemew Fair. He is in his Kingdom, when he can but get
into company, where (when he has a cup in's pate) it is his pride and the hight
of his ambition to pay whole reckonings, though he be sufficiently laughed at
for his courtesy. This wiseacres will we fend for to the mouth Tavern, where
before we part from him, we will make a mere mouth of him.


Serj. I like the motion well, and the prosecution thereof better, but I think
it best of all to catch this Gudgeon (for our own profit) at a more convenient
time the next week then in the Fair time, we shall have the sairer
opportunity to works upon him; in the interim, let me entreat thee to walk
along with me (whether I was intended before I mer thee) to see our old
acquaintance Tom Stitch the Tailor.


Cor. Why, Dus Mr. True-snip live still in London.


Serj. J was enform'd yesterday by Mat-Mulligrub the Vintner, and Dick
Double-soule the Shoemaker, that he inhabits in a house of his own in
Cloth-saire.


Cor. Dus the Buttock his wife bear up still as she did?


Serj. They say, she is as blyth and buxome, as witty and wanton, and as plumpe
and impudent as ever she was. Fame is false, if you have not bin very inward
with her.


Cor. Indeed, I must confess we have been often and familiarly in action
together. The time was when I struck fire in her tynder-boxe, and it has took;
but it was in her former husbands days; yet J believe she is never a whit
altered, but is the same in disposition, as she used to be: I am consirm'd in
this opinion, semel and femper, once a whore, and always the same, J would
either of us were Master of a quart of Canary, to bestow upon her, at our first
visit of her. She Will take us for a couple of poor Rogues to come both to her
house without a stiver in our pockets. Prithee Sergeant Smell-smock, have any
thing about thee to dip in Barbican or in Long-lane as we go along.


Serj. Let not that trouble thee; for I doubt not but before we come to
Rodcrosse-street we shall meet with some or other, whom formerly I have known,
of whom I will boldly take acquaintance, and (taking him or her a side, be it
Brother of the Blade, or sister of the Scabard) take occasion to borrow a
shilling, or 6. d. till Doomes-day.


Cor. J wooed I coo'd see it, quoth blind Hugh, and so say I.


Serj. Never fear it; besides (as I understand) Snips wife has two or three
tubs of Ale continually in her house, which she draws in black Rammallian
pots for her friends and acquaintance that visit her, (a pretty policy to firke
out money of her customers) though she pretends it is to keep her husband at
home from flying from his shop-board, and hunting after Alehouses.


Cor. Nay, then lets go, and by the way (now it comes into my mind) i will call
upon Tim Trebble-gaine the Broker, whom we will take along with us living in
Long-lane, and as he once gulled me, so i will try if with all my wits J can
fetch over him.


Serj. Godamercy for that Jack; howsoever if all our plots fail, and nothing
take effect, weel'e make the Broker drunk, and then leave him for the
reckoning.


Cor. Agreed. He has had many a pavvne of thee, and now thou shall pavvne him.


FINIS.

