A PARADOX Useful for the Times.
Gentle Reader,
AS a preludium to the ensuing discourse, I would entreat you to take notice
that some Sheets of printed Paper that flies up and down the Streets of this
City in Mercuries hands, are worthy of high estimation; such are those
Observations, Protestations, and Messages that truly pass between our
gracious Sovereign, and his two Houses of Parliament, and some of our eloquent
Tullies, and learned Demosthenes Orations and Petitions that adhere to King and
Parliament; but other Pamphlets that are against both, are little to be
regarded, such is your lying Diurnals, your absurd Passages, your diabolical
news from Heaven, your horrible, terrible, and fearful tidings, and such
like: and to some of these I have seen an Order, a Vote, or the Clarke of
Parliaments name inserted; But I believe the Honorable House, or Clerks never
did intend such things, and therefore rather think that the covetous
Stationers does it to make their Books sell. But such things being suffered,
and winked at, I do greatly fear will be a cause of ruin to this Kingdom.
In filling peoples minds full of jealousies both against King and Parliament.
For the people of England being a free State, fear as great a tyrannical
jurisdiction in an Aristocraticall, or Democraticall government, as they do in
the known Monarchical State of the Kingdom. In consideration whereof, I
having played the fool to print 36. Sheets of Paper at my own charge, being
neither against King nor Parliement, but for both, I was bold to cast one
shee^e of my diastrous losses into the Press. And having acted my part
therein, I thought good for the vindication of my reputation in this kind of
public writing, to let this Paradox pass the Press likewise: By which, I
will briefly and plainly prove, That oftentimes good does come of evil,
wisdom from folly, and light out of darkness. Yet Truth it self says, That
a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a bad tree bring forth
good fruit: For answer whereunto: It is true, that a regenerate soul, though
some Leaves of his profession may wither for want of fervent zeal in the time
of temptation and though some rotten branches of bad actions may remain upon
him for want of careful diligence; yet if he be sound at the heart, these
leaves may be driven away by the tempestuous winds of afflictions, or pruned
off with the sharp knife of Repentance, and the tree will not be much the
worse, but rather the better: for instead of these old branches and leaves,
there will spring strong sprigs, and wholesome fruit. Contrary, though an evil
man may make a glorious show of his profession to Godward, and do some good
works of justice and charity toward his neighbor, to be seen of men, yet if
they do not spring from the root of a true saving, justifying faith, he is
but as the accursed Fig Tree, that quickly withers away in the time of
temptation, or in the day of affliction: But from hence let none judge rashly
of any man's election or reprobation, but judge charitably of all, though you
may know them by their fruits, to learn to do better, or to imitate their
virtues. Yet notwithstanding this objection, I will affirm my assertion to be
true, That God has, can, will, and does daily bring evil out of good, wisdom
out of folly, and light out of darkness. That God has done this in former
times, I can prove by many testimonies, but I will instance only in two. The
first shall be of our first Parents. They did very evil in eating of the
forbidden fruit, in doing evil they committed folly, and so did sin against
the command of God, and by that sin did walk in darkness, according to Christ's
rule, for they knew not whither to go to hide themselves from the
all-searching eye of omniscience. Now for this evil, God sends the promised
Messiah, the seed of the woman, according to the fullness of time: In hope
whereof the Fathers, Patriarchs, and Prophets lived a godly and religious life,
which by Divines is reputed to be a greater blessing than Adams being in
Paradise, for that was an earthly Lordship, but by this he is heir ^pparent,
and joynt-heire with Christ of a heavenly inheritance: for there he was to be
but a man, but in heaven he shall be as the Angels, nay more, as the Son of
God. Thus the wisdom of God the Father was given for the folly of man, and for
his sensual blindness he had heavenly illuminations. Secondly, see this
farther illustrated in the second Adam (Christ) did not that Traitor Judas very
evil in betraying his Lord and Master with a kiss? And for a few pieces of
refined earth, to sell a heavenly inheritance? Did not the Jews as bad, to seek
the death of their Messiah, and exclude a murderer? Did not Pilate as bad as
any, in giving judgment against an innocent, contrary to his own knowledge,
and the counsel of his wife? And were not the soldiers vile wretches to
revile, and spit upon a meek, and quiet Lamb, in whose mouth was no guile
found? And were they not all fools to put him to death, that could only give
them life? Did they not walk in darkness that blinded their eyes against the
Son of righteousness? Therefore it appears plainly they loved darkness
better than light, and accordingly they had it, for sure that was a dismal day
to Judas, when he went and hanged himself, so that for very pain and vexation
of spirit his bowels gushed out, an example to all Traitors; and was it not as
black a day to Pilate, when after he had caused many of the Jews, and his own
soldiers to be slain, he went and killed himself? and are not the Jews ever
since in a cloud and mist of darkness, knowing not whither they go, being
vagabonds upon the face of the earth, and dispersed, and hated of all Nations?
Now see what good this evil brought. It is plain, It brought forth the blood
of Christ for the redemption of mankind, one drop whereof were able to save
ten thousand worlds. It is the believers lavor, wherein he bathes his leprous
soul, and comes out as white as Snow. for by the bloody death, and bitter
passion of Jesus crucified, he does as truly trample upon sin, death, and hell,
as if he had himself performed the same: Now what greater benefit than the
salvation of the soul? None surely. Again, out of their folly did arise
wisdom to his redeemed, even the best of all, for the knowledge of Christ
Jesus crucified is more, and above all the wisdom in the world: I desire
nothing says holy Paul) but the knowledge of Christ Jesus, and him crucified.
Is not here then great light for darkness, wisdom for folly, and good for
evil, we see it apparent, it has been so: behold it in the second degree,
that it may and can now be so; For God is as able and as willing as ever he
was: then consider the time wherein we live. Is it not reported for certain,
That the Kings favorites, and the Lordly Gentlemen did intend to bring up a
Tyrannical jurisdiction over the Commons of England, Scotland, and Ireland, as
it is in France? did they not attempt it by Monopolies, Projects, exaction in
Courts of justice, and other ways, was this well done? No sure, it was very
ill. Did not the Lordly Bishops, and imperious Clergy seek to Lord it over Gods
Inheritance, so to eat the honey of the poor laboring Be, to make themselves
fat like idle Drones, was this well done? Surely no, It was very ill. Again,
It is said, That some would have an Aristocraticall government in this Island,
that has been so many years a free Monarchy, thereby to make the Prince a
Subject to his Nobles, and the Commons slaves to many imperious Lords, will
this bewell? Surely no, but very ill; for I had rather be subject to one Royal
King, and his officers, then be under so many distinct Lords, and their
favorites, as I here it is beyond the Sea, where they are enforced to pay for
their own meat and drink, and be exacted of all their labor, which would be
as grievous to an ingenuous spirit, as the Egyptian bondage.

Again, there is of late sprung up a strange kind of Pharisaicall Teachers,
who though in words they despise the kingdom of Antichrist, yet their deeds
establish it. And because they would make people believe that all they utter is
by the Spirit, they scorn the words of Christ, and at the close of their
Sermons give God thanks that they have forgotten the Lords Prayer, and because
they would seem to excel the Law and the Prophets, they expunge the fifth
Commandment out of the Decalogue, and that you may see they have a Revelation
above the Apostles, they cancel the 5. Article in their Creed. And thus they
preach, choosing a Text, from whence they draw an observation as far from it as
the East is from West. Another he railes nonsense against the Book of
Common Prayer for its well composed repetitions, and never considers his own
vain babbling, another is angry, that Cheapside Cross has more gold than he
has in his purse: another like Diogenes in a Tub, b^bbles he knows not what,
and because the Church has been used by Papists, he is afraid to come into it:
etc. Are these things well done? surely no. Wherein we show our folly, and
contemning light, we walk in darkness, so that we know not whether we go nor
what to do, for these differences raised the bloody rebellion in Ireland, and
does now threaten destruction to this Kingdom. But God is the same God still,
he can and will when he sees best, bring out of all these evils much good in
a well composed Monarchical government. By this all men may learn wisdom,
and grave Senators understanding: and out of all this darkness of error and
blindness, we may walk in the clear light, and so shine Brighter and
brighter, till it be perfect day, that so the Lord may continue to be unto us a
good and a gracious God, and we may continue to be unto him a chosen
generation, a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar people, even his own
pleasant plant. Thirdly and lastly, That good does daily spring out of evil, I
would prove by many Presidents, but I will only instance in my self: For I
have lately made two Books, the one entitled Annual world, and sacred Poems,
the other A rare pattern of justice and mercy, with a Meteor and a Star, which
I thought was a good work, and is so approved in it self by many judicious and
learned men, but my ends was bad, for I did them for by respects, and not
chiefly for the glory of God: which I will illustrate in this fable following.
It is by Poets reported, that Phaeton, the too adventrous son of Sob, and
Clymene, having with much entreaty obtained of his Father Phoebus, the guiding
of his Chariot for one day, and being utterly unable to perform such an
enterprise, let the horses raines slip, and had thereby almost set the whole
world on fire, scorching Aethiopia, and many other places, till at length
Jupiter perceiving his boldness, and fearing to be burnt himself, struck him
with a Thunderbolt, and he fell into the River Eridanus, now called Po, or
Padus; which fable, as it does lively represent the picture of inconsiderate,
and ambitious men in general, so in particular it is verified in me, for
notwithstanding the grave advice of my late judicious, loving Master, Sir James
Cambell, and other my friends, who wish^ me to surcease my fruitless labor in
making Books, especially now in this paper-age, wherein many strive to vent
the froth of their inventions into the Press, so that lying and scandalous
Pamphlets fly about the City in every corner, and prove vendible ware, whereas
solid and learned men's works are nothing regarded: And for me to trouble my
self in making Books, who never came within the view of double topt
Parnassus, I mean the two Universities of this Island, and never proceeded
beyond the Rudiments of learning, I mean the Grammar, it could not choose but
prove a fruitless labor: Yet having for some small time conversed with
Star-crowned Urania, that soul-ravishing, and heavenly Muse, I could not rest
satisfied with a little taste of her divine Nactor, till I had so intoxicated
my senses, that in a frantique humor, I have set the frame of heaven in a
combustion, for I have stated the Sun, Moon, and Stars upon such improper
objects, as may cause amazement to the beholders. Therefore it is no wonder, if
with the said Phaeton, or rather with foolish Icarus, if I with the wings of a
vain hope, and as you may think an unadvised pride, striving to ascend into a
Bright firmament of favor, am cast down into an ocean of contempt and
disdain. Herein was my folly, and thus to obtain Bright, I have walked in
darkness. But yet to vindicate my reputation in this particular, these Books
may not unfitly be compared to those holy waters Ezekiel saw flow out of the
Sanctuary, which from a shallow Forde, no deeper then his ancles, became a
River impassable, and I my self may not unfitly be compared to kind hearted
Leander, a young man in Abidos, who for the love of Ero, a beautiful Damsel
of Sestos, did oftentimes in the night swim over the narrow Sea of Hellespont,
it being between those two Towns, to obtain the society of his Love; But at
length one night the Sea being rough, he was drowned: so I in like manner have
oftentimes waded over these waters, but at the first I only drencht my foot, as
is to be seen in Libro Amoris, and by many cheerful perambulatious, and
loving welcomes, I had free and easy access to my love, at the next time
those Poetical waters flowed up to my ancles, as appears in sacred Poems,
and with much alacrity I often visited her, but then these divine waters began to
flow up to my chin, as is to be seen in my Annual world, so that I drowned all
worldly things in a spiritual sense. Yet these I passed over likewise, and had
many times the society of my Love. But at the last these waters began to be
rough, and the winds blew, and a great tempest arose, as is to be seen in my
Meteor, so that I was in danger to be drowned, yet these I passed over
likewise, and had hopes of my love. But my Pattern of Justice and Mercy has
captivated my senses, so that in these waters I am like to be drowned, and have
lost her who was never found by me in the way I sought her. Yet in maintenance
of these my labors of love, I will hazard my life and fortunes, for first in
my Annual world, I have not ascribed any inherent holiness in one day above
another, but made a reverend Memorandum, and divine meditation on every day
through the year, which I think is lawful, and am sure it is the duty of
every Christian so to do, and though I do borrow a better form of prayer
then I am able of my self to compose according to my matter, though it be out
of our Church Liturgy, which some call the English Massebooke, I esteem of my
Book never the worse, for I had rather speak 4. or 5. words with
understanding, then a great deal of nonsense to no purpose. In my sacred
Poems I have used the assistance of learned Du Bartas, and other Poets elegant
expressions on the day in general, and all the days in the week, for which
I, and so I hope all understanding people will love my Apothecaries Shop the
better for such variety of expressions, though some say this dead fly has
made all my Books of ointment unsavory. Thirdly, for my Pattern of justice
and mercy, and my Star, there is few finds fault with, but in my Meteor they
think to have a great advantage against me, beeause I compared my late
honored Master to Laban and Nabal, who in bad qualities is as far unlike them,
as an Apple is like an Oyster, but for riches and honor, so it is true, I did
compare him like them, and my unworthy self like Jacob and David, for penury
and poverty, and my love to Rachel in her Christian name, but otherwise as
unlike them, as Chalk is like Cheese: If it can be proved that Rachel is as
fair and amiable as her namesake, if I am as industrious as Jacob, or as holy
as David, which is very well known to the contrary, then I will affirm my
Master to be as covetous as Laban, and as churlish as Nabal. Besides, I think
it no more presumption in me to use these comparisons, nor dishonor to my
Master, or Rachel, to be so compared, then it was for Moses to compare himself
like unto Christ, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. for it is well known that Moses was borne in
sin, and committed many actual crimes, but Christ was free from ^^ther,
Original, he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, or actual, there was no guile
found in his mouth: but yet Moses, as he was a Man, a Prophet, and deliverer ^f
the Israelites out of Egyptian bondage, so he was like Christ: a true man, of
the flesh of his Virgin mother, The Prophet of the highest, and deliverer of
Mankind out of Satan's slavery. Therefore now let the most Critical Parasite
join himself with the most holy that may be found, and show me in particular,
by writing under their hands, and not in reviling terms, with a big look, and
loud voice, (for I cannot endure scolding) wherein is my light with darkness,
or my holy and vain unprofitable things mixed, which are altogether
inconsistent and wherein I have dishonored my Master in my Books, and if I
do not satisfy them in the view of all the world, I will endure the greatest
punishment they can inflict upon me, but if they fail to do this, be they who
they will that abused me, to my late Master living, and do now endeavor to
oversway my judicious loving friends good opinion of me, and of my honest
endeavors, I do here pronounce in the sight of God, and before all the world,
that they are a company of malicious detractors, wolves in sheeps clothing,
flattering Sycophants, etc. But I am not alone thus wronged, for these kind of
people have abused Authority. Therefore I will commend them to study how they
may vindicate their reputations, and give thanks to God, that out of my folly
he has taught me to be so wise as to make no more Books, and that out of the
most darkest sentence therein I can find a great deal of light to comfort and
cheer my soul after all her vexations, in all places, and at all times, from
this time forth for ever more, Amen.

Soli Deo honor and gloria.
Printed in that same Climacterian year,
When Gods wondrous works in this Land did appear:
In abasing the proud, exalting the low,
As Christ and the Prophets foretold long ago.



