HYDRIOTAPHIA, VRNE-BVRIALL, OR, A Discourse of the Sepulchrall Urnes lately
found in NORFOLK.

Together with The Garden of CYRUS, OR THE Quincunciall, Lozenge, or Network
Hantations of the Ancients, Artificially, Naturally, Mystically Considered.
With Sundry Observations.

By Thomas Brown D. of Physic.

LONDON, Printed for Hen. Brom at the Sign of the Gun in Ivy-lane. 1658.

TO MY Worthy and Honored Friend THOMAS Le GROS of Crostwick Esquire.
WHen the Funeral pyre was out, and the last valediction over, men took a
lasting adieu of their interred Friends, little expecting the curiofity of
future ages should comment upon their ashes, and having no old experience of
the duration of their Relics, held no opinion of such after-considerations.

But who knows the fate of his bones, or how often he is to be buried? who has
the Oracle of his ashes, or whether they are to be scattered? The Relics of
many lie like the ruins of Pomp^^os juvenes Asia, atque Europa, sed ipsum
terra tegit Lyb^^
Pompeys, in all parts of the earth; And when they arrive at your hands, these
may seem to have wandered far, whoin a direct Little directly, but Sea between
your house ad Greenland.
and Meridian Travel, have but few miles of known Earth between your self and
the Pole.

That the bones of Theseus should be seen again Brought back by Cimon. Plutarch.
in Athens, was not beyond conjecture, and hopeful expectation; but that these
should arise so opportunely to serve your self, was an hit of fate and honor
beyond prediction.

We cannot but wish these Urnes might have the effect of Theatrical vessels,
and great The great Urnes in the Hippodrome at Rome conceived to resound the
voices of people at their shows
Hippodrome Urnes in Rome; to resound the acclamations and honor due unto you.
But these are sad and sepulchral^ Pitchers, which have no joyful voices;
silently expressing old mortality, the ruins of forgotten times, and can only
speak with life, how long in this corruptible frame, some parts may be
uncorrupted; yet able to out-last bones long unborn, and noblest pyle Worthily
possessed by that true Gellrleman Sir Horatio Townshend my honored Friend.
among us.

We present not these as any strange sight or spectacle unknown to your eyes
who have beheld the best of Urnes, and noblest variety of Ashes; Who are your
self no slender master of Antiquities, and can daily command the view of so
many Imperial faces; Which raises your thoughts unto old things, and
consideration of times before you, when even living men were Antiquities; when
the living might exeeed the dead, and to depart this world, could not be
properly said, to go unto the Abiit ad plures.
greater number. And so run up your thoughts upon the ancient of days, the
Antiquaries truest object, unto whom the eldest parcels are young, and earth it
self an Infant; and without Which makes the world so many years old.
Egyptian account makes but small noise in thousands.

We were hinted by the occasion, not catched the opportunity to write of old
things, or intrude upon the Antiquary. We are coldly drawn unto discourses of
Antiquities, who have scarce time before us to comprehend new things, or make
out learned Novelties. But seeing they arose as they lay, almost in silence
among us, at least in short account suddenly passed over; we were very
unwilling they should die again, and be buried twice among us.

Beside, to preserve the living, and make the dead to live, to keep men out of
their Urnes, and discourse of humane fragments in them, is not impertinent unto
our profession; whose study is life and death, who daily behold examples of
mortality, and of all men least need artificial memento's, or coffins by our
bed side, to mind us of our graves.

It Is time to observe Occurrences, and let nothing remarkable escape us; The
Supinity of elder days has left so much in silence, or time has so martyred
the Records, that the most Wherein M. Dugdale has excellently well
endeavored, and worthy to be countenanced by ingenuous and noble persons.
industrious heads do find no easy work to erect a new Britannia.

It Is opportune to look back upon old times, and contemplate our Forefathers.
Great examples grow thin, and to be fetched from the passed world. Simplicity
flies away, and iniquity comes at long strides upon us. We have enough to do to
make up our selves from present and passed times, and the whole stage of things
scarce serves for our instruction. A complete piece of virtue must be made up
from the Centos of all ages, as as all the beauties of Greece could make but
one handsome Venus.

When the bones of King Arthur were dug up In the time of Henry the second,
Cambden.
, the old Race might think, they beheld therein some Originals of themselves;
Unto these of our Urnes none here can pretend relation, and can only behold the
Relics of those persons, who in their life giving the Laws unto their
predecessors, after long obscurity, now lie at their mercies. But remembering
the early civility they brought upon these Countries, and forgetting long
passed mischiefs; We mercifully preserve their bones, and piss not upon their
ashes.

In the offer of these Antiquities we drive not at ancient Families, so long
out-lasted by them; We are far from erecting your worth upon the pillars of
your Forefathers, whose merits you illustrate. We honor your old Virtues,
conformable unto times before you, which are the Noblest Armoury. And having
long experience of your friendly conversation, void of empty Formality, full of
freedom, constant and Generous Honesty. I look upon you as a Gemme of the
Adamas de rupe veteri praestantissim^s.
Old Rock, and must profess my self even to Urne and Ashes,

Your ever faithful Friend, Thomas Brown.
Norwich May 1,
TO MY Worthy and Honored Friend NICHOLAS BACON of Gillingham Esquire.
HAd I not observed that Plempius, Cabeus, etc.
Purblinde men have discoursed well of sight, and some D. Harvy.
without issue, excellently of Generation; I that was never master of any
considerable garden, had not attempted this Subject. But the Earth is the
Garden of Nature, and each fruitful Country a Paradise. Dioscorides made most
of his Observations in his march about with Antonius; and Theophrastus raised
his generalities chiefly from the field.

Beside we write no Herball, nor can this Volume deceive you, who have handled
the Besleri Hortus Eystetensis.
massiest thereof: who know that three Bauhini Theatrum Bo^anicum, etc.
Folio's are yet too little, and how New Herbals fly from America upon us, from
persevering Enquirers, and My worthy friend M. Goodier an ancient and learned
Botanist.
old in those singularities, we expect such Descriptions. wherein As in London
and diverse parts, whereof we mention none, lest we seem to omit any.
England is now so exact, that it yields not to other Countries.

We pretend not to multiply vegetable divisions by Quincuncial and Reticulate
plants; or erect a new Phytology. The Field of knowledge has been so traced,
it is hard to spring any thing new. Of old things we write something new, If
truth may receive addition, or envy will have any thing new; since the Ancients
knew the late Anatomicall discoveries, and Hippocrates the Circulation.

You have been so long out of trite learning, that it is hard to find a subject
proper for you; and if you have met with a Sheet upon this, we have missed our
intention. In this multiplicity of writing, bye and barren Themes are best
fitted for invention; Subjects so often discoursed confine the Imagination, and
fix our conceptions unto the notions of fore-writers. Beside, such Discourses
allow excursions, and venially admit of collateral truths, though at some
distance from their principals. Wherein if we sometimes take wide liberty, we
are not single, but err by great Hippocrates de superfoetatione, de dentitione.
example.

He that will illustrate the excellency of this order, may easily fail upon so
spruce a Subject, wherein we have not affrighted the common Reader with any
other Diagramms, then of it self; and have industriously declined illustrations
from rare and unknown plants.

Your discerning judgment so well acquainted with that study, will expect
herein no mathematical truths, as well understanding how few generalities and
Rules without exceptions.
V finita's there are in nature. How Scaliger has found exceptions in most
Vniversals of Aristotle and Theophrastus. How Botanicall Maxims must have fair
allowance, and are tolerably current, if not intolerably over-ballanced by
exceptions.

You have wisely ordered your vegetable delights, beyond the reach of
exception. The Turks who passt their days in Gardens here, will have Gardens
also hereafter, and delighting in Flowers on earth, must have Lillies and Roses
in Heaven. In Garden Delights it is not easy to hold a Mediocrity; that
insinuating pleasure is seldom without some extremity. The Ancients venially
delighted in flourishing Gardens; Many were Florists that knew not the true use
of a Flower; And in Plinies days none had directly treated of that Subject.
Some commendably affected Plantations of venomous Vegetables, some confined
their delights unto single plants, and Cato seemed to dote upon Cabbadge; While
the Ingenuous delight of Tulipists, stands saluted with hard language, even by
their own Tulipo mania, Narrencru^id, La^renberg. Pet. Hondius. in lib. Belg.
Professors.

That in this Garden Discourse, we range into extraneous things, and many parts
of Art and Nature, we follow herein the example of old and new Plantations,
wherein noble spirits contented not themselves with Trees, but by the
attendance of Aviaries, Fish Ponds, and all variety of Animals, they made their
gardens the Epitome of the earth, and some resemblance of the secular shows of
old.

That we conjoyn these parts of different Subjects, or that this should succeed
the other; Your judgment will admit without impute of incongruity; Since the
delightful World comes after death, and Paradise succeeds the Grave. Since the
verdant state of things is the Symbol of the Resurrection, and to flourish in
the state of Glory, we must first be sown in corruption. Beside the ancient
practice of Noble Persons, to conclude in Garden-Graves, and Vrnes themselves
of old, to be wrapped up flowers and garlands.

Nullum sine venia placuisse eloquium, is more sensibly understood by Writers,
then by Readers; nor well apprehended by either, till works have hanged out
like Apelles his Pictures; wherein even common eyes will find something for
emendation.

To wish all Readers of your abilities, were unreasonably to multiply the
number of Scholars beyond the temper of these times. But unto this ill-judging
age, we charitably desire a portion of your equity, judgment, candor, and
ingenuity; wherein you are so rich, as not to lose by diffusion. And being a
flourishing branch of that Of the most worthy St Edmund Bacon prime Baronet, my
true and noble Friend.
Noble Family, unto which we owe so much observance, you are not new set, but
long rooted in such perfection; whereof having had so lasting confirmation in
your worthy conversation, constant amity, and expression; and knowing you a
serious Student in the highest arcana's of Nature; with much excuse we bring
these low delights, and poor maniples to your Treasure.

Norwich May 1. Your affectionate Friend and Servant, Thomas Brown.

En Sum quod digitis Quinque Levatur onus Propert:


HYDRIOTAPHIA Vrne-Buriall. OR, A Brief Discourse of the Sepulchrall Urnes
lately foundin NORFOLK.
CHAPTER I.
IN the deep discovery of the Subterranean world, a shallow part would satisfy
some enquirers; who, if two or three yards were open about the surface, would
not care to rake the bowels of Potosi The rich Mountain of Per^.
, and regions toward the Center. Nature has furnished one part of the Earth,
and man another. The treasures of time lie high, in Urnes, Coins, and
Monuments, scarce below the roots of some vegetables. Time has endless
rarities, and shows of all varieties; which reveals old things in heaven, makes
new discoveries in earth, and even earth it self a discovery. That great
Antiquity America lay buried for a thousand years; and a large part of the
earth is still in the Urne unto us.

Though if Adam were made out of an extract of the Earth, all parts might
challenge a restitution, yet few have returned their bones far lower then
they might receive them; not affecting the graves of Giants, under hilly and
heavy coverings, but content with less then their own depth, have wished
their bones might lie soft, and the earth be light upon them; Even such as hope
to rise again, would not be contenr with centrall interrment, or so desperately
to place their relics as to lie beyond discovery, and in no way to be seen
again; which happy contrivance has made communication with our forefathers,
and left unto our view some parts, which they never beheld themselves.

Though earth has engrossed the name yet water has proved the smartest grave;
which in forty days swallowed almost mankind, and the living creation; Fishes
not wholly escaping, except the Salt Ocean were handsomely contempered by a
mixture of the fresh Element.

Many have taken voluminous pains to determine the state of the soul upon
disunion; but men have been most fantastical in the singular contrivancss of
their corporal dissolution: whilst the sobrest Nations have rested in two
ways, of simple inhumation and burning.

That carnal interment or burying, was of the elder date, the old examples of
Abraham and the Patriarchs are sufficient to illustrate; And were without
competition, if it could be made out, that Adam was buried near Damascus, or
Mount Calvary, according to some Tradition. God himfelf, that buried but one,
was pleased to make choice of this way, collectible from Scripture-expression,
and the hot contest between Satan and the Archangel, about discovering the
body of Moses. But the practice of Burning was also of great Antiquity, and of
no slender extent. For (not to derive the same from Hercules) noble
descriptions there are hereof in the Grecian Funerals of Homer, In the formal
Obsequies of Patroclus, and Achilles; and somewhat elder in the Theban war,
and solemn combustion of Meneceus, and Archemorus, contemporary unto Jair and
Eighth Judge of Israel. Consirmable also among the Trojans, from the Funeral
Pyre of Hector, burnt before the gates of Troy, And the Q. Calaber. lib. 1.
burning of Penthisilea the Amazonean Queen: and long continuance of that
practice, in the inward Countries of Asia; while as low as the Reign of Julian,
we find that the King of Chionia Ammianus, Marellinus, Gumbrates King of
Chionia a Country near Persia.
burnt the body of his Son, and interred the ashes in a silver Urne.

The same practice extended also far West Arnoldis Montanis not in Caes.
Commetar. L. L. Gvraldus. Kirkmannus.
, and besides Herulians, Getes, and Thracians, was in use with most of the
Celtae, Sarmatians, Germans, Gauls, Danes, Swedes, Norwegians; not to omit some
use thereof among Carthaginians and Americans: Of greater Antiquity among the
Romans then most opinion, or Pliny seems to allow. For (beside the old Table
Laws of burning 12. Tabul. part. 1. de jure s^cro. Hominem mortuum in urbe ne
sepelito, neve urito. tom 2. Rogum ascia ne polito. to. 4. Item vigeneri
Annotat. in Livium. and Alex. ab Alex. cum Tiraquello. Roscinus cum dempstero.
or burying within the City, of making the Funeral fire with plained wood, or
quenching the fire with wine.) Manlius the Consul burnt the body of his Son:
Numa by special clause of his Will, was not burnt but buried; And R^mus was
solemnly buried, according to the desoription of Ovid Ultima prolato subdita
flamma ^ogo. De Fast. lib. 4. cum Car. Neapol. anaptyxi.
.

Cornelius Sylla was not the first whose body was burned in Rome, but of the
Cornelian Family, which being indifferently, not frequently used before; from
that time spread, and became the prevalent practice. Not totally pursued in the
highest run of Cremation; For when even Crows were funerally burnt, Poppaea
the Wife of Nero found a peculiar grave enterment. Now as all customs were
founded upon some bottom of Reason, so there wanted not grounds for this;
according to feverall apprehensions of the most rational dissolution. Some
being of the opinion of Thales, that water was the original of all things,
thought it most equal to submit unto the principle of putrefaction, and
conclude in a moist relentment. Others conceived it most natural to end in
fire, as due unto the master principle in the composition, according to the
doctrine of Heraclitus. And therefore heaped up large piles, more actively to
waft them toward that Element, whereby they also declined a visible
degeneration into worms, and left a lasting parcel of their composition.

Some apprehended a purifying virtue in fire, refining the grosser commixture,
and firing out the Aethereall particles so deeply immersed in it. And such as
by tradition or rational conjecture held any hint of the final pyre of all
things; or that this Element at last must be too hard for all the rest; might
conceive most nanaturally of the fiery dissolution. Others pretending no
natural grounds, politickly declined the malice of enemies upon their buried
bodies. Which consideration led Sylla unto this practice; who having thus
served the body of Marius, could not but fear a retaliation upon his own;
entertained after in the Civil wars, and revengeful contentions of Rome.

But as many Nations embraced, and many left it indifferent, so others too much
affected, or strictly declined this practice. The Indian Brachmans seemed too
great friends unto fire, who burnt themselves alive, and thought it the noblest
way to end their days in fire; according to the expression of the Indian,
burning himself at Athens And therefore the Inscription of his Tomb was made
accordingly. Nic. Damasc.
, in his last words upon the pyre unto the amazed spectators, Thus I make my
self Immortal.

But the Chaldeans the great Idolaters of fire, abhorred the burning of their
carcasses, as a pollution of that Deity. The Persian Magi declined it upon the
like scruple, and being only sollicitous about their bones, exposed their flesh
to the prey of Birds and Dogs. And the Persees now in India, which expose
their bodies unto Vultures, and endure not so much as feretra or Beers of Wood,
the proper Fuel of fire, are led on with such niceties. But whether the
ancient Germans who burned their dead, held any such fear to pollute their
Deity of Herthus, or the earth, we have no Authentic conjecture.

The Egyptians were afraid of fire, not as a Deity, but a devouring Element,
mercilesly consuming their bodies, and leaving too little of them; and
therefore by precious Embalments, depositure in dry earths, or handsome
enclosure in glasses, contrived the notablest ways of integrall conservation.
And from such Egyptian scruples imbibed by Pythagoras, it may be conjectured
that Numa and the Pythagoricall Sect first waved the fiery solution.

The Scythians who swore by wind and sword, that is, by life and death, were
so far from burning their bodies, that they declined all interrment, and made
their graves in the air: And the Ichthyophagi or fish-eating Nations about
Egypt, affected the Sea for their grave: Thereby declining visible corruption,
and restoring the debt of their bodies. Whereas the old Heroes in Homer,
dreaded nothing more than water or drowning; probably upon the old opinion of
the fiery substance of the soul, only extinguishable by that Element; And
therefore the Poet emphatically implies the total destruction in this kind
of death, which happened to Ajax Oileus Which Magius reads (...).
.

The old Diodorus Siculus.
Balearians had a peculiar mode, for they used great Urnes and much wood, but
no fire in their burials, while they bruised the flesh and bones of the dead,
crowded them into Urnes, and laid heaps of wood upon them. And the Ramusius in
Navigat.
Chinois without cremation or urnall interrment of their bodies, make use of
trees and much burning, while they plant a Pine Tree by their grave, and burn
great numbers of printed draughts of slaves and horses over it, civilly content
with their companies in effigy, which barbarous Nations exact unto reality.

Christians abhorred this way of obsequies, and though they stickt not to give
their bodies to be burnt in their lives, detested that mode after death;
affecting rather a depositure than absumption, and properly submitting unto the
sentence of God, to return not unto ashes but unto dust again, conformable
unto the practice of the Patriarchs, the interrment of our Savior, of Peter,
Paul, and the ancient Martyrs. And so far at last declining promiscuous
enterrment with Pagans, that some have sussered Ecclesiastical censures, for
making no scruple Martialis the Bishop. Cyprian.
thereof.

The Musselman believers will never admit this fiery resolution. For they hold
a present trial from their black and white Angels in the grave; which they must
have made so hollow, that they may rise upon their knees.

The Jewish Nation, though they entertained the old way of inhumation, yet
sometimes admitted this practice. For the men of Jabesh burnt the body of Saul.
And by no prohibited practice to avoid contagion or pollution, in time of
pestilence, burnt the bodies of their friends Amos 6. 10.
. And when they burnt not their dead bodies, yet sometimes used great burnings
near and about them, deducible from the expressions concerning Jehoram,
Sedechias, and the sumptuous pyre of Asa: And were so little averse from
Sueton. in vita. Jul. Caes.
Pagan burning, that the Jews lamenting the death of Caesar their friend, and
revenger on Pompey, frequented the place where his body was burnt for many
nights together. And as they raised noble Monuments and Mausolaeums for their
own Nation As that magnificent sepulchral Monument erected by Simon. Match. 1.
13.
, so they were not scrupulous in erecting some for others, according to the
practice of Daniel, who left that lasting sepulchrall pyle in Echbatana, for
the Medean and Persian Kings (...), whereof a Jewish Priest had always the
custody unto Josephus his days. Jos. Lib. 10. Antiq.
.

But even in times of subjection and hottest use, they conformed not unto the
Roman practice of burning; whereby the Prophecy was secured concerning the
body of Christ, that it should not see corruption, or a bone should not be
broken; which we believe was also providentially prevented, from the Soldiers
spear and nails that past by the little bones both in his hands and feet: Not
of ordinary contrivance, that it should not corrupt on the Cross, according to
the Laws of Roman Crucifixion, or an hair of his head perish, though
observable in Jewish customs, to cut the hairs of Malefactors.

Nor in their long co-habitation with Egyptians, crept into a custom of their
exact embalming, wherein deeply slashing the muscles, and taking out the brains
and entrails, they had broken the subject of so entire a Resurrection, nor
fully answered the types of Enoch, Eliah, or Jonah, which yet to prevent or
restore, was of equal facility unto that rising power, able to break the
fasciations and bands of death, to get clear out of the Cere-cloth, and an
hundred pounds of ointment, and out of the Sepulcher before the stone was
rolled from it.

But though they embraced not this practice of burning, yet entertained they
many ceremonies agreeable unto Greek and Roman obsequies. And he that
observes their funeral Feasts, their Lamentations at the grave, their music,
and weeping mourners; how they closed the eyes of their friends, how they
washed, anointed, and kissed the dead; may easily conclude these were not mere
Pagan-Civilities. But whether that mournful burden, and treble calling out
after Absalom, had any reference unto the last conclamation, and triple
valediction, used by other Nations, we hold but a wavering conjecture.

Civilians make sepulture but of the Law of Nations, others do naturally found
it and discover it also in animals. They that are so thick skinned as still to
credit the story of the Phoenix, may say something for animal burning: More
serious conjectures find some examples of sepulture in Elephants, Cranes, the
Sepulchrall Cells of Pismires and practice of Bees; which civil society
carries out their dead, and has exequies, if not interrments.

CHAP. II.
THE Solemnities, Ceremonies, Rites of their Cremation or enterrment, so
solemnly delivered by Authors, we shall not disparage our Reader to repeat.
Only the last and lasting part in their Urns, collected bones and Ashes, we
cannot wholly omit, or decline that Subject, which occasion lately presented,
in some discovered among us.

In a Field of old Walsingham, not many months past, were dug up between
forty and fifty Vrnes, deposited in a dry and sandy soil, not a yard deep,
nor far from one another: Not all strictly of one figure, but most answering
these described: Some containing two pounds of bones, distinguishable in
skulls, ribs, jaws, thigh-bones, and teeth, with fresh impressions of their
combustion. Besides the extraneous substances, like pieces of small boxes, or
combs handsomely wrought, handles of small brass instruments, brazen nippers,
and in one some kind of Opale In one sent me by my worthy friend Dr Thomas
Witherley of Walsingham.
.

Near the same plot of ground, for about six yards compass were dug up
coals and incinerated substances, which begat conjecture that this was the
Vstrina or place of burning their bodies, or some sacrificing place unto the
Manes, which was properly below the surface of the ground, as the Arae and
Altars unto the gods and Heroes above it.

That these were the Vrnes of Romans from the common custom and place where
they were found, is no obscure conjecture, not far from a Roman Garrison,
and but five Miles from Brancaster, set down by ancient Record under the name
of Brannodunum* And where the adjoining Town, containing seven Parishes, in no
very different sound, but Saxon Termination, still retains the Name of Burnham,
which being an early station, it is not improbable the neighbor parts were
filled with habitations, either of Romans themselves, or Britains Romanised,
which observed the Roman customs.

Nor is it improbable that the Romans early possessed this Country; for
though we meet not with such strict particulars of these parts, before the new
Institution of Constantine, and military charge of the Count of the Saxon
shore, and that about the Saxon Invasions, the Dalmatian Horsemen were in the
Garrison of Brancaster: Yet in the time of Claudius, Vespasian, and Severus, we
find no less then three Legions dispersed through the Province of Britain.
And as high as the Reign of Claudius a great overthrow was given unto the
Iceni, by the Roman Lieutenant Ostorius. Not long after the Country was so
molested, that in hope of a better state, Prastaagus bequeathed his Kingdom
unto Nero and his Daughters; and Boadicea his Queen fought the last decisive
Battle with Paulinus. After which time and Conquest of Agricola the Lieutenant
of Vespasian, probable it is they wholly possessed this Country, ordering it
into Garrisons or Habitations, best suitable with their securities. And so some
Roman Habitations, not improbable in these parts, as high as the time of
Vespasian, where the Saxons after seated, in whose thin-fill'd Mappes we yet
find the Name of Walsingham. Now if the Iceni were but Gammadims, Anconians,
or men that lived in an Angle wedge or Elbow of Britain, according to the
Original Etymology, this country will challenge the Emphaticall appellation,
as most properly making the Elbow or Iken of Icenia.

That Britain was notably populous is undeniable, from that expression of
Caesar Hominum ivfinita multitudo est, creber' imaque aedisicia fere Gallicis
consimilia. Caes. de bello Gal. l. 5.
. That the Romans themselves were early in no small Numbers, Seventy Thousand
with their associats slain by Boadicea, affords a sure account. And though many
Roman habitations are now known, yet some by old works, Rampires, Coins, and
Urnes do testify their Possessions. Some Urnes have been found at Castor,
some also about Southcreake, and not many years past, no less then ten in a
Field at Buxton In the ground of my worthy Friend Rob Jegon Esquire. wherein some
things contained were preserved by the most worthy Sir William Past^n Bt.
, not near any recorded Garrison. Nor is it strange to find Roman Coins of
Copper and Silver among us; of Vespasian, Trajan, Adrian, Commodus, Antoninus,
Severus, etc. But the greater number of Dioclesian, Constantine, Constans,
Valens, with many of Victorinus Posthumous, Tetricus, and the thirty Tyrants in
the Reign of Gallinus; and some as high as Adrianus have been found about
Thetford, or Sitomagus, mentioned in the itinerary of Antoninus, as the way
from Venta or Castor unto London From Castor to Thetford the Romans accounted
thirty two miles, and from thence observed not our common road to London, but
passed by Combretonium ad Ansam, Canonium, Caesaromagus, etc. by Bretenham,
Coggesh all, Chelmesord, Burntwood, etc.
. But the most frequent discovery is made at the two Casters by Norwich and
Yarmouth Most at Caster by Yarmouth, found in a place called East-bloudy-burgh
furlong, belonging to Mr Thomas Wood, a person of civility, industry and
knowledge in this way, who has made observation of remarkable things about
him, and from whom we have received diverse Silver and Copper Coins.
, at Burghcastle and Brancaster Belonging to that Noble Gentleman, and true
example of worth Sir Ralph Hare Baronet, my honored Friend.
.

Besides, the Norman, Saxon and Danish pieces of Cuthred, Canutus, William
Matilda A piece of Maud the Empress said to be found in Buckenham Castle with
this Inscription, Elle n'a elle.
, and others, some British Coins of gold have been dispersedly found; And no
small number of silver pieces near At Thorpe.
Norwich; with a rude head upon the obverse, and an ill formed horse on the
reverse, with Inscriptions Ic. Duro. T. whether implying Iceni, Durotriges,
Tascia, or Trinobantes, we leave to higher conjecture. Vulgar Chronology will
have Norwich Castle as old as Julius Caesar; but his distance from these parts,
and its Gothic form of structure, abridgeth such Antiquity. The British Coyns
afford conjecture of early habitation in these parts, though the City of
Norwich arose from the ruins of Venta, and though perhaps not without some
habitation before, was enlarged, builded, and nominated by the Saxons. In what
bulk or populosity it stood in the old East-angle Monarchy, tradition and
history are silent. Considerable it was in the Danish Eruptions, when Sueno
burnt Thetford and Norwich Brampron Abbas Journallensis,
, and Vlfketel the Governor thereof, was able to make some resistance, and
after endeavored to burn the Danish Navy.

How the Romans left so many Coins in Countries of their Conquests, seems of
hard resolution, except we consider how they buried them under ground, when
upon barbarous invasions they were fain to desert their habitations in most
part of their Empire, and the strictness of their laws forbidding to transfer
them to any other uses; Wherein the Plut. in vita Lycur^.
Spartans were singular, who to make their Copper money useless, contempered
it with vinegar. That the Britains left any, some wonder; since their money
was iron, and Iron rings before Caesar; and those of after stamp by permission,
and but small in bulk and bigness; that so few of the Saxons remain, because
overcome by succeeding Conquerours upon the place, their Coins by degrees
passed into other stamps, and the marks of after ages.

Then the time of these Urnes deposited, or precise Antiquity of these
Relics, nothing of more uncertainty. For since the Lieutenant of Claudius
seems to have made the first progress into these parts, since Boadicea was
overthrown by the Forces of Nero, and Agricola put a full end to these
Conquests; it is not probable the Country was fully garrisoned or planted
before; and therefore however these Urnes might be of later date, not likely of
higher Antiquity.

And the succeeding Emperors desisted not from their Conquests in these and
other parts* as testified by history and medall inscription yet extant. The
Province of Britain in so divided a distance from Rome, beholding the faces of
many Imperial persons, and in large account no fewer then Caesar, Claudius,
Britanni^us, Vespasian, Titus, Adrian, Severus, Commodus, Geta, and Caracalla.

A great obscurity herein, because no medall or Emperors Coin enclosed, which
might denote the date of their enterrments. observable in many Urnes, and found
in those of Spittle Fields by Stowes Survey of London.
London, which contained the Coins of Claudius, Vespasian, Commodus,
Antoninus, attended with Lacrymatories, Lamps, Bottles of Liquor, and other
appurtenances of affectionate superstition, which in these rural interrements
were wanting.

Some uncertainty there is from the period or term of burning, or the cestation
of that practice. Macrobius affirms it was disused in his days. But most
agree, though without authentic record, that it ceased with the Antonini. Most
safely to be understood after the Reign of those Emperors, which assumed the
name of Antoninus, extending unto Heliogabalus. Not strictly after Marcus; For
about fifty years later we find the magnificent burning, and consecration of
Severus; and if we so fix this period or cessation, these Urnes will challenge
above thirteen hundred years.

But whether this practice was only then left by Emperors and great persons,
or generally about Rome, and not in other Provinces, we hold no authentic
account. For after Tertullian, in the days of Minucius it was obviously
objected upon Christians, that they condemned the practice of burning
Execrantur rogos, and damnant ignium sepulturam. Min. in Oct.
. And we find a passage in Sidonius Sidon. Apollinaris.
, which asserteth that practice in France unto a lower account. And perhaps not
fully disused till Christianity fully established, which gave the final
extinction to these sepulchrall Bonefires.

Whether they were the bones of men or women or children, no authentic
decision from ancient custom in distinct places of burial. Although not
improbably conjectured, that the double Sepulture or burying place of Abraham,
had in it such intension. But from exility of bones, thinness of skulls,
smallness of teeth, ribs, and thigh-bones; not improbable that many thereof
were persons of minor age, or women. Confirmable also from things contained in
them: In most were found substances resembling Combs, Plates like Boxes,
fastened with Iron pins, and handsomely overwrought like the necks or Bridges
of Musical Instruments, long brass plates overwrought like the handles of
neat implements, brazen nippers to pull away hair, and in one a kind of Opale
yet maintaining a bluish color.

Now that they accustomed to burn or bury with them, things wherein they
excelled, delighted, or which were dear unto them, either as farewells unto all
pleasure, or vain apprehension that they might use them in the other world, is
testified by all Antiquity. Observable from the Gemme or Berill Ring upon the
finger of Cynthia, the Mistress of Propertius, when after her Funeral Pyre
her Ghost appeared unto him. And notably illustrated from the Contents of that
Roman Urne preserved by Cardinal Farnese Vigeneri Annot, in 4. Live.
, wherein besides great number of Gemmes with heads of Gods and Goddesses, were
found an Ape of Agath, a Grasshopper, an Elephant of Ambre, a Crystal Ball,
three glasses, two Spoones, and six Nuts of Crystal. And beyond the content of
Urnes, in the Monument of Childerick the first Chisslet in Anast. Childer.
, and fourth King from Pharamond, casually discovered three years past at
Tournay, restoring unto the world much gold richly adorning his Sword, two
hundred Rubies, many hundred Imperial Coyns, three hundred golden Bees, the
bones and horseshoe of his horse enterred with him, according to the barbarous
magnificence of those days in their sepulchral Obsequies. Although if we steer
by the conjecture of many and Septuagint expression; some trace thereof may be
found even with the ancient Hebrews, not only from the Sepulcrall treasure of
David, but the circumcision knives which Josuah also buried.

Some men considering the contents of these Vrnes, lasting pieces and toys
included in them, and the custom of burning with many other Nations, might
somewhat doubt whether all Vrnes found among us, were properly Roman Relics,
or some not belonging unto our British, Saxon, or Danish Forefathers.

In the form of Burial among the ancient Britains, the large Discourses of
Caesar, Tacitus, and Strabo are silent: For the discovery whereof, with other
particulars, we much deplore the loss of that Letter which Cicero expected or
received from his Brother Quintus, as a resolution of British customs; or the
account which might have been made by Scribonius Largus the Physician,
accompanying the Emperor Claudius, who might have also discovered that frugall
Bit Dionis excerpta per Xiphilin. in Sever^.
of the Old Britains, which in the bigness of a Bean could satisfy their
thirst and hunger.

But that the Druids and ruling Priests used to burn and bury, is expressed by
Pomponius; That Bellinus the Brother of Brennus, and King of Britains was
burnt, is acknowledged by Polydorus, as also by Amandus Zierexensis in
Historia, and Pineda in his Vniversa historia. Spanish. That they held that
practice in Galiia, Caesar expressly delivers. Whether the Britains (probably
descended from them, of like Religion, Language and Manners) did not sometimes
make use of burning; or whether at least such as were after civilized unto the
Roman life and manners, conformed not unto this practice, we have no
historical assertion or denial. But since from the account of Tacitus the
Romans early wrought so much civility upon the British stock, that they
brought them to build Temples, to wear the Gown, and study the Roman Laws and
language, that they conformed also unto their religious rites and customs in
burials, seems no improbable conjecture.

That burning the dead was used in Sarmatia, is affirmed by Gaguinus, that the
Sueons and Gothlanders used to burn their Princes and great persons, is
delivered by Saxo and Olans; that this was the old Germane practice, is also
asserted by Tacitus. And though we are bare in historical particulars of such
obsequies in this Island, or that the Saxons, Jutes, and Angles burnt their
dead, yet came they from parts where 'twas of ancient practice; the Germans
using it, from whom they were descended. And even in Jutland and Sleswick in
Anglia Cymbrica, Vrnes with bones were found not many years before us.

But the Danish and Northern Nations Roisold; Brendetiide. Ild tide.
have raised an Era or point of compute from their Custom of burning their
dead: Some deriving it from Vnguinus, some from Frotho the great; who ordained
by Law, that Princes and Chief Commanders should be committed unto the fire,
though the common sort had the common grave enterrment. So Starkatterus that
old Hero was burnt, and Ringo royally burnt the body of Harald the King slain
by him.

What time this custom generally expired in that Nation, we discern no assured
period; whether it ceased before Christianity, or upon their Conversion, by
Ausgurius the Gaul in the time of Ludovicus Pius the Son of Charles the
great, according to good computes; or whether it might not be used by some
persons, while for a hundred and eighty years Paganism and Christianity were
promiscuously embraced among them, there is no assured conclusion. About which
times the Danes were busy in England, and particularly infested this Country:
Where many Castles and strong holds, were built by them, or against rhem, and
great number of names and Families still derived from them. But since this
custom was probably disused before their Invasion or Conquest, and the Romans
confessedly practiced the same, since their possession of this Island, the most
assured account will fall upon the Romans, or Britains Romanized.

However certain it is, that Vrnes conceived of no Roman Original, are often
dug up both in Norway, and Denmark, handsomely described, and graphically
represented by the Learned Physician Wormius Olai Wormii monumenta and
Antiquitat. Dan.
, And in some parts of Denmark in no ordinary number, as stands delivered by
Authors exactly describing those Countries Adolphus Cyprius in Annal. Sleswic.
urnis adeo abundabat collis; etc.
. And they contained not only bones, but many other substances in them, as
Knives, pieces of Iron, Brass and Wood, and one of Norwaye a brass gilded
Jewes-harp.

Nor were they confused or careless in disposing the noblest sort, while they
placed large stones in circle about the Vrnes, or bodies which they interred:
Somewhat answerable unto the Mounment of Rollrich stones in England In
Oxfordshire; Cambden.
, or sepulcrall Monument probaby erected by Rollo, who after conquered
Normandy. Where it is not improbable somewhat might be discovered. Mean while to
what Nation or person belonged that large Vrne found at Ashburie In Cheshire,
Twinus de rebus Albionicis.
, containing mighty bones, and a Buckler; What those large Vrnes found at
little Massingham In Norfolk, Hollingshead.
, or why the Anglesea Urnes are placed with their mouths downward, remains yet
undiscovered.

CHAP. III.
PLaystered and whited Sepulchers, were anciently affected in cadaverous, and
corruptive Burials; And the rigid Jews were wont to garnish the Sepulchers of
the Mat. 23.
righteous; Ulysses in Hecuba Eurspides.
cared not how meanly he lived, so he might find a noble Tomb after death.
Great Princes affected great Monuments, And the fair and larger Urnes contained
no vulgar ashes, which makes that disparity in those which time discovers
among us. The present Urnes were not of one capacity, the largest containing
above a gallon, Some not much above half that measure; nor all of one figure,
wherein there is no strict conformity, in the same or different Countries;
Observable from those represented by Casalius, Bosio, and others, though all
found in Italy: While many have handles, ears, and long necks, but most imitate
a circular figure, in a sphericall and round composure; whether from any
mystery, best duration or capacity, were but a conjecture. But the common form
with necks was a proper figure, making our Iast bed like our first; nor much
unlike the Urnes of our Nativity, while we lay in the nether part of the Earth
Psa. 63.
, and inward vault of our Microcosme. Many Urnes are red, these but of a black
color, somewhat smooth, and dully sounding, which begat some doubt, whether
they were burnt, or only baked in Oven or Sun: According to the ancient way,
in many bricks, tiles, pots, and testaceous works; and as the word testa is
properly to be taken, when occurring without addition: And chiefly intended by
Pliny, when he commends bricks and tiles of two years old, and to make them
in the spring. Nor only these concealed pieces, but the open magnificence of
Antiquity, ran much in the Artifice of Clay. Hereof the house of Mausolus was
built, thus old Jupiter stood in the Capitol, and the Statua of Hercules made
in the Reign of Tarquinius Priscus, was extant in Plinies days. And such as
declined burning or Funeral Urnes, affected Coffins of Clay, according to the
mode of Pythagoras, a way preferred by Varro. But the spirit of great ones was
above these circumscriptions, affecting copper, silver, gold, and Porphyrie
Urnes, wherein Severus lay, after a serious view and sentence on that which
should contain him (...). Dion.
. Some of these Urnes were thought to have been silvered over, from sparklings
in several pots, with small Tinsell parcels; uncertain whether from the earth,
or the first mixture in them.

Among these Urnes we could obtain no good account of their coverings; Only one
seemed arched over with some kind of brickwork. Of those found at Buxton some
were covered with flints, some in other parts with tiles, those at Yarmouth
Caster, were closed with Roman bricks. And some have proper earthen covers
adapted and fitted to them. But in the Homericall Urne of Patroclus, whatever
was the solid Tegument, we find the immediate covering to be a purple piece of
silk: And such as had no covers might have the earth closely pressed into them,
after which disposure were probably some of these, wherein we found the bones
and ashes half mortered unto the sand and sides of the Urne; and some long
roots of Quich, or Dogs-grass wreathed about the bones.

No Lamps, included Liquors, Lachrymatories, or Tear-bottles attended these
rural Urnes, either as sacred unto the Manes, or passionate expressions of
their surviving friends. While with rich flames, and hired tears they
solemnized their Obsequies, and in the most lamented Monuments made one part of
their Inscriptions Cum lacrymis posuere.
. Some find sepulchrall Vessels containing liquors, which time has
incrassated into gellies. For beside these Lachrymatories, notable Lamps, with
Vessels of Oils and Aromaticall Liquors attended noble Ossuaries. And some yet
retaining a Laziu^.
Vinosity and spirit in them, which if any have tasted they have far exceeded
the Palats of Antiquity. Liquors not to be computed by years of annual
Magistrates, but by great conjunctions and the fatal periods of Kingdoms
About five hundred years. Plato.
. The draughts of Consulary date, were but crude unto these, and Opimian Vinum
Opimi^ ian^m annorum centum. Petron.
Wine but in the must unto them.

In sundry Graves and Sepulchers, we meet with Rings, Coins, and Chalices;
Ancient frugality was so severe, that they allowed no gold to attend the Corpse,
but only that which served to fasten their teeth 12. Tabul. l. xi. de Jure
sacro. Neve aurum addito, ast quoi curo dentes vincti e^unt, im cum illo
sepelire and urer^, se frau^e esto.
. Whether the Opaline stone in this Urne were burnt upon the finger of the
dead, or cast into the fire by some affectionate friend, it will consist with
either custom. But other incinerable substances were found so fresh, that they
could feel no sindge from fire. These upon view were judged to be wood, but
sinking in water and tried by the fire, we found them to be bone or Ivory. In
their hardness and yellow color they most resembled Box, which in old
expressions found the Epithere Plin. l. xvi. In^er (...) numera^ Theophras^us.
of Eternal, and perhaps in such conservatories might have passed uncorrupted.

That Bay Leaves were found green in the Tomb of S. Humbert Su^ius.
, after an hundred and fifty years, was looked upon as miraculous. Remarkable
it was unto old Spectators, that the Cypress of the Temple of Diana, lasted so
many hundred years: The wood of the Ark and Olive Rod of Aaron were older at
the Captivity. But the Cypress of the Ark of Noah, was the greatest vegetable
Antiquity, if Josephus were not deceived, by some fragments of it in his days.
To omit the Moore-logs, and Firre-trees found underground in many parts of
England; the undated ruins of winds, floods or earthquakes; and which in
Flanders still show from what quarter they fell, as generally lying in a
North-East position Gorop. Becanus in Niloscopio.
.

But though we found not these pieces to be Wood, according to first
apprehension, yet we missed not altogether of some woody substance; For the
bones were not so clearly picked, but some coals were found amongst them; A way
to make wood perpetual, and a fit associat for metal, whereon was laid the
foundation of the great Ephesian Temple, and which were made the lasting tests
of old boundaries and Landmarks; Whilst we look on these, we admire not
Observations of Coals found fresh, after four hundred years Of Beringuccio
nella pyrotechnia.
. In a long deserted habitation At Elmeham.
, even Egge-shels have been found fresh, not tending to corruption.

In the Monument of King Childerick, the Iron Relics were found all rusty and
crumbling into peecees. But our little Iron pins which fastened the Ivory
works, held well together, and lost not their Magneticall quality, though
wanting a tenacious moisture for the firmer union of parts, although it be
hardly drawn into fusion, yet that metal soon submits unto rest and
dissolution. In the brazen pieces we admired not the duration but the freedom
from rust, and ill savor; upon the hardest attrition, but now exposed unto the
piercing Atoms of air; in the space of a few months, they begin to spot and
betray their green entrals. We conceive not these Urnes to have descended thus
naked as they appear, or to have entered their graves without the old habit of
flowers. The Urne of Philopaemen was so laden with flowers and ribbons, that it
afforded no sight of it self. The rigid Lycurgus allowed Olive and Myrtle. The
Athenians might fairly except against the practice of Democritus to be buried
up in honey; as fearing to embezzle a great commodity of their Country, and
the best of that kind in Europe. But Plato seemed too frugally politic, who
allowed no larger Monument then would contain for Heroic Verses, and designed
the most barren ground for sepulture: Though we cannot commend the goodness of
that sepulchrall ground, which was set at no higher rate then the mean salary
of Judas. Though the earth had confounded the ashes of these Ossuaries, yet the
bones were so smartly burnt, that some thin plates of brass were found half
melted among them: whereby we apprehend they were not of the meanest carcasses,
perfunctorily fired as sometimes in military, and commonly in pestilence,
burnings; or after the manner of abject corpse, hudled forth and carelessly
burnt, without the Esquiline Port at Rome; which was an affront continued upon
Tiberius, while they but half burnt his body Sueton. in vita Tib. and in
Amphitheatro semiustu^andum, not. Casaub.
, and in the Amphitheatre, according to the custom in notable Malefactore;
whereas Nero seemed not so much to fear his death, as that his head should be
cut off, and his body not burnt entire.

Some finding many fragments of sculs in these Urnes, suspected a mixture of
bones; In none we searched was there cause of such conjecture, though sometimes
they declined not that practice; The ashes of Sueton. in vita Domitian.
Domitian were mingled with those of Julia, of Achilles with those of
Patroclus: All Urnes contained not single ashes; Without confused burnings they
affectionately compounded their bones; passionately endeavoring to continue
their living Unions. And when distance of death denied such conjunctions,
unsatisfied affections, conceived some satisfaction to be neighbors in the
grave, to lie Urne by Urne, and touch but in their names. And many were so
curious to continue their living relations, that they contrived large, and
family Urnes, wherein the Ashes of their nearest friends and kindred might
successively be received S. the most learned and worthy Mr M. Casaubon upon
Antoninus.
, at least some parcels thereof, while their collateral memorials lay in minor
vessels about them.

Antiquity held too light thoughts from Objects of mortality, while some drew
provocatives of mirth from Anatomies Sic erimus cuncti. etc. Ergo dum vivimus
vivamus.
, and Juglers showed tricks with Skeletons. When Fiddlers made not so pleasant
mirth as Fencers, and men could sit with quiet stomachs while hanging was
played (...). A barbarous pastime at Feasts, when men stood upon a rolling
Globe, with their necks in a Rope, and a knife in their hands, ready to cut it
when the stone was rolled away, wherein if they failed, they lost their lives
to the laughter of their specators* Athenaeus.
before them. Old considerations made few memento's by sculs and bones upon
their monuments. In the Egyptian Obelisks and Hieroglyphicall figures, it is
not easy to meet with bones. The sepulchrall Lamps speak nothing less then
sepulture; and in their literal draughts prove often obscene and antic
pieces: Where we find D. M. Diis manibus.
it is obvious to meet with sacrificing patera's, and vessels of libation, upon
old sepulchrall Monuments. In the Jewish Hypogaeum Bosio.
and subterranean Cell at Rome, was little observable beside the variety of
Lamps, and frequent draughts of the holy Candlestick. In authentic draughts of
Anthony and Jerome, we meet with thigh-bones and deaths heads; but the
cemiteriall Cells of ancient Christians and Martyrs, were filled with draughts
of Scripture Stories; not declining the flourishes of Cypress, Palms, and
Olive; and the mystical Figures of Peacocks, Doves and Cocks. But iterately
affecting the pourtraits of Enoch, Lazarus, Jonas, and the Vision of Ezechiel,
as hopeful draughts, and hinting imagery of the Resurrection; which is the
life of the grave, and sweetens our habitations in the Land of Moles and
Pismires.

Gentile Inscriptions precisely delivered the extent of men's lives, seldom the
manner of their deaths, which history it self so often leaves obscure in the
records of memorable persons. There is scarce any Philosopher but dies twice or
thrice in Laertius; Nor almost any life without two or three deaths in
Plutarch; which makes the tragical ends of noble persons more favorably
resented by compassionate Readers, who find some relief in the Election of
such differences.

The certainty of death is attended with uncertainties, in time, manner,
places. The variety of Monuments has often obscured true graves: and Cenotaphs
confounded Sepulchers. For beside their real Tombs, many have found honorary
and empty Sepulchers. The variety of Homers Monuments made him of various
Countries. Euripides Pausan. in A^^icis.
had his Tomb in Africa, but his sepulture in Macedonia. And Severus Lamprid.
in vit. Alexand. Severi.
found his real Sepulcher in Rome, but his empty grave in Gallia.

He that lay in a golden Urne Trajanus. Dion.
eminently above the Earth, was not like to find the quiet of these bones.
Many of these Urnes were broke by a vulgar discoverer in hope of enclosed
treasure. The ashes of Marcellus Plut. in vit. Marcelli
were lost above ground, upon the like account. Where profit has prompted, no
age has wanted such miners. For which the most barbarous Expilators found the
most civil Rhetoric. Gold once out of the The Commission of the Gothish King
Theodoric for finding out sepulchrall treasure. Cassiodor. Var. l. 4.
earth is no more due unto it; What was unreasonably committed to the ground is
reasonably resumed from it: Let Monuments and rich Fabrics, not Riches adorn
men's ashes. The commerce of the living is not to be trrnsferred unto the dead:
It is not injustice to take that which none complains to lose, and no man is
wronged where no man is possessor.

What virtue yet sleeps in this terra damnata and aged cinders, were petty
magic to experiment; These crumbling relics and long-fired particles
superannate such expectations: Bones, Britannia hodie eam attonite celebrat
tantis ceremoniis, ut dedisse Persis videri possit. Plin. l. 29.
hairs, nails, and teeth of the dead, were the treasures of old Sorcerers. In
vain we revive such practices; Present superstition too visibly perpetuates the
folly of our Forefathers, wherein unto old Observation this Island was so
complete, that it might have instructed Persia.

Plato's historian of the other world, lies twelve days incorrupted, while his
soul was viewing the large stations of the dead. How to keep the corpse seven
days from corruption by anointing and washing, without exenteration, were an
hazardable piece of art, in our choicest practice. How they made distinct
separation of bones and ashes from fiery admixture, has found no historical
solution. Though they seemed to make a distinct collection, and overlooked not
Pyrrhus his toe. Some provision they might make by fictile Vessels, Coverings,
Tiles, or flat stones, upon and about the body. And in the same Field, not
far from these Urnes, many stones were found under ground, as also by
careful separation of extraneous matter, composing and raking up the burnt
bones with forks, observable in that notable lump of Galuanus Martianus
Topygraphiae Roma ex Martiaano. Erat and vas ustrinum appellatum quod in eo
cadavera comburerentur. Cap. de Campo Es. quilino.
, who had the sight of the Vas Vstrinum, or vessel wherein they burnt the
dead, found in the Esquiline Field at Rome, might have afforded clearer
solution. But their insatisfaction herein begat that remarkable invention in
the Funeral Pyres of some Princes, by incombustible sheets made with a texture
of Asbestos, incremable flax, or Salamanders wool, which preserved their bones
and ashes To be seen in Licet. de reconditis veterum lucernis.
incommixed.

How the bulk of a man should sink into so few pounds of bones and ashes, may
seem strange unto any who considers not its constitution, and how slender a
mass will remain upon an open and urging fire of the carnal composition. Even
bones themselves reduced into ashes, do abate a notable proportion. And
consisting much of a volatile salt, when that is fired out, make a light kind
of cinders. Although their bulk be disproportionable to their weight, when the
heavy principle of Salt is fired out, and the Earth almost only remains;
Observable in sallow, which makes more Ashes then Oak; and discovers the
common fraud of selling Ashes by measure, and not by ponderation.

Some bones make best Skeletons Old bones according to Lyserus. Those of young
persons not tal^ nor fat according to Columbus
, some bodies quick and speediest ashes: Who would expect a quick flame from
Hydropicall Heraclitus? The poisoned Soldier when his Belly brake, put out two
pyres in Plutarch In vita. Gracc.
. But in the plague of Athens Thucydides.
, one private pyre served two or three Intruders; and the Saracens burnt in
large heaps, by the King of Castile Laurent. Valla.
, showed how little Fuel suffices. Though the Funeral pyre of Patroclus took
up an hundred foot (...).
, a piece of an old boat burnt Pompey; And if the burden of Isaac were
sufficient for an holocaust, a man may carry his own pyre.

From animals are drawn good burning lights, and good medicines Speran. Alb.
Ovot.
against burning; Though the seminall humor seems of a contrary nature to
fire, yet the body completed proves a combustible lump, wherein fire finds
flame even from bones, and some fuel almost from all parts. Though the The
brain. Hippocrates.
Metropolis of humidity seems least disposed unto it, which might render the
sculls of these Urnes less burned then other bones. But all flies or sinks
before fire almost in all bodies: When the common ligament is dissolved, the
attenuable parts ascend, the rest subside in coal, calx or ashes.

To burn the bones of the King of Amos 2. 1.
Edom for Lyme, seems no irrational ferity; But to drink of the ashes of dead
relations As Artemisia of her Husband Mansolus.
, a passionate prodigality. He that has the ashes of his friend, has an
everlasting treasure: where fire takes leave, corruption slowly enters; In
bones well burnt, fire makes a wall against it self; experimented in copels,
and tests of metals, which consist of such ingredients. What the Sun
compoundeth, fire analyseth, not transmuteth. That devouring agent leaves
almost always a morsel for the Earth, whereof all things are but a colonie;
and which, if time permits, the mother Element will have in their primitive
mass again.

He that looks for Urnes and old sepulchrall relics, must not seek them in
the ruins of Temples: where no Religion anciently placed them. These were
found in a Field, according to ancient custom, in noble or private burial;
the old practice of the Canaanites, the Family of Abraham, and the burying
place of Josua, in the borders of his possessions; and also agreeable unto
Roman practice to bury by highways, whereby their Monuments were under eye:
Memorials of themselves, and memento's of mortality into living passengers;
whom the Epitaphs of great ones were fain to beg to stay and look upon them. A
language though sometimes used, not so proper in Church-Inscriptions Siste
viator.
. The sensible Rhetoric of the dead, to exemplarity of good life, first
admitted the bones of pious men, and Martyrs within Church-wals; which in
succeeding ages crept into promiscuous practice. While Constantine was
peculiarly favored to be admitted unto the Church Porch; and the first thus
buried in England was in the days of Cuthred.

Christians dispute how their bodies Kirckman nus de funer.
should lie in the grave. In urnall enterrment they clearly escaped this
Controversy: Though we decline the Religious consideration, yet in cemiteriall
and narrower burying places, to avoid confusion and cross position, a certain
posture were to be admitted; Which even Pagan civility observed, The Persians
lay North and South, The Megarians and Phoenicians placed their heads to the
East: The Athenians, some think, toward the West, which Christians still
retain. And Beda will have it to be the posture of our Savior. That he was
crucified with his face toward the West, we will not contend with tradition
and probable account; But we applaud not the hand of the Painter, in exalting
his Cross so high above those on either side; since hereof we find no
authentic account in history, and even the crosses found by Helena pretend no
such distinction from longitude or dimension.

To be knav'd out of our graves, to have our sculs made drinking-bowls, and our
bones turned into Pipes, to delight and sport our Enemies, are Tragical
abominations, escaped in burning Burials.

Urnall enterrments, and burnt Relics lie not in fear of worms, or to be an
heritage for Serpents; In carnal sepulture, corruptions seem peculiar unto
parts, and some speak of snakes out of the spinall marrow. But while we suppose
common worms in graves, it is not easy to find any there; few in Churchyards
above a foot deep, fewer or none in Churches, though in fresh decayed bodies.
Teeth, bones, and hair, give the most lasting defiance to corruption. In au
Hydropicall body ten years buried in a Churchyard, we met with a fat
concretion, where the nitre of the Earth, and the salt and lixivious liquor of
the body, had coagulated large lumps of fat, into the consistence of the
hardest castle-soap; whereof part remains with us. After a battle with the
Persians the Roman Corpse decayed in few days, while the Persian bodies
remained dry and uncorrupted. Bodies in the same ground do not uniformly
dissolve, nor bones equally moulder; whereof in the opprobrious disease we
expect no long duration. The body of the Marquess of Dorset seemed sound and
handsomely cereclothed, that after seventy eight years was found uncorrupted Of
Thomas Marquess of Dorset, whose body being buried 1530. was 1608 up on the
cutting open of the Cerecloth found perfect and nothing corrupted, the flesh
not hardened. but in color, proportion, and solmesse like an ordinary corpse
newly to be interred. Burtons descript. of Leicestershire.
. Common Tombs preserve not beyond powder: A firmer consistence and compage of
parts might be expected from Arefaction, deep burial or charcoal. The greatest
Antiquities of mortal bodies may remain in putrified bones, whereof, though we
take not in the pillar of Lots wife, or Metamorphosis of Ortelius In his Map of
Russia.
, some may be older then Pyramids, in the putrified Relics of the general
inundation. When Alexander opened the Tomb of Cyrus, the remaining bones
discovered his proportion, whereof urnall fragments afford but a bad
conjecture, and have this disadvantage of grave ^nterrments, that they leave us
ignorant of most personal discoveries. For since bones afford not only
rectitude and stability, but figure unto the body; It is no impossible
Physiognomy to conjecture at fleshy appendencies; and after what shape the
muscles and carnous parts might hang in their full consistences. A full-spread
Cariola shows a well-shaped horse behind, handsome formed sculls, give some
analogy of fleshy resemblance. A critical view of bones makes a good
distinction of sexes. Even color is not beyond conjecture; since it is hard to
be deceived in the distinction of Negro's sculls. The Poet Dante in his view of
Purgatory, sound gluttons so meagre, and extenuated, that he conceited them to
have been in the Siege of Jerusalem, and that it was easy to have discovered
Homo or Omo in their faces: M being made by the two lines of their cheeks,
archlng over the Eye brows to the nose, and their sunk eyes making O O which
makes up Omo. Parean l'occhiaie anella senza gemme che nel viso de gli hu^mini
leg huomo Ben'hauria quiui conosciu^o l' ^mme.
Dantes Characters are to be found in sculls as well as faces. Hercules is not
only known by his foot. Other parts make out their comproportious, and
inferences upon whole or parts. And since the dimensions of the head measure
the whole body, and the sigure thereof gives conjecture of the principal
faculties; Physiognomy outlives our selves, and ends not in our graves.

Severe contemplators observing these lasting relics, may think them good
monuments of persons past, little advantage to future beings. And considering
that power which subdueth all things unto it self, that can resume the
scattered Atoms, or identifie out of any thing, conceive it superfluous to
expect a resurrection out of Relics. But the soul subsisting, other matter
clothed with due accidents, may salve the individuality: Yet the Saints we
observe arose from graves and monuments, about the holy City. Some think the
ancient Patriarchs so earnestly desired to lay their bones in Canaan, as hoping
to make a part of that Resurrection, and though thirty miles from Mount
Calvary, at least to lie in that Region, which should produce the first fruits
of the dead. And if according to learned conjecture, the bodies of men shall
rise where their greatest Relics remain, many are not like to err in the
Topography of their Resurrection Tirin. in Ezekiel.
though their bones or bodies be after translated by Angels into the field of
Ezechiels vision, or as some will order it, into the Valley of Judgment, or
Jehosaphat.

CHAP. IV.
CHristians have handsomely glossed the deformity of death, by careful
consideration of the body, and civil rites which take of brutall terminations.
And though they conceived all reparable by a resurrection, cast not off all
care of enterrment. And since the ashes of Sacrifices burnt upon the Altar of
God, were carefully carried out by the Priests, and deposed in a clean field;
since they acknowledged their bodies to be the lodging of Christ, and temples
of the holy Ghost, they devolved not all upon the sufficiency of soul
existence; and therefore with long services and full solemnities concluded
their last Exequies, wherein Rituale Graecum opera J. Goar in officio
exequiarum.
to all distinctions the Greek devotion seems most pathetically ceremonious.

Christian invention has chiefly driven at Rites, which speak hopes of another
life, and hints of a Resurrection. And if the ancient Gentiles held not the
immortality of their better part, and some subsistence after death; in several
rites, customs, actions and expressions, they contradicted their own opinions:
wherein Democritus went high, even to the thought of a resurrection Similis
reviviscendi promissa Democrito vanitas, qui non revixit ipse. Quae, malum,
ista dimentia est; iterari vitam morte. Plin. l. 7. c. 55.
, as scoffingly recorded by Pliny. What can be more express than the
expression of Phocyllides (...). and deincepsi
? Or who would expect from Lucretius Cedit enim retro de terra quod fui^ ante
In terr^m, etc. Lucrer.
a sentence of Ecclesiastes? Before Plato could speak, the soul had wings in
Homer, which fell not, but flew out of the body into the mansions of the dead;
who also observed that handsome distinction of Demas and Soma, for the body
conjoined to the soul and body separated from it. Lucian spoke much truth in
jest, when he said, that part of Hercules which proceeded from Alchmena
perished, that from Jupiter remained immortal. Thus Plato in Phaed.
Socrates was content that his friends should bury his body, so they would not
think they buried Socrates, and regarding only his immortal part, was
indifferent to be burnt or buried. From such Considerations Diogenes might
contemn Sepulture. And being satisfied that the soul could not perish, grow
careless of corporal enterrment. The Stoics who thought the souls of wise
men had their habitation about the moon, might make slight account of
subterraneous deposition; whereas the Pythagorians and transcorporating
Philosophers, who were to be often buried, held great care of their enterrment.
And the Platonicks rejected not a due care of the grave, though they put their
ashes to unreasonable expectations, in their tedious term of return and long
set revolution.

Men have lost their reason in nothing so much as their religion, wherein
stones and clouts make Martyrs; and since the religion of one seems madness
unto another, to afford an account or rational of old Rites, requires no rigid
Reader; That they kindled the pyre aversly, or turning their face from it, was
an handsome Symbol of unwilling ministration; That they washed their bones
with wine and milk, that the mother wrapped them in Linen, and dried them in her
bosom, the first fostering part, and place of their nourishment; That they
opened their eyes toward heaven, before they kindled the fire, as the place of
their hopes or original, were no improper Ceremonies. Their last valediction
Vale, vale, nos te ordiquo natura permittet sequemur.
thrice uttered by the attendants was also very solemn, and somewhat answered
by Christians, who thought it too little, if they threw not the earth thrice
upon the enterred body. That in strewing their Tombs the Romans affected the
Rose, the Greeks Amaranthus and myrtle; that the Funeral pyre consisted of
sweet fuel, Cypress, Fur, Larix, Yewe, and Trees perpetually verdant, lay
silent expressions of their surviving hopes: Wherein Christians which deck
their Coffins with Bays have found a more elegant Emblem. For that he seeming
dead, will restore it self from the root, and its dry and exuccous leaves
resume their verdure again; which if we mistake not, we have also observed in
fures. Whether the planting of yewe in Churchyards, hold not its original from
ancient Funeral rites, or as an Emblem of Resurrection from its perpetual
verdure, may also admit conjecture.

They made use of Music to excite or quiet the affections of their friends,
according to different harmonies. But the secret and symbolicall hint was the
harmonical nature of the soul; which delivered from the body, went again to
enjoy the primitive harmony of heaven, from whence it first descended; which
according to its progress traced by antiquity, came down by Cancer, and
ascended by Capricornus.

They burnt not children before their teeth appeared, as apprehending their
bodies too tender a morsel for fire, and that their gristly bones would scarce
leave separable relics after the pyrall combustion. That they kindled not
fire in their houses for some days after, was a strict memorial of the late
afflicting fire. And mourning without hope, they had an happy fraud against
excessive lamentation, by a common opinion that deep forrows disturbed their
ghosts Tu manes ne laede meos.
.

That they buried their dead on their backs, or in a supine position, seems
agreeable unto profound sleep, and common posture of dying; contrary to the
most natural way of birth; Nor unlike our pendulous posture, in the doubtful
state of the womb. Diogenes was singular, who preferred a prone situation in
the grave, and some Christians Russians, etc.
like neither, who decline the figure of rest, and make choice of an erect
posture.

That they carried them out of the world with their feet forward, not
inconsonant unto reason: As contrary unto the native posture of man, and his
production first into it. And also agreeable unto their opinions, while they
bid adieu unto the world, not to look again upon it; whereas Mahometans who
think to return to a delightful life again, are carried forth with their heads
forward, and looking toward their houses.

They closed their eyes as parts which first die or first discover the sad
effects of death. But their iterated clamations to excitate their dying or dead
friends, or revoke them unto life again, was a vanity of affection; as not
presumably ignorant of the critical tests of death, by apposition of feathers,
glasses, and reflection of figures, which dead eyes represent not; which however
not strictly verifiable in fresh and warm cadavers, could hardly elude the
test, in corpse of four or five days.

That they sucked in the last breath of their expiring friends, was surely a
practice of no medicall institution, but a loose opinion that the soul passed
out that way, and a fondness of affection from some Fran^^sco Perucei. Pomp
funebri.
Pythagoricall foundation, that the spirit of one body passed into another;
which they wished might be their own.

That they powered oil upon the pyre, was a tolerable practice, while the
intention rested in facilitating the accension; But to place good Omens in the
quick and speedy burning, to sacrifice unto the winds for a dispatch in this
office, was a low form of superstition.

The Archimime* or Jester attending the Funeral train, and imitating the
speeches, gesture, and manners of the deceased, was too light for such
solemnities, contradicting their Funeral Orations, and doleful rites of the
grave.

That they buried a piece of money with them as a Fee of the Elysian Ferriman,
was a practice full of folly. But the ancient custom of placing coins in
considerable Urnes, and the present practice of burying medals in the Noble
Foundations of Europe, are laudable ways of historical discoveries, in
actions, persons, Chronologies; and posterity will applaud them.

We examine not the old Laws of Sepulture, exempting certain persons from
burial or burning. But hereby we apprehend that these were not the bones of
persons Planet-struck or burnt with fire from Heaven: No Relics of Traitors
to their Country, Self-killers, or Sacrilegious Malefactors; Persons in old
apprehension unworthy of the earth; condemned unto the Tartara's of Hell, and
bottomless pit of Plato, from whence there was no redemption.

Nor were only many customs questionable in order to their Obsequies, but also
sundry practices, fictions, and conceptions, discordant or obscure, of their
state and future beings; whether unto eight or ten bodies of men to add one of
a woman, as being more inflammable, and unctuously constituted for the better
pyrall combustion, were any rational practice: Or whether the complaint of
Perianders Wife be tolerable, that wanting her Funeral burning she suffered
intolerable cold in Hell, according to the constitution of the infernal house
of Plato, wherein cold makes a great part of their tortures; it cannot pass
without some question.

Why the Female Ghosts appear unto Ulysses, before the Heroes and masculine
spirits? Why the Psyche or soul of Tiresias is of the masculine gender; who
being blind on earth sees more then all the rest in hell; Why the Funeral
Suppers consisted of Eggs, Beans, Smallage, and Lettuce, since the dead are
made to eat Asphodels about the Elyzian medows? Why since there is no Sacrifice
acceptable, nor any propitiation for the Covenant of the grave; men set up the
Deity of Morta, and fruitlesly adored Divinities without ears? it cannot escape
some doubt.

The dead seem all alive in the humane Hades of Homer, yet cannot well speak,
prophecy, or know the living, except they drink blood, wherein is the life of
man. And therefore the souls of Penelope's Paramours conducted by Mercury
chirped like bats, and those which followed Hercules made a noise but like a
flock of birds.

The departed spirits know things past and to come, yet are ignorant of things
present, Agamemnon foretells what should happen unto Ulysses, yet ignorantly
enquires what is become of his own Son. The Ghosts are afraid of swords in
Homer, yet Sybilla tells Aeneas in Virgil, the thin habit of spirits was beyond
the force of weapons. The spirits put off their malice with their bodies, and
Caesar and Pompey accord in Latin Hell, yet Ajax in Homer endures not a
conference with Ulysses: And Deiphobus appears all mangled in Virgils Ghosts,
yet we meet with perfect shadows among the wounded ghosts of Homer.

Since Charon in Lucian applauds his condition among the dead, whether it be
handsomely said of Achilles, that living contemner of death, that he had rather
be a Plowmans servant then Emperor of the dead? How Hercules his soul is in
hell, and yet in heaven, and Julius his soul in a Star, yet seen by Aeneas in
hell, except the Ghosts were but Images and shadows of the soul, received in
higher mansions, according to the ancient division of body, soul, and image or
simulachrum of them both. The particulars of future beings must needs be dark
unto ancient Theories, which Christian Philosophy yet determines but in a Cloud
of opinions. A Dialogue between two Infants in the womb concerning the state of
this world, might handsomely illustrate our ignorance of the next, whereof
methinks we yet discourse in Platoes den, and are but Embryon Philosophers.

Pythagoras escapes in the fabulous hell of Dante Del inserno. c^nt. 4.
, among that swarm of Philosophers, wherein whilst we meet with Plato and
Socrates, Cato is to be found in no lower place then Purgatory. Among all the
set, Epicurus is most considerable, whom men make honest without an Elyzium,
who contemned life without encouragement of immortality, and making nothing
after death, yet made nothing of the King of terrors.

Were the happiness of the next world as closely apprehended as the felicities
of this, it were a martyrdom to live; and unto such as consider none
hereafter, it must be more then death to dye, which makes us amazed at those
audacities, that durst be nothing, and return into their Chaos again. Certainly
such spirits as could contemn death, when they expected no better being after,
would have scorned to live had they known any. And therefore we applaud not the
judgment of Machiavel, that Christianity makes men cowards, or that with the
confidence of but half dying, the despised virtues of patience and humility,
have abased the spirits of men, which Pagan principles exalted, but rather
regulated the wildenesse of audacities, in the attempts, grounds, and eternal
sequels of death; wherein men of the boldest spirits are often prodigiously
temetarious. Nor can we extenuate the valor of ancient Martyrs, who contemned
death in the uncomfortable scene of their lives, and in their decrepit
Martyrdomes did probably lose not many months of their days, or parted with
life when it was scarce worth the living. For (beside that long time past holds
no consideration unto a slender time to come) they had no small disadvantage
from the constitution of old age, which naturally makes men fearful; And
complexionally superannuaated from the bold and courageous thoughts of youth
and fervent years. But the contempt of death from corporal animosity,
promoteth not our felicity. They may set in the Orchestra, and noblest Seats of
Heaven, who have held up shaking hands in the fire, and humanely contended for
glory.

Mean while Epicuras lies deep in Dante's hell, wherein we meet with Tombs
enclosing souls which denied their immortalities. But whether the virtuous
heathen, who lived better then he spoke, or erring in the principles of
himself, yet lived above Philosophers of more specious Maxims, lie so deep as
he is placed; at least so low as not to rise against Christians, who believing
or knowing that truth, have lastingly denied it in their practice and
conversation, were a quaery too sad to insist on,

But all or most apprehensions rested in Opinions of some future being, which
ignorantly or coldly believed, begat those perverted conceptions, Ceremonies,
Sayings, which Christians pity or laugh at. Happy are they, which live not in
that disadvantage of time, when men could say little for futurity, but from
reason. Whereby the noblest minds fell often upon doubtful deaths, and
melancholy Dissolutions; With these hopes Socrates warmed his doubtful
spirits, against that cold potion, and Cato before he durst give the fatal
stroke spent part of the night in reading the immortality of Plato, thereby
confirming his wavering hand unto the animosity of that attempt.

It is the heaviest stone that melancholy can throw at a man, to tell him he is
at the end of his nature; or that there is no further state to come, unto which
this seems progressionall, and otherwise made in vain; Without this
accomplishment the natural expectation and desire of such a state, were but a
fallacy in nature, unsatisfied Considerators; would quarrel the justice of
their constitutions, and rest content that Adam had fallen lower, whereby by
knowing no other Original, and deeper ignorance of themselves, they might have
enjoyed the happiness of inferionr Creatures; who in tranquillity possess
their Constitutions, as having not the apprehension to deplore their own
natures. And being framed below the circumference of these hopes, or cognition
of better being, the wisdom of God has necessitated their Contentment: But
the superior ingredient and obscured part of our selves, whereto all present
felicities afford no resting contentment, will be able at last to tell us we
are more then our present selves; and evacuate such hopes in the fruition of
their own accomplishments.

CHAP. V.
NOw since these dead bones have already out-lasted the living ones of
Methuselah, and in a yard under ground, and thin walls of clay, out-worn all
the strong and specious buildings above it; and quietly rested under the drums
and tramplings of three conquests; What Prince can promise such diuturnity unto
his Relics, or might not gladly say, Tibullus.
Sic ego componi versus in ossa velim.


Time which antiquates Antiquities, and has an art to make dust of all things,
has yet spared these minor Monuments. In vain we hope to be known by open and
visible conservatories, when to be unknown was the means of their continuation
and obscurity their protection: If they dyed by violent hands, and were thrust
into their Urnes, these bone^ become considerable, and some old Philosophers
would honor Oracula Chaldaica cum scholiis Pselii and ^h^^honis. (...) Vi
corpus reli^quentium animae purissimae.
them, whose souls they conceived most pure, which were thus snatched from
their bodies; and to retain a stranger propension unto them: whereas they
weariedly left a languishing corpse, and with faint desires of reunion. If they
fell by long and aged decay, yet wrapped up in the bundle of time, they fall into
indistinction, and make but one blot with Infants. If we begin to die when we
live, and long life be but a prolongation of death; our life is a sad
composition; We live with death, and die not in a moment. How many pulses made
up the life of Methuselah, were work for Archimedes: Common Counters sum up
the life of Moses his man In the Psalm of Moses.
. Our days become considerable like petty sums by minute accumulations; where
numerous fractions make up but small round numbers; and our days of a span
long make not one little finger According to the ancient Arithmetic of the
hand wherein the little finger of the right hand contracted, signified an
hundred. Pierius in Hieroglyph.
.

If the nearness of our last necessity, brought a nearer conformity unto it,
there were a happiness in hoary hairs, and no calamity in half senses. But the
long habit of living indisposeth us for dying; When Avarice makes us the sport
of death; When even David grew politickly cruel; and Solomon could hardly be
said to be the wisest of men. But many are too early old, and before the date
of age. Adversity stretches our days, misery makes One night as long as three.
Alcmenas nights, and time has no wings unto it. But the most tedious being is
that which can unwish it self, content to be nothing, or never to have been,
which was beyond the malcontent of J^b, who cursed not the day of his life,
but his Nativity: Content to have so far been, as to have a Title to future
being; Although he had lived here but in an hidden state of life, and as it
were an abortion.

What Song the Sirens sang, or what name Achilles assumed when he hid himself
among women, though puzling The puzling questions of Tiberius unto Grammarians.
Marcel. Donatus in Suet. (...) Hom. Job.
Questions are not beyond all conjecture. What time the persons of these
Ossuaries entered the famous Nations of the dead, and slept with Princes and
Counselors, might admit a wide solution. But who were the proprietaries of
these bones, or what bodies these ashes made up, were a question above
Antiquarism. Not to be resolved by man, nor easily perhaps by spirits, except
we consult the Provincial Guardians, or tutellary Observators. Had they made
as good provision for their names, as they have done for their Relics, they
had not so grossly erred in the art of perpetuation. But to subsist in bones,
and be but Pyramidally extant, is a fallacy in duration. Vain ashes, which in
the oblivion of names, persons, times, and sexes, have found unto themselves, a
fruitless continuation, and only arise unto late posterity, as Emblemes of
mortal vanities; Antidotes against pride, vainglory, and madding vices. Pagan
vain-glories which thought the world might last for ever, had encouragement for
ambition, and finding no Atropos unto the immortality of their Names, were
never dampt with the necessity of oblivion. Even old ambitions had the
advantage of ours, in the attempts of their vain-glories, who acting early, and
before the probable Meridian of time, have by this time found great
accomplishment of their ddsignes, whereby the ancient Heroes have already
out-lasted their Monuments, and Mechanical preservations. But in this latter
Scene of time we cannot expect such Mummies unto our memories, when ambition
may fear the Prophecy of Elias That the world may last but fix thousand years.
, and Charles the fifth can never hope to live within two Methusela's of Hector
Hectors fame lasting above two lives of Methuselah, before that famous Prince
was extant.
.

And therefore restless inquietude for the diuturnity of our memories unto
present considerations, seems a vanity almost out of date, and superanuated
piece of folly. We cannot hope to live so long in our names, as some have done
in their persons, one face of Janus holds no proportion unto the other. It Is
too late to be ambitious. The great mutations of the world are acted, or time
may be too short for our designs. To extend our memories by Monuments, whose
death we daily pray for, and whose duration we cannot hope, without injury to
our expectations, in the advent of the last day, were a contradiction to our
beliefs. We whose generations are ordained in this setting part of time, are
providentially taken off from such imaginations. bAnd eing necessitated to eye
the remaining particle of futurity, are naturally constituted unto thoughts of
the next world, and cannot excusably decline the consideration of that
duration, which makes Pyramids pillars of snow, and all that is past a moment.

Circles and right lines limit and close all bodies, and the mortal
right-lined circle * The character of death.
, must conclude and shut up all. There is no antidote against the Opium of
time, which temporally considers all things; Our Fathers find their graves
in our short memories, and sadly tell us how we may be buried in our Survivors.
Grave-stones tell truth scarce forty years Old ones being taken up, and other
bodies laid under them
: Generations pass while some trees stand, and old Families last not three
Oaks. To be read by bare Inscriptions like many in Gruter Gruteri Inscriptiones
Antiquae.
, to hope for Eternity by Aenigmaticall Epithetes, or first letters of our
names, to be studied by Antiquaries, who we were, and have new Names given us
like many of the Mummies, are cold consolations unto the Students of
perpetuity, even by everlasting Languages.

To be content that times to come should only know there was such a man, not
caring whether they knew more of him, was a frigid ambition in Cardan Cuperem
notum esse quod sim, non opto ut sciatur qualis fim. Card. in vita propria.
: disparaging his horoscopal inclination and judgment of himself, who cares to
subsist like Hippocrates Patients, or Achilles horses in Homer, under naked
nominations, without deserts and noble acts, which are the balsame of our
memories, the Entelechia and soul of our subsistences. To be namelesse in
worthy deeds exceeds an infamous history. The Canaanitish woman lives more
happily without a name, then Herodias with one. And who had not rather have
been the good thief, then Pilate?

But the iniquity of oblivion blindely scatters her poppy, and deals with the
memory of men without distinction to merit of perpetuity, Who can but pity the
founder of the Pyramids? Herostratus lives that burnt the Temple of Diana, he
is almost lost that built it; Time has spared the Epitaph of Adrians horse,
confounded that of himself. In vain we compute our felicities by the advantage
of our good names, since bad have equal durations; and Thersites is like to
live as long as Agamemnon, without ^he favor of the everlasting Register: Who
knows whether the best of men be known? or whether there be not more remarkable
persons forgot, then any that stand remembered in the known account of time? the
first man had been as unknown as the last, and Methuselahs long life had been
his only Chronicle.

Oblivion is not to be hired: The greater part must be content to be as though
they had not been, to be found in the Register of God, not in the record of
man. Twenty seven Names make up the first story, and the recorded names ever
since contain not one living Century. The number of the dead long exceeds all
that shall live. The night of time far surpasses the day, and who knows when
was the Aequi^ox? Every hour adds unto that current Arithmetique, which
scarce stands one moment. And since death must be the Lucina of lise, and even
Pagans could doubt whether thus to live, were to dye. Since our longest Sun
sets at right descensions, and makes but winter arches, and therefore it cannot
be long before we lie down in darkness, and have our light in ashes. Since the
brother of death daily haunts us with dying memento's, and time that grows old
it self, bids us hope no long duration: Diuturnity is a drean and folly of
expectation.

Darkness and light divide the course of time, and oblivion shares with
memory, a great part even of our living beings; we slightly remember our
felicities, and the smartest strokes of affliction leave but short smart upon
us. Sense endures no extremities, and sorrows destroy us or themselves. To
weep into stones are fables. Afflictions induce callosities, miseries are
slippery, or fall like snow upon us, which notwithstanding is no unhappy
stupidity. To be ignorant of evils to come, and forgetful of evils past, is a
merciful provision in nature, whereby we digest the mixture of our few and
evil days, and our delivered senses not relapsing into cutting remembrances,
our sorrows are not kept raw by the edge of repetitions. A great part of
Antiquity contented their hopes of subsistency with a transmigration of their
souls. A good way to continue their memories, while having the advantage of
plural successions, they could not but act something remarkable in such
variety of beings, and enjoying the fame of their passed selves, make
accumulation of glory unto their last durations. Others rather then be lost in
the uncomfortable night of nothing, were content to recede into the common
being, and make one particle of the public soul of all things, which was no
more then to return into their unknown and divine Original again. Egyptian
ingenuity was more unsatisfied, contriving their bodies in sweet consistences,
to attend the return of their souls. But all was vanity, feeding Omnia vanitas
and pastio venti, (...) ut olim Aquila and Symmachus. V. Drus. Eccles.
the wind, and folly. The Egyptian Mummies, which Cambyses or time has
spared, avarice now consumes. Mummie is become Merchandise, Mizraim cures
wounds, and Pharaoh is sold for balsoms.

In vain do individuals hope for Immortality, or any patent from oblivion, in
preservations below the Moon: Men have been deceived even in their flatteries
above the Sun, and studied conceits to perpetuate their names in heaven. The
various Cosmography of that part has already varied the names of contrived
constellations; Nimrod is lost in Orion, and Osyris in the Dogge-starre. While
we look for incorruption in the heavens, we find they are but like the Earth;
Durable in their main bodies, alterable in their parts: whereof beside Comets
and new Stars, perspectives begin to tell tales. And the spots that wander
about the Sun, with Phaetons favor, would make clear conviction.

There is nothing strictly immortal, but immortality; whatever has no
beginning may be confident of no end. All others have a dependent being, and
within the reach of destruction, which is the peculiar of that necessary
essence that cannot destroy it self; And the highest strain of omnipotency to
be so powerfully constituted, as not to suffer even from the power of it self.
But the sufficiency of Christian Immortality frustrates all earthly glory, and
the quality of either state after death, makes a folly of posthumous memory.
God who can only destroy our souls, and has assured our resurrection, either
of our bodies or names has directly promised no duration. Wherein there is so
much of chance that the boldest Expectants have found unhappy frustration; and
to hold long subsistence, seems but a escape in oblivion. But man is a Noble
Animal, splendid in ashes, and pompous in the grave, solemnizing Nativities and
Deaths with equal luster, nor omitting Ceremonies of bravery, in the infamy of
his nature.

Life is a pure flame, and we live by an invisible Sun within us. A small fire
suffices for life, great flames seemed too little after death, while men
vainly affected precious pyres, and to burn like Sardanapalus, but the wisdom
of funeral Laws found the folly of prodigal blazes, and reduced undoing
fires, unto the rule of sober obsequies, wherein few could be so mean as not to
provide wood, pitch, a mourner, and an Urne.

Five Languages secured not the Epitaph of Gordianus; The man of God lives
longer without a Tomb then any by one, invisibly interred by Angels, and
adjudged to obscurity, though not without some marks directing humane
discovery. Enoch and Elias without either tomb or burial, in an anomalous
state of being, are the great Examples of perpetuity, in their long and living
memory, in strict account being still on this side death, and having a late
part yet to act upon this stay of earth. If in the decretory term of the world
we shall not all dye but be changed, according to received translation; the
last day will make but few graves; at least quick Resurrections will anticipate
lasting Sepultures; Some Graves will be opened before they be quite closed, and
Lazarus be no wonder. When many that feared to dye shall groan that they can
dye but once, the dismal state is the second and living death, when life puts
despair on the damned; when men shall wish the coverings of Mountains, not of
Monuments, and annihilation shall be courted.

While some have studied Monuments, others have studiously declined them: and
some have been so vainly boisterous, that they durst not acknowledge their
Graves; wherein Jornandes de rebus Geticis.
Alaricus seems most subtle, who had a River turned to hide his bones at the
bottom. Even Sylla that thought himself safe in his Urne, could not prevent
revenging tongues, and stones thrown at his Monument. Happy are they whom
privacy makes innocent, who deal so with men in this world, that they are not
afraid to meet them in the next, who when they dye, make no commotion among the
dead, and are not touched with that poetical taunt of Isaiah Isa. 14.
.

Pyramids, Arches, Obelisks, were but the irregularities of vainglory, and
wild enormities of ancient magnanimity. But the most magnanimous resolution
rests in the Christian Religion, which trampleth upon pride, and sets on the
neck of ambition, humbly pursuing that infallible perpetuity, unto which all
others must diminish their diameters, and be poorly seen in Angles of
contingency Angulus contingentiae, the least of Angles.
.

Pious spirits who passed their days in raptures of futurity, made little more
of this world, then the world that was before it, while they lay obscure in the
Chaos of pre-ordination, and night of their fore-beings. And if any have been
so happy as truly to understand Christian annihilation, extasis, exolution,
liquefaction, transformation, the kiss of the Spouse, gustation of God, and
ingression into the divine shadow, they have already had an handsome
anticipation of heaven; the glory of the world is surely over, and the earth in
ashes unto them.

To subsist in lasting Monuments, to live in their productions, to exist in
their names, and praedicament of Chymera's, was large satisfaction unto old
expectations, and made one part of their Elyziums. But all this is nothing in
the Metaphysics of true belief. To live indeed is to be again our selves,
which being not only an hope but an evidence in noble believers; It Is all one
to lie in St Innocents In Paris where bodies soon consume.
Churchyard, as in the Sands of Egypt: Ready to be any thing, in the ecstasy
of being ever, and as content with six foot as the Moles of Adrianus A stately
Mausoleum or sepulchral pyle built by Adrianus in Rome, where now stands the
Castle of St Angelo
.

Lucan -- Tabesne cadaverasolvats
An rogus hand refert. --

Quid Quin cunce speciosius, qui, in quam cungz partem spectaueris, rectus est.
Quintilian:


THE GARDEN OF CYRUS. OR, The Quincunciall, Lozenge, or Network Plantations of
the Ancients, Artificially Naturally, Mystically Considered.

BY Thomas Brown D. of Physic

Printed in the Year, 1658.

The Garden of Cyrus. OR, The Quincunciall, Lozenge, or Network Plantations of
the Ancients, Artificially, Naturally, Mystically considered.
CHAPTER I.
THat Vulcan gave arrows unto Apollo and Diana the fourth day after their
Nativities, according to Gentile Theology, may pass for no blind apprehension
of the Creation of the Sun and Moon, in the work of the fourth day; When the
diffused light contracted into Orbs, and shooting rays, of those Luminaries.
Plainer Descriptions there are from Pagan pens, of the creatures of the fourth
day; While the Plato in Timaeo.
divine Philosopher unhappily omitteth the noblest part of the third; And Ovid
(whom many conceive to have borrowed his description from Moses) coldly
deserting the remarkable account of the text, in three words fronde legisilvas.
, describes this work of the third day; the vegetable creation, and first
ornamentall Scene of nature; the primitive food of animals, and first story of
Physic, in Dietetical conservation.

For though Physic may plead high, from that medicall act of God, in casting
so deep a sleep upon our first Parent; And Surgery (...), in opening the
flesh. (...), in taking out the rib. (...) in closing up the part again.
find its whole art, in that one passage concerning the Rib of Adam, yet is
there no rivality with Garden contrivance and Herbery. For if Paradise were
planted the third day of the Creation, as wiser Divinity concludes, the
Nativity thereof was too early for Horoscopie; Gardens were before Gardiners,
and but some hours after the earth.

Of deeper doubt is its Topography, and local designation, yet being the
primitive garden, and without much For some there is from the ambiguity of the
word Mikedem, whether ab orieute or a principio.
controversy seated in the East; it is more then probable the first curiosity,
and cultivation of plants, most flourished in those quarters. And since the Ark
of Noah first touched upon some mountains of Armenia, the planting art arose
again in the East, and found its revolution not far from the place of its
Nativity, about the Plains of those Regions. And if Zoroaster were either Cham,
Chus, or Mizraim, they were early proficients therein, who left (as Pliny
delivers) a work of Agriculture.

However the account of the Pensill or hanging gardens if Babylon, if made by
Semiramis, the third or fourth from Nimrod, is of no slender antiquity; which
being not framed upon ordinary level of ground, but raised upon pillars,
admitting under-passages, we cannot accept as the first Babylonian Gardens; But
a more eminent progress and advancement in that art, then any that went before
it: Somewhat answering or hinting the old Opinion concerning Paradise it self,
with many conceptions elevated, above the plane of the Earth.

Nebuchodonosor whom some will have to be the famous Syrian King of Diodorus,
beautifully repaired that City; and so magnificently built his Josephus.
hanging gardens; that from succeeding Writers he had the honor of the first.
From whence over-looking Babylon, and all the Region about it, he found no
circumscription to the eye of his ambition, till over-delighted with the
bravery of this Paradise; in his melancholy metamorphosis, he found the folly
of that delight, and a proper punishment, in the contrary habitation, in wild
plantations and wanderings of the fields.

The Persian Gallants who destroyed this Monarchy, maintained their Botanicall
bravery. Unto whom we owe the very name of Paradise: wherewith we meet not in
Scripture before the time of Solomon, and conceived originally Persian. The
word for that disputed Garden, expressing in the Hebrew no more then a Field
enclosed, which from the same Root is content to derive a garden and a Buckler.

Cyrus the elder brought up in Woods and Mountains, when time and power
enabled, pursued the dictate of his education, and brought the treasures of the
field into rule and circum-scription. So nobly beautifying the hanging Gardens
of Babylon, that he was also thought to be the author thereof.

Ahasuerus (whom many conceive to have been Artaxerxes Longi-manus) in the
Sushan in Susiana.
Country and City of Flowers, and in an open Garden, entertained his Princes
and people, while Vasthi more modestly treated the Ladies within the Palace
thereof.

But if (as some opinion) King Ahasuerus were Artaxerxes Mnemon, that found
Plutarch in the life of Artaxerxes.
a life and reign answerable unto his great memory, out magnified Cyrus was his
second Brother: who gave the occasion of that memorable work, and almost
miraculous retrait of Xenophon. A person of high spirit and honor, naturally a
King, though fatally prevented by the harmless chance of post-geniture: Not
only a Lord of Gardens, but a manual planter thereof: disposing his trees like
his armies in regular ordination. So that while old Laertas has found a name
in Homer for pruning hedges, and clearing away thorns and briars; while King
Attalus lives for his poisonous plantations of Aconites, Henbane, Hellebore,
and plants hardly admitted within the walls of Paradise; While many of the
Ancients do poorly live in the single names of Vegetables; All stories do look
upon Cyrus, as the splendid and regular planter.

According whereto Xenophon describes his gallant plantation at Sardis,
Xenophon in Oeconomico.
thus rendered by Strebaeus. (...).
Arbores pari intervallo sitas, ^ectos ordines, and omnia perpulchre in
Quincuncem directa. Which we shall take for granted as heing accordingly
rendered by the most elegant of the Cicero ia Cat. Major.
Latins; and by no made term, but in use before by Varro. That is the rows and
orders so handsomely disposed; or five trees so set together, that a regular
angularity, and through prospect, was left on every side, Owing this name not
only unto the Quintuple number of Trees, but the figure declaring that number.
which being doubted at the angle, makes up the Letter ch, that is the
Emphaticall decussation, or fundamental figure.

Now though in some ancient and modern practice the area or decussated plot,
might be a perfect square, answerable to a Tuscan Pedestall, and the
Quinquernio or Cinque-point of a dye; wherein by Diagonall lines the
intersection was regular; accomodable unto Plantations of large growing Trees;
and we must not deny our selves the advantage of this order; yet shall we
chiefly insist upon that of Benedict Curtius de Hortis. Bapt. porta in villa.
Curtius and Porta, in their brief description hereof. Wherein the decussis is
made within a longilaterall square, with opposite angles, acute and obtuse at
the intersection; and so upon progression making a Rhombus or Lozenge
figuration, which seems very agreeable unto the Original figure; Answerable
whereunto we observe the decussated characters in many consulary Coins, and
even in those of Constantine and his Sons, which pretend their pattern in the
Sky; the crucigerous Ensign carried this figure, not transverly or
rectangularly intersected, but in a decussation, after the form, of an Andrean
or Burgundian cross, which answers this description.

Where by the way we shall decline the old Theme, so traced by antiquity of
crosses and crucifixion: Whereof some being right, and of one single piece
without traversion or transome, do little advantage our subject. Nor shall we
take in the mystical Tau, or the Cross of our blessed Savior, which having
in some descriptions an Empedon or crossing foot-stay, made not one single
transversion. And since the Learned Lipsius has made some doubt even of the
Cross of St Andrew, since some Martyrologicall Histories deliver his death by
the general Name of a cross, and Hippolitus will have him suffer by the
sword; we should have enough to make out the received Cross of that Martyr.
Nor shall we urge the labarum, and famous Standard of Constantine, or make
further use thereof, then as the first Letters in the Name of our Savior
Christ, in use among Christians, before the days of Constantine, to be
observed in Of Marius, Alexander, Roma Sotterranea.
Sepulchral Monuments of Martyrs, in the Reign of Adrian, and Antoninus; and to
be found in the Antiquities of the Gentiles, before the advent of Christ, as in
the Medall of King Ptolomy, signed with the same characters, and might be the
beginning of some word or name, which Antiquaries have not hit on.

We will not revive the mysterious crosses of Egypt, with circles on their
heads, in the breast of Serapis, and the hands of their Geniall spirits, not
unlike the character of Venus, and looked on by ancient Christians, with
relation unto Christ. Since however they first began, the Egyptians thereby
expressed the process and motion of the spirit of the world, and the diffusion
thereof upon the Celestial and Elementall nature; employed by a circle and
right-lined intersection. A secret in their Telesmes and magical Characters
among them. Though he that considers the Wherein the lower part is somewhat
longer, as defined by Vpton de studio militari, and Johannes de Bado-Aureo, cum
comment. clariss. and doctiss. Bissaei.
plain cross upon the head of the Owl in the Laterane Obelisk, or the Casal.
de Ritihus. Bosio nella Trionfant^ croce.
cross erected upon a picher diffusing streams of water into two basins, with
sprinkling branches in them, and all described upon a two-footed Altar, as in
the Hieroglyphics of the brazen Table of Bembus; will hardly decline all
thought of Christian signality in them.

We shall not call in the Hebrew Tenapha, or ceremony of their Oblations, waved
by the Priest unto the four quarters of the world, after the form of a cross;
as in the peace offerings. And if it were clearly made out what is remarkably
delivered from the Traditions of the Rabbis, that as the Oil was powered
coronally or circularlly upon the head of Kings, so the High Priest was
anointed decussatively or in the form of a X; though it could not escape a
typical thought of Christ, from mystical considerators; yet being the conceit
is Hebrew, we should rather expect its verification from Analogy in that
language, then to confine the same unto the unconcerned Letters of Greece, or
make it out by the characters of Cadmus or Palamedes.

Of this Quincunciall Ordination the Ancients practiced much discoursed little;
and the Moderns have nothing enlarged; which he that more nearly considers,
in the form of its square Rhombus, and decussation, with the several
commodities, mysteries, parallelismes, and resemblances, both in Art and
Nature, shall easily discern the elegancy of this order.

That this was in some ways of practice in diverse and distant Nations, hints
or deliveries there are from no slender Antiquity. In the hanging Gardens of
Babylon, from Abydenus, Eusebius, and others, Decussatio ipsa jucundum ac
peram^num conspectum praebuit. Cart. Hortar. l. 6.
Curtius describes this Rule of decussation. In the memorable Garden of
Alcinous anciently conceived an original fancy, from Paradise, mention there
is of well contrived order; For so has Didymus and Eustachius expounded the
emphatical word. Diomedes describing the Rural possessions of his father,
gives account in the same Language of Trees orderly planted. And Ulysses being
a boy was promised by his Father forty Figge-trees, and fifty (...).
Phavorinus Philoxenus
rows of Vines producing all kind of grapes.

That the Eastern Inhabitants of India, made use of such order, even in open
Plantations, is deducible from Theophrastus; who descrribing the trees whereof
they made their garments, plainly delivers that they were planted (...) and
in such order that at a distance men would mistake them for Vineyards. The same
seems confirmed in Creece from a singular expression in (...). Polit. 7.
Aristotle concerning the order of Vines, delivered by a military term
representing the orders of Soldiers, which also confirms the antiquity of
this form yet used in vineall plantations.

That the same was used in Latin plantations is plainly confirmed from the
commending pen of Varro, Quintilian, and handsome Description of Indulge
ordinibus, nec secius omnis in u^guem Arbo^ibus positis, secto via limite
quadret. Georg. 2.
Virgil.

That the first Plantations not long after the Flood were disposed after this
manner, the generality and antiquity of this order observed in Vineyards, and
Wine plantations, affords some conjecture. And since from judicious enquiry,
Saturn who divided the world between his three stones, who bears a Sickle in
his hand, who taught the plantations of Vines, the setting, grafting of trees,
and the best part of Agriculture, is discovered to be Noah, whether this early
dispersed Husbandry in Vineyards, had not its Original in that Patriarch, is
no such Paralogicall doubt.

And if it were clear that this was used by Noah after the Flood, I could
easily believe it was in use before it; Not willing to fix such ancient
inventions no higher original then Noah; Nor readily conceiving those aged
Heroes, whose diet was vegetable, and only, or chiefly consisted in the fruits
of the earth, were much deficient in their splendid cultivations; or after the
experience of fifteen hundred years, left much for future discovery in
Botanicall Agriculture. Nor fully persuaded that Wine was the invention of
Noah, that fermented Liquors, which often make themselves, so long escaped
their Luxury or experience; that the first sin of the new world was no sin of
the old. That Cain and Abel were the first that offered Sacrifice; or because
the Scripture is silent that Adam or Isaac offered none at all.

Whether Abraham brought up in the first planting Country, observed not some
rule hereof, when he planted a grove at Beer-sheba; or whether at least a like
ordination were not in the Garden of Solomon, probability may contest.
Answerably unto the wisdom of that eminent Botanologer, and orderly disposer
of all his other works. Especially since this was one piece of Gallantry,
wherein he pursued the specious part of felicity, according to his own
description. I made me Gardens and Orchards, and planted Trees in them of all
kinds of fruit. I made me Pools of water, to water therewith the wood that
brings Eccless. 2.
forth Trees, which was no ordinary plantation, if according to the Targum, or
Chaldee Paraphrase, it contained all kinds of Plants, and some fetched as far
as India; And the extent thereof were from the wall of Jerusalem unto the water
of Siloah.

And if Jordan were but Jaar Eden, that is, the River of Eden, Genesar but
Gansar or the Prince of Gardens; and it could be made out, that the Plain of
Jordan were watered not comparatively, but causally, and because it was the
Paradise of God, as the Learned Vet. Testamen^^ Pharus.
Abramas hinteth, he was not far from the Prototype and original of
Plantations. And since even in Paradise it self, the tree of knowledge was
placed in the middle of the Garden, whatever was the ambient figure, there
wanted not a center and rule of decussation. Whether the groves and sacred
Plantations of Antiquity, were not thus orderly placed, either by quaternio's,
or quintuple ordinations, may favorably be doubted. For since they were so
methodicall in the constitutions of their temples, as to observe the due
situation, aspect, manner, form, and order in Architectonicall relations,
whether they were not as distinct in their groves and Plantations about them,
in form and species respectively unto their Deities, is not without probability
of conjecture. And in their groves of the Sun this was a fit number, by
multiplication to denote the days of the year; and might Hieroglyphically
speak as much, as the mystical Statua of Which King Numa set up with his
fingers so disposed that they numerically denoted 365 Pliny.
Janus in the Language of his fingers. And since they were so critical in the
number of his horses, the strings of his Harp, and rays about his head,
denoting the orbs of heaven, the Seasons and Months of the Year; witty
Idolatry would hardly be flat in other appropriations.

CHAP. II.
NOt was this only a form of practice in Plantations, but found imitation from
high Antiquity. in sundry artificial contrivances and manual operations. For
to omit the position of squared stones, cuneatim or wedgwise in the Walls of
Roman and Gothic buildings; and the lithostrata or figured pavements of the
ancients, which consisted not all of square stones, but were divided into
triquetrous segments, honey-combs, and sexangular figures, according to
Vitruvius; The squared stones and bricks in ancient fabrics, were placed after
this order. And two above or below conjoined by a middle stone or Plinthus,
observable in the ruins of Forum Nervae, the Mausoleum of Augustus, the
Pyramid of Cestius, and the sculpture draughts of the larger Pyramids of
Egypt. And therefore in the draughts of eminent fabrics, Painters do commonly
imitate this order in the lines of their description.

In the Laureat draughts of sculpture and picture, the leaves and foliate works
are commonly thus contrived, which is but in imitation of the Pulvinaria, and
ancient pillow-work, observable in Ionick pieces, about columns, temples and
altars. To omit many other analogies, in Architectonicall draughts, which art
it self is founded upon Of a structure five parts, Fundamentmm, parie^es,
Aperturae, Comp^rtitio, tectum, Leo. Alberti. Five Columes, Tuscan, Dorick,
Ionick, Corinthian, Compound. Five different intercolumniations, Pycnostylos,
dystylos, Systylos, Ar^ostylos, Eustylos. vitru.
fives, as having its subject, and most graceful pieces divided by this number.

The Triumphal Oval, and Civicall Crowns of Laurel, Oak, and Myrtle, when
fully made, were pleated after this order. And to omit the crossed Crowns of
Christian Princes; what figure that was which Anastatius described upon the
head of Leo the third; or who first brought in the Arched Crown; That of
Charles the great, (which seems the first remarkably closed Crown,) was framed
after this Vti constat ex pergamena apud Chifflet; in in B. R. Bruxelli, and
Icon. f. Stradae.
manner; with an intersection in the middle from the main crossing bars, and
the interspaces, unto the frontal circle, continued by handsome network-plates,
much after this order. Whereon we shall not insist, because from greater
Antiquity, and practice of consecration, we meet with the radiated, and starry
Crown, upon the head of Augustus, and many succeeding Emperors. Since the
Armenians and Parthians had a peculiar royal Capp; And the Grecians from
Alexander another kind of diadem. And even Diadems themselves were but
fasciations, and handsome ligatures, about the heads of Princes; nor wholly
omitted in the mitrall Crown, which common picture seems to set too upright and
forward upon the head of Aaron: Worn sometimes singly, or doubly by Princes,
according Macc. 1. 11. De armis Scaccatis, masculatis, invectis fuselatis vide
Spelm. Aspilog. and Vpton. cum ^rudid. Bissaeo.
to their Kingdoms; and no more to be expected from two Crowns at once, upon
the head of Ptlomy. And so easily made out when historians tell us, some bound
up wounds, some hanged themselves with diadems.

The beds of the ancients were corded somewhat after this fashion: That is not
directly, as ours at present, but obliquely, from side to side, and after the
manner of network; whereby they strengthened the spondae or bedsides, and spent
less cord in the work: as is demonstrated by Aristot. Mechan. Quast.
Blancanus.

And as they lay in crossed beds, so they sat upon seeming crosselegg'd seats:
in which form the noblest thereof were framed: Observable in the triumphall
seats, the sella curulis, or Aedyle Chayres, in the coyns of Cestuis, Sylla,
and Julius. That they sat also cross legged many noble draughts declare; and
in this figure the sitting gods and goddesses are drawn in medalls and
medallions. And beside this kind of work in Retiarie and hanging textures, in
embroderies, and eminent needle-works; the like is obvious unto every eve in
glass-windows. Nor only in Glassie contrivances, but also in Lattice and
Stone-work, conceived in the Temple of Solomon; wherein the windows are termed
fenestrae reticulatae, or lights framed like nets. And agreeable (...).
unto the Greek expression concerning Christ in the Cant. 2.
Canticles, looking through the nets, which ours has rendered, he looks
forth at the windows, showing himself through the lattesse; that is, partly
seen and unseen, according to the vifible and invisible side of his nature. To
omit the noble reticulate work, in the chapters of the pillars of Solomon, with
Lillies, and Pomegranats upon a network ground; and the Craticula or grate
through which the ashes fell in the altar of burnt offerings.

That the networks and nets of antiquity were little different in the form from
ours at present, is confirmable from the nets in the hands of the Retiarie
gladiators, the proper combatants with the secutores. To omit the ancient
Conopeion or gnatnet, of the Egyptians, the inventors of that Artifice: the
rushey labyrinths of Theocritus; the nosegaynets, which hung from the head
under the nostrils of Princes; and that uneasy metaphor of Reticulum Jecoris,
which some expound the lobe, we the caul above the liver. As for that famous
network of Vulcan, which enclosed Mars and Venus, and caused that
unextinguishable laugh (...). Hom.
in heaven; since the gods themselves could not discern it, we shall not pry
into it; Although why Vulcan bound them, Neptune loosed them, and Apollo should
first discover them, might afford no vulgar mythologie. Heralds have not
omitted this order or imitation thereof, whiles they Symbollically adorn their
Scuchions with Mascles Fusils and Saltyrs, and while they disposed the figures
of Ermins, and vaired coats in this Quincuncial method.

The same is not forgot by Lapidaries while they cut their gemms pyramidally,
or by aequicrural triangles. Perspective pictures, in their Base, Horison, and
lines of distances, cannot escape these Rhomboidall decussations. Sculptors in
their strongest shadows, after this order do draw their double Haches. And the
very Americans do naturally fall upon it, in their neat and curious textures,
which is also observed in the elegant artifices of Europe. But this is no law
unto the woof of the neat Retiarie Spider, which seems to weave without
transversion, and by the union of right lines to make out a continued surface,
which is beyond the common art of Textury, and may still nettle Minerva the
Goddess As in the contention between Minerva and Arachne.
of that mystery. And he that shall hatch the little seeds, either found in
small webs, or white round Eggs, carried under the bellies of some Spiders,
and behold how at their first production in boxes, they will presently fill the
same with their webbs, may observe the early, and untaught finger of nature,
and how they are natively provided with a stock, sufficient for such Texture.

The Rural charm against Dodder, Tetter, and strangling weeds, was contrived
after this order, while they placed a chalked Tile at the four corners, and one
in the middle of their fields, which though ridiculous in the intention, was
rational in the contrivance, and a good way to diffuse the magic through all
parts of the Area.

Somewhat after this manner they ordered the little stones in the old game of
Pentalithismus, or casting up five stones to catch them on the back of their
hand. And with some resemblance hereof, the Proci or Prodigal Paramours
disposed their men, when they played at In Eustachius.
Penelope. For being themselves an hundred and eight, they set fifty four
stones on either side, and one in the middle, which they called Penelope, which
he that hit was master of the game.

In Chesse-boards and Tables we yet find Pyramids and Squares, I wish we had
their true and ancient description, far different from ours, or the Chet mat
of the Persians, and might continue some elegant remarkables, as being an
invention as High as Hermes the Secretary of Osyris, figuring the whole world,
the motion Plato.
of the Planets, with Eclipses of Sun and Moon.

Physicians are not without the use of this decussation in several operations,
in ligatures and union of dissolved continuities. Mechanics make use hereof in
forcipall Organs, and Instruments of Incision; wherein who can but magnify the
power of decussation, inservient to contrary ends, solution and consolidation,
union, and division, illustrable from Aristotle in the old Nucifragium or
Nutcracker, and the Instruments of Evulsion, compression or incision; which
consisting of two Vectes or arms, converted toward each other, the innitency
and stresse being made upon the hypomochlion or fulciment in the decussation,
the greater compression is made by the union of two impulsors.

The Roman In the disposure of the Legions in the Wars of the Republike, before
the division of the Legion intoten Cohorts by the Emperors. Salmas. in his
Epistle a Mounsieur de Peyresc^ and de Re militari Romanorum.
Batalia was ordered after this manner, whereof as sufficiently known Virgil
has left but an hint, and obscure intimation. For thus were the maniples and
cohorts of the Hastati, Principes and Triarii placed in their bodies, wherein
consisted the strength of the Roman battle. By this Ordination they readily
fell into each other; the Hastati being pressed, handsomely retired into the
intervalls of the principes, these into that of the Triarii, which making as it
were a new body, might jointly renew the battle, wherein consisted the secret
of their successes. And therefore it was remarkably Polybius Appianus.
singular in the battle of Africa, that Scipio fearing a rout from the
Elephants of the Enemy, left not the Principes in their alternate distances,
whereby the Elephants passing the vacuities of the Hastati, might have run upon
them, but drew his battle into right order, and leaving the passages bare,
defented the mischief intended by the Elephants. Out of this figure were made
too remarkable forms of Battle, the Cuneus and Forceps, or the sheare and wedge
battles, each made of half a Rhombus, and but differenced by position. The
wedge invented to break or work into a body, the forceps to environ and defeat
the power thereof, composed out of the selectest Soldiery and disposed into
the form of an V, wherein receiving the wedge, it enclosed it on both sides.
After this form the famous Agathius Ammianus.
Nasses ordered his battle against the Franks, and by this figure the Almans
were enclosed, and cut in pieces.

The Rhombus or Lozenge figure so visible in this order, was also a remarkable
form of battle in the Grecian Aelian, Tact.
Cavalry, observed by the Thessalians, and Philip King of Macedon, and
frequently by the Parthians, As being most ready to turn every way, and best to
be commanded, as having its ductors, or Commanders at each Angle.

The Macedonian Phalanx (a long time thought invincible) consisted of a long
square. For though they might be sixteen in Rank and file, yet when they shut
close, so that the fixed pike advanced before the first, though the number might
be square, the figure was oblong, answerable unto the Quincunciall quadrate of
Curtius. According to this square Thucydides delivers, the Athenians disposed
their battle against the Lacedaemonians (...).
brick wise, and by the same word the Learned Guellius expounds the quad^a^e
of Secto via limi^e quadret. Comment. in Virgil.
Virgil, after the form of a brick or tile.

And as the first station and position of trees, so was the first habitation of
men, not in round Cities, as of later foundation; For the form of Babylon the
first City was square, and so shall also be the last, according to the
description of the holy City in the Apocalypse. The famons pillars of Seth
before the flood, had also the like foundation, if they were but Antidiluvian
Obelisks, and such as Cham and his Egyptian race, imitated after the Flood.

But Nineveh which Authors acknowledge to have exceeded Babylon, was of a
D^^d. Sic.
longilaterall figure, ninety five Furlongs broad, and an hundred and fifty
long, and so making about sixty miles in circuit, which is the measure of three
days journey, according unto military marches, or castrensiall mansions. So
that if Jonas entered at the narrower side, he found enough for one days walk
to attain the heart of the City, to make his Proclamation. And if we imagine a
City extending from Ware to London, the expression will be moderate of six
score thousand Infants, although we allow vacuities, fields, and intervals of
habitation, as there needs must be when the monument of Ninus took up no less
then ten furlongs.

And, though none of the seven wonders, yet a noble piece of Autiquity, and
made by a Copy exceeding all the rest, had its principal parts disposed after
this manner, that is, the Labyrinth of Crete, built upon a long quadrate,
containing five large squares, communicating by right inflections, terminating
in the center of the middle square, and lodging of the Minotaur, if we conform
unto the description of the elegant medall thereof in Antonio Agostino d^lle n
edaglie.
Agostino. And though in many accounts we reckon grossly by the square, yet is
that very often to be accepted as a long-sided quadrate, which was the figure
of the Ark of the Covenant, the table of the Shewbread, and the stone wherein
the names of the twelve Tribes were engraved, that is, three in a row,
naturally making a longilaterall Figure, the perfect quadrate being made by
nine.

What figure the stones themselves maintained, tradition and Scripture are
silent, yet Lapidaries in precious stones affect a Table or long square, and in
such proportion, that the two laterall, and also the three inferior Tables are
equal unto the superior, and the angles of the laterall Tables, contain and
constitute the hypothenusae, or broader sides subtending.

That the Tables of the Law were of this figure, general imitation and
tradition has confirmed; yet are we unwilling to load the shoulders of Moses
with such massy stones, as some pictures lay upon them, since it is plainly
delivered that he came down with them in his hand; since the word strictly
taken implies no such massy hewing, but cutting, and fashioning of them into
shape and furface; since some will have them Emeralds, and if they were made of
the materials of Mount Sina, not improbable that they were marble: Since the
words were not many, the letters short of five hundred, and the Tables written
on both sides required no such capacity.

The beds of the Ancients were different from ours at present, which are almost
square, being framed ob-long, and about a double unto their breadth; not much
unlike the area, or bed of this Quincuncial quadrate. The single beds of Greece
were Aristot. Mechan.
six foot, and a little more in length, three in breadth; the Giantlike bed of
Og, which had four cubits of breadth, nine and a half in length, varied not much
from this proportion. The Funeral bed of King Cheops, in the greater Pyramid,
which holds seven in length, and four foot in breadth, had no great difformity
from this measure; And whatsoever were the breadth, the length could hardly be
less, of the tyrannical bed of Procrustes, since in a shorter measure he had
not been fitted with persons for his cruelty of extension. But the old
sepulchral bed, or Amazonian Plut. in vit. These.
Tomb in the marketplace of Megara, was in the form of a Lozenge; readily made
out by the composure of the body. For the arms not lying sasciated or wrapped up
after the Grecian manner, but in a middle distention, the including lines will
strictly make out that figure,

CHAP. III.
NOw although this elegant ordination of vegetables, has found coincidence or
imitation in sundry works of Art, yet is it not also destitute of natural
examples, and though overlooked by all, was elegantly observable, in several
works of nature.

Could we satisfy our selves in the position of the lights above, or discover
the wisdom of that order so invariably maintained in the fixed Stars of
heaven; Could we have any light, why the stellary part of the first mass,
separated into this order, that the Girdle of Orion should ever maintain its
line, and the two Stars in Charles's Wain never leave pointing at the
Pole-Starre, we might abate the Pythagoricall Music of the Spheres, the
sevenfold Pipe of Pan; and the strange Cryptography of Gaffarell in his Starrie
Book of Heaven.

But not to look so high as Heaven or the single Quincunx of the Hyades upon
the neck of Taurus, the Triangle, and remarkable Crusero about the foot of the
Centaur; observable rudiments there are hereof in subterraneous concretions,
and bodies in the Earth; in the Gypsum or Taleum Rhomboides, in the Favaginites
or honey-comb-stone, in the Asteria and Astroites, and in the crucigerous stone
of S. Iago of Gallicia.

The same is observably effected in the Julus, Cutkins, or pendulous
excrescencies of several Trees, of Wallnuts, Alders, and Hazels, which hanging
all the Winter, and maintaining Capitula squammata Quercum Bauhini, whereof
though he says pe^^aro reperiuntur his tantum invenimus* yet we find them
commonly with us and in great numbers.
their Net-worke close, by the expansion thereof are the early foretellers of
the Spring, discoverable also in long Pepper, and elegantly in the Julus of
Calamus Aromaticus, so plentifully growing with us in the first palms of
Willowes, and in the Flowers of Sycamore, Petasites, Asphodelus, and Blattaria,
before explication. After such order stand the flowery Branches in our best
spread Verbascum, and the seeds about the spicous head or torch of Tapsas
Barbatus, in as fair a regularity as the circular and wreathed order will
admit, which advances one side of the square, and makes the same Rhomboidall.

In the squamous heads of Scabious, Knapweed, and the elegant Jacea Pinea, and
in the Scaly composure of the Oak-Rose, which some years most abounds. After
this order has Nature planted the Leaves in the Head of the common and
prickled Artichoak; wherein the black and shining Flies do shelter themselves,
when they retire from the purple Flower about it; The same is also found in the
pricks, sockets, and impressions of the seeds, in the pulp or bottom thereof;
wherein do elegantly stick the Fathers of their Mother. To omit the
Quincunciall Specks on the top of the Miscle-berry, especially that which
Anthe. Grae inter Epigraminata (...).
grows upon the Tilia or Lime-Tree. And the remarkable disposure of those
yellow fringes about the purple Pestill of Aaron, and elegant clusters of
Dragons, so peculiarly secured by nature, with an ^mbrella or skreening Leaf
about them.

The Spongy leaves of some Seawracks, Fucus, Oaks, in their several Especially
the por^s cervinus Impera^i, Sporosa, or Alga (...).
kinds, found about the Shore, with ejectments of the Sea, are over-wrought
with Network elegantly containing this order, which plainly declares the
naturality of this texture; And how the needle of nature delights to work,
even in low and doubtful vegetations.

The Arbustetum or Thicket on the head of the Tearell, may be observed in this
order: And he that considers that fabric so regularly palisadoed, and
stemmed with flowers of the royal color; in the house of the solitary maggot,
may find the Seraglio of Solomon. And contemplating the calicular shafts, and
uncous disposure of their extremities, so accommodable unto the office of
abster^ion, not condemn as wholly improbable the conceit of those who accept
it, for the herb Ier. 2, 22.
Borith. Where by the way, we could with much inquiry never discover any
transfiguration, in this abstemious insect, although we have kept them long in
their proper houses, and boxes. Where some wrapped up in their webbs, have lived
upon their own bowels, from September unto July.

In such a grove do walk the little creepers about the head of the burre. And
such an order is observed in the aculeous prickly plantation, upon the heads of
several common thistles, remarkably in the notable palisados about the flower
of the milk-Thistle; and he that inquireth into the little bottom of the
globe-thistle, may find that gallant bush arise from a scalpe of like
disposure.

The white umbrella or medicall bush of Elder, is an Epitome of this order:
arising from five main stemms Quincuncially disposed, and tollerably maintained
in their subdivisions. To omit the lower observations in the seminal spike of
Mercury weld, and Plantane.

Thus has nature ranged the flowers of Santfoyne, and French honey suckle; and
somewhat after this manner has ordered the bush in Jupiters beard, or
houseleek; which old superstition set on the tops of houses, as a defensative
against lightening, and thunder. The like in Fenny Seagreen or the water
Strutiotes.
Soldier; which, though a military name from Greece, makes out the Roman
order.

A like ordination there is in the favaginous Sockets, and Lozenge seeds of the
noble flower of the Sun. Wherein in Lozenge figured boxes nature shuts up the
seeds, and balsame which is about them,

But the Fur and Pinetree from their fruits do naturally dictate this
position. The Rhomboidall protuberances in Pineapples maintaining this
Quinouncial order unto each other, and each Rhombus in it self. Thus are also
disposed the triangular foliations, in the conicall fruit of the fur tree,
orderly shadowing and protecting the winged seeds below them.

The like so often occurreth to the curiosity of observers, especially in
spicated seeds and flowers, that we shall not need to take in the single
Quincunx of Fuchsius in the grouth of the masle fear^, the seedie disposure of
Gramen Ischemon, and the trunk or neat Reticulate work in the codde of the
Sachell palm.

For even in very many round stalk plants, the leaves are set after a Quintuple
ordination, the first leaf answering the fifth, in lateral disposition. Wherein
the leaves successively rounding the stalk, in four at the furthest the
compass is absolved, and the fifth leaf or sprout, returns to the position of
the other fifth before it; as in accounting upward is often observable in in
furre pellitorye, Ragweed, the sproutes of Oaks, and thorns upon pollards, and
very remarkably in the regular disposure of the rugged excrescencies in the
yearly shoots of the Pine.

But in square stalked plants, the leaves stand respectively unto each other,
either in cross or decussation to those above or below them, arising at cross
positions; whereby they shadow not each other, and bettter resist the force of
winds, which in a parallel situation, and upon square stalks would more
forcibly bear upon them.

And to omit, how leaves and sprouts which compass not the stalk, are often
set in a Rhomboides, and making long, and short Diagonals, do stand like the
legs of Quadrupeds when they go: Nor to urge the thwart enclosure and
furdling of flowers, and blossoms, before explication, as in the multiplied
leaves of Pionie; And the Chiasmus in five leaved flowers, while one lies wrapped
about the staminous beards, the other four obliquely shutting and closing upon
each other; and how even flowers which consist of four leaves, stand not
ordinarily in three and one, but two, and two cross wise unto the Stylus; even
the Autumnal budds, which awaite the return of the sun, do after the winter
solstice multiply their calicular leaves, making little Rhombuses, and network
figures, as in the Sycamore and Lilac.

The like is discoverable in the original production of plants, which first
putting forth two leaves, those which succeed, bear not over each other, but
shoot obliquely or crossewise, until the stalk appears; which sends not
forth its first leaves without all order unto them; and he that from hence can
discover in what position the two first leaves did arise, is no ordinary
observator.

Where by the way, he that observes the rudimental spring of seeds, shall
find strict rule, although not after this order. How little is required unto
effectual generation, and in what diminutives the plastic principle lodges,
is exemplified in seeds, wherein the greater mass affords so little
comproduction. In Beans the leaf and root sprout from the Germen, the main
sides split, and lie by, and in some pulled up near the time of blooming, we
have found the pulpous sides entire or little wasted. In Acorns the nebb
dilating splitteth the two sides, which sometimes lie whole, when the Oak is
sprouted two handfuls. In Lupins these pulpy sides do sometimes arise with the
stalk in a resemblance of two fat leaves. Wheat and Rye will grow up, if after
they have shot some tender Roots, the adhering pulp be taken from them. Beans
will prosper though a part be cut away, and so much set as suffices to contain
and keep the German close. From this superfluous pulp in unkindely, and wet
years, may arise that multiplicity of little insects, which infest the Roots
and Sprouts of tender Grains and pulses.

In the little nebbe or fructifying principle, the motion is regular, and not
transvertible, as to make that ever the leaf, which nature intends the root;
observable from their conversion, until they attain their right position, if
seeds be set inversedly.

In vain we expect the production of plants from different parts of the seed,
from the same corculum or little original proceed both germinations; and in the
power of this slender particle lie many Roots, that though the fame be pulled
away, the generative particle will renew them again, and proceed to a perfect
plant; And malt may be observed to grow, though the Cummes be fallen from it.

The seminall nebbe has a defined and single place, and not extended unto both
extremes. And therefore many too vulgarly conceive that Barley and Oats grow at
both ends; For they arise from one punctilio or generative nebbe, and the
Spear sliding under the husk, first appears nigh the top. But in Wheat and
Rye being bare the sprouts are seen together. If Barley unhulled would grow,
both would appear at once. But in this and Oat-meal the nebbe is broken away,
which makes them the milder food, and less apt to raise fermentation in
Decoctions.

Men taking notice of what is outwardly vifible, conceive a sensible priority
in the Root. But as they begin from one part, so they seem to start and set out
upon one fignall of nature. In Beans yet soft, in Pease while they adhere unto
the Cod, the rudimentall Leaf and Root are discoverable. In the seeds of
Rocket and Mustard, sprouting in Glasses of water, when the one is manifest the
other is also peeceptible. In muddy waters apt to breed Duckweed, and
Periwinkles, if the first and rudimentall strokes of Duckweed be observed, the
Leaves and Root anticipate not each other. But in the Date-stone the first
sprout is neither root nor leaf distinctly, but borh together; For the
Germination being to pass through the the narrow Navell and hole about the
midst of the stone, the generative germ is feign to enlengthen it self, and
shooting out about an inch, at that distance divides into the ascending and
descending portion.

And though it be generally thought that Seeds will root at that end, where
they adhere to their Originals, and observable it is that the nebbe sets most
often next the stalk, as in Grains, Pulses, and most small Seeds, yet is it
hardly made out in many greater plants. For in Acornes, Almonds, Pistachios,
Wallnuts, and accuminated shells, the germ puts forth at the remotest part of
the pulp. And therefore to set Seeds in that posture, wherein the Leaf and
Roots may shoot right without contortion, or forced circumvolution, which might
render them strongly rooted, and straighter, were a Criticisme in Agriculture.
And nature seems to have made some provision hereof in many from their figure,
that as they fall from the tree they may lie in Positions agreeable to such
advantages.

Beside the open and visible Testicles of plants, the seminall pores lie in
great part invisible, while the Sun finds polypody in stone-wals, the little
stinging Nettle, and nightshade in barren sandy Highways, Scurvy-grasse in
Greeneland, and unknown plants in earth brought from remote Countries, Beside
the known longevity of some Trees, what is the most lasting herb, or seed,
seems not easily determinable. Mandrakes upon known account have lived near an
hundred years. Seeds found in Wilde-Fowls Gizards have sprouted in the earth.
The Seeds of Marjorane and Stramonium carelessly kept, have grown after seven
years. Even in Garden-plots long fallow, and dug up, the seeds of Blattaria
and yellow henbane, and after twelve years burial have produced themselves
again.

That bodies are first spirits Paracelsus could affirm, which in the maturation
of Seeds and fruits, seems obscurely implied by In met. cum Cabeo.
Aristotle, when he delivers, that the spirituous parts are converted into
water, and the water into earth, and attested by observation in the maturative
progress of Seeds, wherein at first may be discerned a flatuous distenfion of
the husk, afterward a thin liquor, which longer time digesteth into a pulp or
kernel observable in Almonds and large Nuts. And some way answered in the
progressionall perfection of animal semination, in its spermaticall
maturation, from crude pubescency unto perfection. And even that seeds
themselves in their rudimentall discoveries, appear in foliaceous surcles, or
sprouts within their coverings, in a diaphonous gellie, before deeper
incr-ssation, is also visibly verified in Cherries, Acorns, Plums.

From seminall confiderations, either in reference unto one mother, or
distinction from animal production, the holy Scripture describes the
vegetable creation; And while it divides plants but into Herb and Tree, though
it seems to make but an accidental division, from magnitude, it tacitly
contains the natural distinction of vegetables, observed by Herbarists, and
comprehending the four kinds. For since the most natural distinction is made
from the production of leaf or stalk, and plants after the two first seminall
leaves, do either proceeed to send forth more leaves, or a stalk, and the
folious and stalky emission distinguishes herbs and trees, and stand
Authentically differenced, but from the accidents of the stalk.

The Aequivocall production of things under undiscerned principles, makes a
large part of generation, though they seem to hold a wide univocacy in their
set and certain Originals, while almost every plant breeds its peculiar insect,
most a Butterfly, moth or fly, wherein the Oak seems to contain the largest
seminality, while the Julus, Oak, apple, dill, woolly tuft, foraminous roundles
upon the leaf, and grapes under ground make a Fly with some difference. The
great variety of Flies lies in the variety of their originals, in the seeds of
Caterpillars or Cankers there lies not only a Butterfly or Moth, but if they
be sterill or untimely cast, their production is often a Fly, which we have
also observed from corrupted and mouldred Eggs, both of Hens and Fishes; To
omit the generation of Bees out of the bodies of dead Heifers, or what is
strange yet well attested, the production of Eeles in the backs of living Cods
and Schoneveldus de Pisc.
Perches.

The exiguity and smallness of some seeds extending to large productions is
one of the magnalities of nature, somewhat illustrating the work of the
Creation, and vast production from nothing. The true Doctissim. Laurenburg horr.
seeds of Cypress and Rampions are indistinguishable by old eyes. Of the seeds
of Tobacco a thousand make not one grain, The disputed seeds of Hearts tongue,
and Maidenhair, require a greater number. From such undiscernable seminalities
arise spontaneous productions. He that would discern the rudimentall stroke of
a plant, may behold it in the Original of Duckweed, at the bigness of a pins
point, from convenient water in glasses, wherein a watchsull eye may also
discover the puncticular Originals of Periwincles and Gnats.

That seeds of some Plants are less then any animals, seems of no clear
decision; That the biggest of Vegetables exceeds the biggest of Animals, in
full bulk, and all dimensions, admits exception in the Whale, which in length
and above ground measure, will also contend with tall Oaks. That the richest
odor of plants, surpasses that of Animals, may seem of some doubt, since
animall-musk, seems to excel the vegetable, and we find so noble a scent in
the Tulip-Fly, and The long and tender green Capricernus rarely found, we could
never meet with but two.
Goat-Beetle.

Now whether seminall nebbes hold any sure proportion unto seminall enclosures,
why the form of the germe does not answer the figure of the enclosing pulp, why
the nebbe is seated upon the solid, and not the channeld side of the seed as in
grains, why since we often meet with two yolks in one shell, and sometimes one
Egg within another, we do not oftener meet with two nebbes in one distinct
seed: why since the Eggs of a Hen laid at one course, do commonly outweigh
the bird, and some moths coming out of their cases, without assistance of food,
will lay so many Eggs as to outweigh their bodies, trees rarely bear their
fruit, in that gravity or proportion: Whether in the germination of seeds
according to Hippocrates, the lighter part ascends, and makes the sprout,
the heaviest tending downward frames the root; Since we observe that the first
shoot of seeds in water, will sink or bow down at the upper and leafing end:
Whether it be not more rational Epicurisme to contrive whole dishes out of the
nebbes and spirited particles of plants, then from the Gallatures and treddles
of Eggs; since that part is found to hold no seminal share in Oval Generation,
are quaeries which might enlarge but must conclude this digression.

And though not in this order, yet how nature delights in this number, and
what consent and coordination there is in the leaves and parts of flowers, it
cannot eseape our observation in no small number of plants. For the calicular
or supporting and dosing leaves, do answer the number of the flowers,
especially in such as exceed not the number of Swallows Eggs; as in Violets,
Stichwort, Blossoms, and flowers of one leaf have often five divisions,
answered by a like number of calicular leaves; as Gentianella, Convolvulus,
Bell-flowers. In many the flowers, blades, or staminous shootes and leaves are
all equally five, as in cockle, mullein and Blattaria; Wherein the flowers
before explication are pentagonally wrapped up, with some resemblance of the
blatta or moth from whence it has its name: But the contrivance of nature is
singular in the opening and shutting of Bindeweeds, performed by five
inflexures, distinguishable by pyramidcall figures, and also different colors.

The rose at first is thought to have been of five leaves, as it yet grows
wild among us; but in the most luxuriant, the calicular leaves do still
maintain that number. But nothing is more admired then the five Brethren of the
Rose, and the strange disposure of the Appendices or Beards, in the calicular
leaves thereof, which in despair of resolution is tolerably salved from this
contrivance, best ordered and suited for the free closure of them before
explication. For those two which are smooth, and of no beard are contrived to
lie undermost, as without prominent parts, and fit to be smoothly covered; the
other two which are beset with Beards on either side, stand outward and
uncovered, but the fifth or half-bearded leaf is covered on the bare side but
on the open side stands free, and bearded like the other.

Besides a large number of leaves have five divisions, and may be circumscribed
by a Pentagon or figure of five Angles, made by right lines from the extremity
of their leaves, as in Maple, Vine, Fig Tree: But five-leaved flowers are
commonly disposed circularly about the Stylus; according to the higher Geometry
of nature, dividing a circle by five radii, which concur not to make
Diameters, as in Quadrilaterall and sexangular Intersections.

Now the number of five is remarkable in every circle, not only as the first
sphaerical number, but the measure of sphaerical motion. For sphaerical bodies
move by fives, and every globular figure placed upon a plane, in direct
volutation, returns to the first point of contaction in the first touch,
accounting by the Axes of the Diameters or Cardinal points of the four
quarters thereof. And before it arriveth unto the same point again, it makes
five circles equal unto it self, in each progress from those quarters,
absolving an equal circle.

By the same number does nature divide the circle of the Sea-Starre, and in
that order and number disposes those elegant Semi-circles, or dentall sockets
and eggs in the Sea Hedgehogge. And no mean Observations hereof there is in
the Mathematics of the neatest Retiary Spider, which concluding in forty four
Circles, from five Semidiameters begins that elegant texture.

And after this manner does lay the foundation of the circular branches of the
Oak, which being five-cornered, in the tender annual sprouts, and manifesting
upon incision the signature of a Star, is after made circular, and swelled
into a round body: Which practice of nature is become a point of art, Elem. li.
4.
and makes two Problemes in Euclide. But the Bryar which sends forth shoots and
prickles from its angles, maintains itt pentagonall figure, and the unobserved
signature of a handsome porch within it. To omit the five small buttons
dividing the Circle of the Ivy-berry, and the five characters in the Winter
stalk of the Walnut, with many other Observables, which cannot escape the eyes
of signal discerners; Such as know where to find Ajax his name in Gallitricum,
or Aarons Mitre in Henbane.

Quincuncial forms and ordinations, are also observable in animal figurations.
For to omit the hioides or throat-bone of animals, the furcula or merry-thought
in birds, which supporteth the scapulae, affording a passage for the windepipe
and the gullet, the wings of Flies, and disposure of their legs in their
first formation from maggots, and the position of their horns, wings and
legs, in their Aurelian cases and swaddling clouts: The back of the Cimex
Arboreus, found often upon Trees and lesser plants, does elegantly discover the
Burgundian decussation; And the like is observable in the belly of the
Notonecton, or water-Beetle, which swimmeth on its back, and the handsome
Rhombusses of the Seapoult, or Werrell, on either side the Spine.

The sexangular Cells in the Honey-combs of Bees, are disposed after this order,
much there is not of wonder in the confused Houses of Pismires, though much in
their busy life and actions, more in the edificial Palaces of Bees and
Monarchical spirits; who make their combs six-corner'd, declining a circle,
whereof many stand not close together, and completely fill the area of the
place; But rather affecting a six-sided figure, whereby every cell affords a
common side unto six more, and also a fit receptacle for the Be it self, which
gathering into a Cylindrical Figure, aptly enters its sexangular house, more
nearly approaching a circular Figure, then either does the Square or Triangle.
And the Combs themselves so regularly contrived, that their mutual
intersections make three Lozenges at the bottom of every Cell; which severally
regarded make three Rows of neat Rhomboidall Figures, connected at the angles,
and so continue three several chains throughout the whole comb.

As for the Favago found commonly on the ^ea shore, though named from an
honeycomb, it but rudely makes out the resemblance, and better agrees with the
round Cells of humble Bees. He that would exactly discern the shop of a Bees
mouth, need observing eyes, and good augmenting glasses; wherein is
discoverable one of the neatest pieces in nature, and must have a more piercing
eye then mine; who finds out the shape of Bulls heads, in the guts of Drones
pressed out behind, according to the experiment of Gomesius; wherein Gom. d^
Sale.
notwithstanding there seems somewhat which might incline a pliant fancy to
credulity of similitude.

A resemblance hereof there is in the orderly and rarely disposed Cells, made by
Flies and Insects, which we have often found fastened about small sprigs, and
in those cottonary and woolly pillows, which sometimes we meet with fastened
unto Leaves, there is included an elegant Network Texture, out of which come
many small Flies. And some resemblance there is of this order in the Eggs of
some Butterflies and months, as they stick upon leaves, and other substances;
which being dropped from behind, nor directed by the eye, does neatly declare
how nature Geometrizeth, and observes order in all things.

A like correspondency in figure is found in the skins and outward teguments of
animals, whereof a regardable part are beautiful by this texture. As the backs
of several Snakes and Serpents, elegantly remarkable in the Aspis, and the
Dart-snake, in the Chiasmus and larger decussations upon the back of the
Rattlesnake, and in the close and finer texture of the Matter formicarum, or
snake that delights in Anthils; whereby upon approach of outward injuries, they
can raise a thicker Phalanx on their backs, and handsomely contrive themselves
into all kinds of flexures: Whereas their bellies are commonly covered with
smooth semicircular divisions, as best accommodable unto their quick and
gliding motion.

This way is followed by nature in the peculiar and remarkable tail of the
Bever, wherein the scaly particles are disposed, somewhat after this order,
which is the plainest resolution of the wonder of ^ellomius, while he says,
with incredible Artifice has Nature framed the tail or Oar of the Bever: where
by the way we cannot but wish a model of their houses, so much extolled by some
Describers: wherein since they are so bold as to venture upon three stages, we
might examine their Artifice in the contignations, the rule and order in the
compartitions; or whether that magnified structure be any more then a rude
rectangular pyle or mere hovell-building.

Thus works the hand of nature in the feathery plantation about birds.
Observable in the skins of the Elegantly conspicuous on the inside of the
stripped skins of Dive-Fowl, of the Cormerant, Goshonder, Weasell, Loon, etc.
breast, legs and Pinions of Turkies, Geese, and Ducks, and the Oars or finny
feet of Waterfowl: And such a natural Net is the scaly covering of Fishes, of
Mullets, Carps, Tenches, etc. even in such as are excoriable and consist of
smaller scales, as Bretts, Soals, and Flounders. The like Reticulate grain is
observable in some Russia Leather. To omit the ruder Figures of the ostracion,
the triangular or cunny fish, or the pricks of the Sea-Porcupine.

The same is also observable in some part of the skin of man, in habits of neat
texture, and therefore not unaptly compared unto a Net: We shall not affirm
that from such grounds, the Egyptian Embalmers imitated this texture yet in
their linen folds the same is still observable among their neatest Mummies, in
the figures of Isis and Osyris, and the Tutelary spirits in the Bembine Table.
Nor is it to be over-looked how Orus, the Hieroglyphick of the world is
described in a Network covering, from the shoulder to the foot. And (not to
enlarge upon the cruciated character of Trismegistus, or handed crosses, so
often occurring in the Needles of Pharaoh, and Obelisks of Antiquity) the
Statuae Is^^cae, Teraphims, and little Idols, found about the Mummies, do make
a decussation or Jacobs Cross, with their arms, like that on the head of
Ephraim and Nanasses, and this decussis is also graphically described between
them.

This Reticulate or Network was also considerable in the inward parts of man,
not only from the first subtegmen or warp of his formation, but in the netty
fibers of the veins and vessels of life; wherein according to common Anatomy
the right and transverse fibers are decussated, by the oblique fibers; and so
must frame a Reticulate and Quincunciall Figure by their Obliquatio^^,
Emphatically extending that Elegant expression of Scripture. Thou have
curiously embroydered me, thou have wrought me up after the finest way of
texture, and as it were with a Needle.

Nor is the same observable only in some parts, but in the whole body of man,
which upon the extension of arms and legs, does make out a square, whose
intersection is at the genitals. To omit the fantastical Quincunx, in Plato of
the first Hermaphrodite or double man, united at the Loins, which Jupiter
after divided.

A rudimentall resemblance hereof there is in the cruciated and rugged folds of
the Reticulum, or Net-like Ventricle of ruminating horned animals, which is the
second in order, and culinarily called the Honeycomb. For many divisions there
are in the stomach of several animals; what number they maintain in the Scarus
and ruminating Fish, common description, or our own experiment has made no
discovery. But in the Ventricle of Porpuses there are three divisions. In many
Birds a crop, Gizard, and little receptacle before it; but in Cornigerous
animals, which chew the cudd, there are no less then four of distinct position
and office.

The Reticulum by these crossed cells, makes a further digestion, in the dry and
exuccous part of the Aliment received from the first Ventricle. For at the
bottom of the gullet there is a double Orifice; What is first received at the
mouth descends into the first and greater stomach, from whence it is returned
into the mouth again; and after a fuller mastication, and salivous mixture,
what part thereof descends again, in a moist and succulent body, it slides
down the softer and more permeable Orifice, into the Omasus or third stomach;
and from thence conveyed into the fourth, receives its last digestion. The
other dry and exuccous part after rumination by the larger and stronger orifice
bears into the first stomach, from thence into the Reticulum, and so
progressively into the other divisions. And therefore in Calves newly calved,
there is little or no use of the two first Ventricles, for the milk and liquid
aliment slippeth down the softer Orifice, into the third stomach; where making
little or no stay, it passes into the fourth, the seat of the Coagulum, or
Runnet, or that division of stomach which seems to bear the name of the whole,
in the Greek translation of the Priests Fee, in the Sacrifice of
Peace Offerings.

As for those Rhomboidal Figures made by the Cartilagineous parts of the Wezon,
in the Lungs of great Fishes, and other animals, as Rondeletius discovered, we
have not found them so to answer our figure as to be drawn into illustration;
Something we expected in the more discernable texture of the lungs of frogs,
which notwithstanding being but two curious bladders not weighing above a
grain, we found interwoven with veins not observing any just order. More
orderly situated are those cretaceous and chalky concretions found sometimes in
the bigness of a small fech on either side their spine; which being not
agreeable unto our order, nor yet observed by any, we shall not here discourse
on.

But had we found a better account and tolerable Anatomy, of that prominent
jowle of the 1652. described in our Pseudo. Epidem. Edit. 3.
Sperma Ceti Whale, then questuary operation, or the stench of the last cast
upon our shore, permitted, we might have perhaps discovered some handsome order
in those Net-like seases and sockets, made like honey-combs, containing that
medicall matter.

Lastly, The incession or local motion of animals is made with analogy unto
this figure, by decussative diametrals, Quincunciall Lines and angles. For to
omit the enquiry how Butterflies and breezes move their four wings, how birds
and fishes in air and water move by joint strokes of opposite wings and
Finnes, and how salient animals in jumping forward seem to arise and fall upon
a square base; As the station of most Quadrupeds, is made upon a long square,
so in their motion they make a Rhomboides; their common progression being
performed Diametrally, by decussation and cross advancement of their legs,
which not observed begot that remarkable absurdity in the position of the
legs of Castors horse in the Capitol. The Snake which moves circularly makes
his spires in like order, the unequal and concave spirals answering each other
at alternate distances; In the motion of man the arms and legs observe this
thwarting position, but the legs alone do move Quincuncially by single angles
with some resemblance of an V measured by successive advancement from each
foot, and the angle of indenture great or less, according to the extent or
brevity of the stride.

Studious Observators may discover more analogies in the orderly book of
nature, and cannot escape the Elegancy of her hand in other correspondencies.
The Figures of nails and crucifying appurtenances, are but precariously made
out in the Granadilla or flower of Christ's passion: And we despair to behold in
these parts that handsome draught of crucifixion in the fruit of the B^rbado
Pine. The seminal Spike of Phalaris, or great shaking grass, more nearly
answers the tail of a Rattle-Snake, then many resemblances in Porta: And if the
man Orchis Anthropophora, Fabii Columna.
Orchis of Columna be well made out, it excels all analogies. In young
Wallnuts cut athwart, it is not hard to apprehend strange characters; and in
those of somewhat elder growth, handsome ornamental draughts about a plain
cross. In the root of Osmond or Water sern, every eye may discern the form of
a Half Moon, Rainbow, or half the character of Pisces. Some find Hebrew,
Arabic, Greek, and Latin Characters in Plants; In a common one among us we
seem to read Acaia, Viviu, Lilil.

Right lines and circles make out the bulk of plants; In the parts thereof we
find Helicall or spirall roundles, voluta's, conicall Sections, circular
Pyramids, and frustums of Archimedes; And cannot overlook the orderly hand of
nature, in the alternate succession of the flat and narrower sides in the
tender shoots of the Ash, or the regular inequality of bigness in the
five-leaved flowers of Henbane, and something like in the calicular leaves of
Tutson. How the spots of Persicaria do manifest themselves between the sixth and
tenth ribbe. How the triangular capp in the stem or stylus of Tuleps does
constantly point at three outward leaves. That spicated flowers do open first
at the stalk. That white flowers have yellow thrums or knops. That the nebbe of
Beans and Pease do all look downward, and so press not upon each other; And
how the seeds of many pappous or downy flowers locked up in sockets after a
gomphosis or mortis-articulation, diffuse themselves circularly into branches
of rare order, observable in Tragopogon or Goats-beard, conformable to the
Spiders web, and the Radii in like manner telarely inter-woven.

And how in animal natures, even colors hold correspondencies, and mutual
correlations. That the color of the Caterpillar will show again in the
Butterfly, with some latitude is allowable. Though the regular spots in their
wings seem but a mealie adhesion, and such as may be wiped away, yet since they
come in this variety, out of their cases, there must be regular pores in those
parts and membranes, defining such Exudations.

That Suet. in vit. Aug.
Augustus had native notes on his body and belly, after the order and number in
the Star of Charles wayne, will not seem strange unto astral Physiognomy,
which accordingly considers moles in the body of man, or Physical
Observators, who from the position of moles in the face, reduce them to rule
and correspondency in other parts. Whether after the like method medicall
conjecture may not be raised, upon parts inwardly affected; since parts about
the lips are the critical seats of Pustules discharged in Agues; And
scrophulous tumors about the neck do so often speak the like about the
Mesentery, may also be considered.

The russet neck in young Lambs seems but adventitious, and may owe its
tincture to some contaction in the womb; But that if sheep have any black or
deep russet in their faces, they want not the same about their legs and feet;
That black Hounds have mealy mouths and feet; That black Cows which have any
white in their tayls, should not miss of some in their bellies; and if all
white in their bodies, yet if black-mouthed, their ears and feet maintain the
same color, are correspondent tinctures not ordinarily failing in nature,
which easily unites the accidents of extremities, since in some generations she
transmutes the parts themselves, while in the Aurelian Metamorphosis the head
of the canker becomes the Tail of the Butterfly. Which is in some way not
beyond the contrivance of Art, in submersions and Inlays, inverting the
extremes of the plant, and fetching the root from the top, and also imitated in
handsome columnary work, in the inversion of the extremes; wherein the Capitel,
and the Base, hold such near correspondency.

In the motive parts of animals may be discovered mutual proportions; not only
in those of Quadrupeds, but in the thigh bone, leg, foot-bone, and claws of
Birds. The legs of Spiders are made after a sesqui-tertian proportion, and the
long legs of some locusts, double unto some others. But the internodial parts
of Vegetables, or spaces between the joints, are contrived with more
uncertainty; though the joints themselves in many plants, maintain a regular
number.

In vegetable composure, the unition of prominent parts seems most to answer
the Apophyses or processes of Animal bones, whereof they are the produced
parts or prominent explantations. And though in the parts of plants which are
not ordained for motion, we do not expect correspondent Articulations; yet in
the setting on of some flowers, and seeds in their sockets, and the lineal
commissure of the pulpe of several seeds, may be observed some shadow of the
Harmony; some show of the Gomphosis or mortis-articulation.

As for the Diarthrosis or motive Articulation, there is expected little
Analogy, though long-stalked leaves do move by long lines, and have observable
motions, yet are they made by outward impulsion, like the motion of pendulous
bodies, while the parts themselves are united by some kind of symphysis unto
the stock.

But standing vegetables, void of motive-Articulations, are not without many
motions. For beside the motion of vegetation upward, and of radiation unto all
quarters, that of contraction, dilatation, inclination, and contortion, is
discoverable in many plants. To omit the rose of Jericho, the ear of Rye, which
moves with change of weather, and the Magical spit, made of no rare plants,
which winds before the fire, and rosts the bird without turning.

Even Animals near the Classis of plants, seem to have the most restless
motions. The Summer-worm of Ponds and plashes makes a long waving motion; the
hair-worm seldom lies still. He that would behold a very anomalous motion, may
observe it in the Tortile and tiring strokes of Found often in some form of
redmaggot in the standing waters of Cisterns in the Summer.
Gnatworms.

CHAP. IIII.
AS for the delights, commodities, mysteries, with other concernments of this
order, we are unwilling to fly them over, in the short deliveries of Virgil,
Varro, or others, and shall therefore enlarge with additionall ampliations.

By this position they had a just proportion of Earth, to supply an equality of
nourishment. The distance being ordered, thick or thin, according to the
magnitude or vigorous attraction of the plant, the goodness, leanness, or
propriety of the foil, and therefore the rule of Solon, concerning the
territory of Athens, not extendible unto all; allowing the distance of six foot
unto common Trees, and nine for the Fig and Olive.

They had a due diffusion of their roots on all or both sides, whereby they
maintained some proportion to their height, in Trees of large radication. For
that they strictly make good their profundeur or depth unto their height,
according to common conceit, and that expression of Quantum vertice ad auras
Aethereas, tantum radice ad tartara tendit.
Virgil, though confirmable from the plane Tree in Pliny, and some few
examples, is not to be expected from the generation of Trees almost in any
kind, either of side-spreading, or tap-roots: Except we measure them by
lateral and opposite diffusions; nor commonly to be found in minor or hearby
plants; If we except Sea-holly, Liquorish, Sea-rush, and some others.

They had a commodious radiation in their growth; and a due expansion of their
branches, for shadow or delight. For trees thickly planted, do run up in
height and branch with no expansion, shooting unequally or short, and thin
upon the neighboring side. And therefore Trees are inwardly bare, and spring,
and leaf from the outward and Sunny side of their branches.

Whereby they also avoided the peril of (...) or one tree perishing with
another, as it happens ofttimes from the sick effluviums or entanglements of
the roots, falling foul with each other. Observable in Elmes set in hedges,
where if one dies the neighboring Tree prospers not long after.

In this situation divided into many intervals and open unto six passages, they
had the advantage of a fair perflation from winds, brushing and cle^nsing
their surfaces, relaxing and closing their pores unto due perspiration. For
that they afford large effluviums perceptible from odours, diffused at great
distances, is observable from Onyons out of the earth; which though dry, and
kept until the spring, as they shoot forth large and many leaves, do notably
abate of their weight. And mint growing in glasses of water, until it arriveth
unto the weight of an ounce, in a shady place, will sometimes exhaust a pound
of water.

And as they send forth much, so may they receive somewhat in: For beside the
common way and road of reception by the root, there may be a refection and
imbibition from without; For gentle shows refresh plants, though they enter not
their roots; And the good and bad effluviums of Vegetables, promote or
debilitate each other. So Epithymum and Dodder, rootlesse and out of the
ground, maintain themselves upon Thyme, Savory, and plants, whereon they hang.
And Ivy divided from the root, we have observed to live some years, by the
cirrous parts commonly conceived but as tenacles and holdfasts unto it. The
stalks of mint cropped from the root stripped from the leaves, and set in glasses
with the root end upward, and out of the water, we have observed to send forth
sprouts and leaves without the aid of roots, and scordium to grow in like
manner, the leaves set downward in water. To omit several Sea-plants, which
grow on single roots from stones, although in very many there are side-shoots
and fibers, beside the fastening root.

By this open position they were fairly exposed unto the rays of Moon and
Sun, so considerable in the growth of Vegetables. For though Poplars,
Willows, and several Trees be made to grow about the brinks of Acharon, and
dark habitations of the dead; Though some plants are content to grow in obscure
Wells; wherein also old Elm pumps afford sometimes long bushy sprouts, not
observable in any aboveground: And large fields of Vegetables are able to
maintain their verdure at the bottom and shady part of the Sea; yet the
greatest number are not content without the actual rays of the Sun, but
bend, incline, and follow them; As large lists of solisequious and
Sun-following plants. And some observe the method of its motion in their own
growth and conversion twining toward the West by the South, as Bryony, Hops,
Woodbine, and several kinds of Bindeweed, which we shall more admire; when any
can tell us, they observe another motion, and Twist by the North at the
A^^ipodes. The same plants rooted against an erect North-wall full of holes,
will find a way through them to look upon the Sun. And in tender plants from
mustard seed, sown in the winter, and in a plot of earth placed inwardly
against a South-window, the tender stalks of two leaves arose not erect, but
bending toward the window, nor looking much higher then the Meridian Sun. And
if the pot were turned they would work themselves into their former
declinations, making their conversion by the East. That the Leaves of the Olive
and some other Trees solstitially turn, and precisely tell us, when the Sun is
entered Cancer, is scarce expectable in any Climate; and Theophrastus warily
observes it; Yet somewhat thereof is observable in our own, in the leaves of
Willows and Sallows, some weeks after the Solstice. But the great Convolvulus
or white-flower'd Bindweed observes both motions of the Sun, while the flower
twists Aequinoctionally from the left hand to the right, according to the daily
revolution; The stalk twineth ecliptically from the right to the left,
according to the annual conversion.

Some commend the exposure of these orders unto the Western gales, as the most
generative and fructifying breath of heaven. But we applaud the Husbandry of
Solomon, whereto agrees the doctrine of Theophrastus. Arise O North-winde, and
blow thou South upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out; For the
North-winde closing the pores, and shutting up the effluviums, when the South
does after open and relax them; the Aromatical gummes do drop, and sweet odours
fly actively from them. And if his garden had the same situation, which mapps,
and charts afford it, on the East side of Jerusalem, and having the wall on the
West; these were the winds, unto which it was well exposed.

By this way of plantation they increased the number of their trees, which they
lost in Quaternio's, and square-orders, which is a commodity insisted on by
Varro, and one great intent of nature, in this position of flowers and seeds in
the elegant formation of plants, and the former Rules observed in natural and
artificial Figurations.

Whether in this order and one Tree in some measure breaking the cold, and
pinching gusts of winds from the other, trees will not better maintain their
inward circles, and either escape or moderate their excentricities, may also be
considered. For the circles in Trees are naturally concentricall, parallel
unto the bark, and unto each other, till frost and piercing winds contract and
close them on the weatherside, the opposite semicircle widely enlarging, and at
a comely distance, which hinders ofttimes the beauty and roundnesse of Trees,
and makes the Timber less serviceable; whiles the ascending juice not readily
passing, settles in knots and inequalities. And therefore it is no new course
of Agriculture, to observe the native position of Trees according to North and
South in their transplantations.

The same is also observable underground in the circinations and sphaerical
rounds of Onyons, wherein the circles of the Orbs are ofttimes larger, and the
meridionall lines stand wider upon one side then the other. And where the
largeness will make up the number of planetical Orbs, that of Luna, and the
lower planets excede the dimensions of Saturn, and the higher: Whether the
like be not verified in the Circles of the large roots of Briony and Mandrakes,
or why in the knotts of Deal or Fur the Circles are often eccentricall,
although not in a plane, but vertical and right position, deserves a further
enquiry.

Whether there be not some irregularity of roundnesse in most plants according
to their position? Whether some small compression of pores be not perceptible
in parts which stand against the current of waters, as in Reeds, Bullrushes,
and other vegetables toward the streaming quarter, may also be observed, and
therefore such as are long and weak, are commonly contrived into a roundnesse
of figure, whereby the water presses less, and slippeth more smoothly from
them, and even in flags of flat-figured leaves, the greater part obvert their
sharper sides unto the current in ditches.

But whether plants which float upon the surface of the water, be for the most
part of cooling qualities, those which shoot above it of heating virtues, and
why? whether Sargasso for many miles floating upon the Western Ocean, or
Sea-lettuce, and Phasganium at the bottom of our Seas, make good the like
qualities? Why Fenny waters afford the hottest and sweetest plants, as Calamus,
Cyper^s, and Crowfoot, and mudd cast out of ditches most naturally produces
Arsmart, Why plants so greedy of water so little regard oil? Why since many
seeds contain much oil within them, they endure it not well without, either in
their growth or production? Why since Seeds shoot commonly under ground, and
out of the air, those which are let fall in shallow glasses, upon the surface
of the water, will sooner sprout then those at the bottom? And if the water be
covered with oil, those at the bottom will hardly sprout at all, we have not
room to conjecture.

Whether Ivy would not less offend the Trees in this clean ordination, and
well kept paths, might perhaps deserve the question. But this were a quaery
only unto some habitations, and little concerning Cyrus or the Babylonian
territory; wherein by no industry Harpalus could make Ivy grow: And Alexander
hardly found it about those parts to imitate the pomp of Bacchus. And though in
these Northern Regions we are too much acquainted with one Ivy, we know too
little of another, whereby we apprehend not the expressions of Antiquity, the
Galen. de med. secundum loc.
Splenetick medicine of Galen, and the Emphasis of the Poet, in the Hedera
formosior alba.
beauty of the white Ivy.

The like concerning the growth of Misseltoe, which depends not only of the
species, or kind of Tree, but much also of the Soil. And therefore common in
some places, not readily found in others, frequent in France, not so common in
Spain, and scarce at all in the Territory of Ferrara: Nor easily to be found
where it is most required upon Oaks, less on Trees continually verdant.
Athough in some places the Olive escapes it not, requiting its detriment, in
the delightful view of its red Berries; as Clusius observed in Spain, and
Bellonius about Jerusalem. But this Parasiticall plant suffers nothing to grow
upon it, by any way of art; nor could we ever make it grow where nature had not
planted it; as we have in vain attempted by inocculation and incision, upon its
native or foreign stock. And though there seem nothing improbable in the seed,
it has not succeeded by sation in any manner of ground, wherein we had no
reason to despair, since we read of vegetable horns, and how Rams horns will
root about Linscholen.
Goa.

But besides these rural commodities, it cannot be meanly delectable in the
variety of Figures, which these orders open, and closed do make. Whilst every
enclosure makes a Rhombus, the figures obliquely taken a Rhomboides, the
intervals bounded with parallel lines, and each intersection built upon a
square, affording two Triangles or Pyramids vertically conjoined; which in the
strict Quincunciall order do oppositely make acute and blunt Angles.

And though therein we meet not with right angles, yet every Rhombus containing
four Angles equal unto two right, it virtually contains two right in every
one. Nor is this strange unto such as observe the natural lines of Trees, and
parts disposed in them. For neither in the root does nature affect this angle,
which shooting downward for the stability of the plant, does best effect the
same by Figures of Inclination; Nor in the Branches and stalky leaves, which
grow most at acute angles; as declining from their head the root, and
diminishing their Angles with their altitude: Verified also in lesser Plants,
whereby they better support themselves, and bear not so heavily upon the stalk:
So that while near the root they often make an Angle of seventy parts, the
sprouts near the top will often come short of thirty. Enen in the nerves and
master veins of the leaves the acute angle rules; the obtuse but seldom
found, and in the backward part of the leaf, reflecting and arching about the
stalk. But why ofttimes one side of the leaf is unequal unto the other, as in
Hazell and Oaks, why on either side the master vein the lesser and derivative
channels not directly opposite, nor at equal angles, respectively unto the
adverse side, but those of one part do often exceed the other, as the Wallnut
and many more deserves another enquiry.

Now if for this order we affect coniferous and tapering Trees, particularly
the Cypress, which grows in a conicall figure; we have found a Tree not only
of great Ornament, but in its Essentials of affinity unto this order. A solid
Rhombus being made by the conversion of two Equicrurall Cones, as Archimedes
has defined. And these were the common Trees about Babylon, and the East,
whereof the Ark was made; and Alexander found no Trees so accomodable to build
his Navy; And this we rather think to be the Tree mentioned in the Canticles,
which stricter Botanology will hardly allow to be Camphire.

And if delight or ornamentall view invite a comely disposure by circular
amputations, as is elegantly performed in Hawthorns; then will they answer the
figures made by the conversion of a Rhombus, which makes two concentricall
Circles; the greater circumference being made by the lesser angles, the lesser
by the greater.

The Cylindrical figure of Trees is virtually contained and latent in this
order. A Cylinder or long round being made by the conversion or turning of a
Parallelogram, and most handsomely by a long square, which makes an equal,
strong and lasting figure in Trees, agreeable unto the body and motive parts of
animals, the greatest number of Plants, and almost all roots, though their
stalks be angular, and of many corners, which seem not to follow the figure of
their Seeds; Since many angular Seeds send forth round stalks, and sphaericall
seeds arise from angular spindles, and many rather conform unto their Roots, as
the round stalks of bulbous Roots, and in tuberous Roots stemmes of like
figure. But why since the largest number of Plants maintain a circular Figure,
there are so few with teretous or longround leaves; why coniferous Trees are
tenuifolious or narrowleafed, why Plants of few or no joints have commonly
round stalks, why the greatest number of hollow stalks are round stalks; or why
in this variety of angular stalks the quadrangular most exceeds, were too
long a speculation; Mean while obvious experience may find, that in Plants of
divided leaves above, nature often begins circularly in the two first leaves
below, while in the singular plant of Ivy, she exercises a contrary Geometry,
and beginning with angular leaves below, rounds them in the upper branches.

Nor can the rows in this order want delight, as carrying an aspect answerable
unto the dipteros hypoethros, or double order of columns open above; the
opposite ranks of Trees standing like pillars in the Cavedia of the Courts of
famous buildings, and the Portico's of the Templa subdialia of old; Somewhat
imitating the Peristylia or Cloister buildings, and the Exedrae of the
Ancients, wherein men discoursed, walked and exercised; For that they derived
the rule of Columns from Trees, especially in their proportional diminutions,
is illustrated by Vitruvi^s from the shafts of Fur and Pine. And though the
inter-arboration do imitate the Areostylos, or thin order, not strictly
answering the proportion of intercolumniations; yet in many Trees they will not
exceed the intermission of the Columns in the Court of the Tabernacle; which
being an hundred cubits long, and made up by twenty pillars. will afford no
less then intervals of five cubits.

Beside, in this kind of aspect the sight being not diffused but circumscribed
between long parallels and the (...) and adumbration from the branches, it
frames a penthouse over the eye, and makes a quiet vision: And therefore in
diffused and open aspects, men hollow their hand above their eye, and make an
artificial brow, whereby they direct the dispersed rays of sight, and by this
shade preserve a moderate light in the chamber of the eye; keeping the pupilla
plump and fair, and not contracted or shrunk as in light and vagrant vision.

And therefore providence has arched and paved the great house of the world,
with colors of mediocrity, that is, blew and green, above and below the sight,
moderately terminating the acies of the eye. For most plants, though green
above-ground, maintain their Original white below it, according to the candor
of their seminall pulp, and the rudimental leaves do first appear in that
color; observable in Seeds sprouting in water upon their first foliation.
Green seeming to be the first supervenient, or above-ground complexion of
Vegetables, separable in many upon ligature or inhumation, as Succory, Endive,
Artichoaks, and which is also lost upon fading in the Autumn.

And this is also agreeable unto water it self, the alimental vehicle of
plants, which first alters into this color; And containing many vegetable
seminalities, reveals their Seeds by greenness; and therefore soonest
expected in rain or standing water, not easily found in distilled or water
strongly boiled; wherein the Seeds are extinguished by fire and decoction, and
therefore last long and pure without such alteration, affording neither
uliginous coats, gnatworms, Acari, hair-worms, like crude and common water; And
therefore most fit for wholesome beverage, and with malt makes Ale and Beer
without boiling. What large water-drinkers some Plants are, the Canary-Tree and
Birches in some Northern Countries, drenching the Fields about them do
sufficiently demonstrate. How water it self is able to maintain the growth of
Vegetables, and without extinction of their generative or medicall virtues;
Beside the experiment of Helmonts tree, we have found in some which have lived
six years in glasses. The seeds of Scur^y-grasse growing in waterpots, have
been fruitful in the Land; And Asarum after a years space, and once casting
its leaves in water, in the second leaves, has handsomely performed its
vomiting operation.

Nor are only dark and green colors, but shades and shadows contrived through
the great Volume of nature, and trees ordained not only to protect and shadow
others, but by their shades and shadowing parts, to preserve and cherish
themselves. The whole radiation or branchings shadowing the stock and the root,
the leaves, the branches and fruit, too much exposed to the winds and
scorching Sun. The calicular leaves enclose the tender flowers, and the
flowers themselves lie wrapped about the seeds, in their rudiment and first
formations, which being advanced the flowers fall away; and are therefore
contrived in variety of figures, best satisfying the intention; Handsomely
observable in hooded and gaping flowers, and the Butterfly bloomes of
leguminous plants, the lower leaf closely involving the rudimental Cod, and the
alary or wingy divisions embracing or hanging over it.

But Seeds themselves do lie in perpetual shades, either under the leaf, or
shut up in coverings; And such as lie barest, have their husks, skins, and
pulps about them, wherein the nebbe and generative particle lies moist and
secured from the injury of Air and Sun. Darkness and light hold
interchangeable dominions, and alternately rule the seminal state of things.
Light unto Lux orco, tenebrae Jovi, tenebrae orco, lux Jovi. Hipp^cr. de diaeta.
Plato is darkness unto Jupiter. Legions of seminall Idaea's lie in their
second Chaos and Orcus of Hipocrat^s; till putting on the habits of their
forms, they show themselves upon the stage of the world, and open dominion of
Jove. They that held the Stars of heaven were but rays and flashing glimpses
of the Empyreall light, through holes and perforations of the upper heaven,
took of the natural shadows of stars, while S. Hevelii Selenographia.
according to better discovery the poor Inhabitants of the Moon have but a
polary life, and must pass half their days in the shadow of that Luminary.

Light that makes things seen, makes some things invisible, were it not for
darkness and the shadow of the earth, the noblest part of the Creation had
remained unseen, and the Stars in heaven as invisible as on the fourth day,
when they were created above the Horizon, with the Sun, or there was not an eye
to behold them. The greatest mystery of Religion is expressed by adumbration,
and in the noblest part of Jewish Types, we find the Cherubims shadowing the
Mercy-seat: Life it self is but the shadow of death, and souls departed but the
shadows of the living: All things fall under this name. The Sun it self is
but the dark simulachrum, and light but the shadow of God.

Lastly, It is no wonder that this Quincunciall order was first and still
affected as grateful unto the Eye: For all things are seen Quincuncially; For
at the eye the Pyramidal rays from the object, receive a decussation, and so
strike a second base upon the Retina or hinder coat, the proper organ of
Vision; wherein the pictures from objects are represented, answerable to the
paper, or wall in the dark chamber; after the decussation of the rays at the
hole of the hornycoat, and their refraction upon the Christalline humor,
answering the foramen of the window, and the unequal or burning-glasses, which
refract the rays that enter it. And if ancient Anatomy would hold, a like
disposure there was of the optic or visual nerves in the brain, wherein
Antiquity conceived a concurrence by decussation. And this not only observable
in the Laws of direct Vision, but in some part also verified in the reflected
rays of sight. For making the angle of incidence equal to that of reflection,
the visuall raye returns Quincuncially, and after the form of a V, and the
line of reflection being continued unto the place of vision, there arises a
semi-decussation, which makes the object seen in a perpendicular unto it self,
and as far below the reflectent, as it is from it above; observable in the
Sun and Moon beheld in water.

And this is also the law of reflection in moved bodies and sounds, which though
not made by decussation, observe the rule of equality between incidence and
reflection; whereby whispering places are framed by Ellipticall arches laid
side-wise; where the voice being delivered at the focus of one extremity,
observing an equality unto the angle of incidence, it will reflect unto the
focus of the other end, and so escape the ears of the standers in the middle.

A like rule is observed in the reflection of the vocal and sonorous line in
Echoes, which cannot therefore be heard in all stations. But happening in
woody plantations, by waters, and able to return some words; if reached by a
pleasant and well-dividing voice, there may be heard the softest notes in
nature.

And this not only verified in the way of^ence, but in animal and
intellectual receptions. Things entering upon the intellect by a Pyramid from
without, and thence into the memory by another from within, the common
decussation being in the understanding as is delivered by Car. Bovillus de
intellectu.
Bovillus. Whether the intellectual and fantastical lines be not thus rightly
disposed, but magnified diminished, distorted, and ill placed in the
Mathematics of some brains, whereby they have irregular apprehensions of
things, perverted notions, conceptions, and incurable hallucinations, were no
unpleasant speculation.

And if Egyptian Philosophy may obtain, the scale of influences was thus
disposed, and the geniall spirits of both worlds, do trace their way in
ascending and descending Pyramids, mystically apprehended in the Letter X, and
the open Bill and stradling Legs of a Stork, which was imitated by that
Character.

Of this Figure Plato made choice to illustrate the motion of the soul, both of
the world and man; while he delivers that God divided the whole conjunction
length-wise, according to the figure of a Greek X, and then turning it about
reflected it into a circle; By the circle implying the uniform motion of the
first O^b, and by the right lines, the planetical and various motions within
it. And this also with application unto the soul of man, which has a double
aspect, one right, whereby it beholds the body, and objects without; another
circular and reciprocal, whereby it beholds it self. The circle declaring the
motion of the indivisible soul, simple, according to the divinity of its
nature, and returning into it self; the right lines respecting the motion
pertaining unto sense, and vegetation, and the central decussation, the
wondrous connection of the several faculties conjointly in one substance. And
so conjoined the unity and duality of the soul, and made out the three
substances so much considered by him; That is, the indivisible or divine, the
divisible or corporeal, and that third, which was the Systasis or harmony of
those two, in the mystical decussation.

And if that were clearly made out which Justin Martyr took for granted, this
figure has had the honor to characterize and notify our blessed Savior, as
he delivers in that borrowed expression from Plato; Decussavit eum in
universo, the hint whereof he would have Plato derive from the figure of the
brazen Serpent, and to have mistaken the Letter X for T, whereas it is not
improbable, he learned these and other mystical expressions in his Learned
Observations of Egypt, where he might obviously behold the Mercurial
characters, the handed crosses, and other mysteries not thoroughly understood in
the sacred Letter X, which being derivative from the Stork, one of the ten
sacred animals, might be originally Egyptian, and brought into Greece by
Cadmus of that Country.

CHAP. V.
TO enlarge this contemplation unto all the mysteries and secrets, accomodable
unto this number, were inexcusable Pythagorisme, yet cannot omit the ancient
conceit of five surnamed the number of (...).
justice; as justly dividing between the digits, and hanging in the center of
Nine, described by square numeration, which angularly
divided will make the decussated number; and so agreeable unto the
Quincunciall Ordination, and rows divided by Equality, and just decorum, in
the whole com-plantation; And might be the Original of that common game among
us, wherein the fifth place is Sovereign, and carries the chief intention.
The Ancients wisely instructing youth, even in their recreations unto virtue,
that is, early to drive at the middle point and Central Seat of justice.

Nor can we omit how agreeable unto this number an handsome division is made in
Trees and Plants, since Plutarch, and the Ancients have named it the Divisive
Number, justly dividing the Entities of the world, many remarkable things in
it, and also comprehending the (...), Arbor, fru^ex, suffrutex, herba, and that
fifth which comprehends the fungi and tubera, whether to be named (...),
comprehending also conferva marina salsa, and Seacords, of so many yards length.
general division of Vegetables. And he that considers how most blossoms of
Trees, and greatest number of Flowers, consist of five leaves; and therein does
rest the settled rule of nature; So that in those which exceed there is often
found, or easily made a variety; may readily discover how nature rests in this
number, which is indeed the first rest and pause of numeration in the fingers,
the natural Organs thereof. Nor in the division of the feet of perfect animals
does nature exceed this account. And even in the joints of feet, which in birds
are most multiplied, surpasses not this number; So progressionally making them
out in many, that from five in the fore-claw she descends unto two in the
hindemost; And so in four feet makes up the number of joints, in the five
fingers or toes of man.

Not to omit the Quintuple Section of a Elleipsts, parabola, Hyperbole,
Circulus, Triangulum.
Cone, of handsome practice in Ornamentall Garden-plots, and in some way
discoverable in so many works of Nature; In the leaves, fruits, and seeds of
Vegetables, and scales of some Fishes, so much considerable in glasses, and the
optic doctrine; wherein the learned may consider the Crystalline humor of the
eye in the cuttle fish and Loligo.

He that forgets not how Antiquity named this the Conjugall or wedding number,
and made it the Emblem of the most remarkable conjunction, will conceive it
duly appliable unto this handsome Economy, and vegetable combination; May
hence apprehend the allegorical sense of that obscure expression of (...) id
est nuptias multas. Rhodig.
Hesiod, and afford no improbable reason why Plato admitted his Nuptial guests
by fives, in the kindred of the Plato de leg. 6.
married couple.

And though a sharper mystery might be implied in the Number of the five wise
and foolish Virgins, which were to meet the Bridegroom, yet was the same
agreeable unto the Conjugall Number, which ancient Numerists made out by two
and three, the first parity and imparity, the active and passive digits, the
material and formal principles in generative Societies. And not discordant
even from the customs of the Romans, who admitted but Plutarch problem. Romans 1.
five Torches in their Nuptial folemnities. Whether there were any mystery or
not implied, the most generative animals were created on this day, and had
accordingly the largest benediction: And under a Quintuple consideration,
wanton Antiquity considered the Circumstances of generation, while by this
number of five they naturally divided the Nectar of the fifth Planet,

The same number in the Hebrew mysteries and Cabalistical accounts was the
Archang. dog. Cubal.
character of Generation; declared by the Letter He, the fifth in their
Alphabet; According to that Cabalisticall Dogma: If Abram had not had this
Letter added unto his Name, he had remained fruitless, and without the power
of generation: Not only because hereby the number of his Name attained two
hundred forty eight, the number of the affirmative precepts, but because as
increated natures there is a male and female, so in divine and intelligent
productions, the mother of Life and Fountain of souls in Cabalisticall
Technology is called Binah; whose Seal and Character was He. So that being
sterill before, he recived the power of generation from that measure and
mansion in the Archetype; and was made conformable unto Binah. And upon such
involved considerations, the Jod into He.
ten of Sarai was exchanged into five, If any shall look upon this as a stable
number, and fitly appropriable unto Trees, as Bodies of Rest and Station, he
has herein a great Foundation in nature, who observing much variety in legs
and motive Organs of Animals, as two, four, six, eight, twelve, fourteen, and
more, has passed over five and ten, and assigned them unto none, or very few,
as the Phalangium monstrosum Brasilianum, Clus^i and Jac. de Laet. Cur. poster.
Americae Descript. If perfectly described. And for the stability of this
Number, he shall not want the sphericity of its nature, which multiplied in it
self, will return into its own denomination, and bring up the rear of the
account. Which is also one of the Numbers that makes up the mystical Name of
God, which consisting of Letters denoting all the sphaericall Numbers, ten,
five, and six; Emphatically sets forth the Notion of Trismegistus, and that
intelligible Sphere, which is the Nature of God.

Many Expressions by this Number occur in Holy Scripture, perhaps unjustly
laden with mystical Expositions, and little concerning our order. That the
Israelites were forbidden to eat the fruit of their new planted Trees, before
the fifth year, was very agreeable unto the natural Rules of Husbandry:
Fruits being unwholesome and lash, before the fourth, or fifth Year. In the
second day or Feminine part of five, there was added no approbation. For in the
third or masculine day, the same is twice repeated; and a double benediction
enclosed both Creations, whereof the one, in some part was but an
accomplishment of the other. That the Trespasser Lev 6.
was to pay a fifth part above the head or principal, makes no secret in this
Number, and implied no more then one part above the principal; which being
considered in four parts, the additionall forfeit must bear the Name of a fifth.
The five golden mice had plainly their determination from the number of the
Princes; That five should put to flight an hundred might have nothing
mystically employed; considering a rank of Soldiers could scarce consist of a
lesser number. Saint Paul had rather speak five words in a known then ten
thousand in an unknown tongue: That is as little as could well be spoken. A
simple proposition consisting of three words and a complexed one not ordinarily
short of five.

More considerable there are in this mystical account, which we must not
insist on. And therefore why the radical Letters in the Pentateuch, should
equal the number of the Soldiery of the Tribes; Why our Savior in the
Wilderness fed five thousand persons with five Barley Loaves, and again, but
four thousand with no less then seven of Wheat? Why Joseph designed five
changes of Raiment unto Benjamin? and David took just five pibbles out of the
Brook against the Pagan Champion? (...) four and one, or five. Scali^.
We leave it unto Arithmeticall Divinity, and Theological explanation.

Yet if any delight in new Problemes, or think it worth the enquiry, whether
the Critical Physician has rightly hit the nominall notation of Quinque; Why
the Ancients mixed five or three but not four parts of water unto their Wine:
And Hippocrates observed a fifth proportion in the mixture of water with milk,
as in Dysenteries and bloody fluxes. Under what abstruse foundation Astrologers
do Figure the good or bad Fate from our Children, in (...), or bona fortuna the
name of the fifth house.
good Fortune, or the fifth house of their Celestial Schemes. Whether the
Egyptians described a Star by a Figure of five points, with reference unto
the Conjunct, opposite, sextile, trigonal, tetragonal.
five Capital aspects, whereby they transmit their Influences, or abstruser
Considerations? Why the Cabalisticall Doctors, who conceive the whole
Sephiroth, or divine emanations to have guided ^he ten-stringed Harp of David,
whereby he pacified the evil spirit of Saul, in strict numeration do begin
with the Perihypate Meson, or ff^fa ut, and so place the Tiphereth answering C
sol fa ut, upon the fifth string: Or whether this number be oftener applied unto
bad things and ends, then good in holy Scripture, and why? He may meet with
abstrusities of no ready resolution.

If any shall question the rationality of that Magic, in the cure of the blind
man by Serapis, commanded to place five fingers on his Altar, and then his hand
on his Eyes? Why since the whole Comoedy is primarily and naturally comprised
in (...)*
four parts, and Antiquity permitted not so many persons to speak in one Scene,
yet would not comprehend the same in more or less then five acts? Why amongst
Sea-starres nature chiefly delights in five points? And since there are found
some of no fewer then twelve, and some of seven, and nine there are few or none
discovered of six or eight? If any shall enquire why the Flowers of Rue
properly consist of four Leaves, The first and third Flower have five? Why
since many Flowers have one leaf or Vnifolium, nullifolium.
none, as Scaliger will have it, diverse three, and the greatest number consist
of five divided from their bottomes; there are yet so few of two: or why nature
generally beginning or setting out with two opposite leaves at the Root, does
so seldom conclude with that order and number at the Flower? he shall not
pass his hours in vulgar speculations.

If any shall further quaery why magneticall Philosophy excludes decussations,
and needles transversly placed do naturally distract their verticities? Why
Geomancers do imitate the Quintuple Figure, in their Mother Characters of
Acquisition and Amission, etc. somewhat answering the Figures in the Lady or
speckled Beetle? With what Equity, Chiromantical conjecturers decry these
decussations in the Lines and Mounts of the hand? What that decussated Figure
intends in the medall of Alexander the Great? Why the Goddesses sit commonly
crosse-legged in ancient draughts, Since Juno is described in the same as a
veneficial posture to hinder the birth of Hercules? If any shall doubt why at
the Amphidromicall Feasts, on the fifth day after the Child was born, presents
were sent from friends, of Polipusses, and Cuttle-fishes? Why five must be only
left in that Symbolicall mutiny among the men of Cadmus? Why Proteus in Homer
the Symbol of the first matter, before he settled himself in the midst of his
Sea Monsters, does place them out by fives? Why the fifth years Ox was
acceptable Sacrifice unto Jupiter? Or why the Noble Antoninus in some sense
does call the soul it self a Rhombus? He shall not fall on trite or trivial
disquisitions. And these we invent and propose unto acuter enquirers,
nauseating crambe verities and questions over-queried. Flat and flexible truths
are beat out by every hammer; But Vulcan and his whole forge sweat to work our
Achilles his armor. A large field is yet left unto sharper discerners to
enlarge upon this order, to search out the quaternio's and figured draughts of
this nature, and moderating the study of names, and mere nomenclature of
plants, to erect generalities, disclose unobserved proprieties, not only in the
vegetable shop, but the whole volume of nature; affording delightful Truths,
confirmable by sense and ocular Observation, which seems to me the surest path,
to trace the Labyrinth of Truth. For though discursive enquiry and rational
conjecture, may leave handsome gashes and flesh-wounds; yet without conjunction
of this expect no mortal or dispatching blows unto error.

But the Hyades near the Horizon about midnight, at that time.
Quincu^x of Heaven runs low, and it is time to close the five ports of
knowledge; We are unwilling to spin out our awaking thoughts into the
phantasmes of sleep, which often continues praecogitations; making Cables of
Cobwebbes and Wildernesses of handsome Groves. Beside De Insomnii^.
Hippocrates has spoke so little and the Artemodorus and Apomazar.
Oneirocriticall Masters, have left such frigid Interpretations from plants,
that there is little encouragement to dream of Paradise it self. Nor will the
sweetest delight of Gardens afford much comfort in sleep; wherein the dullness
of that sense shakes hands with delectable odours; and though in the Strewed
with roses.
Bed of Cleopatra, can hardly with any delight raise up the ghost of a Rose.

Night which Pagan Theology could make the daughter of Chaos, affords no
advantage to the description of order: Although no lower then that Mass can we
derive its Genealogy. All things began in order, so shall they end, and so
shall they begin again; according to the ordainer of order and mystical
Mathematics of the City of Heaven.

Though Somnus in Homer be sent to rowse up Agamemnon, I find no such effects
in these drowsy approaches of sleep. To keep our eyes open longer were but to
act our Antipodes. The Huntsmen are up in America, and they are already past
their first sleep in Persia. But who can be drowsy at that howr which freed us
from everlasting sleep? or have slumbring thoughts at that time, when sleep it
self must end, and as some conjecture all shall awake again?

FINIS.
THE STATIONER TO THE READER.
I Cannot omit to advertise, that a Book was published not long since,
Entitled, Natures Cabinet Unlocked, bearing the Name of this Author: If any
man have been benefited thereby this Author is not so ambitious as to
challenge the honor thereof, as having no hand in that Work. To distinguish of
true and spurious Pieces was the Original Criticisme, and some were so
handsomely counterfeited, that the Entitled Authors needed not to disclaim
them. But since it is so, that either he must write himself, or Others will
write for him, I know no better Prevention then to act his own part with less
intermission of his Pen.

Books Printed for Hen. Broom at the Gun in Ivy-Lane.
The Souls Conflict, Being Eight Sermons, six whereof were preached at Oxford.

The Queens Exchange, A Comedy, By Richard Brom.

Two Essays of Love and Marriage.

The Grand Impostor Examined, Or, the life and Trial of James Nayler.

The Souls Tournkey, Being a Conference betwixt Mr Hanum and Mr Tuke Moderator
of Gr. Coll. in London.

Books now in the Press which will shortly be extant.
The Affinity of sacred Liturgies, By Hamon L'Estrage, Esquire.

Five New Comedies which were never before published, By Richard Brom.

A Learned and much desired Commentary on the whole Epistle to the Philippians,
By Nath. Tucker Late Preacher of the Gospel at Portsmouth.


