THE DECLARATION Of Major-Generall BROWN, CONCERNING The Lord General Fairfax,
and the Army, and the raising of Forces, for securing and guarding of the City
of London, and putting it into a posture of WAR.

WITH His Speech in Parliament touching the same, and his Protestation
thereupon.

ALSO, The Declaration, Desires, and Proposals of the House of Commons, to the
Lord General.

Subscribed, WILLIAM LENTHALL, Speaker.

AND His Majesty's Speech concerning the Army, upon his coming to Hurst-Castle
in VVilt-shire.

LIKEWISE. The Resolution of the Army, touching the Parliament and City, and
their joyful Propositious thereupon.

Printed for C. VV. near the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1648.

Major General BROWN HIS SPEECH In PALIAMENT,
Concerning the Lord General Fairfax, and his Declaration touching the Army.
BOth Houses having received a Letter from the Lord General Fairfax, for the
gaining to such ends as have been proposed in the Armies late Remonstrance, and
pressing them to the present apprehension of the dangerous Juncture of
affairs; the Commons began to consult upon the same, whose debates for'd up,
and flew exceeding high; some moving that his Excellencies Commission might be
made null and taken from him; Others, that the Army might be required to
retreat 40 miles from London, and others moved, that the City might be put into
a posture of War; but Sheriff Brown stood up, and made an excellent Speech,
declaring, That there was nothing to be expected from the City, and that f^r
his part he would endeavor the preservation of the peace thereof, and to keep
a right understanding between his Excellency, the City, and Army. And Mr Pryn
declared his sense and resolution touching the Army, cyting many presidents,
that many have been voted traitors ^or disobeying auth r^ty of Parliament, but
for his part he would not say that any were such. After some disputation and
debate thereon, the House voted that a Declaratory Letter should be presented
to the General, a coyy whereof follows,

May it please your Excellency,
THe House taking notice by your Letter of the 30. of Novem. touching the
present motion and design of the army, have commanded m^ to let you know, that
upon matu^e deliberate judging, that it may be dangerous both to the City and
army; it is their pleasure that you remov^ not the army near London; and to the
end the country may not be burdened with free quarter, nor the army want their
due support, they have commanded me to acquaint you, that they have signified
their pleasure to the Lord Major, Aldermen, and common council, that they
forth with provide the sum of 40000. l. of so much thereof as they can possibly
raise at present* and pay the same to the Treasurers at wars, to be forthwith
sent unto you for our army, which being all I have in command, I remain

Your humble servant, VVil. Lenthal Speaker.


The resolution of the Army touching the Citizens of London, viz.
That a more equal dispensing of Justice and Mercy in relation to things done
or suffered in the late wars, and the establishing of the future Government of
this kingdom upon a safe succession and equal Constitution of Parliaments, and
that (for the ending of present, and avoiding of future Differences) to be
Ratified by an Agreement and Subscription of the people thereunto. Which things
we pressed in the way of Reason and Persuasion only, that they might be duly
and timely considered. But to our grief we find, in stead of any Satisfacton
or a reasonable answer thereto, they are wholly rejected, without any
consideration of what ever Reason or Justice might be in the things set forth
or propounded therein; for what less can be understood, when the things
propounded were mainly for the avoidance of evils appearing in the Treaty with
the King: And seeing the prevailing part of those, to whom we did apply, to
have as it were their eyes wilfully shut, and ears stopped, against any thing of
Light or Reason offered to them, we find no place left for our former
charitable or hopeful apprehensions, concerning their error in such evilf
ways; but remaining fully assured of the danger and destructivenesse thereof,
as to all those public ends for which they were entrusted, and also of the
just advantage and necessity which lie in the things we have propounded and
insist on, we now see nothing left, to which their engaging and persisting in
such ways, and rejection of these better things propounded, can rationally be
attribur^d less then a treacherous or corrupt neglect of, and Apostasy from
the Public Trust reposed in them; although we could wish from our souls, we
might yet find the contrary.

Therefore it is our hearts desire, and shall be our endeavor, that so much,
both of the matter and form of the present Parliamentory Authority may be
preserved, as can be safe, or will be useful to these ends, until a just and
full Constitution thereof, both for matter and form (suitable to the public
ends, it serves for) can be entroduced.

And therefore first, it should be great rejoicing (if God saw it good) that
the majority of the present House of Commons were become sensible of the evil
and distructivenesse of their late way, and would resolvedly and vigorously
apply themselves to the speedy execution of justice, with the righting and
casing of the oppressed people, and to a just settlement of the Kingdom upon
such foundations as have been propounded by us, and others for that purpose,
and would for the speedier and surer prosecution of these things exclude from
Communication in their Councels, all such corrupt and Apostarized Members as
have appeared hitherto, but to obstruct and hinder such matter of Justice,
Safety, and public interest, and to pervert their Councels a contrary way and
have therein so shamefully both falsified, and forftied their Trust,

But however if God shall not see it good (to vouchsafe that mercy to them and
the Kingdom) we shall secondly desire, That so many of them as God has kept
upright, and shall touch with a just sense of those things, would by
protestation or otherwise, acquit themselves from such breach of Trust, and
approve, their faithfulness, by withdrawing from those that persist in the
guilt thereof, and take such a posture, whereby they may speedily and effectually
prosecute those necessary and public ends, without such inteeruptions,
Diversions, or depravations of their Council from the rest, to their endless
trouble, and hazard of the Kingdom as formerly, and for so many of them, whose
hearts God shall stir up thus to do.

We shall therein, in this case of extremity, look upon them as persons having
materially the chief Trust of the Kingdom remaining in them, and though not a
formal standing power to be continued in them, or drawn into ordinary
Presidents; yet the best and most rightful that can be had, as the present
state and exigence of affairs now stand; And we shall accordingly own them,
adhere to them, and be guided by them in their faithful profecution of that
trust, in order unto, and until the introducing of a more full and formal power
in a just Representative to be speedy endeavored.

Now yet further to take away all jealousies in relation to our selves, which
might withold or disccurse any honest members from this courage, as we have
the witness of God in our hearts, that in these proceedings we do not seek,
but even resolve we will not take advantages to our selves, either in point of
profit or power; and that if God did open to us a way, wherein with honesty and
faithfulness to the public Interest, and good people engaged for us, we
might presently be dischargeed, so as we might not in our present Employments
look on, and be accessory to, yea supporters of the Parliament, in the present
corrupt, oppressive and destructive proceedings, we should with rejoicing, and
without more ado, embrace such a discharge, rather then interpose in these
things to our own vast trouble and hazard; so if we could but obtain a
rational assurance for the effectual prosecuting of these things, we shall
give any proportionable assurance on our parts, concerning our laying down of
arms, when, and as we should be required.

His Majesty's Declaration upon his coming into Wiltshire.
MY Lords, You are come to take your leave of me, and I believe we shall scarce
ever see each other again: but Gods will be done, I thank God I have made my
peace with him, and shall without fear undergo what he shall be pleased to
suffer men to do unto me. My Lords, you cannot but know, that in my fall and
ruin, you see your own, and that also near to you; I pray God send you better
friends then I have found. I am fully infoamed of the whole carriage of the plot
against me and mine; and nothing so much afflicts me, as the sense and feeling
I have of the sufferings of my Subjects, and the miserice that hang over my
three Kingdomr, drawn upon them by those who (upon pretenses of good) violently
pursue their own interests and ends. His Maj having thus declared himself, the
Commissioners kissed his Maj. hand, and took their leave. And on Friday morning
last, his May. was guarded by a troop of horse from the Isse of VVight, to
Hurst Castle in Wilsthire, where he is now secured, Cap. Mil^^^ay, cap.
loyner, cap. Weston, Mr. Herbert, Mr. Cutchside, Mr. Reding and Mr. Lewen,
being appointed Attendants for his Majesty's person.

FINIS.

