CASES CONSIDERED and RESOLVED. WHEREIN All the tender godly conscientious
Ministers in England (Whether for a Congregationall, or a Presbyteriall way)
are concerned. OR Pills to Purge Malignants. And all profane, ignorant, and
scandalous persons. (But more particularly Calculated for the Meridian of
Margarets Fishstreet-hill) from those gross conceits that they have of their
Childrens right to Baptism; and of their own right to the Supper of the Lord,
etc. ALSO Good Council to bad men. Or friendly advise (in several
particulars) to unfriendly Neighbors. By THOMAS BROOKS, a willing Servant unto
God, and the Faith of his People, in the glorious Gospel of Christ, at
Margarets Fishstreet-hill.

Mallem ruere cum Christo, quam regnare cum Caesare. Luther. Si veritas est
causa discordiae, mori possum tacere non possum. Jerome. LONDON: Printed by M.
Simmons, for John Hancock and are to be sold at the first Shop in
Popes-Head-Alley, next to Cornhill 1653.

To the Conscientious READER.
THe World is full of Books, and of how many may it be said, That they do but
proclaim the vanity of the writer, and procure weariness, if not vexation, to
the Reader, in this knowing and censorious age? What I have written is out of
faithfulness to Christ, and love to Souls: If my pains shall prove
advantageous, for the internal and eternal good of any poor Souls, I shall
count it reward enough. I doubt not but those that are spiritual will find
something of the Spirit in what follows, and for that cause will relish and
love it, though others may therefore stand at the greater distance from it.
Surely, where Truth comes, the Children of Truth will entertain it, and ask
no body leave. In these days they that have least right to Ordinances, do
make the greatest noise in crying out for Ordinances. Gods Ordinances are
choice pearls, and yet too often cast before Swine, which doubtless has
provoked the Lord to shed the blood of many among us, who have unworthily drunk
the blood of his Son, and trampled it under their feet as an unholy thing. Heb.
10.29.
Though my Candle be but little, yet I must not hide it under a bushel. Though
I have but one Talent, yet I must not hide it in a Napkin. I hope thou have
that anointing of the Spirit that will teach thee not to reject the fruit for
the trees sake, nor so much to mind the man as the matter. But least I should
hold thee long in the porch, I will briefly acquaint thee with the Reasons that
have induced me to present to the World what follows; and so draw to a close.

The Reasons are these.

First, That the honor, truth and ways of Christ, which I hope are dearer to
me then my life, 1 Samuel 2.30.
and which are struck at through my sides, may be vindicated.

Secondly, That the mouth of iniquity (or which is all one, Psalm. 107.42. Titus
1.11. Psalm. 63.11.
that the foul mouths of profane, ignorant, malignant, and scandalous
persons) may be effectually stopped.

Thirdly, That the honest, just, and righteous proceedings of the Honorable
Committee may be manifested, and not smothered by the false reports of any
profane malignant spirits that were present; Isa. 5.20.
who are apt and ready enough to call good evil, and evil good, light,
darkness, and darkness light, etc.

Fourthly, That the importunate desires of several Ministers, and Christians
may be satisfied, especially those to whom I preach, etc.

Fifthly, 2 Cor. 11. Chapter 10-ult. Pro. 22.1. Eccles. 7.1.
That my Ministry and good name (which should be dearer to me then my life) may
be vindicated. A good name is rather to be chosen then great riches, and loving
favor rather then silver and gold: a good name is better then precious
ointment, says Solomon, Eccles. 7.1. The initiall letter ((...)) of the Hebrew
word ((...) Tob) that in this Text is rendered good, is bigger then ordinary, to
show the more then ordinary excellency of a good name amongst men. The
Moralists say of fame, or of a man's good Name (Omnia si perdas, The French have
this Proverb among them, That a good renown is better then a golden Girdle.
famam servare memento; Qua semel amissa postea nullus eris) i. e. Whatsoever
commodity you lose, be sure yet to preserve that Jewel of a good Name. But if
any shall delight to blot and blur my name, that their own may shine the
brighter; I shall desire them frequently to remember a sweet saying of Austin
(Quisquis volens detrahit famae meae, nolens addit mercedi meae.) He that
willingly takes from my good Name, unwillingly adds to my reward. Mat. 5.11.12.
The remembrance of this, and the bird in the bosom (conscience) singing,
makes a Heaven of joy in my heart, 2 Cor. 1.12.
in the midst of all the trialls that do attend me.

Sixthly, That others may be undeceived, who are apt enough to judge that there
are other things and worse things charged upon me then indeed there is. Jer.
20.10, 11. Psalm. 35.11.
And indeed some say already, that there were eighteen things, others that
there were six and twenty things charged against me; and all this to render my
person and my doctrine, contemptible in the World, etc.

Seventhly, That the Malignant and profane Petitioners, and others of their
stamp, may be either satisfied, convinced, and reformed, or that they may be
found speechless, and without excuse in the day of Christ.

Eighthly, Because my case is a general case, and reaches all the godly
conscientious Ministers in England, be they of one judgment or another. And
clearly if upon the following Charge against me, the profane, ignorant, and
Malignant party, should out and rout the godly Ministers in the Nation; I
wonder where there would be found a conscientious Minister, that should not
upon these grounds be outed and routed?

Reader,

I desire that thou would cast a mantle of love over the Mistakes of the
PRINTER, I having no opportunity to wait on the Press, by reason of my many
Engagements other ways. I will not by any Prolepsis detain thee at the door,
but desire that the God of all consolations would bless thee with all
external, internal and eternal blessings, that thy actions may be
prosperous, thy troubles few, thy comforts many, thy life holy, thy death
happy, and thy soul lodged for ever in the bosom of Christ. So I remain

Thine, so far as thou art CHRIST'S. Thomas Brooks.

A SHORT PREAMBLE That I intended (to make before the Honorable Committee for
Plundered Ministers) that Truth and my Self might be the better vindicated and
cleared.
Gentlemen,
'TWas a Divine saying of Seneca, No man sets a better rate upon virtue, Qui
boni viri famam perdidit ne conscientiam perderet. Seneca.
then he that loses a good Name to keep a good Conscience. He that has a
good conscience, sits Noah-like, quiet and still in the greatest combustions,
and distractions (Conscientia pura semper secura) A good Conscience has sure
confidence, it makes a man as bold as a Lion, Proverbs 28.1.

I remember Calvin writing to the French King, says, that Opposition is
(Evangelij genius) the black Angel that dogs the Gospel at the heels. And
certainly, where Christ is like to gain most, and Satan like to lose most,
there Satan in his instruments will stir and rage most; yet if every opposer of
the Gospel and the Saints, were turned into a Devil, that old saying would be
found true (Veritas stat in aperto campo) Truth stands in the open fields, yea
and 'twill make those stand in whom it lives; yea 'twill make them stand
cheerfully, resolutely, and unmoveably, in the face of the greatest, highest,
and hottest oppositions.

Concerning these profane, ignorant, malignant, and scandalous Petitioners, I
shall say as Lactantius says of Lucian (Nec diis nec hominibus pepercit) he
spared neither God, nor man; such are these Petitioners. It Is said of Cataline,
that he was Monstrum ex variis diversisque inter se pugnantibus naturis
conflatum.
a compound and bundle of warring lusts and vices; such are these Petitioners.
Historians say, that Tigers rage and are mad, when they smell the fragrancy of
Spices; such are these Petitioners, when they smell the fragrancy of the Graces
of Gods Spirit in the principles and practices, in the lives and religious
exercises of the people of God.

Gentlemen, I am compelled to tell you that I have by the gracious assistance
of God, preached publicly the Gospel above these thirteen years, and the
greatest part of those years I have spent in Preaching the word in London,
where God has given me many precious seals of my Ministry, which are now my
comfort, and in the day of Christ will be my Crown. They are my living
Epistles, they are my walking Certificates, they are my letters testimonial,
as Paul speaks. And yet in all this time none have showed themselves so
malicious, 2 Cor. 3.1, 2.
impudent and ignorant, as to Petition against me, as these that stand now
before you; yet am I confident that this act of theirs shall work for my
external, internal, and eternal good: Romans 8.28. Judge. 14.14.
And out of this eater God will bring forth meat and sweetness to others also.

Gentlemen, I shall now trouble your patience no further but come now to answer
to the things that these profane, Malignant Petitioners have charged against
me, in their Petition to this Honorable Committee.

TO THE HONORABLE COMMITTEE FOR Plundered Ministers. The humble Petition of the
Parishioners of Margaret New-Fishstreet, London, whose Names are hereunto
subscribed.
SHOWING,
THat one Mr. Thomas Brooks, was by Order of your Honors, dated the twenty
third of March, 1651. appointed to Preach for a Month, next ensuing, as
Probationer; to the end, that upon the Parishioners, and the said Mr. Brooks
mutual trial of each other, the said Mr. Brooks might continue, or your
Petitioners have some other to officiate amongst them.

Your Petitioners are humbly bold to offer to your Honors consideration, that
they have had trial of the said Mr. Brooks ever since your Honors Order; but
cannot find that comfort to their souls they hoped; nor indeed is the said
Mr. Brooks so qualified to your Petitioners understandings, as to remain any
longer with them. And further, your Petitioners say, that the said Mr. Brooks
refuses to afford your Petitioners the use of the Ordinances, of Baptism and
the Lords Supper; nor will he bury their dead.

The Petitioners therefore humbly pray, that your Honors will be pleased to
revoke your Order, and give liberty to your Petitioners for six Months, to
present a fit person to your Honors to be their Minister; and in the mean
time, that Sequestrators may be appointed to provide for the service of the
Cure, out of such money, as shall arise for tithes out of the said Parish; And,
etc.
QUERIES Upon the Malignants PETITION.
Gentlemen,
IN their Petition they say, that I was to preach a Month, as Probationer, and
after a mutual trial of each other, I might continue, or the Petitioners have
some other to officiate amongst them. To this I say,

1. That I never had any such thing, by one or other propounded to me, to
preach amongst them as Probationer. It was only thus propounded to me; That at
a full meeting, I was chosen by the honest and well affected of the Parish, to
come and preach amongst them. And I did more then twice or thrice declare to
them before I came, that if they did expect any thing else of me, I would not
come: Only I did declare my willingness, to receive any among them into
Fellowship with us, that the Lord had taken into Fellowship with himself, and
that were willing to walk in Gospel Order.

2. I say, that had they propounded the business to me, as it is presented in
their Petition, I would never have come upon such terms, and that upon several
reasons, which here, I shall omit.

3. I say, that they had a trial of me all the Winter, I preached above twenty
Sermons on the Lecture-nights, before this Order was granted, or desired;
therefore I know not to what purpose I should preach among them upon trial,
when they had beforehand so large a trial of me.

4. I say, that these profane, malignant Petitioners, had neither a hand in
choosing of me, nor yet hearts to make any trial of my ministry; (so far as I
can understand) and therefore they may well have a black brand put upon them,
as men void of common honesty and ingenuity, in abusing the Honorable
Committee, and petitioning against me: When as they were neither the major part
of the Parish, by far, nor yet was the Order of the Committee granted to them,
nor did the Order of the Committee give any power, or liberty to these profane
malignant Petitioners, to choose some other to officiate, as they pretend; what
greater dishonor and contempt can they cast upon the Committee, then to
declare to the world, that they have given to them (that are so notoriously
known for their profaneness and malignancie) an Order to choose one to
officiate amongst them.

In their Petition they further say, That they have had trial of me ever since
your Honors Order; this is as far from truth, as the Petitioners are from
being real friends to the present Authotity of the Nation. For it is notoriously
known, that they use not to hear me, but others, whose malignant principles and
practices, are most suitable to their own.

Further they say, they cannot find that comfort to their souls they hoped.
Here give me leave to quere; 1. How they could have any comfort from my
ministry, that did not attend it. 2. But grant they did, I Quere, whether their
want of comfort, did not spring rather from their want of faith, to close with
the word, and to feed upon the word, and to apply the word to their own souls,
then from any defect in my preaching? The word preached did not profit them,
not being mixed with faith, in them that heard it, Heb. 4.2. Faith and the word
meeting, make a happy mixture, a precious confection. When faith and the word
is mingled together, then the word will be a word of power and life; then 'twil
be a healing word, a quickening word, a comforting word, a saving word. Faith
makes the soul fruitful; As Luther says of prayer, so I may say of says, it
has a kind of Omnipotency in it, it is able to do all things. Est quaedam
omnipotentia precum. Tantum possumus, quantum credimus.
faith has Rachels eye, and Leahs womb. Where faith is wanting, men's souls
will be like the Cypress, the more it is watered, the more it is withered.
However that tree that is not for fruit, is for the fire, Heb. 6.8. Some say of
King Midas, (not true, but fabulous) that he had obtained of the gods, that
whatsoever he touched should be turned into gold. I may truly say, in a
spiritual sense, what ever faith touches, it turns it into gold, into our
good. A Be can suck honey out of a flower, so cannot a Fly do. Faith will
extract abundance of comfort out of the word, and gather one contrary out of
another, honey out of the rock, Deuteronomy. 32.36.

3. I quere, whether their not finding comfort by my ministry, did not rather
spring from a judicial act of God, When she in Seneca, was stricken with sudden
blindness, she cried out of the light: So when God strikes profane men with
spiritual blindness, then they cry out of the Minister, Psalm. 119.70.
rather then from any thing in my ministry? God, many times, punishes men's
neglect of the means, and their dispising the means, and their barrenness under
the means, etc. by giving them up to a spirit of slumber, by shutting their
eyes, and closing up their hearts, as you may see in that, Isa. 6.9, 10. and he
said, Go and tell this people; hear ye indeed, but understand not, and see ye
indeed, but perceive not; Make the heart of this people fat, and make their
ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert and be healed. A fat
heart is a fearful plague; a fat heart is a most brutish and blockish heart; a
heart fitted and prepared for wrath. These four keys (say the Rabbis) God
keeps under his own girdle: 1. The key of the womb. 2. The key of the grave. 3.
The key of the rain. 4. The key of the heart. He opens and no man shuts,
and he shuts and no man opens.

4. I Queere, whether their not finding of comfort did not spring from the
wickedness and baseness of their own hearts, Isa. 29.13, 14. Ezekiel. 33, 30. -
ult. Mat. 15.4, - 10. The Patient in Plutarch, complained to his Physician of
his Finger, when his Liver was rotten. So many complain of the Minister, when
their hearts are rotten; they complainthey can find no comfort, when the fault
lies in the baseness of their hearts,
When men bring pride, and prejudice, and refolvednesse to walk after the ways
of their own hearts, let the minister say what he will, (as they in Jeremiah,
44.15. - ult. which I desire you will turn too and read) it is no wonder, that
they can find no comfort in the word. This is just as if the Patient should
cry out of the Physician, Oh he can find no comfort in any thing he prescribes
him; when he is resolved before hand, that he will rather dye then follow his
prescriptions. May not every one of these men's hearts say to him, as the heart
of Apollodorus in the Kettle ((...)) it is I have been the cause of this? I
judge they may, and if they will not now acknowledge it to their humiliation,
they will at last be forced to acknowledge it, to their confusion and
destruction, in that day wherein the great searcher of hearts shall judge the
souls of men.

5. I Quere, whether all the godly conscientious Ministers, of one judgment or
another, in all England, would not be outed and routed, if this plea of
profane, ignorant, malignant, 1 King. 22.8.-29.
and scandalous persons, that they cannot find no profit, nor no comfort by
their ministry, be admitted, as a thing that has worth or weight in it. Without
doubt, if this would carry the day against a godly ministry, 2 Chronicles. 36.16
we should hear a cry from all parts of the Nation, where such men are; Oh!
what shall we do with such Preachers as these be? Isa. 30.8, 9, 10, 11.
we can find no comfort, nor no profit by their ministry; we will have none of
these, but we will have such, as will preach pleasing things; Lam. 2.14.
we will have Common Prayer Book men, and such that will administer Sacraments
to us, as in former good days, wherein their was no such difference put
between men and men, but all that would bring their two-pences, might come and
be as welcome to the Parson, (if not more) as any Puritan, or Roundhead of
them all.

6. I Quere, whether your not finding of comfort and profit by the word, did
not spring from Satan's blinding your eyes, and from his catching away the good
seed out of your hearts. If our Gospel be hid, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. Satan is like the
picture of the Goddess, that was so contrived, that she frowned on men as they
went into the Temple, and smiled as they came out. Math. 13.19. (...), Rapio,
He took it, or snatched it by force or violence.
(says the Apostle) it is hid to them that are lost: Whom the god of this
world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them. Is
it any wonder, that profane, ignorant, scandalous persons, can find no
comfort by the word, when as the Devil has shut their eyes with his black
hand? When he has put a covering upon their eyes, that they cannot see any
beauty, excellency, or glory in it? Gospel droppings have richly fallen among
many, and yet like Gideons fleece they are dry, because Satan has blinded them,
and catched away the good seed that was sown upon them. When any one hears
the word of the Kingdom, and understands it not, then comes the wicked one,
and catches away that which was sown in his heart: (or rather upon his heart)
this is he which received seed by the way side.

7. I Quere, whether your want of profit and comfort by the word, did not
spring from your want of interest in Gospel-consolations. It Is interest in a
pardon, a Crown, an inheritance that comforts, and not the talking of them: So
here. The very Heathen could not have comfort, nor quiet when they were under
the rage of sinful lusts; therefore when they knew not how to bridle them, they
offered violence to nature: pulling out their own eyes, because they could not
look upon a woman, without lusting after her.
Oh, it is not the hearing of Gospel-consolations that comforts, but the
knowledge of a man's interest in them that cheers up the heart. Ah, where is that
word to be found in all the Book of God, that does evidence comfort, (which is
childrens bread) to be of right belonging to profane, ignorant, malignant, and
scandalous persons, as you cannot but know your selves to be, if conscience be
in the least measure awakned. God has all along in the Scripture, made a
separation between sin and comfort; and how then can you expect comfort, who
hold on in sinful ways? though love and wrath, life and death, heaven and
hell, be often set before you. God is not prodigal of Gospel-consolations: they
are the best, and strongest Wines in Gods Cellar, and reserved only for his
best and dearest friends, Isa. 40.1.2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says
your God, speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare
is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned, etc. The Hebrew word that is
here rendered comfort, signifies first to repent, and then to comfort. And
certainly, the sweetest joy is from the sowrest tears. Tears are the Breeders
of spiritual joy: When Hannah had wept, she went away and was no more sad. The
Be gathers the best honey of the bitterest herbs: Christ made the best wine
of water. The purest, the strongest, and most excellent joy, is made of the
waters of Repentance. Ah, lay your hands upon your hearts, and tell me, whether
you can look God in the face and say, Lord we are thine; First, by Purchase.
Secondly, we are thine by Choice. Thirdly, we are thine by Conquest. Fourthly,
we are thine by Covenant. Fifthly, we are thine by Marriage. (...) nahhamu,
nuhhamu, from (...) nahham; which signifies, first, to repent, 1 Samuel 15.35.
and then to comfort, because true comfort belongs only to the penitent. Divine
comfort is a delicate thing, and it is not given to him, that admits any other,
says Bernard. Nulla verior miseria quam falsa loetitia. Bernard. There is no
truer misery then false joy. Nil nisi sanctum a sancto Spiritu prodire potest.
Neh. 8.10. There have been those that have died under the strength and power of
their joy. Valde protestatus sum, me nolle sic satiari ab eo. Luther. I said
statly, that God should not put me off with these low things. I have read of
one who cried out with a loud voice to Flavius Vespasianus, (vuspem pilum
mutare non mores) that the Wolf might change his hair, but not his qualities.
You know how to apply it. Isai. 49.4, 5.
Ah, if you are not the Lords in these respects, what Minister on earth has a
commission to comfort you? their commission is to read other Lectures to
profane, ignorant, scandalous persons, etc. then those of comfort and joy, as
you may see in these Scriptures, (if you will but take the pains to read them)
Psalm. 7.11. Psalm. 9.17. Psalm. 11.5, 6. Psalm. 37.10, 20. compared with Psalm.
75.8. Psalm. 145.20. Job 21.30. Prove. 11.5, 21, 31. compared, Prove. 12.2. Prove.
14.19. Prove. 15.29. Prove. 21.18, 27. Eccles. 8.13. Isa. 11.4. Isa. 13.11. Jer.
25.31. Ezekiel. 3.18, 19. Nah. 1.3. Mal. 4.3. Deuteronomy. 28.15- ult. Levit. 26.14- ult.
Ah, did you but wisely consider the excellency of Gospel-comforts, above all
other comforts in the world, you would not wonder at Ministers giving them
forth so sparingly, to profane, ignorant, malignant, and scandalous persons:
For first, Gospel-comforts are unutterable comforts, 1 Pet. 1.8. Phil. 4.4.
Secondly, they are real, Joh. 14.27. all others are but seeming comforts, but
painted comforts. Thirdly, they are holy comforts, Isa. 64.5. Psalm. 138.5. they
flow from a holy Spirit, and nothing can come from the Holy Spirit, but that
which is holy. Fourthly, they are the greatest and strongest comforts, Ephesians.
6.17. few heads and hearts are able to bear them, as few heads are able to bear
strong wines: Fifthly, they reach to the inward man, to the soul, 2 Thessalonians.
2.17. the noble part of man: My soul rejoices in God my Savior. Our other
comforts only reach the face, they sinck not so deep as the heart. Sixthly,
they are the most soul-filling, and soul-satisfying comforts, Psalm. 16. ult.
Can. 2.3. other comforts cannot reach the soul, and therefore they cannot fill,
nor satisfy the soul. Seventhly, they comfort in saddest distresses, in the
darkest night, and in the most stormy day, Psalm. 94.19. Hab. 3.17, 18. verses.
Eighthly, they are everlasting, 2 Thessalonians. 2.16. The joy of the wicked is but as a
glass, bright and brittle, and evermore in danger of breaking, but the joy of
the Saints is lasting. (Aeterna erit exultatio, quae bono laetatur aeterno)
Their joy lasts for ever, whose object remains for ever.

8. I Quaere, whether you, and men of your stamp (remaining under the power of
your lusts) will ever say, that you can find any comfort at all in any man's
ministry, that is not a Common Prayer Book man, or one that will give you and
yours the Sacraments, and lash at the power of godliness, and at the State, in
preaching, and praying, etc. doubtless under such a man's ministry (were he
never so ignorant, scandalous or profane) you would plead that you found much
comfort, to your souls, and that he was a man indeed for your money, etc. Well,
if you have found no comfort, under my ministry, yet my comfort is, that my
reward is with the Lord, and my work with my God: my comfort is, that there are
many hundreds in this City, that have, and that do find comfort, by the
blessing and breathings of God upon my weak endeavors.

Further, in their Petition they say, that I am not so qualified to their
understandings, as to remain any longer with them.

To this I say, First, it is my joy and crown, that I am not so qualified, as to
please and content, ignorant, profane, malignant, scandalous persons in their
formality, and impiety. Remembering that he is the best Preacher, Non qui aures
tetigerit, sed qui cer pupigerit. Male de me loquuntur, sed mali, says Seneca.
not that tickles the ear, but that breaks the heart. It Is a comfort to me that
I am no nearer that woe, Luke 6.26. Woe be to you when all men speak well of
you. When one told Aristides, that he had every man's good word; says he, what
evil have I done, that I should have every man's good word? It Is sometimes more
a shame then an honor, to have the good word of profane, ignorant, scandalous
persons. Latymer in his last Sermon, before King Edward, says, That he was
glad when any objected indiscretion against him in his Sermons; for by that he
knew the matter was good, else they would soon have condemned that. 'Twas a
notable saying of Salvian, Mirum esset si hominibus loquentia de Deo verba, non
placeant quibus ipse forsitan Deus non placet, Salv.
'Twere very strange, (says he) If I should please a world of men, when God
himself, does not give every man content. Luther, writing to his friend, has
this passage, My greatest fear is the praises of men, but my joy is in their
reproaches and evil speeches. It Is certain that the praises of men, to many,
are the Basilisks, that kill, the poison that destroys their immortal souls.

2. I say, If the understandings of ignorant, malignant, profane and
scandalous persons, should be the rule or standard, by which the abilities, or
qualifications of such Ministers, that are Ministers, not of the letter, but of
the spirit, (as the Apostle speaks) should be measured and tried: 2 Cor. 3.6.
doubtless he that is no Witch may easily conclude, that there are no
Ministers in England, Jer. 5.30, 31.
qualified to their understandings, but such as are malignant, ignorant,
profane, and scandalous as themselves; and such without doubt would be the
only qualified men to their understandings; as might be confirmed by a cloud
of witnesses.

3. Chriysostom studied not, (aures titillare, but corda pungere) to tickle the
ears of his hearers, but to prick and ravish their hearts. Prove. 11.30.
Though I am not qualified, as to their understandings, yet (through grace) I
am qualified, as to the understandings of those, that are eminent both for
piety and parts, and who have made trial of what is in me, and what the Lord
has done for me. And though I am not so qualified, as to gratify your lusts,
yet it is joy and honor enough to me, that the Lord has so qualified me with
gifts and grace, as to make me instrumental, to bring in souls to Christ, and
to build up souls in Christ. In the day of account it will be made manifest,
that they have been the best, the wisest, and ablest Preachers, who have
brought most souls to Christ, and provoked most souls to walk with Christ,
(...) velokeakh. which signifies by art and industry, to catch souls, as
Fowlers do to take birds.
and cleave to Christ, and lift up Christ in this world. Through grace, I can
say, (with blessed Cooper) my witness is in heaven, that I have no such joy,
and pleasure, as in doing the work of Christ, and in being serviceable to the
honor of Christ, the interest of Christ, and the people of Christ.

4. If this plea of profane, ignorant, malignant and scandalous persons should
be admitted, as authentic, doubtless, all the godly, They that are wise
cannot but observe much of this spirit, upon all the profane, ignorant, and
malignant persons in the Nation.
tender conscientious Ministers in the Nation, that cannot do as they would have
them, would quickly be ejected. All the profane, ignorant, malignant,
scandalous persons in the Nation, would soon cry out, as one man, Our Ministers
are not so qualified to our understandings, as to remain any longer with us,
Ergo.

5. It Is to be remembered, that when the Petitioners were several times pressed by
the Committee, to show wherein I was not qualified for the work of the
Ministry, The Petitioners seemed to be like those in Matthew. 22.46. that were
non plust, by the question Christ put to them, etc. My first Sermon preached
before the Parliament, was on the 26. Decmb. 1648. My second was preached on
the 8. of October, 1650. for that great victory, the Lord of Hosts gave our
Army over the Scots Army, in a barttel at Dunbar, Sept. 3. 1650. and both are
printed by their Order. Besides my book, called, Precious Renedies against
Satan's devices; which came forth this year which some of them have seen.
they all seemed to be dumb, and at very great loss, as not knowing what to
answer; but at last, their malignant Champion, after much pumping gave this
answer to the Committee, That I was not so qualified to their understandings,
as to remain any longer among them; because I would not give them the
Sacraments, nor bury their dead; which put some rather upon smilings, then upon
answering. But at last a worthy Member of that Committee, made this answer,
That they had both heard me and seen me in Print, and so were best able to make
a judgment of my abilities, and fitness for the work of the Ministry, etc.
For a close of this branch of the Petition, I shall only say this, (being
compelled thereunto by some) that I do believe, that I have spent more money at
the University, and in helps to Learning, then several of these Petitioners are
worth: (though happily I have not been so good a proficicient, as those that have
spent less) I am a lover of the Tongues, and do, by daily experience, find,
that knowledge in the Original tongues, is no small help for the understanding
of Scripture, etc. Yet am I not kin to them, that advance and lift up acquired
gifts, above the sweet sanctifying gifts and graces of the Spirit of Christ, in
the souls of his Saints, as many have, and do to this day. But certainly Christ
will more and mote, cloud those that labor to cloud the shinings forth of his
Spirit, in the souls of his servants. Nor yet am I kin to Licinius, who held
Learning to be the Common wealths Ratsbane. Neither am I kin to those, that
labor might and main the overthrow of Learning, in order to their lifting up
Jack Straw. It Is sad, when men are not so ingenious, as to favor that in
others, which they cannot find in themselves.

Further, the Petitioners say, that I refuse to Baptize their children, etc.

Answ. 1. This give me leave to premise by the way, that it is my judgment, Genesis
17. Act. 2.38, 39. 1 Cor. 7.14. etc.
(upon many grounds moving me to it) that Baptism is to be administered to the
children of believing Parents, who walk in the order of the Gospel; and my
practice herein, does answer to my judgment, as is well known to many.

2. But in the second place, I confess I have refused, and shall refuse to
Baptize the children of profane, ignorant, malignant and scandalous persons,
and that upon these following grounds.

1. Non parentum aut majorum authoritas, sed Dei docentis imperium, Jerome. The
command of God, must outweigh all authority, and example of men.
Because I cannot find any warrant in my commission from Christ so to do. I do
seriously profess, that I have made a diligent search and strict inquiry into
that commission, that I have received from the Lord, for the dispencing of holy
things; and I cannot find any thing in my commission that will bear me out, in
the Baptizing the children of those Parents that are profane, ignorant,
malignant, scandalous, etc. and therefore I cannot do it, lest I should hear
Christ and conscience, sounding that sad word in my ears; Who has required
this at your hand? Isai. 1.12.

2. Because, such persons that are profane, ignorant, malignant, Mat. 3.5, 6,
7, 8, 9.10, 11, 12. Mark. 1.4, 5. Act. 2.38, 41. Luke 3.3. Act. 13.24. Act.
8.12, 31. to the end. Act. 10.45, 46, 47, 48. Acts 18 8. Acts 22.16, 17, etc.
So Ps. 50.16, 17.
scandalous, etc. if they were now to be baptized themselves, ought not to be
baptized, they having no right to baptism, as these Scriptures in the margent
do evidence: therefore such Parents cannot justly, upon any Scripture account,
challenge baptism for their children, who have no right to it themselves. All
that know any thing are not ignorant of this, that it is the Parents interest in
the Covenant that gives the child right to baptism; now how profane, ignorant,
scandalous parents, can give their children right to baptism when they have no
right to it themselves, is a thing that I am no ways able to reach; and a
thing (I judge) too hard for any to prove Hos. 2.2, 3.

3. Because, the children of Parents, whereof neither can be judged, to be a
Believer, ought not to be Baptized, till the child grow up to manifest his own
faith, as these Scriptures (among many others that might be produced) prove,
Genesis 17.7, 8, 9. Act. 2.39, 40, 41. 1 Cor. 7.14. etc.

4. Isa. 28.15, 18. (...) They cut a covenant with hell and death: in old time
men were wont to kill and cut asunder sacrificed beasts, and to pass between
the parts divided, Gen 15.17. Jer. 34.18. The ceremony intended an imprecation,
that he might be cut in pieces, as that beast was, who should violate the
covenant so made. The same rite was used among the heathenish Gentiles also,
Romans 14.23.
Because, profane, ignorant, scandalous persons, etc. are visibly in covenant
with Satan, and therefore to administer baptism, the seal of the Covenant to
their children, upon their accounts who are visibly in Covenant with Satan,
cannot but be a notorious profaning of the Ordinance, therefore I dare not do
it. Now that such persons are visibly in Covenant with Satan is clear, Isai.
28.15. Because ye have said, We have made a covenant with death, and with hell,
are we at agreement, when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall
not come unto us; for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we
hid our selves, verse. 18. And your covenant with death shall be disanulled, and
your agreement with hell shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall
pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it. Not that they had formally
made a covenant with Satan; but their ways and courses were such, as did
proclaim to the world, that they had as it were formally made a covenant with
hell and death. Therefore to apply this blessed Ordinance to their children,
who are thus invisibly in covenant with Satan; and who are not capable thereof,
through want of divine warrant, cannot (doubtless) but be esteemed a high
profaning of it.

5. Because, I may not yield blind obedience, nor do any thing doubtingly, both
which I should do, should I baptize their children, who are profane, ignorant,
scandalous, mockers, and scoffers, at God and godliness, etc.

6. Because, by administering that holy Ordinance to the children of profane,
ignorant, scandalous persons, I shall make my self guilty, of nourishing, If I
partake in other men's sins, I must partake in their punishments. Rev. 18.4.
Christians were wont to be of that courage, that they feared nothing but sin.
Nil nisi peccatum timeo, said Chrysostom.
and cherishing in such wicked persons, such vain opinions and conceits, that
cannot but be very prejudicial to their souls, as that they have aright to that
precious ordinance, when they have none. That God has taken their children
into covenant, as well as the children of the best believers in the world, when
he has not. That God is more favorable and loving to them, then indeed he is:
And that their case is not so bad as some would make it, etc. All which
opinions and conceits (with many more of the same stamp that might be named)
cannot but prove many ways prejudicial to men's immortal souls.

I shall forbear the laying down any more reasons, why I have not, nor shall
not baptize their children, who are profane, ignorant, malignant, scandalous,
mockers, and scoffers at God and godliness; judging that these may be
sufficient, to satisfy all intelligent men.

Further, these Petitioners say, that I will not give them the Lords Supper.

Answ. Though I do give the Lords Supper to those to whom of right it belonges,
yet I cannot, I dare not give it to profane, ignorant, malignant, scandalous
persons. I had, with Calvin, rather dye, then that this hand of mine should
give the things of God to the contemners of God. 2 Cor. 6.14. ult. Phil. 32.
Mat. 15.26. 1 Cor. 5.12, 13. Rev. 22.15, 21, 27. It is worse to admit a man
openly polluted with sins, then a man bodily possessed with Devils, Chrysostom.
The Thurians had a law, that whosoever went about to abolish an old law should
present himself with a rope about his neck, before the people; that if his
invention was not approved, he might presently be strangled. You know how to
apply it. 1 Cor. 11.27, 28, 29, 30. Rev. 2.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. 1 Cor. 10.3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 21, 22. compared, Nehem. 13.18, 19.
And with Chrysostom, I had rather give my life to a murderer, then Christ's
body to an unworthy receiver. And had rather to suffer my own blood to be
poured out like water, then to tender Christ's blessed blood to any base liver,
and that upon these following grounds.

1. Because, such persons are excluded by the word of God, from communion with
Believers in that glorious Ordinance, as the Scriptures in the margent do
evidence.

2. Not only the Scriptures, but the very Episcopal Rubric, for the
administration of the Communion, dos exclude, and shut out such persons from
the supper of the Lord, in these words, They that intended to partake of the
holy Communion, should signify their names before to the Curat and if any of
those be an open and notorious evil liver, so that the Congregation is
offended; or have done any wrong to his neighbor by word or deed, the Curat
having knowledge, shall call him and advertise him in any wise, not to presume
to the Lords table, until he has openly declared himself, to have truly
repented, and amended his former naughty life, that the congregation may
thereby be satisfied, etc. As for the Presbyterial way, you all know, that by
their Directory, and laws annexed, they must not receive any to the Communion
that are ignorant, scandalous or profane in their conversation. So that the
sum of what has been said is this, that by the laws of God, and by the
laws of Episcopacy, and by the laws of Presbytery, profane, ignorant, and
scandalous persons are to be excluded from the Supper of the Lord. Ergo.

3. Because, the admitting of such that are profane, ignorant, scandalous, or
that are scoffers, and mockers of all goodness, etc. to the Supper of the
Lord, is the ready way to turn the House of God into a den of thieves; and to
bring a dreadful doom, both upon consenters, and presumers, as the Scriptures
in the margent will make good. Not only the lack of the word and Sacraments,
(says Bilson) but the abuse of either greatly hazards the weal of the whole
Church. If profane ones be allowed to defile the mysteries and assemblies of
the faithful, and holy things be cast to dogs, Matthew. 7.6.
it will procure a dreadful doom, as well to consentaries as presumers. Ergo,

4. Because there are many horrid sins in their coming to the Supper of the
Lord.

1 There is horrid pride, Yet pride cannot climb so high, but justice will sit
above her.
else no man in his wickedness would presume to taste of the Tree of Life. 2
There is Rebellion and Treason against the Crown and Dingity of Christ. Their
hands and lips adore him, as Judas his did, but their hearts and lives abhor
him. 3 There is theft and sacrilege, Possidonius reports, that all that took
the gold of Tholosse, perished in the possession of it. Apply it. They may say
with Henry the 7th, the cup of life is made my death.
if the taking away of the Communion Cup or Cloth, etc. be such horrible theft
and sacrilege, surely, it is far greater theft and sacrilege to take that
bread and wine that is set apart, and sanctified by the Lord himself, for a
holy use. 4 There is murder in the cruellest manner that can be; for they kill
two at once, Christ, and their own souls, 1 Cor. 11.27.29. compared.
'Twas wickedness in Julian to throw his blood in the face of Christ; but for
a wicked Communicant to take Christ's own blood (as it were from his heart) and
throw it into the face of Christ, is most abominable and damnable.

5. A gracious soul may say, not only ( Credo vitam aeternam and edo
vitamaeternam) I believe life eternal, but I receive life eternal.
They want those qualifications that should fit them for this glorious
Ordinance. As,

1 Experimental knowledge. 2 Faith, without which they cannot see Christ, nor
receive Christ, nor feed upon Christ, nor apply Christ, nor seal to Christ. 3
Repentance from dead works. 4 New obedience. 5 Love to Christ and his Children.
6 Holy thankfulness. 7 A spiritual Appetite. All which are absolutely
necessary to fit souls for the Lords Supper, Ergo.
6. Because such as are profane, scandalous, scoffers, and mockers, Read these
Scriptures. Prove. 4.14, 15, 16. Ephesians. 5.14. 1 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2,
3, 4, 5. The Heathen could say (Qui aequo animo malis immiscetur, malus est) He
that is well contented to keep company with those that are naught, is himself
made naught. Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 25. 1 Cor. 5. 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. Mat. 18.15, 16,
17, 18. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5.
etc. are not fit for civil society, how much less fit are they then for
Religious societies? Men that love but their names and credits in the world
will shun the society of such vain persons; how much more then, should men that
love their Christ, and that love their precious souls, shun such society? Look
as shelves and sands do endanger the Seaman, and as weeds endanger the corn,
and bad humors, the blood, and an infected house, the neighborhood: So does
the society of evil men, endanger good men. One said, As often as I have been
among wicked men, I returned home less a man then I was before. Men that keep
ill company, are like those that walk in the sun, tanned insensibly. Eusebius
reports of John the Evangelist, that he would not suffer Cerinibus the Heretic
in the same Bath with him, lest some judgment should abide them both. You may
easily apply it to the point in hand.

7. Because such persons as are profane, scandalous, and wicked, etc. if they
were in the Church, they are by the word of God to be Excommunicated, and cut
off from visible union and communion with Christ and his Church; therefore they
are not to be admitted to the privileges of the Church. That wickedness that
is a sufficient ground for the casting them out if they were in, is a
sufficient ground to keep them out from polluting the glorious Ordinance of the
Lord.

8. Mat. 26.27, 28, 29. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17, etc. Mat. 3.12.
Because the Supper of the Lord is a Feast instituted by Christ only for his
friends and children, for those that have received spiritual life from him,
and that have union and communion with him. But profane, ignorant, malignant,
scandalous persons, Luke 15 8. 1 Cor. 5.6, 7.
are chafe which the fan flings out of the floor. They be as dirt and dust
which the besome sweeps out of the house. They be as leaven, which if let
alone, so wres the whole lump, and therefore must be purged out. They be as
thorns and briers which must not stand in the midst of the corn, Heb. 6.8.
Romans 3.13. Mat. 3.7.
but must be stub'd up and burned. They be as open Sepulchers, out of which
proceeds nothing but noisome savours. Acts 28.3, 4, 5.
They be as Vipers, which must be shook off, as Paul shook off the Viper that
fastened upon his hand. They be as ravenous wolves, which every careful, John
10.12.
watchful shepherd must keep out of his fold. They be as swine, that will
trample the choicest pearls under their feet, Matthew. 7.6.
if they should be cast before them; therefore Ministers must not hang
Gospel-pearls in such swines snouts, The Table of the Lord (says Chrysostom)
is that whereon the (blessed) carcass is laid; we must not suffer chattering
Jaies to come thereunto, for only high-flying Eagles are to feed thereupon.
nor cast them under such swines feet. The fouler the chest is, the more unfit
it is to have a fair and precious Garment put therein; and the filthier the
soul is, the unfiter it is to receive in this holy Sacrament. I have read of a
Jewel, that being put into a dead man's mouth, loses all its virtue. Such a
Jewel is the Supper of the Lord, it loses its virtue when it is put in
profane, ignorant, scandalous persons mouths, who are dead God-wards, and dead
Heaven-wards, and dead Holynesse-wards, and dead Christ-wards.

Lastly, these Petitioners say, That I will not bury their dead.

To this I shall give this short Answer, That if they mean that I would bury
their dead after the old fashion, Matthew. 8.22. Nay, it is known to hundreds,
that it is my practice, after the dead is buried, to preach to the people that
are met upon that occasion (if so desired) many grounds moving me thereunto.
I confess it, and shall only say, that it is most proper for the dead to bury
the dead, as Christ speaks; my work being to Preach the Gospel. But if by
burying their dead, they mean, that I will not accompany their Corpse to the
grave, being the last office of love that can be performed to the deceased
person, it is notorious false; all that know any thing of the Scripture, cannot
but know that there is nothing in all the Book of God that will bear a Minister
out to bury the dead, as profane, ignorant, scandalous persons, would have
them buried; and therefore I don't, and I hope I shall never be so far left of
God, as to conform to the superstitious desires and customs of vain men.

Reader, for a close, thou may take notice, That though I was ready to give
in the forenamed Arguments, Greater respect the Honorable Committee could not
cast upon me, nor greater contempt upon the profane malignant Petitioners,
then not to put me to answer to the things objected against me. One of these
profane malignant Petitioners objected to me, Judas his receiving the Supper
of the Lord, which I disproved, and yet this vain; person (as I have been
informed) boasted of victory. John 13.30. Hilar Durand. Piscator, Beza, etc.
compare Mat. 26. and Mark. 14. together, and you shall find that neither of
them doaffirm that Judas was at the Lords Supper, therefore we have no ground
to believe that Judas was at that blessed Supper. Luke 22.19, 20. Mat. 26.26,
27, 28, 29.
in answer to the objections made by the Profane Malignants, in their Petition
against me. Yet the Committee in their wisdoms (it seems) did not judge it
meet so much as to ask me a reason, why I did not Baptize their Children, give
them the Lords Supper, and bury their dead: they well knowing, that there is
nothing more ordinary, then for those to be bauling and crying out for
Ordinances, that have no right to them: And that if upon the non giving of the
Ordinances to such profane persons, they should eject Ministers out of their
places, they should quickly eject all those in the Nation, that are most tender
of the honor of Christ, and that have been some of their best friends in the
worst times.

Before I give the Council intended to the Petitioners, I judge it useful (in
several respects) to batter down that which most profane, ignorant,
malignant, scandalous persons do count their strong hold, or their greatest
Argument to prove it lawful for them to receive the Supper of the Lord,
notwithstanding their profaneness and wickedness; and that is, That Judas
was admitted to the Lords Supper, and that they are not worse then Judas, no
nor yet so bad, Ergo.

Now for the casting down of this their (imagined) strong hold, for the
dispatching this their first born, this their Goliath, consider with me these
following things.

1. The Holy Ghost by the Evangelist John, does punctually, and expressly tell
us, that Judas went out immediately after the sop. That this sop was no part of
the Sacramental Supper, both Fathers and Schoolmen do agree, and many others
in our own time, who are men of great piety and parts, Ergo.

Did I know any thing of weight that could be objected against this Argument, I
would be so faithful as to give an answer to it, as the Lord should enable me
to do, but I know nothing that has that strength in it, as to weaken the
truth asserted.

2. Those to whom Christ gave the Sacrament, he says without exception, This
is my body which is given for you; this is the cup of the new Testament, in my
blood, which is shed for you; and I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of
the Vine, until that day I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom. Now
I would willingly know, Were hypocrites, and reprobates known to us, we ought
to shut the door against them, and will Christ open it? surely no.
how this can in the least measure stand with the wisdom, holiness, justice,
righteousness, innocence, and integrety of Christ, to say this, and promise
this to Judas, whom he knew to be an hypocrite, reprobate, a devil, as himself
calls him? Joh. 6.70, 71. chap. 13.10, 11. If this be not to make Christ a
false witness, a liar, a deceiver, etc. I know not any thing.

3. It Is as clear as the Sun, (from that 22. of Luke 28, 29, 30.) that those to
whom Christ gave the Sacrament, were such as did continue with him in his
temptations, Matthew. 26.24. Mark 14.21. Joh. 6.70. Act. 1.25. 1 Cor. 6.2, 3.
and such as Christ did appoint to them a kingdom, and such as should set upon
Thrones, etc. Now are there any so vain and foolish, as to say, that Judas did
continue with him in his temptations? Or, that Christ did appoint to him any
other kingdom, then a kingdom of darkness? Or, that he shall set on a Throne
to judge others, who shall at last be judged as a Devil?

4. Quod non actibus, sed finibus pensantur officia. Duties are esteemed not by
their acts, but by their ends.
Judas was no ways capable of any of those noble ends and glorious uses, for
which the Lord Jesus appointed this Sacrament; he having no real love to
Christ, no experimental knowledge of Christ, no faith to discern Christ, to
apply Christ, to feed upon Christ, to seal to Christ, etc. How could this
Ordinance strengthen grace in his heart, who was wholly void of grace? How
could this Ordinance confirm him in the love of God, who was at that very time
under the greatest wrath of God? Maximilians Motto, was Tene mensuram, and
respice finem.
How could this Ordinance seal up to him the pardon of his sins, who
notwithstanding all the hell fire, that Christ cast in his face, yet would hold
on in his sins, and rather betray Christ into the hands of his enemies, and his
own soul into the hand of Satan, then cease from doing wickedly, etc. That
little wisdom that is in man, will work him to forbear his work, and suspend
his act, Coloss. 2.3.
where he sees his end will fail. And will not those treasures of wisdom that
be in the Lord Jesus, much more work him to suspend his work, where he sees
plainly and clearly that his end will fail him? (as in the case of Judas)
surely it will.

5. Consider seriously, whether it be in any degree probable, that Jesus Christ
would give his blood to Judas, John 17.9.
and yet not so much as lift up a prayer for Judas; that Christ would do the
greater thing for Judas, Sanguis Christi, clavis coeli. Christ's blood is
heavens key. And so Judas would have found had Christ given it to him.
and yet not do the lesser; that he should give his blood to Judas, and yet
not spend a little of his breath, to save Judas from wallowing in his blood for
ever. Among men, it would argue the greatest weakness that could be, to deny
the least favor, where they have showed the greatest favor, etc.

Well, but if for argument sake we should grant, that Judas did receive the
Lords Supper, it will not from thence follow, that it is lawful for those that
are openly profane, wicked, scandalous, and malignant to receive it, and that
upon these following grounds.

Reason 1. Secreta mea mecum. My secret is with my self, is an Hebrew Proverb.
We are not to look to men's hearts, but to their lives and conversations, and
according as they are good or bad so to proceed.
For that Judas was a close hypocrites and carried his sin so secretly, that
nothing appeared openly against him, for Christ yet to refuse him. Hypocrisy
is spun of a fine thread, and not easily discerned, Matthew. 26.21, 22. And as
they did eat, he said, Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me:
And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto him,
Lord is it I? Sincere hearts, are more jealous of themselves then of others;
and will rather judge a thousand hypocrites to be Saints, then one Saint to be
an hypocrite.

Reason 2. Because Judas was a member of the Church, and had done nothing
openly that could cast him out; and by virtue of this membership, he might
justly claim it as his due, he being called into fellowship by Christ himself.
Now what advantage is this, to such open profane wicked persons, as ( de jure)
ought and ( de facto) are excluded from the Lords Supper, as I have before
clearly and fully proved.

Reason 3. Judas, as Tertullian thinks, was pretty honest till he carried the
bag. (It is hard to be in office, and not to put conscience out of office)
Several other Writers were of Tertullians opinion concerning Judas, Isa. 50.1,
2. Prove. 28.21. Cato hits M. Caelius in the teeth with this baseness, that for
a morsel of bread, he would sell either his tongue, or his silence. Isa 53.2,
3. Act. 5.30, 31. Romans 8.34. Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22, 23. Prove. 15.21. Matthew. 27.3,
4, 5. Prove. 30.20.
Because, in respect of wickedness and all profaneness, they go beyond Judas,
Judas was no drunkard, swearer, mocker, scoffer, he did not sin openly, and
glory in his sin. He did not by any open way of wickedness, sad and quench
Christ his Spirit, or Disciples: he was so far from giving any scandal, or
offense to his fellow-Disciples, that when Christ told them, one of you shall
betray me, they were all jealous of themselves, none of them were jealous of
Judas; And they began every one of them to say unto him, Lord, is it I? Judas
betrayed Christ for thirty pieces of silver, but open profane wicked persons,
they betray Christ, his word, his people, and their own souls for a thing of
naught. They will transgress for a morsel of bread, (as Solomon speaks) for a
trifle. They will fell the greatest and the choicest things dogcheap, even at
the poorest and the lowest rate, that the world, or the god of this world shall
bid. Judas betrayed Christ once, and open profane wicked persons, by their
open treasons and transgressions, do oftentimes in a day betray the Crown,
Scepter, and dignity of King Jesus. Judas plotted treason against Christ when
he was in a low afflicted, despised condition; but such as are openly profane,
and wicked, they plot and act treason against Christ, now he is exalted,
crowned, and set down at the right hand of God, in that glory and Majesty, that
can neither be conceived nor expressed by any mortal creature. Judas betraies
Christ, and is struck with dreadful horror and terror, but such as are openly
wicked, they betray Christ, and yet joy in their transgressions, which are as
so many treasons against Christ. Judas betrays Christ, and yet justifies the
innocence of Christ, he repents and confesses his sin; but such as are openly
wicked, proceed from evil to evil, and yet with the harlot, they wipe their
mouths, and say, What evil have we done?

Reas. 4. Because, Had Christ, as a God and searcher of the heart, kept out
Judas from the Passover, because he knew his heart was naught, he had left us a
pattern to eject such as the Church should be jealous of, that their hearts are
not right before the Lord, when there is nothing detected.
Christ gave the blessed Sacrament Ministerially, as he was man, leaving them a
pattern to walk by that should come after him; and such was the carriage of
Christ toward Judas all along. Christ did not act toward Judas as he was an
all-seeing God, nor as he was the heart-maker, the heart-searcher, the
heart-observer, the heart-discoverer, but he acted toward him ministerially.
Neither do I see how it could stand with the holiness, justice, faithfulness,
and wisdom of Christ, to give that holy Ordinance to Judas, whom he knew (as he
was God) to be such a dog, a devil, considering how he had bound all his
servants from casting pearls before swine. To affirm that Christ gave the
Sacrament to Judas, as he was God, what is this, but to make Christ's practice,
fight against his own precepts? which for any to do, is, doubtless, blasphemy
in the highest degree.

And now I appeal to the consciences of all profane, wicked, malignant
persons, whether they were not better a thousand times, to be shut out from
this glorious Ordinance of the Lords Supper, (till the Lord shall in mercy, if
it be his good pleasure, fit them for it) then to think to get in at this door,
by making Judas the Porter.

I shall now adresse my self, to give some good counsel to the Petitioners, and
so conclude.

GOOD COUNCIL TO Bad Men. OR FRIENDLY ADVICE TO Unfriendly Neighbors, and
their Abettors.
YOUR Petitioning against me, to all underderstanding men, was a compounded
evil; an evil made up of pride, envy, malice, discontent, ignorance, etc. Dan
4.27. Isai. 50.11. Isai. 33.14. Vtinam ubique de gehenna dissereretur,
Chrysostom. I could wish that men would discourse much and often of hell.
My council to you is to break off your sins by repentance, that it may go
well with you for ever; if you will not, justice will be above you, and in the
close, you must lie down in sorrow. Tell me, Can you dwell with the devouring
fire? Can you dwell with everlasting burnings? 'Twas a good saying of
Chrysostom, speaking of hell, ( Ne quaeramus ubi sit, sed quomodo illam
fugiamus) Let us not seek where it is, but how we shall escape it. Grievous is
the torment of the damned for the bitterness of the punishments, but it is more
grievous for the diversity of the punishments, but most grievous for the
eternity of the punishments. Ah, consider before it be too late! what a sad
thing it is for souls, at last, to have the gate of Mercy, the gate of
Indulgence, the gate of Hope, the gate of Glory, shut upon them, Matthew. 25.10.
When a sinner is in hell, shall another Christ be found to dye for him? or will
the same Christ be crucified again? Oh no; oh that you were so wise and
merciful to your own souls, They were wont to say in former times, ( Caius
Seius bonus vir, sed Christianus. Caius Seius was a good man, but he was a
Christian. You may easily apply it, etc.
as to dwell upon these Scriptures, Joh. 3.3. Jesus answered, and said unto
him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born again, he cannot see
the kingdom of God. Except men be first unmade, and new made up again by the
Spirit and Word; except the whole frame of their old conversation be dissolved,
and a better erected, there is no heaven to be had. Heaven is too holy, and too
hot to hold Drunkards, Revilers, Mockers, and such like, as you may plainly see
by comparing these Scriptures together, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Jude
14, 15. Revel. 21.8. and 22.15. He that is truth it self and cannot lie, has
said, Without holiness no man shall see God, Heb. 12.14. This I am sure of,
that all man's happiness here, is his holiness, and his holiness, Chrysostem
calls some holy men of his time (aggelous) earthly angels.
shall hereafter be his happiness. You must in this life be holy, or in the
life to come you shall never be happy. Seneca, a heathen man, saw so much
excellency that morality put upon a man, that he says, that ( ipse aspectus
boni viri delectat) the very looks of a good man delights one. Oh then, what a
beauty and glory, does real sanctity put upon a man; it makes him more
excellent then his neighbor, as Solomon speaks, Proverbs 12.26. When Agesilaus
heard the king of Persia, Psalm 16.3.
styled the great king, says he, I acknowledge none more excellent then my
self, unless more righteous; none greater, unless better.

But to hasten toward a close, you may be very confident of these few things,
which I desire, as you tender your own good, you would seriously consider.

1. That those ways of the flesh, wherein now you walk, will be bitterness in
the latter end, It was the saying of an ancient Philosopher, Whosoever sins,
does in that decline from his purposed end, and is certainly deceived. Hark
Scholar, said the Harlot to Apulsius, It Is but a bitter sweet that you are so
fond of. Ah, your scoffing, and mocking, will prove but a bitter sweet at last.
Act. 5.38, 39. and chap. 9.4, 5. Constantine the great Symbol, was
(immedicabile vulnus ense rescindendum est.) When there is no hope of curing,
men must fall a cuting. And so will God deal with sinners souls. Therefore look
about you sinners. Isai. 40.15. I laugh said Caligula speaking to the Consuls,
to think that I can kill you with a nod of my head. And cannot God do it with as
much ease; Romans 14.19. Heb. 12.14. Luther said, That in the cause of God he was
content (totius mundi odium and impetum sustinere) to undergo, the hatred and
violence of the whole world. The Heathen Orator could say, (A recta conscientia
ne latum quidem unguem discedendum) a man may not depart an hairs breadth all
his life long, from the dictates of a good conscience. Cant. 8.1. Psa 63.1, 2,
3. Romans 14 1. and chap. 15.1. 1 John 1.3, 4. Luke 23.24. Act. 7.39.60. Mat.
6.12, 13, 14, 15. Tully said of Caesar (nihil oblivisci soles, nisi injurias)
That he forgot nothing but injuries.
Prove. 14.12. There is a way which seems right unto a man; but the end
thereof are the ways of death. Though sin does come sometimes clothed with a
show of reason, and religion, yet the end of it will be death. Sin at last will
betray your souls into the hands of Satan, as Dalilah did Sampson, into the
hands of the Philistims. Sin makes the soul black with filth, and red with
guilt, and then vengeance follows. The Rabbis were wont to tell their
Scholars, to scare them from sin, that every sin made Gods head ache; but,
without sound repentance, you will at last find, that every sin will make your
hearts ache. Oh, that when you are tempted to sin, you would say, as Demosthenes
the Orator, did of the beautiful Lais, when he was asked an excessive sum of
money to behold her; I will not (said he) buy repentance so dear. I am not so
ill a merchant, as to sell the eternal for the temporal.

2. You may be confident, that all your oppositions, one way or other, against
the ways of God, and against the people of God, is a fighting against God, who
will be too hard for you, when you have done your worst; and what you get, you
may put in your eyes, and weep it out again. Those that strive for mastery with
God, God will over-master with a witness, Isa. 27.4. who would set the briars
and thorns against me in battle? I would go through them, I will burn them
together. God can nod a soul to hell; He can speak a soul miserable in a
moment. Who ever stood out against him and prospered? There is such a near
union between God and his people, between God and his ways, that you cannot
possibly oppose them, but you oppose God himself, who can presently cause the
greatest arm of humane power, to shrink up; as you may see in his dealing with
Pharaoh, Hamman, Belshazzar, and others, etc. Is a dry Reed able to stand
against a consuming fire? Is a worm able to overcom a Lion? Is weakness able to
overcom strength? Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are
counted as the small dust of the balance: Behold, he takes up the Isles as a
very little thing; as the Prophet Isaiah speaks. And what then is the poor
creature, that he should fight against an Almighty Creator? Caesar told
Metellus, he could as easily destroy him, as bid it be done. So can God; Who
dares then engage against him?

3. You may be confident, that though I hate your sins, yet I do don't hate
your persons. I am willing to live in love, and peace with all men, so far as I
may without sin; but I abhor compliancy with any man, to the dishonor of
Christ, to the wounding of my conscience, to the profaning of holy things; or
to the prejudice and disadvantage of the truth. It Is below humanity to hate a
man, whose nature and similitude he may behold in the humanity of Christ. (
Deum odit qui hominem odit) He hates God, that hates man. I must love men,
but hate their vice. It is said of Ephesus, That they hated the deeds of the
Nicolaitans, their errors not their persons. So Jacob cursed the wrath of his
sons, but blessed their persons. So Paul, 1 Cor. 4.15. and so do I, through
free mercy.

4. You may be confident, that I don't refuse the baptizing of your children,
and the giving you the Sacrament, etc. out of pride, or envy, or upon any
carnal account in the world, but only upon the grounds, that I have before
laid down. I take the searcher of all hearts to witness, that I should much
rejoice and bless the Lord, if he would be pleased to work such a through work
of grace upon all your hearts, as that I might (without sin) dispense all the
precious things of Christ to you. Ah, it is not a joy, but a real grief to my
soul, that others han't that right, and cannot come to those Ordinances, which
God has made so sweet and advantageous to me, and many others of the sons of
Sion.

Oh! how willing should I be, and those that walk with me, to give you the
right hand of Fellowship, if we could but see, that the Lord has taken you into
fellowship with his blessed Self; that so the Ordinance might be a cordial, and
not poison to you.

I do profess before the Lord, that I do, from my soul, forgive you the wrong
and injuries that you have done me, or attempted to do. God has been good to
me, notwithstanding my failing toward him, and my sins against him: And the
sense of his love and rich goodness, makes my bowels to earn toward you.

Oh! It Is a mercy more worth then a world to me, that God has given me such a
frame of spirit, as that I can pray for your souls, and weep over your sins;
and that I am ready to serve you in all those ways, wherein I may further the
eternal welfare of your souls, etc. Lihnod lelammed, We therefore learn that
we may teach, is a Proverb among the Rabbis. I could have dealt with you in
another way, had I not intended the good of your souls. Jer. 44.15- ult. Acts
20.26, 27. Ezekiel. 3.17, 18, 19. 1 Cor. 9.20, 21, 22. John 12.48. 2 Cor. 5.10.
Romans 8.28. Micah 7.8, 9, 10. Jer. 20.9, 10, 11, 12. Mal. 3.17, 18. Isa. 49. 4,
5. Prayer is (porta coeli clavis paradisi) the gate of Heaven, a key to let us
in to Paradise. Heb. 3.7-12. Nec Christus nec coelum patitur hyperbolen. A man
cannot hyperbolize in speaking of Christ and Heaven. Omne bonum, in summo bono.
All good is in the chiefest good. Isai. 1.16, 17.
Make use of me in any thing wherein I may serve you without sin, and see
whether I shall not be willing to act for your good, notwithstanding all
provocations to the contrary.

5. For a close (because I would not be over tedious I shall draw many things
within a narrow compass) you may be confident that my end in writing, is your
due conviction and satisfaction, that you may weigh my Arguments, and clearly
see that it is not will, nor humor, etc. but Conscience, Reason, and Religion,
that acts me. If notwithstanding what I have said, you shall continue in your
malice, envy, hatred, etc. I shall have comfort in this, that I have in all
faithfulness freed my self from being guilty of the blood of your souls; and
in that I have declared to all the world my willingness to serve the interest
of your souls in all chings wherein I may without sin. And most confident I am,
that if what I have written do not better you, it will be a witness against
you, when you and I shall meet before Christ's judgment seat. And confident I
am, that God will bring much good to me out of all the plots, designs, and
actings that have been, or that shall be by vain men against me. And confident
I am, that, the more you stir in any way of baseness or wickedness, the more
the Lord will make you to stink, and the more contempt he will pour upon you,
and the more bright he will cause my innocence to shine, and the more weighty
shall be my Crown in the day of Christ.

My desires for you before the Lord, are these, That you may have such a sight
of your sins as may work you to kiss the Son lest he be angry, and you perish
when his wrath is kindled but a little. And that you may not trifle away the
day of grace, and the things that belong to your eternal peace, least God
should swear in his wrath, that you shall never enter into his rest. Oh that in
the light of the Spirit you may see Christ to be the greatest good, the most
desirable good, the most necessary good, the most suitable good, to be a
total good, an only good, and an eternal good; that so your souls may in good
earnest fall in love with Christ, and may cry out with that Martyr, None but
Christ, none but Christ; Oh none but Christ to save us, and none but Christ to
rule us, none but Christ to justify us, and none but Christ to command us. Oh
that you may cease from doing evil, and learn to do well, that so you may be
happy in life, blessed in death, and glorious in the morning of the
Resurrection.

FINIS.

