A MAP OF THE MICROCOSME, OR, A Moral Description OF MAN. Newly compiled into
ESSAYS: By H. BROWN.

Sunt bona, sunt quaedam mediocria, sunt mala plura,
Quae legis: hic aliter noa sit Avite liber.
Martial. Ep. l. 1. LONDON, Printed by T. Harper, for John Williams, and are to
be sold at the Holy Lamb in Paul's Churchyard. 164^.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE William Lord Marquess and Earl of Hartford, Viscount
Beuchamp, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Bath, one of his Majesty's Most
Honorable privy Council, and Lord Governor to the Prince his Highness.
RIght Honorable, the great glory of your name, and unparalleled goodness of
your nature, have not invited, but enforced the readiest affections of my mind,
like so many winged messengers, to fly to your most honored Lordship, in most
humble acknowledgement of that unspeakable duty and service I owe to your most
noble lineage, which if I should forget, I were worthy, as Alexander once served
one, ^o be branded in the forehead with Ingratus Hospes. My Father had this
small Parsonage he now enjoyes through the means of the Right Honorable your
Lordships grand father of famous memory, whose deserts were so great that
Virtue and Fortune scemed to contend for the pre-eminence in crowning them: had
he no statue erected for him, his great memory is marble to it self, and his
goodness is its own Monument sufficient to consecrate his name to perpetuity.
He is gone, Majore nostro cum damno quam suo, (as Suetonius said of Titus) his
soul accompanied with the winged host of heaven is fled to her Maker, and is
clothed with the glorious robes of immortality and perfect glory in heaven;
where I leave his blessed soul, and return to your Lordship, who makes me
weigh my thoughts as it were in a balance, whether I should conceive m^re
grief for the death of your Lor^ships grandfather, or more joy for enjoying
your Lordship, who now shines in the upper Region of honor and authority:
certainly it is fit they should be equal. Seeing then my joy is nothing
diminished, I am bold humbly to crave your Lordship^ propitious favor so much
as to shroud this my brood (now offered with the young Eagles at the altar of
your Sun) under your Honors powerful wings; that like the Sparrow which
fled into the Philosopher Zenocrates his bosom from the talons of the
perspicacious Hawke, it may be protected from the poisonous teeth of
black-mouthed Momus, in this critical, carping and censorious age. As Apelles
when he painted Bucephalus, appealed to none but Zeuxis: so I appeal from the
judgment of all men to your Lordships approbation, without which this mean
work of mine may be compared, as Plato compared many writing Adonidis hortis,
writings that were of short continuance, Scombros metuentia scripta. Your most
noble name, honored of all sorts of men, being stamped in this leaden piece of
my fantasy, will make it current: and as Phidias his Images were wont to be
rspected for the makers sake not for the stuff: so your Honor will make this
Image, and gain r^spect unto it; for unless your Lordship were ultim^
perfectio and forma hujus materiae, I might well say with Theognis,

(...),

Agens vero non egi, and non finivi finiens.

I should never have presumed to crave your Honorable patronage of these first
fruits of my poor endeavors, or but offered them to your judicious view; but
that I trust you will favorably accept the will for the deed, because Voluntas
est mensura actionum. It is enough for little Birds to be (...), it is required
of beasts that are bigger Characters in the book of Nature, to be (...): For
obscure and poor men that were not able to sacrifice a living Bull, the
Gentiles deemed it sufficient if they did but Taurum e^farina fingere.
Artaxerxes did graciously accept of a fist-full of water from the hand of poor
Cynaetas. And ambitious Alexander the Great, would parva libenter accipere.

I hope therefore (most Noble Lord) that as the great glory of your powerful
name is able to dispell the foggy mists of my weakness, so your goodness
which exceeds your greatness will excuse my boldness: So shall I rejoice more
then the old Arcadians did to see nights sable canop^ removed, and heavens
great spy, the Sun, shine in his sphere again; and I will always praise
the Lord of Lords for your ear^hly honor, praying for increase thereof,
beseeching him to multiply his richest blessings upon your Honor here, and to
give you the inco^ruptible Crown of glory hereafter.

Your Lordships loyal and most humble servant, Humphry Brown.

AD Lectorem.
CVpio, si fieri potest, propitiis auribus quid sentiam dicere: Sin minus,
dicam and iratis.

Senec. Epist. 59. A Map of the Microcosme: OR, A moral description of MAN.
Newly Compiled into ESSAIES.
MAN is the masterpiece of GODS workmanshippe, the great miracle and monument
of Nature, both for external transcendencies and inward faculties. He is the
abstract, model, and brief story of the universe. He is the Analysis or
resolution of the greater world into the less, the Epitome of that huge Tome,
that great Manuscript of Nature, wherein are written the Characters of Gods
omnipotency and power, the little Lord of that great Lordship the World. In a
word, he is Gods Text, and all other creatures are commentaries upon it. Heaven
resembles his soul, earth his heart, placed in the midst as a center, the
liver like the sea, from whence the lively springs of blood do flow, the
brain giving light and understanding, is like the Sun; the senses set round
about like stars. The World is a great Man, and a man is a little world; as
one wittily:

Est Microcosmus hom^, venae sant flumina, corpus

Terra, oculi duo sunt lumina, silva caput.

The soul of man is Immortal. And as Aristotle by the light of Nature says,
(...), etc. Restat ^t men's sola extrinsecus accedat, eaque sola divina sit,
nihil enim cum ejus action communicate Lib. de genesis anim. c. 3.
actio corporalis. The body of man is mortal, but so symmetriously composed,
as if nature had lost it self in the harmony of such a feature. Omnium
anima^tium formam vincit hominis figura. Cicero 1. de not. deorum.
The form of all living creatures is without form, compared to the excellent
figure and composition of man. Man is called in the Hebrew Adam, from Adamah,
which signifies red earth, not that solid part of it, but the britlest dust.
His body only is mortal, and that only per accldens, occasioned by his
disobedience, not by creation, a false persuasion of his immortality, made him
become mortal, by the fond desire of knowing more then he did, his eyes were
opened, but his sight was blemished. He knew indeed (...). Those Homer. Odysls
things that were good, and those things that were evil: but he had the
speculative knowledge in the former, the practical only in the latter. An
Apple kindled flames of dissension in Greece, which was like Catilines
incendium, being extinguished with ruin. Two pretty toys, an Apple and a
woman made man be disinherited of immortality; so that in a moment he is
thrown down from the pinnacle and spire of all his glory and is no better then
the Poet calls him, (...). Man is a shadow, a dream, or a dreaming shadow. I
have said enough of him, for he reads daily Lectures of his imperfection.

A learned Man.
A Learned man is the best chararacter in the world, Gods great book in Folio.
He is a God in the shape of man, when one that is rude, shut up in the dark
dungeon of ignorance, is but a beast in the shape of man. Learning is so
transcendent and superexcellent Angelical a gift, that a man is a man and no
man which wants it. It is to be esteemed far above gold or any precious stones
dug out of the bowels of the earth. A needy scholar, whose wealth lies all
in his brain, is better then a sheep with a golden Fleece (as Diogenes (...).
Diog. Laert.
once said of a rich Idiot) for the one wants money, the other humanity. The
one is alive, the other dead. The one is in no fear of losing his riches, when
they are in him; the other is in fear of losing himself when he is in his
riches. Let not any one who is of a noble progeny, say, I shall shine like a
star in the worlds firmament, without the rare influence of Mercurius;
neither let any man say, In ^ure paterno, Est mihi far modicum purum Persius
Sat. 5.
and sine labe salinum:

I have a fair inheritance in my fathers country: what need I -- Nocturnis
impallescere chartis, contract palenesse to my self by study; or taste of pale
Pirene, that Acrocorinthian Fountain, in love unto the Muses? It is better to
be Doctus in libris, then Dives in libris, learned in books then rich in
pounds; although the Poet said:

Dummod^ sit dives, barbarus ille placet: For Aristotle's lecture was in these
words: (...): Learning said he, is an ornamen^ in prosperity, a refuge i^
adversity. It is wealth to the poor, and treasure to the rich. Alexander the
Great made so great account of learning, that he thought himself more bound to
Aristotle for his learning, then to his Father Philip for his life. This great
Monarch of the world, in the triumphant conquest of Thebes sold all free men
(Priests only excepted) and commanded his Soldiers neither to damnifie
Pindarus the Poet, nor any of his family. Pirrhus, that great vaunter of his
victories, confessed, that Cyneas, his great favorite, got more by his
learning, then he by his sword. Learning is never without glory; Mercurius is
never far distant from Phoebus. It is hard, and almost inaccessible to be as
Hippias Eleus Quintilian. lib. (...) Orat.
was, a living Library of learning, and a walking Vatican of wit, ignorant of
nothing that is by humane industry comprehensible. Ex quolibet ligno non fit
Mercurius. I cannot but praise them who are adorned with this incomparable
Pearl. And I will not altogether dispraise them that want it. For the Ass of
all beasts, is (...), dull and stupid; notwithstanding, out of his bones are
made the best Pipes. Rich fools, which are but golden Asses, although
eliminated themselves from the quire of the Muses, yet by their gold many
excellent Scholars are nourished up in learning, who sacrifice pure inventions
to the Muses. Our sottish and idle Enthusiasts are to be reproved therefore,
who call humane learning but Splendidum pec^atum. They are sure the Cobblers
disciples, stitching together tales of Tubbes in Tubbes. They must either deny
any truth to be in humane learning, or else they ^ought to honor it
Lacedemonian like, crediting the sentence, though re^ecting the Author if bad.
They cannot deny truth to be in profane Authors. It was true which Menander
the Poet spoke before the Apostle ever wrote it to the Church of Corinth,
(...). Evil words corrupt good manners.. There is but one truth, and
wheresoever it is found, it must not be rejected* If they honor not humane
learning then, so far as it is profitable and true, I leave them to be hissed
at, as unworthy ever to be entered into Wise man's College. And as Pierius his
daughters were turned into Mag-pies for speaking against the Muses; so let them
be accounted of all men, but as railing phanaticall Momes, and black-mouthed
Curres, void of reason and humanity. Cicero said, he would rather err with
Plato, then conceive the truth aright with other. But I would have all men
^onor learning, as joined with truth and infallibility, even as Aristotle
honored his Master Plato. Some may object and say, It is a part of great
presumption in me, who am of so few years, and small experience, to attempt
the painting forth of learning, when there be so many lively pictures thereof
drawn already, of which I may say with Zeuxis, more will envy then imitate. I
confess I am an unworthy Herald to proclaim the fame of learning when my
Cabinet enshrineth least of thi^ invaluable treasure; and know you cannot know
me by my lines to be ^cunning and accurat^ A^ificer, as Protogine^ did
Apelles. Where therefore my pensill fails me to limb in so curious a
portraiture, I will play Timanthes, and shadow with a veil.

A Lustful Man.
A Lustful Man is so married to his unclean affections, that he is marred by
them, and becomes a Monster, using Humano capiti Cervicem Horat. l. de Art Poet
jungere equinam.

He continually courts the Lady Venus, who dwells at the sign of the Ivy
Bush: And as Antonius was so bewitched with Cleopatra, who drank an Union to
him, that Vnam Cleopatram, and Plutarch. in vita Anton.
spiraret and loqueretur: so the luxurious man is so bewitched with this lazy
Lady, that Vnicam Venerem and spirat and lo^ quitur; Venus only is his
discourse, and the Book of Physickes that he too much studies. This kind man
increases mankind, not for love to the end, but to the means. He is so
sensual, that he has more command over wild beasts, then his own unruly
and beastly affections, as one said of Hercules:

Lenam non potuit, potuit Owen Ep.
superare Leaenam
Quem Fer a non valuit vincere, vicit Hera.
He is a Salamander, living continually in the flames of lust; and he will
still love, not leave any Lais, though he buys repentance at a dear rate: He
is Planetstruck with every rare female, and he will become a Planet too,
wandering far from the way of honesty (which he never could find) if there
be not concordia formae atque pudicitiae in her. He is the Vulcan which picks
the locks of Virginity; and he commends women no longer then he commands
them. He honors the Pope as Patron of his sin, which he counts venial, at
least venall. He is the women's Calendar from seventeene to thirty, if he
scapes burning so long. He is still in the Optative mood, when not in the
Conjunction. He dries up his radical moisture with the fire of his lust: so
that

His hairs and sins he cannot equal call:
For as his sins increase, his hairs do fall.
Venus was begot of Neptunes scumme, and therefore called Aphrodite, as Poets
fain, propter naturam seminis spumosam. She is called He^o^ (...), a visione,
because oculi sunt in amore duces. The eyes are the windows to let in lust to
the soul: where like a subterraneous fire, it breaks forth with unspeakable
vehemency and fierceness, never satisfied so long as a Whore is the Horizon
of the sight; the heart is the center of unclean and polluted affections.
Protogines portrayed Venus with a Sponge, sprinkled with sweet water; but if
once she wrung it, it would drop blood. She is not unwittily compared to
Chimaera: for as Chimaera is conceived to have the head of a Lion, the belly of
a Goat, and the tail of a Dragon: so venereous lust in the beginning, has the
fierceness of a Lion; in the middle, the lechery of a Goat; in the end the
venom of a Dragon. Aristotle's counsel was, to behold pleasures, Non
venientes, sed abeuntes: Not as they come with pleasure, but as they go with
pain. Sweet sents are dedicated to Venus, and sour sauce also follows her.
Whosoever is allured by the pleasant fragance of this fading flower, Beauty,
(which is the eyes Idol) like a Goat, taken with a fond desire of the Panthers
pleasantness, he comes nearer and nearer to her, till he be destroyed by her:
not unlike the tall trees in Ida, which allured many to rest in them, under
their shadow, and then infect them with their sent. I could wish that all men
would imitate Cyrus, a most noble and valiant King of Persia, endued with such
continency, that he loathed to look on the heavenly hiew of Panthaea,
notwithstanding Arastus told him, the beauty of all others was eclipsed by her
incomparable feature. By so much the more, said Cyrus, may I be wounded with
Cupids quiver, and in loving her I should lose the Majesty of a King. When
Venus rises, Phoebus sets: Love never rises, but when glorious Majesty
sets. Venus is a Goddess that has no Deity where discretion reigns.

Non been convenient nec Ovid. M^t. l. 3.
in una sede morantur
Majestas and amor --
The Poets fained Jupiter through love, or rather lust, to have assumed any
form: he turned himself into the shape Not. Comes 2. Myth. c. 1. Aelian.
Var. Hist. l. 13 c. 31.
of Amphitrio and a golden shower to betray Alcmena and Danae: Et Taurus,
Cygnus, Satyrusque ob amorem Europae, Ledes Antiopae. More worship the Planet
Venus, then Mercurius. Theodota was in more request then Socrates. But he that
desires to sail happily on this Sea, the world, must play Parthian war with
bewitching. Syren-like Harlots.

Sed fuge: tutus adhuc Parthus ab host fuga est: Let him fly idleness, which
is the first shaft Cupid shoots into the hot liver of a fond Lover: let him
shun opportunity as his Bawd, and occasion as his Pandor. Let him follow this
counsel:

Nesedeas sed eas, ne pereas pereas. If he refuses to keep the nest of lust
warm, the pernicious brood of actual follies will not be hatched: Fuel
also must be with-drawne from this fire, fasting spettle must kill this
Serpent, which like the Serpent Sardinius, makes men dye laughing. Sine
Terentius
Cerere and Baccho friget Venus: where there is cleanness of teeth, there is
no filthiness of body. Crates the Theban prescribed (...), Hunger, Time, an
Halter, signifying, thereby, that if present hunger, or length of time, quench
not this flame in any man, he is worthy to be hanged. Wound Venus therefore
with Diomedes in Homer, lest Venus wound thee.

A factious Hypocrite.
A Factious Hypocrite is Satan's close Factor, and Gods open professor, an
outward Christian, an inward Devil; according to the proverb the Grecians had
of Philo Iudaeus (...) Either Plato follows Philo, or Philo imitateth Plato.
Mutato nomine d^te. Either the hypocrite follows the Devil, o^ the Devil the
Hypocrite Intus Nero, foris Cato, to tus ambiguus, monstrum est. Cruel Nero
within grave Cato without, always double, and a monster. Like the Dragons of
Armenia, that have cold bodies, and yet cast fire out of their mouths: like
pepper, hot in the mouth, cold in the stomach. The mouth of a painted hypocrite
tells all men, that his zeal is in the torrid Zone, when indeed his own heart
conceives that the frigid Zone may well challenge Persius.
it. Astutum rapido serrat sub pectore vulpem. His inside is lined with Fox
furre, his outside is of Sheep wool: He is a dunghill covered over with
snow, whereon if the Sun of a clear judgment does but reflect his
resplendent beams, it will yield so many noisome exhalations, that are enough
to infect a kingdom. All virtues are as parallel lines to him, and therefore
two of them cannot be coincident in his heart as the Center. Formal
precisenes holds the door as a Porter, whiles legions of Devils dance within.
He is on Sunday like the Rubric or Sunday letter, zealously red; and if his
other occasions will permit him, he will then dance after the Fiddle of some
base Mechanicke of the fraternity; (who with his phantasticke vain conceits,
brainsicke dreams, forged revelations, and inspired nothings, adulterates
Truth, the very spouse of the understanding) but all the week you may write
his deeds in black, he being a Student in the Devils Academy. He is a book
with a painted cover, bescribled with many black Characters of mischief,
written with the Devils own hand, and thoroughly read of very few. His tongue
writes volumes of dissimulation in folio, and himself is a Christian hardly in
decimo sexto. Plutarch writes, that the Amphictyones in Greece, a famous
Council, assembled of twelve sundry people, wrote upon the Temple of Apollo
Pythius, in stead of the Iliads of Homer, or songs of Pindarus; short sentences
and memoratives, as, Know thy self, use moderation, beware of Suretiship, and
the like. These Hypocrites are delighted with large tiring discourses, if the
fruit of their own brains, and they will be sure to observe the last of
those 3. sentences: for their words are precise, their deeds concise; like a
loose hung Mill, they keep great clacking, but grind no grist. They are all
for dead faith; and rather then they will be thought to hold good works
meritorious, they will do none at all. They have more Divinity then Humanity
and will ^ather give distressed neighbor a ^ater noster then a penny, loying
his stomach with ^exts against sloth and ^eggery: as if an hungry ^oule were
like Charles ^f Prage, who supped ^ften with the dishes in ^lato's banquet, a
few Sen^ences and Arguments in ^he Schools. They are ^o little guilty of the
Pa^ists error, in holding good works meritorious, that I may say and not
^lander them, the fire of zeal dries up the deaw of Charity. There be some
hypocrites who deny all humane inventions, except their own, and rail at
ceremonies for trifles, when indeed their piety is but a ceremony, outward not
inward. They mislike all set forms of prayer, and worship only the Calves of
their own lips, extemporary nonsense. These are factious Schismatics
possessed with the spirit of contradiction, supposing like him in Tully, great
learning and eloquence to be in contradiction. Disertus esse poss^m Tusculan
Quaest. l. 1.
si contra iste dicerem. They are mere Antipodes to order, when they should
stand they will kneel, and when they should kneel, to show all their uprightness
at once, they will stand: therefore they deserve to fall. They pray long in the
Church, and if they can conveniently, they will prey on the Church. They turn
sound preaching into a sound of preaching, prating. Like empty Cymbals they
sound for emptiness, being but vain symbols of schism: they are bad
consonants in truth; and I could wish, they were Mutes in falsehood. As Phydias
made all pictures with one face, so they paint all virtues, which square not
with their brainsicke humors, with vices face, thinking themselves to be the
sole elect, though true piety, pity, honesty and the like, are in grad^^
incompossibili to them, and they to heaven. They seem so confident of their
salvation, that with the Swan they sing Anthemes of apparent joy at their
departure hence: But I am afraid, they leave this world the welhead of salt
tears, and go to hell in a golden dream of heaven.

A covetous Wretch.
THe covetous misers thoughts are still golden, and his mind is never elevated
above his Mine. He thinks gain to be godliness, crying it up with Demetrius
as his great Diana. He likes our Religion best, because it is best cheap; he
smells this Maxim well every where, Lucri bonus Iuven. Sat. 14.
est odor ex re qualibet. As the Ostrich disgests iron, so can his conscience
any gold, howsoever gotten. He subordinates al things both Divine and humane to
gain; and with Vespasian he conceives no way to be indirect to it. He would
slay an Ass for his skin; and like Hermocrates dying would make himself his
own executor: for cetain he is made administrator to his good name while he
is alive, for it dies long before him, without a funeral. When insatiable
avarice steeres the will, and sits in the heart as Queene-regent, she is
attended on with impiety, want of charity, envy, dishonesty, infamy, and the
like, as her maids of dishonor. This wretched muck worm seldom surfets with
excess of cheer: For at home he eats more for present need, then future
health: Corpus extenuat ut lucrum extendat: he defraudes his Genius, and is in
debt to back and belly for lucres sake. Chius like he will fill the best wine
to others, and drink the lees himself, his desire being to fill his Coffers,
and to put his belly into his purse: for parcimony and slender diet are the
chiefest virtues commended in his Ethickes: but another man's table sharpneth
his appetite, and if he ever surfeit, it is then. He does so accustom himself
to baseness, that it become^ his nature. He esteeme^ the mockes and hisses o^
the people a vain frivolous matter, and dashes i^ by the contemplation of his
money in his chest* Quid enim salvis insani^ Inven. Sat. 14.
nummis? If his money be safe, he counts infamy an idle thing not to be
esteemed. All things besides his rusty coine^ seem nothing to him; he with it,
seems nothing to others, and without it he is nothing to himself; because his
money is his ultima perfectio, and the very ratio formalis of his soul: for he
has a lease of his wits only during the continuance of his wealth, which
makes him an Artist. His Rhetoric is how to keep him out of the Subsidy: his
Logic is to prove heaven in his Chest: his Geometry is to measure the goodness
of any thing by his own profit: his Arithmetic is in Addition and
Multiplication only: his Physic is to administer gold to his eye, though he
starve his body: his Music is, Sol re me fa, sola res me facit, that which
makes me, makes me merry. Divinity he has none, but Sculptura is his
Scriptura; and he has so many gods as Images of coin. The earth is his
heaven, and the golden Angels are his gods, in whose sight consists his
beatificall vision. If his purse be l^ght, his heart is heavy* and if his
purse be filled, he is filled with more cares, Crescentem sequitur cura
pecuniam majorumque Horatius. Quo plus sunt potae plus sitiunt aquae.
fames. Tantalus like he is never satisfied: for his (...) does Senectute
juvenescere. He thinks it just to deduct from a servants wages the price of an
halter, which he cut to save the wretch when he had hung himself at the fall
of the market. There is no man poorer then himself, Magnas inter opes inops:
he is poor being rich. For as Seneca, pauper est non qui parune habet, sed qui
plus cupit. He is not poor who has little, but that covets more. He is like
the tempestuous Sea between Scilla and Charybdis, agitated with contrary winds
and waves. Desire, distrust, Spemque metumque inter, he is cruelly tormented
and excrutiated, as if he were in Phalaris his brazen Bull, or Aemilius
Censorinus his brazen Cow: for the desire of getting infinite riches, is a
spur to his sides; and riches gotten are as thorns to his eyes. Misera est
magni custodia consus. The custody Juven.
of great substance has still equal misery to accompany it: so that I may
well say, Avarus nemini bonus, sibi vero pessimus, a covetous wretch is good to
no man, worst to himself, (...), drawing to himself evils, as the Northeast
wind does clouds. Fulgentius observes, that king My hol. l. 1.
^idas, who desired Apollo, that every thing which he touched might be turned
into gold, is so called, quasi (...), knowing nothing: but if he knew nothing,
how could he covet so much? for Ignoti nulla cupido. Certainly he knew enough,
though he was no Graduate in the liberal Sciences; but of that which was sibi
conveniens, he was utterly ignorant, his understanding therein being as blind
as his will. Every Midas is a fit instrument for Satan to effect any
mischievous designs, because his piety is always overswayed by his profit:
And as the children of Israel forsook God, and worshipped the Golden Calfe, so
he will leeve (...) and embrace (...): This miser cannot abide to hear Arist.
l. 2. Ethic. c 7.
of restitution; he does exceed in receiving, but is very deficient in giving;
like the Christmas earthen boxes of Apprentices, apt to take in money, but he
restores none till he be broken like a potters vessel into many shares, and
then the Devil will have his wicked soul, the worms his lean Karkasse, which
will scarce afford them a breakfast; and some unthrifty heir the golden web
which he, like the Spider, has weaved out of the bowels of his long travel
and vexed spirit, all the days of his vanity. The end of his ambition is to
die rich to others, and to live poor to himself: he toiles like a Dog in a
wheel, to roast meat for other men's eating. There is but one way for this
covetous Holdfast to go to heaven, which is to be drawn up by that (...), or
golden chain in Homer, Iliad. l. 1.
reaching from earth to heaven; but he knowing that to be a fable will go where
gold is, In viscera terrae, hell being his center, where I leave him.

An Angry Man.
AN angry man is cousin german to a mad man, unless his anger be in the best
sense, which anger is always lawful, being adorned with advised speech in a
seasonable time; it is to the soul as a nerve to the body. The Philosopher
calls it Cos fortitudinis, the whetstone of fortitude, infusing valor in the
vindication of a public or private good. As the Vestal fire was preserved by
chastity, so this by charity: But I leave this anger to be followed, and follow
that anger which is to be eschewed, that anger which is a tyrannical, sinful
passion, initium insaniae, said Ennius, and initium poenitentiae, said Seneca;
the cause Sen. de ira lib. 2. c. 22. Ira sorti producit lacertos imbelli
linguam.
whereof is some conceived injury; causa iracundiae opini^ injuriae est. This
heat becomes hate, and a malicious desire of revenge, exercising the arms of
the strong, and tongues of the weak; and as a noisome pestilent fiery Meteor,
composed altogether of fuliginous vapors, risen from pitchy Acheron, it
belcheth forth nothing but flames of sedition, tumults, battles, murders, and
destruction, and all through a conflict of two contrary passions assaulting the
heart at the same instant, grief and pleasure; grief for the injury offered,
whereby great heat is gathered about the heart, making the face pale and
blackish; which intestine flame like a subterraneous fire, makes an eruption
into direful threats of revenge, and enlarges the heart with the pleasure
thereof: for according to Aristotle, Rhet. l. 2. cap. 2.
some pleasure through hope of revenge still accompanies this affection, which
differs from madness only temporis mora. The Grecians call it (...), from the
word (...), appeto, because desire of revenge is essential to it. Aquinas
makes three degrees of anger, Fell, maniam, furorem; the one he says has
beginning and motion, but presently cease, like a flash of lightning, cito
oritur cito moritur. The other takes deeper hold in the memory. The third
desisteth not without revenge, for it is kept so long in the vessel of the
heart, that it waxes eager and sour, and is turned into malice. Some are
sharp, says Aristotle, who like gunpowder are no sooner touched, but they
fly in your face; others are bitter; a third kind is implacable, who like the
stone in Arcadia named Asbestos, mentioned by Solinus, being once set on fire
can hardly be quenched: they never unfold their brows, as if anger had there
plowed the furrows of her wrath, and they graven their injuries in marble:
they commonly harbor this unruly affection so long in their hearts, (as the
Lacedemonian boy did his Fox) till it gnaw out their hearts. Furor iraque
mentem praecipitant, Fury is a mere Circe which makes a monstrous and
inhumane metamorphosis, transforming men into cruel Tygres. An angry man is
altogether irrational quoad actum secundum. He respects neither Prince,
Priest, nor People; he reviles al, fratremque patremque. Of Dametas he is
turned into Hercules furens, and while the lightning of his rage lasts, he
throws out the thunderbolts of his rage upon all, not sticking in his fiery
fury, with Hippi^^, to butcher his dearest innocent friends, Cum spirat irae
sanguinem nesci^ regi, when anger breathe^ forth bloody comminations, she knows
not how to be ruled, for reason, which should steer the little ship of man,
sailing on the raging sea of affections, is now put besides the helm. Wisdom
cannot be the judge when anger is the sollicitour. Men sick of this Bedlam
passion, often make irrational and insensible creatures, the objects of their
bitterness: Balaam smote his Ass, Xerxes levelled the fiery darts of his
fierce fury against Athos a Thracian mountain, threatening to cut it down, and
cast it unto the sea, if it were not passable. Darius, because a river had
drowned a white horse of his, vowed to cut it into so many channels, that a
woman with child might go over dry-shood. So the Africans being infested with
a North wind, that covered a Corn field with sand from a mountain, levied an
army of men to fight with that wind; but the sand became their Sepulcher. How
much more irrational and insensible are these men, then the things they
malign? Any one without spectacles may behold Asses ears under their Lions
skins, folly in their fury. That disease, says Hippocrates* is most dangerous,
in which the sick man changes the habit of his mouth, and becomes most unlike
himself: And if that be true, there is no disease more desperate then anger;
for it alters not only the countenance, the language, and the gestures of
the body, but also the faculties of the mind, making a man a monster.

Impatiens animus, dirae, blasphemia, probrum,
Vltio, rixa, minae, sunt irae pignora septem.
Other passions dally with a man, entice him, dazzle him, and only incline
him, but this commands him, compels him, blindes him, that he ^ees no good, and
fears no evil: Therefore Fury which drives him, is painted with a Sword in
his hand, and for the impatient desire of revenge wherewith he is inflamed*
violently rushing upon a Iavelin: so that, plus ^ocitura est ira quam inju^ia,
anger is more hurtful then the injury that causes it. No Physic may be
prescribed s^ long as this Dog-starr^ predominates. The bes^ preservative is to
resis^ the beginning of this evil, and (as the Pigmie^ deal with the Cranes
crack it in the shell. I^ confinibus arcendus est h^stis, The enemy is be
driven back in the frontiers If any man did well consider the great danger o^
this bloody passion which like the viper causes corruption where i^ has
generation, he would hate himself for affecting that which makes him not
himself The Emperor Nerv^ ended his life in a Fever contracted by anger. The
Emperor Valenti^ianus died by an irrupti^n of blood through anger, with many
other. Black clouds of danger ^re always imminent, and a more then beastly
^eformity, never absent ^o long as this ugly Toad ^s present. It is Seneca's
^ounsell, that the angry ^an should behold himself in a mirror, Iratis ^rofuit
aspexisse speculum; Lib. 2. de Ir^. c. 36.
^ui ad speculum venerat ^t se mutaret jam mutave^at: He who comes ^o the
looking glass to ^hange himself, is al^eady changed. Again, Sen. l. 2. de
Ira. c. 28.
Maximum remedium est irae mora; desinet, si expectet. Delay is the greatest
remedy of anger, it ceases if it fall in suspense. The counsel of Anthenodorus
the Philosopher to Augustus Caesar was, Antequam indulge as irae percurre tecum
alphabetum Graecum; before thou feedest thy fury, recite with thy self the
Greek Alphabet; as if he should have said, sing to thy passion as Nurses to
their babes, (...), haste not, cry not, and anon I will content thee.

An envious Man.
AN envious man stands always in Diametricall opposition (...) Aristot. Rhet.
l. 2. c. 10.
to a good man. Aristotle calls him, Antagonista fortunatorum, according to
his definition. Envy ^s a certain molestation and grief for the apparent
felicity of others; which, like a Fever Hec^icke, consumes a man: and because
of some^hing he has not, he is ^rought to nothing; so that he wants as
well what he has, as what he has not. Vicinitas est Franc. Petrarch.
prosperitas invidi^ sunt parents, neernesse and prosperity are the happy
parents of this monster, which is squint-eyed, that sees not far off, and
near hand sees too perversely with the Spectacles of a wicked imagination. The
eye is the seat of this soar, and a blessing espied through this window,
kills the envious man like the Basiliske. Intabescitque videndo, the more he
sees, the more he sighs, altogether esteeming his neighbors weal his woe,
and others glory his grief. Parum est si ipse sit foelix, nisi alter fuerit
infoelix; he cannot put on the white robes of felicity, except another mournes
in the sable weeds of adversity; neither can he sail happily, except fell
Boreas assault others. He delights like flies, in the wounds of others, and
that which is a Tragedy to others, is to him a Comedy; using like the Bragmans,
to laugh when he should weep, and to weep when he should laugh. The bright
Sun of other men's prosperity, beating upon the Dunghill of a dejected base
spirit, engenders this snake, which if it bite a man, he instantly swelles
with much poison: but like the Serpent Porphyrius wanting teeth and power to
vent his venom, he hurts himself most. Vt Aetna seipsum, sic se non alios,
invidus igne coquit.

The envious man is no Physician to himself: for by his pining and repining,
he burns up his blood in the furnace of hatred: so that his body has just
cause to sue his soul on an action of Dilapidation. Envy is the mere Megaera
which continually torments his soul. Titiique vultur intus qui semper lacerat
comestque mentem. As poison is life to a Serpent, but death to a man; and
spettle life to a man, but death to a serpent: so the virulent sustenance that
the envious man lives on, is death to a good man; and a good man's been esse, is
the envious man's non esse. Bion Pallor in ore sedet macies in corpore toto.
Metam.
beholding such a one, (with a pale face and lean body, whose heart was full of
gall, and his tongue tipped with poison) very sorrowful, asked him, saying:
Whether has some evil befallen thee, or some good to thy neighbor? As the
venomous Beetle Cantharides, delights to consume the finest wheat, and nip the
fairest flowers: so envy invades the best men, and those that excel in any
good, whether of mind, body or fortune. Therefore Themistocles being but of
tender age, said, He had effected as yet nothing excellent and praiseworthy,
because the darts of envy flew not about his ears. As those eyes are
acccounted bewitching; qui gemin^m habent pupillam, sicut Illyrici, which have
double-sighted eyes: So the doublesighted eyes of the envious, bewitch his
understanding, whereby he misconceives and misinterprets another man's felicity
and fortune, beholding it with an evil eye, as in a multiplying glass, that
makes good things appear great things, according to the Poet:

Fertilior seges est alienis Ovid.
semper in agris
Vicin^mque pecus grandius uber habet.
He prints discontent in his countenance, if another atchieve that honor
which is beyond his reach. Hunc atque hunc superare laborat. He strives to
excel all, though he is excelled by all: if he undertakes a great work,
which is above the sphere of his capacity, he will give leave to none other,
like Aesops dog in the manger. Like the snake in the Apologue, that l^cked
off her own tongue, when thinking nothing should have teeth but her self,
she would have licked the file plain which she found with teeth at the
Smiths forge; he drinks the most part of his venom, and hurts himself
seeking to hurt others; yea, he will hurt himself so that he may hurt others.
Simul peccat and plectitur: expedita j^stitia. An expedite kind of justice,
when punishment treads upon the heel of sin.

For my part, I Will ever embrace Pallas, who as the Poets fain, still knocks at
the door of envy, that dwells in vallibus imis, and so she keeps her from
sleeping: whom being now stirred and awakned by Pallas, I leave with him that
loves her, till she transform him to a mere Aglauros, as void of sense as of
humanity.

A Fortune Tellers.
A Fortune Tellers is an idle adle-brain'd fellow, who takes upon him as if he
were a bawd to the celestial bodies, by the conjunctions of planets, and
position of stars, to foretell the ruins of public weals, to calculate
nativities, and to foretell strange events. He pleads a deep insight into
their secrets, as if he were their Midwife; or as if, like the Physician, he
had cast the urine of the clouds, and knew where the fit held them, that it
could neither rain, nor hail, nor snow, till some star had made him her
secretary. This Aeruscator, that strives to get money by ill means, tells the
fortunes of others uncertainly, that he might increase his own certainly: if
he tell any thing that comes to pass, it is but as if a blind Archer should
hit the Mark. Diogenes seeing a fellow (that showed tables of the stars
openly) say, Hae sunt stellae errantes, These are the wandering stars,
answered, Ne mentiaris, bone vir, do not slander the stars, good man, that
err not, but thy self only do err, by thy vain speculations of the stars.
The Tale-tell star-gazers and Chronologers, are so different among themselves,
that it is truly said of them, Inter horologia magis convenit quam inter
exactos temporum calculatores. The clockes agree better then them, but to make
amends for that, their opinions as lines of the same circumference, are
coincident in falsehood as their center. Cicero mentions it for the Chaldean
folly, that they would have De divinat. l. 2.
Omnes ^odem tempore ortos, eadem condition nasci: all that were born
together, to be borne to the same condition. But if that be true, how came
Romulus and Remus, who (if we may believe it) were both borne of a Vestal
(defiled by a soldier) at one birth, to such various fortunes? Was all the
world, drowned in the deluge, under one star? Or all Soldiers slain
together in one field, under the same signs? The Astrologers assertion is,
that all borne under the sign Aquarius, would be Fishers: but in Getulia
there are no fishers; was never any there born under the sign Aquarius?

Surely all Astrologers are Erra Paters disciples, and the Devils professors,
telling their opinions in spurious aenigmaticall doubtful terms, like the
Oracle at Delphos. What a blind dotage, and shameless impudence is in these
men, who pretend to know more then Saints and Angels? Can they read other men's
fates by those glorious characters the stars, being ignorant of their own?
Qui sibi nescius, cui praescius? Thracias the Soothsayer, in the nine years
drought of Egypt, came to B^siris the Tyrant;

-- Monstratque piar^ Hospitis effuso sanguine posse lovem, And told him, that
Jupiters wrath might be expiated by sacrificing the blood of a stranger. The
Tyrant asked him whether he was a stranger: he told him he was.

Illi Busiris; fies Iovis hostia primus,
Inquit, and Aegypto tu dahis hospes aquam.
Thou, quo^h Busiris, shall that stranger be,
Whose blood shall we^ our soil by destiny.
If all were served so, we should have none that would rely so confidently on
the falsehood of their Ephemerides, and in some manner shake off all divine
providence, making themselves equal to God: Tolli enim Au. Gel. l. 14. c. 1.
quod maximum inter Deos atque homines affert, (...) homines qu^^^res post
futurus praenoscerent. The greatest difference between God and man is taken
away, if man should foreknow future events. These prophesieusurpers, who
ascribe all things to the influence of constellations, shoot at the stars,
but aim at themselves, according to that of Accius: Nihil, inquit, credo
Auguribus qui aure^ verbis divitant alienas, suas ut auro locupletent Domos. I
do nothing credit the Soothsayers, who enrich other men's ears with words,
that they may enrich their own houses with gold.

Believe not the Impostures of these juggling companions: they foretell
prosperous things, or not prosperous: First, they foretell prosperous, and
fail, thou art made miserable by expecting them in vain. If they foretell
unfortunate events, and deceive thee, thou art made miserable by fearing them
in vain. I^ those things they forete^ do happen, being not prosperous, thou art
made miserable because they come to pass. If they promise auspicious fate to
thee, and have no^ paid it, thy hope will weary thee, and the long expectation
thereof, will prove miserable to thee.

Fortune.
FOrtune is so constant in inconstancy, that the best Amulius cannot portray
her in one constant shadow, nearest resembling the counterfeit that Praxiteles
made for Flora, before the which if one stood directly, it seemed to weep; if
on the left side, to laugh; if on the other side, to sleep. Fortuna amica
varietati constantiam respuit, says the heathen Orator: Wherefore I cannot but
commend the pithy answer of Apelles, that cunning painter, who being asked why
he painted Fortune sitting, answered readily, Quiae stare loc^ Stobaeus.
nescit, because she is so unstable, knowing not how to stand constant:
otherwise he commonly painted her sitting upon a Globe, blind, and turned by
every puff of wind. Nihil enim est tam contrarium rationi and constantia quam
fortuna. For nothing is so contrary to right reason and constancy, as Fortune,
that is winged with the feathers of Fickleness. Nil equ^dem durare d^u Ovid
Me^.
sub imagine eadem crediderim. Ima permutat brevi^ Sen. Thyest.
hora summis. Nothing continues long under the same form: in an hour things
are turned topsi^urvie. The lowest va^our becomes the highest cloud, and the
highest cloud the lowest vapor* ^esostris, an illustrious and happy King of
Egypt, famous for abundance of wealth and earthly trea^ure, subdued many
Na^ions under the yoke of Ph. Melancthon. l. 3. Chron
^is slavery. He was wont ^o be carried in a Chari^t adorned with gold and
^retious stones, by four Kings whom he had conquered: and when one of them
often regarding the wheel of the Chariot, contemplated with himself, was
asked by Sesostris, why he did so much behold the motion of the wheel? In
beholding (said he) the volubility of the wheel, wherein the lowest are soon
highest, and the highest lowest, I perceive the instability of Fortune, who
dejecteth those that are highly advanced, and advances those that are low
pressed. Whereupon Sesostris would never after exercise his inhumane cruelty
against any captive King in that kind. Remembering Perchance that of Herodotus:
(...). Let no man think to erect Castles or fair Monuments in the air, or
build upon the uncertain and short prosperous winds of favour-blooming
Fortune high and huge hopes, as the Tragedian excellently admonishes:

Nemo confidat nimium secundis, Sen. Trag.

Nemo desperet mel^ora lapsis.
Let no man think to give Fortune the defiance in prosperity, neither let any
despair of better things in adversity. Marius Tacitus.
begged in the sixth Consulship, governed in the seventh. Scipio Africa of a
Consul became a Captive, of a Captive a Consul. To be haughty therefore if
our ship sail bonis avibus, on the calm sea of prosperity, is vain glory
void of wisdom: for the greater fortune is, the less is she secure. So to
be overmuch dejected, because the ship of all our treasure sailing malis
avibus, on the tempestuous seas of adverse fate, be wracked against the ^raggy
Clifts of misfor^une, does argue our wisdom was our ri^hes, and in losing
one, we lose both. He that is fixed star in wisdom, will not prove a meteor
composed of vanity, neither shall any interposed earth eclipse his glory. When
Fortuna opes an^erre, Senece.
non animam potest. Fortune may take away his outward riches, not his soul. A
prudent provident man still expects ^he worst; and as it is said of Socrates,
his mind is ^lwayes equal, still prepared against any boy^terous blasts and
storms of malignant Fortune. And being not a servant to this uncertain Lady,
he thinks himself not unhappy if she frowns on him, nor more happy if she
smiles. Zen^ having lost his outward goods by ship-wracke; Immobili vultu euge
(inquit) fortuna quam opportune nos ad pallio^um redegisti. For as he that
struck Jason on the stomach, thinking to kill kim, brake his impostume and
cure^ him: so this step mothe^ Fortune strikes at Zen^ intending to kill him,
and to make his heart evaporate into sighs, by reason of this tempest
(drowning that which would have drowned him) but in stead of a sword she
applied a salve, breaking the impostumation of vain glory, and outward
pleasure, growing in his heart, and framed his mind again to the study of
Philosophy.

Ambition.
AMbition is a vice opposite to Magnanimity, being an immoderate desire of
honor without merit. It is the proud souls dropsie^ when a draught of Honor
causes a drough^ of Honor. One advancement gives a fresh provocation to
another. He is not so soon laid o^ the bed of honor, bu^ he dreams of a
high preferment. His desires are as high as the stars, his deserts lower then
the earth; he will willingly stay on no staire if there be a higher, and yet
ascended to the top, want of highness is his malady. Alexander having
conquered all Asia, and being set on the pinnacle of imcomparable dignity on
earth, hearing Ahaparchus dispute of innumerable worlds, salt tears immediately
distilled from the Limbecke of his proud sorrowful heart, because he had not
yet conquered one world. Alexander mundo magnus, mundus Alexandro parvus.
Alexander though the greatest Monarch in the world

( Imperium Oceano famam Virg. 2. Aene^d.
qui terminat astris, Who terminates his Empire with the remotest seas, and his
fame with the Poles) thought the world a Mole-hil, being too narrow a stage for
the large Scene of his ambition,

Vnus pellaeo juveni non sufficit orbis, Juven. Sat. 10.

Aestuat infoelix angusto limite mundi.
His heart being a Triangle could not be filled with the world being a Circle.
An ambitious mind like Tullies strange soil, much rain of promotion falling
from his heaven the Court, makes him still as dry as dust. The Court is the Sea
wherein he desires to fish, and the starry firmament wherein he desires to
shine; yet an old Courtier being asked what he did at Court, answered, I do
nothing but undo my self: And I can say this of other Suitors, If ten be
dispatched, ninety are despighted. Aspiring minds, whiles they behold the
stars with Thales, fall into the ditch. Agrippina, Nero's mother, being told
by an Astrologer, that her son should be Emperor, but his Orient should be
her Occident, answered, Occidat Tacitus l. 14. An.
dum imperet: Let him kill me so he may get the Empire. Pyrr^us Plu^arch. ejus
vita.
King of the Epirotes, said, If he had conquered Rome, Italy, Sicily, Africa,
Carthage, and all Greece he could be frolic with his friends: but surely had
he achieved the triumphant victory of all these nations, blind ambition would
not have suffered him to rest; but he still would have adored Fortunes bright
Sun, desiring to increase, like the new Moon, donec t^tam circumferentiam The
new Moons Mot^o.
imple^t, till he fill the whole circumference, not considering that the full
Moon suffers an Eclipse: Camelionlike Plin. Not.
they have nothing within, but large lungs, windy ostentation, thinking with
the bladder of their blown hopes, and windy vapors of self-love, to swim
(with Antiochus) upon the earth, and to walk on the sea. An ambitious man of a
Farmer would be a Yeoman, of a Yeoman a Gentleman, of a Gentleman a Squire, or
else he is out of square; of a Squire a Knight, and no Gentleman. Once
knighted the world must count him a Count; and then he rides all upon the
Spur (Policy being his Post horse) till he come to Nonesuch. He would be a
Peerlesse Peer willing to have no Equator in the terrestrial Globe: his
greatest plague is a Rival. The impulsive cause of the civil wars between
Pompey and Caesar, was, ambitio and nimia foelicitas (as Florus) the one not
enduring an equal, the other a superior.

-- Stimulos dedit aemula Lucan. l. 1.
virtus,
Nec quemquam jam far potest Caesarve priorem, Pompeiusve parem.
It is an essential property of a swelling and proud boasting person, not to
consider whom he excels himself, but who excels him. Joy does not so
much dilate his heart to see many after him, as grief contracts it to see any
before him: he seldom or never looks back, but always forward; and when
he sees himself to be Fortunes singular and greatest favorite (with
Alexander) he conceits his immortality, and causes Temples and Altars to be
erected to his name, making himself a God with man, but a man with God. Sapor a
Persian King, entitled himself Rex Regum, frater Solis and Lunae, particeps
Syderum etc. Kings of Kings, brother to the Sun and Moon, partner with the
stars. O more then stupid Ambition! Art thou King of Kings, when not King of
thy self? Art thou so lunaticke as to imagine thy self brother to the Sun
and Moon? Art thou such a Planet or wandering Star of invincible ignorance, as
to write thy self a partner with the Stars? A falling star and a fiery
meteor shall thou be. Thou shall complain of Fortune with Tiberius, that
having set thee in so high a place, she did not vouchsafe thee a Ladder to
come down again. They that are advanced to high degree of honor, Senec. Ep.
Non in praerupto ill^c stant, sed in lubric^, have a slippery and dangerous
station. Tolluntur in altum ut lapsu graviora ruant. They are tossed up into
the air by Fortunes sling, to receive the greater fall; and bein set up as
Buttes, they cannot be without the quiver of fears. Feriunt summos fulgura
montes, The high mountains are smitten with the lightning, when the valleys
are secure. The tall Cedars and lofty Pines are shaken with the Aeolian slaves,
when the low shrubs stand firm. The Sun that rises in a gray and sullen
morn, sets clearest: Ambitious minds in the dawne of Fortune break so
gloriously, meet with a storm at noon, or a cloud at night, which will not
merely eclipse, but extinguish their glory.

The Common People.
THe rude multitude is an untamed monster of many heads, locked up in the
darksome dungeon of ignorance and inconstancy, more infected with errors then
Augeus stable was filled with ordure. Vulgus ex veritate pauca ex opinione
multa aestimat. The common people judge of all things as they appear to them,
not as they are in themselves; being led by the erring eyes of their clouded
intellects, seduced by false opinions a vero, and diverting their wills a bono.
They play as did the fond Satyr, who espying the fire that Prometheus stole
from heaven, would needs kiss it, because it glistered in his eyes. Like white
clouds, or deawy exhalations, they are carried hither and thither, by every
wind. Now they flow with honied salutations, placing you in the star-spangled
Canopy of heaven: Anon their gall overflows with bittter words, and railing
accusations, kicking thee with contempt into Vulcans Forge. The wind of
giddiness does so possess them, that an opion now received, is expelled by
clean contrary Ideaea's of their seduced fantasies. Fluctuque magis Sen. Trag.
mobile vulgus. They ebb and flow oftener then Euripus. As the childs love, so
the peoples commendations gotten and forgotten in an hour. It is better to be
praiseworthy, then to be praised by them, when they honor the worst and
condemn the best; being in the estimation of wise men as the sense in respect
of reason, brutish. Stultus honorem saepe dat indignis. Socrates in Plato
suspected that evermore to be bad, which the vulgar extolled for good. And
Pliny gave this rule in the School, That he declamed worst who was applauded
most. Their knowledge is opinions, and their wit is never to swim against the
stream, nor set up sail against any windy rumors; which makes them like
Cyclops, roaring without his eye, attempt things with great tumult and no
judgment. Their inquisition does never sound the depth of matters, but their
judgment follows the sound of words. In their actions there is no harmony: for
they are too flat or too sharp, admitting no mediocritie. Democracie is their
ambition; and as in the Serpent Amphisbaena to have the head at the tail,
would be a mere Anarchy. Laertes-like they have more care of their rural
affairs then themselves in the better parts of themselves their souls. Much
like the fellow, who vowing to Mercury half of what he found; finding
Almonds, presented only the shelles upon the Altar. If they afford God a
shell in Religion, it is to get the kirnell themselves: As it is said of the
Scythians, that they once smothered their Gods with earth, most of them seem
almost to smother their godliness with their worldliness. They have drunk
the Circean Cup of ignorance: And as Grillus being by the enchantment of Circe,
changed into the form of an Hog, refused to return to the shape of a Man: so
they being beasts by ignorance, refuse to be men by understanding. If they
take head against a man, they run violently like a torrent, to overthrow him
without law, reason or judgment: they exclaim against him, making such an
uproare and obstreperous noise, that the Frogs in Homer, (that with their noise
would not let the Goddess Pallas sleep) croaked no louder. I cannot but
remember that o^ Epicurus Ep. 29. ad Lucillum.
in Seneca: Epicurus dicebat, Se nunquam voluisse placere populo. Nam quae ego
scio, inquit, non probat populus; quae probat populus, ego nescio. Epicurus
said, he would never please the people: for (says he) what I know, that
Briar^us the multitude approve not: those things which win the peoples
approbation, I know not. And wel^ he might so say: for a^ Philo has it:
(...). The vulgar so^^ will grow reproachfully mad against them tha^ are not on
their parts, an^ so please them not i^ their madness. Phocili(...)des joins
the common people with the wate^ and fire in these words:

(...) The common people, the water and the fire, are altogether unruly; being
good servants, but ba^ masters. Male imperatu^ cum regit vulgus duces ^aith
Seneca in the Tragedy. It might well be ^n the Tragedy: for cer^aine I am,
Democracie is Tragical wheresoever it ^s. The natures and dis^ositions of the
common people are out-ragious and cruel, like unto them that inhabit the
North, where the clymate is very cold, as Seneca the Phi^osopher says: In
frigora Septentrionemque vergenti^us immansueta ingenia sunt, ut ait Poaeta,

Sucque sim^lima Coelo. A Flatterer.
A Flatterer is Prosperities shadow, and a false glass to Greatness, giving a
false gloss to goodness. He has as much respect unto rich fools, as
Heliotropium has unto the Sun, delighting to dance as Flies in the warm Sun
of prosperity. As Orators sometimes feign another person to speak by the
figure Antonomasia, either to avoid suspicion of falsehood, or the darts of
envy: So the Flatterer faines many persons praising his friend though he
hears none, he tells him he is the eye of the country, when indeed he is the
eyesore: he sleekes the itching Athenian like ears of his too credulous
Patrons, with a supple Di^lect, soothing them in any wicked inclination,
playing as the unskilful painter, who limbs deformities in rare colors, he
puts a fair title upon a foul act; with Su^ton ^^ his In Dom^^^a^*
Crow this bird of prey proclaims an Omne been, P^rsiu^ P^olo^*
Magister a^tis, (...) largitor ven^er; the belly, that Master of Art, and
giver of wit, makes him ^une his tongue to another ears, his sole song being
Placebo, so long as he spins a golden thread on the voluble wheel of his
pleasing tongue. Hic lauds numerat, dum ille munerat: As gifts are multiplied
upon him, he multiplies his praises, which are only in his Benefactors
hearing, being his reflection merely before his face; Polipus* like he will
change himself into any color for his own advantage. As the Cameleon:

Et mutat faciem, vari^s Alciat. Emb. 53.
sumitque colores,
Praeter rubrum vel candidum.
He can assume to himself all colors, except red and white: red signifying
Modesty, white innocence. A fawning flatterer of all tame beasts, is the
worst, as Diogenes once said, And as Antisthenes, it is better, (...), to be
exposed to Crows then Parasites: for they devour karkasses, these living men.
As the Wolf by tickling the Ass, devoures him; so this rational Wolf by
tickling his Patron, who becomes his prey, with light delight, and arrident
applauses, devoures his substance in praising his quality. He honoreth not se
but sua: he uses no more crouches and cringes to him, then were made to the
Ass that carried the Egyptian Goddess. Riches, not the man are his Idol;
and if he devour them, as Acteons Dogs did him: he thinks himself a
cunning hunter, and compares the man to the proud Fly sitting on the Chariot
wheel, which gave out, that it was she which raised all that dust. These
Wasps do hover about the Gallypot no longer then there is honey in it. The
flatterer will be your Mimicall attendant, so long as you are his good Master,
Hyaena-like he will imitate your voice in hope of a prey; like the Olympian
Porch, he will echo to your words seven times. Plato compares him to a Witch,
which (if we may believe Pliny) is true: for they which use witchcraft, kill
in praising, wounding like thunder, the intrals, without any outward
appearance. And as Antigonus once said, he is worse then an open enemy: they
who carry their eyes in Pl^ta(...)
a box, like the Ladies of the Fairy Lamiae, and only look into themselves by
the eyes of Sycophants (that like Adjectives vary case and gender with their
Substantives,) are overcast with worse then Cimmerian darkness in their
understandings. The spectacles of adulation, make the least letter of a great
show, and sometimes a cipher to be mistaken for a figure. He is rotten at
Core, like a Sodom apple. He is of a bad course, and good discourse. Bonus
videri, nonesse cupit. He is an apparent friend, but a real foe: Of all such
friends we may say as Aristotle frequently said (...). O friends, no friend.
These friends run away as Mice from a decaying house; or like the Nightingall,
Aelian. var. hist. l. 1. cap. 11.
they are voice and nothing else, singing only in the Summer. It was the
Scythians proverb, Vbi amici, ibi opes; but now the proverb may be inverted,
Vbi opes, ibi am^ci, where riches are, there these fained friends will be
continually.

A Brainsick Man.
A Brain-sicke man is one ( divisus inse, and divisus ab omnibus aliis) whose
speculative beams of knowledge both direct toward others, and reflected on
himself, are very much darkened by the foggy mists of privative and corruptive
ignorance. The optic nerves of his soul are so weak, that he cannot discern
between white and black: he would make a very bad painter: yet his brain is
strangely si^ke of crotchets, and toyish inventions, Caecus amor sui does so
possess him, that Pygmalion like, he falls in love with an Image of his own
carving; and being besides himself, he becomes an idle Idol to himself. His
only joys are in his own toys, like the Fisherman in Theocritus, who
satisfied his hunger with dreams of gold: he is full of complacencie, and
affected with singularity. He thinks all Constitutions but Ciphers and visible
nothing, if his consent be not the figure which makes the number. He beholds
himself i^ a multiplying glass, and looks upon others with a simple vision.
He is the only wise man in his own conceit; and it is not the least part of
his Rhetoric to persuade others to deem him so too. He wonders why all men
do not consult with him as an Oracle, it being his greatest ambition to be
thought as well of others as he is of himself. He is lightheaded, and
presumes so much of light, that if himself were set, our world would be left
without a Sun, overcast with worse then Egyptian darkness, when indeed he is
but a Mote, or Glow-worme, shining in some obscure village. As one said of
Molon the Dwarf, (...), qu^ntillus quantus? How little is he in himself, how
great to himself? His brains are turned like the Fannes of a Winde-mill, and
his tongue moves like a Clacke: The disquisition of a palpable truth is his
Logic, himself being the opponent, the answerer and the Moderator. He has
so little reason, that he mootes the reason why snow should be white, and not
Jet. This Natural, with all his Art cannot answer Natures Argument herein: and
therefore with Anaxagoras, he will hold the Snow to be black; whereby he
becomes continually opposed by the clouds which utter Arguments in abundance
against him. Copernicus his opinion of the earths circular motion, makes his
distempered and Moone-changing brain sick of a Vertigo. Nonsense and errors
are so individuated in him, that he is as naked of reason, as an Adamite of
clothes. I believe he has been with Menippus as far as the Moon, his talk
savours so much of lunacie: (...) Aul. Gell* l. 1. c. 15.
(...). Blaterare optimus, dicere ineptissimus. He is best of all to babble,
most unapt to speak. The concurrence of ignorance and arrogance does smother
the clear light of his judgment, and corrupts his brain the proper orb of
the Sun, Understanding: Whereby his heaven in earth, the Soul, is moved
irregularly, opinion being the sole intelligence thereof: he waxes and wanes
an hundred times in a minute, as if he had got in the change of the Moon.
Mere contradictions and Chimaera's of a restless brain, are his Philosophy.
His troubled brain, continutinually fools him; and at last he is lost in a
distracted dream.

A Scandalous Scholar.
A Scandalous Scholar is an able wicked man, like Tullies Offices, politic
but profane; witty, not wise. He is a mere Comaedian in Religion, acting
goodness in voice and gesture only, having all Theological and moral virtues
but in terms alone, as the Philosophers Materia prima. It may be said of him
as was of Galba, Ingenium Galbae, male habitat, a good instrument is put into
an evil case; good wine is put in a bad vessel. He is one wherein are drawn
some lines and notes of able endowments; but being not actuated by the
resplendent beams of saving grace: like a Sundiall in a cloudy day, he is
unheeded, unregarded both of God who is an immortal man, and of man who is a
mortal God: he is an Ignis fatuus, a Comet which portends delusion to others,
confusion to himself. With Caius Gracchus he seems to defend the Treasury,
himself being the spoiler. A Scholar should be Densior pars sui orbis, a
star giving light to them that sit in darkness, sick of a fatal Lethargy,
dispelling multitudes of opinions (which like black clouds arising from the
Mare mortuum of lunaticke brains, mist the intellectual faculty, and like
reverberated blasts, whirle about the spirits) being a Divine Hermes, occupied
in the interpretation of those things which transcend common capacity. If ever
he intends to kill that Python ignorance, like heavens great spy, the Sun, he
must shine forth in integrity of life before all men, he must be nothing
inferior to Phoenix, who was the instructor of Achilles, whom Pileus (as Hom^^
reports) did not choose merely to be to his son a teacher of learning, but an
ensample of good living: great learning without good living, is but matter
without form incomplete, indeterminat, nothing operative in goodness: the
preaching of life is made more forcible by the good life of the preacher,
Citharisante Abbate tripudiant M^nachi. When the Abbot gives the music of a
good example, the Monks dance after him. The goodliest harmony is, when the
Graces and Muses meet together, when practice and preaching kiss each other.
Else like a Cothon or Laconian cup he gives water of life to others, and keeps
the mud of mischief still in the bottom of his heart. And whiles he strives
by his preaching to cut off one headstrong sin, by his living (as Hercules by
the Hydra's head) he gives birth to two. Doctrine is the light, and a
Religious life the Lantern, and the light without the Lantern, will be
soon blown out by the wind of malice. Like a cracked Bell, this dissolute
Preachers noise is heard far enough; but the flaw which is noted in his life,
marres his doctrine, and offends those ears which otherwise would take
pleasure in his teaching. It is possible that such a one, even by that
discordous noise may ring in others into the triumphant Church of heaven; but
there is ^. Hall.
no remedy for himself, but the fire, whether for his reforming or judgment.

A Lawyer.
GOod Laws were established to sup^resse all exorbitant and ^^centious
enormities, and ^o extol and magnify virtue and truth, building them so high
in admira^^on and honor, that (as ^lomer in his swelling ^tine of fabulous
Poetry ^ayd of the celestial ^nountaine Olympus: ^(...)) their foundation may
not be sha^en with the wind of ^alse witness, nor undermined by the
sowresweet waters of deceit. But alas! there is another Play acted, wherein
Dame Lucre is the Prologue and the Epilogue. The Lawyer being agent and his
Client Patient, according to that of our modern Epigrammatist.

Ipse tibi causas dicis, no^ Owen Ep. 140. l. 2.
Marce Clienti
Qui tibi Londinum, non sibi portat opes.
Certa tibi lex est, lis est incerta Clienti:
Tu lucri, damni certus and ille sui.
The Lawyer pleads his own, not Clients cause,
Yet Clients money he to London draws,
Not for himself, but for his Lawyers fees.
Thus Lawyers get how ere the Clients leese.
The law is plain, the poor man's cause in doubt.
Thus Lawyers gain must hold the Client out.
A corrupt Lawyer with his^ smooth tongue, and his eloquent speech, full of
flourishes, like the first letter of a Patent, to better it, and himself by
it, makes a bad cause seem to be extra controversiae aleam, good without all
doubt. He is a false glass, which howsoever ill favored a man be, will show a
fair face* Thus with their fals^ glasses and glosses they entangle the silly
client, holding him fast in their nets, till they perceive ^ clean deplumation
of al^ his golden feathers. A poor client among the^ is as a blind sheep in ^
thicket of thorns, where he is sure to lose his fleece, if not some of hi^
flesh. Fallacy is the Logic they choppe with their Country attendants,
altogether seducing them with the dark Lantern of delusion. Their Logic
consists more i^ Division then Definition discord is the music ^hey are
delighted with: where harmonious con^ent, love and concord is, ^ Lawyer can
live no ^ore in that place, then ^ spider in Ireland. Other ^ens unquietnes is
their quietness, it being their ^appinesse to fish in trou^led waters, where
if ^hey catch not poor ^ohn, they will make him. Clients are so long waft^d in
the sea of troubles ^y their quirkes and deayes, that if they escape ^rowning,
they are sure ^t last to land at Beggars Haven. Their word is ^urrat L^x, let
the Law ^ave his course, but their will is to stop it. A motion this Term, an
order next; instantly all crossed: one Term proves contradictory to another:
the suit runs on* sine termino, whereby each Term becomes woful^ to the
client, an Hilary t^ Ignoramus the Lawyer. This makes a syllogism^ so seldom
in the mood^ Festino, that he oftentime^ makes his moan in Bocardo, the one by
his Session taking away the others possession. Demo sthenes was wont to cal^
the Laws, animam civi^ tatis, the soul of a city or politic body. An^ Cyrus
being demanded whom in his judgment he conceived to be unjust, Lege inquit
non utentes, they (says he) who use not the Law. But now the case is
otherwise; many that use the Law are most unjust: whom I may tax as Aristotle
did Laert. lib. 5.
the Athenians, They labor more to be advanced to honor, and to abound with
riches, then ^o promote the candor and sincerity of the Law. They make the
common and Canon Laws, Engines to take away our lands and titles, not to
secure them. And as Solon once complained, they make them (...) (...), like
Spiders webs, which every great Drone will break through at his pleasure, when
the small Fly is entangled in them to his utter overthrow. Plato being
earnestly besought of the Cyrenians to prescribe and compose Laws to their
Common wealth, refused, saying, Perdifficile est condere leges tam foelicibus:
it is hard to establish Laws to men so opulent and flourishing in so great
prosperity. Money is the white these conscience'es Lawyers aim at. Their Sun
which is full of motes shines not upon the rich and poor alike. If then no
plummets but those of an unreasonable weight can set their mercenary tongues a
going; and then a golden addition can make the hammer strike to our pleasure;
if they keep their mouths and their ears shut till their purses be full, and
will not understand a cause till they feel it,

Quid faciant leges, ubi sola Petron.
pecunia regnat?
Aut ubi paupertas vincere nulla potest?
Why are laws made, where money bears the sway?
And where poor men are sure to lose the day?
A Physician.
A Physician has some affinity with the Lawyer; and although they act not the
same part on this earthly Theater, yet gain is communis terminus which
connects them.

Iuris consultorum idem Owen Epis. 71. l. 1.
status and medicorum est.
D^mna quibus licito sunt aliena lucro.
Hi morbis aegrorum, ag^orum l^tibus ^ui.
Dant pattenter opem, dum potiantur opum.
The Lawyers and Physicians case have near affinity;
For others ruins make them rich, no doubt most lawfully.
These suck the sick for potions, pounds.
For Law those lands purloine:
These promise health, and so get wealth;
Those quietness for coin.
When men prevail in strength of body, they consult with the lying Oracle the
Lawyer who makes them want so long attendance, and ^o often explicate their
wearied joints that he makes them sick; then they consult with as bad an
Oracle, the Oracle of Apollo ((...) I had almost said) the Physician, to
recover their former health. Ones exit being the others Intrat. The dignity of
a Physician is great, though sometimes base abjects in themselves, are the
objects of his speculation, and the restoration of a frail habitation is the
finis cujus of his practice. Christ is a Physician both of soul and body: the
body cannot be cured except the soul of the Physician does prescribe a
medicine, the soul of the Physician cannot prescribe a remedy, except God who
is the soul of his soul does enlighten that divine part, no more then the
lower orbs move without the primum mobile. Sabid King of Arabid, Sabor and
Giges Kings of the Medes, Mithridates King of Po^tus, Dionysius, Tyr. Si^ulus,
with many other blazing stars in the worlds firmament, were professed
Physicians.

The Poets feign Apollo to be ^he first inventer of Physic or Medicine:

Inventumque medecinae Metam. l. 1.
meum est, opiferque per orbem Dicor -- And certainly many Physicians may be
called by the name of Apollo, derived from (...) which signifies to perish (not
only formaliter but effective) for either they are such unskilf^ll Empericks,
as Pliny speaks of, Qu^ exper^menta per mortes gunt, which give men many
poisonous pills to gain experlence; and s^ Officiosiss me muitos occidunt,
they are very busy to cast many men away with expedition, wanting skill: Or
else wanting will to recover their patients, they let them lie languishing at
Sickemans Hospital under the burden of a life worse then death.

Gain is the center of most Physicians practice, bodies are the orbs which
receive the influence of these stars, whose nature it is to suffer a continual
eclipse without the often interposition of earth. You must supple their hands
with some unguentum rubrum or album, which is in your purse, or else they will
hardly feel your pulse, but rather will extinguish the lamp of your life then
preserve it, and many times the body if it be sick is content to buy
unguentum aereum with unguentum aurcum, leaden trash with golden cash. He
tells your disease in some hyperbolicall bombaste words, though it be but an
ague or tooth ach, and his Rethoricke is to persuade that you are desperately
sick, almost irrecoverable, that his gain might be greater, and his skill
seem incomparable.

Without action and passion the Physician would scarce be in the predicament
of substance: he draws good out of evil, and whenever he is in the vocative
case, his patient must be in the ablative. (...). Who is this, a Physician? Oh
in what an ill case every Physician would be, if no man were in an ill case.
Corruption is his conservation, and Adams fall was his rise. Physic includes
sick, They that are whole need not a Physician. Thrice happy are they who are
not necessitated to embrace such a walking consumption of the purse, who though
by his art he prolongs your life, he will be the Attropos who shall cut off
the golden thread of your livelihood, and so spinne a fair thread for himself.

I have read the Socrates never needed a Physician, Pomponius a Poet of noble
Progeny, was so sound that he never belched: Anthonia the wife of Drusus never
spit: If all were so, D^t Galenus opes were false. Nicocles would have wanted
an occasion to call Physicians happy (because their good success the Sun
beholds, and their errors the earth buries in obscurity) if there were no
objects to work on, for then like empty stomachs, they will work upon
themselves. Whosoever keeps a good di^et using Vel modico med^ce vel medico
modice is a Physician to himself, and needs not worship. Aesculapius who is
adored Ovid de Ponto.
in a serpentine form, but if ( ad medicam confugit aeger opem) any man be
constrained to fly to the Physician, let him use none but such as are skillful
(and so able to give a reason for a remedy, if with Aristotle thou do ask
them) and Aelian l. 9 c. 23. var. hist.
conscionable considering presentem que refert qualibet herba Deum, every herb
which they use is a dumb lecture of a present deity.

A good woman.
A Good woman is a rare Phoenix, a chaste Turtle, and an indulgent Pelican: she
is Virtues moral Looking-glass, and desires to excel in virtue, not in
vesture. The Vestall fire of chastity continually burns on the hallowed Altar
of her heart: such a b^shfull heat at several tides ebbes and flows; flows
and ebbes again in her modest face, as if it were afraid to meet the wilder
flames of some unchaste Gallants. Her lips are never guilty of a wanton smile;
not one lascivious glance does dart from her eye; her carriage is sober, free
from all toyish gestures, and her discourse is a moral lecture of chastity. No
man (though he be past all expression comely, being adorned with fine hair,
amorous brows, pretty lovely eyes, most delicious cheeks, an handsome nose,
Nectar-sweet lips, teeth like two fair ivory pales, enclosing a tongue made up
of harmony) is able to make her lose the Virgin-zone without the nuptial knot;
and there the conjunction of this milder Star will temper the malignant force
of any man, though he be like cruel Mars, carrying a storm in his countenance,
and a tempest in his tongue. God who reads the secret characters of her heart,
finds no other image graven in her soul besides her husband. The Sun shall
sooner change his course, and find new paths to drive his chariot in: the
Loadstone shall leave his faith unto the North, sooner then she will leave
hers to her husband. She is beyond all jealousy immaculate. She is no
personage that had other Incumbents. She has power enough to conquer them who
have learned the military discipline of wooing, and are recorded in Cupids
Annals for great exploits: though they can rank and file their kisses, and
muster their troops of complements, she will not yield unto them beyond the
precise rules of honesty; neither is she affected with such a proud squeamish
coyness, as to deny any honest man free leave to sacrifice a kiss upon her
ruby lips. If her husband go to the Elysian fields before her, she embalmes
him with her tears, and keeps the sparks of a love alive in his ashes. That
man is happy that mary's her, he may bless that minute wherein he met her,
and may desire Time to sanctify it above all his Calendar.

A proud woman.
A Proud woman is Eves sinful daughter, beguiled in fools paradise, with the
Adde^ arrogance. If she b^ rich there is nothing more intolerable, as the
Poet, Intelerabilius nihi^ Juven. Sat. 6.
est quam faemina dives. Insolent pride does so possess her, that she delights
to be an Ape tricked up in gorgeous apparel which must be unmended but not
uncommended. As the Stoics placed felicity in the inward habit of virtue, so
she in the outward habit of vesture, ^ounting it her summum bonum to excel
therein, witness the Mercers, Silke-men, Tire-women, and all other
professions, whose Tutelar goddess is pride, the monopoll of mischief. As it
is said of Italy, Novitate quadam nihil habet stabile, she is so mutable that
she has nothing stable, she shifts her attire so often, that her husband
cannot shift himself out of the Tradesmens books. Through her monstrous pride
he is constrained to turn hospitality into a dumb show, whereby the soul of
charity is transmigrated into the body of bravery. Pride begins with habe^,
but ends with debeo, and sometimes makes good every syllable gradatim* Debeo, I
owe more then I am able to pay. Be^, I bless my self from my creditors. E^, I
betake me to my heels. A woman which is stung with that insinuating serpent
pride, leanes continually on idleness the Devils cushion, spending her days
in vanity; she spends many an hour between the comb and the looking-glass
that ^eers her before her face, crisping and curling that ^oor excretion her
hair, and sitting as moderator ^etweene them both, and whether concludes best
on her beauty is best ^raised: All the morning ^he spends in dilling and
^ecking her body, and ^tarving her soul, she ^ever goes to Church through
devotion, but to ^ee and to be seen, and though she be lip-holy, ^he is
heart-hollow, she ^ikes standing at the Creed, not because the Church commands
it, ^ut because her gay ^loathes are more spe^table; she will laugh there of
purpose with Egnatius, to show her white teeth. The air of her pride is
commonly enclosed in the base bubble attire, whose generation is produced from
her own corruption. God has made her a woman out of man, bringing woe to man:
yet she thinks her self not a perfect woman except the Tailor (scarce a man
himself) whose original was sin, make her a brave gallant woman. She is
never the greater part of her self, but the least. Like the bird of Paradise,
her feathers are more worth then her body. Whosoever paints this constantly
inconstant Woman, must paint her with a pair of sheeres in one hand, and a
piece of cloth in the other, ready for any new fashion: she counterfeits the
great seal of Nature, and walks with an artificial complexion, being no
better then a walking Painters shop. Our women are so pointed and painted, that
whereas heretofore there were two feces under one hood, now there is one face
under two hoods; and the color for their painting is, that they may be
daughters of admiration, and so they are for their folly. Optickes is this
woman's science, the next newfangled fashion, and the reflection of her face,
terminates her sight, and is the scope of her study and discourse. Because
sweet smells are dedicated to Venus, she is never without them. N^n been olet
quae been semper olet: she smells not well, which always smells well: for she
which breathes perfumes artificially, hat^ corrupted lungs naturalle. She that
wears always gaudy cloths, may nourish the French Caniball. Foemina
cultanimis foemina casta minus. Too slender chastity still accompanies too
gaudy bravery. The Poets fained Venus to commit adultery in golden chains.
Lewis the eleventh was wont to say, when pride was on her saddle, shame and
confusion was on the crupper. This pestilent vapor pride must vanish, or else
women with their top-gallant head-attires, cannot stoop low enough to enter
into the narrow low gate of heaven.

A prodigal man.
A Prodigal man is most commonly the son of a covetous wretch, who sat
brooding upon his bags, and only knew the care, but not the use of gold. It
is the wealthy beggary of thriving and griping fathers, that makes the hands of
sons so open. The father becomes a Mole and son of earth, that digges his
mothers intrals to turn up treasure for his prodigal son, and with
industrious eyes he searches to hell, to buy his son heaven upon earth. When
wealth like a torrent overthrowes the bank, as it would threat a deluge; this
swaggering spendthrift (who by moral Alchymie is extracted a Gentleman almost
out of the dunghill) invents sluices enough to draine the copious stream thereof.
He will bid his pockets not be sad, for though they are heavy now, they shall
be soon lighter. He will swear never to wear any thing that jingles besides
his spurs. As the Earth swallowed Amphiaraus, so he swallows the earth, and
makes his purse sick of a consumption not to be recovered. The prodigal
Arist. l. 4. Ethic. c. 1.
man is one that exceeds in giving moneys. He is better then the covetous man,
who exceeds in receiving; because prodigality comes nearest to liberality. For
they are liberal which give and receive, nothing exceeding the golden
mediocrity. But liberality leans more toward them that give, then them that
receive; for they that receive (says Aristotle) Ibid.
are not praiseworthy at all. The virtue which consists in a Geometrical
mediocrity in all things is best: according to the Poet,

-- Modus optima regula rerum. The prodigal man thinks it a disparagement to
his nature to observe any golden mean: for he thinks it the best moral
Philosophy to spend his gold and means; and that he may be the better
proficient in this Art of spending, he gets the elective habit of choosing such
brave companions, that like skillful Pilots will steer both him and his estate
into safe harbor. Therefore I may say to him as Martial does unto Cinna,

Nam tu dum metuis ^^ Ep. lib. 9.
quid post fata relinqu^s
Hausisti patrias luxuriosus opes.
He being afraid lest he should leave any thing after death, will be sure with
Demetrius the son of Antigonus, to spend Plut.
his patrimony in riot, luxury, and all extravagant enormities. He would
dispeople all the elements to please his palate. Midnight shall behold his
nightly cups and wear a blacker mask, as envious of his jollity. He will cast
his love upon such dangerous rocks as harlots, to satisfy his liquorish
lusts* He will ever be a devout sacrificer to Bacchus and Venus. He dies
commonly as Anacreon did, with a grape in his throat. If it were true as the
Philosopher says, (...), Quod nutrit Deus est, that which nourishes is a god:
how many gods does this man devour? and yet becomes more ungodly thereby. When
this profuse spender dies, he will be sure to have Tigellius his Ambubajaru^
Collegia, etc. Horat. l. 1. Ser. Sac. 2.
mourners to sigh out elegies at his death, and to sing dirges at his funeral.

Truth.
TRuth is defined in Metaphysics, a conformity of the thing and the
understanding. In L^gicke it is a correspondence of propositions with things.
In a moral acception it is an Homiliticall virtue, wherein we profess that in
word and deed which we conceive in our hearts to be true. Hence it is one
thing mentiri and another thing mendacium dicere. He is said to lie and feign,
which speaks that against his conscience which perhaps otherwise is true in it
self, this is false Ethice but not always Logice. He is said to tell a lie,
who speaks that which he thinks true when it is false in it self. This is
false Logice but not Ethice. It is in the mind as in subjecto cognitivo, in
the mouth as in signo repraesentativo. The mind knows, the mouth manifests.
Verily as Mirandula spoke, Veritatem Philosophia quaerit, Theologia invenit,
Religio possidet. Philosophy seeks Truth, Divinity finds it, Religion
possesses it. Truth it is called (...), in Plato fair, kiss it therefore and
ever embrace it, making it thy souls sole intelligence.

The Roman Praetor wont always to wear the image of Truth upon his breast, and
the true Christian wears it still in scrinio pectoris sui, in Egyptii
veritatem ex humano cord gutturi appenso (...) in dicabant Pier. Val.
the closet of his heart. The Poets ingeniously devise, that when Jupiter had
created man (who is virtually (...), or an Index to Gods great book in folio)
find fault, Momus told him that one thing he greatly misliked, which was,
that he had forgot to frame a window in his breast, whereby it might be known
whether the motions of his tongue were concentricke to his heart.

Truth is always one and the same thing in her self, though in the
apprehension of others she lies sick ready to dye without a confessor; she
does not like the Chameleon Chamaeleon prae metu colores mutat. Gesnerus.
put on diverse colors, for no palsy fears assault her, she seeks no corners,
but may look Caesar in the face, when falsehood dares look no man, but like
the Owl hates the light, setting Euripide^.
light by Truth. (...) (...) The night is the thieves, and the day Truths,
though sometimes she loses it. Truth is a fixed star not a planet, and all
people love it lucentem not reaarguentem, light is good, but yet to sore eyes
very offensive; honey though sweet, is to wounds smarting: Truth is always
wholesome, but to most distasteful; as they write of some beasts who have fell
in aure, the gall in the ear, the hearing of Truth galls them, nothing being
more bitter to them, and better for them. Sweet Siren sounds is the harmony
whereof their souls consist, they stomach truth and the rough phrase of
reproof, but their stomachs can digest smooth fables and concoct errors.

Sed quid opus teneras Persius S^t. 1.
mord^ci radere vero Auriculas. Sharp biting Satyrs of reprehension offend
delicate ears. It was Agathons Dilemma, if I please thee I shall not tell the
truth, and if I tell the truth I shall not please thee, but procure enmity,
Veritas odium parit: Ter.
As the beautiful Nymphs are said to have brought forth the ill favored
Fawnes and Satyrs; so beautiful and glorious truth brings forth hatred, enmity
and many foul deformities. Aliena vitia quisque reprehendi Quintilian. l. 2.
Orat. c. 5.
mavult quam sua* Every man had rather other men's vices were reproved then his
own. Truth like that bloody water sweet and potable to the Hebrwes, says
Josephus, but sour and not potable with the Egyptians. Truth in the
universal, subratione very is hated of none, but in the particular, sub
ratione contrarii, so it is usually hated of all. The bright rays of this Sun
that never sets, reflecting on a wise man who has learned that heavenly
precept, (...), illuminate his understanding with a greater light of wisdom:
but in the breast of fools they kindle a fire of ire and enmity. Quint^lian
gave Vespasian this commendation, Patientissimus very, which few men in these
days deserve, being so bad; for as the Poet, Rari quippe boni numero Iuven.
Sat. 13.
vix sunt totidem quot
The barum portae vel divitis ostia Nili.
good men are so rare, that they are scarce so many in number as the gates of
Thebes, or mouths of rich Nilus, which were but seven. Ep^minondas a Theban
was so severe and strict a lover of truth, Vt ne joco quidem mentitus Alex. ab
Alex.
sit: that he abhorred a lie even in jest. I would have all men put on this
armor of proof, and then they need not fear wounding. Truth (like Medusa's
head) will turn their adversaries into stones: and again, like Orpheus his
pipe, it moves the stones, and gives life unto the dead. Let this glorious
light then, which ^hines brightest between ^wo clouds, Malice, Er^our, be thy
Cynosura and ^oad-starre, to guide thy ^oul the mother of truth, and thy tongue
the Midwife.

An Invective against ignorant Mechanickes who presume to prate in Churches and
Conventicles.
HOW now? goodman cobbler, have I carch^ you stitching together the Ends of tub
sermons, to the end your hollownesse might sound forth an alarm to the
supposed Saints of God who wear Christ's colors, but fight under the Devils
banner? Do you deem your self and your ignorant adherents to be all in Aule,
and to be the Sole Elect at the Last? Be not deecived, God is not mocked. Are
you so lightheaded as to think your self a light of the Church, and the
only star which points the way to Christ? Certain I am, if there were no
brighter stars, and more shining lights in this heaven upon earth, our Church
now truly mili^ant, then thou art, we should all walk in darkness, and in
the shadow of death: we should soon suffer shipwreck on the ^raggy clists of
utter perdition, in the Euxine sea of ignorance, if we should be as Load-stones
turning to you as our Polestarre: if you will be a Star, you shall be a
Dogge-starre, whose influence is so bad, that it hinders the purgation of any
malignant humors, and begets more. If I must grant you some light, you are at
the best but an Ignis fatuus of blind zeal, seduced your self, and seducing
others. You are indeed but a noisome vapor elevated above your self, so that
all the world may think you to be as you are, besides your self. You are a
worse plague unto our Land, then ever was any thing unto Egypt, and therefore
I will say with the Poet,

-- Ditalem avertite pestem. You are the very Hydra of our ills, and you do
endeavor to make this Land Lernam malorum, a filthy sink of all evils;
therefore you deserve to sink and not swim. The Church of God is an Arc, and
you are one of the unclean beasts in it. O touch not the Church with your
unhallowed and foul hands. Atlas is the pillar of the Poets Empyreall Palace.
A child must not take Atlas his burden upon his own shoulders, for then he
will be sure to fall under it. Neither should you take the weigh^y calling of
the Ministry upon you, being not called thereunto. You being unlearned ought
to reach none. If you offer to lead the learned, your attempt is as much as if
the blind should presume to lead him that can see: if you endeavor to lead the
unlearned into the way of truth, it is as much as if the blind should offer to
lead the blind, and the^ the consequent will be, you will both fall into the
ditch together. Therefore I will say unto you, as Saint Paul unto women; You
are not to speak in the Church. You by your pernicious air and feculent
doctrines strive to defile the silver streams of learning, and to poison the
pure fountain of truth and sound religion.

Your Commentaries upon the sacred Bible, are like to an handful of filthy
ordure fetched from Augaeus Stable, and cast in the face of beauties fairest
table; yet you would feign be called Seer though you are most blind, for to
be ignorant of ones ignorance is a double blindness.

Are you so well read in the book of life, as that you can like a Boanarges,
or son of thunder, denounce damnation to those that are not of your blind
Sect: And like a Barnabas, or son of consolation, can you promise absolution
to your selves? You are not skild I am sure in divlne Astrolabe, neither can
you take with the Jacobs staff of your pretended purity, the height of any
sta^^e in the firmament of Grace, you are not able to knock down one star
and place another. You and all of your mad Sect are seedsters of schism and
debate: You rail against the Commonprayer Book, because it was used and
abused in the time of Popery; you may as well acknowledge Christ not to be the
Son of the living God, because the Devil said it; and because the Papists
wear clothes, you may if you will go naked, and then you will be as naked of
clothes as of reason. As the Chinois whippe their gods if they displease them,
so you whip any godly men, wounding them with your tongues which have poison of
aspes under them. Though a Bishop be a lamp of our land, a pillar of the
Church erected by divine hand, and a Trophey built unto al^ the virtues, yet if
any word of his be an apage to you, and the cogitations of his heart be
excentricke to yours (yours being excentricke to the holy Scripture) you cry
down with him down with him even to the ground. This is your blindness;
like the foolish blind Beldam Harpastes in Seneca, you impute your blindness
wherewith you are overcast, unto the place where you are and not unto your
self. The light of the Gospel was never clearer in England then now it is: But
now (...) constrained to confess, the clearer the light is, the blinder are
the Owls. I would to God there were an order taken with all Green teachers
that step into the Pulpit without order, being never ripened by the
resplendent ^eames of saving know^edge to perfection. If I have too much
vinegar ^n my ink, or if rude phrase has defiled and defaced my style with
barbarism,

Pray pardon me, for in this argument

To be Barbarian is most eloquent.

FINIS.

