THE Brothers of the Separation.

OR A true Relation of a company of Brownists which kept their Conventicle at
one Mr. Porters in Goat Alley in Whitecrosse-street, where they were
apprehended on Sunday, Aug. 14. 1641.

As also, A Sermon preached afterward in the same house by John Rogers a
Glover, wherein is showed their wicked rancorous minds at full.

This was justified by above twenty men of good life and conversation.

Mark 13.30. Verily I say unto you, that this generation shall not pass, till
all these things be done.

Printed at London by Tho: Harper, 1641.

The Brothers of the Separation.
WHat good counsel has our Savior given us, and how little use we make of
it? he bids us take heed in Mark 10. lest we be led away with the doctrine of
false Prophets, and yet how apt are we to believe the traditions of every
frothy brained coxc^mbe? To this intent I speak, here are so many Sects and
Schisms lately sprung up here in this Kingdom, that they (like to the plagues
of Egypt) have overrun the Land: but the Brownists, the brothers of the
separation, bear the greatest sway, being upheld by too many of that Sect,
they like to the Philistines bring their Goliath to fight their battles, but
there is no doubt but there will arise a David of truth to beat down their
soaring impudent thoughts. I have reasons founded upon such deep grounds, that
I doubt not but that the Reader will easily grant what I shall here propound, to
which purpose read as follows.

In Goat alley in Whitecrosse-street here in London, dwells one Mr. Porter,
one who is not ashamed to confess himself to be of the separation: nay he is
grown so foolish in his opinions, that he keeps weekly Conventicles in his
house. These were held so covertly, that they there had meetings Sunday after
Sunday for a great while together undiscerned, but the house was so continually
troubled with Crows and Magpyes, that they could scarce hear what was spoken
in the house: at last it pleased God to make their w^aknes known: and one
Sunday the 14. of August last they were apprehended, and the chief of them
committed to prison, but they stayed not there long till they were delivered,
and every one at liberty again, this was not enough though to make them d^sist
from their wickedness, for they went on ^gaine in their old frailty, like the
dog to his vomit, or the sow to her wallow, putting the poor sensl^sse birds
in all the fault for betraying them, as they termed it, which the contents of
the next Sermon which a Glover taught will manifest, for I had the chief notes
from a friend which was at the relation thereof.

He began first with an ex tempore prayer about an hour long, and then thus he
proceeded.

The text is the first Chapter of the third book of Moses, called Leviticus,
at the 14. verse, the latter part of the verse, Then he shall bring his
offering of Turtle Doves, and of young Pigeons.

Dearly beloved brethren, if you have not forgotten your selves, we were
lately betrayed by two unclean birds, the Crow and the Magpye; be not dismayed,
for sure it was rather an ench^ntment of the wicked, then any thing sent from
God, for I will prove them to be birds which are unclean and fit for no use, as
you may re^de in the el^venth of Leviticus, the 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, verses,
where there is the Raven mentioned, which is cousin german to the Crow, for
they are birds of a feather; and by the little Owl in the 17. verse, is meant
the Magpie, which is also a very unclean bird; I shall also prove them to be
utterly unlawful by circumstance.

First, the Crow is black, being adorned with the very same color which our
Clergy wears, which signifies his black wickedness, and that he is not
worthy to keep company with the just.

Secondly, he never cries but he bows his head, as our late sup^rstitious
Clergy have done, in so much that in the conclusion of this circumstance I
utterly abjure the Crow, for thou art a favourer of the Romish Religion.

Thirdly, the Crow is always feeding on the dead carcases, for the old Proverb
tells, that on a dead carcass you shall always find Crows, therefore I
compare the dead carca^^s to sinners, and Crows to the Devils, for I say they
can be no better then D^vils. To prove which, mark I pray you, the Crow is the
last bird that goes to roost, and the first bird that com^s from his roost,
having just the properties of the Devil, for he is up early, and down late,
seeking all he can how to devour.

I rests now that I prove the Magpy also to be unl^wfull for the company of
man.

F^^st, he is streaked with white on both sides, which should be ^n emblem of
righteousness, but it does resemble the Bishops lawne sleeves so nearly, that
I cannot endure the sight of it.

Secondly, he has a cross on his back of black and white, which fully
denotes him to be one of the Popes disciples, whom I love as the devil loves
holy water.

Thirdly, in his chattering still I can understand him when he says and
caetera, and that is the language of the beast, which is most abominable: he
also gets his living among dead carcases, which makes me resolve my self of
it, that he is marked out for no good end.

Now I have observed this also, that they will sit on the heads of swine, a
stinking ditty creature, and I persuade my self, should the evil spirits
enter into those swine, they would sit f^st whilst they were hurried headlong
into the sea.

Thus much for to prove these birds not fit for the society of man. Now must I
a little vindicate our religion, because that many black mouthed persons
envying our happiness, are never well but when they are spitting f^rth
venomous words against our honest doing; these says one will not keep company
with the wicked, when God knows themselves are as whoring rogues, and whores,
as ever lived under the coape of heaven; to whom I answer.

If the spirit of the flesh do move a brother of the separation so strongly
that he cannot resist it, I persuade my self that he is not to be faulted,
always provided that he does not pollute himself with the wicked, but make
use of a sister of the separation. Then they will say again that we preach in
barnes and stables and the like, which say they is most abominable, for is it
fit that they should make ^ barn, o^ a stable, or the like, the house of God,
it (...) not to be endured. To that argument I answer, that the sparrowes
build their nests about the roof of the house of God, and the swallows on the
top thereof, now where do either sparrowes, or swallows more often build then
in the roof and on the top of a barn, a stable or the like; and again our
Savior chose a homely stable to be borne in, and I dare avouch that his word
is never the worse for being taught in a barn, a stable, or any such like
pl^ce.

Dearly beloved brethren, who are only Gods elect here from forth a multitude
of people, consider what a h^ppie estate ye now are in, and into what a most
damnable estate ye fall if ye slide: but I h^ve not done with the unclean
birds and beasts as yet, for I will prove them worse as yet by showing their
contraries.

The turtle doves, and the pigeons which are intimated in my text, are such
harmless and loving birds, that the one will pine away for the loss of the
other, and again they are as it were an Emblem of us, for they always keep
company with none but with turtles and pigeons, and again they fly always in
fear of their lives by reason of the ravenous crows, hawks and, buzzards.
This age gives the crows leave to prey upon the poor silly doves; and that
you might understand it the better, I would have you know that these crows
here divinely spoken of are our high soaring clergy, who have lately rose
early, and went to bed late that they might persecute the Saints of God. Wi^h
these and such like base railing term^s, he a mechanic simple gull must offer
to profane the name of our great God, who is the alpha, and omega, the
beginning and the end: His discourse was not so short, he that gathered the
notes was more weary of hearing and writing, by much, then the other of
speaking; for he went on in a confused manner, without either division of his
text, or any such matter.

Here reader have thou presented to thy view the whole force of what he spoke.

FINIS.

