THE HOLY FEASTS AND FASTS OF THE CHVR^H.

WITH MEDITATIONS and PRAYERS Pious and Proper for them.

And some also upon the Sacraments, and other Subjects of Sacred and Weighty
Consideration, both for Christian Life and Comfort, in Sickness, and at Death.

By Dr. W. BROUGH D. G. and one of His late Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

1 Cor. 11. 16. If any man seem to be contentious, we have no such Custom,
neither the Churches of God.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for John Clark, and are to be sold at his Shop under
S. Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1657.

TO THE DUKE OF RICHMOND AND LENOS His GRACE.
SIR,
YOur Noble FATHER, a Person as High for Excellency of Spirit as Blood, having
as much of Saint as Prince in him. A great Son and Friend of the Church; a
full and lively Image of Him, who is most Good and Great. A rare Copy of one
Regularly, Rationally, Really, and Constantly Devout and Charitable, without
all Ostentation of vanity or Contradiction of life; He Sir, with floods of
tears from the Churches and Nations Eyes, is loosed from an ill Earth, and
arrived (whither his course tended) at the Blessedness of Heaven: But to you,
the Son of his Prayers and Hopes, He has left the double Inheritance of his
Honors and Virtues, and your hands must wipe off our tears. And God be
blessed for it, so you begin to do, whilst we who knew him, see you, and
behold with comfort (and good hope) so many of His Motions, and good
Dispositions in you, that Body and Spirit both seem to be Alive still; and
whilst you live and they in you, (and long may both!) He cannot be altogether
Buried. And we (especially we of the Church) who honor His Ashes, cannot but
admire and bless you His Image, who have learned to write so early and fairly,
Not yet eight years old.
good, after your Fathers Copy. Carrying a constant Foot to Gods Sanctuary; and
there finding both a Knee and Mouth at His service. These Buds of Hope and
first Apparitions of your Fathers spirit in you, we take for Prophecies of the
Flower of your Race and Pillar of your House.

Go on Good Sir, and let none so far Delude you, as to make you think Piety a
thing of Peasantry, and Religion fitter for a Churchman then a Noble person.
Believe it your Happiness to be great in Heaven as Earth, and your Honor to
have a good name as well in the Church as the World. Let none Deprave you so
much as to make it Noble to follow base Lusts, and what throws us below men,
to befit persons of Honor. Let others with Domitian the Roman Emperor spend
their time in catching Flies, and with the Grecian Constable. C^pranymus.
delight to roll themselves in Dung vain and vicious pleasures.) Do you embrace
Piety as Princely, no Music like David's Harp, no Money to Constantines Coins,
which makes the one as Famous as his Scepter, and the other not less Renowned
then his Conquests. For that and these proclaim them pious as well as potent
men; The Harp (with which David is pictured instead of a Scepter in his hand)
was the Instrument of his Devotion. The Coins (as Constantine was and would be
portraid) present him on his Knees ^useb.
at his Prayers. Sir, make us true Prophets who foretell in you, your Dear
Mothers Comfort, your Friends Glory, the Churches Joy, the Honor and Firmament
of your Family. So he prays who has been often under your Roof, and now
appears under your Name, with confidence to have as many Amens as your Father
had Hearts, that your House may long last, and you live to Resemble your
Heavenly Father, and Revive your Earthly!

The most Cordial and Common Prayer of SIR, Your Graces most Humble Servant,
WILLIAM BROUGH.

THE PREFACE AND GENERAL PURPOSE OF THE AUTHOR.
THe Mark at which all good Designs and Acts take their aim, is the Glory of
God, and (which 1 Cor. 10. 31.
falls in with it) the Good of Man in order to His Glory. To this Scope These
Devotions tend. Their First part to advance God in His Honor; The Second to
promote the Welfare of thy Soul.

Holy Feasts are Gods Honors. High and Services Dedicated to Heavenly Majesty.
With Sacred Offices erected for His Glory. Founded on some Acts of His Singular
Goodness and Blessing; for which we do Religiously Rejoice before him, and
Triumph Deuteronomy. 16. 11, 14.
in His holy name. Holy Fasts are Gods Glories too; In which we do proclaim His
Greatness, and set forth his Sovereignty on whom we (Persons and Nations) all
depend, as our Lord and God, for Life and Comfort, and whose Displeasure we
dread and deprecate as the Fountain of all our Want and Woe. In them therefore
with all possible Acts and Signs of Subjection, we Afflict our souls, and
Humble our selves Lev. 23. 27 Isa. 58. 5. Dan. 9. 7.
before him, making our selves little, nothing, less, worse, to show Him Great,
Just, High above all. Not taking to our selves any thing but Shame, to give Him
all the Glory. In keeping of both, though the Body have a Part to act, and Duty
to do, Cum in fervore meditation is admiscetur ardor orationis, etc. Bern.
Part 2. summed up.
the Minds elevation in her Thoughts and Desires, is the main Observation, and
the Soul both of the Fast and Feast.

Holy Courses carry us unto Heaven. By the Motions and Operations of that
Spiritual Life, of which we have Birth by our Baptism, Growth from the Holy
Eucharist. Whose Decaies and Fails are Restored by our Repentance, and we in
it Preserved through Perseverance. The true and only Ground of Comfort in
Sick^esse, Peace at Death, and Bliss after it. And indeed of all Happiness to
be had in Life and Death.

Now, as in those Honors of God we do our selves good, because by them we
Deuteronomy. 16. 15. 1 Samuel 2. 30. Romans 2. 7. Act. 10. 35
Receive from Him His Blessing and Honor according to the Everlasting Rule and
Law, after which He proceeds with man in His Goodness and Holiness: so in
seeking our own Eternal Good, we do Him Honor. The way being our Holiness,
which is much to His Glory. All our Regular Isa. 35. 8.
and Religious Actions being as so many Tongues and Trumpets of His Praise, and
Psalm. 50. 32. Mat. 5. 16. Qui been agit D^um laudat. Aug.
our Life opening many Mouths to His Honor. At one End then and Mark Holy
Devotion and Conversation, though they do not at first look, they do at last
meet. And these are our parts and purposes, the Sum and Aim of these
Devotions.

That the Issue may be answerable to their Aim, (with Reference to the
several Advertisments in the Particulars) against those contrary Winds and
Blasts of Doctrine, which may make them fall short or wide of the Mark, to
fortify and fore-arm thee, and speed them the better, I premise these
Generals.

1. Demand not peremptorily an Express Joh. 21. 25.
Scripture for Warrant of every Particular in and about Gods Service. For
unless the Bible should be bigger then the Church, and the World too, it
cannot be Comprehensive of all and Singular cases Lev. 24. 22. Nu. 15. 34
and Circumstances which were, are, will, or might be; it is Impossible. And
since the Light of Nature is Gods Law in the Breast Ille hujus legis author,
lator. Lact. l. 6. c. 8.
if what is done by it contradict not That in the Book, Tert. de res. carnis In
Dei rebus, etc.
there is leave and license enough from God the Author of both, and so more is
not Necessary. It was a Gross Error to make the Light of Nature a sufficient
Guide to Heaven Pelagians.
and it is, to set up Reason as Supreme Judge in Religion Socinians.
but that may be a good Companion, though not such a Guide; and this a Friend,
though not a Judge; and he that is an Enemy to them, when they are not to Gods
Verbum Dei summa ratio. Bas.
Word (which is indeed the Sovereign Reason) in S. Austins judgment is as
great a Sinner as Fool, and as great a Foe to Religion as Reason.
Disciplinarians. Luminis naturalis ducatum repellere, non modo stultum est sed
impium. l. 4. de Civ. Dei c. 6. Church has power to make Laws, etc. Calv. 1
Cor. 14. 40. Tit. 1. 5. Heb. 13. 17.
Nay since that is enough as to require more is vain, to exact it is perilous.
To put a Shield into the hand of the Jew to defend his Seventh day Sabbath
against all the Christian World^, and to defy our Translation of it to the
Frist, because they had, we have no such Explicit Commandment. Yes, and to
give a Sword to the Anabaptist too, to cut all Infants off from Baptism at one
blow, because (besides the usage of the Church) our Command for it is but by
Equivalency and General Warranty. And the Separatist hence will take a Hammer
to beat down the Church, which if it cannot prescribe as a Mother, where God
the Father does not command (since That is all she claims for hers, and This is
Gods) has no Authority. And God Himself shall have little left, who does
(under Him and for Him) give her the power of such Commands. Which themselves
use with sufficient and severe Authority, who have no better, nay no other, nay
not so good a plea for their power.

2. Revile not those things as Ill and Romish, which have good Religion and
Reason for their Pleas. For we bewray gross Ignorance, if we make what is
Primitive to be Popish; what is really and culpably such, being Novell, and not
of so old and good a date: Great Malice, if we allow nothing good in them, when
we cannot see, and say all things are ill because we have some of them, and
hold them not so in our selves. Nor shall we show more in this then we do
Prejudice. When we make that a Blot in Religion which is a Beauty. And
consequently, if ours be as black as our mouths, do the Adversary (instead of
Shame) an Honor, and bring on our selves a Blot. This is not to convert them
from their Error, but confirm them in it, as very good, when what is made
worst, is found not ill. And the way, if not better established, to stagger us
in our own, if not make us fall, when we are convinced, that our Detestation
of Theirs was founded upon Passion and Error, and what we called Gods Zeal
was indeed our Fury.

Had we the Capacity of Children, our Mother Church has given us both a Copy
and Lesson of more Christian Charity and Wisdom. Which in her just Reformation
of Religion ( Depraved much by the Church of Rome, both in points of Faith and
Life) proceeded by this Rule; Not to differ in any thing from the Roman Church,
wherein they do concur with the Primitive; not to leave them where they keep to
Gods Infallible Word and Canons, and the Churches Catholic and Universal
Creeds and Customs; That they and all the world might see, our severing from
them was not an act of pet and peevish mind, but good wit and judgment; Not a
fit of spleen and spite, but the deliberate determination of a sober spirit,
and well-governed Conscience. Which if it had been (as it should) well weighed
and followed by all Reformers, had got us from them more Proselytes, and them
from us, fewer Apostates.

3. Reject not all Consuetudines Angliae.
Customs which are and have been in the Church. For in Sacred life In quibus
non statuit Scriptura mos populi D^i pro lege. Aug. ep. 8.
as well as Civil, Ancient Usages pass for Laws. Christ said, I am Truth, not
Custom; And Custom without Truth is but the oldness of Error; Cypr.
but when with and for the Truth, we owe both Reverence and Obedience to the
Hoary Head of Custom. And as the Fathers bid us pay it, (...). ( Mos antiquus
obtineat.) In Council. Nic.
the Scriptur^s warrant it, Deuteronomy. 4. 12. Job 8. 8. To. 2. 15.
and God Himself seals it Mat. 19. 8. 1 Cor. 11. 16. 1 Timothy 3. 15. Jos. 4. 6.
, St. Paul makes something (If not much) due to it, when He condemns Contention
in Church Matters, because neither the Apostles nor their Churches had any such
Customs. We have no such Custom, nor the Churches of God. A Respect then is
due to Ecclesiastical Usages, especially Catholic, Universal, and
Apostolical Custom. When as the Church is the Ground and Pillar of Truth,
these stand as those stones out of Jordan, to show the Ancient Bounds of the
Ground, and serve as Monuments and Marks of Religion, the better to make, or at
least keep up the Pillar. By Saint Paul's Evidence then, to cross Customs and
contemn them, instead of paying them a due Regard, proves men more Contentious
then Religious, and shows them greater Friends of Strife, then Truth. And
Saint Austin being judge, (...). Insolentissimae, insaniae est. Ep. 115. c. 5.
to forsake or question what the whole Church has usually observed, has more
Phrenzie then Piety in it, and is not an act of extraordinary Zeal and
Goodness, but of an Insolent madness.

And this I premise as a sufficient and useful Pass and Guard against all
Cavills and Blusters of Contrary minds, for the Observation of the Churches
Holy Fasts and Festivalls.

What is writ of Christian Courses and Ways requires more a Practice (one
would think) then an Apology; yet because as the Separatist before, the
Catharist here stands somewhat in our way, we must clear the passages. To
those then that think They do not sin, they cannot fall, they are above
Repentance, beyond Apostasy; I wish a Profligate Time and Apostate Age, gave
not so great a Confutation: Full of as many Sinful Persons, and Senseless
Changes, as before it here was not known, and besides it none can parallel. The
Novatian^s of old, those Murderers of Repentance, yet let Baptism live.
Interfect^res P^^nitentiae.
Yea, in High and Holy Reputation which made them Defer it, not Deny it. Safe
they were with it, but to sin after it was wi^h them to be past all Recovery of
Heaven, or place of Repentance* Therefore they did put it off, not because they
did deride Heb. 6. 4. as they urged it.
it but dread it. Ours stumble at the Threshold of Christianity, and so fall in
the House, and yet so pure in their own eyes, as if they could not fall at
all, or not be foul, wheresoever Quod volumus sanctum est. Donat. Audes
Novatiane purum te dicere, etc. Hosts miseoicordiae. Cypr. Et solus in coelum
conscendito. Eusebius. Rev. 3. 18. Jude v. 19
they fall, yes and in their own mouths too. From which Saint Ambrose does well
conclude them foul: Hoc ipsum dicendo, the very saying so is Falsehood, the
thinking so Pride, and both these are filthy. And which is fouler, if it can
be, All but themselves must be for Hell, they alone are for Heaven, which is as
abominable Uncharitableness: Erige scalam (as Costantine said to Acetius)
Their Ladder is too pure and perfect for any else to go up to Heaven. But to
those who are Deluded and Depraved a like, I offer Chists advice, Collyrio
inunge ^ocul^s; Naked and polluted souls (God knows) sensual sufficiently in
their lives, to whom if any such eyes have this Book in view, I pray God it may
become a Box of such Eye Salve.

A christian life is a continual Repentance, Quotidiana poenitentia. Ephesians. 6.
13, 18. To. 11. 20.
says Luther. And if life with Job be a Perpetual, S. Paul makes the
Chistians an endless Warfare. If we have not the better shield and care, the
best may be wounded and fall. So what is written, is not superfluous, of the
daily Uses of Repentance, and aids for Perseverance, the only way to make a
Sick b^d soft, Isa. 38. 3. Psalm. 41. 3.
and Deathbed blessed. Putting the pillow of Peace under our Head there, and
here the Staff of Comfort into our Hand, on which with Jacob we may lean and
bless, and Depart with Blessing in our Mouth, and Heb. 11. 21.
Blessedness in our Eye. The last But and Bound to which our lives tend, and
Mark our souls should aim at. To which I hope and pray, These following
Pieties, as holy Arrows drawn from no ill Mind, may by the Blessed Blast and
Conduct of the Holy Spirit in Thee and on Thee, lead and serve Thy Soul.

The Dominicall Feasts Weekly and Extraordinary, With Meditations and Prayers.
THE FIRST PART.

For
1. The Lords day, or Sunday. 2. Palm Sunday. 3. Easter-Sunday, with 4.
Easter-Monday. 5. Easter-Tuesday. 6. Rogation-Sunday. 7. Whitsunday, or
Pentecost, with 8. Whitsun-Monday. 9. Whitsun-Tuesday. 10. Trinity-Sunday.
Advertisement touching the Dominicall Feasts.
BY the Love we have to Christ, (...), andC. Ad Magn.
we must Observe the Lords Day, says S. Ignatius. And by the love they bear to
it, most do. And by the love we have to Religion, all should. For That will
grow a thing of great Incertainty, and come to nothing, if there be not (as a
set Place where, so) a set Time when to serve God, and observe it. Therefore
the Seventh ( the Set day to the Jews) is put by God Himself, not only for a
Sign of our Sanctification, but the Sum and Substance Isa. 56. 4.
of all his Service. A weekly Keeping then of the Lords Day, all do not more
generally then justly grant, and all are Advocates for it, though not with the
same pleas and ways of Observation.

And none then should Libel against the Extraordinary. Because they are but
Additionals to the Honor of the Weekly. Grounded upon some singular Acts of
Christ or the Church, done on those Partic(...) Days. The Progress and
Proclamation of Him as Messiah, on the Lords day before His Passion,
Palm Sunday.
Her extraordinary Praying on that Day before, and the Week of His Ascension
Rogation-Sund.
. And Sacred Memory and Office to the Holy Trinity, after the Third Persons
Apparition Trinity-Sunday.
, But especially those on which He Raised his Holy Body East^rday.
, and sent the Holy Ghost Whitsunday.
. Above all other, to question the Title and Honor of those Two Great
Christian Feasts, is an act of gross both Absurdity and Injury. For shall all
Lords Days be kept for the Blessed Resurrection on the Primatum in diebus
tenet, etc. Hier.
First, and shall it be neglected above the rest? Give we it but a Common
Portion, and yet grant it to be the Firstborn? And shall that Lords day on
which the Holy Ghost (the great Gift of God) came down to earth, not be a White
one in the Eye of the Church? And for the Holy Ghosts sake be never the more
Holy Day? Nor for Gods sake, who made It and Us in it, Twice blessed, be at all
more Hallowed? In all Reason and Religion too, If single it must have an usual
part of Holy Honor, For this it should receive a double portion. High Lords
Days there may be as well as High Sabbath Days. And what more High then
Easter, which Crowned the First day Queen for Christ's Conquests, Dominicus dies
Sanctissimi festi dicitur ab Aug.
and Whitsunday which Proclaimed it Princely by His Gifts: Most Happy both and
Heavenly.

And if these be principal and Royal Feasts, they must have days of
Honorable Attendance. And since they are greater then the Jews Passover and
Pentecost, of which one had Seven, Two a piece should Tertium Festidiem. Aug.
de c. 22.
( and need) not be thought too many.

Though then we have no Reverence and Duty to the Churches Holy Orders and
Usages; No Dread of any Curse for removing Her Ancient Mounds and Landmarks;
If any love or care of Religion live in us, As we are for the Weekly we should
not be against the Extraordinary. And if we be not mad (without both Grace and
Wit) we should not so fight against the one; as to cut off the other, till we
have destroyed all both Times and Things of Devotion. Leaving at last no Feasts
or Days to serve God in, nor Religion to serve him by, non God to be served.

THE HOLY FEASTS AND Fasts of the Church, etc.
The Lords Day.
MEDITATION upon Rev. 1. 10. I was in the Spirit on the Lords Day.
EVery day is the Lords. The Maker of the Sun, is the Lord of the day, and of
the night too. The Ps. 74 17.
day is thine, the night is thine, thou have prepared the light and the sun.
The Sun and Moon to divide Time into those two. The sun to Genesis 1. 14.
rule the day, (the greater light) and the moon and stars to govern Genesis 1. 16.
the night, (the lesser Luminaries.) But, some Day, is with Specialty, Gods,
Because, by His Precept, or Providence, Extraordinarily His. This is the day
which Ps. 118. 24.
the Lord has made, let us rejoice and be glad in it. That is, keep it as a
Holy and Festival day. And so, this first of the week, is, The Lords Day.
Christ's Resurrection Aug. Ser. 251. de Temp.
then from the dead, was the Rise, and the Churches observation the Growth of
that day, and both make it to be The Lords. The Honor of the Seventh day was
Buried, and for it, This did Arise. Justly set on the Throne, because, the
Queen of days. And rightly Crowned Queen of days, because Regina dierum. Ign.
The Redemption is the Crown of Mercies. The Creation (by our Ps. 103. 4.
Fall) became a miserable day to us (rather then ever damned, better never
borne) But by our Redemption, Ma. 26. 24
the Bliss of that, is restored; 2 Cor. 5. 17
and a Bliss above that, bestowed. So the Sabbath Day that was, is Deposed;
and The first, Created Lady of days, because of that great Act of The Lords.
By His Rising from Death, Proclaimed Heb. 4. 10.
Lord of life. And, sealed Lord Redeemer of the world. For this, we have not
only the Fathers, but an Apostles evidence: Act. 4. 11.
The Stone refused, was then made Head of the corner, and It crowned, the
Choice of days. It is the day which the Lord has made, yea, and the day which
made (that is) Manifested Him, Act. 2. 36.
Lord. The Primate therefore, the Chief, the Only Day. And Romans 1. 4.
for that we have the Churches Primitive Practice, and S. John's witness. For,
it was famously known in his time, to be The day of the Lord. And Sacredly
observed and Honored then, as The Lords day. He was in the Spirit then, by His
Devotion to it. And filled he was with heavenly Visions and Revelations, when
he was at His Devotion in it. And indeed, when he and all the rest of the
Apostles had their first and greatest fill of the Holy Ghost at Pentecost, it
was at their devout Meeting, upon this First day. He at Patmos, and They at
Jerusalem; He Banished, and They Act. 2. 1, 4.
Assembled. The Spirit was in Them, and He in it, on the Same day, that is (for
His Honor) the Lords, and (of the Week) the First. Ever since observed by The
Church with singular Advantage to Gods Glory, and great increase of His Grace,
as Christ's Heavenly Coronation, and The Spirits Holy Market Day. As I love my
Soul, and would have it Prosper, and be happily Provided for, Lord make me ever
One at that Market! In the place appointed (The Church) amongst those Holy
Merchants of Thine Isa. 55. 1. Rev. 3. 18.
(The Priests) For those Blessed Commodities of Thine, (Thy Graces.) And if my
Spirit be too poor, to reach to Heavenly Raptures and Revelations, let me be so
Rich, as to be Furnished with all Holy Necessaries for my Soul. If not in The
Spirit, let Thy Spirit be in Me, O Lord!

The Prayer for Morning.
O Lord, who this First day of Mar. 16. 2. Romans 1. 4.
the week, did Rise from Death, Declaring Thy self thereby to be the Lord,
and Dedicating this Day therein, to be the Lords; By thy Holy Church and
Children, Religiously observed and Consecrated, according to that thy first and
most Glorious Declaration and Dedication In Obedience and Observance to Thee
and It, let me Keep the Day. And by the Virtue of Thy Holy Resurrection, Romans
6. 4, 6, 8.
let me rise from the death of Sin, to the life of Righteousness in my Soul.
Believing that I shall at that day arise from the Grave, in my Body. And,
Hoping To. 15. 22. Hos. 6. 2.
to be Raised from the greatest Grief, and most deadly Distress to my Soul and
Body, by Thy Comfort. Thou that did Raise Thy self out of the Grave, Bring my
Soul and Body; and estate, out of the Sepulcher of Sin and Death and woe (Thou
can, Thou will;) And Revive Thy Church and Children with me in this, and that
day, I beseech Thee! Lord Jesus Raise us all. Amen.

The Prayer for Evening.
O Lord, I have seen this Holyday begin and end, (for that I bless Thy Mercy!)
Thou have seen the Desires of my Soul to do This day some Duty to Thee (for
this I bless Thy Grace!) Thou have given me This day some Opportunities, and
others some Abilities to serve Thee, and do Ministerial offices for me, (For
both, I bless Thy Providence!) O Pardon what has been amiss. Accept what is
good. Enable us to do better, I beseech Thee, for Jesus Christ His sake. Amen.

Palm Sunday.
MEDITAT. upon Mat. 21. 8. Others cut down branches of trees, and strawed them
in the way, etc.
FRom these Branches grew the name Palm Sunday. A piece of that poor Pomp which
was then done to the Great Messiah. A Prince, whose Kingdom was not of this
world, That appears by His present Progress to the Royal City. For instead
of Chariots and Steeds, and Trains of State, He has not a Beast but a borrowed
one, to ride upon. No Crown on his Head. No Scepter in his Hand. No Cloth of
Mat. 21. 3.
estate over Him. No precious Furniture about Him. No Tissue upon Him. No
Caparisons of Gold under him. No Rich Carpets, and Curious Tapestries before
Him. No Heralds in Robes, no Clarions, no Trumpets to proclaim Him: And yet,
Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like this Lilie of Cant. 2. 1.
the valleys. No Coats of Arms like his Fishermens. No Laurels to the peoples
Boughs. No vests of beaten Gold to their spread Clothes. No Troops of Nobles
to His Trains. No Grandees to His Disciples, (which have even Luke 10. 20.
the Devils themselves for their Subjects.) No Heralds to the Babes that
bless Him. No Salve's, no Jo's, no Ave's to the Hosanna's and Benisons
bestowed on Him. The Son of David, The Christ, The blessed Messiah, The
Promised Prince: No Barchocab that comes in his own, or the Devils name, but in
Gods. He Saves us! God Save Him! Blessed be He that comes in the name of the
Lord! That We, Genesis 18. 18. Act. 4. 12.
They, Jews, Gentiles, All the Nations of the world in his Name (and his
alone) may be blessed. To Him Son of God as well as Man, Son of the Most High,
Hosannah as High as Heaven, is with the Lowest. To God of Heaven, on Earth, In
Heaven and Earth (above Heaven). Hosanna to the Prince of Heaven, Heir of all
things, Lord of Angels, King of Saints, Sovereign to Devils, Creator and
Savior of the World: By Inheritance, Purchase, Conquest, Prince and King, and
Sovereign Lord of Heaven, Earth and Hell, Hosanna in the Highest!

So they Cry now, but Crucify after. They make Bloody Outcrys for these
blessed Acclamations (The very same men and Mouths) yes and Crown Him with
Thorns instead of Palms, and put a purple of Scorn upon Him, that now take off
their own Clothes to Honor Him (The very same Hands.) Nay, they Dye their
Heads and Wash their Hands in Mat. 27. 25. ^
His Blood, which once opened their Mouths, and lifted up their Hands for His
Blessedness.

Within five days both are done. And writ to ^each us, That to Court the
Multitude is ^o Coat the Moon; nothing is so mean, so mad, as to make their
Mouth my Heaven, and their Breath my Blessedness. Though as Innocent, as
Excellent, and Constant as Christ himself, the People by their own
Unsteadinesse, or others Artifice, may cry me as fast to a Cross as ever they
did to a Throne. But if the Simple, Fickle Rabble change, let us not alter. The
Hosanna that was Lu. 23. 24.
then, let us cry now. Cry it at Lu. 22. 32.
the Cross with the Penitent Thief, that we may Sing it on the Throne with the
Glorified Apostles: nay for the Hosanna of the Saints, Sing the Halleluja Rev.
19. 1.
of the Angels, when we shall Receive with their gifts of Bliss, their tongues
and songs of Glory. Amen, Hallelujah!

The Prayer.
O Lord Jesu Christ, Yesterday, Heb. 13. 83.
and to day, and the same for ever, who did receive of the Jews* Honor and
Ignominy, Applauses, and Outcries, Hosanna's and Crucifiges; let me never
build my Bliss on so brittle a Foundation as the Breath of Man, especially of
a Multitude; which as a wind, so soon comes and goes away, and (as a Castle in
the air) fails and falls in an instant: Since, if I be the same to them, they
may be diverse to themselves, in their Judgments and Affections: But on thy
Love let my Soul lean, who art the same Mal. 3. 6. Joh. 13. 1.
without change of mind or will, both now and for ever. O let me Constantly
love Thee, that Thou may Eternally love Me. And not Isa: 54. 8. Rev. 7. 9. 2
Cor. 4. 17*
give me Thorns for Palms, but Palms for Thorns! for all my afflictions of this
present lifetime, an eternal weight of glory. A Crown that does not fade.
Above the Moon which signs and makes change with Thee the Sun of
Righteousness, Rev. 21. 25.
who do Rise and never Set. Hosanna to Thee, not on Earth, but in Heaven,
Hosanna in the highest.

Amen.
Easter Day.
MEDITAT. upon Mat. 27. 65. You have a watch, Go make it as sure as you can.
THe Jews having got Christ to a Cross, and thence to a Grave, think there to
keep him for ever going out. To Pilat therefore they go to secure the Corpse
from being (as is pretended) stolen away by his Disciples, lest what himself
said (He should Arise the Third day) should be reported by them, and believed
by others, and raise stir amongst all. The Judge, who against his own
judgment, gave the Live Body to their Bloody Hands, commits the Dead to their
Will. They Seal the Stone at the door of the Sepulcher; set a Guard to watch
and keep all safe, and (as they thought) made It and Him Sure. But O Judge
blinded with Ignorance, and Jews with Malice; Did you not see Rocks rend at
His Passion, and will a Stone bar His Resurrection? Did you not hear of Dead
Saints rising and walking up and down the City, and can Mat. 27. 51.
you hinder it in a Dead Savior? Was not the whole Band of you struck down by
a word of His Joh. 18. 6.
Mouth, and can a Watch keep Him from Rising up? Though your Soldiers be too
strong for weak Disciples, can they hold Arms against Angels? Because God
suffered your bloody rage to do a thing incredibly barbarous (to butcher your
Savior) do you presume to do what is absolutely impossible, to destroy Act. 2.
24.
His Son? No. A wonder it was to Heaven and Earth that the Maker of both should
be suffered to die, the ruin of the world it would be, if the Preserver of it
should not live. That the Prince of Life should be subject Acts 3. 15.
to Death, is strange, not that He should be Sovereign of it. That He who is
Immortal should taste Death, is wonderful, not that He should not see
Corruption. Acts 2. 27.
That the Lord of Angels (who feeds all things) should not feed worms! That God
should go into a Grave, not that he should come out of it! It is impossible for
His Person, yes, and for His Acts 2. 2^.
Function too. For when all is suffered on Earth, something must be done in
Heaven. A Prin^es office, as well as a Priests belongs to a Savior. A
Throne-part as well as the Crosse-piece.

He must be a Sacrifice, and have a Sovereignty. Gain himself a People, and
give them a Protection. A Possession must be after the Purchase. And the Spirit
granted, Acts 2. 17.
as His Bloodshed.

An Advocate He must be as well as a Surety. And Intercede as well as Expiate.
Appear in the presence of God (as of Men) for Heb. 9. 24.
us. At the Right hand of God, after that of the Thief. From a Grave to come
to such a place as Heaven, such a Throne, such a Presence, such a Hand as Gods,
no way but by a Resurrection. Make therefore the Sepulcher as sure as they can,
He must, He will, He did Arise. The Angel is Mat. 28. 2.
a Roller of the Stone. The Wax melts at His Presence. The Soldiers die, and
their heart within them is even as melting wax. So their Security against the
Resurrection is an Assurance of it. Their Seal signs it. Their Soldiers
witness it. Their Watch (bribed and suborned) said no after, but before,
affirmed it. Let the Jews stand (as then) now Infidels to it; to us Christians;
it is so many ways made sure, it is our Creed to believe it.

O that it were made as good too! He did; by Virtue of Col. 3. 1. Romans 6. 4.
His, by the Pattern of Him, for His Honor, to our Bliss, we should Arise.
And if we do as we should, we shall as we wish: We must from Sin, we may from
Woe, we shall from Death. The first by our Repentance, the rest by His
Deliverance.

Repentance is the Resurrection Ephesians. 5. 14. 1 Cor. 15. 34.
of the Soul from the death of Sin, to the life of Righteousness. Deliverance
from Extremity is a Rising from Death. The dust of it (yet at greatest) less
then a Grave. Psalm. 113. 17. Ps. 116. 3.
Raising up the Body at the Last day is to be done for all as easily as one, by
Power infinite, and is Romans 5. ^5. 1 Cor. 15. 22. 1 Cor. 15. 47. 1 Cor. 15. 23.
done for all in one. An Adam that is the Common Root, a Christ who is the Head
of Mankind. All that are His, shall arise then. But look well to our Souls now,
for the good of our Bodies then. Secure our Repentance. Make sure the
Sepulcher. No hope of life without the death of Sin. Else to rise from Woe, is
but to fall deeper into the Pit, and from the Grave to come to a Bar; and fall
from it, to Hell: But if that be sure, so is our Deliverance from Woe, if good
for us, and if not, it were woeful. Make the Prison safe for S. Peter, and the
Scaffold ready; Acts 12. 7. Acts 5. 19.
shut it never so close upon the Apostles; an Angel has them all, out. And so
shall be our Resurrection from the Grave.

Let the Philosopher roll his stone of infidelity upon it. Put the Seal of
Sense to it, and set Reason to stand Sentinel against it; That what Worms eat,
and Winds scatter, after so many Transmutations, should rise it self, the same
Body again, an Archangel shall raise it up. By the power which made it first of
1 These. 4. 16. Genesis 2. 7.
Dust, and brought Christ's out of the Sepulcher.

The Prayer.
O Lord, (who did according to Thy Word, and the Appointment of thy Father
(maugre all opposition of the Heathenish and Jewish people) Rise from Death the
Third day, and wast after a Cruel and Ignominious passion Exalted to be a
Prince and Savior; I beseech Thee, by Thy Spirit of grace raise Act. 4. 31.
me from the death of Sin and grave of Lust to a righteous Life: That I may be
Revived in, and from all my woes on Earth, and Raised (for all the worms and
changes which shall fall on me, upon or under it) to the Doom of the Blessed,
and Blessedness of the Saints in a life without all Woe and Sin, without death
or change of Body or Soul, Immortal, Eternal, Beatificall, for ever, Blessed
Lord, by the Merits of Thy Death, and Virtue of Thy Resurrection, so Raise me
in this world, that I may Rise so in the world to come: And be with Thee for
ever and ever. Amen, Lord 1 These. 4. 17.
Jesu!

Amen.
Easter-Monday.
MEDITAT. upon Luke 24. 34. The Lord is risen indeed, and has appeared unto
Simon.
IF ever subject to Death, He should not be the Lord. The Lord of Life may lie,
but not long in a Grave. He may be Captive, but will be Conqueror. Bound if He
be for a time and turn (as He was for our Debt) Isa. 53. 5. Romans 4. 25.
loosed He must be, and was, to get and give us our Acquittance. Not in
pretense and show, but indeed He was. The Stone is rolled from the Sepulcher.
The Grave-clothes lie about it. The Kerchief and Sheet wrapped up, but Joh. 20. 6.
no Head, no Body in it. The Watch set to guard the Corpse, so frighted, that
they are scarce to keep either their Wit or Life. This shows, that He was
really Risen. And because no better witness for this then the evidence of the
Eye, as the 1 Cor. 15. 17.
Lord did arise, He appeared. Upon this Act of His, depends all the Evidence
for our Souls, and Assurance of our Salvation: For we had been in our Sins for
all His Death, if He had not both quit and brought Himself and us out of all,
by His Resurrection. His care therefore for our greater Faith and Comfort, is,
to make it appear. And so he did to Simon. Not first, for that was to Magdelene
to her out of whom Mar. 16. 9. Mar. 16: 1:
He had cast Seven Devils. She was early at the Sepulcher, and has the first
sight of her Savior. She goes thither, where He meets her, in love. She was
therefore sent as a Messenger with the Mat. 28. 7. Mar. 16. 7.
Blessed news to S. Peter (so it appears to his ear;) but that is not enough, He
must have it in His Eye too, so He appeared to Simon. Particularly, to Her, and
Him, for the Comfort of poor Penitents, Grievous Sinners so, become Gracious
Saints. A Polluted woman, and a Perjured man, one that had Seven Devils, but
now has in her the love of Seven Sainrs, has the first word of the
Resurrection.

From Angels, the first sight of her Lord. Another who abjured his Master, and
perjured himself; who professed he would die rather then deny Him, though all
should, would never do it, when foretold and forewarned against the deed, one
that was the first man at His Grave, though not last at His Cross, Joh. ^0. 4.
He is the man who is honored with the first Apparition. Penitential Tears
gain Christ's Heart, as well as His Bowels. Mary washed Christ's Feet with her
Tears, and Simon so washed his own face with his. Bitterly he weeps. Mat. 26.
75. Eccl. Hist.
As if Mara was in his eyes, such streams run down his cheeks every midnight to
his dying day, that they are furrowed with those continual watercourses: As if
he were rather a Dying heart, then a Living man, and had as tender eyes with his
tears, as S. James had hard knees with his prayers; which were said to be like
Camels hoofs, by their frequent bows to his Devotions. To her and Simon He
appeared.

But to others also, To Two on the Way. To Ten in the House. To Thomas with the
ten. To more then five hundred of the 1. Cor. 15. 68.
Brethren. To S. Paul, after all. So to Men and Women, Apostles and Disciples.
In House and Field. Together and Asunder. To every person, in every place. He
did every way appear.

Mahomet, after his Thousand years time, appears not. Christ did the Third day.
By this, the Truth of Christian Religion, by that the Imposture of the
Mahumedan appears.

Open the eyes of that Great part of the Deluded World, Good Lord, and make that
Grand Impostor to appear, and the Cheat of his Tomb, by this stay in his
Sepulcher. And let the hearts of all Christians be so openly good to all, that
the truth of Thine and Their Resurrection may every where be seen! Let none be
such Hypocrites as to appear Saints, when they are not risen from their Sins;
nor any so profane as to say they are risen, when by their life no such thing
does appear. As our Lord, let us truly Rise; and evidently make it appear that
it is so.

The Prayer.
O Lord, who after Thy Resurrection, did appear in the Angels mouths and
Apostles eyes: let it appear in me, that Thou art Risen who art my Head,
because I am raised from the grave of Corruption, who am Thy Servant. Let it be
heard from my mouth, and seen in my life, that I am raised by Thy Spirit, and
alive to Thy Glory. To Friends, to Enemies, to Thy Church, to the World, to
Heaven, to Earth, let it every where appear, That at the Last day when all must
appear before Thy Bar, I may be quitted by Thee, before Men and Angels, found
in Peace, and doomed to thy Glory. Clean from guile, and cleared of all guilt.
By Thy Blessed Blood and Spirit. Amen, Lord Jesu,

Amen.
Easter-Tuesday.
MEDITAT. upon Luke 24. 39. Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self:
handle me and see me, for a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.
BEsides the evidence of the Ear, strong when from the Mouth of an Angel; and
that of the Eye (better then ten witnesses of the Ear) we have here the
Testimony of the Hands too. An Attrectation with an Apparition. Palpable as
well as visible evidence, That, as in the mouth of two or three witnesses every
word, by those Three Senses, this Point should be established of Christ's
Resurrection from the dead. A Point on which all our Christian Comfort and
Salvation only depends, and in which 1 Cor. 15. 14.
our Belief and Religion chiefly consists, and therefore to us all, and the
Apostles (who were to be witnesses of it to the whole world) above all, Gods
wisdom makes this to be most manifest. To take away all doubt and fear of
Delusion, He calls them to come and handle Him and see Him. Before they did see
but not touch Him, now He condescends Joh. 20. 7.
and calls them to handle and see Him. By their Senses to give all Assurance to
their Souls. Nay, He keeps and shows the Wounds of the Cross, to heal all
Infidelity or Question of His Coming out of the Grave. They may behold His
Hands and Feet, and in them His Wounds. Made first for Cities of Refuge from
the pursuit of Guilt, for sinful Souls, but showed now as watch-towers, from
which both Eyes and Hands may discern the Truth of His Person, and by it, the
certainty of His Resurrection. And if Thomas will have no Faith in His Body,
without a Finger in His Side, His Heart is laid open for Him to see through the
Perspective of that Breast-wound, that so his Sense and Weakness may be more
convinced and satisfied, That it was. He (no other but He) His Lord and His God.

Having thus satisfied all Capable Senses, He demonstrates itby them to their
Understandings; and convinces their Reason by their Sense. A Spirit has not
Flesh and Bones. Some composition is in it, but no Corporeity. If any Body be
to it, it is not native, but assumed: But I have both. You See, you Feel that I
have, The Limbs of a Man, The Marks of the Cross.

The Wounds of your Savior. The same Back, the same Head, the same Hands, the
same Feet, the same Side, which the Jews with Whips, and Thorns, and Nails, and
the Spear, did Tear, Gore, Bore and Pierce. The very same Body Act. 2. 36.
which they so barbarously Crucified; It Is no Ghost, no Apparition; It Is I the
Same (My self, and no other.) Do you therefore Believe your selves, and Preach
it to all the world, and make them believe; I was Sacrificed to death for their
Sins, but am Raised to be their Savior.

So must our Spiritual Resurrection appear. The Truth of it must be seen. The
Goodness of it must be felt. Heard it must be from our mouths. Seen it must be
in our lives, and Felt it must be in our hands. Good Words, Lives, Works, must
give the world, audible, visible, palpable Evidence of it. And that we be not
mere Spirits for all this, and it, all but an Apparition, it must be evident
(as to Man) to God, that Romans 6. 6. Mat. 5. 29.
as the Body, the Heart of sin, is Crucified. The Lust of the Flesh with the
Limbs, and the Dearest of them, the Delight and Darling of the Heart. As our
Hands and Feet (our visible Works and Ways) we must show our Side too. Our
Sincerity must not be doubted. Else, if we have a form of Piety without the
Power, An Apparition of Religion without the Body, A Body of Grace without a
Soul: Heaven is in our Eye, Angels at our Lips, Saints in our Lives, but Hell
is in our Hearts, and Devils in our Thoughts. Unmortified, black and bloody
Lusts possess our Minds: As our Resurrection is Fantastical on earth, our
Ascension will be Imaginary to Heaven, but our Condemnation shall be Real at
our Doomes-day both of Body and Soul, to Hell.

The Prayer.
O Lord, who for the firmer faith of Thy Disciples in Thy Resurrection, did
keep and show them the Wounds of the Cross, and did offer and give those
Holy Evidences both to their Eyes and Hands: I beseech Thee give me Grace so to
Evidence my Spiritual Resurrection from the death of Sin, that all the world
may see my life of Righteousness, and thou may behold both: They may see it,
and give Thee Glory; Thou may see it, and give me Witness; That I am what I
seem. Religious, not in Show, but Integrity. Righteous, not in Appearance, but
Truth. A Saint, not in Picture, but to Life. An Angel, not in Shape, but Deed.
An Israelite, in whom is no guile. A Christian, without all Deceit. ^ That when
other place their Heaven in their Heads, I may have a place at Thy Right hand;
And when their End is in a Fools Paradise, I may find a true Salvation, by
Thee, and with Thee. Amen.

R^gation-Sunday.
MEDITAT. upon Joh. 16. 23. Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall
ask the Father in my name, it shall be given you.
A Large Charter, with a double Seal. Such a Grant, as no King on earth can
give, and therefore the Prince of Heaven procures it (All good whatsoever) Half
his Kingdom Herod offers. Mar. 6. 22. 1 King^ ^^ 12.
A Whole one, Solomon makes it absurd to ask: but here nothing is excepted, no,
not the Crown it self. It is your Fathers good will Lu. 12. 32. Mat. 7. 7.
to give you the Kingdom. Ask, and it shall be given you. Yes, That above all;
Seek ye first the Kingdom Mat. 6. 33.
of God. Were as much in the Devils Mat. 4. 8.
gift as boast; (not one, but) all the Kingdoms of the world, and had any one
head (what Christ contemned) a Crown made up, of and for them all, all were
nothing to the Kingdom of God, which is in Heaven, and for ever. Next, the
Crown of Glory, is Ephesians. 1. 13.
the Spirit of Holy Majesty, which fits and seals us for the Kingdom; and
that is in too. Both, the Grace of the Spirit (if any man Iam. 1. 5.
want wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives liberally) And, the Spirit of
Grace; How shall He not give His Holy Spirit to those that ask Him? As for
Temporalities, Luc. 11. 13.
they are in His Gift and Our Grant also. For, He gives to all men all things,
Life 1 Timothy 6. 17. Act. 17. 25.
and Breath, and all things (belonging to life.) And to us, if we do, as we may
and should, ask: Not absolutely, for they are but good with respect, but in
order to the Spiritual, for the Eternal: Therefore of the Six Petitions, but
One asks Bread. And that (as many make it) but as the Crust of a Better and
more Substantial, then Common and Natural Sustenance.

So far the Charter is enlarged; To whatsoever, but limited too,

In my name. A Restraint not of Bondage, but of Favor. A Mediator must be
between a Ps. 143. 2.
Just God and Guilty Man.

Consumed we shall be, if nothing come betwixt our Stubble and His Fire. That
Christ is. By the Appointment of God, sent Heb. 12. 20. Isa. 5. 24. 1 Timothy 2. 5.
from Heaven to Earth with Holy Commission, In writing; It is written of Him in
the volume of Heb. 10. 7. Ioh. 6. 27. Mat. 3. 16. Isa. 61. 1.
Gods Book, and under Seal. (Him has the Father Sealed) And the Spirit Signed
it, on his Head. For that Office, none like Him. For, what more Noble, then to
go by the Prince, to the King? Or, more Powerful, to Propitiate the Father,
then the Son? Or, more Divine, then to Mediate with God, by God: (with God the
Father, then by the Son of God?) And none but Act. 4. 12. Ephesians. 2. 18. Ioh. 14.
6.
Him. For there is no other name under Heaven. Because none else in it, or from
it. For through Him we have access by the Spirit to the Father. And, No man
comes to the Father but by Him. Other Mediators are more His Affronts then our
Advantages. For, if one suffice, many are vain. To make Him insufficient, is
black Blasphemy. To put others into Office with Him, blasphemous Injury. To
Invade His Prerogative, Violate His Charter-Royal, and to Doubt, if not to
Break His Seal. To Question His Word, nay Dispute His Oath, if not to
Disbelieve it. For so He Seals it, with word upon word, and oath upon oath,
Verily, Verily, is put to it. Heaven and earth Mat. 5. 18. 1 Cor. 1. 20. Rev.
3. 14. Job 26. 13. Genesis 1. 2. Heb. 9. 14.
shall sooner fail then a tittle of it. His Amen is more then His Word. And
here are two Amens of His, who Himself is Amen. Whatever Man's be, Gods Breath
(whose Spirit made the World) is a sure Seal. No Wax like His Blood. His, who
both Made and Redeemed the World.

Himself, indeed, who is in Eye, and the Spirit which is at Hand; are two such
great Gifts on Earth, as Assure the Third and Last, of the Father in Heaven. If
His Son, He will give all things. If His Spirit, He does; To. 8. 32
And All in All we shall have in Lu. 11. 13. Mat. 7. 11. 1 Cor. 15. 28.
Himself, then, if now, His Spirit, and His Son.

The Church then wisely makes use of this Charter in this Rogation-time.
Whether to ask Mercy in Common Miseries (as of old) or to be Blessed from them
(as of late.) The Gospel is good and fit. And the Time, Encouraging.

For our Minds to Ascend to Heaven in our Prayers, when our Mediator Himself
Ascended thither in His person. Nor were the little Circuits then gone, ill. To
view Bounds, and fence against Wrongs (an act of Justice.) To prevent Quarrels,
(an act of Charity.) With Holy Scriptures and Prayers (an act of Piety.)
Acknowledging all Good to come from God, by Christ, through the Holy Ghost (an
high act of Christianity.) Justice being the Hand, Charity the Heart, Piety the
Soul and Self of Religion; and that a most high and holy act of Piety: And, if
the Perambulations be not at all, the Devotions should be more. That the floods
of ungodliness which have drowned all Ancient Bounds and Marks both of Land
and Church in a Deluge of Woes, may be swallowed up in another Deluge and
drowning of Sins, which is our Tears. And then we return our Rogations to their
Original use, and Gods Mercy to us, by our Peccati diluvium mundi expiam^ntum.
Na^. Iocl 2. 14. Zach. 1. 3.
Humble and Holy Rogations. What we want, He would give, be it never so much or
great, whatsoever.

The Prayer.
O Blessed and Bountiful Jesu, who art one with Thy Father in Thy Ioh. 10. 30.
Mat. 1. 23.
Eternal Essence, and yet did become One with us, of ^hy Infinite: Mercy; To
Reconcile us and make us One with Thy Father by Thy Blood; and to Sanctify and
fit us for Thy Father by Thy Spirit: In what Name, but That, should I call on
Him (my Father) and in whose Gal. 4. 6.
name but Thine, who art His Son. In whose Mediation I have all Assurance to
have whatsoever I ask. If with the Holy Confidence and Innocence of a Son; If
with the humble Reverence and Submission of a Suppliant; If with the Fe^vency
and Constancy of a Servant; depending and waiting on his Masters work and will:
So shall I have it in Kind, as Thou gave Abraham an Heir of his loins, Genesis
21. 2^.
or in value, as St. Paul had an Issue 2 Cor. 12. 9. 1 Samuel 1. 27. Genesis 21. 5.
of his Troubles: and if not presently, as thou gave Hanna a Samuel; yet in
Time, as Sarah had her Isaac. Thy Charter let me plead, not change; Thy Time
Attend, not Appoint: So be it to all Thy Servants, who pray to Thee in this, or
any day of trouble. So be it to the soul of Thy Servant, now, and ever, I
beseech Thee Dear Jesu.

Amen! Amen.
Whitsunday, or, Pentecost.
MEDITAT. upon Acts 2. 3. And there appeared cloven tongues as of fire, and it
sat upon each of them.
WHen all Mankind had in ( Adam) their Head lost their Wits with their Souls,
and The Spirit of Wisdom was sent to Recover them to a Rightnesse of mind (if
that was on a Sunday) it may well be called for the joy, a white one, and for
the Gift Whit-sunday. A Dismal day, and Black time it was, when for that
Rebellion of his and theirs against a Holy God, they were given up to the power
and possession of a Hellish Ghost; but when Livery and Seizin, in the Name of
Christ, was taken on the Heads of some, for the use of all by the Holy Spirit:
This was a Bright and Blessed day. Clothing in white at and after the watery
Baptism for a Regeneration (which the Newborn and baptized did then wear) had
signified Mat. 3. 11.
little, and that had small virtue, did not the fiery one warm the Water for
the Birth. The Heavenly Efficacy of that Holywater Joh. 3. 5.
was from the Spirit of this Holy fire. There appeared tongues of fire, and it
sat on each of them. Tongues, to Teach the World by the Ear (the Sense of
Discipline;) Cloven, because to preach to all Nations and Languages. Not
divided (as at Babel) to Ruin a Tower against God, but cleft for Bethel, to
build a Church to Christ. Fiery therefore, to warm their Hearts, who were to
preach, that they may be burning as well as shining Lights; And, to Heat theirs
who were to Hear too. For, hardly will they warm other Hearts, that have no
Fire in their own. And It (One) sat on each of them. To make them One, in, and
like It. All in this are Equal and Alike. In Christ's Breath, Ioh. 20. 22.
when He gave them the Holy Ghost, and in Gods Fire, when they received The
Spirit. The Place, The Promise, The Conveyance of the Holy Ghost, grants no
Privilege to the Chair and Conclave at Rome, no Prerogative to St. Peter. It
was Confined rather to Jerusalem, Acts 1. 4.
and Bestowed not on One, but Each of them. All have like Heads of Fire. All
the same Tongues and Hands. All the same Keys and Commissions. All speak
Oracles, All do Miracles, All give Pardons. This was the Apparition of the Day.

But the End was Everlasting. To fill all Heads with the Doctrine, and fire all
Hearts with His Love. These Gifts did but serve for those Graces. And these
Acts were ordained as Preparatory works to those more Principal Services.
Salvation is the great Work of Heaven; Sanctification the best Work on Earth.
And these Gifts were as the Hands and Tools, with which the Spirit (in us and
by us) does perform those Works. So then, better is a Cleft Heart then Tongue.
Fire in the Heart, then on the Head. Humble Obedience, then any Language, and
Holy Zeal, then all Knowledge. Louder is the Trumpet of good Works, the^
Words; For the Sound and Sense of these goes but to Some Ears and Minds, those
are Heard and Understood of All, to the ends of the earth. Such Hearts, Lingua
been operandi, ab omnibus intellecta est. Tacit. de Matif.
and Hands, and Tongues, are framed in the Church as the Forge, by the Spirit
as the Fire, and the Ministry, as the Bellows. But they who have no Tongues
cleft but for Division in the Church, nor Heads fired but for Rebellion against
it, nor Hands strengthened for any Miracles, unless of Mischief; these Brands
belong to him, who is said to have the Cleft Foot. At his Anvile they work, and
however, they pretend to the Dove of Heaven, they are moved by the Vultur of
Hell, and are full, not of the Holy Ghost of God, but the Devils: Cursed are
these. But Blessed they whose Spirit and Motions are made Holy by the Holy One.
When that day dawnes in the Heart, it is white indeed, my Holy and Happy
Pentecost, 2 Pet. 1. 19.
which makes not only a Three days, but all my life, Festival, and my Death,
the great day of the Feast.

The Prayer.
O Holy and Heavenly Spirit, which did visibly and gloriously descend on the
Heads of the Apostles, endowing them with Gifts and Tongues to Instruct and
Convert the World. Descend, O Dove of Heaven, upon my Head, and give me a Holy
Understanding and Zeal for the Truth and Honor of my Lord, Mine, and their
Sovereign and sacred Head. And in the Body of Thy Church, let me Keep, that
thou may be in me, and on me, who do Inspire and Inanimate every Member,
and only in the Body. Another Head let me not make by Schism, then He is, nor
by my Lust Grieve Thee away, and be possessed 1 Cor. 1. 12, 13. Epe. 4. 30.
with another Spirit then Thou art: Lest, if that lead me, which comes from
Hell, I never come to God in Heaven. Preserve me for it, from the Hellish One,
to Him and Thee, for Jesus His sake. Amen.

Whitson-Monday.
MEDITAT. upon Acts 10. 44. While Peter yet spoke these words, the Holy Ghost
fell on all them which heard the word.
HEre was a Whitsunday without a Pentecost. Not for the punctual Time, but by
a Holy Festival. Not of the Jews (as at the first coming of the Holy Ghost)
but to the Gentiles. Gods Heb 2. 9. Acts 2. 17.
Blood was shed for all, and His Spirit is given to all, without difference, to
the Jew first and also to the Gentile. At Jerusalem and Caesarea, where S.
Peter preached, both were so Blessed. There at the Sermons end, and here before
it. Then Thousands, and now A^t. 2. 41.
All. O happy Fisher of Men, which at one Cast of the Net, draws to God Three
thousand Souls! And at another, takes as many Men as the Net had to compass!
There many Hearers were his Converts, here, all. As the Breath of man goes in
his Speech, so Gods Spirit in His Word. All therefore is One Ministry 2 Cor. 3.
2. 1 Ioh. 4. 1.
of the Word and the Spirit. But what every Spirit breaths and speaks is not
the Word. It is Man's often, the Devils too often.

When delivered by an Inspired Spirit, or Consonant to what was so delivered,
then it is the Holy Word, and so is from the Holy Ghost as the Author, and the
Holy Ghost comes from it and by it, as the Organ. A Spirit against the Word
(yet called Gods) is Blasphemy at the worst: A Spirit, besides it (yet made the
Holy One) is Heresy at the best. As Christ speaks from the Bosom Joh. 1. 12.
John 16. 13, 14.
of the Father, so the Holy Ghost does from the Mouth of Christ. It is so said
by His own Mouth. Part we must not then Word and Spirit. Word without Spirit is
Erraticall Doctrine. Spirit without Word Fanaticall 2 These. 2. 2. Isa. 8. 19,
20.
Ghost. Gods Word is not as common, as Man's Speech, and His Spirit as Our
Breath; then were neither Holy. What comes from S. Peter's mouth, is, what from
a Preachers should be, the Holy Word of God. What comes by an Apostles
preaching is, what by others, may, and may not be, the Holy Ghost. Apostolic
mouths make Holy Conveyances, and Apostolic men shall to the end of the world;
Mat. 28. 20.
but Apostaticall Ministers from them, who cannot plead Doctrine or Discipline
successive and Hereditary to them, To them no Seal is given of such
Conveyances, Romans 16. 17.
but a Brand on them for Spirits not of God, and a Mark to us, as such to avoid
them. As men possessed with a Hellish Spirit, and therefore cannot convey the
Holy one. It was conveyed by S. Peter, on as many as heard him. Not when he had
done, but whilst he was preaching. As Daniels Supplication was granted, not
when he did end, but as Dan. 9. 23.
he begun his praying.

But, on none that heard him not (out of the reach of the Net) out of hope to
be taken; so on them that Then, and So heard ^i^. Humbly and Heartily, before
Ac^. 1^. 33. ^
God, without Prejudice to his Person, or Exception to his Doctrine. Come it
cross to their Minds or Wills, no Error or Lust shall bar it Conscionable
Entertainment. So The Holy Ghost fell on them all. Not by Chance (they do not
Stumble at it;) but by Providence, It Lights on them. Not as an Accident or
Windfall, but as from a voluntary Agent, of Choice, and by Intendment. So let
it fall upon our Holy Assemblies, O God! Make our Preachers as S. Peter, and
our Hearers as Cornelius, that it may so fall upon us all.

The Prayer.
O Lord, who by the mouth of S. Peter did Breath and Convey the Holy Ghost to
the Gentiles now, as Thou did before to the Jews; Bless Thy Church with
Apostolic Preachers, who succeeding in their function, may Convey the Holy
Ghest, to Convert those who lie in any Error, and Confirm them who stand in
the Truth; and Bless those who are to Hear and Receive Thy Holy Word, with
Hearts and Ears not stopped with Prejudice or worldly Lusts, but open to give
Entrance to Thy Holy Spirit: That, as Thy Blood was shed for all the world, Thy
Spirit may fall on all Flesh. That all may see the Salvation of God, and the
Inheritance so dearly bought for all may be Sealed to every Sanctified Soul;
and Thy Holy Name may be glorified by all on Earth, and Thy Holy Saints
glorified with thee in Heaven. So be it, by the Blessed Mediation and Operation
of thy Holy Son, and Holy Ghost, O God. Amen.

Whitson-Tuesday.
MEDITAT. upon Act. 19. 6. And when Paul laid his hands upon them, The Holy
Ghost came upon them, and they spoke with tongues, etc.
AS the Gifts of the Holy Ghost are diverse, so are the Receipts. Sometimes it is
Conveyed by Water, sometimes by Breath. Sometimes it is Taken on Holy Knees,
sometimes from Holy Hands: By Baptising Pruying, Preaching, Confirming, The
Holy Ghost came. These Ordinances of God are the Carriages of the Spirit.
Vehicula Spiritus Sanct.
The Apostles, they were the Masters (or rather) Ministers of these Carriages.
An Office not Confined to One, but Common to All. As all were Joint Receivers
of It, when Christ gave them their power, Joh. 20. 12.
so they are all Conveyers of It, when others take His Gifts. Nor did that die
with their persons, but live in, and to, their Heirs and Successors to the end
of the Mat. 28. 20.
world; as the Ordinances are Eternally Entailed on the Church (till in Heaven)
not to end. Though not to those Extraordinary Gifts, there shall be Conveyances
and Conveyers for ever of the Holy Ghost. Because Assurances of Salvation are
to be made to the Saints in the Church. And as there is no Title to it, but in
Christ's Blood the Purchase; so no Possession of it, but by the Spirit of God,
the Seal. Laying on of Hands then (for one) must not be laid aside. For, as it
is an Apostolic use, so it is by Ordinance. And no petty one, and
superstructive piece, but Heb. 6. 2.
a Principal and Fundamental in the Building. Not a Pinnacle, but a Pillar in
the Temple. They of Rome raise it too high to make it a Sacrament of the
Church. And some Reformed sink it too low, taking it for a Superfluity in it.
If not Sacramental, it is not Trivial, but a Sacred thing. So the Most and
Best of the Reformed, do Receive and Retain it. The Church of England (happy in
hitting the Golden Mean and Midway, betwixt the Extremes of Errors) holds it
not such a Sacrament as is generally necessary to Salvation; yet such an
Ordinance as is Requisite after Baptism, and before the Holy See Rubr. after
Con^^rmation and before ^.
Communion. As Completory to That, and Preparatory to This. And this she does
with great wisdom. Having for her Adversary (besides the Papist) who makes it
necessary to Heaven, the Anabaptist and Brownist too, who would else make
Baptism it self superfluous, and the Eucharist profaned. For here Children
Baptized profess the Faith with their own mouths, and take their Christening
on their own skores, Sealing with their own souls what their Sureties did at
the Font in their Names. Nor are any to be Admitted to Confirmation, but first
Examined, nor to the Communion, but first Confirmed.

And herein she shows both great Reason and Affection. It Is odd to think God
can Pardon Sin by the Mouth of a Priest, Purify a Soul by his Hand (in
Absolution and Baptism) and not Fortify a Soul by the hand of a Bishop in
Confirmation. That one can Consecrate Christ's Body by Gods Word, and his Hand,
and the other not Confirm a Christened by this Hand and Blessing. It is absurd
to believe a Ministers Preaching and Praying can convert and give man a new
Nature, and that a Prelates Hand and Prayer cannot confirm a Child, and put on
a Holy Armor.

And it is sad to see the pestilent Sequels of these causeless Neglects and
Prejudices. How people are wounded with every dart of Temptation, because not
Armed. Shaken with every Spirit of Delusion, because not well Foundation'd.
Most Infirm in points of Faith, and more to Gods Fear, because never
Confirmed. Tossed like Balls with every foot of Falsehood, because the Holy Hand
of Blessing and Ephesians* 4. 14.
Strength was never on their Head. Nay, as if Baptism it self were a blot,
they wash it away. And as though the Body of our Savior were a Business of
Fright, and the Bread of Life a Noli me tangere, they dare not, they must not
come at the Blessed Communion. No wonder we are so full of Hellish Ghosts,
(Spirits of Error, Envy, Pride, and Profaneness) when we block up the
Passages of the Holy Spirit of Truth, Love, Meekness, and Godliness. And
instead of having Apostles, and their Successors lay Holy hands on us, as
Christians had, we are ready to lay violent hands and hold on them, as the
Jews did. And for that as Crime enough, that they dare Patronize or use the
laying on of Hands. Lord, lay not that Sin to their Charge, who did not
Practice, or would not Suffer that Laying on!

The Prayer.
O Lord, who by the Hands of Thy Holy Apostles, did Convey the Holy Ghost;
and by the Pen of a Holy one, have taught us, that it is one foundation which
the Bliss of Heb. 6. 6.
Souls is to be built upon; Give me a right Judgment and reverent Esteem of
it, with a Religious Care and Conscience, that I and mine (who had it not) may
have that Holy Blessing. And since also no Increase will come (though Paul
Plant, and Apollos Water) no Spirit will appear for all S. Peter's Preaching, or
S. Paul's Confirming; Bless all Holy Hands and Heads, who use Thy Ordinance, and
let Thy Church never want such Heads and Hands. That we and our children may be
Grounded in Truth, and Increase in Grace. Defended by Thy Holy Ghost, and
Preserved to Thy Heavenly Kingdom. Thou that did lay Thy Hands on men and
children, and Bless them on earth, Reach Thy blessing to us from heaven, Dear
Jesus. Amen.

Trinity-Sunday.
MEDITAT. upon Mat. 28. 19. In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost.
THe Blessed Trinity, and Sacred Unity, did, and does still meet with Enmity.
The Pagans with their many Gods, divide the Unity. The Mahumetans with their
One God, deride the Trinity. Yea, (which is more Woe to be done, and Shame to
be suffered) many Christians exceed or equal both. Some out go the Heathens in
Profanation, for they had many Gods, these have none. Many come to them in
Superstition, multiplying One God into Many. Giving as much veneration to their
Saints ( He Is and She Is) as Pagans did to their Numens, ( Gods and Goddesses.)
He that was friend enough to the Church of Rome (but no flatterer of it) does
ingenuously and openly profess, in the worships of the one and other, he saw
no difference. And as little is Lu^. V^v^s non video q^od sit discrimen.
there betwixt the Alchoran and Creed of some, concerning the Trinity. If with
the Turks they draw not bloody Scymiters, they whet blasphemous Tongues and
Pens, against it. And make Books, if not Wars to Desie it. The true
Christian-Catholike Faith was, and is; There is one God. For though there be
that are Gods, whether in Heaven or Earth Deuteronomy. 6. 4. 1 Cor. 8. 4.
( as there be Gods many and Lords many) to us there is but one God, of whom
are all things, and one Lord, by whom are all things, etc. yea, the truth is,
To the most and best of Heathens. Though many petty Deities, they had but one
Sovereign God and Lord. Nor can there be more. For, if many and equal, there
will be Wars and Woes amongst all, and so no quiet, none blessed, and then
none. And if an unequal Many, some must be inferior, and serve, as Subjects
(not Gods) to Him who is their Lord and chief. And so the Sovereign God is One.
But then in this God (undeniably) One in Essence, the ways of Subsistence
(with the Church) are Three. In her Sacred Language called Persons. Three
Persons parallel to those several and singular Subsistences. A Mystery indeed,
which we are not to dispute, but adore; nor can express, but must believe.
Because, Received by the Church, as Revealed by God. For besides that the
Eagle-eyed Evangelist saw it, and in so many terms and words wrote it; There
are Three which bear 1 Ioh. 5. 7.
record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these Three
are One.

It is so manifest from Christ's own mouth, that an eye more Bat-like may behold
it, A Son, John. 14. 16. Mat. 3. ^7.
besides the Father, and Spirit besides the Son. Another from the Son, as He is
from the Father. At His Baptism it appeared very clear, when by the voice of
the Father, The Dove of the Sp^r^t rested on the head of the Son. But at ours,
most, commanded to be done, In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
Three Distinct Persons, but of One Authority, so, of one and the same Nature
and Essence, all, that is (In one Name.) The Son, is not a Divine Man (as the
Arrian) The Holy Ghost, a Divine Thing (as the Macedonian.) If the Father be
allowed a Person, it must not be denied to the Son and Holy Ghost. This is the
Churches Faith.

And for it, This Day, the Churches Feast. For the Father appeared first (in
the Creation) The Son next (to our Redemption) The Holy Ghost last (for our
Sanctification.) Before the Two, now all the Three; Now therefore (not before)
is the Feast to the Holy Trinity. Which we shall best keep to our Advantage and
Gods Glory, By a Trinity of Graces, (Faith, Hope, and Charity, in Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost; Power, Wisdom, and Love.) With a Trinity of Offices, when we
Admire, Adore, and serve, That Mysterious One. For then will follow Two more
Trinities; One of Comforts, The Fathers Love to us as His Sons, The Sons
Favor, as His Brothers, and the Holy Ghosts Care, as His Pupils: And another
of Benefits, Inheritance from the Father, Purchase in the Son, and Seal by the
Spirit. For all which a Trinity of Homages is due to God. In all Places,
Heaven, Earth, and Hell: From all Phil. 2. 10.
Persons, Angels, Men, and Devils: At all Times, Past, Present, and to Come.
Holy, Holy, Holy, Isa. 6. 3.
Lord God of Hosts. The Seraphims Heavenly Song, and Saints Rev. 4. 8.
Creed. The Churches Holy Hymn, Heaven and Earth are full of the Majesty of
Thy Glory. Chanted with one Tongue and Tune in both her Quires, the Higher in
Heaven, and Lower on Earth! O Thrice, and Three, Holy God, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost! Glory be to Thee, O Lord most High.

The Prayer.
O Holy Three, and Blessed One, in a Mystery passing my apprehension, Make me
to Comprehend Ephesians. 3. 18.
with all Saints the Height, and Depth, and Breadth of Thy Love in Christ, and
Thee in it. Thee, O Father! who did send Thy Son to be My Savior. Thee, O
Son, who did Come Thy self, and Send Thy Spirit, to work and seal my
Salvation! Thee, O Holy Ghost, who wast sent and did Ioh. 14. 26. and 15. 26.
come, from the Father and the Son, for the Conduct and Comfort of my Soul. For
which High Mystery and Mercy, of my Redemption, to the Holy Trinity in Unity,
All Three Agreeing and Acting as One, to make me Happy, with Saints and
Seraphims, be all Honor, Adoration, and Glory, for Rev. 4. 8.
Ever, and Ever, and Ever.

Amen, Amen.
So end the Dominicall Feasts weekly and Extraordinary.
HOLY DAYS Meditations and Prayers, From St. Andrews to Easter- Day.
1. S. Andrews Day. 2. S. Thomas Day. 3. H. Nativity, or Christmas Day, with 4.
S. Stephens Day. 5. S. John's Day. 6. H. Innocents, or Childermas Day. 7.
Circumcision, or Newyears Day. 8. Epiphany, or Twelf-Day. 9. S. Paul's Day. 10.
Purification, or Candlem* Day. 11. S. Matthias Day. 12. Annunciation of the B.
Virgin.
Advertisement touching Holy Days.
IF thou be a Child of the Church, well taught and trained up in the Knowledge
and Obedience of Her Holy Commands and Customs, I hope these Devotions may do
thy Soul some Service. If thou be a man of another Soul, I wish thee possessed
with a better Spirit. And if without prejudice thou will read and well weigh
what is written, I am willing to believe thou will not be the worser; nay (by
Gods blessing) thy mind* may be made more Intelligent, and thy Heart more
Devout, and so, thy Soul much better.

The Best Spirits which ever Christendom had, Those Ancient and Eminent ones
(whose Profession was to Contemplate Heaven, and Contemn Earth, and their
Practice and Business to Live to God, and Die for Christ) the Holy Champions
of Christian Faith, and high Presidents of Holy Life, they did think and find
it good to Appoint and Observe these Holy Days. Of which their Homilies, and
Sermons, and Prayers, are their good Evidences, and our great Advantages. Now,
if we shall with the foot of Pride, spurn at what they thought and did, (who
are neither greater Wits nor Saints) it were better, if we were more Humble.
And if they did so Improve those Times and Occasions to the Honor of God, the
Glory of Religion, the Exercise of Piety, the Evidencing of Truth, and Edifying
of the Church, it were well, if we would be so Zealous. If we dare to Damn
them and their Doings for Superstitious, that were so High in Gods Favor on
earth, and are as High in the Glory of Heaven, (Great in His Service and
Salvation, both), though not in Love to them, for fear of Blasphemy it would
become us well to be more Charitable. If that be all we say for our selves,
that Six Days we must work by Commandment, and sanctify none without it;
this signifies little. For as the Jews had, Christians may have, other Holy
Days then the Seventh. And the First which St. John calls The Rev. 1.
Lords Day (we miscall our Sabbath) has (though warrant enough else without
just doubt of any) yet no formal, Express Commandment. Nay, why do we
ordain and observe Religious Fasts, and Thanksgivings of our own, with Zeal,
instead of Scruple, and Bars of all works, and yet upon the Six, not the
First Day? If these be the best Bills and Pleas we have against the Churches,
but not our own Holy Days, to press them no more, but cast them out, would be
more Reasonable. If we plead the use of Rome, which retains and observes the
Days we do, this is less then nothing. Superstition is not in the same
Days, but their Different Doings. Not the Exempla pro nobis, but the Ora pro
nobis, is ill. Not a Memory of the Saints to Gods Glory, but a worship like his
Honor. Not to Praise His Grace in them, and Pray our Imitation, but to Admire
and Invocate them with Devotion; not to Co^memorate Gods Blessings by them, but
to Consecrate Altars and Temples to them. If we would without all blindness of
Ignorance or Malice discern better betwixt white and black (use and abuse) what
we show for our cause, might be more colorable.

Raze not then these Ancient Records of the Church, which serve as Books to
teach Christianity to th^se who have no Bibles. And by the Eye, as well as Ear,
make Holy Conveyances of what we do Believe, and ought to Practice in Religious
Points and Piety. Nor blot them with foul Tongues and Pe^s, lest we appear for
men of ill and erroneous Mouths and Minds, and all bad, if our Hearts be no
better.

Read and Ruminate on this in cold blood, with good Conscience, and I trust
thou will no more hate a Holy Day then Heaven, whose Reatificall Eternity is
but One Festival Day. And if thou have better Devotion to it at last, for all
thy Prejudice at first, I fear not His better Devotion in it, who has non^
against it. And if my Pen prove so happy, I shall not miss of my Aim, who
wrote my Thoughts for, and on the Holy Days, not to kindle Contention, but
Devotion. The Hoo^^rs Eccl. Pol.
Sum of all what they mean and is written, comes to this, The Holy Days Tune
is to the Angels Caroll, and the Churches Feasts Several Exemplifications of
what the Heavenly Host did sing, and the Holy Luc. 2 13, 14.
does; Glory to God on High, on Earth Peace, Good will toward Men.

Saint Andrews Day. Novem. 30.

MEDITATION upon Mat. 4. 20. And they straightwayes left their nets and
followed him.
SImon called Peter, and Andrew Mat. 4. 18.
(the Saint of the Day) it was They. Brothers at first by Birth, after Fishers
by Trade, and 1 Cor. 3. 10. 2 Cor. 4. 7.
at last Apostles by Grace. That the virtue of their High Office might not seem
to be of Man, but from God, they are taken from so mean a function. As they
were mending their nets, the better to Catch and hold their Fish. Christ calls,
and so they are Taken. Had He not Called, they had never Come. So sad a thing
is it to be out of Christ's call. And had they not Come, better never have been
Called (so ill a thing is it, not to answer Gods Pro. 1. 24.
Call.) They did. Their nets they consider not, no thoughts of House and Home,
and Livelihood for them and theirs (which Mat. 19. 22.
are as Nets and Impediments to many) and hold them fast from Coming to Christ.
No, They left their nets and followed Him. Their Nets (not all Vocation) That
they do not leave, but change. Their Trade, they do not cast off, but better
it. No Fishing to the Sea. No Sea to the World. No Fi^h to Men. To Mat. 4. 19.
take Souls for God. To fish all the World over for Heaven. This was their New
Profession. And them they leave, and Him they follow forthwith. Had they
Demurred as Felix did, when God Act. 24. 25.
Knocked at his heart, by the hand of St. Paul, they might never have followed
(as he staid behind.) But Flesh and Blood, they Consulted not. At the first
Call they forthwith follow Him. Him, that Mat. 8. 20.
had not a foot of land to maintain them. Not a House nor Mat. 17. 27.
Hole for his, or their Heads to cover them. That lived by Loans, and Miracle.
That takes His Money by Angle. And provides His Table by Prayer. A Lord of poor
Revenues. No Rents, no Means at all for His Servant, or Himself, and yet away
they go with haste, and Follow Him. So let me do, O Lord, whenever Thou
call me. Leave Nets, leave Lusts, leave Friends, Luke 14. 32.
leave all and follow Thee! And at Thy first Call let me Come, lest a second
never come to me. Whom better can I follow then Thee, O Christ! A Bountiful
and Blessed Lord at last, to all Thy Followers. That gave the Fishermen
Thrones for their Mat. 19. 24.
Nets, and wilt Crown all Thy Servants with Joy in Heaven! Mat. 25. 23. Ps. 91.
11. Heb. 10. 33 Phil. 4. 7. Isa. 35. ^.
And, at present, do give them Thy Angels for their Conv^y, Thy Saints for
their Company, and Thy Peace for their Comfort, who follow Thee in the way of
Holiness upon Earth.

The Prayer.
O Lord! When Thou do Call, Thou would have me Come. And it is, from ill to
good, Thou would have me Go; From Earth to Heaven, From the World to ^hee:
All thy Employments and Offices, are Holy, Just, and Good: O let me not Delay
to come to Thee! Let me by a speedy Repentance leave the Sins, which (as Nets)
hold me and keep me from Thee. All Habits and Customs which are vile or vain.
All Acts and Arts of ill Advantage and Allurement, which are the Devils Snares,
and 1 Timothy 3. 7.
the Worlds (the Closest and the Strongest Nets) From them all, let me Hie to
Thee and follow Thee, If not as an Apostle, as a Disciple; Though, not a Great,
a True Servant to Thee. A Preacher of Piety by my life to all the World, who
shall know me, and see Thy Grace in me and Godnesse to me! So Mat. 5. 16. 1
These. 1. 8.
be it, Dear Jesus, I beseech Thee.

Amen.
Saint Thomas Day. December. 21.

MEDITAT. upon John 20. 29. Blessed are they which have not seen and yet have
believed.
AT the First meeting of the Joh. 20. ^4, 25.
Disciples Thomas was away, and so missed the sight of Christ. Told so he was,
but Believe he will not their Eyes, unless he see it with his own, and feel as
much with his fingers. Christ Condescends John. 20. 26.
so far, as to Appear the Second time, with Wounds, at once to check and Cure
his weakness. Then Thomas contradicts no more, but as a man both Convinced and
Transported, cries out, My Lord, and my God! John. 20. 28.
Christ tells him he was happy in his Belief upon such Evidences of Sense, but
They are more Blessed who believe without such Evidences. For Faith, the more
Heb. 11. 1.
it is abstract and taken away from Sense, is more Pure. And the more it does
Transcend and Surmount all R^^son, is more Perfect. Which gave to Abraham's
Faith a Nobleness, and to us a To. 4 18.
Pattern in his Faith. Reason is Hoc est fides, credere quod non ^ides.
above Sense, but Faith is above Reason, because it builds on Gods Word, whose
Thoughts are above the reach of our Minds. Yet, He being Infallible, to believe
it is Tit. 1. 2.
in the Compass of our Apprehensions, and as it is His (and so the greatest)
should be Ours, and is our Best Reason. Though not seen to us with either Eye
of Sense or Reason, if seen and said by Him, it is enough Ground for Holy
Faith, and we more happy for our so Believing: yes, and though not Felt
neither. For Blessed we are by our Believing in Christ, not by believing we
believe. John 3. 15, 18. To. 18. 8.
Such Persuasion is rather the Effect then Act of Saving Faith. And if full of
an High, not all, Belief. Assurance is not the Essence, but Excellence of
Faith, if we speak of the Act, though the Ground of it be ever with good Faith.
For Believing in Christ is Building Salvation on a Col. 2. 7. Mat. 7. 25. 1
Cor. 10. 4* Mat. 16. 8.
Rock, and surer building, because one may, the other cannot, fail. But my
Believing of this, though it yield much to my Comfort, does not found my
Salvation. Which depends not on the Sense, but Truth of my Faith. My Faith may
be true, though I have not the Sense of it, and I may have a Sense that I have
it, and it not be True. A great Mistake in many Books and Souls. Which pretends
to Enrich the Believers heart with Joy, but really Robs Millions of Comfort,
and puts Thousands upon the Embraces of Fancy for Faith. I believe, Lord Mar.
9. 24.
help my unbelief! And my Misbelief Heal, My Faith but weak, Lu. 17. 25.
yet true, Accept and Increase! Though I want the Sense and Job 23. 15. ^s.
116. 3.
Feeling of Thy Comfort in my Soul, yet since it is Thy Gospel, That Thou art
the Savior of them 1 Timothy 4. 10.
that Believe, and set themselves to Serve and Obey Thee, let me Thy Faitfull
but Poor Servant, Believe Thee to be my Merciful Savior, and Speak Thee what
I Psalm. 116. 10. M^t. 11.
Believe, and Find Thee what I Speak, My Lord and my God.

The Prayer.
O Lord, Thomas did doubt, yet was Thy Disciple. I have much of Didymus in me,
Natural and Spiritual weakness make me full of Fears and Doubts, yet Thine my
Soul truly is, and by Thy Grace ever will be. Lord by Thy Wounds heal all my
Weaknesses! I desire no Finger in them, but my Faith. My God Thou art, who
did Make me. My Lord, who did Redeem me. I Confess this with Faith, I
Believe it with Thankfulness. As if mine were the Only Soul Ransomed with Thy
Gal. 2. 20. Psalm. 139. 13.
Blood, and I the Only Man made after Thy Image. I Believe, I Extol, I Adore
Thee, My Lord, and my God.

Amen!
Christmas Day. December. 25.

MEDITAT. upon Luke 2. 10, 11. Behold I bring you tidings of great joy, which
shall be to all people. For unto you is Born this day in the City of David, a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord.
BEhold! When an Angel comes, it is some great Message. When a Good Angel is
Ambassador, it is some good Errand. The Greatest, the Best on which ever
Ambassador, or Messenger came. The Birth of a Savior is the Joy of the World.
To a Damned World, what news like the Birth of a Savior? Not to some Persons,
but, to all People, All else Persons and People, had been Eternally Lost Mat.
18. 11.
and Damned. To you, He is Born. To you Men, He is, To us Angels, He is not. We
that Stood have not the Need, They that Fell have not the Grace of Salvation.
He was made Man, not Heb. 2. 14. 16. Joh. 1. 14.
Angel. Took Flesh, not Spirit. Every one therefore that has Manhood in him,
that has Flesh upon him, for him He was Born, and In him He is, or may be
Blessed. Because for him, He is a Savior. Act. 3. 25, 26.
None Better then He, because Appointed and Anointed to it, Christ! None Nobler
then Act. 10. 38.
He, because God before He was 1 Timothy 3. 16.
Born Man, The Lord! None Truer then He, because Borne where the Birth was
Prophesied, Mic. 2. 6. Mat. 2. 6.
In the City of David. None Fitter then That, Bethlehem the House of Bread for
Him, who was the Life of the^ World. As Ioh. 6. 33.
well the Poor man's, as the Rich man's, Bread for Little Bethlehem as much as
Great Jerusalem. This is that the Angel would have us behold now; That is it
the Prophet would have Beheld before. Never such a wonder in the Isa. 7. 14.
Ie. 31. 22.
World, The Child of a Virgin, and God a Child, said the Evangelicall Prophecy.
Never such a Jubilee to the World, as a Christ and Savior, says the Angelical
History. What was foretold by Isaiah's Pen, is fulfilled in Gabriels Tongue.
Heaven and Earth with one Mouth Proclaim it, Men and Luc. 1. 19. Luc. 4. 41.
Angels from one Spirit Preach it. The Devils themselves Profess it. None but
Jews are Infidels Act. 13. 41. Ioh. 1. 41.
to it. Behold ye despisers, and wonder. The M^ssiah is Come, Come to your
Eyes, though because not to your Fancies you are become Blind and Mad, and will
not believe it. But (God be thanked for the Grace) the Gentiles Luc. 2. 32.
Acts 28. 27.
eye is open, though yours be shut against it. A pity and shame it is, that of
those two Eyes of the world either should not be open, when an Angel bids your
Shepherds, as a Prophet did your Nation, both bid all the World Behold it. Born
He is, and where your Scribes and Priests told Herod, upon their Counsel asked
and had, He should be Born. But when? This Day. By that Birth made a Blessed
Day. Proclaimed by One Angel, a Joyful Feast, Observed by Many for a Luc. 2.
13.
Feast of Joy. By many Angels That day, and by all Saints since in all Ages.
The Birthday of no Petty Prince, but the Great Sovereign and Savior of the
world, which is Christ, The Lord. Lord for my Fear; Christ for my Faith; a
Savior for my Hope. So let me Dread, Depend, and Tr^st on Thee, O Lord Jesu
Christ, and be Thou so to me for ever, my Lord, my Christ, and Savior.

The Prayer.
O Jesu, who wast (as this Day) Born for me, and Gave me by my Baptism to be
born to Thee, and by Thy Holy Eucharist art Born in me: By The Holy Communion
of Thy Body and Blood ( This 1 Cor. 10. 16.
Day, or whenever I am Blessed with it) be Incarnate in me as Ephesians. 5. 30.
Thou wast for me! Then shall my Soul keep Festival with Thy Church. When Thy
Nativity is not only Celebrated, but Sealed in me. O Blessed Savior, as my
Eye, let my Soul, see that Joyful Day! I may be One with God in Heaven,
because thou, O God, art One with me on Earth. I am Mat. 1. 23.
One with God in Grace, because Heb. 2. 16.
God is One with me in Nature. Nay I am One with God in Heaven. Ephesians. 2. 6.
My Flesh is there in Christ, who is One with God. This let me Behold in Him
with Thy Saints, and for this Bless Thee with Thy Angels, Carolling and
crying, Glory be to Thee O God most High. Amen!

Saint Stephens Day. December. 26.

MEDITAT. upon Act. 7. 59, 60. And they stoned Stephen, calling on God, and
saying, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, etc.
MUst Stephen then be Stoned? A Man that had so much of God in him. In his
heart, Full of the Holy Ghost. In his Mouth, Full of Wisdom Act. 6. 55. Act.
6. 10.
and Spirit. In his Hand, Full of Faith and Power, Working great wonders among
the people. A man Acts 6. 8.
that had an Angel in his Face, Act. 6. 15.
and God in his Soul. Yes, even he, if he fall into the hands of them, who are
full of the Devil. Their Hellish Spirit will do it, if the Peoples Slavish
Spirit will suffer it. It is done. Angels Incarnate cannot escape some men's
Stones. God incarnate did not a Ioh. 8. 58.
stoning but by Miracle. No news for Saints to meet with Butchers. When
Miscreants sit as Judges, Saints must fall for Malefactors. No Scandal to us
if they do; no Censure on them that suffer so. Gods best Servants have been,
and may be murdered.

The Pretense for this, is Zeal, not Fury. All is for God and the Temple,
against a Blasphemer of Act. 6. 13.
both. A man against Temple and Law too. An Overturner of Foundations, both in
their Religion and Nation. A Man against God and Heaven. A Belcher of
Blasphemies, that the One opens to Him (Heaven,) and the Other Act. 7. 56.
appears to him (The Son of Man, whom they Crucified) at the right hand of
God. The One a Blasphemy, but False: The Other True, but no Blasphemy. But
however they forge and wrest his words, his Brains must pay for it. The truth
is, he told them of their Sins, and was particular and home with them in Acts
2. 51, 52.
their Sin against their Savior. He minds them of their Fathers bloody Murders
of the Prophets, and their own barbarous. Massacre of the Son of God, That Just
one, of whom they were the Betrayers and Murderers. This cuts them to the
heart, and that costs S. Stephen Act. 7. 54.
his head. Such Truths sooner find Stones then Friends. And their Speakers for
the boldness lose both their Breaths and their Brains. He that touches Herod's
or the Jews sins, must look for a Sword or Stone for his Thanks. They
therefore stoned him. They are at their Stones, but he is at his Prayers. For
himself; That when they had his life, Christ would take his Soul. Lord Jesus
receive my Spirit! And for them too He prays their Bliss that shed his Blood,
(upon his knees with a loud voice) Lord lay not Lu. 23. 38.
this sin to their charge! From a Saviors Lips he learnt this Language. And
well it was for them that he spoke it, for God heard it. And at S. Peter's
Sermon (by Act. 2. 41*
S. Stephens Prayers) thousands were coverted. As his Blood made Assassines,
his Spirit made Saints. Their hard hearts melted, and of those Stones are
raised up Children unto Abraham. Lord let me so speak and do, and if I must, so
suffer, Charitably, Piously, Patiently, Resolvedly. To others Good, for my
Comfort, and Thy Glory.

The Prayer.
O Lord of Life and Death, if I must be one of the two, Persecuted, or a
Persecutor, a Murdered man, or a Murderer, let me not Offer Violence, but
Suffer it. And that the Stone 1 Pet. 3. 17.
may not come out of my hand, let me keep it cut of my heart, lest this being
hardened, that grow bloody: Minds turned rocks will spare no Bodies, not a
Saint, not a Savior. O let me not be once flesht in Blood, lest I fear no
Bloodinesse. If the Stone come, not from my Hand, but to my Head, let me not
speak Shimei's but St. Stephens 2 Samuel 15. 6.
Language. Give me Prayers for their Curses, and even Bless them, that Butcher
me. Giving (in the Murder) a Martyrdom to me. That St. Stephens Crown may be
Occideris me beaveris me.
on my Head, let his Spirit be in my Heart. The Spirit of a Saint in the Body
of a Martyr! So be it I beseech Thee, O Lord! Amen.

Saint John's Day. December. 27.

MEDITAT. upon Rev. 1. 9. I was in the Isle of Patmos for the word of God, and
for the testimeny of Jesus Christ.
HE was an Exile then, if not a Martyr. And most of this also. In Mind, if not
in Body. And for it, he offered fair too, his Lips to the Deadly Cup, his Limbs
to the boiling Caldron. Tertul.
If the Poison did not Swell him, the Oil did not Scald him to death;
Omnipotency was his Antidote and Armor. By the Special Preservative of that
power, which made the Sea a Plain, Psalm. 66. 5. Dan. 3. 28.
the Furnace a Bower, Ravens Purveyors, Lions Playfellowes, a Dan. 3. 25. 1
Kin. 7. 6. Acts 28. 4, 6.
Viper a Bracelet, His Poison was made Mithridate, and his Burning Oil a Bath
of Milk. By Election and Oblation of himself, he was, it is by Miracle, he was
not, a Martyr. All the Apostles else were persecuted to death, to Seal Gods
Truth, and show their Patience; He only was preserved, to manifest Gods Power
and Wisdom. That the Truth of Christ might pass all Seals (in Blood, and
out;) Signed by all Witnesses (Living and Dying Testimonies;) Evidenced by all
Martyrdomes (of Bodies and Minds.) Though the Mind made his Singular, The Cause
(which makes a Martyr more then Death) That was common, for the Word of God,
and Testimony of Jesus. He was in the Isle with that Spirit which would have
had him, at a Stake. He was the beloved Disciple, The Favourite-Apostle. Ioh.
20. 2.
His Foot did not only stand in Christ's Presence, but his Head lay in his
Lords Bosom. His Spirit was all Love. His Ioh. 13. 23.
Mouth, his Pen, his Hand, speaks, writes, does nothing else. From the Flower
of his Youth, to the Chair of his Age his Dialect, his Character, his Design is
See Eccle Hist:
whilst he can stand (nay when for oldnesse carried from place to place)
Little Children love one another. As he was the Eagle of the Evangelists, he
was the Dove of the Apostles. He had a Cherubins Heart, with his Seraphins Eye.
This made him have so much of Christ's Eye and Heart. For God is love. Love 1
Ioh. 4. 8.
therefore is His Favorite, and S. John for it the Darling of Heaven, and Dear
one of Christ. And for that, he shall offer at a Martyrdom, but not suffer it.
Maugre Domitians rage, and the Devils malice, they may Thirst for his Blood,
but shall not Drink it. He is privileged from Heaven to be an unbloody Martyr,
and Hell shall not make him die. O Lord, if I have not S. Stephens Head, let me
have S. John's Heart for Thee! If I have not his place at Thy Breast, let me be
his Partner in the Cross! Choose a Desert Rev. 1. 19.
with a good Conscience, before a Palace with a bad. Let me be with Beasts
sooner then Devils; and go from a Caldron to Heaven, rather then out of a Bath
to Hell. That whether I die on a bed, or stake, it may be in Thee, if not for
Thee, and I by it for ever Revel. 4. 13.
with Thee.

The Prayer.
O Lord, who can save and none can destroy, and destroy and none can save;
let me serve Thee that none may hurt me: That if good to live, I may not die;
if good to die, I may not live. Let that spirit of the Dear Disciple be in me,
and that Providence of Thine over me. Jesus, let me love Thee as he did, that
Thou may love me as I desire. If not S. Stephens full Bowl of Blood, let me
drink St. John's Cup for Thee. Bonds, Banishment, Disparagement let me suffer,
and no Torments decline; But what Thou do Send Entertain as a Preferment, not
a Misery, because for my Honor, and Thy Glory! 1 Pet. 4. 14.
Lord let me do so for Thee, and do Thou for me by Thy Grace and in Thy Mercy,
I beseech Thee, Dear Jesus,

Amen!
Innocents Day. December 28.

MEDITAT. upon Mat. 2. 18. In Rama was a voice heard, Lamentation, and
mourning, and weeping, etc.
BAbes, and Circumcised, are perfect Innocents. Because their Simplicity clears
them from Actual Sin, and the Sacrament from Original: But how Martyrs? The
Church resolves, not by Speaking, but by Dying As Abel the first Murdered
Man-Innocent, 5. Collect. Ge^. 4. 10.
his Blood cried, and being dead, yet he speaks. So these poor
Infant-Martyrs, have Blood (if not Spirit) to witness for Christ; and Bodies,
if not Minds, for Martyrdom. The last, because the least. S. Stephen a Martyr
in Blood and Heart, is first. S. John, in Heart, not Blood, is next. The Holy
Innocents that had Blood (though no Heart to speak for Him) the last. But not
least fit; because their Lord was little. Babe-Martyrs became an
Infant-Saviour. So they are Protomartyrs to S. Stephen. He was the first Man,
but they were the first Martyred. For their Bloodshed, the Church gives them a
Red Letter, and because their death was found when Christ's was sought, they are
Saints in her Calendar. Herod was the Butcher of those Lambs, His Shambles,
Judea, in and about Bethlehem. Ambition did whet his Knife. Their Blood shall
be shed, before His Throne be shaken. Innocent blood and Innocents, all Mat. 2.
2.
must be sacrificed to Ambition. In her skirts is found the Blood Jer. 2. 34.
of Innocents. In Him, nor a Skirt-ful, but Town-fulls. Mat. 2. 16.


Rachels Heart bleeds for this; but Mat. 2. 18.
what is that to Herod? But to God it is much. He is for her comfort. If she
have none of her own work, God gives her an Handkerchif: Ier. 31. 16.
Refrain thy self from tears, says the Lord. They shall come again. Herod may
Butcher their Bodies, but God will Save their Souls. Yes, and Return their
Lives too, (at farthest) in the Resurrection. They were not living to the
World, they are not dead to God. That Is the Comfort, Hers and Ours. Herod's
Profession lives, Innocents still find Butchers. Babes must have no Baptism,
(the only known way to save John 3. 5.
their Souls) a Butchery above Herod's. Men (at least of their own Religion)
Innocent, must be cut, or rather torn in pieces, by a Plot of Powder, (Hallowed
both by Priest and Sacrament,) all in a moment at one blow. Fly where they
will (they care not) Bodies nor Souls. A Mattens must be sanctified for a
Massacre, and a Hallowed Bell give the ring to the Butchery. It were happy if
Sermons made no such Sounds, and Fasts did not whet Swords as well as Appetites
to such Slaughters: Ambition whets both Knives and Swords. Men, Women,
Children, Babes in the world (Yea, and in the Womb too) if they stand in Herod's
way, shall not escape for being Innocents. But if for God and Christ, we may
die as Men, but live as Martyrs. And a Day will come (Heavy to others, but Holy
and Happy for us) which shall declare us Innocent. Fit us, Dear Lord, for that
Doom, what ever we suffer in this Judgementday!

The Prayer.
O Lord make us Innocent as Babes for Blame, but as Men for 1 Cor. 14. 2^. 1 Samuel 11. 5. Dan. 6. 22. Luke 1. 6. 2 Cor. 7. 4. Phil. 2. 15. Ps. 19. 13. 1
Kings 15. 5. Ezekiel. 12. 31. Isa. 1. 18. Phil. 3. 9.
Choice. As Samuel the Judge was to the People. As Daniel the Prophet was to
the King. As Zachary the Priest was to the Jew. As S. Paul the Apostle was to
the World. As every good Christian should be to all: By my conscience, from the
great offense; By Thy Connivance, from less; In my Repentance, from all. And
because even this Innocence is mixed with Guilt, put the Mantle of His Merits
upon me, who is purely and perfectly Holy, Harmless, and Heb. 7. 26. 1 Pet. 1.
19.
undefiled. The Lamb and Son of God, and only Savior of my Soul, Jesus Christ
our Lord!

Amen.
Circumcision, or, Newyears Jan. 1.
Day.
MEDITAT. upon Luke 2. 21. And when eight days were accomplished for
Circumcising of the Child, His Name was called Jesus, which was so named of the
Angel before he was conceived in the womb.
THis Day Christ's Blood was first shed. The First Fruits of my Redemption. The
Harvest was at the Cross where he did Consummate His Passion. The Law was for
Circumcision. He was for Conformity to the Law. Not that He had any Lust to cut
off in Flesh or Heart, but that we had both to bleed for. Without Blood no
Remission. Without Heb. 9. 22*
some Bloodshed, no Circumcision. Without much, no Passion. Without both, no
Redemption. As Circumcised, He was Baptized too. Not for any spot He had to
wash, but to Erect a Laver. And to teach us, that setting aside that of the
Spirit (which is by Moral and Eternal Law) we are now free from the Ceremony,
and not bound to, but from the Sacrament of Circumcision. The Eighth day the
Jew-child was to pass the Knife, and why not the Christian to enter the Laver?
Ours have as much need, and theirs had not more understanding. Then they had
their Hebrewname, and we now our Christian. Christ's was Jesus. The greatest
name that ever Child had (God Isa. 43. 11.
only is a Savior) and the best that ever was, (no person like a Savior, no
Savior like God) and the most wonderful that ever was, He to be Circumcised
who Phil. 2. 9.
is God, To be a Child, who is Jesus. In that Name all things do Him Homage.
And we interessed in It above all, owe Him therefore Eternal Thanks and
Reverence. An Rev. 1. 6.
Angel gave it, before He was born in the World, nay before he was in the Womb,
to show that He was Gods Son, before a Child. Isa. 9. 6.
We call this Newyears-day, and on it send one another Gifts. Eight days
before, God gave us His Son, This day Gods Son gave us His Blood. For God to
Take Flesh and Give Blood, these are Gifts, and New. Never the like in the
World. A Jesus is the Greatest Gift, His Blood the Newest. And now was the
first Blood. Circumcision was the door by which He entered on His Office, and
the Rite, by which He was both Named, and Consecrated to be, Jesus.

Have we nothing to give to God for this Gift? Yes, we have; Our Heart is His
Gift. Though we owe it as Duty, and must pay it as a Service, He does ask it as
a Prove. 23. 26.
Boon, and receive it as a Present. But New, or he will have none. Thoughts
more Holy, Affections more Heavenly (Renewed Minds and Wills) they make it New.
Gods greatest Wish, and Man's best Gift. O Man! It is not thy Blood, but thy
Heart which God would have! Thy Hearts Truth, not Thy. Hearts-Blood! All
Signs, all Ceremonies are nothing without the Heart. Have the Mark of a Jew in
Thy Flesh, and Sign of a Christian on Thy Forehead, if Thy Mind be Mahumetan,
and Thy Heart Heathenish (Thou a Bloody, Fleshly, Worldly Soul) they are not
Evidences of Thy Bliss, but Guilt. 1 Cor. 7. 29. Gal. 5. 6.
Not Sacraments, but Enditements against Thee. Circumcision Romans 2. 25 1 Pet.
3. 2^.
and Baptism both, and a Thousand such Washings will not make thee Clean,
either to God, or for Heaven. In my Spirit be Thy Circumcision in the Flesh, O
Jesus! And the Baptism on Thy Head, in the Purity of my Heart! So God shall
have it for His, and I, Heaven for my Gift.

The Prayer.
For Thy Blood shed this Day, let me be Content, O Christ, to ^ay my Estate,
Credit, Liberty, Limbs, yea and Life it self, a bleeding; let me make
Conscience to kill my Lust by Deuteronomy. 10. 16.
a spiritual Circumcision. What is my Blood to Thine, O Jesus! An Ocean of
Man's to a drop of Gods? Let my Hearts-Blood then, and my Hearts-Lust to the
last drop, bleed for Thee, who did This Day shed so many drops, and after as
many showers for me. As a Sign of my Duty, and Thy Grace, and Seal of Thy
Glory, so Sanctify, Seal and Save me. Dear Lord do so by me and for me!

Amen!
Epiphany, or, Twelf-Day. Januar. 6.

MEDITAT. upon Mat. 2. 11. And when they saw the Child, they fell down and
worshipped Him, etc.
THey were Wise men which came to Christ: They are Damned Fools that go from
their Savior! They came far from the East to See Him; shame it is, not to stir
out of door to Serve Him. They believe and resolve it fit to worship him: They
are not the Wisest in the world that dare not bend a Knee, or bow a Head unto
Him. When they see Him, they fall down before Him; To whom we owe our selves,
our Bodies must pay Homage to Him. As they adore, they offer too. He must be
served on our Estates, as well as our Knees. It is not Trash but Treasure they
offer Him; We must not give God what we dare not Mal. 1. 18.
offer our Governor. Brass, Pitch, Tar, are no Presents for them. Gold,
Frankincense, and Myrrh, are fit for Him. As a King, a God, and a Man: To
Enthrone, to Enshrine, to Embalm Him. Our Faith is His Gold. Our Prayer His
Incense. (Not the Saints, but His.) Our Mortification His Myrrh; The first
must be in Him, The next to Him, The last like Him. And we do all (and best of
all) when out of the Treasures of our Hearts (upright and open before Him) Mat.
12. 35.
we Bend our Minds to His Truth, Bow our Heads to His Honor, and Break our
Hearts for His Sacrifice. A Star was the Preacher of His Birth, and Leader to
His Birthplace. At Bethlehem, there they find Him. But how? The King in Straw,
God in a Manger, The Babe amongst Beasts: yet this does not stagger their
Faith, falter their Worship, nor hinder their Offering. Whom they saw Heaven to
serve, they deem fit for the Greatest man to adore. Though in an Inn, a
Stable, a Cratch, they Fall down, Worship, and Present Him. He did not find so
great Faith and Honor, no, not in Israel. Saba exceeds Jerusalem. There they
do not Embrace and Adore, but Deny and Defy Him. Not Offer, but to Kill Him.
These are Herod's, His Nobles, and His Peoples Offerings. For Gold, Iron to
Chain Him. For an Altar, a Gibbet to Crucify Him. For Incense, the Stench of
Golgotha, and (which is worse then the Graves) the Belches of their Mouths open
to Blaspheme Him. For Myrrh Psalm. 14. 5. Ps. 61. 21. Joh. 19. 29. Mat. 27. 34.
he shall have Bitterness enough, the very Gall of it. Myrrh, Gall and
Vinegar, not a Cup, but a Vessel-full. Such difference is there betwixt the
Wise men of the East, and the Politicians of Jerusalem. O let me be so Wise and
Good, as by the Light of Heaven to Seek my Savior, and with all Respects due
to God and Man, to treat Him, when I find Him! Let others follow false and fond
Fires and Firebrarnds out of the Church, Meteors and fallen and wandering Stars
in it, Barcochibs, Mahomets, Simon Magus's, Sectaries, Schismatics, Heretics:
Let others bow to Mammon as God, and to Money as their Goddess; Fall down to
Honor as their Idol, and offer their Shrines to Pleasure, as their great
Dia^a; and court and dread Herod and his Power, as their only Deity and Devil;
Let Thy Truth Revealed be my Star, Thy Church my Guide; and Thy Service my Way,
that I may not lose, but find my Lord and Christ, and in Him my self and
Savior.

The Prayer.
O Lord Jesu Christ, who in Thy greatest Poverty had Angels for Heralds of
Thy Birth, and the Wise men of the World to Worship Thee! And in Thy darkest
obscurity, had a Star in Heaven to lighten Thy Godhead to the Earth, and a
Voice from Heaven to own Thee: Let me Mat. 3. 17.
so see Thy Glory as to serve Thee 2 Pet. 1. 17.
with a Heavenly heart, whatever others are in their Conversation. And so mind
Thy Humility, as to have and keep a Contented mind in whatsoever condition! By
the Starlight of Thy Truth, seeking to come to the Sunshine of Thy Glory. For
which end I beseech Thee to cause the Day to dawn, and Day Star of 2 Pet. 1. 19.
Grace to arise in my heart. That when the Sun of my life shall set (whether
clear or in a cloud by a violent or a natural way) When my Body takes up in
the Common Inn of the Grave, my Soul may find my Savior!

Amen!
Saint Paul's Day. Jan. 25.

MEDITAT. upon Acts 9. 5. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? etc.
SAul was a bitter Enemy to Christ, and bloody to the Church. When S. Stephen
was Act. 7. 58.
Stoned, he kept the Murderers clothes. And when cruel Commissioners were sent
to Imprison, Scourge, Kill, and Slay all that called on the Name of Christ, he
Acts 9. 2.
carried the Letters, he runs, he rides to do all Mischief: Blood and Blasphemy
are his Breath, Murder and Torture his Business. Acts 9. 1.
So exceeding mad was his Rage against that poor Flock of Acts 26. 11.
Christ. This Wolf of Benjamin, tears, scatters, and worries them, filling all
places with his Threats, and Cities with their Blood. He made not only a
Horror in the Church, but a Havoc of it. Religion Acts 8. 3. Act. 22. 3. Act.
23. 1.
whets his Rage. He was a Jew born, brought up, taught, learned, and (his
Principle Pardoned) Conscientious too: He verily Act. 26. 9.
thought he ought to do many things against the name of Jesus of Nazareth. And
therefore he did those things. He abhorres a Christian as an Enemy to his 1 Timothy 1. 13.
Faith, and curses Christ as the Author of theirs.

What hopes now that this Wolf should turn Lamb? This Persecuting Jew become
a Professed Christian? Nay a Preacher of Christianity, an Apostle of Christ? He
does, to the joy and wonder of the Church. Christ does so much for him, a
Pulpit will not do it, He preaches to him from Heaven. The voice of man will
not reach him, the voice of God does rouse him; Saul, Acts 9. 4.
Saul, why persecutest thou me? He singles out his person, He doubles his Call,
He convinces his Madness. Will thou fight against Heaven? Thence I speak,
Will thou persecute God? Him I am. I* who am with God, God in Heaven; I am
Jesus of Nazareth, Act. 9. 5.
whom thou persecutest on earth. Through the sides of the Saints thou woundest
my Heart. Thy Rage at my Members does fly to their Head. Will thou ^ick
against the pricks? That thou Act. 9. 38.
do. This voice with a light from Heaven, strikes him* blind, and down, and
does both unhorse him and un-Jew him. His Thunder and Lightning does both
fright and melt his Heart. He does ask and receive Direction what to do. Goes
to Ananias and receives at once his Sight and his Baptism. And thenceforth the
World becomes his Charge and Conquest. Gal. 2. 8. Ephesians. 3. 8. To. 16. 18.
The Gentiles his special Charge, and Converts. His Tongue and his Pen go all
the earth over, and the Truth which he spoke and writ to the world He Seals at
the Head of it with His Blood. Gives Rome (that had his Breath and Ink) his
Life, and Blood, and Head. Cut off by Nero's Bloody Sword, Christened Christ's
Glorious Martyr. To the Memory of his Conversion* This day the Church keeps,
and we most Concerned (his Gentile-Converts) have greatest cause of all to keep
it. To his Memory, but to Thy Glory, O Christ!

The Prayer.
O Lord, who did make Saul a Paul; Convert all blinded Jews, and Spirits
madded and fired against Thy Church and Service: Reclaim them by Thy Grace, or
Restrain them by Thy Providence. Keep my hand from hurt of any who are Thine,
lest I persecute Thee. Hold my mind from Delusion, that I may not think I do
well, when I do them or Thee any hurt. Curb my heart from passing a final Doom
on any, though at present never so bad. And stay up my Spirit from Despairing
(if ordinary means do not help;) and from Presuming too of Miracles, if I
neglect the ordinary means. If I fall into any Error or Sin, let me not stand
obstinate, but yield to him whom thou have sent, and to the Truth which He has
taught. Not Rebelling against the light, but Submitting Gal. 1. 16. Acts 9. 6.
to it, with Eyes, and Ears, and Heart, all openened to Thy Word and Spirit,
offered to me, and calling on me, by and through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen!
Purification, or, Candlemas Februar. 2.
Day.
MEDITAT. upon Luke 2. 22. And when the days of her Purification were
accomplished, according to the law of Moses, they brought him to Jerusalem to
present him to the Lord.
THat the Blessed Virgin was a most Holy Woman, is no doubt, That without
Original Guilt (the common blot of Mankind) is a Dispute, even amongst them
who pretend most Honor to Her, and pay too much, not yet determined. Her
Prerogative was to be the Elect of all Womankind, to be the Mother of God; but
so, as she to be His Handmaid and Servant, He to be Luc. 1. 48.
Her Lord and Savior. Had she neglected this Days work to Purify her self,
and Present her Son Luc. 1. 46.
in the Temple, she had not been without blemish, because so was the Law. Nor
are They blameless now who are guilty of like voluntary and refractory
Neglects. For, though the Ceremony did expire with the Temple, the Morality of
the Law lives, and the Thing is of Eternal Equity. That God the Author should
be praised for Deliverance from so great a Danger. And the Almighty Father
blessed for so great a Gift as a Child. And why not in the Church, His
Exchequer for such Holy Payments? Do they believe it needs not? That Is Profane,
to be unthankful 2 Timothy 3. 2
and unholy. Do they think at home is enough? That Is Simple. So God shall have
no Church Service. They can pray too at home. Do they say, it is Superstitious?
That Is Sawey. It Is the Law and Observation of the Jewish, and Order and Usage
of the Christian Church. Did they remember the Sacrifice at the Luc. 2. 24.
Jewish Churching was Two Turtles, they would not offer such Owls and Crows
to deface and defile the Christian. Christ and his Mother (the Lamb without
Guile, and Dove without Gall) these brought, and were Turtles. Never was such a
Present in the Temple before, A Virgin Mother, with an Infant-God. They keep
the Church-Custome, we should not break it. If we be not for Moses his
Purifying, we must be for S. Iam. 4. 8.
James's; Cleanse your hands, ye sinners, and purify your hearts ye
double-minded. We must have S. Paul's amongst Christians, if not Act. 21. 16 2
C^r. 7. 1.
his amongst Jews; Cleanse our selves from all Filthiness. Indeed, a Christian
life is nothing else but a Continual Purification. And the Two holy Doves in
the Service, are our Faith and Repentance. By that the Heart, by this, the Hand
is Purified. Spirit and Flesh, by both. And all by the Blood of the Lamb
presented, the H^b. 9. 14.
Holy Babe Jesu, not in the Milk of the Holy Mother, Mary. No Flesh, no Blood.
No Birth, no Flesh. No Mother, no Birth. No Blood, no Savior. This is His only
Glory. That was all Her Honor. And this Days Feast. Cleanse my Soul and Life
by Thy Spirit and Blood, O Christ, unto the last; So shall all my Sickness bid
the Holy day, and my Death be my Festival. My Purification perfect, and Thy
Glorification my end.

The Prayer.
O God, Holy and Pure in Thy Majesty, Rich and Great in Thy Goodness, who
did receive the Present of Thy Holy Child Jesus in the Temple: Accept the
Present, which I offer this Day in Thy Sanctuary, of my self, and my Service.
The poor pair of Pigeons which I present is (all my Soul and Body) for that
Great Mercy and Mystery of my Redemption so wonderfully wrought. And what
Actual Filth I have contracted since my first washing in the Laver of my
New Birth, let me purge by my Repentance, the Laver of my life. That my
Present, and my self may be pure and pleasing in Thy Eyes. By the Merits and
Blood of Jesus Christ our Lord!

Amen.
Saint Matthias Day. Febr. 24.

MEDITAT. upon Act. 2. 26. And the lot fell upon Matthias, and he was numbered
amongst the eleven Apostles.
THe Use of a Lot is old, the Heb. 6. 16. Pro. 18. 18.
Aim good. As an Oath ends all Controversy, It cease all Contention. A
Religious Lot makes a Reference of the matter in question to God, to determine
and dispose of. And so dispose it He does. The lot is cast into the lap, Prove.
16. 33. Exo. 21. 13^
but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord. His Providence orders all,
even Casual things are under it. But then we must Observe, not Impose upon it.
Here they did, with all due Religion and Reverence to the Lot and the Lord.
With Holy Ceremony about a Holy Business. They go to Prayers before their
Lots: For an Apostle (a great Man) who may best fit and serve the Church (a
great Matter.)

The Church appoints ^asts and Ember weeks for Priests lesser Ordinations. And
did we consider our Concernment, how much of the safety of our Souls depends
upon good Bishops and Priests, we would Fast and Pray, when the Church gives
those Orders. Judas was Degraded. His Bishopric Acts 1. 20.
let another take. A Traitor he was, with brand then, and to a Proverb now. He
carried Christ's Purse, yet takes the High Priests Money. Not as His Lords
Receiver to serve Him, but as their Pensioner, to batray him. They basely buy
His Blood, as their great Purchase, and he with a Kiss signs the Conveyance,
and Delivers them Possession of Him. This, when the foul guilt begins to work,
casts him both out of his Bishopric and the World. For then, He Repents,
Despairs, Dies, Hanged by his own Hand, Mat. 27. 5. Act. 1. 18.
instead of Blood, gushing out his Bowels. And so, (as none else is noted to
do) he went to his place, dead and damned. Act. 1. 25.


His Apostles place being void, another must fill it. For God* will have his
full number. Elect Men, for Reprobate Angels. A Church of Gentiles for Rejected
Jews. And if the first Asian fail, other Churches. A Matthias for a Judas. By
Choice this cannot be as it was by Christ on earth, by Lot therefore it must be
from God in Act. 1. 24 25.
Heaven. Two are taken and offered to God. He takes one of the Two. Bishops
they chose under them, and Presbyters under Bishops; but His Apostles, Christ
chooses Twelve by Call, and One by Lot. And that falls on Matthias, not on
Joses his Kinsman. To show that Consanguinity in such choices, is not to be
considered. Therefore He gives, Matthias takes, the place. All allow him and
receive him as the Lords Elect. When God once Determines, none must Dispute it.
Were the Thirteenth Apostle Decimus tertius Apostolorum, said of Paul. V.
as fairly Chosen always, as the Twelfth, the Church would have wanted many
Schisms, and the Christian World the woes of such Divisions. But, as if the
Dove of Christ, and Mahomets Pigeon were all one, more crafty Guile, then Holy
Chost, has appeared too often in their Conclaves and Councels. They know whence
and how the Taunt came from Rome to Trent, of sending the Holy Ghost in a
Clokebag. O Lord, whosoever, or wheresoever they are which are to be chosen to
Sacred Offices in Thy Church, Save it from ill, and Send us good Elections!

The Prayer.
O Lord Jesu Christ, which know who are Thine, by Heart, as well as Face,
yet did not cast out the Traitor till he had cast himself away, and then
did take in a true heart for the treacherous: A false heart let me not have
to thee; and not a Covetous one, that I be not false. Whether a Matthias or a
Joses, whatever my Let is, let me serve Thee in it faithfully, diligently, and
constantly, as the place and sphere wherein Thy Hand has set me, not to Enjoy
my self, but to Improve what I am and have, to Thy Honor and Glory. That using
my Talent well (whether in Thy Church or the World) whilst I live I may not
with Judas die desperately, but with Simeon depart in peace.

Amen.
Annunciation Feast Day. March 25.

MEDITAT. upon Luke. 1. 28. And the Angel came unto her, and said, Hail Mary
full of grace, etc.
AS they said of S. Peter's, It was his; I cannot say, It was Her Angel. With
Ancients and Moderns I can piously believe, Act. 12. 15.
each Soul has her Guardian. And (probably) when God does send from Heaven to
a Pious Soul, That Angel may come on the Errand. However Angelvisits are!
Honors; and Messages, more. Ours is an Embassy, and that Extraordinary. Not
of an Angel, but Archangel. An Angel of Name, Gabriel. And sent very Solemnly.
In the sixth month the Angel Gabriel was sent from God to a City of Galilee,
to a Virgin espoused. Errand and Angel, both are Extraordinary. A fit
Messenger, An Angel to a Virgin. So one to another Angel. For Virgin is
Angelical life. And because Great, more Fit. For Earth never had the like
before, therefore Heaven brings the Errand. Not of Defiance, as the Number. 22. 32.
Angels to Balaam, but of Congratulation, as that to Gedeon. He Jud. 6. 12.
comes not with a Sword in his Hand, but an Olive Branch in his Mouth; Not an A
page, but an Ave. No Thunder from Above, but fair Sunshine, Hail Mary. All
Peace, and Love, and Kindness in the Salutation. That Is the first word in his
Mouth, and every letter of it is written in his Heart. Though Devils and
devilish men can have Hail in their lips, and Fie in their hearts, so must not
Saints, so do not Angels. They take Bodies and Tongues to do God and us
Service, not to deceive and do Mischief. To a Virgin, but Espoused, Judge. 13.
10.
He comes. Marriage-life may have the Visit of an Angel. The Virgin Mary, full
of grace, whether with God, or of God, She was full of it. His Favorite and
Saint, Highly favored with God, and Richly furnished with Goodness. Elect out
of all Mankind, to be a Virgin Mother, That Is Singular. The Mother of Christ,
That Is most Honorable. The Mother of God, That Is most High. The Mother of a
Savior, That Is most Happy Favor. She that was thus an Elect Woman, must be a
Precious Saint. So it became The Body to be, which should be a Sanctuary of God
and a Savior. And even so she was. A Virgin in each kind, Heart and Womb. A
Saint every way, Body and Soul. Saints have Gods Ear and His Eye; but Humble
Souls have His very Soul and Heart. Most favored of all His Favorites. And
she was Eminently such, and so most Dear to God. His Angel therefore does so
graciously Treat her, The Lord is with thee. Luc. 1. 48.
He is with her mercifully and marvellously, because God was to be in her. He
in her Womb, that is greater then the World. Wrapped in Skins, yet above the
Heavens. Therefore, Blessed among women. By Men and Angels. Yea, therein
blessed above all that ever were, are or shall be in the World. Unblessed by
none, but Jews and Devils. Blessed, not Adored. Among Women, not Gods. Dear,
but no Peer to the God of Gods. Dignified By Angels. Magnified by Saints.
Glorified by God. But Deified by None. None but such as Affront Christ, Usurp
on God, Impose on Her, Cross and Check Saints and Angels. O Holy Mother of
God, an Highly Favored, and ever Blessed Woman Thou art, not God ever Blessed!

The Prayer.
O Lord, if I have not a Virgin-Body, let me have a Virgin-Soul. And let it
make me a wise and a pure Mat. 25. 4.
one, not securely to sleep out the Time of my Salvation, but stand with Oil
and Lamp (by Faith and good life) ever Prepared for my Bridegroomes coming, to
meet and wait upon my Lord. Not formally to appear holy before men, but really
undefiled before them and Thee: That if my Body have not a Womb, my Soul Ephesians.
3. 17. Joh. 14. 23. Mat. 12. 47.
may find a Seat for my Savior. And if he be not my Son, I may be His Servant:
Honored of Saints, Blessed by Angels, Beloved of Christ, Dear to God. Such an
Annunciation let not one but all the Angels make, and Saints with them, and I
with all, for my Saviors Birth, and my Salvation's.

Amen.
So end the Meditations and Prayers for the first Twelve Holy Days.
HOLY DAYS Meditations and Prayers, From Easter to St. Andrews Day.
1. S. Marks Day. 2. S. Philip and Jacob, or May Day. 3. Ascension, or Holy
Thursday. 4. S. Barnabas Day. 5. S. John Baptists, or Midsummer Day. 6. S.
Peter's Day. 7. S. James's Day. 8. S. Bartholomews Day. 9. S. Matthews Day. 10.
S. Michaels Day. 11. S. Lukes Day. 12. S. Simon and Iudes Day. 15. All Saints
Day.
Advertisement touching the Number and Choice of Holy Days.
ALl the Holy Days ( you see) a Annunciation, de quo Festo Athan. primarium
and prorsus venerandum.
are not very many. Besides the Lords Days, in which by Allowance of all, we
pay out a Seventh of our Time to God, the Remain comes not to a Twelf of the
Year. And Abating those which have more Respect to Christ (His Conception,
Birth, Circumcision, Manifestation, Epiphany.
Presentation, Purification.
and Ascension) the Rest make not Twice Twelve. Taking in those which are by
Devotion S. Paul's Day. S. Barna. Not in Catalogue Commanded, yet have Services
Directed. See Service Book.
as well as them which be by Obligation. Here the Church shows her Wisdom.
They which go with Rome, Establish too many, those who tread Antipodes to it,
Abolish all; Betwixt those Two Extremes she walks, being neither for their
Superfluity nor Nullity. As a careful and tender Mother to her Childrens
lives, leaving them Days enough to work and look to their worldly Affairs; and
for their Souls not to be harrowed and wearied out with frequency of Holy Duty,
and Heavenly Concernments. Which indeed is to Invert their nature and end, and
to turn Holy days into Working days, or Times more tedious. And therein as full
of Piety as Mercy. For as in Her use, so in Her choice, Nothing of Superstition
is seen, nor just Suspicion of any. Because to the great Glory of Almighty God,
and Honor of Christ an Holy Memory is kept of none but Angels, Saints,
Martyrs, Evangelists, Apostles, and their Associates and Assistants (
Evangelicall and Apostolical men;) The High Ministers of Gods Providence,
Stout Champions of Christ's Truth, Sacred Organs of the Holy Ghost, Blessed
Instruments of our Eternal Good, Incomparable Examples of Christian Patience
and Piety, Bright Glori^s and Beauties of Religion, Goodly Ornaments and
Muniments of the Church.

But why any Particular Festivals, 1 Cor. 5. 8
when our life is but One Feast? Nay if so, let them say too, Why do we ever 1
These. 5. 17.
Work, who are bid to Pray continually? Why do we Weep at any time, who are to.
Rejoice always? Phil. 4. 4.
And why do they observe a Set day of the week, since we must each moment cease
from Sin, and so keep a perpetual Sabbath? Different 1 Pet. 4. 1. Aug.
Duties require several Times on Earth. In Heaven the Keeping of one day of
Eternity Holy, is the Business and Blessedness. Below things must be done in
Time. And in Spirit we must do ever, what in Act we cannot. And we both mind
Heaven, and move to it when we so do. For as the Devout Mind from them mounts
to Heaven, as Moses Deuteronomy. 32. 49.
from Mount Nebo saw Canaan, so the Heart climbs thence thitherward, as the
Angels went up on Jacobs Genesis 28. 12.
Ladder; we see Types there of it, and make Steps toward it. And more and
faster for the Saints days. That Holy cloud of witnesses draws Heb. 12. 1.
Rev. 19. 9.
our Eyes and Hearts up to Heaven, where they are at the Everlasting Festival,
and stirs up our Spirits so to live and die as they did, that following their
steps we may come to be where they are. To that tends the Discretion and
Devotion of the Church, which keeps not their Birthdayes Holy (as of Kings) but
their Genesis 40. 20.
Death-dayes ( as of Saints) borne to that Blessed Eternity, of which those be
their Birth-dayes.

So then, as the Holy Place is Genesis 28. 17.
called The Gate of Heaven, these Holy Times may be* The Days of Heaven. But
because we are on Earth, all ours must not be such Days: yet for that we are
for Heaven, some should be Holy, though not all. And if we shall thus Discern
the Times, we shall love the Church as Heaven, and no more hate or fear a Holy,
then a Happy Day.

Saint Marks Day. April 25.

MEDITAT. upon 2 Timothy 4. 11. Take Mark, and bring him with thee, for he is
profitable to me for the Ministry.
OF the Four Secretaries of Christ's Holy Gospel, S. Mark was one. And because,
when he begins, he Roars out the Baptists Mar. 1. 3.
Cry of the Lamb of God, he is made the Lion of the Four. It seems he was with,
or near Timothy, therefore S. Paul bids, Take him and bring him with him. It Is
well, when the Bishop, and the Evangelist, and the Apostle, can all Agree and
Come together. When the Doctors of the Church (like the Pleiades) shine in one
close Constellation near one another, and are not as the Pole-stars, the whole
Heaven asunder. Timothy must take Mark and bring him. By no Power that he had,
but of Friendship over him. To do Good for God, Advance Glory to Christ, and
Gain Souls to the Church, all his Ministers are Peers. The Highest Condescend,
and the Lowest take their Place. The Common Interest of the Christian Cause (as
the great Wheel in a Clock) moves all, as the Primum mobile in Heaven carries
about all the Stars. But why must both come to S. Paul? Was it for the pleasure
of their Company? No doubt, as the Saints were David's, these Servants Psalm. 16.
3.
of Christ were his great Delight. Next the Fellowship of Angels, none like the
Communion of Saints. But, that was not it. It was not the Solace of himself,
but the Service of the Church. Touching whose great Affairs, they were to
receive his holy Advices, and orders. That Is the reason; For he is profitable
to me (for his own ends or advantages? No, His Masters Service was all his
business.) To finish his course Act. 20* 24.
with joy, was his care. And such good Companions as they would serve him as
Wagons in the way, to pass the Toil with more Content, and Wheels to his
Course; and add better speed to his Apostolic Offices, as Joint- Partners 2
Cor. 8. 23. To. 16. 3.
and Carriers of his Cares. That Is the Profit he seeks. For the Ministry, All
seek their own, Phil. 2. 21. 2. Cor. 12. 14.
and not the things of Jesus Christ. That Is his Complaint, not his Course. They
are for the Profits of the Minister, he of the Ministry. He Takes Care, and
Giver Order for them. For their Gal. 6* 6. 1 These. 5. 13. 1 Timothy 5. 17.
due Means, for their Honors, for their Powers; but all in order to their
Ministry. Or Gods rather. His they are, and Christ's Ministers; T^t. 2. 15.
for, to, and over (not so properly of) the people. These Heb. 13. 17.
are their Charge, they are not their Creatures. His Word is Ministry. He
abhors not Priesthood. Nor must they which understand what Presbytery is, or
Christ was, An High Priest, and Heb. 2. 17. 1 Pet. 2. 25. Heb. 13. 20. Heb. 7.
11. 2 Timothy 2. 14. Joel 2. 17. Heb. 8. 1. Vid. Leiturgie, Confession, and
Absolution, and at the Communion.
Archbishop of Souls, unless we will not allow Melchisedeck as well as Aaron,
an Order. We should not fall out for the Word when we agree in the Thing. The
Scripture and Church allow both (Thing and Name) Promiscuously using the Word,
Priest and Minister. It were a better strife to contend, who shall do what is
most Honorable for Priesthood, what is more Profitable for the Ministry.

The Prayer.
O Lord, who for the Service of the Church, and the Salvation of Souls, did
give some Apostles Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for
the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying
of the Body of Christ; And made S. Mark Thy singular Servant to Preach and
Pen Thy Holy Gospel: Grant to all the Children of Thy Church Wisdom and Care by
all means to Advance (above all ends) the Business and Blessedness of Souls.
And to all Thy Children in he Church give Humility and Grace, to Submit to Them
(in Thy Name) as to Thee, and to Entertain them and their Errands as Thine.
That Heb. 13. ^7 Ga^. 4. 1^ 1 Timothy 4. 1^.
Ministers doing Thy work with both hands, of Holy Doctrine and Life; and
People doing Duty to ^ Iam. 1. 21.
Thee in them in Meekness and Obedience, with all their Hearts, Thou may at
last save all our Souls, Through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Saint Philip and Jacobs, May 1.
or May* Day.
MEDITAT. upon John 14. 8. Philip says unto him, Lord show us the Father, and
it suffices.
PHilip was a Jew, but his Name is Greek: Conquerours give their Captived
people both Laws and Names, not as Marks of Honor, but Signs of Bondage. After
his Apostleship, he did not take nor change his Name. It might not have been
Philip then, it is so still. To have all Names Scripture Proof is more of
Nicety, then Necessity. To stand against others as Profane, is to fall upon
Superstition. And since he was so known and called even by Christ Himself, is
to rise to Blasphemy. By what he says, he should be rather a man of Macedon
then Jury. A Natural Philosopher, then an Apostle. God, who will not, cannot be
seen, must be made Visible. Show us the Father: You heard a voice, you saw no
Deuteronomy. 4. 15
Image. (He will not) God is Invisible. (He cannot.) Visible He is in the
World, as a Book, St. Anthony's Volume, Licensed by S. Paul. Visible in the
Word, as To 1. 20. 2 Cor. 3. 18.
a Glass. Set up by him to be looked on. Visible in Christ, as his Image
(only lawful and to be worshipped.) So He is seen of Heathens, Jews, and
Christians. So he was of Philip, or should be. In the Son. The Image of the
Invisible Col. 1. 15. Heb. 1. 3. Ioh. 10. 30. Ioh. 4. 9. Ioh. 1. 18. 1 Cor. 1.
23. Mal. 4. 2. ^oh. 3. 4.
God. The Express Image of His Person. The same Essence with the Father. So
that he who sees One, cannot but behold the Other. That Humane Minds to Divine
Mysteries are as Bats to the Sun, Aristotle both says and himself proves (with
his fellow-Philosophers) by the blindness they had touching Christ the Son of
Righteousness. No wonder, when such dark Sights are found even amongst Christ's
Disciples. What a gross Conceit had Nicodemus of the New Birth, and Philip of
the Father? But his sufficit is good though, his show was gross. Show him, and
it suffices. For Knowledge we need no more, for He is all Truth. For Bliss we
need no more, He has all Goodness. The World has not. It is but a Show, and a
short one too. The Devil shows Christ all in a Moment. Luc. 4. 5.
Man's Appetite after Choiser and Eccl. 1. 2. Isa. 55. 2.
Higher Good, for all it, is left Empty and Hungry. God, the Infinite and
Eternal Goodness, is sufficient for all. He is All-sufficient. Show the
Father, and it suffices us. Not to the Mahumetan Eye. The Father without the
Son, at whom they have an ill Eye, and a worse Tongue, Denying and Blaspheming
the Son of God, as if God (say they) could have a Mother, or the Cross have a
God. Nor in the Arrian apprehension, who in this sides with the Scymiter, and
draws both Pen and Sword against the Deity of Christ, and Trinity of God. Nor
of the upstart Aerian, Socinia^
who takes up Arrius his Arms, and the Turks Cudgels, to fight against both: We
have a better Dove then the Pigeon which bill'd Mahomets Faith into his ear,
to Assure ours; which came from the Father, and Matthew. 3. 16, 17. Luc. 1. 35.
Mat. 28. 8.
rested on the Son of God. We have another Gabriel, then his Trance-Angel,
which tells us, He that was born Man, was the Son of God. And a Surer Sepulcher
then his Tomb, to show Him God as well as Man, Raised out by His Father the
Third day, when Mahomets Thousand years do not yet Return him. And that Holy
Dove which rests upon the Ark of the Church has Inspired it, 2 Ioh. v. 9.
and it Taught us so to believe of God, the Son, and the Father. Christ chid
Philip for being so long in his School, and not learning that Lesson. If we
have had it Read as many Hundreds as he had Years, and are new to Learn, do we
not deserve a Chiding?

The Prayer.
O God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, The only Wise, Invisible God, who
can not be seen on Earth, and wilt be seen in Heaven; let me see by my Faith,
what I cannot Hab. 1. 13.
in my Flesh. Believingly let me behold Thee in the Image of Thy Son, and
favorably look on me in the Face of Thy Christ. Thou art 1 Pet. 1. 19 Psalm.
32. 2.
of purer eyes then to behold iniquity. None but pure hearts can behold Thee; I
am not pure from it, life or heart; but wash^ in the Blood of the Lamb without
spot, and purified by the Grace of the Spirit without Heb. 7. 266
guile, I shall be clean; So Lord Wash me, so Behold me, so Accept me; For his
sake, who was Thy Holy, Harmless, and Undefiled One, and Son Jesus Christ our
Lord:

Amen
Holy Thursday, or Ascension Day.
MEDITAT. upon Psalm. 47. 4. God is gone up with a merry noise, and the Lord
with the sound of the trump.
CHrist came down on earth with Carols of Angels, went Luc. 2. 14. John 20. 25.
Luke 24. 41, 52.
into His Grave with the Tears of His Saints; came out with their Joys, but
went up to Heaven with the Jubilees of All, Saints and Angels. All but Devils;
They had more cause to Roar then Sing at His Ascent, Attending in Chains to set
forth his Triumphs. So, Captives do at once bewail and honor Conquests. And
then, Captivity (it self) was led Captive. When David Conquered Ephesians. 4. 8.
Goliath the Great, the Victory was celebrated with Tabrets and Dances, and
Songs of Triumph; Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands. 1 Samuel 187.
But, if David slew his ten thousands, the Son of David slew his ten millions.
Not of Philistims, but Fiends, with the Devil, the great Goliath of them all.
The 2 Pet. 3. 22
Battle was in the Passion, The Victory by the Resurrection, The Triumph at the
Ascension. God (in Christ) went up with a merry noise. Heaven and Earth made
Ps. 69. 34.
the Melody. And (as a victorious King) The Lord with the sound of a trump. In
the mouths of Men and Angels. To Heaven, Ioh. 3. 31. Ioh. 17. 5.
whence He came. To the Glory, which he had. A Hymn therefore for Him. No
Cross now, but a Throne. No Devils or Men now to Tempt or Torture Him, with
their Tongues or Hands; but to give Him their Necks and Knees. Phil. 2. 10.
And for us He went to Heaven. To take Possession of His Purchase ^ph. 1. 14.
(our Salvation) To complete the Office He took on Him Heb. 7. 25.
for us (to be our Savior.) And for that, To Protect us as our Prince. To
Propitiate for us, as our Priest. To Plead for us, as our Advocate. To set down
our Nature Heb 9. 24. To. 8. 34. Ephesians. 2. 6. Joh. 14. 2.
with Him on Gods Throne, and Prepare our Persons, Mansions in Gods House. So
that Glorified we are in Him our Head, and shall be with Him as His Body, which
is Exalted in, and shall be United with the Head. So then, to Translate our
Flesh to Heaven, and Transport His Spirit Joh. 16. 7.
to Earth, and Assure our Comfort, He went up from Earth to Heaven. And can we
have better Assurance and Security for our Souls? Two such Advocates with the
Father, as His Spirit 1 John 2. 1.
and Son? Two such Pleas for To. 8. 26. Heb. 12. 24
our Salvation, as our Frailty and His Blood? Two such Hostages for our Safety,
as our Flesh taken into Heaven, and His Spirit sent unto Earth? Two such
Legates for our Peace, as Christ our Legier for Ioh. 14. 16.
us, and the Holy Ghost, His Agent with us? Sing we therefore for our selves. O
sing praises, sing praises Psa. 47. 6.
unto our God: O sing praises sing praises unto our King. Our King, not now
Riding (as in His Meekness) on an Ass, but in Majesty on a Cloud. Mounted upon
the wings Acts. 1 9. Ps. 104. 3.
of Winds and C^erubs, to, and on the Heavens, and above them, as His
Triumphant Horse and Chariot! Good luck have thou with Ps. 18. 10.
thine Honor, Thou Son of God! and in Thy Majesty ride on prosperously Ps. 45.
5.
for the Sons of Men. Bear them up with Thee, and Bring them to Thee, O Son
of the Father! Sanctify and Seal them, and keep them for the Father and Son,
O Holy Ghost of God, the Son and Father! Sing O Saints and Angels for the
Glory, Shout for the Joy!

The Prayer.
O Lord Jesu Christ, who when Thou had overcome Death, and stayed some time
to instruct Thy Servants in the Affairs of Thy Kingdom, did ascend to
Heaven Act. 1. 3.
to take up the Glory which Thou did lay down at Thy Descent to earth; And
did take up our Nature with Thee in Thy Body, to John 20. 17.
possess us of what our sins had lost us, a Place in Heaven: I bless Thee in
the Honor Thou have done to my Self and Kind on Thy Throne, and for the Glory
Thou have Purchased for Thy Saints and my self in Thy Kingdom. I beseech Thee,
O Lord, when I die, let my Soul ascend to Thee. And whilst Col. 3. 1, 2. Phil.
3. 20.
I live let my Mind be with Thee. Let my Holy Prayers and Praises carry it,
and my Heavenly Thoughts and Affections keep it up continually. By that Holy
Spirit which when thou did go up on High, came down with Gifts and Comforts
from thee. Till Death and in Death, Enable me and Encourage me, my Gracious God
and Glorious King, and Christ, Jesus!

Amen.
Saint Barnabas Day. June 11.

MEDITATION upon Act. 4. 36. Barnabas, which is, being interpreted, a son of
consolation.
BArnabas had Lands, but Sold Acts 4. 37.
all on Earth to Purchase in Heaven. He lays down the price at the Apostles
feet, for Gods use; and so puts it out (to his best Advantage and Security)
into Gods hands. A good sign, he would be His Faithful Servant. And so he was.
The true Minister and Messenger of Christ and Act. 11. 22.
His Church. When God gave Saul His fiat for an Apostles place, to the
Disciples Demurre, he pleads his Title, and Inducts Acts 9 27.
him into the College, and they admit the Induction: After which they two are
Joynt-Commissioners for the Church, Fellow-Travellers, Acts 13. 2.
Consorts, and Act. 13. 46. Act. 12. 23.
Zelots for Christ. Nor for his Purse, nor for his Pains, he was Sparing. For
Joses therefore he was called Barnabas. A Good Man he was, and a great Minister
Act. 14. 22. Acts 15. 22. 36.
of the Church; Devout, Diligent to Plant and Water. To Baptize and Confirm. To
Convert, and Visit. To do all Works that are good ones. And Excellent, at the
Best and Divinest Business for the Saints (To Comfort) He had his Name for it.
Christ called James and John, Boanerges (Sons of Thunder) Mar. 7. 17.
The Apostles named him Barnabas (and interpret it) a Son of Consolation.
Some lie in those deep sleeps of Sin and Security, that a still voice will not
stir them. Others have such waking Consciences and trembling Hearts, that
Thunder would Distract them. God has Servants for all 1 Pet. 4: 10. Genesis 35.
18.
sorts of Souls, and gives them Supplies for all and several Necessities. A
John for a Benhadad, a Barnabas for a Benoni. To Suit This for his Sorrow, and
That for his Tumult. One brings Thunder, the Other rains Comfort. A Son of
Consolation. Fit Act. 11. 24.
for it, because Full of the Holy Ghost, (The Comforter.) And 2 Cor. 13. 4.
fitly a Son; because God is the Father of Comfort. In the Son, the Purchaser.
By the Spirit, the Ioh. 15. 26.
Conveyer of all Consolation. Designed and sent for that end, of purpose from
the Father and the Son. If I then be a Comforter, I am a Brother of the Son of
Comfort. Nay, not of Barnabas, but Jesus. He is the Consolation of Israel, The
great Comforter: Luc. 2. 25. John 14. 16. Act. 9. 31.
And near akin to the Holy Ghost. His Function is our Consolation, I am Joint
or under-Officer with Him. And I am the Son of God, if of Comfort, for He is
It. A Tormenter of Bodies, especially of Souls, is Servant, Son, and Brother to
the Devil. Whosoever is a Son of Heb. 6. 17.
Comfort, a Saint is the Heir. An Heir of Grace and Life, of which it is the
Loom and Pledge. An Appurtenance of Grace Spiritual, and Assurance for Life
Eternal. Mat. 11. 28.
A Sinner has no Portion in it, unless a Troubled Sinner, in the way and
motion to a Saint. The Children of Satan and Sin are Heirs of Woe, not Comfort.
And if Pillowes be Ezekiel. 13. 18, 19.
sowed under their Elbowes, it is the Prophets Shame that does it, and will be
his Woe. It Is a wrong to God and those Souls, and themselves. Rebuke is their
due from God, and for their Good, not Peace. Men Dead in sin must Ier. 6. 14.
Isa. 57. 21.
not be Revived with it, but from it. If we be Raised to an Integrity 1 Cor.
15. 14. Ephesians. 5. 14.
for God, and Charity to Man, and so Preferred to a Favor and Interest in God,
in Death, in Distress, we have the Pleas of three great Presidents (
Hezekiah's, Job's, and David's) for all necessary and desirable Comforts. Isa.
38. 3. Job 13. 15 1 Samuel 30. 6.
Lord make us such Children of Thine as they were, that we may Inherit from
Thee such Comforts as they had; and have a Father (if not a Son) of Consolation.

The Prayer.
O God of Mercy, who for the Support Isa. 40. 2. Isa. 50. 4.
of frighted and sadded Souls, have provided Men and Means of Comfort, and
made Thy Servant Barnabas such a Man; I beseech Thee send a Man, or be a God of
comfort to all Afflicted Lives and 2 Cor. 1. 3. 1 These. 5. 14.
Souls. And as my Power is, let my will be, to be One of those Men. And what I
am not in my Powers, let me be in my Prayers: What they want for Heaven or
Earth, let Thy Mercy reach from Thy Power, especially 2 Cor. 2. 7.
to those, whom the deep sense of their Sorrows or Sins is ready to swallow
up, and the Gulf of Temptation to sink and drown in Despair. The Devil is sore
against them, Lord be thou for them! He sits hard upon them, Jesus shield them,
They are ready to take part and join with him against themselves: Holy Spiri,
Defend them against themselves and him! Support, Succor, and Comfort them, O
God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost!

Amen.
Saint John Baptists June 24.
Day.
MEDITAT. upon Luke 1. 63. -- His name is John.
FIt for the Child A Name of great Grace for a Child of Luke 1. 60. 63. verse
64. Luc. 1. 68. Ps. 127. 4.
such Goodness. His Mother spoke, His dumb Father writ his Name. And his Mouth
immediately opens upon it. And a Benedictus comes out both for his Child and
Tongue. Every Child is, and deserves a Blessing; but One so Masculine,
Miraculous, and Gracious, will force the Dumb to speak a Benedicite. Because
(the Isa. 9. 6.
Child excepted, who was The Everlasting Father, when a little Babe.) There
never was such another. And this Eight-dayes Infant was the Morning Star to
that Mal. 4 2.
Sun of Righteousness, Eternal, when one day old. He was a Virgins Birth, But
of those that were (ordinarily) born of Women, there was not a greater then
John. Foretold Mat. 11. 11. Mal 3. 1. ^ Luc. 1. 15. Mat. 21. 26 Mat. 1. 6.
many hundred years before Born. Sanctified in the Womb. And Sacred in the Eye
of the World. An Angel in a Wilderness. A Cherub in Camels hair. A Seraphim
with a Leathern belt. He was a burning and a shining light, of His, who makes
His Ioh. 5. 35.
Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a Ps. 104. 4.
Flame of fire. He had both the Peoples and the Princes Ear and Honor. Herod
is his Auditor and Admirer, and with great Reverence and much Obedience,
receives Mar. 6. 2^
and observes him. The Baptist was his Office and Glory. He was Commissioned
from Heaven to Baptize for Christ. As Holy Harbinger of the King of to Prepare
His way, by Preaching Ioh. 1. 33. Matthew. 21. 25. Ma^k 1. 3. Luke 3. 7. Mark 1.
8.
and Penance. Taking up Hearts for His Lodgings, and Marking them out by His
Seal and their Baptism. Nay, He was Honored to pour water not on the Hands,
but Head of His Savior. To Baptize Christ. And so Singularly, The Baptist.
Mat. 3. 14.


In the Discharge of his Function, Luke 3. 10, 12, 14.
he spares none. No Place, no Person. Camp nor Court, Chair nor Throne. Men of
Arms or Honors, Publican or Pharisee, King or Queen. That cost him his life.
He tells Herod of his Incest with his Brothers Wife. And for that Herodias
pronounces him a Luc. 3. 19.
Child of Death.

If any Tongue dare offer to pull her out of his Heart, or take him out of her
Bosom, when ever opportunity meets her malice, that Head shall fly from the
Shoulders for it. So it did. At His Birthday, her dancing Daughter does so
please Herod and his Mar. 6. 22, 24, 25.
Lords, that in a Frolic he vows, What she will ask she shall have. And her
Mother tells her, what: John Baptists Head in a Charger. This grieves Herod,
but his Oath Mar. 6. 26.
must not be broken. His Company must be satisfied. The Damsel must have her
Due. So in all have and hot blood, John's Head is Commanded and Cut off; The
Daughter Provides, the Mother has, her Bloodydainty dish at the Feast, to feed
her Malice and Revenge. The Disciples have his Corpse to Bury, she his Head in a
Charger.

So ancient are Covers of Religion for Cups of Blood, Pretenses of Conscience
for Acts of Cruelty. Pleas of Oaths for Designs of Iniquity. As if God, who
Bans Perjury, did not Bar us Blood. So unstrange is it for Innocent and
Excellent Persons to find Bloody Graves, by the Coverings and Contrivances of
such Oaths and Acts. So poor are the Pleas of Reluctance for Dooms and
Executions of Villainy. Pilats Water for Christ's Blood, and Herod's Grief for the
Baptists Butchery! Lord let me have no finger in Mat. 27. 24. (...)
that hand, which for whatsoever Pleas or Pretenses, cuts off such a Head.

The Prayer.
O Lord, who did suffer the blood of Thy Servant to be sacrificed to the will
of a Woman, by the pride and power of a Man, Pretending a Rash Oath to satisfy
Conscience for a Deliberate Bloodshed: Keep me from the filthy and bloody
thoughts of a Lustful Bed, and Revengefull Heart. And preserve me from a
Conscience so blind, as not to see Blood a Crime; So Daring, as to fear no
Colors; So Dawbing, as to see any other Color but Crimson-guilt in Blood. Let
my Mind be right, and my Heart upright. Lest being Deluded, I kill a Baptist
for Thy Service, or being Depraved, I murder Thy Christ for my Satisfaction.
From Herod's Heart and Hand, Deliver me, Good Lord, for Jesus Christ His Sake.

Amen!
Saint Peter's Day. June 20.

MEDITAT. upon Mat. 16. 18. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my
Church.
THey of Rome build much on this Rock. And let them build on in the Name of
God, so it be not beside it. But if they shut up the House of the Church into a
Room, and shrink the Rock into a Stone, this is besides both Rock and Church.
Christ's It is, not Theirs; and the Rock He is, not S. Peter. His Church is the
Catholic. Which for Faith is Theirs who have and hold the Three Christian
Creeds, and Four General Councils, as well as Romes. And if for Place, there
be Christian Churches in the world, which are not Roman. One is not All that is
in the World. Of it then it may be; a Particular Church, but is not the
Universal. As the City of Rome was called the Mistress of the World, yet it
was so far from making a Conquest of all, that much of it was not in
Cognizance; So the Church of Rome claims to be Mother and Mistress of all the
Christian World, and yet many Parts of it Refuse the Yoke, and bid her just
Defiance.

All that Build on S. Peter's Rock, are Christ's Church, though they Bottom not
on S. Peter. For he was not the Rock to build on, but a Stone built on it.
Therefore Joh. 1. 42.
Christ does not set his Church on Him, but It, That is, Himself. Who is the
Rock of the Church. The Foundation of that Faith on 1 Cor. 10. 4. 1 Cor. 3. 11.
Jude 20. 1 Pet. 2. 5.
which we build, and by which also we are built upon it. Under Him, if S. Peter
be made a Foundation, so are all the Apostles as Ephesians. ^. 20. Rev. 21. 14
much as He, and the Prophets too, as well as they. And S. Paul, (who has part
with him in the Day) was a Founder with him of Churches 1 Cor. 3. 10.
too. And as he watered it with him at Rome, with his blood, so he planted it
for Christ, all over the 1 Cor. 3. 6.
world. Nay as if all Christian Churches had been his Children, The 2 Cor. 11.
28. Hierom. Aug. Chrysostom. Hilar.
care of all was upon him. The Fathers on whom they pretend to build much, are
plainly for Ours, and not for Their Building. Not the Man, but the Faith. Not
the Person, but the Profession. Not Bar-jona (a Son of Man) but Barjova, (The
Son of God) is the Rock. Christ so Believed, so Professed, not S. Peter. And
the Churches Standing proves it. For against Particular Churches (even those
Primitive ones) we see how Rev 1.
much Mahomet (one Gate of Hell) has prevailed, so that in some not a Stone is
left, in others scarce a wall of the Building; but against the Universal nor
One, nor All ever did, or shall Prevail. Because the powers of Heaven are
above the Gates of Hell. Angels above Men, and God above all Devils. And why?
Christ is the Rock of the Church, on which His Servants stand safe, His Enemies
1 Pet. 2. 8.
fall and are dashed in pieces. Himself is in Heaven, but with His Church and
for it, to the end Mat. 28. 20.
of the world. For where Christ and His Apostles are, there is a Church, and so
shall be to the end. And as this is my Common, so for my Singular Comfort. Nor
the Gates nor the Guiles of Hell shall overcome me, if I be well built on this
Rock in the Church. By the hands of a True Faith and Col. 2. 5. Ephesians. 4. 16
Love, is well. For as a Castle in the air, so is all other Building, though
said to be a Bottoming on Christ. Without Scoff we may speak it, Even that
which they build, if a Fox go upon it (much more the Roaring Lion) will pull
down their stone-wall. Though Neh. 4. 3.
they brag to build as high and sure as Heaven. Well were it for all Christian
Souls, if instead of justling and throwing one another off and out of the Rock
of the Church, all Persons and Churches would unite forces against that
Mountain of Mahumedan Pride and Power, which does Blaspheme and Rage against
both Church and Rock. Defend Thy Church, O Christ, against those, and all Gates
of Hell.

The Prayer.
O Christ, who art the Son of God, and Rock of Salvation, on whom the Church is
built, and in whom to believe is to be saved: let me by a Act. 16. 31.
Holy Faith so build on Thee in it, that I may be blessed. Yea Lord, do Thou so
build me up, as no power of Man or Devils shall pull me down. On Holy
Repentance let me found my Faith, and Raise it up in Love, lest I build my
Salvation upon Sands, or so weakly as will not stand upon the Foundation. Thou
Holy Mat. 7. 26.
Lamb of God, and Lion of the tribe of Juda, who have prevailed, Keep me Thy
poor Lamb, from the Roaring Lion. Yea Lord, who have him under Thy foot, Tread
him under 1 Cor. 15. 21. To. 16. 20.
mine for me, I beseech Thee, Dear Jesus!

Amen!
Saint James' s Day. July 25.

MEDITAT. upon Acts 12. 2. And he killed James the brother of John with the
sword.
Herod's, it seems, are lineally bloody. Usurpers by their fate turn Butchers.
Innocent children and Excellent men, all is one to a Herod. Babes must be
Sacrificed to their Pride, and Apostles cut off at their pleasure. Mat. 2. 16.
James the Great and Good is Beheaded with great applause of the giddy people,
and he purposes S. Peter the first of the Twelve, Act. 12. 3. ^
shall be their next Spectacle. But why was James his Death their Joy, and
Herod's Love? It is enough that he was a Disciple, more then so, that an Apostle
of Christ, and most that he was so eminent an Apostle. They who drank so deep
of the Masters Blood, will easily down with a Servants. They who mangled
Christ's Body, will make nothing of St. James his Head. Flesht once in Blood,
men fear no Bloodshed. James had more Goodness in his little Finger then was
in all Herod's Loins, yet his Head must be had. A Head more worth then His Head
and Crown. Nay, then all the Herod's before or after, had there been for every
hair on his a Head. Though the bloody Judge would not see this, the unhappy
Accuser did. Beholding his Holy and Undaunted Spirit in the way to his Death,
he prays his Pardon, sealed with his Kiss, turns Christian, and falls Martyr
with the Apostle, at the same Execution, with the same sword. Cl^m. Al.
But why does not the Hand of Providence hold the arm of Vengeance from
striking of such holy Heads? It is to give them Crowns. More glorious then
ever came on Herod's, Kings or the Greatest Conquerours Temples. So they lose
not by the bloody Bargain, God gives them Blessedness for their Blood. It is
to Mat. 5. 10.
give us Shields. To Defend us, if not against the Edge, against the worst of
Herod's sword. And to Keep us and Confirm us in that Holy Faith, which for
Christ's cause gives Courage (if we cannot Act. 20. 24
decline) to Defy the Rage of all Herod's. It gives us Caveats too. Not to Doom
all from Bliss, whom we see to Die in Blood, lest we be worse Butchers then
Herod was, because he destroyed but their Lives, and we cut off their Souls. So
the Best Son of Man may be, The Son of God was most unrighteously, (...)
(...)mercifully, and blasphemously Is. 53. 3, 4.
Doomed. The End tryes all, and that shows James another man then Herod. He
that has a Sword for an Apostle, has no Shield against an Angels. In all his
Pomp Act. 12. 23.
with his Head and Crown on, he cannot keep the Blow off. Instead of Blood
Worms come out of the loathsome Body of a more loathed Soul. When Heavenly
Wights bear up the Apostles holy Spirit upon their wings to his Throne, all
Herod's Guard cannot defend his Body from Worms, his Soul from Fiends, his Life
from an unnatural and most fearful Death. St. James who had the honor to see
Heaven upon Earth, with Christ in his Transfiguration, Mat. 17. 1.
has the happiness to go to it, at his Decollation. Boanerges, a Son of
Thunder he was, Mar. 7. 1^
he is above all Hands and Clouds.

God keep us from the Place whither Herod's go! He buys a Crown very dear,
that has it at the rate of Herod's Conscience. He comes to that in Heaven
cheap, who gives no more but his Matthew. 16. 26. To. 8. 18.
Head for the Crown.

The Prayer.
O Lord who did suffer Herod to draw the Sword against Thy Servant, and
encourage him to suffer it; Let his Example give me Courage, that at Thy Call I
may die for Thy Cause, and be Crowned at my death with a Martyrs Crown. And let
his Life give me Pattern to live to Thy Glory, that I may have the Crown of a
Saint, if I die not a Martyr. A life I have from Thee, let me Dedicate it to
Thee. A Death ^ow to Thee, let me Sacrifice my Life for Thee. So making a Gain
of a Debt, and an Honorable of an Inevitable Death. Give me some of his Zeal,
but Cooled with Thy Wisdom, that I may know how to live, and why to die. To my
Comfort and Thy Glory. In Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Saint Bartholomews Aug. 24.
Day.
MEDITAT. upon Mat. 10. 3. Philip and Bartholome^, Thomas, etc.
THere is a Gospel called Saint Bartholomew's. But so far from being
Canon-proof, that it will scarce pass for good Apocrypha. That he was One of
the Mar. 3. 18.
Twelve, and had here the Sixth Place in their Number, is good Gospel. Whether
so by Creation, as S. Peter was called first, Mat. 10. 3.
or by Dignity, as there were Degrees amongst the Sons of David, as well as
David's Worthies, Worthy to be an Apostle Christ thought 2 Samuel 23. 19. Act. 1.
13.
him, and made him. And at Pentecost he had his Fiery tongue, as a Sign and
Seal of it. Of his ^ermons and Miracles, we have no mention in Canonical
Scripture. No do^bt as he had his Circuit in the World, he did his Office.
Preaching the Gospel, and Signing it as the rest did, at first with Gods Power,
at last with his Blood. As St. John says of the Masters Acts, Were all
written, the world Ioh. 21. 25.
would not contain the Books, that is, they would be vastly voluminous; it may
be said of the Apostles. Had S. Luke penned all they did, it would have been a
Book so big, as the Bible would have been but a small Chapter to it. Had it
been fit for us to Read more, the Spirit of God would have Writ it. Where God
holds his Pen and Tongue, we must withhold our Eyes and Ears, and satisfy our
Hearts, in humble Submission and Silence. So much as we need to know above
Canonical, Ecclesiastical Writ may suffice us. That tells us, His Life was
laborious, his Death dolorous. When he struck the Indian Idols dumb, and by
casting a Devil out of a Child, Converted the Parents unto Christ (all Great
Persons and Marcellin. Astyages.
Princes and the near Kindred of the King) at the Instance of the Priests, and
Instinct of the Devil, the Servant of God is clubb'd and stead to death. By
which the Devil became a Liar, who said, Skin Job 2. 4.
for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life. And a loser too.
As Zisca's skin was to be a Drum to dread his Enemies, S. Bartholomew's served
as a Banner for the Encouragement of the Saints in Persecution and Patience,
and Defiance to all Idols and Devils in their rage, with all their Adherents.
Christ was a great Gainer by his Suffering, and for his Constancy with and for
Christ, He got a Throne for his Skin, and so was no Loser. Lu. 22. 30.


O that we would Believe and Learn this Art of Gain! But Alas! We will not
suffer our selves (not our states) to be stead for our Savior. Instead of
Clubs we will not endure Twigs for Him. It is good sleeping in a whole Job 13.
14. Heb. 10. 29
skin, though the Devil have the Soul for it. Rather then have it in our teeth
(if we can help it) our Savior shall lie under foot. If as the Judges Skin was
hung up for being Bribed to a wrong Sentence, all were Flead who are Corrupted
in this kind of Judgment, we should have as many Men's Skins as Beasts hanging
up in all places.

The more Beasts we who see 1 Cor. 15. 32. Romans 2. 7.
no life but the present, or Suffering for God not to be the way to Eternal
life, and therefore prefer a Beasts life before an Angels, nay a better then
theirs. For, though they be Chiefs in the Glorious Host of the Saints, men
only are listed in the Noble Army of Martyrs. And if I must have one of the
two, a Torn Skin or Conscience, Lord take not only my Skin with my Coat, but
my Flesh with my Skin, and my Blood with my Flesh, and my Life with my Blood.
Yea, had I as many Skins as Pores, Fleshes as Flakes, Bloods as Drops, Heads as
Hairs, Lives as Breaths; so that One Eternal life be left me, let them Mar. 8.
26. Matthew. 10. 39. Act. 21. 13.
take all. All is but enough for my Soul, too little for my Savior.

The Prayer.
O Lord, who did suffer Thy Servant S. Bartholomew to be slain for Thy sake,
and did make him patiently and courageously to suffer his death, and endure
the Torture. Give me the Spirit of Thine Holy Apostle. For Thy Cause and a Good
Conscience sake, to suffer what Thou do Appoint rather then Deny Mar. 8. 38.
Lu. 10. 20.
Thee, or Disclaim it. That my name may be Writ in Heaven, and Read in Thy
Church; and above all, that my Soul at my last hour may be Received into
Heaven, and my Body at Thy last day, may Rise and come to my Soul, and both
live Blessed with Thee for ever. Through His Merits, whose Skin was Torn, and
Flesh gored, and Blood shed for me Ps. 2^. 17.
and my Salvation. Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Saint Matthew's Day. Septem. 21.

MEDITAT. upon Mat. 9. 9. He saw a man named Matthew, sitting at the Receipt of
Custom, and he says unto him, Follow me. And he arose and followed him.
LEvi S. Mark calls him. He Mar. 2. 14. Mat. 9. 11.
writes himself humbly The Publican. An odious and execrable Office and Name. A
Receiver of Caesar's Tribute. A Sign of their Woe, and Badge of their Bondage.
Though a Jew, yet because that was a Gain he gets and minds the
Gentile-Office. He sits to it. At the receipt of Custom, however it stand with
Conscience.

There Christ sees him, and with a Cast of his Eye, and Call of his Mouth Darts
those Beams, and Breathes that Spirit into his Heart, which does at once wound
him and heal him. Christ said, Follow me. And he arose and followed him.

But whither now does Levi go with Christ? To His House? He has not a Hole.
For Lands? Mat. 8. 20.
He has none, but what he treads upon. For Moneys? A Fish brings Him a piece
to pay His Tribute with. For Pleasure? The Cross Matthew. 17. 25.
is His Cognizance. For Honor? Contempt is His Common Livery. Matthew. 16. 28.
For all that, He follows him.

And thereby does not lose but change his Office. To be an Apostle for a
Publican. A Treasurer of 2 Cor. 4. 7
Christ's for a Receiver of Caesar's. An Ambassador for a Customer. 2 Cor. 5.
20.
To take Tribute of Souls for the King of all the Earth. A King, to whom Caesar
owes himself, however he pays his Tribute. Christ is now his Caesar, The World
his Mar. 16. 15. Mat. 28. 19.
Counter, Every man the Money. And all Places (as well Rome as Jerusalem) and
all Persons of Mankind (as fast as Conquered) Tributary. The Young man that had
many Possessions went away Mar. 10. 22
from Christ to keep with them, Matthew leaves all to go after him. It Is well
he does.

Here is a door of Hope for poor Profligate Sinners; They may be Called and
Come to their Savior. The Bloody Persecuter, and Black Publican, both made
Saints, both Holy Apostles. And a Bar belongs to the Door, against Damning
before Doomesday. God knows (we do not) who are Reprobates. He may at last have
the Call of a Saint, who as yet has the Brand of a Profligate. Manasse is a
He, Magdalene a She of two Souls as Black as Hell could make them. Of which
one was taken into Grace 2 Chronicles 33. 13.
on Earth, the other is one of the Brightest Saints in Heaven.

God has two Baths (our Tears and Christ's Blood) which wash Blackamoor-Souls
white, and Leopards Isa. 1. 16, 7 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
Spotless. Taking Matthew both from the Receipt of Custom, and Custom of
Receipt. But then he came (so must we) at Christ's Call. If to be but a Disciple,
not an Apostle; a Saint, and not such a singular Servant, Zacheus the Publican,
not Matthew's Call. This is another, That Is the Better. More High, because from
Earth to Heaven; and Holy, because from the Devil to God: More Happy, because
from Temptations to Thrones: And Honorable, Heb. 3. 1. 1 Timothy 3. 6. Luc. 22.
30. Revel. 3. 21. Ier. 6. 16. Ephesians. 2. 14.
because to a Greater Kings Service then Caesar's. More Peaceable, because no
Rest but in God, nor Peace but by Christ. From the World to Bliss, from Sin to
Salvation, is the Blessed Call, the most Principal Service. An Apostle may
save others, a 1 Timothy 4. 16. Joh. 17. 12. Act. 24. 25
Saint is saved, not Judas, though an Apostle, if he cease to be a Saint. If
God then Call, Come, not with Faelix at leisure, so Time and Soul may be lost
for ever. With S. Matthew go at the first call. Whether in the soft murmr of
His Mercies, or Louder Thunder of his Judgments (which is Gods) or the still
voice of His Spirit, or open mouth of His Rev. 3: 20.
Word (which is Christ's) say as he did when called to our Redemption; Lo I
come. So, as S. Matthew Heb. 10. 9.
in his house I shall feast him in my heart: yea, when Obstinates make Hell an
Holy Day, I shall by my conversion bid God, and Christ, and Angels, to a
Festival, and give Heaven a Feast.

The Prayer.
O Lord, who did call Matthew from a Publican to be an Apostle, and did
make him and find him Obedient to Thy Call: I beseech Thee, by Thy Blood shed
for all, send forth Thy Powerful voice, and call All Turks, Jews, Heathens,
Apostates, from their and the Devils Impostures, Delusions, Idolatries and
Obstinacies, into thy Church to be Christians and believers with it. Call all
within the pale of Faith, but out, for life, to be Penitent and Christian
Livers in it. Romans 2. 4. Ps. 83. 16. Rev. 3. 7.
If Thy Mercies will not woo and win them to Thy service, let Thy Judgments
drive and draw them from their Sins. If the Key of Thy Spirit will not open
their Hearts, Ier. 23. 29.
let the Hammer of thy Word break them. As for me, when Thou do any way call
me from any sin, to any Duty, and say to my Soul, Seek my face, let my
Conscience Echo and Answer, Thy face Lord will Ps. 27. 9.
I seek. O let me seek and find it; Thy Face and Favor, Lord Jesus Christ!
Amen.

Michaelmas Day. Sept. 29.

MEDITAT. upon Heb. 1. 14. Are they not all Ministering spirits, sent forth to
minister for them, who shall be heirs of salvation?
THat Angels are the Excellencies of the Creation, appears by their Nearest
Approaches to the Creator. Man has a Ps. 104. 4. Joh. 4. 24.
Spirit, an Angel is One, as God Himself is, (they are Spirits,) Spirits all,
that implies many. Daniel has an Express for it; Dan. 7. 10. Rev. 5. 11. Heb.
12. 22
Thousand thousands -- and Ten thousand times ten thousand, Exceeding,
Innumerable many. But all in good order, A Hierarchy they have. Which, were it
not well founded on S. Paul's, Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Col. 1. 16.
Luc. 1. 19. Jude 9. 1 These. 4. 16. Rev. 1. 20.
and Powers, is sufficiently set up by S. Luke's Gabriel, S. Jude's Michael,
both which are made to be not Angels merely, but Archangels. One of which is
said to be so, and Another (whosoever he be) All these Holy Spirits are not
Peers, and in the Angels of the Church as of Heaven, a Parity is sooner made
then maintained, if the Holy must be like the Heavenly Hierarchy. Of what rank
and order soever, all are Ministers to Gods Majesty, and (at Dan. 7. 10. Luc.
1. 19.
His pleasure) Messengers to His Saints, and (piously and probably) some
Singularly sent and set to be the Guardians of His Children. Act. 12. 15 Psalm.
34. 7.
All, by a Common Care, and Some in a Particular Custody. And those two Places
divide their Offices, Gods Throne and Footstool. Ministering Spirits Ps. 103. 20
they are to God, and for them who shall be heirs of Salvation.

O my God, what an Honor is this to Thy poor Servants, that Thy Angels
descend from Heaven to Earth, to be their Ministers! What an Humble Obedience
is this in Them, to leave Waiting on Thee at Thy Throne Dan. 7. 10.
to do all good Offices to us on Thy Footstool! What a Blessed Security is
this to my Soul, that I shall not Miscarry, when besides the Ministeries of
Men, Angels are Thy Messengers and Agents for my Salvation! Let me see my
Honor and not stain it by any Acts of Fleshly or Worldly Baseness! Let me see
my Security and not fear it, that I shall come to Heaven, who have Thy Son for
my Captain, Thy Spirit for Heb. 2. 10. Joh. 16. 13
my Guide, and Thy Angels for my Guard, all the way. Let me see their Humility,
and follow it; Contented (at the Pleasure of Heaven) to do all good things,
though mean, even to the meanest on Earth. And for all this Care and
Providence, and Goodness of Thine and Theirs, make me from an Holy and Humble
Heart Isa. 57. 15.
(Thy little Heaven) to send up to Thee Spirits of Praise as my best Angels;
and with them my Prayers as my Heavenly Messengers, Psalm. 88. 1.
that by all these good Ministeries and Means, I, who am Thy poor Child and
Heir, may be Inheritour of my Salvation: By Him who is the Firstborn He^. 1.
6.
of His Brethren, our Lord, and the Angels Sovereign.

The Prayer.
O Lord, when I consider the Wrath and Wiles of the Devil, Rev. 12. 12 Ephesians. 6.
11. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
who seeks as a Roaring Lion to devour me, And think how all his Legions of
Infernal Spirits are restless in their rage and toil to destroy my Soul, I
fear and quake, and the seizures of horror are upon me. But when I believe
and behold Thy Heavenly Angels, more and mightier then they all, Engaged and
Employed to Preserve 2 Kings 6. 16.
me, I take heart and Hope. O let me take care too, To keep in my ways, that I
may ever be held in Ps. 91. 11.
their hands. And by the Holy Ministeries of Men and Angels under the Safe
Conduct of Thy Holy Spirit, be carried on in Thy Holy Fear, till I come to a
Heavenly Communion with them, in Thy Eternal Glory. Through the Merits of Him,
whom all Saints adore, and Angels worship, Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Saint Lukes Day. October. 18.

MEDITAT. upon 2 Timothy 4. 11. Only Luke is with me.
SAint Paul had much Company with him at Rome in his House, Act. 28. 30
but little at the Bar. One man was all. And the Disciple whose praise is in
the Gospel, S. Luke was 2 Cor. 8. 18.
that One. And it is much to his praise, that he was. For this proclaims him a
Man as stout as good. Whom Nero's Sword and Fury cannot fright from the
Discharge of his Christian Charity and Duty. And it gives a praise to Gods
Providence, To send S. Luke to S. Paul, The beloved Physician to a beloved
Apostle. A Prisoner, that may need as well Col. 4. 14.
his Art as his Love. To a man in Distress a Friend is a Cordial; but to one
in Restraint a Physician is a Double Friend. And a Disciple is the only Friend
to an Apostle, who may Administer both Corporal and Spiritual Comfort, being
the Christian Souls more ^ These. 3: 2
then the Bodies Friend. And none so Great in Grace, who does not need, none so
Mean in Office who may not from God give Comfort to the Soul. Blessed Saints,
you never want for Friends! S. Paul has* One on Earth, S. Luke, and one in
Heaven (God:) God stood by him. Luke was with him. He needs no 2 Timoth. 4. 17,
more that has such Two. S. Paul had more with God, His and Gods Angel, nay
all His Angels Act. 27. 23
about him. So it is with every Servant of God! If they have no Psalm. 34. 7.
Saints, Angels stand about them. God stands by them, if no man be with them.
God never forsakes His Servants and Saints. H^b. 13. 5.
Some Luke looks to St. Paul in prison, or God Himself looks after him. Angels
are his Hands of help, whose Office and Delight it is to attend Gods Commands
Ps. 91. 11. Ps. 103. 20
and Servants. S. Paul therefore takes courage, and with more Joy dies Martyr
then Nero lives Emperor.

Lord, let me leave none of Thine, if I can give them Comfort! Especially the
Messengers of Thy Will and my Peace, let Deuteronomy. 12. 19.
me never leave. If in their Extremity I cannot give them Bread and Wine, as
Abigail did to David's, 1 Samuel 25. 18. 1 Kings 18. 13.
let me with Obadiah provide them with Bread and Water, whose Hands from Thee
do Consecrate and Communicate to me the Blessed Bread and Wine. When Man and
Chain are both Ephesians. 4. 1.
Thine, let me both Honor and 2 Timothy 1. 16. 2 Timothy 1. 18. Mat. 10. 41 Matthew.
25. 43.
Relieve the Prisoner. That I may have both a Prisoners Prayer, and a Prophets
Reward. Let me not neglect Them in Bonds, lest I forsake Thee in prison. Yea,
Thy Church and my Self with Thee and Them, since she is bound in their Chain,
and I am chained in their Body, But a Limb of that Holy and Mystical Body of
Heb. 13. 3. Col. 1. 18.
Thine, of which I and They are mutual Members. And all are in Bondage, though
but one be Tied to, and with the Chain. Not only by Sympathy, but by
Concorporie^y, 2 Timothy 1. 8*
and as by the Compassion, by the Communion of Saints, St. Paul and St. Luke
are both bound in one Chain. And so Luke is twice with him, Body and Soul; in
the Mystical and with his Natural Body. Though (to the reproach of others)
Naturally and Sensibly, only Luke was with him.

The Prayer.
O Lord, who by Thy Providence did make S. Luke a Physician, and by Thy Grace
an Evangelist; let me never want the means of health for my Body, but
especially for my Soul. A Friend and a Physician let me ever find to help and
heal me in the way to Heaven. Those who are such let me ever value, and in
their distress never for sake. The Ministers of Thy Honor and my Salvation,
let me Reverence, and (if they need) Relieve. And what I desire to do in the
Name of a Prophet to such, God who know the Aims and Ends of my Acts and
Desires, Accept it for Jesus Christ his sake,

Amen!
Simon and Judes Day. October. 28.

MEDITAT. upon Jude ver. 1. Jude the servant of Jesus Christ.
GOd has more Servants then Good. All serve His Powerful Providence, even the
worst. But none serve His Holy Pleasure but the Best. Nebuchadnezzar was Gods
Servant, as the Executioner of His Wrath, but Ier. 25. 9.
David as a Saint and the Observer Ps. 89. 21.
of His Will. Such a Servant S. Jude was to Christ. Not as a Sheriff in the
World, but as an Apostle in the Church. And in their style he writes himself,
The Servant of Jesus Christ. A High and a Holy style. As much as an Emperor,
nay more. To Serve God is to Rule Lust, to which they are Slaves, who serve
Romans 6. 13. 8, 27.
not God. It is no less then to be an Angel, which is more by far, then to be
an Emperor. The Angels are (and its their Honor D^o servire Imperare est. Job
4. 18. Ps. 103. 20. Heb. 1. 6.
they be) Gods Ministers and Servants, Gods and Christ's, because His, and all
theirs, even the meanest which belong to Christ. Him Angels Worship, and Kings
Serve and Honor. Never more Sovereign then when Subject to Psalm. 2. 11. 1 Timothy
6. 15.
Him, who is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. Never so Happy, as when they do
His Work, who gives no less to His Servants Mat. 7. 21. To. 6. 22: Genesis 15. 1.
then Heaven for their Wages. Nay more, Himself, which is more then all, were
there not more Stars then Heavens. A High and Happy style, to write out
selves without blot, His Servants. And if His, it must be without blot. It Is as
Holy as High a style. For His Commands enjoin all Virtue, forbid all Vice, both
in Ps. 37. 27. Tit. 2. 12.
Life and Heart. A Service purely good, whose quality is perfect freedom of
Spirit from the slavery Romans 6. 18.
of Sin, and Holy Peace and Joy, the fruits of that Perfection. For Conscience
(Gods Deputy-Power) Psalm. 119. 165. Gal. 6. 16. Ps. 105. 3.
is quiet when He is obeyed And the Heart (the Throne of Himself) Glad, when
the Kingdom is in quiet.

Simon and Jude were both Such Servants, yea, and Extraordinarily so. The Day
therefore is to the Memory of both. Brothers in Office, if not Birth. By the
same Commission Acting their Apostolic Charge, and some say in the same
Country. And as Themselves, their Names agree. Obedience and Praise. Praise
the Language of Obedience, Obedience Sabellic.
the Life of Praise. When Heart and Mouth make such a Meeting, as the Church
for Them, The Soul keeps Holy Day for it self. O Lord, let me be Thy Servant,
if not as an High Apostle, as a True Disciple, Both to Thine and my Honor! Let
me make it my Joy to be so, my Care to continue so, and my Happiness in so
Continuing!

The Prayer.
O Lord, I am thy Servant, I am thy servant, the child of Thine Ps. 116. 16.
Handmaid, by my Creation and Redemption most fully and rightly Thine: Born in
Thy House ( The Church) my Mother and Thine Handmaid, most Duly and
Legitimately Thine! As of Right I am, let me indeed be so, To Do or Suffer the
will of my Lord, Ready and Resolved in my Mind, and Enabled and Instructed by
Thy Grace and Truth; That when Thy Will and my Work is done, I may be Rewarded
with Thy Joy and Mat. 25. 21. Mat. 19. 28. Isa. 42. 1. Mat. 12. 18. Mat. 3. 17.
Glory. And till then Comforted with Thy Love and Peace, Through the Merits of
Him, who is Thine Elect, The Servant in whom Thy Soul delights, Thy Beloved
Son, my Dear and only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen!
All Saints Day. November. 1.

MEDITATION upon Ps. 149. 9. Such honor have all his Saints.
SAnctified Persons they are Saints. And Men of Honor they must be, because
possessed with the Spirit of Glory. So they are in Gods Sight, and 1 Cor. 1. 2.
1 Cor. 3. 16. 1 Pet. 4. 14
all Eyes which know what belongs to Honor. For the Holy is above the Heroic.
(Yet much Isa. 43. 4. Psalm. 15. 4.
Glory is given by Men to that Spirit) which Devils daunt not, the Flesh foiles
not, the World moves not; This is the High and Great Heroical Spirit indeed,
and that is the Holy one. And in the Saints who are Victors (as such) of the
Ioh. 2. 13. and 5. 15.
Devil, the Flesh, and the World. Saints that are His. For some are not so. In
their own Esteem, or others Canonization, is not it, but in His Eye and Mouth.
And so Really His, because Consecrate Ezekiel. 43. 20. 2 Timothy 2. 21 1 Pet. 2. 5.
by His Grace, and Dedicate to His Glory. Persons of Honor they are. And an
Eminent one it is* Great and Good. What such have is such Honor.

Such Honor. No Worship. We must not rob God of His Glory, Isa. 42. ^. and 48.
11
and make the Saints Accessaries to the Robbery. Such Honors they refused on
Earth, and therefore Act. 10. 26 and 14. 15.
do abhor in Heaven. The Honor of Commemoration is their Due, and our Duty.
Adoration is for God, not Them. And Misplaced and Mispaid if to Rev. 22. 9.
Ecclus. 44. Hebr. 11.
Them for Him. We must Remember Them and Worship God. Glorify God in the Grace
they had, and Glory they have; Remember them, and Serve God better, not them at
all. Wear their Examples as Signets on our Hands, not serve them as Idols upon
our Knees. Remember them, and Serve God more, not less for them. More quick in
our Endeavors and Hopes for Heaven, because Heb. 12. 1. 1 Timothy 4. 8 Iam. 1.
12. Rev. 3. 21. 2 Timothy 2. 3 Heb. 2. 10. Gal. 5. 18.
they, who did fight as we do with Lusts and Fiends, are Crowned, as we shall
be (if we faint not) with Blessed Ends and Estates. Remember them as Christ's
faithful Soldiers, but Him as the Captain of their Salvation, and His Spirit
as their Leader; by whose Courage and Conduct, and not by their own Merits and
1 Cor. 1. 8 Phil. 1. 6. ^ Heb. 13. 7.
Powers, they Hold out unto their Ends. No Commemoration is too little,
Adoration is too much. Not to follow them, is to forget them. But eye them we
must as Copies, after not above their Original. 1 Cor. 11. 1 Phil. 2. 15. Mal.
4. 2. Act. 14. 15
As Stars, not as the Sun of Righteousness; Beholding a great Godliness, no
Godhead in them.

Such Honor, O Lord, Thy Saints have from Thee, Magnified in Thy Eyes, and
Glorified in Thy Sight. So much let Ps. 16. 13. Mat. 5. 8.
them have from me; let them be always Dignified, but (not so much as is Due
to Thee) let them be no ways Deified. And that such may be my Honor, Lord
make me one of Thy Saints!

The Prayer.
To the Honor of Thy Saints This Day is Dedicate, O Lord, but to Thy Glory in
Them: To Their Memory, but to Thy Glory. O Lord make me a Saint on Earth, that
I may be One in Psalm. 16. 3. Rev. 19. 8.
Heaven. One Before Thee in my Life, that I may be One With Rev. 2. 10.
Thee at my Death. If I have not a Name in the Calendar, let me Phil. 4 3. Rev.
2. 17 2 C^r. 13. 5.
have one in Thy Book, Wrote by Thy Hand in the Book of Life, and Copied out in
the Book of my Conscience. For One, who did and does Consecrate my Soul and
Service to Thee, Lord Accept, and Own me! Make me so Remember All, This day, as
to Pray and Seek, ever after to be One. One not in the Esteem of the World, but
the Church, yea not in the eyes of Men and ^aints (who may mistake) stake) but
in the sight of Thy Angels and self, who can not be del^ded. Such a One do
Thou man me by Thy Holy Spirit, in Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen!
So end the Holy Days.
THE HOLY FASTS Of the Church, With Meditations and Prayers, FOR
1 Wednesday Weekly Fast. 2. Friday Fast. 3. Ashwednesday, and Lent Fast. 4.
Ember-Weeks. 5. Eves of Festivalls. Holy Week; or before Easter. 6. Monday. 7.
Tuesday. 8. Wednesday. 9. Maundy Thursday. 10. Good Friday, or Passion Day. 11.
Easter Even, or Saturday before Easter, for Saturday Fast.
Advertisement touching the Churches Fasts.
I Presume Thee no Montanist, for so much Fasting, as if Man were an Angel. I
hope Thee no Epicure; so much for thy Belly, as if Man were a Beast. Yet even
They for their Gust, though not for Gods sake, had their Abstinencies: But I
suppose thee a Christian, of so much Piety and Prudence, as have betwixt God
and Thee, A Conscience of His Law, and Thy Need, and a Reverence to the
Religion of a Fast.

And since all such are for some Fasting, none should be against the Churches.
Nor will be, if they search wisely after their Originalls, and look well to
their uses and Ends.

Since the Jews, besides their Lu. 18. 17. Buxt. de Synag. Judaica. Mat. 13.
16.
Monthly and Yearly* Fasts, did and do keep Two a Week; We Christians more
Blessed, and so Bound to serve God more, must not Think Fasting Twice too much.
And as the Joyful Act of Christ's Ps. 118. 24.
Resurrection, Grounds the Weekly Festivalls ( by the Grant of all:) In all
Reason and Religion, the Mournful Passion should Found the Fast. On Those very
Days in which first by the Conspiracy Wednesd.
and after by the Cruelty Friday. Mar. 2. 20.
of the Jews, The Bridegroom ( Christ) was Taken away. And so it did of old,
and should now (without doubt of any) because by Apostolic order so done,
says Epiphanius, Comp^ndium (...) c 22.
and their Constitutions Clem. l. 5. c. 17. and 19.
.

And if our Souls be Gods Best Gifts, Eccl. 12. 7.
and their Goods, His Greatest Blessings; Ephesians. 1. 3.
and such should be sought by Extraordinary Devotions, Act. 13. 3
if not for Conscience, for Concernment sake, we should more solemnly Fast and
Pray at the Churches Ordinations, since the Ember Weeks. Jer. 3. 15. Mic. 2.
11. ^ves of Feasts.
Highest Blessing and curse that can befall Gods people, is their Good and Bad
Ministers.

To have a stomach to some Feasts, and loath all Eves, is to set up a Palace,
and make it no Portall, since they are but fair Entries to pass our Souls from
Secular to their Sacred Services. And serve as whets to our Spirits to feed
them better on the Holy Festivalls. Lent.


As for the Lent, or Forty Days Fast, the Antiquity and Authority and Use of
it, are so Great and Good, and General, that the Holy Fathers do hardly Allow
them Christians Si vis Christianus esse, debes quod Christus fecit, sacere.
Ille qui peccatum non habebat, Quadrage* simam jejunavit, Tu non vis qui
peccas. Ambr.
which do not Keep it, and will easily pass them for Infidels that Question
and Quarrel at It. And if after due Monitions to do more reverently and
obediently by the Church, their Opinions and Actions alter not, such may fear
to be sent and packt away amongst Heathens, and have Christ Himself Seal the
Pass. -- Let him Mat. 18. 17.
be unto thee as a Heathen.

And if All Lent be Good, The Holy Week. Sacratissimum tempus, vocat Caesarius.
last Week is not Ill. The Crown of That Penitential Time, and Complement of
The Holy Fast. The last Run of the Heavenly Course. A Time Anciently of so Many
and Great Pieties and Penances, Prayers and Tears, as if their Eyes were
turned Fountains of Salt Waters, and their Bodies fixed Pillars or Statues,
not like Lot' s Wife's of Apostasy, but Devotions.

And if That Week be especially Consecrate to Fasting, because in it Christ was
Hung on the Cross, we need not Execrate it as Profane, to Take in the Day, in
which He lay last and most in the Grave, and all our 1 Cor. 15. 17, 18.
Comfort Buried with Him. Though in Memory of the Creation it was sometimes
Anciently, otherways Kept as a Feast. And Fasting on Clem. Constable. l. 7.
Irenae. l. 1. c. 20. Epiph. Haer. 21. Ign. ad Phil. (...).
it, as some Heretics did, who held The Father of the World to be ill, and
that day sad, as the Birthday of it, was Cursed and Condemned, as not a
Service, but a Murder of Christ.

And if Thy Affection be not won by all this to a better Opinion and
Observation of these Fasts, The Scriptures are Good food for thy Soul, on which
the Meditations are framed, and They (I hope) not so ill and poor as cannot
Contribute any thing of more and better Light and Heat, to a Duller Spirit, and
but Ordinary Understanding. Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee
understanding in all things. Solomon's judgment was great, who bids thee Not
lean to thy own, and Trust Prove. 3. 5.
in the Lord. So thou may, and lean on His Church. As Gods Pillar 1. Tim. 3.
15.
to preserve His Truth, uphold Thee, and Keep both Christian.

Wednesday Weekly Fast.
MEDITAT. upon Mat. 27. 50. Then came they and laid hands on Jesus and took
him.
BLind Men! Do you see on whom you lay your Hands? It were fitter to bow down
your Mat. 27. 2^. Mar. 17. 14.
Knees to Him (not in Mockery, as was after done) but by an humble Entreaty for
Mercy, and Holy Adoration, as to the Son of God, and Savior of the World. The
blind Body Bartimeus that Mark 10. 46. and 51.
could not look, did cry after Him for his Eyes, and do not you for your
blinded Souls? Lord that we may recover our sight, were a Cry better from your
Mouths, then a rude Touch of His Body with your unhallowed Hands. But the blind
lead the blind. Your Guides Mat. 15. 14. 2 Cor. 4. 4. Joh. 9. 3^.
by Malice, you by Prejudice. The God of this World has struck you blind with
those two hands, and the God of Heaven (by a just one) suffers it. So you lay
hold on Him, to whom you should lift up your hands. But, Bold men! how dare ye
lay them on? True, He has only Eleven Disciples for His Guard, and they but
Two Swords to Defend Him, but with One word of Prayer can ask Lu. 22. 38. Mat.
26. 53.
and have more then Twelve Legions of Angels for His Aid. Each of which can
baffle and beat your Band, nay Scatter and kill an Army Isa. 37. 36.
of as many Thousands as you are Men. And One Legion cut off all both in
Jerusalem that sent you, and in the World that side with you, and make your
Torches light you and them to your Graves. Nay without moving His hands, did
not the laying of His Eyes upon you with the Dart of their Majesty strike you
down? And the Sword of His Mouth Jo^. 17. 6.
throw you backwards to the ground? And could and would (if His Mercy were not
more) as easily have struck you all under it? They were thus Blind and Bold.
They did it. The High Priests and Pharisees hire them to go, and Bribe Judas
to guide them. And so he (one of the Twelve, M^^ 26. 15. Acts. 1. 6. Luc. 22.
3. Man. 14. 44.
being Leader to them, and the Devil to Him) they come with him in the Front,
and upon the Word and Sign of his Treachery given, lay hands on him, and
apprehend Him. But Blessed God, Why do Thou suffer this on Thy Beloved Son?
It was, Act. 2. 23.
because Thou did so wisely order it; nor Soldiers that came, nor Sanhedrim
that sent, intended to serve the Purposes of Thy Providence, but by that
All-ruling Power of Thine, are made to perform and Advance it. They do Act. 4.
28. and 13. 27. Lu. 22. 2. Act. 3. 26. Heb. 10. 7, 10. 1 Cor. 2. 6.
it to have Christ's Blood, and He suffers it to work Man's Blessedness. So God
ordered the Salvation of the World by the Sacrifice of His Son. They seek to
bring him to a Cross, and this way they offer, and He admits and ordains it.
So that never Act was so foul, nor so fair. On Man's part full of Devilish
Rage and Hellish Tyranny; On Gods full of all Wisdom, Justice, Goodness, and
Mercy. So they fulfill His will (most Good) in doing their own (most wicked
one.) Judas therefore is not a Saint (as a Sect Iu^itae.
made him) for being Isntrumental to so great a Blessing; No, then the Devil
must be canonized more, who (in all those Motions and Actions) was principal.
Those High favors (...) Facts, Preparatory to the Cross, and Consummatory on
it, we owe not to the Devils or Man's, but to Joh. 19. 30
Gods Blessed Hands.

They did; let not us lay hold Isa. 49. 23. Heb. 13. 17. Lu. 10. 16.
upon Him. The Christian Prince and Priest are the Hands by which He Conveys to
us all our Blessings; if we be rude and violent with them, we lay Hands on Him.
Yes, and Christian men are His Limbs. We are rough with Him, if with them. The
truth is, though not our Selves, our Sins Act. 9. 5. To. 4. 25.
did. We by them robbed God of His Glory ( stole the forbidden Fruit) and the
Devil in that robbed us of our Honor (instead of Gods made us Beasts;) So we
Ps. 49. 20.
were the Thief, and He was Apprehended. To satisfy and Repair the wrong done
to our Maker, and Genesis 2. 17
our Kind. For this (if for His Sake) what should we not suffer? Violent
Tongues to be laid on our Credit! Hands of Rapine on our Estates! of Bondage on
our Persons! of Blood on our Lives! Apprehend of us what they will, Apprehend
us as they can, what is this to the laying Hands on Him? So Lord let me
apprehend Thy Phil. 3. 12. Ioh. 4. 42. Mat. 1. 23. Gal. 4. 5. Ioh. 1. 29. Heb.
3. 1. and 4. 15. Ioh. 1. 49. Act. 3. 22. 1 Timothy 6. 12. 1 Timothy 1. 19.
Apprehension, and so let me be affected with it. And so let me Apprehend Thee
too. Not with the Jew, but like a Christian; Not as a Thief, but as The Christ.
Not as a Malefactor, but my Savior. The Son of God and Man (in Thy Person.)
The Redeemer of the Church and World (in Thy Function) The True and Great High
Priest, and Prince, and Prophet, to be the Complete Christ, a full and perfect
Redeemer and Savior. So let me lay hold on Thee and Eternal life in Thee,
with both hands of my Faith and Love. And keep my hold with all my strength of
Prayers and Endeavors. That no man take away Rev. 2. 25.
my Crown, let no man have away my Christ. Let no Extremity without or within
me, no fraud or force of Devil or Man take Him, or make me give away my Hope
and Hold of Heaven by Him; lest I be a worse Thief then the Jew, Robbing His
Godhead as well as Manhood of life, Despairing of His Infinite Mercies and
Merits, who was both Man and God, To Death, against it; In my saddest
Desertion, in the hottest Temptation; In the deepest Distress of my own Spirit
and Danger of the Evil One, let me take and keep my hold.

The Prayer.
O Lord, who was content to be Apprehended, and could but did not Resist, to
show Thy willingness to Suffer for my Soul; let me suffer my self to be both
Apprehended; and (if Thy will) Executed for Thy Act. 20. 23. and 24. 23.
sake; And Endure both Bonds and Swords, rather then Renounce my Faith and
Allegiance to my Savior; let no Pillar of Pain, no Reed of Scorn, no Purple of
Contempt, no Cross of Shame, take me or hold me from what is for the Honor of
my Lord, and comes within the Conscience of my Duty. Let me Remember Thy
Sufferings, and not Consider what I Endure, but for Heb. 12. 3.
whom. The Day wherein Thou wast Taken out of the Garden (and within three
after out of the world) O Heavenly Bridegroom, on Those Days Thou (at least)
Allowest it, and let no man forbid me to fast. Mat. 9. 15*
Especially, if Thy Church Appoint what Thou do Allow. On the Day when Thou
wast Affronted by Barbarous hands, and Crucified by Bloody ones. Let me not
Remember my Meat but Thee. The Bread and Lord of Life. At least so far Ioh.
6. 35.
forget my Flesh, as to Bar my Body, what may make me mind the Savior of my
Soul. Whether I eat or drink, or whatever I do, Be Thou ever in my mind, and
Thy Passion in my Eye. But when their Swords and Staves were about Thee, let
not my Delicates be before me: Let me Pray and Fast. And Lord Hear and Accept
me, and Enable me to do my Duty to Thy Glory. Lord Jesus,

Amen.
Friday Weekly Fast.
MEDITAT. upon 1 Pet. 2. 14. Who his own self bare our sins in his Body on the
Tree, that we being dead to sin should live to righteousness, etc.
SEe, O Sinner! the Sins which Ezekiel. 18. 19. To. 8. 22.
thou make so light are loads. The whole Creation groans under their heavy
yoke. Yes, and The very Creator Himself cries out of their Burden. God
^ncarnate, The Son, did on the Cross; My Mat. 27. 46.
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And God ^ncarnate (The Father) does by
the mouth of His Prophet; I am pressed under Isa. 1. 14.
you as a cart is pressed under the sheaves. The Spirit of God (The Am. ^. 13.
Holy Ghost) Grieves and Groans for it. Lo, what a weight Sin is, which makes
The Spirit groan, Ephesians. 4. 30. Romans 8. 36.
The Son cry out, and the Father complain, Creator and Creation both; and yet
Thy Shoulders do not shrink under it. Guilts are Feathers to Insensible Souls,
where Sin is in it proper place, as the Element; Elementa non gravidant in suis
locis. Rev. 6. 16. Genesis 4. 13.
but when out of that obdurate Heart, and Conscience recovers, and retains
Sense of it, they will weigh like Mountains, nay Hills and Rocks will be as
Strawes and Feathers to it. As a burden the Son of God bare them; and though
God as well as Man (for all the Support of an Infinite strength) was ready to
Sin^ under what He bare. In His Body For His He had, and a True one Heb. 10. 5,
10. Heb. 2. 10, 14. Isa. 53.
it was. Else He could not Suffer, and then He should not Save. This Body of
His was the Butt of Man's Rage, but the Soul too, it felt Gods Anger. His Person
was the Mark, at which Heaven and Earth, and Hell too, bent all their Bows,
and shot their several Arrows. By which He became woefully wounded, Body and
Soul. So He was for no Guilt of His, Isa. 53. 5, 6 Heb. 7. 22. Mat. 6. 12. Heb.
7. 26.
but because He was our Surety, and undertook our Debts (that is) our Sins. Not
His; He was clear of all (Root and Branch) Original and Actual Guilt. Not
Gods: Then Man in justice should not Suffer for what God does do: Jam. 4. 7.
Jam. 1. 13. Jam. 1. 14.
No, not the Devils; For, Tempt he can, but not Enforce a Sin. For any thing
God does about them by His holy Providence, or the Devil in them by his busy
Malice, Man is Mother of them by his Lust, his Heart is the Womb, Himself
Contracts the Guilt. The Sins are Ours. For what we did in the Garden He
Suffered on Genesis 2. 27.
the Tree. On it He bore our Sins. O Cursed-Blessed Tree! Cursed on which Man
hangs: Blessed on which Salvation grows! For our G^l. 3 10. Ephesians. 2. 16.
Sins He becomes a Curse, for our Sake to become a Savior. That we should live
no longer to the Gal. 3. 13.
lusts of the flesh. No, for shame do not; They brought our Lord to the Tree.
For fear do not; If not Crucified, they will bring us to Hell. For Fear and
Shame do To. 8. 13. Heb. 6. 6.
not; They will Crucify Him afresh, and what hope for us by whom our Savior
is not once but twice Crucified! If Christians, we cannot, we are dead to sin.
Our Romans 6. 2. 1 Pet. 4. 2.
Profession else is to no purpose, and His Passion to no end. Therefore it was,
That we being dead to sin (His Death was to strike Sin dead, and make us
alive to God) that we should live to righteousness. To. 6. 11.
For He so fulfilled all for us, that we thus might fulfill all for our selves.
And so be righteous as he is righteous. Though not at His 1 John 3. 7. Luc. 1.
6.
Height, yet with His Heart, Really, Impartially, Inalterably, Lovers Isa. 38.
3.
and Doers of Righteousness. Jam. 3. 2.
And if so Set and Devoted to the Ps. 19. 22.
work, though not without Sins, Ps. 143. 2.
which raise Guilts, and give 1 John 1. 7.
Wounds; Though not without fails and frailties, often in the best and most
righteous Acts we do, which are our Griefs, and speak our Infirmities; The
Blood of the Cross, and Merits of that Blood, and the Spotless and Eternal
Heb. 9. 14.
Spirit of Him who Sacrificed Heb. 13. 12.
Himself for us (Life and Blood) will be both a Balm and Physician to cure all
those Weaknesses of our Souls, By whose stripes we are healed.

Blessed Physician, that give Thy Blood for Thy Patients Cure! Fusus est
sanguis m^dici, and factum est medicamentum phrenetici.
Is this after the manner of man, O God? 1 Samuel 7. 19.
As God, do Thou carry my Cares, and as Man, my Sins? Yea, Take a Body of
purpose to Bear what else had Sunk me down for ever! What a wonderful 1 Pet.
5. 7. Psalm. 55. 22. Act. 20. 28 Act. 3. 15.
Thing and Love is this, God to be in Gore, that Man may be in Bliss! The
Prince of Life to die, that the Child of Death should live! The Son of God on a
Cross, that the Son of Man should not be in Hell! Dissolve, O my Soul, into
Love and Tears for thy Dying Lord! Love Him above Lu. 14. 26. 1 John 5. 3.
thy life. To serve Him think Milstones light. To suffer for Heb. 10. 34. Phil.
2. 17.
Him make Tortures Pleasures. Hate Sin more then Death. The Crown of Pride as
His Thorns. Thy Hearts Lust as His Spear. Thy Isa. 48. 4.
Iron Neck, and evil Works and Ways, as His Nails. Their Habit as His Hammer,
which drives them home into His Heart, and His Hands and Feet. Had thou for
One a Thousand Souls, give all to His service. A Thousand Bodies, all to His
Suffering. A Thousand Heads, all to His Study. A Thousand Hearts, bate not one
to 1 Cor. 2. 2.
thy Savior. A Thousand Lives, lay out all to His Honor. Had thou for Two,
Two thousand Hands, let them all do His Business. Two thousand Feet, let them
all go His Errands. And will thou not Hazard a Hair of thy Head, lose an Inch
of Estate, quit a Jot of thy Pride, leave a Drop of thy Pleasure, quench one
Spark of thy Lust, for all his Love, and Blood, and Pains, and Passion? O Soul,
unworthy of so Good a Savior! O Soul, most worthy to be given to the
Destroyer! O my Soul, be thou never so unworthy!

The Prayer.
O Lord, Who did bear my Sins in Thy Body on the Tree; let me learn by Thy
Suffering why to love Thee, and how to fear Thee. O make me with all Saints to
comprehend Ephesians. 3. 16.
what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know thy love
which passes knowledge. And to the Height of Thy Honor, from the Depth of my
Heart, to the Length of my Life, all Lu. 1. 75. Ps. 119. 96
the Breadth of Thy Law, let me Serve Thee and Love Thee, my Lord and my
Savior! Let me have Thy Passion ever in my Eye, and carry Thy Cross in my
Breast, that I may ever love and serve Thee as my Life and Soul, yea, above
both: And do thou thence teach me to fear Thee, and not dare to sin, since that
which Nailed Thee to a Cross for some Hours, will Crucify me in Hell for
ever, if Thou do not save me; And Thou will not, except I Believe and Repent.
And Joh. 3. 18. Luc. 13. 4. Mar. 9. 44.
could I escape the Fire and Worm, which the Guilt and Corruption of Sin there
kindles and brood; Because it Hanged Thee on a Cross, and Laid Thee in a
Grave, in my Bosom, let not the Traitor and Romans 6. 6. and 12.
Murderer of my Lord Reign or Live. If any Day, let me not pass a Week without
a Memory of Thy Passion. If any other, let me not live This Day without some
passages of it, in that pious Meditation and Devotion. Let me Mourn for Z^c.
12. 10
Thee whom I have pierced, and weep for the Wounds I made in Thee by my Sins.
Not Thy Tree, but Thee, let me Adore; and Thy Wounds, not Thy Nails, let me
Admire. Be Thou (The Tree and Book of Life) my study ever, and Thy Bloody
Passion This Day's leaf. In which let me always Read Thy * Liber in quotria
folia rubrum, album, n^gr^ i. e. Passi^ Coelum, In sernum, (piorum Meditati^
veterum.)
Love and my Duty; And Daily learn to Esteem that, and do this better. As my
Mother (Thy Church) does this Day teach me, set apart to Fast and Pray in all
Humble and Holy Duty, to my Comfort and Thy Glory.

Amen! Amen!
Ashwednesday, or Lent.
MEDITAT. upon Luke 4. 2. In those days he did eat nothing. --
MAny times Christ did Fast, and Eat nothing; but once He did so, Forty days.
So did Moses twice, and Eliah once before. Deuteronomy. 9. 18. 1 Kings 19. 8. Mat. 17.
3.
Two like Him in their Fasts, and both with Him at His Transfiguration.
Possibility then there is for the Forty Days Fast. Not only He, who was God
as well as Man, but they who were mere Men, have Fasted and Lived Forty Days.
And if S. Austins Faith have Credit, there Epist. ad Casul. 16.
was one such in His days; and Petrarch l. 4. De rebus memorabilibus.
tells of one in His. But this is above the strength of Nature, though not
above the Power of God. In the Ordinary Pliny.
Course of Providence, the Seventh days Fast is made Mortal in men of Health:
However if the Fortieth be not Deadly, it is by Extraordinary Power. Moses was
all the while with God in the Mount. Elia's Strength was from an Angels Meat.
And Christ Observed a Fast so long by the Support of His Godhead, and held out
so may days by the S. Chrysostom.
same Hand which wrought all His Miracles. And if any since did the like, the
Privilege and Providence for it was the same. To keep up Life so long without
Bread, must be by some Extraordinary Staff.

What then should we do with These Days? Bind our Bodies strictly to them? As
good Tie our selves to a Grave. We should Die before we have half done, and so
not keep the Forty without adding to the living Man's Fast, a Dead Bodies
Abstinence. Shall we then quite loose our selves from them? That were to lay
the Churches Wisdom under foot, and Christ's Goodness in a Grave. We owe much
to His Memory, and something to Her Authority. And must pay somewhat, if not
much, Respect to His and Her Example. We cannot then Keep them as much as He
did; we must keep them as well as we can. As Daniel did His Twenty, if not as
Moses His Forty Dan. 10. 3. Jejunium magnum and generale abstinere ab
iniquitatibus. Aug. Trac. 17. in Joh. 1 Cor. 9. 27.
Days, Fast from Sin, Forty and all our Days. From Gluttony all, especially
These. By a Humble Temperance, if not an Utter Abstinence. From Pleasant Bread,
if not all. To Hunger, though not to Death. To Tame, though not to Kill the
Body. Following some Paces after Christ, though we cannot Overtake Him. To give
His Fasting (if not a perfect Conformity) a pious Commemoration.

This may be without Superstition. Sermon. de Quadr. Illa de arbitrio veniant,
ista de lege. Ad^lla invitamur, ad ista compellimur.
To speak or do against this, will scarce escape Profanation. Nay, it must be,
or we sin, says S. Ambrose. Other times we Fast by Choice, but these Days by
Law. Invited we are to others, but Enforced to these.

But if we cut off His Forty Days, let us not cast away His Fasting: That was
undoubtedly good in Him, and certainly was, and is for us. Adam played the
Glutton, and Christ Fasts for it. We do not so well but we have need, are not
so perfect but we have cause to Fast. If He without all Distemper in Flesh or
Spirit, much more we. To teach us that He did this; and to show us what 1 Kings
21. 9. Isa. 58.
Virtue there is if it be right done. Not as Jezebels for ill, nor as Isreal's
for fashion, nor as the Misers for thrift, nor as the Prisoners perforce, nor
as the Epicures for Gust; but Humbly, and Freely, and Conscionably, and
Charitably to seek God when we have most sense of our Sin, and need of His
Mercy.

This is the way to Avert and Prevent Judgments. It Takes 1 Chronicles. 20. 16. 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. 1 Kings 8. 37. 1 Kings 21. 29.
up the Plague, Keeps off the Sword, Drives away the Arrow of Famine. Pacifies
Anger. Mitigates Fury. Moves Mercy. Propitiates God. Procures Favor. (All good
for our Lives.)

It is the Cordial to a good Temper, and Cure of a bad. Restorative of
Strength. Preservative to Health. Expulsive of Sickness. Dreines Rhumes.
Spends Superfluities. Digests ill Humors. Helps Distillations. M^rbos sana^,
Distillationes exsiccat. Act. 2.
Heales Surfeits. Leaves the Dear and Doubtful way of Art. Sends to the
Physician that Heals without a Fee. Lets Nature do Mar. 5. 26.
her own work, which will be sure to do her self no Mischief. The true
Philosophers Stone which alone cures all Diseases. (So good is it for our
Bodies.) Cardan.


And it is of Virtue. To take down the Flesh. Cool Concupiscence. Curb Lust.
Baffle Temptation. Beat out the Devil. Deny Vanity. Defy the World. (An Armor
of Proof against our Ghostly Enemies.) Mentem purgat, sensum sublevat, carnem
spiritu^ subjicit, cor contritum facit. Aug. sic. Athanas.
It Elevates Sense. Purifies the Mind. Exalts the Spirit. Breaks the Heart.
Cleares the Memory, and Cleans the Conscience. Sovereign (in all Faculties) for
the Soul. It is the Root of Grace. The Ground of Chastity. The Plough of
Holiness. Daemones fugat, malas cogitatione expellit, mentem reddit
nitidiorem, cor purgatius, mors culpae, remediu^ salutis, radix gratiae,
fundamentu^ castitatis, ^oc grad^ Elias, etc. Amb. de Eliae. jejunio. Singular
aratrum Sanctitatis. Hier. Alimentuman^mae. Chrysostom.
The Death of Sin. The Strength of Prayer. The Ladder of Jacob to see God
Above. The Chariot of Eliah to Ascend to Heaven. The great Friend and Furnisher
of all things needful and useful for Salvation.

If not for Christ's sake, then for our own. If not for Heaven, for Healths
sake. If not in Piety, for Peace. If not for our Souls, for our Lives. For our
Bodies, for our Goods, for our Worldly Bliss sake, Let us Fast, at least some,
if not Forty Days. Do the Moral, if not Miracle of the Fast. Had the Jews so
many Set and Solemn Fasts: Have the Turks Three Rambans, and we not One Lent?
They Three Times in a year, and many of us not Three Days? nay some not One,
unless want, or will, or Sickness, bid the Fast. No, not this first and great
One, the beginning of that Holy and Humble Time. If we will not Keep a Lent to
the last Foot, let us not Break it in the Caput jejunii.
Head. If no Sackcloth and Ashes of Abstinence, let us forbear Silks and
Powders, and Banquets on the first. No better season of the Year for Health,
then this. No fitter Time for Sin and Woe, then now, to Fast. An Age of so
much Sin and Sorrow, as till God Amend us and It, should turn all the Year
into a Fasting-time. And lest the Fire of his Wrath should Consume us all to
Ruin, make us to have not Days, but Months of Mourning, and more and many
Ashweeks, as well as One Ashwednesday.

The Prayer.
O Lord, who for our sakes did suffer Thy self to be Tempted of the Devil,
and Before did Fast, and do Teach us, that Fasting and Mat. 4. 2.
Praying are the Two Holy and Mighty Hands, by which we may Mat. 17. 21.
cast out the greatest Devil, that neither He nor his Temptations may prevail
against me, let me Watch, and Pray, and Fast. And do Thou, Mat. 26. 41. Heb. 2.
10.
The Captain of my Salvation, succor me in all my Conflicts, and Accept me in
those Holy and Humble Services, which I desire to do to Thy Glory, and my
Salvation. Under Thy Banner Lord Jesu let me To. 8. 27. ^hilip. 4. 12, 13.
fight, and by the Power of Thy Merits and Graces let me Conquer. And in the
Holy Army of Thy Church let me keep, and her Heavenly Orders and Times observe;
that Joining with Her Prayers and Fasts, my Devotions may have a Better Spirit,
and Greater Strength, and find More Favor with Thee, who have made Her (as my
Dear Mother, so) Thy Beloved Spouse; And love that Duty best, which is done
with Obedience to Her Laws, in Conformity to Thy Will, and Correspondence to
Thy Honor. Lord let me so fight together with Her on Earth, that I may Triumph
with Thee and Her in Heaven! Amen; Lord Jesu,

Amen!
Ember-Weeks Fast.
MEDITAT. upon Acts 13. 3. And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid hands
upon them, they sent them away.
A Fair Original for the Churches Embers. These Deeds are Her Evidences. This
Time Her Title. And these Ancient Days Pleas for Her Holy Weeks. Her Commands
are but Transcripts of Their Apostolic Orders; and Her Practice a Copy of
Their Warrants made and signed by the Holy Ghost. And were it well weighed and
considered, would be better obeyed, and not quarreled at. Blessedness is the
Joh 21. 15 Act. 20. 28
Best business in the World. Care of Souls the Greatest work of the Church.
Nothing then of greater Concernment can be for the Children of God or Men, then
to whom that high and holy Care is Committed, who are Trusted with our
Salvation and Souls.

Who should be, God tells us. Breasts that have Urim and Thummim Deuteronomy. 33. 8
upon them (Men of Ability and Integrity.) These are Gods Priests. Heads that
take heed to themselves and to Doctrine. (Such 1 Timothy 3. 16.
should be Christ's Ministers) That was writ in Aaron's Pectorall; and This was
read in S. Paul's Caveat. In the Baptists Commendation, both; He was a burning
and a Joh. 5 35.
shining light. None that had a Blemish in his Eye or Hand, or any else might
be a Priest to God, though a Son of Aaron. And Lev. 21. 17. and 2^. Heb. 4. 5.
Act. 13. 2.
that is not all, To be Qualified; He must be called too, as was Aron, or
separate to the Ministry, as Paul and Barnabas. Found, or made fit by God, in
Ordinary or Extraordinary Calling; and by the Church Ordained. Consecrated by
Holy and Appointed Hands. 1 Timothy 5. 22. Tit* 1. 5.
All Knowing Men may not be; then every Intelligent* Person might be a
Minister. All Godly Men must not; then there would be as many Priests as
Saints. All of Understanding and Integrity cannot; then all of any Perfection
could be in Priesthood. The Church is a Body; all Members 1 Cor. 12. 14. Cant.
6. 10. Ephesians. 3. 15* 1 Timothy 2.* 15.
are not Tongue or Eye: An Army; All in it are not Commanders and Leaders. A
Family* Every one is not a Master or Steward. No* As it was with the Prophets*
and their Sons, they did not go out, till they had their Mission and
Commission; it was and must be with the Apostles and their Successors; Hands
must be laid on, before they move in the Ministry. As they must be men
Qualified, they are to be duly Chosen and Commissioned. No man must dare to
Assume an Holy Office in the Church without their and He^ Orders. So it was in
Ours, and will not be well till it shall be. The Churches Rules are good.
Testimonials for Life, Examinations of Ability, before Mission into the
Ministry.

And for this She requires the good Prayers of the People. And for their
greater Efficacy Appoints Efficax est ^ratio prae^edente je^unio. Cypr. Mat. 9.
38.
Fasts with our Prayers: Christ gives Her His Warrant, Pray to the Lord of the
harvest, that he will send laborers into his harvest. And is it ill to pray
God to Direct and Prosper the Work, and Bless both them that are sent and
send? Or, is it unseasonable to do it at the Times of their Sending? Or
unjustifiable to Set and Appoint such Times? And if Prayer then be good, is it
worse for Fasting? or is it any Bar to Gods Blessing to Fast and Pray, when we
seek it? Or is this less Beseeming and Pleasing God, because it is a Solemn
Fast? As S. Paul said of the men of Athens (though ours are no great Learned
Act. 17. 22
men who most Except at these things) they are too Superstitious. They would
not else raise such a Smoke of Obloquie against these Orders of the Church, and
rake up so much Scandal, as if the Fire of Hell it self were to be found under
Her Embers. In this too Superstitious; and with that, Profane too. O what sad
and fearful Profaneness is brought upon the face of the Church by a fond and
vain Fear of such Superstition! Aarons Priests turned out, and Jeroboams taken
in. Gods Order abolished, and Confusion admitted. As if His Calves were our
Gods. Basest Men serve for Priests. Priests of Wood for Gods of Gold to those 2 Chronicles. 13. 8. 1 Kings 12. 21. and 28.
who make Interest their Heaven, and Gold their God. The Churches Elect are the
Times Reprobates; and Her Castawayes the Ages Chosen ones. The Holy Army is
Routed, no Ranks kept. Apostolic Order and Orders are both Broke and Damned.
Ministers are unduly made by others, or of their own making themselves. The
Land so spirited and Manner'd, and strange to what it was, as if we were not
the same Nation. And the Church so Altered, so Confused a Chaos, as though we
were of another Religion. Both so far from being Primitive and Apostolic, for
Doctrine or Discipline, in Faith or Life, that we stretch Charity it self to
call us Christian. And if the Spirit of Ataxie find not a Power to cast it out,
shall in time (if not thrown into Atheism) be turned Heathen.

O that our Usurpers would remember Uzza's Breach, for touching 2 Samuel 6. 8 2 Chronicles. 26. 19.
the Tottering Ark, when he was not a Levite! And Uzzia's Brand for Offering
Sacrifice, when not a Priest! That the Good Care of the one did not shield his
Body from Death; nor the Crown of the other could keep a Leprosy from his
Forehead! O that all their Abettors and Receivers would Mat. 7. 15.
take Christ's Caveat and Character of such; Beware of them (as Wolves to the
Flock) though they show in Sheeps clothing. And listen to S. Peter's Prophecies
of 2 Pet. 2. 1.
such, and the Prophets Marks for these Pretended Men of Gods Privy Counsel:
The good Times Jer. 23. 22.
and Men, they have made us, Declare whether they be of God, or have Another
Spirit then the Holy one to lay Hands on, their Heads and Hearts to be His
Ministers, and not Gods Apostles: O that all which fear God would lay this to
Heart, and then not a few weeks, not four Times of the year, but many more,
would put us to our Ashes and Embers.

The Prayer.
O Lord Jesu Christ, who with Thy own Blood did Purchase Thy self a Church,
and by Thy Act. 20. 26. Ephesians. 5. 26.
Word and Spirit sanctify it to and for Thy self, and ordain a Settled and
Sacred Ministry to Propagate and Preserve it in the World; and did Thy self
send Apostles and Appoint Joh. 20. 21
them and their Successors to set apart Chosen men and Able for Thy Service,
and the Salvation of souls to the end of the world: Hear all Prayers made by
and in Thy Church, for the making and ordaining of such Holy and Necessary men:
And let me bear a part in all those Devotions which are offered to Thee for
that purpose, at such Holy Times. Thy Blessing be on all such Holy Hands and
Heads. And from them, on all our Hearts and Souls. Save Thy Church for Their
sake. Send and save them in it for Ours. Save Isa. 62. 1. 7. Ps. 106. 23.
us all for Thy Names sake. By the Merit and Virtue of Thy Blessed Name, Jesus,

Amen!
Holy Dayes-Eves and Fasts.
MEDITAT. upon Mar. 15. 42. And when the Eve was come, because it was the
Preparation, that is the day before the Sabbath, etc.
THat Holy Feasts are God's Dues, is a Law Imprinted in Man's Breast, as well as
Expressed in Gods Book, and so writ both in His Volume and Epitome. That there
should be Preparative Times to those Feasts, has as much of Reason in it as
Religion. The Mind must be Taken off from Worldly Matters, before it be Busied
on Heavenly. The Heart cannot Attend both at once: And all is nothing which is
done without the Heart. This is not obscure in the Gentiles, but clear in the
Jews. For the Sabbaths, for the Passover, for their High Days and Feasts
they had their Parasceves, their Days of Preparation. Joh. 19. 14. and 31.
And as we call our Great Feasts by their Names (Passover, Pentecost) (not out
of Jewish Principles or Inclinations, but upon wise and Christian grounds) To
show the Things to be ours, and our Religion (bating Circumstance and Ceremony)
to be Ut quod ipsi in figura, nos c^l^bremus i^ veritate. Aug.
for Substance the same; Ours may have Eves as Theirs had Preparations. And, as
the Church appoints, Fasts on those Eves. And I see not how They should be ill,
if the Feasts themselves be good. And if none be so which are not by Divine
Precept, Mordecai and Esther did ill to Command the Feast of Purim, and (which
is Est. 9. 29.
horrid to say) Christ Himself did not well to Observe that of Joh. 10. 22.
the Dedication. The use therefore is Justifiable and Commendable, where there
is such Injunction. Especially in Things which Concern Gods Honor and our
Souls Health. And Consequently (besides the Bliss of Heaven) even our Blessing
on Earth too, as it is here. For as to Honor God with our substance, Prove. 3.
7. Ephesians. 5. 16.
makes it flow, so, with the Treasure of our Time, makes it Come upon us. Never
so well Bestowed To. 8. 18. Romans 2. 7.
and laid out to Advantage, as for Eternity and Blessedness. When the Jews
went from Home to Gods Sanctuary and Service, He kept House for them. His
Providence stood Sentinel at the Door, whilst They were in His Holy Camp.
Sacred Worships prosper Commonwealths, and Holy Pieties do not Impair but
preserve a Kingdom. Jachim That is, He shall Establish.
and Boaz In it is Strength:
were the Pillars of the Temple-gate. The Strength and Stability of Jury was to
be seen in those Pillars, and got and gone to by that Gate. Did not Atheism
turn Religion out of doors, it would be better both for the Church and the
World. And Gods Service would Jer. 17. 24, 25. Isa. 55. 2.
not be thought a loss of Time, but a Good as well as Holy Husbandry.

For the great Feast in Heaven all on Earth is but one Eve: A Short Vigil to an
Eternal Festival. And as the Four Advents are as an Eve to Christ's First
Coming 1 Timothy 1. 15.
to be our Savior; so all other Festivities with that are but a Preparation to
His Second, for our Heb. 9. 28.
Salvation. They were as four Number. 10. 3
Trumpets sounded before the Solemnities of His Holy Birth. And These as so
many Bells ringing us into our Heavenly Blessedness.

Indeed our Holy Feasts on Earth do both Promote and Type our Joys in Heaven.
And as Epicurus his Abstinences got him a better Gust to his Belly-chear, The
Churches Fasts give our Souls a Holier Relish and Happier Digestion for the
Spiritual Meat. They that will not Fight against a Holy Day, should not
Quarrel at an Eve. And when the Heat is over (if they do) will discover an Ill
and Erroneous Spirit to have made and maintained the Quarrel to the prejudice
and loss of much precious Time, if not Blood. And when we are to pass from
earth, will find it no good Preparation to Jude v. 19
that High Passover.

The Prayer.
O Lord, who Allowest and Enjoynest us to Feast and Fast, both in a Civil and a
Sacred way; what I may do by my own Appointment, what I must do by Thine, what
I should do by Thy Churches order; let me not decline, but do, not Oppose,
but Observe. Thee I do in Her and Them; My soul and self in Thee. For the
more I serve Thee the more is my Blessing on Earth, and will be my Blessedness
in Heaven. Day and Night if I cannot Luc. 2. 37.
with Anna in the Temple, because of my business and charge in my House and
the World, yet Days and Eves let me keep; All that are Holy to Thee and in
Thee: Since I am Redeemed to serve Thee all my Days, let me not deny Thee
those Holy Hours; Since Thou will give me Eternity, let me bestow Luc. 1. 75.
my Time upon Thee. With a 2 Timothy 1. 3 Act. 26. 16 Ps. 100. 2.
good Conscience at all Times, with good Devotion on Holy Ones, daily and duly
serving Thee; That when my last hour comes, I may by the Door of Death Enter
into Life Immortal and Eternal, where there is Rev. 22. 5.
no Eve nor Night, but a Feast Day which lasts to all Eternity. So be it with
me now, and to me then, I beseech Thee, Lord Jesus,

Amen.
THE HOLY WEEK Before Easter. Meditations and Prayers, UPON
1. The Bloody Sweat, for Monday. 2. Judas Kiss, for Tuesday. 3. Caiphas
Prophecy, for Wednesday. 4. Pilate's Sentence, for Thursday. 5. The Doleful Cry
on the Cross, for Friday. 6. The holy Sepulcher, for Saturday.
Advertisement touching the Holy Week.
THe Devotions and Mortifications of all Lent were not little, but This Week
became Exceeding Great a. It was held and kept as a Called the Great Week.
Holy Time, but this as the Oracle in the Temple, (The Holy of Holies) was most
Holy Holy Week.
. In it Devout Men not content to be Saints, strove to be Angels. So Careful
of their Souls, as if they had no Bodies. So Mindful of Christ, as if He were
their only Meat, and they had no Life but His Death to think upon. As Duty to
His Father was His Meat, Joh. 4. 34.
Devotion to Him was theirs. His Cross their Table, and the Passion Passion
Week.
their Food. To which they had the better Appetite for what followed after (His
Holy Resurrection and Communion) in His Easter and their Eucharist. The Church
therefore spread all the Gospels before them which write the Passion, that so
by their Eyes and Ears it might better come into their Souls. That it was
Acted and Represented as a Play to their Senses, I read not of old, Their
Devotion was too full and free to need such Artifices. The Springs of Tears
did so naturally flow from their Hearts, they used not such Pumps for these
Holy Waters. In Conformity to Ancient Church, Ours, Each Day this Week (as fit
and holy Fare) sets before her Children Passion- Epistles and Gospels. Serving
our souls out of both Testaments, as it were with Two Courses. And in
Observance to both (I hope without offense to any) I take some pieces out of
them, all which will make our Minds more Intent on the Cross, and Perfect in
the Passion. The Bloody Sweat was His Cross in Gethsemani, His Mat. 26. 38, 39.
Suffering out of Golgotha, His Pro-passion, His former Crucifying, that is
First. For the Latter in Calvary Judas Kiss made the Way. Caiphas Prophecy
tells the Cause. Pilates Sentence gives the Law for it. And Christ's Cry the
Close to it. Now because the Sweat and the Kiss upbraided is only in St.
Luke, The Prophecy in St. John, The Sentence and Cry in S. Matthew, not of
choice to cross the Gospel of the Day, but of purpose to pursue those
Particulars of the Passion, I was Constrained to that Change. With more easy
pardon I presume because (though not that Order) I observe the Aim and Act of
the holy Church and Week both, in each of them the Meditation is of what it is,
or belongs to the Passion. Touched at least, if not Handled in Every one.

God make all our hearts Touched with It. Though what is said of S. Francis, we
have not his Wounds printed in our Bodies, S. Ignatius his Impression will do
well in our Hearts. And with Magdalene, to let them Bleed in our Eyes. I pray
my Pen may prove a Lancer for such Joh. 25. 11*
Wounds, and that no Eye which falls on her works may come off without some
answerable Bloodshed. The Two holy Lessons of the Cross, whatever Pen or
Tongue does Teach, God grant us all to Learn, More to Hate our Sins, and Love
our Savior.

Monday before Easter.
MEDITAT. upon Luke 22. 44. And his sweat was as it were great drops of blood,
falling down to the ground.
WHence is this, that in a cold Joh. 18. 18
Night, when others are Crowding to the Fire, my Lord is sweating in the open
Air? What Sweat is this which flows in such abundance from His Blessed Body,
as if all the Parts in It were Doors, nay Floodgates to to pour it out, so
that it runs and trickles down to the ground? What Die is it which turns it
Bozra's color, Blood-red, and Isa. 63. 1.
puts the Body all in purple, from which it flows and falls as drops or clods
of Blood? Whence it is not, I can soon know, it runs not in a course of Nature;
Season, Measure, Color, all are Extraordinary in it. It was not the Issue of
any Distemper in Christ; He bare all our infirmities in the Mat. 18. 17
Kind, but Personal ones (of His own) He had none. Was it some Conflict with
another Body, which made His Spirit boil and burst out in Blood, as has been
seen on some lips, Scanderbeg.
when fired with Fierceness and Eagerness to Fight and Battle? Besides, that
all His Limbs, nay His Pores, are Bloody Lips to speak His Anguishes. Here are
none but Disciples, Friends, and Servants about Him. Did He like Jacob wrestle
Genesis 32. 24. Hos. 1. 24.
with some Angel, and as He bled Tears from his heart, shed Blood and sweat,
and Wept both, as if His Body had been turned all Eye for such Weeping? No, All
these Heavenly Mat. 26. 53. Lu. 22. 43.
Legions are at His Command, And One comes at this very Time to Comfort Him.
Did Mat. 4. 11.
the Devil do Him this Distress? Enter Combat with Him again, and fight Him in
a fresh Duel of Temptation? No, that Field was fought and past; and His and our
Ghostly Foe utterly Beaten and Baffled in it.

Thy Sin, O Son of Man, caused this Bloodshed; Thy Guilt, this Sweat; That was
the Sword, This the Fire, which made this Blood and Sweat. Adam sinned in a
Garden, Christ there sweats for it. His Day-lust made this Night-sweat. Man's
spirit was distempered in Eden, Gods Body therefore is thus bedewed in
Gethsemani. That we might not Burn and Fry in Hell, He thus Sweats and Bleeds
on Earth. He Suffers this Horrid Agony for a Time, Lu. 22. 44.
that we should not endure a Hellish and worse Extremity for ever. So He was
Gods Holocaust, that we might not be the Devils Burnt Offering. Besides
Gethsemani's Pains, Golgotha's were upon Him. Those Floods of Blood foreseen,
made these Drops trickle. The Passion then to be Acted on His Body, was now
Imprinted in His Mat. 26. 38, 39, 45.
Mind. Yea, what would then be upon Him, Mind and Body. The Guilt of Sin. The
Rage of Hell. The Wrath of Heaven. The Wretchedness of Man. Ungrateful Man,
for whose sake all this was Suffered to Save him from that Wrath and Hell.
Heaven, Earth, and Hell, all in Union to Afflict One (though God and Man) must
needs make a Heavy Conflict, a Blody Agony.

A Bloody, but a Blessed one. For my Caution; Did He thus Sweat for another
Guilt, and shall I not Bleed for my own? If instead of the pains of
Repentance, I take pleasure in Sin, will Romans 1. 32. Luke 13. 15. 2 Pet. 2. 13.
not this cost me my Life, my Souls Blood? Yes, but for my Comfort; If I be
Contrite, and by that put into a great Agony of Spirit, Ps. 51. 8, 17. and 147.
2. Isa. 57. 15, 1^.
I may come out, and must hope I may, by the Virtue, and under the Conduct of
this Agony of Christ. And be not (for His sake) a Cruel Judge, but
Compassionate Brother and Friend, to any Soul Christian, in the Horror and
Sweat of an Agony. And be Constant for Christ, to the last drop of Sweat and
Blood, be it in a Natural, or by a violent Rev. 2. 10.
Death. A Drop of His is more Act. 20. 24 Etiamsi me millies rependero, quid
sum ego ad Deum? Bern.
then a Sea of Thine, shed all thou have for Him. Though life with it fall to
the ground, and every drop were a Several life.

The Prayer.
O Lord, whose Sweat did drop as Blood to the ground, to Sanctify Genesis 6. 11.
what I had Defiled, and Satisfy for what I should have Suffered, and did at
Thy Passion for my Sin and Sake, not Drop, but Pour out Thy Blood: I beseech
Heb. 9. 14.
Thee by the Bath of Thy Blood, Heal all Sinners and Guilty Souls, Rev. 2. 7. ^
and by the Balm which dropped from Thee (the Tree of Life) Cure Heb. 12. 24.
Heb. 2. 17.
and Comfort all Sad and Wounded Spirits. And mine, which is or should be
wounded for my Sins. O Thou merciful High Priest, more Holy and Happy then
Aaron or Melchisedech, let Thy Bloody Heb. 7. 26, 27.
Sweat, as a Precious Ointment on Thee our Head, descend to the very Ps. 133. 2.
skirts of thy clothing ( all that call on Thy Name) Especially those Feet of
Thine which lie as low as Hell in their Sins or Thoughts; That if they see the
Flashes they may not suffer the Flames of Hell. And when their and my last
hour shall come, and Death drop the cold Dew upon my Cheek, O let Thy Bloody
one then fall by the hand of the Holy Ghost, from my Brow and Face to my Breast
and Heart. Lord wash me in It and Thy Blood; Head, Hands, and Feet: Other
Ceremony I ask not, This Extreme Unction Joh. 13. 9. Zach. 13. 1 Luc. 2. 29, 30.
I beg: Give it me Thou Blessed Physician of my Soul, Dear Jesus!

Amen.
Tuesday before Easter.
MEDITAT. upon Luc. 22. 48. Judas, betrayest thou the son of man with a kiss?
CHrist was A Son of Man, because God cannot Die, and He must that will save
us; so He Heb. 2. 14.
was a Son of Man for His Passion. And God as (naturally) He has no Blood, so
no Bowels neither, and therefore by the Sensible Experience of Flesh and Blood,
knows not what it is to be Tempted H^b. 2. 18.
and to Suffer, and so Christ was a Son of Man for our Compassion. The son of
Man He was; because never man came so into the World. By the Conception of the
Holy Ghost, Through the Womb of a Virgin. And never Luc. 1. 3^ 35.
such a man was in the World, because He was True God as well as Man. Isa. 9. 6.
Yet (though so Pure, so Good, so Godly, God-man) He is Betrayed. The best
Prince and Person on Earth is not priviledg'd from Treasons. David the Father,
and His Son ( The man after Gods own Act. 13. 22 Joh. 1. 18.
heart, and from Gods own Bosom) both have their Traitors. But who was
Christ's? A Professed Foe, a Pharisee? No, A Disciple, a Domestic, In High and
Holy Office. One of the Twelve Patriarchs Mar. 14. 10.
of His (Elect out of Mankind to Propagate and Govern the whole Christian
World) He an Apostle, and His Treasurer of the Twelve. He was the Brute to this
Holy Caesar, (...); Judas, Joh: 12. 4, 6.
betrayest thou? What moved Him to this Horrid Act? Malice? He quits himself of
that; No, it was Money. Millions sure? No, poor Thirty pence. Money, Mat. 27.
3. Tim. 6. 10
the old Makebate of Men, and Mother of all their Mischiefs. Avarice (which
turns Man Devil) makes him go with Temptation to them, before they bring Luc.
22. 4.
it to him, who were full of Hellish rage against his Lord. The Psalm. 2. 2.
Devil entered into him, and so he becomes both tempted and Tempter. Joh. 13. 2.
He tempts Temptation. Lord deliver us from this Devil of Devils! The Root and
Parent of all ill. Avarice! It will Betray our Soul, our very Savior. But how?
The Bargain is as basely sealed as made. With a Kiss. The humble Sign of
Allegiance? The Psalm. 2. 12. 1 Pet. 5. 14
Holy Seal of Love? Is this the Mark of Treason? With a Kiss, and Hail Master
in his Mouth, does he give them Livery and Seifin of His Lord? No news for
Kisses to be as the Instruments and Conveyances of Wantonness, so the Trains
of all Wickedness. 2 Samuel 15. 5.
Absalon Kisseth Israel into Rebellion. Joabs Murder is covered with 2 Samuel 20.
9.
a Kiss. It is the Box of the Poison, the Sheath of the Poniard. But never
such a Treason, never such a Kiss as that of Judas; because never so Great a
Person as Christ, so Good a Lord as His Master! so Fond, so Mad a Contract, as
for a little Money to sell what is better then the whole World (a Soul) and
what is greater Mat. 16. 26.
then all the Souls of the world (a Savior.)

What is the Issue of this? He Mat. 27. 3.
does Repent, Confess, Restore. He that goes not so far in Holy Penances,
does not Reach Judas: But he Despaires, and Dies unreform'd and Desperate. He
that goes no further, does not overtake him. In that he did undo and out-doe
himself. Not only Betray but Murder his Savior. And in this outstrip the
Jews, mischieving not the Manhood, but Godhead of Christ. To the loss of his
own, and all the Souls of the World in Him. For without a Savior no Salvation.
And if any Sin be Superior to His Saving Power, He is not God, He is no
Savior. So ended He. So end not Thou. Thou Christian (A Disciple of Christ) be
not a Judas to thy Lord. Betray not His Trust, in Doctrine. 1 Timothy 1. 11. 2
Pet. 2. 2.
His Authority, in Discipline. Sell not Souls for Gain, His Members for Money.
Do not Sell nor Buy His Patrimony for Pence. Barter not thy Interests in Him
for what is offered. If such a Jew be never such a Judas.

The Prayer.
O Lord, who have given me to see an Age wherein is so much Treachery to Thy
Holy Truth, Authority, Honor, Laws, Servants, Service, Church, Christian Lives
and Souls, that not to be some ways an Iscariot, is to seem an Idiot. Preserve
my heart from a faithless Spirit. Whatever my Trust, whoever my Lord is (so
not Cross to Thee and against Thee) let me be True to Him and It; As it stands
with the will of my Great Lord, and Thy great Trust: If not, let me not so run
from a petty Treachery, as to fall into the greatest Treason. As I dread Thy
Traitors End, let me abhor his Sin, and fear his False heart, as I quake at
his Bowels. Let neither Joabs Bloody Kiss, nor Judas' s, come from my lips. In
the Black Band against my Sovereign and Savior (my Lord and Friend) let me be
neither Chief nor One, Captain nor Follower. True let me be in all things to my
God and my Lord, and to my Friend (in right) that I may have the love and
praise of both. And that a false heart be not in me, keep Covetousness out I
beseech Thee, which for Thirty pence will betray Soul and Savior. Keep it from
me, and me from it, Lord Jesus.

Amen.
Wednesday before Easter.
MEDITAT. upon John 11. 50. It is expedient for us, that one should die for the
people, and not the whole nation perish.
THis is Caiphas his Prophecy, and our Wonder. Both for the Mouth and the
Matter. He thinks Mischief, but speaks Mercy. His Spirit is not below a Devils
for rage at Christ. His Tongue is above an Angels for Excellency. His Heart
conceives a Murder, the blackest that ever Heavens saw. His Mouth brings forth
Oracle the Happiest that Earth ever heard. So Good and Great is the Providence
of God! All Hands are made to do His Work. All Tongues to speak His Mind. To
Punish Israel Nebuchadnezzar is Jer. 29. 9.
His Sheriff. To Proclaim The Redemption of Israel, Caiphas is His Herald.
One is Gods Sword, The other His Trumpet. Neither minds what he does or speaks;
But He, the Destruction of Gods People, to advance his own Dominion; And This,
the Death of Christ, to Satisfy His Indignation. Thus whilst they do their
own Bloody Wills, they serve Gods Holy One. And whilst they follow their own
Cursed Ends, pursue His Blessed Act. 4. 28.
Interests. And when they neither know nor think of God, promote His Glory.

A Comfort to us to think, that if God will have a Business done (be it of
Justice or Mercy, to a Person or Nation) He can press the Hands and Tongues of
all (even His Enemies) to do Him and us any Service. If an Embassage to be
Delivered, an Expedition to be made, he never wants a Tongue or Hand. But
what is the matter Caiphas speaks? An Expedient the greatest that ever was, for
Saving the World; and the strangest, that Death should bring Salvation; so he
Prophecies; It is expedient that one should die. But who? A guilty one Suffers
for himself. A guiltless one should not Suffer for the Guilty. Die one must,
that is sure. All sinned in one, therefore All or Genesis 2. 17.
One must die. But must the Kind of Man suffer for the Particular Sin of One?
Yes, unless One can be found who will and may Suffer for all the Kind. Who
will; for by Consent he may, who by Constraint should not, if Innocent; Who
can; None therefore of the Guilty Kind. They are to die on their own score.
Their Death will be no Discharge to Others. How then shall One be Not guilty,
and Die? There Is the Mystery, He shall die as a Surety, not as a Principal.
For all Guilt Imputed, for none Contracted. Here Is the Mercy; There was no man
fit for this on Earth, therefore It does fetch one from Heaven. The First Man,
The Malefactor was from 1 Cor. 15. 47.
Earth (Adam) The Second Man, The Mediator is The Lord from Heaven (Christ.) So
the Business is Blessedly Reconciled. One that Ps. 85. 10.
Dies, Saves; and one not Guilty Dies; and one (Himself Innocent) is made (for
others) Guilty. A great matter it was to find such a Man, and mighty it must be
for which He is found. So it was, That the whole nation should not perish.
That Is poor, the whole World else should. What Die? That Is Pity: Be Damned.
Once and Ever Perish. Body and Soul; (both which Sinned) both must Die. Man in
both; every Body and Soul. Better One die then All, then Unity. Especially if
All shall live by the death of that One. And He do not for Ever, 2 Cor. 15. 22.
but for a Time die. To find this Man, this Means of Saving, is a Wisdom
which the Heads of 1 Cor. 1. 24. 1 Pet. 1. 12.
Men and Angels United and Met at Counsel, could never so much as Imagine. It
was Gods Expedient, His Love, called the Council, Love above all Example.
Justice pleads, All deserve Joh. 3. 16.
to die. Mercy moves some Means for them to live. Wisdom finds the way for
One to die for All. And Love of Christ beyond all Extension, goes it, and is
Ephesians. 3. 19.
That One.

The Prayer.
How shall I sufficiently praise my God, or Love and Serve my Lord, who when I
deserved to Perish Eternally, did Save me; and for that End, Suffered and Sent
His Son to die, who came to do and suffer That for which He was sent? Give me,
Dear Lord (that gave me Thy Blood) Thy Spirit, some of that High and Holy
Spirit of Love. Infuse into my Redeemed Soul, that I Ephesians. 3. 19.
may comprehend with all Saints what is Thine, and Exceed Angels with mine. And
as They, let me serve Thee. Not Thy Providence, as the most wicked men and
Devils do, and must; but Thy Holy Pleasure, as Thy best Servants do, and
should. Give me not Nebuchadnezzars, but David's Hand for Thy Service. Not a
Caiphas, but Peter's Mouth for Thy Glory. Not a Jehu' s Heart, but a Job' s for
Thy 2 Chronicles. 25. 2. Job 1. 8.
Holy Interests. Since one way I must, let me serve Thee the Best. And if not
better, O let me not pin and put my Ill Acts and Wills on Thy Heavenly Purposes
and Decrees, lest whilst I seek to Diminish my Guilt, I Double it. Once making
my self to offend, and again, because I make Thee; yea, more and worse then
Twice offending, because I so make Thee Principal, and my self but Accessory.
Lord let me not Love my self, Excuse my self, Serve my self so of Thee, but
love and serve Thee uprightly and eternally, for Thy Inestimable and Infinite
love in Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Thursday before Easter.
MEDITAT. upon Mat. 27. 24. I am innocent of the blood of this just person, see
ye to it.
THat Christ should be Clear of all, both Crime and Fault, was Necessary; else
He would not be, but need a Savior. He was so, Nicodemus sitting on the Joh.
7. 51.
Bench, and Pilate at the Bar. A Jewish Justice and Caesar's Judge is His
Witness. Why what evil Mat. 27. 23.
has he done (that is Capital and worthy a Cross?) Nothing worthy Lu. 23. 15.
of death is done by Him. And Herod does witness the same with the Judge. No
cause to Condemn Him. I find in him no cause at all. The Jewish Jury have Lu.
23. 1^. Joh. 19. 4.
the Malice to Accuse Him, but the Heathenish Judge has not the Conscience to
Condemn Him. Not only by the warning of His Wife, who sent her Dream from Mat.
27. 19.
her Bed to his Bar, but upon perusal of the Evidences against Christ, in all
which he read no Guilt, but great Rage against Lu. 23. 23.
Him. And plainly saw and said, it was no Ill of His, but their Envy Mat. 27.
18.
that Delivered Him. Envy and Malice, they were the Evidences which the Great
Accuser in Rev. 12. 10.
them produced to gain His Blood and Their Souls; Of Guilt, in Him there was
none, of this in Them there were all Evidences. And after Proclamation of
Christ's Innocence Thrice made, An Appeal to their Breasts (but to no purpose),
A Tender of Release (but not Received), When he Joh. 19. 39
saw nothing but His Blood would serve, to satisfy their Importunity Joh. 19.
13
and His Popularity, and a Dread of Caesar more then God; With Crucifying of
Conscience, and Contradicting in his Sentence, he gives up the Lamb of God to
their Mat. 27. 26.
Bloody Hands, to be Scourged and Crucified. But Enters first His Protestation,
that the Blame and Blood should be Theirs, He was Innocent. And Signs this with
Mat. 27. 24.
the Ceremony, and Seals it with an Imprecation, and washing his Hands in
Water as clear of that Blood, bidding them Look to it.

But if Christ be a just Person, is he that Condemns Him innocent? If His
Hands give away the Blood of the Guiltless, can a Sea, will a Basin of Water
clear Him? No; nor Judge, nor Jury, neither of them were clear. The Guilt (as
wished) was upon their Heads, and sticks to this day Mat. 27. 25.
on their Children. Not a speck (as some say) in some part of their Bodies, but
all upon their Heads, as appears in the Body of the Nation. The most Loathed
and Confounded People that ever was on Gods earth (now for sixteen hundred
years) from that to this, nay or before that day. And it clave as fast to
Pilates hands; who by the just Judgment of God fell first from Caesar's
favor, thence into Exile, and there on his Sword; Christ's unrighteous Judge,
and his own most miserable Executioner.

God keep all Concerned from Pilates Blood and Conscience, The Judge of Rome
and Jury at Jerusalem. As the Judges Skin, His Blood should terrify the
unrighteous from such Verdicts and Sentences. A fit Sign to be hung up and seen
in an Age full of Pilates, Jews and Iudasses. His Sword should be a Shield from
all such Judgments. Learn justice by His (...)te justitiam mo^iti, etc.
Bloody Body, and Damned Ghost, and Despise not Godliness. If Conscience cry
Innocent, for Applause or Fear, pronounce not Guilty. That does not Abrogate
or Extenuate, but Aggravate the Guilt, the Plea of the Time, to think well,
though we do otherwise, To have Principles for Right, but Practices with the
Time, is a poor one on which to put the great Case of Salvation and Cause of
Eternity. It is to say, We do ill against Light, the Check, the Cry of
Conscience; That is, we have none, or no better then Pilates. And if not so
good, a worse.

And God give us all Prudence and Providence. Every Judgment proves not a
Guilt. A Massacre is not Evidence enough for a Malefactor. Isa. 53. 4.
No, To show there is a Phil. 1. 28.
Bar to come, Such Dooms and Acts are suffered by God, and passed at Men's
Tribunals. The Pilate-Judge must stand at the Bar, and the Jewish Jury hold up
their Bloody Hands, when the Butchered Innocents shall sit on the Bench, and He
be their Judge, whom they Condemned and Executed. Be patient therefore brethren
Jam. 5. 7, 9.
to the coming of the Lord, behold he stands at the door, that fell at the
bar. Who when he suffered 1 Pet. 2. 23
threatened not, and Cursed not when He was Condemned.

The Prayer.
O Lord, who wast at once pronounced Innocent and Condemned to the Cross, by
Thy Appointment so suffering and ordering it that we might be Acquitted at the
Great day of Judgment; I Adore Thy Providence, and Implore Thy Grace, That I
may be a Just Judge at the bar within me, and not clear Guilt, and let
Goodness go to the Sword (Christ instead of the Flesh to be Crucified.) And
without, let me Grieve to see an Innocent Sheep doomed and sent to the
Shambles, but not wonder, since it was so with Thee, The Lamb of God. Make me
fearful to have a Hand in such guilt of Blood, and careful to have no Finger
in their hand, who to satisfy their own or others lusts, forbear not to
Condemn and Crucify a Saint, and in him, Thee, their Savior. Act. 9. ^.
Especially against the light of Reason and Conscience, let Pilats Bar be a
Pulpit, and his Breast a Sermon to preach better to me; and his Blood and Sw^rd
fright me, from all such Hypocisie and Villainy. Let me make use of his
Reluctance, to see mine a sign not of Grace but Guilt, if it check, but do not
cure my iniquity. From Pilats Blood and Judas Bowels deliver me, Dear Lord
Jesus!

Amen.
Good Friday, or Passion Day.
MEDITAT. upon Mat. 27. 46. My God, my God; why have thou forsaken me?
THe most bitter Pang of a most painful Passion. The last Cry before
Dissolution. A Cry which makes Heaven Tremble, Mat. 27. 50.
Earth Shake, The Sun dark at Noonday. Angels Amazed, Devils Affrighted, Men
Astonished. The Grave give up her Dead. The Temple tear her Vail. Rocks to
rend, and all Hearts (unless harder.) Whose is it, what will it, whence Lu. 23.
48.
comes, whither tends this woeful Cry? It is the Cry of one as a Man of Forlorn
hope hanging betwixt Heaven and Earth, as a Spectacle to Men and Angels, at
once Despised and Deserted by both. Is it thy voice, O son of David? Yes, even
Thine, O Christ Mar. 15. 39.
the Son of God!

But if His, how is He, how can He be forsaken? Can God desert His Son Himself?
Though Man did Tear His Soul from the Body, did God Take away His Eternal
Spirit from the Soul? Heb. 9. 14.
Was the Divine Majesty in Him Deposed, The Humane Nature Dispossessed of that
which was Divine? No, it was not, because it could not be in Christ. He was
ever Gods Son, He was ever Himself, God. And since He did Assume Manhood, His
Godhead was never severed from it, nor It from His Godhead. The Hypostaticall
is an Eternal Union. God since once, was ever with Man, and Mat. 1. 23.
the Godhead with God. The Desertion then was a Suspension of Comforts, not a
Separation of Natures. God did withdraw the Influences and Assistances of
Divine Power in His Passion, not Depart from His Person. An Exinanition there
was, not an Extinction. I hill. 2. 8.
Man was left by God, not bereft of the Godhead. It was at present laid by, it
was never lost. Nor was He further forsaken. But why so far, Thou Dear One of
God? A Guilty Earth, and Angry Heaven, and Busy Hell, brought this Woe to Thee
and Cry from Thee. That I should not be forsaken utterly, Thou did Suffer
this Extremity. Thus Deserted for a Time, that I should not be Damned to
Eternity. That I might not Roar in Hell, Thou did Cry on the Cross. The
chastisement of our peace was upon Isa. 53. 56.
Thee. The Lord laid on thee the iniquity of us all. And now the full load of a
World of Sins and Sinners was laid on Thy Soul, and this caused the Cry. That
which made Thy Sweat in the Garden, makes Thy Cry on the Cross. There the
Cross was in Thy Spirit. Here Thy Body is on the Cross, and the Soul in the
Body, One was at Gethsemani, Both are Crucified at Golgotha. The soul is made a
sacrifice for sin. The Isa. 53. 10.
Body Exposed to the Rage of Earth and Hell, for Sacrifice. This broken, That
bruised, nay so Torn and Mangled in pieces with Pains, that her Wounds so much
exceed the Body's, as Gods Wrath is above Man's, and all our Sins more then
their Thorns and Nails. The Blood cries them to be insufferably Great. Thy Cry
speaks them to be unspeakable Sufferings. And yet not the proper pains of Hell.
It is Simplicity and Blasphemy both, to make God in Hell, or Hell in God.
Hellish they were, that is, most Extreme. And Hellish they were, that is,
Sufficient Expiations to Save us from Hell; but Hells they were not. Nor for
Time; because Temporal and short; Nor for Height, because nor Worm can Bite
the Mar. 9. 43.
Breast of God, nor Fire Burn His Body. Such are not Infernal and Eternal
Pains. The God of Heaven did not, could not suffer the Pains of Hell. And as
in greatest Extremity and Discomfort He calls God His ( My God, my God) words
of Hope, which show God to be His Father, and Him to Believe in God as His Son;
So He was in it, as Before it, God as well as Man. And as both, Luc. 1. 32. 35.
The Son of God.

This was Thy Cry to God! What is this Cry to me, O Christ? Shall it not Cry me
to Contrition for my Sins, which Zach. 12. 10.
caused Thy Sufferings? Shall it not Cry me to Consolation, in my Heb. 12. 3.
Spiritual Distresses and Desertions? for all Complaints and Conflicts of Soul
(though I be but a broken Reed, a smoking Flax) in the very Extremity of my
Bitterest Agonies (if I be Contrite) Thou may be, Thou art my God. Shall it
not Cry me to Compassion, if I see Heb. 2. 18.
any Crucified Soul or Body, and hear them for their pains on the Cross so
to Groan or Cry? Shall it not Cry me to courageous Resolution, To do, to
suffer any Act. 21. 13
thing for Thy Sake, and (as Peter said at first, and did at last) Never Deny
Thee and Thy Truth and Cause (though all else do) whatsoever I suffer? Shall
it not Cry me to Congratulation to God who suffered it in His Son, To the Son,
who suffered it Himself, with a voice of Praise, and cry of Thanksgiving? Shall
it not Cry me to a Heavenly Confusion, To an Exinanition and Emptying of my
Heart of all Affections save what will serve me to Embrace and Bewail my
crucified Love, Amor meus Crucifixus est.
my crying Lord? Shall it not cry me to Devotion, This day, that hour of the
day, and (as I can that minute of the Hour, to commemorate this Cry with
Compunction, to bleed my Heart in my Breast for Him that Bled on the Cross? To
shed Tears for His Wounds, Sighs for His Cries, and show Affection for His
Pains? Fasting and Praying, and Repenting for my Sins? And if I neglect this
Cry, or the Cause (my Sin) and frolic it, and Jew-like feast my self This Day
(this very Day) does it not cry me to Consternation? When Surety Cr^es, shall
not Principal Complain? Heb. 7. 22.
And what shall Redem my Soul from Sin and Hell, if He be not my Surety? And is
that the way to have Him mine, to Affront His Church and Himself by these
Neglects of His Passion, and Contempts of Her Power? O Christ Cry from Heaven,
and Rend their Hearts with Horror for disregarding Thee so much, who are not
more Holily and Humbly moved at Thy Cross and Cry.

The Prayer.
By Thy blessed Breath on the Cross at Thy last Gasp, by the bitter Cry
uttered with that last Breath; Heal me O Lord of all my Infirmities, and
Quicken me in all my Distresses and Agonies of my Soul or Body, in Life or
Death: Be thou ever my God and Father O Lord my God. And be thou ever my God
and Savior, O Lord Christ. And let me ever be Thy true Child and Servant, on
or of the Cross (living and dying) let me be Thine for ever: Sin let To. 14. 8.
me hate as the Devil, and fear Guilt as Hell; Bewail and Abhor my self for it:
And in Thy Hearts-blood and the Breath of Thy Mouth, see it to be black above
both. But let not Despair in any Ill make me Quit all Interest in Thy
Goodness, which will turn my Heart Hell, and my Spirit Devil. Thy Cry, let me
ever hear with my Ears, and let into my Heart; And when my Guilts cry loudest
against me, let me see and believe Thy Blood above their Heb. 12. 24. Acts 2.
36, 37.
Cry, and Thy Cry above all Clamor of Guilt of Man's, yea even Thy own Blood.
Thy Unspeakable Love and Insufferable Torments to save my sinful Soul, let me
ever have and hold in Mind and Heart: Melt my Soul, O Jesu, with that Fire of
Thy Love; and by Thy Holy Spirit blow up the poor Spark of Devotion in me, that
it may break out into a Flame of Praise from a holy Fuel and Fire of Zeal for
Thee, who did take with my Sins, my Griefs on Thee, and for them did cry
out thus bitterly! For Thy sake, O Dear Savior, let me have a Tender care and
heart to all such Cries and Cryers on the Cross; especially from the Broken
Pro. 18. 14
Bleeding hearts of wounded Spirits. Them that so Cry, Hear Thou, O Christ, and
Heal! yea all, both Ps. 147. 3.
Sorrowful and Sinful Souls! And by that Pure and Powerful Spirit of Thine,
which out of a Chaos made the World, out of their Genesis 1. 2.
Confused heaps of woes and sins Raise up their Comfort in Thy Isa. 18. 57. 19.
Pardon, and create in them Thy Peace. For Suffering Thy Cross let me cry as
Thou did in the Garden, Not my will, but Thy will be Lu. 22. 42.
done. In all my sufferings for Thee make me Remember what Thou did Cry on
the Cross. Eloi, Eloi, Lamasebacthani, My God, my God, why have Thou forsaken
me? Let me never forsake Thee, that Thou may never forsake me! Though Thou
do forsake me, let me cry My God, my God! my Interests 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. Heb.
13. 5.
in Thee let me never forsake, O Christ!

Amen.
Easter-Even, or Saturday Fast.
MEDITAT. upon Mat. 27. 60. And laid it in his own new tomb, etc.
JOseph of Arimathea was a Ruler of the Jews, yet a Disciple Lu. 23. 50.
of Christ. But a Night-one, for Mat. 27. 57.
fear of his fellow-Rulers. For by a Law (which their Malice made Joh. 19. 48.
against Christ) all was one, To be Excommunicate, and to own Him. Joh. 9. 22.
His Vote was not for Christ's Lu. 23. 51.
Death, but against it. He knew Him an Innocent Man, and believed Him the
Messiah. He had no Heart for that Bloody Deed; nor Finger in it. He Consents
not to the black Doom or Fact. But when he saw it was done, and Christ dead,
Continuing the Duty to the Deceased which he had to his Living Lord, and
Quitting Mar. 15. 43
all fear, when there was cause for most, He goes to the Judge and begs the
Body with boldness. And having his Boon, does all Mat. 27. 59.
Honor to the Body* Wraps it up in clean linen (fit for so White a Corpse, but
not so pure) and puts it into his own Grave (not good enough at all for his
Lord, but in many things suiting to a Savior) Hewn out of a rock* For the
Stone cut out of the Mountain. Not Ashes committed to Ashes, but a Rock to a
Rock. A Grave untouched, Dan. 2. 45.
for a Body undefiled. Wherein never Lu. 23. 53.
man lay; for God to lay-down his Head in. In a Garden, where Joh. 19. 41
Mankind was lost, for Him, by whom the World was saved. In the Sepulcher of
Another, for He had no Sin of His own. If He give us His Life, well may we
lend Him our Grave. And when the Ransom of ours cost Him His Blood, take Care
and Room for His Burial. His in our Grave* No, rather ours in His Sepulcher.
There our Sins are blessedly Buried, never to Rise up against our Souls. On His
Cross they were Slain. In His Grave they are Buried. Col. 2. 14. Romans 6. 4.
Nay There our Graves are Triumphantly buried with our Sins. The Victory was
got by His 1 Cor. 15. 55. Act. 2. 24.
Death, and Celebrated in and over His Sepulcher. That took His Holy Body
Captive, but soon lost the Conquest. In Him and in us too, for whom He was both
Dead and Buried. So that now we may both Say and Sing, O Death where is thy
sting? O Grave where is thy victory? The Serpent is Bruised, The Den is Broke
open. The Two great Bodies of all Man's Mischiefs ( Sin and Death) are both
Baffled and Buried, By the Blessed Body which was on the Cross, and in the
Grave. Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this (or that) body of
Death? Blessed To. 7. 24.
Lord that Thou art, Thou art my Savior from them both! I thank God through
Jesus our Lord To. 7. 25.
(for the one) And thanks be to God who has given us victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ (for the other) 1 Cor. 15. 57.
Blessed for ever be God and Christ our Lord for Both.

Now the Flesh has lost her Life. And Sin in that his Throne. And Death with
it, his Sting. And the Grave (with this) his Rev. 1. 18.
Power. And Hell (with them) her Heb. 2. 14. 1 Cor. 5. 17. To. 4. 25. 2 Timothy 1.
10.
Keys. And the Devil withal, his Scepter. All went in with Christ into the
Grave, and if He Come out, All is Conquered for us, that was against Heaven.
All that belonged to Hell is Buried. And something which sometime belonged to
God too. The Seventh Day, wherein God before was Weekly Served. The Sabbath
went in with the Lord into His Grave. The Day on which He did entirely rest in
it, to show that the Lords Day was to Rise in the room. And therefore the Jews
Feast is made the Christians Fasting-day. And indeed with as good Reason as
Devotion; as all the Time of His Passion on the Cross, so His lying Dead in
the Grave was a Doleful Time, and made a Mournful Day of this. Till Joy came
in the morning, the Sufferance of This was, and the Remembrance of it is as a
Bitter, and therefore Observance Post Sabbata tristia felix irradiat dies. Hier.
by a Fast fitter, as many Christians kept and keep, This Day. But though sad
with the Thoughts; Enrich thy self, O my Soul, with the Spoils of the Grave!
Take out the Lessons and Comforts which lie in Thy Savior! If Poor, be
Patient; Christ had not so much Land as to set His Foot on; Living, no House
for His Head to rest; Dead, no Mat. 8. 20.
Grave for to lay His Body in. If Penitent, be Perfect: When the Gal. 5. 24.
Body of Sin (as His) is Crucified, out of Sight, out of Reach with it, let it
be buried. And because Romans 6. 6.
that was the Body which brought Christ to His Cross, to His Grave, to the
Scaffold to the Tomb with it, out of thy Heart, under Foot with it. And then,
if Death come, Dread it not; If the Grave appear, Grieve it not; It Is
Conquered, nay Converted, from a Pit of Horror to a Bed of Rest. The Entry to
a present Bliss. Rev. 14. 13. Joh. 5. 29.
The Door to a future Resurrection. The Bound of all Ill, and Beginning of all
Good that can be. Prepared by Christ's Body, perfumed with His Odours. The Place
where our Lord Himself lay. The Mat. 28. 6.
Pillow on which He slept; lie 1 These 4. 14.
down in Peace in and upon it; it is thy Saviors Bed. His was made of our
Grave, ours is made in His; Both lie down and sleep in one and the same Bed,
of the Grave. Lord let me live to Thee, and die in Thee, and be buried with
Thee, that at the Last Day I may Rise to Thy Throne from my Bed.

The Prayer.
O Dear Lord and Savior, wh^ for my sin and sake wast content to be Crucified
and Buried; To Hang (as a Malefactor on a Cross) and be laid (as a Guilty Man)
in a Grave: Let me Admire the Humility of my Lord, and Adore the Love of my
Savior! Let me Abhor my sin which brought Thee to a Sepulcher, and not Dread
a Grave, since Thy Body was Buried. Let me Carry Thy Cross, and Go to Thy
Grave, and Sleep on Thy Pillow: And that I may Die with such Comfort, let me
Live with all Care, to yield to Thy Yoke and submit to Thy Scepter. That I may
sleep in Peace, and Rise to Thy Kingdom. Let Thy Grave and mine be often
before me, that I may so Live and Die. So let my Woe be buried in my Grave, and
my Sin in Thine, and when my person is Dissolved, Phil. 1. 23. 2 Cor. 5. 1
let my Soul be Revived in Thee, and by Thee, and for Thee, and with Thee, Dear
Jesus, Amen!

So end the Holy Fasts.
And thus ends the First part of these Meditations and Prayers upon the Holy
Feasts and Fasts of the Church.

MEDITATIONS AND PRAYERS UPON The Sacraments, and other Sacred and Weighty
Subjects, Penitential and Preservative against Sin and Change, Cordial and
Preparative, In Sickness, and for Death.

THE SECOND PART.

Of
Holy Baptism. Holy Communion. Holy Estate of Marriage.
Of
Guilt of Sin. Judgment on it. Pardon of it.
Against
Falling from Truth. Falling from Goodness. Fickleness in Faith.
Of
Jobs Consumption. David's Ulcer. Hezekiah's Plague.
Of
Holy Simeons Release. S. John's Rest. S. Paul's Preferment.
Advertisement touching the Aim and Use of these Devotions.
HAving served Thy more Solemn Devotions in the Holy Feasts and Fasts of the
Church, these are prepared to Attend Thy Soul in thy Ghostly Affairs and Needs,
upon other Occasions. And that is done from the Font to the Tomb, from thy
First Birth to Spiritual Life, to thy last and great Birthday to Eternity.
Baptism should have an Influence upon all Thy life, and will have a good one,
if thou Remember it to be thy High Birth to all Honor, and Bond to all
Holiness; so that for shame to Thy Birth, and fear of Perfidiousnesse, thou
should and must be Godly. Then when Age comes (as Church Allows) Thou that
have kept thy soul clean from thy Christian Cradle, art Invited and Admitted
to Holy Communion with the Church at Christ's Holy Table. If Married by Her
Order thou must, if Single, thou may. And art Directed How to Guide thy self
well in the way to that Estate, if thou go it, and to Carry thy self
Christianly in it. In what Estate soever thou art after Baptism has washed thee
from Original Guilt, before the Communion and after too (in or out of
Marriage-life) Actual sin thou will have, and Mortal it may be, so thou art
served at thy Holy need, with that which all thy life is needful, The
Penitentialls. One of which shows the Guilt of Sin, another the Process
against it, and the third, the Pardon of it. And all will lead thee through the
whole course of Repentance (for the Ground, Growth, and Fruit.) In the Cause,
Act, and Issue of it. If Raised by it from lying in sin, thou meet, as thou
may, in these falling and s^aggering times, with Seducing Spirits which will
push at thee for thy Religion, or Atheistical Souls, which for thy better and
more conscientious Conversation, labor with all their Art and Strength to cast
thee down, and thou find thy self tottering and in fear to fall, thy
Backsliding may be Prevented and Recovered, and Fickleness settled by those
which would and may Preserve and Maintain thee in thy Christian state of Truth
and Grace, against all such fearful and dangerous both Apostasy and
Inconstancy.

Though never so good and s^out to stand to the last in the Faith; and to a
Holy Life, to the Death* thou may fall into Sickness, and wilt in Death.
Against the One thou have Cordials of choice, be it a Languishing, Violent, or
Pestilent Sickness, from Job's, David's, and Hezekiah's Experiments and
Receipts; Against the other, Preparatives of great Virtue from the Good, in, at,
and after Death, which Simeon, St. John, and Saint Paul prescribe and provide.

So I take Thee from the Churches Door (Baptism) and leave Thee at Heaven
Gate (Blessed Death.) If in the way, and for thy walk betwixt both, thy soul
has received any Glance of Heavenly light, any Spark of Grace, any Drop of
Comfort, any degree of Strength, for thy better and happier passage (and I hope
thou may some.) I shall be both Rewarded for what is written, and Encouraged
for more, if the fatal Spade strike not my Pen out of my hand, or some
Impediment do not take it out; Thy good Wishes go with me to satisfy my own
in doing Thine and other Souls such service. And thy Amen to my Prayers, that
all may live to do more good, and repent we have lived so long and done no
better.

Christening-Day, or Baptism.
MEDITAT. upon Gal. 3. 29. So many as are baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ.
ALl Christians then are Holy and Honorable men. And Act. 17. 11.
Baptism is a Singular Blessing of Almighty God, which makes us Christians. If
we be in Christ, we must be Holy. If He be in us, we are most Honorable. And
we are baptized into Him. Not To Him only, that is, to His Service. Nor In Him
(by His Authority) In the name of the Father, and Mat. 28. 19.
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; (though That, and This, both are Holy, and
for Holiness;) but both Unto and Into Him, which signs and makes a more
Intimate Union. Planted into Him as our Stock. To. 6. 3, 5. ^ Ephesians. 4. 15. 1
Cor. 12. 13. To. 8. 8, 9.
Joined to Him as our Head. Ordered in His as our Body. Animated by His as our
Spirit. Because he is our Head* and not of Angels; we should be more Holy then
they, says S. Chrysostom. But because there is One Spirit Ephesians. 4. 4.
in Head and Body, we should be more then that (if possible for men) as much as
God. The Holy 1 Cor. 12. 27. Col. 2. 19. 1 Pet. 1. 16.
Body of Christ, and Spirit of God should make His Members holy as he is holy.
Incorporated in the most Holy Body, and Possessed with the Holy Ghost. United
to the Holy God, Holy, Holy, Isa. 6. 3.
Holy.

And Thrice Honorable, if so Holy. And so we are, if Christ be on us, and our
Baptism puts Him on. As He is our Bread, so He is our Cloth too. In the
Eucharist our Bread, in Baptism our Cloth. Our Spiritual Life and Joh. 6. 51.
Livelihood in Both. The Well of our Heavenly welfare, by His Sacraments as
Conduits, Conveying Joh. 4. 14.
to us all Necessaries for Heaven for Meat and for Clothing. In the One, the
Refectory, in the Joh. 6. 55. To. 13. 14. Col. 2. 3.
Other the Vestiary, in Both the Treasury for our Souls.

This is every way for our Honor, that Christ is put on us. As our Covering,
Robe, and Shield. A Garment of Need, Glory, and Safety. Isa. 61. 10.
For our Nakedness. By His Righteousness. To our Happiness. In all, to our
Honor. Not Constantines Covering, The Imperial Purple, but in a deeper and
richer Die, In His own Blood. Angels Isa. 63. 2*
had not the honor to be so covered. Heb. 2. 16.
Not Herod's Robe of Royalty glorious as the Sun, but the Sun Act. 11. 21. Mal.
4. ^.
of righteousness Himself. Ten thousand times brighter then the Natural Sun.
Never King on Rev. 22. 5.
earth wore such a Clothing for Glory. Not an Ahabs Coat of 1 Kings 22. 33.
Maile, Armor to be shot through, but of Proof against both the Arrows of Man
and Darts of the Devil: The Garment of Salvation. Isa. 61. 10. Ps. 104. 2.
Gods own Apparel, The Light of Glory, The Glory of Heaven, The Brightness
and Blessedness of all Holy and Heavenly Majesty.

Such a Garment (in Christ) is put on me, and shall I put it off again? Dip and
Doff it of by an After-Baptisme? Do and Cast it off by an After- Apostasy, to
Error, or Schism, or Sin? Shall I Mire it with the World, Spot it Jude v. 23
with the Flesh, or Black it with the Devil? Shall I wear His To. 13. 14.
Cloak upon it, Her Coat under it, or that Lining with it? When at the Taking
of my Military Belt, This holy Livery of my Lord, I did in His Name, Defy them
all? O Holy Christian Man, by Thy Baptism made the Highborn Son of God, Great
Grandee John 3. 5.
of and for Heaven, by the High and Holy Spirit of God; be not so poor, and
mean, and base a Soul as to lie, Grovelling on Earth, Wallowing in Flesh, and
Phil. 3. 19. 2 Pet. 2. 8. 1 John 3. 8. 2 Cor. 5. 3.
moiling for the Devil. That when the Day of Fire comes, I may not be found
naked in Guilt, and quaking with Fear, let Thy Christ (the only shield of
Salvation) be my Shelter, O God! Whom I put on in the Day of my Baptism, let me
Keep on to the Hour of my Death! Let no Vanity Take, no Violence Tear Him off!
And however some Spot and Slight the Holy use and Efficacy of it, make me
believe what my Holy Mother has Taught me, and Thou did Tell Her, By it I am
made a Member of Christ, a Child of God, and Inheritour of the Kingdom Joh. 3.
5. Tit. 3. 5.
of Heaven.

The Prayer.
O Lord Jesus Christ, who art the Life of my Soul, and Joy of my Life; The
Staff of my Strength, and Shield of my Safety; who did make the Purchase of
Eternal Life for me in Thy Blood, and Ephesians. 1. 14.
Convey and Seal it to me in my Baptism; did then give me Birth to it, and
Cloth me for it: Let me and mine be so Blessed as to be Baptized into Thee;
and so Honored as to be Vested in Thee, and with Thee: Let me wear Thee in a
Holy Profession, and not sully Thee by a Worldly or Fleshly To. 13. 14.
Conversation: As a Member of so Glorious and Holy a Head, let me do nothing
vile or vain. And 1 Cor. 6. 15.
as my Purple is rich and pure (Thy Righteousness upon me) let my Linen be
white and clean ( Mine within me.) Mine for the Use, Revel. 19. 14.
but Thine for the Grace; Mine for the Possession, but Thine for the Purchase
and Gift. Even Thine by the Hand of Thy Holy Spirit, put on me, and in me. O
Lord! Amen.

Eucharist, or Holy Communion.
MEDITAT. upon 1 Cor. 11. 34. And the rest will I set in order when I come.
THings at Corinth were much out of order. They rush into Church as an Inn,
and fall to the Sacrament as an Ordinary. They 1 Cor. 11. 20, 21, etc.
make no difference betwixt Gods Heavenly Mysteries, and their daily
Provisions. They discern not the Hallowed Bread from that in a Bakers Shop.
Nor the Holy Wine from what is drawn in a Tavern. They see no more in the
Blessed Board then when the Joyner made it. As for the Holy Body and Blood of
Christ, they behold 1 Cor. 11. 29.
no Sign, no Seal of it. And if we may judge of Souls by Bodies, their
Love-Feast looks like a Ceremony to Venus, and the Holy Communion it self as a
Sacrifice 1 Cor. 11. 21.
to Bacchus rather then a Service to God, and Sacrament of Christ. They Eat and
Drink as if they were not at an Eucharist but a Carnivall. Their Gestures,
Postures, Carriages, speak them so Irreverent, and Unprepared, and Unworthy, so
much and so foul to blame, that God in honor to Himself, His Son, His House
and His Service, cannot but scourge such Profaneness with a rod of 1 Cor. 11.
30, 32.
His Anger. And so He does, some He plagues to Death, and strikes others sick
with the Plague. To save their Souls from the 1 Cor. 11. 32.
stroke of Vengeance, their Bodies bleed for it. And so in His great Mercy by a
sharp Correction, they escape a further Condemnation. It Is but a Chastening of
His Rod for the Preventing of His Sword.

This the Apostle hears and Rebukes in Zeal to God, and Rectifies by his
Authority for God. By Letters Missive, because absent from them; by his
Apostolic Pen Reforming, when His Tongue could not reach them. He tells them,
To meet together makes not a Communion. Common things 2 Cor. 11. 20. 1 Cor. 11.
22.
and Commendable at Home, in the Church make a Profanation. The Bread, Wine,
Eating, Drinking at Gods Table, and in Gods House, are all Sacred, and must not
be made Common. We must Eye and Eat them as spiritual Food, not corporal,
Soul-meat, not Bodies. In the Bread and Wine Consecrate we must discern Christ's
Body and Blood, and behave 1 Cor. 10. 26. 11. 24, 25, 27, 28.
our selves accordingly with all Imaginable Worthiness at a Table of such
Heavenlinesse. And make a Trial before we come, whether we be fitted for such
a High and Holy Participation, with all possible Preparedness.

To this end he delivers them the Doctrine of the Holy Sacrament; Discovers
their gross Abuse, and Directs to the Right and Religious Observation of it.
Pressing them to a more Reverend Use by the Plagues of Profanation on some as
Thunderbolts for a Warning and Arming of all, against like Judgments. What
more was to be done, when he did come (as he meant and would) as he had now put
them in part, he would set all in better order.

By virtue of which Order and the Holy Contents and Authority of it, they are
out in their Sacrament, who have no Cup. For by Christ's and His, we must both
Eat and Drink. And to put the Cup into the Loaf (make Body and Blood confused,
which are Distinct) that is not with Order. And of a Sacrament to make a
Sacrifice more then Commemorative, 1 Cor. 11. 26. Heb. 7. 27
that is not by it, but besides it. But they are Altogether out, who instead of
Giving Half, will give their People No Sacrament; let them neither Eat nor
Drink, yea though they confess Christ is All, and those hunger; They can get
no Bread though they starve, they must be satisfied with nothing; This is by a
private Verdict of their own against the Apostles Judgment, and Christ's
public Order. Nor will it put them or any in, to say, They may not Give the
Communion to men Unworthy of it (that is, Unacceptable to them); And we dare
not Receive it with persons Profane and not Holy (that is, not of or like
themselves) For at Corinth some did Communicate well, and others Consecrate and
Give it 1 Cor. 11. 30.
Right, as in a Christian Church, though all was not orderly, nay much in it
was quite out of order. And if Things be in order, the Persons are out, who
come and are Admitted, but are Impenitent Before, or Irreverent At their
Coming. A Process should be served on the Soul by virtue 1 Cor. 11. 28.
of this at the Bar of Conscience. It should be truly and strictly Examined,
whether the life have been in order to the Law; whether the Mind in order by
Faith; The Will by Love; The Tongue for Praise; The Conscience to Peace; The
Heart with Integrity. This Examination past, Judgment must be given; Upon our
selves as Guilty, but in Christ's Blood 1 Cor. 11. 31. Ephesians. 1. 6.
Quit. In our selves Unworthy, but by Him Accepted. So Guilty, so Unworthy all,
as no Hope, no Face to Appear before God at His Blessed Board, but only in
and by Him: But so we may. And if the Soul by Faith and Love act and do Her
Duty, Minding and Embracing the Holy Mystery, and the Body (Reverently
Disposed) Attend the Soul, Adoring and Trembling before the Heavenly Majesty,
we are put in order by Gods Grace, and Saint Paul's Care, and the rest Christ
will Perfect when He comes in Glory.

The Prayer.
O Lord Jesu Christ, who for the Memorial of Thy Bloody Sacrifice 1 Cor 11. 26.
have ordained a Sacrament in Thy Church, to Commemorate Thee, and Convey and
Seal to our Souls the Benefits of Thy Blessed Body and 1 Cor. 10. 26.
Blood; let me give Due Memory to Thy Death, and Take the Pledges of my Peace.
Preparing and pu^ting my Soul in order when I come, that Thou may Accept me
and my Coming. And O Lord God of all Order and Grace, give me and all
Christians Conscience to obey, as all 1 Corin. 16. 1. Heb. 13. 17. Tit. 1. 5. 1
Cor. 14. 40.
Thy Orders for my souls health, so all the Orders of Thy Church concerning
Thee and Thy Service, in Thee and for Thee; That all things in it being done
decently and in order, to our Bliss and Thy Glory; we may rejoice in Thee, and
Thou in us. From Confusion before Thy face in the Church, and confusion 1 Cor.
14. 33. 1 John 2. 28.
of face at Thy Bar; From the Guilt of That in Thy Eye, and the Doom of This
from Thy Mouth; From Doing that Sin, and Hearing this Sentence; From an Act
of such Shame, and End in such Woe; From that Disorder in Thy Church which will
Discard me from Thy Kingdom; Merciful Lord Keep us Bodies and Souls, and
Deliver us now and ever.

Amen.
Matrimonial or Marriage-Meditation
Upon Mar. 10. 8. And they Twain shall be One Flesh.
THough we make not Marriage a Sacrament (as some) we reckon it not a mere
Civil See Liturgy for it.
Thing with others, but with the Church judge it a Sacred Estate. And besides
the Witnesses of both Jews and Heathens, we Christians have good Evidences for
this Dionys. Halicarn. l. 2. Rituale Hebr. In narrabile conn^bium. Ephesians. 5. 32.
Judgment. For the High Union betwixt God and Man in the Person of Christ, the
Holy One betwixt Christ and His Church on Earth, and the Happy One of God and
Christ with the Saints in Heaven (The Hypostaticall, Spiritual, and
Beatificall Union) Rev. 19. 7.
all which are shadowed and signed by the Matrimonial; the Original does well
argue it. It was not a Thorn which grew by Sin, but a Plant of Paradise. The
First Married and Marriage were made Genesis 2. 18.
by God in Man's Innocent and Best Estate. For out of Man Genesis 1. 26
(made by a Holy Counsel of the Trinity) Woman was Gods Extraction, upon
singular consideration. Of a Rib (not more) Genesis 2. 23.
she was made, to show they ought to be but Twain. Polygamy Chrysostom. Ambr.
vocat adulterium permissum, etc.
was rather by Gods Sufferance then Ordinance. In which the Patriarchs did more
Mean then Do well. It was not Lust but Seed they looked at, when it was a
Curse to want, and a great Blessing Genesis 15. 2.
to have some, because of the Messiah, The promised Seed. From the beginning it
was not so, God made them male and female. One Mat. 19. 8.
Adam and One Eve (as after it in the Mystical Marriage, was One Christ and
One Church) the Original was so at their First Creation, when all the Race of
Mankind was to come from them, Then it was not, They Many, but They Twain.

By it made One Flesh. One Person (says the Civil Law) Husband Liable to the
Debts of the Wife, and the Wife Capable of the Privileges of the Husband; but
that is not all; One for Propagation of Issue: As a Man and Harlot 1 Cor. 6. 15.
are wickedly, they in That are innocently One. And so for the Issue of that
Propagation. And One by Incorporation too. As Head and Body make but One. And
One in Propriety of Body; Hers is His, and His is Hers. Right they have one to
another, and ought 1 Cor. 7. 3, 4.
to have Possession, if they claim their Right. As every one should possess
his own.

A Caveat for the Single-liv'd, Before they Marry, to look whom; One Spirit in
Disposition, One Knee for Religion: For else Judge. 19. 29.
(as the Concubin's body) One Flesh will be torn into many pieces. And (as Fire
and Water) will hardly agree and keep one. And Different Religions will be apt
to Distract, no Contentions being either more fair or fierce, then wherein God
is concerned, nor Affections so good and great, as when Salvation is the
Cement. We shall less love them for a Time, whom we believe not to live with
for an Eternity. And One House will scarce hold us, if One Heaven shall not:
And as we are less One, our Children will be more Two, and the whole Family in
Faction. Or else grow Neuters, to offend neither Parents, or prove a Mungrel
Brood of both Religions, which is as ill 1 King. 18. 21.
as a Neuter. Hal^ing betwixt God and Baal; or Halfing Canaan and Ashdod. A
Temper in Religion Neh. 13. 24. Apoc. 3. 15
which some Politics love, but God loathes. Though therefore that Difference do
not Disanull, it should make us Disaffect a Marriage. Because if their Two
Religions cannot, their Persons will not, at least they Twain will hardly be
One Flesh, who agree 2 Cor. 6. 2.
not in One High and Holy Spirit.

For the Married; This serves as a Wedding Sermon. To have One Head, Heart,
Back, Bowel, and Home. If One Flesh have Two Heads, the Body is a Monster. The
Husband is the Head of the Wife, 1 Cor. 11. 2 Ephesians. 5. 23, 24.
she must be Subject, not Sovereign to her husband. It Is Prodigious for a Side
to grow above the Head. So to have Two Hearts too. Friends (of which these are
the nearest) have but both One Soul ( They Twain) much more These, who Ephesians. 5.
28.
are but One Body. To see the Body tear it self, the Head to beat and bite
the Arm, or Hands to strike and fly at the Head, turns the House Bedlam, and
shows a Frenzy if not a Prodigy. No man hates his own flesh. Makes Ephesians. 5.
29.
a Hell of his Home, or at least a Purgatory, unless a Madman. Amongst
Christians this should not be done, must not be seen. As Christ the Church, he
ought to ibid.
Cherish and Nourish his own Flesh, not Abhor and Abuse it. And for that
they are to have but One Back to bear the Yoke of the Family. One Bowell to
feel one another misery. To have sense of one another Frailty. To consider
they are One Flesh, not Spirit. They Man ^. 41.
are not Two Angels, but Flesh and Blood both. He or She that is Joh. 8. 7.
without fault, let them cast the first stone, and there will be no Broken
Heads, though for want of this so many Broken Hearts, yea and Houses and
Estates too, the sad Issues of such damned Discontentednesse which Mutual Pity
should Pardon, and would Prevent. And one House, one Home should hold one Body,
one Board in the House, 1 Pet. 3. 7.
one Bed, as one Board, unless by consent for a Time, which some 1 Cor. 7. 5.
Devout (more to our Wonder then Pattern) have made a life, taking more
pleasure to be Blissfellowes, then in the Fellowship of the Bed; Preferring the
Ways and Joys of Heaven, and their only Studies, before those and all other
earthly Solaces; or by Bar of Law for the foul Breaches Mat. 5. 32. and 19. 3.
Mar. 10. 2*
of the Married Bed, not Jealousy, but Authority being Judge.

And here is a Sentence too, o^ all Condemnation to those who foment such
Discords, and draw on Divisions and Divorces. Devils they are whosoever they
be. Two they are from God, who against* His Law and their Bliss, make His One
Two. Those whom God Man. 10 9.
has joined together, no man must (he is a Devil that does) put them asunder.
These veriest Friends Tale-bearers separate. Wicked and P^o. 17. 9.
Wretched men, who do the Devils part, and deserve punishment for Seminaries of
strife and Confusion, as well as they of Sedition and Treason. And should have
a Bore in their Tongues, and Brand in their For^heads, to be Banished all
Christian and Civil Societies of men, especially Married ones.

And if any He or She Guilty of Blame, or Ingulph'd by such means in so ungodly
and unhappy a Condition, shall read this, I beseech them by the love they have
to Bliss in Heaven, and to Peace (the Paradise on Earth) that they will sadly
and seriously lay this to heart, and lovingly and earnestly Seek and Embrace
all Means and Mediators of Reconcilement and Union. If not for their Souls
sake, for their Families, which else will be overturned and ruined with their
Estates and Children. If One Heaven shall, why should not One House hold us? If
it will bar us one or both out of Heaven, how dare we hold such a Spirit and
State? If it will cast us out of Heaven on Earth too, why will we keep in such
a Hell? Remember we are but Flesh, and should be One. So God made us at first,
and we are never so happy for this or a better World, as when we be, and
continue as God made us: So we that are by His Order One Flesh, shall be in His
House one Spirit, Col. 3. 10.
perfectly Knowing and Loving Him, Blessedly, Indissolubly, and Eternally Joh
17. 21 Lu. 20 ^6. Rev. 19. 7. 1 Pet. 7. 12. Rev. 1^. 9.
One, not only with another, but with and in Him. One Flesh now, Two Angels
then; nay Married to God in Christ with such an Union, as is more the Maze then
Bliss of Angels. Married or unmarried, God Prepare us and Admit us to that
Great Marriage-Day.

The Prayer.
O Lord, who have made Man and Wife (they Twain) One Flesh; If I be a Single
Person, let me learn the Discretion thence (if any) to choose that person for my
Half, that will most make One Flesh: If Married, let me never be so wretched as
to break at once Thy Ordinance and this Unity in my self; so Damned, as to make
a Breach in others, making them to be of One Twain, whom Thou of Twain have
made One. As the Paradise of the House, let me preserve Peace, and as the Ruin
of my Family, Avoid Division. Let Patience possess my soul to bear
Discontents, and Pity incline my heart to pardon Provocations: My self being
not blameless to others, and if to them, not before Thee without blame. As I
expect Thy Mat. 6. 15.
Forgiveness, I must give mine to all, shall I except one? Whom Thou of all
mankind have made my Nearest, and would have my Dearest one. (If none om^t
this Clause.)
Let the Pledges of Thy Love be the Pleas of our Peace (the Children Thou have
given us) Union of our Blood, and the Issue of our Bowels *. If we have no such
Gifts, that Thou may Bless us with such Ps. 127. 3. Ruth 4. 11.
Pledges of Thy Favor, and Pillars of our Family.

A Deaf Ear let me turn to all that speak the language of Division, yea an
angry Brow to them as Devils Prove. 25. 23.
tempting me out of Paradise with the Apple of Contention. But all godly and
friendly Advises let me Embrace as Thy Counsels: those that give them as
Saints, and those that prevail with me against such Mischiefs, as my good
Guardians and Thy Angels. Let me not trample on Thy Order that I may not suffer
Thy Displeasure, especially when with it I tread under foot the Contents of
this life, and hazard hard the Joys of a better. That Thou may not be Two
with me, let me as Thou have made me, be One, for Jesus His sake, who forbids
me to be Two.

Amen.
The Horror and Haunt of Guilt.
I. Penitential MEDITATION upon Psalm. 51. 3. My sin is ever before me.
THe Act of Sin is Transient, Genesis 41. 22.
which quickly comes and goes, but the Guilt is Permanent, and (...)t so soon
got away. If thou Genesis 2. 7.
do not well sin lies at the door. And like a Band-dog hunts and Genesis 4. 7.
haunts the Guilty Ghost, till it pull us down to our Death Psalm. 140. 11.
Heb. 6. 18, 20.
or Despair, if we find not Sanctuary against it. True Penitents Seal this
Truth with Sad Experiences. The Wheel is but a poor Picture of their Pain, and
broken Bones but little Types of their Torments. Bones do not Psalm. 51. 8*
Torture like Hearts that be broken. Pro. 18. 14
Nay after David was off the Wheel, and had his Pardon passed him, the Wounds
have their Smarts still, even when Mercy Psalm. 51. See Title.
had healed him. His Guilt was in his mind still, and his sin ever before Psalm.
51. 4.
him.

His own was, not another: Penitent Souls are Pitiful and Sparing to other
men's Sins, but Severe Censurers of their own. When they set their Guilt before
Gods Bar, they dar^ not Judge the Sins of others. It belongs to them to
Receive, not to Give a Sentence. Others Sins they mind not, their own are
before them. And so they be even to their Dying day. S. Paul bewailed 1 Timothy 1.
13.
his Bloody Blasphemy; St. Peter wept for his foul Perjury all S. Clem. Ps. 51.
2. 14
his days. David had never done with his Filthy and Bloody Sins. Uriah's Ghost
and his Guilt haunt him and hale him. His Remembrance and Conscience fill his
Eyes and Thoughts with Griefs and Frights. And his Heart (too tough before his
sin, but most tender after it) Creates continual Psalm. 51. 8, 12.
Trouble to him. Yet though this made his Soul sad, it was good to humble him.
So it is not ill to have our Sins, if with them we have Gods Mercies before us.
They may to good ends afflict us, they must by no means overwhelm 2 Cor. 2. 7.
us. That Is to be a Penitent of Judas his Rank, not in the Mat. 27. 2.
Quality of David. Yea and it is Cordial as well as Corrosive to us. For the
more they are before our Eyes, the further they be behind Gods Back. The more
we Remember Isa. 38. 17 Eze. 36. 31 and 33. 16. Psalm. 6. 8. 2 Cor. 7. 10. 2
Kings 20. 5.
them and Review them, the more he does Forget and Forgive them. If with our
Sins our Sorrows are before Him. If with our Guilts our Tears are in His
Eyes. If as our Ills our Alms come up in His Sight: And Act. 10. 4, 31. Lu. 11.
41. Dan. 4. 27 Psalm. 88. 3. Ephesians. 1. 7. Heb. 12. 24. To. 3. 25. 1 John 2. 2.
Ephesians. 2. 14.
withal our Prayers come into His Presence. And above all the Blood of His Son
be set before us and Him, to mediate His Pardon, and Propitiate and Procure our
Peace; These are not greater Grievances to our Souls, then Assurances of our
Salvation. And so David's sins were before him. The Blood of His Savior was in
his Eye as well as the Guilt of his Sin. And in those Psalm. 51. 7. Heb. 9. 14.
Isa. 1. 16, 18. Lu 7. 47.
Two Baths of Christ's Blood and His Tears, he whose heart was as black as Hell,
is washed as white as Snow. His Garment (defiled with the Flesh) Dipped and Died
in that Rev. 7. 14. Psalm. 51. 7.
Blood becomes so, White. Nay Snow it self is not so white as a Penitent (by
Faith and Repentance) made Clean of all Guilt, and so again Innocent. Lord let
my Sin be before me, but never above me, lest I make it Above Thee too, even in
the Genesis 4. 13. Ps. 103. 11
Height of Thy Glory, beyond my Hope and Thy Mercy.

The Prayer.
I have sinned, what shall I do Job 7. 20.
unto Thee, O thou preserver of men! Out of my sight I cannot expel my Sin, In
my Eye I cannot endure it. Whither can I fly from the Preserver of men, but to
Job 19. 25.
the Redeemer of Mankind? How shall I pacify the Provocation of my Maker, but
by the Propitiation of a Savior? What hope of Peace 1 John 2. 2. Heb. 9. 15.
but by His Mediation? Who have I to make my Plea but that Advocate? I see in
Thee a Sea of M^c. 7. 19.
Bottomless Mercy, sufficient to drown mine and all the Sins of the World: I
see in Him a Sea of Ps. 130. 7.
Blood, each drop whereof does move for Mercy: I feel in my self a Bleeding
Broken Heart, every Ps. 51. 17. Isa. 57. 18. Psalm. 47. 3. 1 John 1. 7, 9.
Groan and Sigh whereof Entitles me to the Merits of that Blessed Blood. To
Thee then I come, O Father of Mercies! By Thee I go, O Savior of the World!
Through Thee I do both Come and Go, O spirit of Comfort! Of Thee O God I ask my
Pardon! By Thee O Son of God, I seek it! From Thee, O Holy Spirit of God, and
in Thee, let me find it! O Seal it to my Soul, and Witness it in Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Amen.
The Early and Happy Judgement-Day.
II. Penitential MEDITATION upon 1 Cor. 11. 31. If we would judge our selves,
we should not be judged.
THough others then we should Mat. 7. 1. Romans 2. 15. 1 John 3. 20.
not, we may judge our selves. There is a Power in Conscience to do it, and a
Command to use it. As Man is the Wonder of the World, and the Soul most
wonderful in Man, Conscience is the Wonder of the Soul. For by virtue of it
Man is made his own Prisoner and Judge, Accuser and Executioner. It lays Gods
Law Tit. 3. 11.
to Man's Life, and Dooms Him for his Breach of the Law. And Commits the Soul to
Grief and Fear (as a Jail and Rack) upon that Doom. If I deny my Guilt, it is a
thousand Witnesses against me; If I do not Right for God in my Sentence, it
Appeals to His Judgment from me.

But the Conscience of the Penitent quickly finds for God, and cries the
Prisoner Guilty. Both of Faults and Crimes. And does not Extenuate but
Aggravate both. As done against the Bonds of Gods Mercies, the Obligations Ezr.
9. 14.
of our Promises, The Comminations of Gods Judgments, The Inspirations of His
Spirit, The Informations of His Word, The Stipulations of His Sacraments; Most
Ingratefully, Persidiously, Contemptuously, Obstinately, Impiously done. For
this he does judge himself. Unworthy to be called Lu. 15. 19.
Gods Child or Creature. Unworthy Gods Bl^sse or Bread. To live either in
Heaven or on Earth. More worthy to be with Devils then Angels. Under Earth then
Above it. Not only in a Grave but Hell. Most worthy of all the Plagues
Denounced against the living Sinner, and the Torments Executed against the
Damned and Deuteronomy. 29. 20.
Dead. And for this He lays the hands of holy Vengeance on himself. Ps. 69. 10.
He gives his Body to the Scourge, and his Soul to the Sword. He macerates his
Flesh, and mortifies Col. 3. 5. Ps. 109. 24
his Spirit. His Head is in Ashes, His Mouth in Dust. His Breast is Beaten with
Remorse. His Loins Lu. 18. 13. Psalm. 6. 6.
are in Sackcloth. His Eyes are overflown with Tears. His Ears Deaf with
Plaints. His Hands wearied with Alms. His Belly pincht with Fasts. His Body
broken 1 Cor. 9. 27.
with all terrible and possible Penances. As for His Soul, it is Rackt with
Fears. His Mind Sawn with Doubts. His Heart on the wheel of Torture. All her
Limbs are Loosed and Torn. 1 Pet. 1. 13.
Her Bones Disjoynted and Broken. The Conscience cries. The Ps. 119. 28. Ps.
143. 7.
Heart melts. The Soul swouns. The Spirit fails and dies within Isa. 57. 16.
him.

But then, Discretion looks to the Execution. That must sit on the Bench, when
Guilt stands at the Bar: And orders all to be done so, as it be to the Killing
of Sin, not the Man. That it be not under-done; The Body the only Sufferer,
when the Soul is the Isa. 58. 5.
Great Malefactor; Nor that the Body be unpunished, which is Accessory, if not
Principal with the Soul; For this is but to do Justice by Halves: Nor must it
be over-done neither; The Soul must not suffer to Despair, and be strangled 2
Cor. 2. 7.
for want of Hope, nor may the Body be beaten into Dust; not only brought down
to a great Distress, but struck down to the Grave of Death. That is to do it
too much. Indeed it were to undo Soul and Body, and Life, which is the Union
and Issue of both, and Comfort, which is the 1 John 3. 15. Genesis 45. 27.
very spirit of life.

Nor does God Require, nor did the greatest Penitents perform such Penances.
They are to Save a Sinner, not to Destroy him (Body or Soul.) Though Mary
Magdalen be the Woman, and Manasseh himself the Man, her Tears do not Drown
her 2 Chronicles. 33. 12, 13.
life, His Griefs do not Sink his Soul. David a Prince and Pattern of all
Sin-sad Penitent-Hearts, out-lives his Wounds of Spirit, and out-grows his
Griefs. Such Excesses of Sorrow and unmeasurable Repentings are Executions Mat.
27. 45.
fitter for a Judas then a David, when yet fallen into the filth of Lust, and
plunged in Blood. Discretion then with an Eye of Hope preserves the Penitent
from such Extremities of Horror, and Massacres of all Comfort. Though it
Wounds and Shames, it never Kills and 2 Cor. 7. 10. Romans 5. 5.
Confounds the Soul. No, for this Hope lives in it; Because we do judge our
selves we shall not be judged. God will not Damn the Innocent, and that with
him is the Penitent. God in Justice cannot Twice Condemn for One Crime. God in
Mercy will not Twice Execute for One Judgment. What the Viceroy does the King
allows. What the Delegate Judge dooms, the Sovereign ratifies. What the Little
God -- (...) ^1. and. Joh. 20. 23. 1 John 3. 21.
within us acts, the Great above us ownes. What is done in Gods Name is done by
Himself. Whether by His Deputy Without us, His Priest; or Within us, our
Conscience, In such Cases and Causes of the Soul and Sin. So we are we shall
not be judged. Our little Doomes-day Secures the Great Day of Judgment.
Because we were, we shall not be Executed. Our Hell of Guilt prevents our Guilt
of Hell.

O Blessed Sessions of our Souls, which Excuse us from Those Grand Assizes! O
Joyful state of Mournful Penitents, which have their Doomes before their
Deaths-Day come! Their Pardon Sealed in Heaven, before their Summons Served on
Earth!

This Gives them Beauty for Isa. 61. 3.
Ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of
heaviness. This Gets them Manna for their Bitterness. The White Stone for
their Dustinesse. Rev. 2. 1^ Ps. 30. 12. Lu. 15. 22 Lu. 6. 21.
For their Sackcloth a Robe. For their Water, Wine. For their Tears, Jubilees.
For their Scourges, Scepters. For their Alms, Crowns. For their Fasts,
Festivities. (Yea God and His Angels Mat. 25. 34, 35. Lu. 15. 7.
are Guests at the Penitents Feast.) For their Severities against their Sins
for Gods Sake, all the Felicities of the Saints in Gods House. From the Holy
Pavement wet and washed with their Eyes, He shall take them to His Holy Table
furnished with His Sons Flesh on Earth; and thence to His Heavenly Table, to be
Fed and Filled with Himself in Heaven. For if we be not judged of the Lord, we
shall surely be saved. And, If we would judge our selves, we should not be
judged.

The Prayer.
O Lord, If Sin must have a Hell on earth, or under it; If I must Condemn my
self, or be Condemned for my Sin; let me give my self my Doom, that I may not
receive it; And have Hell for a time in my Conscience, rather then my Soul for
ever in Hell. O let me suffer all the Tortures of a Penitent, rather then the
Torments of a Damned Soul. Give me rather a Wounded Spirit and Wasted Flesh for
a time, then a Frolic Heart and Pampered Body Lu. 16. 25 Rev. 18. 7
in this life, and to have both burn Eternally in the life to come: Let my
heart now Gnaw me, that the Worm then do not Bite me. The woeful Worm that
bites and stings Mar. 9. 44
to all Eternity. O Lord I do not judge my self Innocent, O do Thou judge me
Penitent. My Guilts deserve those Pains from the Bar of Justice, but I appeal
from It, to ^eb. 4. 16.
Thy Mercy-seat. From the Deserts of my Sins, to the Merits of my Savior. From
their Pleas to Thy Pardon. From their Cries to His Blood. From them for His
sake Acquit me, for which I do Condemn my self; That I may be Cleared at Thy
Great Day of Judgment, and Freed then from that Endless Torment. By Thy
Mercies and the Merits of Jesus.

Amen.
The Sinners Hope and Guide.
III. Penitential MEDITATION upon Luke 7. 47. Her Sins which are many are
forgiven; for she loved much.
BLessed Woman! A great Sinner, a great Penitent, and a great Saint! Not
blessed in the ill Quality of a Sinner, but Cursed. Jezebel (though a Queen) if
such, is a Cursed Woman. Nor 2 King. 9. 14.
that a great Penitent, if it were all to be sorry for Sin; Judas was that in
deep Remorse, and with a witness of Restitution too, but without Hope, and so
had a Wretched end, and lived and died a Cursed man: But being a Psalm. 109.
Saint, that makes her Blessed. A Sinner which begins to be Penitent, and ends
in a Saint, is Blessed, be it He or She, Man or Woman. That sets the Crown of
Ps. 103. 4.
Mercy upon their Head, and so continuing, keeps it on in Earth, till the Crown
of Glory be set on Rev. 2. 10.
in Heaven. So it was with our Blessed Woman.

A Sinner she was notorious, In a City, where notice is not taken Lu. 7. 37.
of low and little Offenders. Hers were no small Faults. She was Branded for
them with a Black Fame on Earth, nay Marked with a Black Cole of Hell, Seven
Devils Mar. 16. 9.
were in her. And if they were not (as some make them) the seven deadly sins,
it makes her at S. Greg.
best a Deadly Sinner. One that has the Devil in her Body, and Hell in her
Soul. As her Fiends, her Sins were many. They must if there be any Great. For,
besides the near Kindred of Sins (Children all of the same Parents) the 1 John
3. 8. Joh. 8. 44. Iam. 1. 15. Mat. 15. 19. ^ Iam. 2. 10.
Devil and the Flesh, and of the same Womb and House, the Heart; And the ill
Appetite which serves for all, if to one; and viciously Inclines to every one
in Principle equally Disposed for any, if not Conscionably set against all; The
Power of Sin and Dominion of One makes a Multiplication of more, and Commands
many. Great Sins like great Persons have many meaner ones to wait upon them.
And the Sovereign Romans 6. 13*
Sin above all, has many Subjects over which it Reigns. So that, where such a
one is, there are not only Relatively and Habitually, but Actually, Many.

Yet, though neither small nor few, Her sins are forgiven her. For Gods Mercy
is above Man's Sin. Because This is Infinite by Psalm. ^03. 12, 13. ^
Aggravation, That beyond all Extension. Our Evils are Innumerable ^ob 22. 5.
P^. 40. 12.
by Comparison; His Mercies G^n. 7. 19.
beyond Calculation. Mountains and Cedars as well as Valleys and Shrubs were
drowned in the Deluge, when all the World was made Sea; So are the Greatest and
Highest Sins in the Bottomless Deep of Gods Love, Ephesians. 2. 4. 13, 18. ^ic. 7.
19.
and Boundless Sea of His Mercy. Her many are, because His Mercies are more.
Sins may be past our numbering for Multitude, but not His who numbers the
stars, Ps. 147. 4. See his Prayer. Ps. 139. 18.
though to us Innumerably-many. If our Sins be like Manasse's, as the sands,
His Mercies are as the Drops of the Sea. One Drop of the Blood of the Son of
God is enough to drown the Guilt of any Son of Man. One Drop of Gods Favor,
The Father of Mercies, is sufficient to Quench the Fire of Guilt. What Sin then
so great and much which cannot be purged and pardoned by that Flood and Sea of
Christ's Blood and Gods Mercy? S. Chrysostom* therefore does* truly tell Cain, He
lies, when he says, His sins are greater then can Genesis 4. 13.
be forgiven him. For then, Gods Mercies are such as may be Measured, yes, and
Exceeded too. Which is as great an Absurdity as Blasphemy; For so man's Ill
shall be above Gods Good, and then what is Finite shall be greater then
Infinite. Magdalens many sins are forgiven her; so she is a Door of Hope for
Sinners.

But, Because she loved much: The Key for Penitents to open* them that Door.
Impenitency shuts Heaven on Sinners, and Bars Lu. 13. 3.
them the Door. It was she that sinned, but loved Christ much. She that loved
and grieved much. That has as many Tongues of Grief as Tears, and of them so
many as serve to wash his feet. As many Lu. 7. 38*
signs of Repentance, as Hairs, all which are Knit as a Towell to dry off the
Wash. That has as many Acts of Penance as Limbs of Dalliance (Heart, Eyes,
Lips, Hands, all Officers for all Offices of it) as if every Part of her were a
Person, and Joint a Penitent. Loved and Believed much. Before His Cross, on
it, after it, Her Faith Mat. 28. 1.
holds Him. The High Priests Bans, and Soldiers Swords, cannot pluck Him out
of her Arms. Her Heart they may tear out of her Body, they cannot Him out of
her Heart. Loved much, and lived well. Now her Company is not Wantons, but
Saints. She is One with them and of them. No more a Mistress of Lust, but a
Disciple of Christ. As famous for Sanctity now, as before for Sin. An Eminent
and an Excellent Saint. Loved, Believed, Served Christ much, and yet Thinks all
little. Behind Him is her place. His Feet the part she Touches. At them she
Kneels and Lies. Her Head Bows to them, her Heart below them. Most Lowly
though most Highly Eminent. Her sins which were many were forgiven her, because
she (thus) loved much.

And little she was not to love Him. For Christ showed her much Love. Mercy is
Amiable; she had that. A Drop in that Day more worth then a World. Pardon 2 Timothy 1. 18. Psalm. 32. 1. 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2.
is Desirable; she had it. A Word for it above many Worlds. (What were a
Thousand without Life?) Eternity is Delectable; she has the Gift of it. A Boon
greater then all (were there as many Millions of Them as there have been
Moments in the World.) What Is all that is, or is Imaginable to a Crown of life.
A life for Iam. 1. 12.
all Eternity.

So Magdalen is our Schoolmistress to Repentance. Her Life our Lecture. Her
Love our Loadstone. Her Eyes our Lookingglass. Her Tears our Spectacles. Her
Pardon our Handkerchief. We must not be Great Sinners and Little Penitents;
Great Penitents and Small Saints. All the Instruments of our Sins must turn
Organs to Gods Honor. And what gave Him most Offense, on 2 Cor. 7. 11.
that must we take more Holy Vengeance.

But to the Wounding, not the Murder of our Souls. The Bleeding ^ Sam. 20. 10.
Man. 14. 17.
must not be with Joabs Stab to Death, but like Malchus Cut, with Life. As we
Love and Grieve, we must Believe and Hope. Bitterly with Saint Peter weeping
for ^at. 26. 7.
a fouler Fact, but not utterly Despairing with Judas, for the foulest. For
whatever That is, This will be more foul. Because a Sin, not against God, but
Godhead. Trampling on the Blood of S. Hieron.
Christ, and Tearing out the Bowels of God. For if any Sin be above Those
Bowels and That Blood, One is not God, the Other is no Savior. If none be
above Them, Despair should be under us. Under us indeed, under Earth; in Hell,
with Damned Ghosts of Men and Devils, who can never Repent, and therefore do
ever Despair.

Our Penitent is a Better Pattern. A Heart of Grief with an Eye of Hope, and
Care of Life. So she who was a Woman of Ill note in the City, is of good mark
in the Church. Much Honored by the Saints. Most Dear to her Savior. Ever
after Glorious on Earth, and now for ever and ever Glorified in Heaven.

Poor Sinner! Take Example and Encouragement from Her! Presume not of a small
Repentance for great Offenses. Nor Despair of Pardon, be thy Offenses never so
great. From Her take better Heart and Care. She was Crowned with Gods
Forgiveness, Ps. 103. 4.
but Commended that she loved much.

The Prayer.
O Lord, who did make of a Great Sinner a Great Saint, and did in Thy Mercy
pardon her sins which were many, and had her great Love for Thy Mercy: O make
me (a Sinner as she was) penitent as I need to be, and a Saint as every
Penitent should be! Let me Redeem by my Love what I have Lost by my Lust, and
show my loving Affection to Thee, by my more pleasing Conversation before Thee.
Let me have Col. 1. 10.
no will but Thine: A Heart according to Thy Mind and Mouth, as Careful to
Keep as I was Car^lesse to Break Thy Commandments. Let Mar. 8. 38. Lu. 14. 26.
no Scoff or Cross cool my Love to my Savior on Earth, that no Door, no Bar
may shut me from Him in Heaven. Cast out of my soul all devilish and deadly
sins, and let Thy Heb. 1. 4.
Good Angels Assist me, and Thy Holy Spirit Possess me, that with Thy Saints I
may love and serve Thee as Those Holy Ones do. So let me live and die. The
Sinners Comfort, The Penitents Pattern, The Saints Fellow, Hells Shame, Heavens
Glory, Men's Honor, Angels Joy, Gods Care, and Christ's Love. And when I must
die and no longer live, Amongst Holy Saints and Angels live with Thee in the
Glory of Heaven, and love and laud Thee for ever and ever!

Amen!
Meditation against Apostasy, (1.) In RELIGION,
Upon Joh. 6. 68. Lord to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of Eternal
life.
OUr Blessed Lord being left by many of His Disciples, Joh. 6. 66.
which did not well enough apprehend or affect His Doctrine, puts it to His
Apostles, Will ye also go Joh. 6. 67. Os omnium Apostolorum. H. 55. in Mat.
away? S. Peter (not as the Head, but Mouth of the rest) makes answer for all;
To whom should we go? Better Master we cannot have. For what beter then Life?
What life like that Eternal? Thou have the words of both. Worser we must needs
do. For to forsake Life, is to embrace Death, Jer. 2. 13.
and to Depart from what is Eternal Mat. 25. 41
to go to the Death which is Everlasting. Of this great and good Lesson Christ
was the Teacher. From the bosom of the Father Joh. 1. 18.
He was sent and brought it. Psalm. 36. 9.
The Father the Fountain and Joh. 1. 16.
Well of life. Christ from Him Conveyed it by Taking Flesh, becoming so the
Conduit of it. Therefore was He a Priest to Purchase the Well. And a King,
freely to Bestow the Water. And a Prophet to Proclaim, and Preach. All the
College of the Twelve were His first Scholars, and other Disciples as lesser
Forms in His School. Saint Peter, as the most Confident (if not Intelligent
of the Twelve) speaks at once his Reason and Resolution for not Quitting or
Changing so Blessed a Master. Eternal life? what better then it? The Teacher
of That? who better then He? From both we go, if from Him. To whom then shall
we go?

Saint Peter's resolute Reason is both our Warrant and Warning not to leave that
School in which are the words of eternal life. The Church is that School (The
Plantation and Propagation of the Twelve.) In It Christ still is and ever will
be (though not in Person Mat. 28. 20.
as with them now) in Spirit as He was after, with His Apostles always, and
amongst His Disciples every where. Out of the Church Mat. 18. 20. Mat. 24. 26.
if they say, He is here or there, believe it not, or you believe not Him. Out
of Church then and out of Eternal life, that is sure; And when we were Received
in, to Reneague and Fall off to Infidel Jews, Mahumetans, or Heathens, is to
be shut and barred out. But not if in (in any) Church which has the words of
Eternal Lu. 1. 79. Act. 13 46
life. We may be Disciples, though not of the First Form. We may be in the
School, though not Apostles. We may be in the Ark, though not in the Highest
Deck. And blessed we are by being in the School, and saved we are by being in
the Ark. And if any within be so fierce and bold as to Throw all out, and
overboard, which are not of their Fo^m and Deck, that is not the way to be
Saved Lu. 6. 36.
and Blessed.

This God Pardon and Amend in the Church of Rome, or in the Fiery Spirits and
Furies of that Church: All must be Damned Eternally who come not in Loyalty to
the Court, that are not and keep not of their Communion. Though else they want
not The words of eternal life. The Church of England when it cast off their
Corruptions and laid by their Usurpations, Kept all the words of Saving Faith
in the Three Christian Creeds, and Four General Councils; The words of Saving
Life, In the Decalogue, Comprehending all our Duty in Gods Ten Commandments;
The words of Saving Hope, In the Lords Prayer, Comprizing all Suits in His Six
Petitions: And as the Words, we keep the Seals of Eternal life, In the Two
Sacraments, Generally and Undoubtedly Necessary to Salvation. As Her Doctrine
is Christian and Catholic, so Her Discipline Primitive and Apostolic. Bishops
were the Apostles Children, and they are our Fathers. Priests or Presbyters are
Bishops legitimate Issue (not Peers but Sons) and they are Her Children. Ours
as well as Theirs Descend from the line of the First Bishops and Fathers, and
can and do as well Prove their Descent such, as They theirs from S. Peter. If
Bastardie be laid to the Charge of ours by an undue Propagation of Priests from
a Scandalous Creation of Bishops; That Black Mouth deserves not a Pen but
Scourge to See Mason de Minist. Aug.
answer it. And were it Christian or Comely to cast ink at one another face,
we might be Quit with some Successions of their Great Bishops, which look and
are more spurious.

Go then (if thou can) from the Persecution, not from the Church. To forsake
a Church for the Cross, is to leave it for wearing the Cognizance of Christ.
Mat. 10. 38. 1 Cor. 11. 19.
Take Grief but no Scandal at the Sects and Schisms that abound: when the
Church had her Scepter, they durst not show their Heads. They are and go
Rebelliously against Her Rule, and therefore are Her Woe, not Her Reproach. And
whither if not to Heaven, can thou go to a Church Exempt by Privilege from
Danger of Schism; or by Purity, from Distress and Persecution? Rev. 1. 23.


And if the Tempter come with the Apostle in his mouth, which seems so fair,
and takes too much with many, The words of Eternal life are with the Church of
Rome* Allowed by Her Enemies a Possibility of Salvation; Bite not too fast at
that, but let them first Bite at this; It is, because of that old Saving Truth
and Worship, wherein they Concur, not for that new Unnecessary and Un-Catholick
Doctrine and Practice, wherein they differ from us. By believing more Creeds
then the Apostles and Apostolic; Receiving more Councils then the Universal;
By their Adoration to Relics and Images, Invocation of Saints, Communion
without the Cup, we believe them not to be Saved or Saveable; But by Belief of
the Christian Creeds. Worship of God, Praying by Christ, Communion with Him.
And therefore for this Mixture and Poison, more Perilous to Souls and their
Salvation.

So then for Doctrine to Rome, for Discipline to Geneva, if tempted to go away,
with Saint Peter's words make our Answer and Apology against the great
Pretenders to S. Peter and S. Paul too: Whither shall we go? Thou Church of
England (though a sad a True one of Christ) However it be with Thee for Thy
Temporal, Thou have (none better, none fuller has) the Words and Thing of
Eternal Life.

The Prayer.
O Lord, who did purchase to Thy self a Church on Earth, and Act. 20. 28 1 Timothy 3. 15.
founded in it a School to teach the way to Heaven; And by Thy Holy Spirit and
Providence art, and ever wilt be present and president in that School, in and
with Thy Holy Servants and Ministers appointed and Joh. 16 13
set apart to declare and deliver Thy Truth: I bless Thee that I am born in so
blessed a place as Thy Church, and have in it the Words and Seals of Eternal
life, and Thee in them: O let me never leave my Lord! Suffer no Spirit of
Seduction or Temptation ever to take or keep me out of Thy School, till I can
find Good better then Eternal Life. And since by Thy singular Blessing, I am
in a Church which holds Thy Word pure without equal Mixture of Tradition, Thy
Sacraments perfect without Mutilation, Prayers Devout without Superstition,
Worship good without Contradiction: By a Discipline, Primitively Right without
Alteration; let me not for Her Miseries forsake so good a Mother, nor for the
Schisms and Rents in her Coat, Renounce so Holy a Body; But Those as the fruits
of Hers and my sins, let me sadly bewail. And These, as the Foils of her former
Beauty, wisely behold: That it may appear to be, not her Prosperity but Truth
which I love, and that it is Thee (in her) and no Interests or Ends of mine
which I serve. And that the Spirit of Discerning may may be seen in me, not
judging of Joh. 7. 24.
things by Sense and shows of right, but Reason and more Real Evidence; nor
valuing of Churches by Rev. 3. 1.
what they seem, but are. And O Lord I beseech Thee show mercy to my poor
Mother Church, and Remove at once her Sins and Woes. And let her Children do
her right, not to leave her for her Distresses, but to love her the more. Do
Thou Lord Jesus love her, pardon, pity, and preserve her, and mercifully
Restore her. And let thy Blessing with the Beauty of Holiness be in her and
upon her, and all her Fathers and Friends, and Children of her and in her, who
shed Tears and pour out Prayers for her, to Thee who art Head of the Church,
and can Col. 1. 18.
heal her. Lord in mercy help her! Help and Heal her Lord Jesus!

Amen.
Meditation against Apostasy, (2.) From GOODNESS.
Upon 2 Pet. 2. 22. The Dog is turned to his own vomit again.
Does He call Men Beasts? No: For Sinners are not Men. They are Endowed with
Reason, says the Philosopher, with Religion, says the Divine. Nay the
Divinest Philosopher; Fear God and keep his Commandments, Eccles. 12. 13.
this is every man. To Act as Sense does guide, and Appetite move, that is to
be Beast. Man being in honor has no Understanding, but is compared to the Ps.
49. 20.
beasts that perish. Not in Death more then the Deprivation of his
Understanding. For that is it which makes a man. Brutality of Mind as well as
Mortality of Body forms a Beast. Both give a perfect Form; for which they have
the Definition of Beasts that are such Men. Natural Bruits or unreasonable
Beasts. But Monsters, because made after the form, 2 Pet. 2. 12. Jude v. 10
and manifested in the shape of men.

All are Beasts, but some are Dogs, the filthiest of Beasts. The unclean
Gentiles were to the Jews; The Infidel- Jews are Mat. 15. 26. Phil. 3. 2.
to the Christians. Which instead of Believing in Christ Bark and Bite at Him
as mad, not Men, but Dogs. To His Cross they did Hunt Him as so many
Bloodhounds, and on it Bait Him and Ps. 22. 16.
Tear His Flesh, and Devour His Blood. Julian (after) by S. Hierome is made a
Mad dog for his rage and raving at the Flock of Christ; The Jews (before) were
a Kennell full, let loose by the Devil with a fury no less then His, flying
and falling on the Lamb of God. All Dogs are filthy, but not alike. At their
Vomit there they are most filthy. And Sins and Lusts (the Ill Humors of the
Soul) The Superfluity Jam. 1. 21. -- Evomit peccata. Orig.
of Naughtiness, this is the vilest Vomit. When cast out before by Confession,
and fallen to after by a Second Commission, this is To turn to it, and be most
vile. Twice vile, because Once before. By Jude v. 12. Jer. 2. 13.
Lapse then, by Relapse now. Turning to Evil before Repentance, and Returning
to it after Conversion. And most vile, because never till now so much. For this
is to shake hands with God and Cast Him off, and that is to strike hands with
the Devil, and Take him on. So Seven worse Spirits Lu. 11. 26.
are let in to the Heart, and all Sins made seven times worse to the Soul. We
had power to stand, and stood, and are fallen for Heb. 6. 45.
all that Ability. We had high Favor from God in the Gift of such Grace, and
Fall off after such Obliging Mercy. We stood fair in the Eye of Heaven, and
have thrown our selves into the Arms of Hell. We have Divorced our Souls from
God, and have Wedded them to the World. The Holy Spirit is Dismissed, and the
Evil One Entertained. All Former Goodness is lost, and nothing left but a Guilt
of the loss, and all Ezekiel. 18. 24.
Aggravation of that Guilt. Better never be Good, then after Bad. Hypocrisy
Doubles, Apostasy more then Trebles, Iniquity. And this in Manners (as the
Commonest) is the Worst Apostasy. The Ill of that into Error, is, that from
the Fall to Heresy, there is a Downfall into Pravity. For Conscience is
seldom saved good, if Faith suffer Shipwreck. And a Blind Tim. 1. 1 9. 1 Mat.
15. 14. 1 Timothy 3. 9. Heb. 3. 12. 2 Timothy 3. 6. 2 Timothy 4. 3.
guide carries the Followers out of the way. And the Affections hardly foot it
right, when the Thoughts are erroneous. And this Fall in Life often ends in a
Grovelling of Error. And the Corruption of Lust fouls not only the Heart in
the fall, but the mind with it. Therefore as S. Paul says (Story shows) Heresy
to be a Lust of the Gal. 5. 20.
Flesh. And Heretics whoever is their Father have it for their Mother. The
World may push, but the Flesh throws them down. If then we must fly ill as
Hell, Apostasy must be most Abhorred. For as the Devil Himself was the first
Apostate, and made the second, and is Father of all Apostasy, so his lot is the
End of it. And since he had no Christ to Redeem, no Spirit to Raise him from
his fall, and so did not Apostate in Contempt of God and Christ; The man that
does, must have a Double Lot. But man out of Hell is not (even the most
Devilish) a Devil. He by 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26.
the Grace of Repentance may rise from his Fall. Return from his Vomit. Of Dog
turn Sheep again. And of a filthy Creature be washed in the Lambs Blood, and
made clean and innocent. So many in Primitive times did, and others may, and
do. And man out of Heaven, even the Holiest, is not an Angel. He therefore may
Gal. 6. 1.
and will fall to former infirmities, and yet keep his state of Grace. That is
rather a Lapsing then Relapsing to Evil. Not an Act of Apostasy, but Frailty.
And I must take heed I bind not my Soul too hard from such failings, Ps. 19. 12.
lest I tie my self to Inevitable Trouble, because to Absolute Impossibility.
Good Prayers and Endeavors against all Ills and undue Acts do well, but not
too great Vows and Promises. Which instead of setting the Heart free and full
to the service of God, puts the Conscience into Fetters. He that stands shall
do wisely to consider this, that a Trip is not a Fall from Grace, lest he lie
in Distress if he do not: And he that is fallen indeed, shall do comfortably
to Remember this, that a fall from God may be Recovered, lest he wallow in
Despair, if he do not believe it. Art thou fallen by the Weakness of the
Flesh, and Strength of the Devil? Repent and Rise in the name, Ephesians. 5. 14. Jer.
3. 10.
and by the Hand of God. So thou do Defeat Hell, give Saints a Joy, Angels a
Feast, and Heaven Luke 15. 7, 10.
a Holy Day.

The Prayer.
O Lord, who in Thy Goodness have made me a Man with a Reasonable soul, and by
Thy Grace a Christian of a Sanctified spirit, let me not make my self a Beast
by my Sensuality. Of a Child of Thine let me not become a Goat for my
Wantonness, a Dog for my Filthiness. Lust as Vomit let me loath, and above all,
Backsliding sins, which make me lick up my Vomit, and Thy Vengeance with it.
Before Thee let me be humbly vile in my own eyes, as a Dog unworthy the least
Crumb of Thy Mercy, but against Thee let me not be wickedly vile, lest I be
both as a foul and dead Dog before Thee. 2. Sam 9. 8
From Lust which makes so foul a Fall; From an evil Heart which will harbor
such a Lust; From Devils in whatsoever shapes, which Tempt to have such a Lust
in my To. 11. 20.
Heart; From Pride which throws down without a Devil; Thou that had
Temptation, but did neither trip nor fall from Thy perfect purity, Lord Jesus
Deliver me. From so great a Guilt, and Woe, and Shame ever Keep me! My Lapses
pity, my Relapses prevent in me. If I do fall into any, let me not lie
Impenitently: but from falling from a state of Grace and holy Course to a
naughty and filthy Life, O suffer no Lust or Fiend to cause it in me. As the
state of the Devil himself let me behold and beware all such Apostasy! Thou
that art able To. 14. 4
to make me stand, uphold me Lord Jesus!

Amen!
Meditation against Inconstancy, In our BELIEF or COURSE.
Upon Ephesians. 4. 14. That we henceforth be no more children tossed to and fro
with every wind of doctrine.
THe Spirit of God (at Pentecost) Act. 2. 2. Joh. 3. 8.
came as a Wind. And so It blows, not by chance, but where it lists. Whence,
is easily known, and whither, and wherefore, It Comes from God, and Blows to
and for Heaven. All Souls Bound and Embarked Thither, 1 Timothy 1. 19.
Sail and Arrive at that Blessed Port and Place by the Favor and Power of
this, and only this Wind. All good Doctrine is a Blow, and every Truth a
Breath Veritas a quocunque dicitur a Spiritu Sanoto est. Joh. 16. 13.
of This Spirit, called therefore, The spirit of Truth; because all is (as in
It) from It. For the Truth of Things is in Gods Mind, and the Truth of Words is
in Gods Mouth, and those two are all. And God and His Spirit are one, which is
both Gods and God. Acts 4. 4.


All Wind is a kind of Spirit, which we feel but do not see. But this is not
Intellectual, but blows naturally. Intelligent Spirits Act and Breath
voluntarily, but are not all Gods, because many of them are Blasted with Error
and Ill, and move Irregularly. All Regular and Religious Spirits are moved from
God, and are His Works and Gifts, but none can be said to be the Spirit of God,
because they are the Spirits of Saints who are but Men, and not as that of God
is, Essentially. It is then not the same, but another from God, but what Mouth
or Heart soever is moved in Truth, and to Good, there the Spirit of God
breathes, which is the Principal Agent in all good Acts, and the first Mover.
And those Doctrines are and must be Divine and Infallible Truths, which are
delivered by Pens or Tongues possessed of Purpose, and Acted 2 Pet. 1. 21. 2.
Tim. 3. ^ 16. 1 These. 2. 13. Gal. 4. 14. Luc. 1. 10. Mar. 13. 11. 2 These. 2. 2
1 John 4. 1.
and Guided by the Holy Ghost, because they write and speak by His Inspiration.
Therefore Holy Prophets and Apostles are to be Heard and Believed in their
Words and Scriptures as God Himself; made therefore Organs of the Holy Ghost,
and Gods mouth.

But not all that pretend to theirs and Gods Spirit. And a matter of good
Wisdom and great Concernment it is, to Discern Spirits, which are, and which
are not, Gods. And no better way then that: To Remember where It was, and
Consider what It is. As Breath is in man's Mouth, Gods Spirit is in His Word. As
the Procession of it, so 2 Cor. 3. 8. Joh. 16. 13. Joh. 16. 15.
the Inspiration of us is from the Father and the Son in the Holy Prophets and
Apostles, which as Two Lips make up the Mouth of God. The Scriptures are the
Coasts from which these good Winds come. If they blow besides or against them,
they are Isa. 8. 20. Gal. 1. 8. 2 John ver. 10. Romans 1. 4.
not of God, they are not good. And if they be Thence, there is no error nor
ill in the Breath, as there is none in Gods. Nor in the Spirit of God, which is
the Spirit of Truth and Holiness, and cannot move to what is false or foul.
What does so is Another from It. And cross to Him. So not Gods, because as
Himself, His Spirit is One, and His Mind Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6.
is Himself; but so there should be Two. The Doctrine of the Heb. 13. 9. 1 Timothy
3. 10.
Spirit is Diverse, never Contrary to it self. For God is ever the same, and
One. What blows against God and Heaven, is a Ps. 102. 27 1 Timothy 4. 1
Wind from the Devil and Hell. What is To and Again, is not from God. If Tossed
to and fro, the best of the Spirit is but Man's.

This Spirit of discerning Spirits, Heb. 5. 14.
should possess all Christian Souls. And the Wind of God be so well known,
that we should not be Moved, much less Transported, by any other Spirits. For
we are not Chaff but Wheat. Not Mat. 3. 12. Lu. 12. 29. Heb. 3. 4. Jam. 1. 6.
Heb. 5. 14. 2 Cor. 14. 20.
Weather-cocks (Phanes) but Houses and Temples. Not to be Meteors, (...).
but Stars. Not Waves but Rocks. Not Babes in Knowledge, but Doctors. Not
Children for Ignorance, but Men. And if not for Duty, for Peace sake we should.
For our minds else are in perpetual Motion, and we like Tennis Balls ever upon
the toss, never at rest. For Honor; for why should my Thoughts serve as
Feathers for every Mouth to play withal, and my Mind as a Football for every
Foot to spurn? My Heart a Prey for every Hand 2 Pet. 2. 3.
to take? Nay for very Happiness sake; For where the Mind is Indifferent, the
Spirit is not Resident. And my Bliss in the way, and at my end, both depend
upon the Conduct of the Holy Spirit.

God be merciful then to us and our Times! More Bodies when Christ came were
not possessed with Ill Spirits, then Souls Mic. 2. 11.
are now with odd ones. Every Spirit that blows moves us. Every Wind that
stirs drives us. Every Drum me that beats to Novelty gets Voluntaries. Every
Trumpet that sounds for Heresy finds Followers. Aecebolius His Ghost haunts
many. They have been in Religion, Wrong and Right, and Right and Wrong again.
God give them at last with Him to Repent with due shame and woe, and to Come
and Continue Right. As if we had no Care to come to Heaven, or no doubt that
all Winds would waft us to that Holy-Happy Port; our Souls sail with any. The
high wind of Power, or fair wind of Prosperity carries away many. The Side-wind
of Faction most. The foul wind of Lust all. Where 2 Timothy 3. 9.
Profit blows, or Pleasure breaths, or Honor moves. Nay the Basest, and
Filthiest, and Shame fullest Profit, and Pleasure, and Honor, that is our
wished loved wind. And if in a Church, and from a Pulpit, though from a Spirit
as far from Gods as Heaven from Earth, we hoise up our Hearts as Sails to take
in the Breath, and Commonly, whatever it be, are for the Next wind, and Away we
go with it.

This Ill Spirit of Giddiness of old did much haunt and hurt the Church. The
Apostles therefore prescribe so often and much against it. They who had the great
Cure and Care of Souls, and 1 John 4. 1. 2 John 2. 9. Jude v. 4. Tit. 3. 10.
knew this Malady was fatal to some, might prove mortal to many, use all Arts
and means to Prepare and Confirm their minds against it. And for that end did
Contend and Labor much to Keep and Cast Ill Spirits out the Church, lest
weaker Souls should be Blasted in it. St. Paul discovered this Vertigo at
Ephesus, and does Intimate both the Cause and Cure of it. They were Children
(that was the Cause) They must be Men (that will be the Cure.) Men of Heavenly
Minds, Established in the present Truth; 2 Pet. 1. 12.
and of Holy Affections, Established Heb. 13. 9.
with Grace (that is to be Christian men;) and this will make a perfect Cure.
For God is the Center of the Soul. The Heart is that which sets man on his
Center. Religion which binds Ps. 112. 7.
man to God, brings the Heart to His Center in God. And Truth and Grace, Sound
Judgment, and a Sanctified Spirit, these two take up all Religion. Error, if
Capital, shakes; Lust, if more mortal, quits the hold. For God the Center
being the First Truth and Chief Good, the Soul cannot fix on Him, if they be
fastened on. Hence Catechizing is so much Commended, because it founds the Mind
in Christian Gal. 6. 6. Heb. 6. 1. Jam. 4. 6.
Truth, and Humility Commanded, because it grounds the Heart in Grace. That
lays the foundation right, and this low; and so both bear up the House, and
keep the Soul fixed and sure from either falling or wavering. Childish Thoughts
and Lusts (as all Erring and Earthly ones are) which show us not to be as we
should be ( Men) these make us Tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine,
as Toies and foolish Frights draw and drive away Children.

The Prayer.
O God, who have made me a Man and a Christian, and so one of Thy Children, let
me not be a Dwarf amongst them, nor a Monster instead of such a Man. Having in
^he age Heb. 5. 12. 1 Cor. 16. 13. Ephesians. 4. 13.
of a Man, the wit of a Child, and standing at the stay of a Babe, when I
should be a Tall man in Christ: If not for Shame, for Fear let me have a wiser
and stronger Soul. Lest as a silly Bird it be caught in every Seducers Snare,
and as a w^ndering Bird be in perpetual danger, and never at rest. And as one
not settled in any Religion, be judged of none. And go not forward in my
Conversation because at a stand for my Religion. Not daring to do what I doubt
to be Right, or Presuming too much, if I do what I doubt; Having no Comfort,
because no Conscience and Constancy in the best things which I think and do.
Let me not be one man at Bethel, 1 Samuel 10. 3. 1 Samuel 28. 7. 2 Samuel 3. 1 Samuel
30. 6. Gal. 1. 6. and 3. 3.
and another at Endor with Saul, but in Hebron and Ziglag one and the same man
with David: Not with the men of Galata be Fickle in Faith, betwixt the Jewish
and Christian; but as the Saints of Christ at Pergamus ( even where Satan had
his Throne) Holding Rev. 2. 13.
fast his Name. Let no Wind of Doctrine but from Heaven, drive me, no Spirit
but of God move my soul. Let Thy Holy Spirit be my Card, Thy Holy Word my
Compass, and Thy Holy Apostles my Pilots; Bind my Ears to their Mouths, whose
Doctrines and Doings 2 Cor. 11. 13.
are most Apostolic (not as false Teachers in pretense, but really and
reasonably so.) A pure Mind from Error and Ignorance, and clear Heart from
Lust and Ill, make me O God of Truth and Grace. So shall my Soul fix on Thee.
No Seduction nor Temptation shall hurry me in the way to Hell, or stagger me in
the way of Heaven. And so my soul shall at last Arrive with Thee, and Rest in
Thee, where no Infirmity or Enemy shall move or remove me; fixed on the Rock of
my Salvation in all Felicity to all Eternity. So be it for His sake who Heb.
13. 8. Ps. 102. 27
was yesterday and to day, and the same for ever: O Thou who do never change,
but art ever the same. Even so be it to Thy Servant, for Jesus His sake.

Amen.
WHOLSOME MEDITATIONS FOR SICK BODIES, Raised from the Estate of Three Sick
Saints; Bodies sometimes sorely Diseased on Earth, and now Ever Blessed Souls
in Heaven, Job, David, Hezekiah.

I. Sick Job, or Job' s Consumption.
Job 19. 25, 26, 27. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at
the latter day upon the earth.

And though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see
God.

Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another,
though my reins be consumed within me.


Job's Body then was in a Consumption. No wonder when not the Stone, Strangury,
Gout, Dropsy (two or three, or four, but) ten of the greatest Torments and
Maladies Bolduct on Job.
of mankind, are observed and numbered up in him. And no wonder at that, when
(life excepted, which must not be touched) Job 2. 6.
God Commissions the Devil, to do what he will or can to his Body.

Touch he could not an Ox, an Job 1. 11.
Ass, a Sheep of Job's without Gods leave (much less a Limb of his Body, or
Hair of his Head, but by Permission.) But having got license for the whole,
from Head to Foot, no part shall want pain, every Member shall have Mischief.
The But of Satan's Malice shall be filled with his poisoned Arrows. That by
those Extremities on Job's Flesh, he may (if possible) provoke his patient
Spirit, and distemper his holy Soul. This was the Devils aim. That the mark
which he shot at.

The wonder then is, That God (a most Gracious Lord) should give up His good
Servant into his enemies Hand. The Job 2. 6.
good Gods professed Foe, the good Man's mortal and Enraged Adversary.

God would teach us by this piece of His Providence, not to doom others for
Reprobate Souls, because they have most Miserable bodies. Nor to deem our
selves Butts of Gods wrath, because stuck full of the Devils Arrows. It is not
evidence enough to pronounce our selves or others Castawayes, because our
Bodies show us to be wretched Lepers or Lazars. The mark of Misery does not
exclude us the Fold of God, it admits us into His Sheep fold.

Afflictions are sometimes Trialls, not Judgments. The Sick Bed is not always
Gods Jail, but His Field. And we on it not Gods Prisoners, but Champions. The
best Soul on earth has Job 13. 7.
the worst Body in it.

Woeful, but withal Joyful too. He is it, He knows why He is. I know that my
Redeemer lives. A Redeemer he has at present for his Soul, at last of his
Body. A Kinsman, Allowed by Lev. 25. 49 Mic. 5. 2.
Law to Redeem. Who lived from all Eternity as God, and from and before the
beginning of the world as Man (in the Appointment of God.) God-man, 1 Pet. 1. 20
who lived to do good to Man, before he was born of Mankind. And though after,
it was His lot (as Mediator) to fall by Death, and lie in a Grave, before
Three days past He did Arise and Ascend to Heaven, to possess the Purchase of
His Redemption and ours. And thence shall Descend to Earth to stand and judge
the World.

And although, after Diseases have stead Job's skin, and torn his flesh, what
remains shall be to feast Worms (which shall have less to feed on, because so
Torn and Flead) yet In his flesh (that miserable, macerated, and mangled Flesh,
for Substance the same, but for Quality another* and far better Body) he shall
see God. Not as a Foe, but a Father. In Christ, not as a Judge, but a Redeemer.
With a Beatifical face, and eye of Gods and His. Even those eyes which were
then sunk in their holes, and after to be closed with Death and Mould, never
more to see man on earth, With those eyes shall he see God, and Christ for
himself, and not another. For Bliss is no more to be seen with others eyes,
then to be wrought with others hands. Himself therefore (no other) with his own
eyes (none else) shall to his Eternal and Infinite Blessedness, see God then,
though now, His reins be consumed within him.

No Cordial in Sickness to Job's. The Sight of Bliss above, against the Sense
of Woe below. When Death is a Call to Heaven, Diseases are our joyful Summons
to Death. Hope of Eternity devours the Grief of Misery. No fainting of Spirits
under all those burdens of the flesh, if we take but this Cordial. S. Paul
gives it us, as it was taken by Job. -- Therefore we 2 Cor. 4. 16.
faint not. The Renues of the Inner man support the Decaies of the outer.

No Compare betwixt a Moment and Eternity. No Concord between Levity and
Gravity. Our light afflictions which are but for a moment, work for us a far
more eternal and exceeding weight of glory. But how does this Cordial work?
As the Eye is set upon Eternity. Whilst we look not at the things which are
seen, but at the things which are not seen. And why? For the things which are
seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal.

Lord! If Thou send me Job's Sickness give me his Cordial too, I beseech Thee.
So good a life on Earth, as will assure that blessed one in Heaven! And then for
joy or Woe, Health or Sickness, Do what Thou will, dear Father, with Thy Child
and Servants life.

The Prayer.
O Lord, if Thou send me Job' s Misery, give me his Patience. If mine be not
more, let me not be Impatient for less. If my Misery be less, let my patience
be the more. And that I may have Job' s Patience, let me have his Conscience. A
heart so sound before Thee, that whatsoever wounds shall be in my Estate or
Body, I may not bleed desperately. If Woe be on me, let not Sin be in me;
Hypocrisy within, or Profaneness without; That taking away the sting, I may
not feel the Serpent bite me, though it touch me. So shall I have with Thy Rod,
Thy Staff to support Ps. 23. 4.
me; Job' s staff for his burden. Whatsoever my load is, let that staff lie by
me, let Thy Grace and Mercy uphold me for His sake, who is the Only support of
my soul and hope of my Salvation, Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
II. Sick David, or David' s Ulcer.
Psalm. 38. 5, 6, 7. My wounds stink and are corrupt through my foolishness.

I am brought into so great trouble and misery, that I go mourning all the day
long.

For my loins are filled with a sore disease, and there is no whole part in my
body.


MY wounds stink? Diseases are the wounds of life. David's are not from Man's but
Gods Sword. He heals, He wounds, Deuteronomy. 32. 39. V^r. 2.
Man is struck with Sickness, God Smites. Infirmities are his Arrows. They
hit not our Bodies, but ^s aimed and shot from His hand. David's loins were
filled with them, no limb was free ( There was no whole part in him.) The whole
Body was but one Ulcer. He went mourning all the day long, (not an hour of
ease.)

Nor was the Disease only sore, but loathsome too. His wounds stink. They do
not only smart, but smell. And no marvel. They rot whiles he lives. Not
mortified, but putrified. They are corrupt. And how is this? Through Gods
Severeness? No, but Through his foolishness. No rest in Ver. 3.
his bones by reason of his sin. Nothing but Painfulnesse and Noisomenesse in
his Body, but by his own foolishness.

Wickedness is Foolishness. Filthiness is Folly in Israel. David Genesis 34. 7.
Deuteronomy. 22. 21.
was fooled by Lust, and therefore is filled with Sickness.

He fouled another Bed with his Body, and for that does wash his couch with
his tears. All the Psalm. 6. 6.
night long weeping at last for his wantoning in the day and night. His eye
roves from his roof, his 2 Samuel 11.
bed must be watered for it.

Repentance is the best fruit of Wickedness. It ends in Tears or Fires.
Sickness is the least pain of Sin, it brings forth Death Jac. 1. 15.
(without Repentance) Bodies and Souls both Eternal Death. So Sin makes us
twice fools. The first folly of Man is to miss of God, his End. The next is to
fail of Comfort in the way. And in it we commit such foolishness. The first
Sin ( Adam's) was the Original of all our Woe. And the Second (our own) is the
Spring of our Wretchedness. Our loss of Joy in Heaven, and Comfort on Earth,
both flow from that Spring. The Pains of Hell and Earth run both from that
Original. David's wickedness went over his head, and because his Guilt, his
Woe was intolerable. No wonder Ps. 38. 4.
when God Himself is pressed Am. 2. 13. Mat. 37. 46.
under our sins, and the Son of God cries out as oppressed under them, if we
sink in our Spirits, and our Bodies groan, and bow, and break under the burden.

Yet sin we will, come Sickness, come Death, come Pains, come wounds, come what
will come, That Is our foolishness.

To keep from Sin then, is our First Wisdom, and to go from it, our Second. So
David got away by Repentance from his sin, and above his Woe, by Patience,
Psalm. 38. 18. 13.
That takes the Core out of the Wound, and this applies a Plaster to his Sore.

No Plaster to Patience for the Wounds of Sickness. No Patience to that which
is prepared by Repentance.

If it be just what I suffer, why do I complain? The Prephet silenceth that in
his loudest Lamentations -- Wherefore does a Lam. 3. 39.
living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sin? The Church
professes as much in her deepest Distresses (The Insults of her Enemies) in
her greatest Calamities. I will bear the indignation of Mic. 6. 9.
the Lord, because I have sinned against him.

Nay, it is Merciful what I endure on earth, if Sin deserve the Sufferings
under it. It Is Favor 1 Cor. 11. 32.
to come off with a Rod for a Sword. It Is Clemency to commute the Pains of Hell
for Woes on Earth. It Is Bounty to accept a Moment for Eternity.

David therefore thanks God that he was struck Sick, not Dead. The Lord has
chastned me sore, but Psalm. 118. 18, 19.
he has not given me over to death. S. Austin prays God to Cut and Cup, Wound
and Burn, and do what he will with his Body, so that He will Eternally spare
his Soul.

The Church does proclaim it, not for a Simple Pity, but a multitude of
Enlarged and Continued Mercies, that they were not consumed. Though never
Nation on earth before them, was so plagued and confounded, crying out of the
dungeon of her greatest darkness, and deepest discontentedness. -- It is of
the Lords Lam. 3. 22
mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions fuil not. They are
new every morning, great is his faithfulness.

Law, Temple, Throne, Country, all was gone, yet in their Captivity they live;
They are upon some, though not their own earth; It Is Mercy, it is Mercies they
are not utterly and eternally consumed.

O Lord, if for my sin I must have some, let me have Hell in my Bed (day and
night tortured with diseases.) Let me have Hell in my Conscience (Tormented
with the Fire and worm of Guilts above all bodily Tortures.) Let me have Two
Hells, Two hundred Hells on earth, so that I may not have that One, that
fearful one under it. Psalm. 6. 1.


If I offend, Correct me in Mercy, not in Thy Fury. With Thy Rod, not with Thy
Sword. If my Sickness be Thy Rod, and my Sin wound me, give me the Plaster
with the Sore. The Patience of a Penitent for a Sinful Soul. Patience,
Patience I beseech Thee, for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen, Amen.

The Prayer.
O Lord, if I do sin as David did, why should I not think to suffer like him?
If I sin more, and grieve my God, let me more quietly bear my Grief. Whatever
my punishment is, how bitter soever on earth, let me not suffer that which is
without end or ease for ever. Let me rather roar in Bed then Hell; since Guilt
will make me cry somewhere. And with my Cry let my Prayer come before Thee for
Thy pardon to my sin, and pity to my misery. Preserve me in it, till Thou
please to Deliver me from it. Since I pay so dearly for the folly of my sin,
make me wiser then to buy such pleasure with so much pain. Of my Body, and
(without Thy Mercy and my Repentance) of Soul to^, in all Extremity to
Eternity. From That deliver me whatever Thou inflict upon me. From This (if Thy
will) which is so grievous to me. For His sake, who is the Deliverer of us from
wrath to come, Jesus Christ 1 These. 1. 10.
our Lord.

Amen.
III. Sick Hezekiah, or, Hezekiah' s Plague.
Isaiah 38. 13. I reckoned till morning that as a lion so will he break my
bones. From day unto night will thou make an end of me.
PRobably the Plague was Hezekiah's Disease. The Plaster of Ver. 22.
Figs and the Boil, make it guessed to be the Pestilence. A Raging and Roaring
Sickness it was, by the shape wherein God appears in it ( As a Lion.) That did
not only tear the Flesh, but gnaw the Bones (The cruellest Extremity which
could be felt or feared, an Angry and a Hungry Lion.) And without all ease or
intermission too. From morning to night, from night to morning. From day unto
night, he reckons till morning, it will make not an assault and breach, but a
prey and havoc, an utter ruin, and absolute end of him. (A mortal and
perpetual Malady) so he reckoned.

But without the Lord of Hosts, the God of Health and Sickness. True, the Lion
was set on by God ( Set thy house in order, thou Ver. 1.
shall die.) Peremptorily, he shall. And with a Duplicate, Thou shall not live;
But taken off too by the same Hand (Gods) and the same Mouth (the Prophets.)
Indeed Gods hand was taken off by Hezekiah's. He weeps, he prays. Even Ver. 2,
3. Numb. 14. 12. Genesis 32. 28.
God Himself is conquered by those hands. But not by every ones, but
Hezekiah's. Who else would not take the Lion off?

Who would die of Sickness, if Prayers and Tears could make them live?
Hezekiah's it was that did plead, as well as weep and pray. That made a plea
for his life which every one cannot draw. From the goodness of his life, for
the Respit of his death. From the uprightness of his heart, Ver. 2.
for the Preserving of his life. For Gods Mercy, from his Truth. For a longer
course on earth, from his holier one before heaven. This makes him hope a
Reprieve from the Sentence of God. That makes him pray for it. And to very
happy purpose. For though the Doom was pronounced Peremptory, it was meant
Conditional. And that Reserve God kept in Ver. 5.
His breast, to renew the Kings Lease upon that Condition* That he should so
Weep, Pray, and Plead. And the Belief of it lived in Hezekiah's breast. He did
not lie down in despair under the dreadful Message of his Death, but raises
up a good Spirit of hope, and from it seeks and finds a Grant of life. So the
good man strives to have the same will with God, and the good God does please
to have the same mind with him. And a Blessed meeting is made of their minds
and wills, as if both had but one Bosom and Heart.

And now for the Chatters of a Ver. 14.
Crane, and mournings of the Dove, Hezekiah chants like an Angel his Hall
elujah's out, and sings Hymns and holy Anthems in the House of God. Ver. 20.


Out of Heaven, no Cordial in Sickness like a good Conscience. And no
Conscience so Cordial as what is extracted out of a good life. To remember our
selves of a Ver. 3.
holy Course, and pray God to remember it. Lord, if thou sendest to me sad
Maladies as Messengers of Death, and Sicknesses as Prophets to my Body, to bid
me set things in order and die; let me give them Hezekiah's Entertainment, Not
despair, but hope. Not presume, but use means of life. Let me not roar, but
pray. Not fret at it, but weep. Not question, but plead to the Bill. Not
slight, but peruse the Message.

And before the sad Messenger or Message of Death shall come, let my Cordial
be ready. That when the Lion shall be on my bones, the Lamb may be in my
bosom. The Lamb of God by my Faith in his Blood, and quietness Rom 15. 1.
of Soul by the Peace of His Spirit. The Comfort and Courage of a good
Conscience. Amen.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, if Thou smite my Body with the Pestilence, keep the Plague out of
my Soul. The Pestilence of a guilty Soul, and Heart struck with Guilt. Whatever
my Plague is, let me see it sent from Thy Hand, and how peremptory soever the
Message seems, let me not despair of Thy Help. Thou can Heal, who do Wound,
and wilt Revoke Thy Sentence if I sue for Thy favor; Nor let me presume to ask
without use of means to obtain. O Lord heal me, for I am sick, and let my
penitent Tears be my Cordial waters to Comfort me, till Thou help me: And
moving Messengers to Thy Mercy to pity me, and make haste to my help: And if
Thou do graciously please to Renew my life for further years, let me not
forget my self and Thee so far as to be lift up against, or above what I ought
to do and be, lest failing of that small Rent, Thou take away my Lease, or load
it with such Encumbrances, as I shall make it a mercy to have it taken from me.
So let me hope, and do, by Thy Grace and Mercy, Good God, for Jesus Christ His
sake.

Amen.
The sum of these three Meditations, as an Elixir extracted out of all the
Cordialls and Prescripts, and Practices used and received in them all.
Three great Persons all these J^b 22. 9, 10. Job 1. 3.
were, Job a Prince, David and Hezekiah Kings. He the greatest man of the East,
and They, not the meanest Kings of Judah, or the World. And they were all as
Good as Great. Job the Best Job 1. 8. Act. 13. 22 2 Chronicles. 29. 2.
man in the Earth. David the Best King in the World. And Hezekiah in all things
like unto David. Yet as all of these are Dead, they were Sick all, and all of
grievous Sickness.

1. If Greater, then be not Prouder then others. If we be above them in some
things, they are even with us in others. In the Best things they are our
Equals, (Christ's Blood and Heaven.) There is one Savior and Salvation for mean
and great. All in God and Christ are Peers. In the Col. 3. 9.
worst things we are their fellows, Sickness and Death. The Portall and House
are of equal Passage for all. All mankind is laid and levelled in the Grave.
Kings have Eccles. 7. 2
no Prerogative over Sickness. Beggars are Coheirs of Happiness. Lu. 16. 22.
The Power of more Goodness is all the Privilege of Greatness.

2. Has the Saint then no Prerogative above a Sinner? none from the two Common
Beds of Mankind (of Sickness and the Grave;) Their Privilege lies another
way. No Kings (except such) have like Prerogatives to the Saints.

God is their Father, Christ their Brother. The Holy Ghost their Comforter.
Angels their Guardians. Saints their Associates. Death their Desire. The Grave
Phil. 1. 23. Revel. 14. 13. Lu. 21. 20. Joh. 17. 21.
their Rest. The Bar their Joy. God their Portion. The Trinity their Propriety.
Heaven their Home. Eternity their Term.

Before Death their Prerogative is much. At it more. After it most. But from
Death and Diseases none. By Death they have, from it they have not.

Come it as it will, by the Common Arrow or Sword (naturally or violently, by
Infirmity or Accident.) Come it as it may (quick or slow, by wound or weakness,
a lingering or a hastening pace) it Rev. 2. 1^
is the Coronation of a Saint. It puts his Soul in Glory, when his Body to the
Grave. And there the Body goes to bed, assured to Rise and Unite with the Soul
in Glory, and to make the Person Complete man Crowned, then with Immortality,
both Soul and Body.

O Lord, If the worst of Sickness be to die, and the best of Death to live for
ever, Welcome Sickness, Welcome Death in the name of the Lord! I will no more
fear Death then Heaven. Nor to be Diseased, then to be Blessed. Since that is
the Door of Heaven; and this is the way to that Door.

Job, David, Hezekiah, were all Sick, are Dead, and in Heaven.

The Saints Death a fair Dismission. (I.) Meditation of the good in Death,
Upon Luke 2. 29, 30. Lord now let thou thy servant Depart in peace,
according to thy word. For mine eyes have seen thy salvation.
DEath then is a Dismission. To. 7. 24. (...). 2 Cor. 5. ^
The Body is the Souls Prison; So it is a Deliverance from a Jail. The Body is
the Souls Sepulcher; So it is a Resurrection from a Grave. The Body is the
Souls Burden; So it is an Ease from a Pain. That is not all; Corruption makes
the Prison loathsome, the Grave noisome, the Burden wearisome; And by that it
is chained to the Body, Death To. 8. 21.
breaks that Chain. From the Acts of Sin, the Bondage of the Soul. And from the
Enticements of Corruption, the yoke of that Bondage. For these are done and
Rise against the Sovereignty of the Soul, by the strength of the Members, and
motions of the Body. Romans 7. 5. 8. 23. Ps. 68. 20.


This Dismission is by God the Lord of Death. Till He Dismiss us we must not
Depart. That Is not to leave but break the Prison; and not to quit but change
the Jail. For a worse too, a better; Hell for a Grave. That is or should be
with Horror. This is In peace: Assurance of Gods Favor the Seal of Peace, and
Quiet of man's Mind, the fruit of that Favor.

This is the Devout, not the Debaucht man's Privilege. He that lives in War
with God, cannot die in His Peace. Death is not a Dismission Isa. 57. 21.
but Commission of his Soul. From the Bodies to the Bottomless pit. Simeons
Security was the Having his Savior in his Arms, not under his foot; and in
Him his Eyes saw Gods salvation. And for that his Heart does not Abhor, but
Invite Death. His Fiat is ready for Gods will. Now Lord (even when Thou will
now) for I have Embraced Thy Christ, I have felt Thy Word. (I have had a sight
of my Lord, an experience of Thy Truth) Mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

It was the Arms of his Faith (not of his Flesh) which laid hold on his
Salvation. Those may hug the Body of Christ; These hold Him as a Savior. So do
Thy devout Servants O Christ! Their Hearts are for none but Thy Embraces. Thee,
and what is Dear to Thee, Thy Church, Thy Children, Thy Ministers, Thy Members,
Thy Sacraments, Thy Services, Thy Word, Thy Worship; What is with Thy Will, and
to Thy Honor, These are the Desires of Their Souls, The Delights of their
Hearts; These have the Value of their Minds, and Vigor of their Spirits; These
they Entertain with all their love and strength; And for Thy sake All, and so
Thee, in these. Thou do therefore let them (as Simeon did) depart in peace. O
let me love and serve Thee as He did, that I may possess the Peace which he
had. When I must die, make good Thy Word, show me my Savior, let me so depart.

The Prayer.
Merciful Lord, give Thy Servant Simeons death. When the Hour comes that I
must, Quietly and Comfortably to depart. That I may have his Death, let me have
his Faith; Thy self in my Heart, and Thy Son in my Eye; That I may have his
Faith, let me have his Life. A Simeon that I may die, a Simeon let me live. A
Devout man in Thy Temple, and a just one Luc. 2. 25, 26. Heb. ^0. 36.
out of it. Have Thy Holy Ghost within me, and Thy Heavenly Promise before me,
and with a hopeful and patient Piety wait for the Joy and Comfort Thou do
promise. Thee O Christ let me Embrace and Hold in the Arms of my Faith and Love
till I die, that Thou may Embrace and uphold me in the arms of Thy Power and
Mercy at my Death. O make me Thy Servant now, that Thou may be my Salvation
then. Let me not fancy Thee in me, but find and feel Thee. Nor be then to seek
Thee, when I perish for ever, if I do not find Thee. Lord dwell in my heart by
my Faith, that I may not be a stranger to Thee at my death. Let my Arms and
Heart Ephesians. 3. 17. Lu. 13. 27.
be full of my Savior, and (at their last close) O then let my Eyes see Thee,
and Thy Salvation, Dear Jesus.

Amen.
A Pious Death, a Present Blessedness. (II.) Meditation of the Good by Death,
Upon Revelat. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from
henceforth, yea says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and
their works do follow them.
BLessed are the dead? They are then; Else they could be neither Cursed nor
Blessed. But Numb. 23. 10.
all the dead are not Blessed. No, Men of Cursed Lives cannot die Blessed
Deaths. Dives who lives and dies an Unmercifull Epicure, Luc. 1^. ^ 19, 23. ^
dies and ever lives after a Damned Wretch. They are blessed, Ps. 116. 1^
and only they, which die in the Lord. And in Him they cannot be at death,
that were out all their life. No, out of Sin we must be 1 Cor. 5. 7 2 Cor. 5.
17. Ephesians 3. 17. 1 John 4. ^2.
by Repentance. By Faith He must be in us, and we must be in Him by Love, or no
Blessedness when we die. If in Him so, who is Ever blessed, we shall be blessed
then and ever. Blessed with all possible Blessedness. For all consists in our
Rest and His Recompense. 2 These. 1. 7. Heb. 11. 26.
We shall then Rest from our labors. The Troubles both of Natural and
Spiritual Life. The Toiles and Temptations of a Mortified Course. And Ails and
Accidents of a Mortal Body. The Grave is their Bound and our Bed. Which when
Godliness moves God to make it, gives us (against all weariness of Body and
Soul) a full, sweet, and blessed Rest. Isa. 57. 2. ^


And then, Our works follow us. At Death then they must not be to do, how can
they follow if they were not before? Indeed, some 1 Timothy 5. 25.
go to Heaven before us to open the Door when we come, and receive us into
everlasting habitations. Lu. 16. 9. Mat. 6. 19.
Our Treasure is there laid up ready for us to receive; and our Passage and
Entrance made sure; God for our Charitable Expenses on the Poor, being willing
to Receive us. They are both our Bankers and Porters in Heaven, Chrysol.
whom we for Gods sake Relieve and Help on Earth.

Works, but good works follow. Lu. 13. 27. Mat. 6. 5.
Ill ones go another way to Hell, and vain ones stay behind on Earth. Good
deeds attend us in a Train to Heaven. The Children of our Goodness by His
Grace, which Rise up then as high as it, Pro. 31. 28.
and call us Blessed.

Even so says the Spirit. (There Is Gods Seal.) So said a voice from Heaven
(There Is Gods Word.) To S. John* (There Is Gods Witness.) Who must not Hear but
write this. (There Is Gods Warrant.) A Warrant for the Dying Saints Salvation,
witnessed under Gods Hand and Seal. And not from thenceforth When Purgatory
pains are past, but from henceforth when Death is present. A Bed of Fire so
fierce and long as that is made, would be more like Procrustes (a Tyrants than
a Saviors) Bed, without all Ease or Rest. It is not their Sins, but their
works follow them. They leave 1. Cor. 15. 17. Col. 2. 12.
these in Their Grave on Earth, or rather their Saviors, and purge all their
filth away in their Tears, and His Blood. These go after them to make them not
long Tormented, but presently Blessed. In Heaven (out of Purgatory) which is
the last and great Reward and Good of Good Works. Dorcas for all her good
Works, did die. Gal. 6. 9. Heb. 6. 10. Act. 9. 39.
Those Dear souls whose study and work it was to do all good, Mat. 24. 46.
are dead, yes, and blessed too, because found so doing. To souls and bodies
all Acts of Goodness. They died (as they lived) not of the World, but in the
Lord. With a sweet scent and savor in the Nostrills of God and Man. And now
they have their Rest, their Reward, and are Blessed.

So let us live and do, and die, and Rest in Thy Bliss, O Lord.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, since to live in Christ is the way to die in Him, and to die in
Him the means to be blessed; let me be in Him all my life, that I be not out at
my death. Let me not cut out my self by my Infidelity, nor keep Him out by my
Impenitency; but humbly and constantly by a holy Faith and Life, Keep Him in
me, and me in Him, that I may ever be in the way to be blessed. And O Lord Jesu
Christ, who art the Center of all Rest, and Reward of all Goodness, let me
always move to Thee by Thy Holy Spirit the Mover to all good; and work for
Thee Phil. 4. 13.
by Thy Grace the strength for all goodness, that Death may ^e my blessed Rest.
An end of all my Sins and Sorrows, and Beginning of that Blessed Eternal life
which shall never have an end: O let me so Do and Die, Work and Rest, To Thee
and By Thee, and In Thee, and for thee, to be for ever blessed With thee, Lord
Jesus.

Amen.
A Saints Departure, A Going to Christ, (III.) Meditation of the Good After
Death.
Upon Phil. 1. 23. Having a desire to Depart and to be with Christ, which is
far better.
DEath is that which a Sinner 2 Cor. 5. 6.
abhors, a Saint desires. Yet it is not Simply for it self Desirable, but as a
passage to God, a way to be with Christ. With Him in Heaven, as we cannot be on
Earth. He is with His Church and us in it, to the end of the world by His
Spirit Mat. 28. 20. 2 Cor. 13. 5. Gal. 4. 19.
and Providence. And we are with Him (yea and in Him too) by our Holy Faith and
Conscience. He is Spiritually formed in us on Earth, but Gloriously seated for
Ephesians. 2. 6. Col. 3. 2. Phil. 3. 20.
us in Heaven. Yea, there we are with Him, and in Him too, by our Hearts and
heavenly-mindednesse; But Death brings us to Him, and puts our Souls into the
possession of Him and His Presence in Heaven.

For That, Death is desirable. Because He and Heaven are most to be desired.
For that is far better then any state on earth. Incomparably, Absolutely,
Infinitely, Best of all. This life is but the shadow Luc. 8. 13.
of Good, There Is the substance. Here we do but half live, (the Body by the
Soul) but there Genesis 2. 7.
we do entirely live, because the Soul lives by God. Here is nothing but Woe
(the Death of Life.) There all things of Joy Job 14. 1. Mat. 25. 23. To. 8. 18.
Mat. 25. 46.
without sense or fear of Death and Woe. Here our life at best is a moment.
There our life at least is an Eternity. Here we have some fellowship with
Saints, There 1 John 1. 3
we have all fellowship with Angels. Here we are in Perpetual Fights with
Devils, There we are Ephesians. 6. 12.
in Everlasting Triumphs with the Saints. This is the life of the Cross. That
is the life of the Throne. So then, if no Compare betwixt Substance and Shadow,
a Whole and Half a life, All Woe, and No Sorrow, Time and Eternity, Angels and
Men, Saints and Devils, Fights and Triumphs, a Cross and a Throne, It Is far
better to be in Heaven then Earth, with God then Man, with Christ then the
World.

And God gave His Servant what he did desire. To do good he would live, To go
to Christ he did die. That was the desire of his Soul, to do good on Earth.
This was the end of his Desire, to reap good in Heaven. So let me O Lord Do,
Design, and Desire! Let me live to Thee, let me groan after Thee. And because
this poor Tabernacle of the Body must be put off before I can be clothed with
my house from Heaven, 2 Cor. 5. 1.
as Christ is my Joy, let Death be my Desire. To be with Thee and Him let me
desire to die; for if that be the best I can wish (as my last end) This is good
for me to desire (even my last hour) because appointed by God to be The way to
That. And why should I desire to live, if to depart be far better, and to be
with Christ, Best of all? So fitted for Thee, so to go to Thee, Come Lord
Jesus, Rev. 22. 20
come quickly. When thou will, let me depart* To be Blessed let me be
Dissolved. Let Death be with me, so I may be with my Savior.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, who have made Death not Destructive to my Being, but Conductive to
my Bliss, let me love Thee whilst I live, that I may not fear Death when I
die. And however it look formidable to my Flesh, let it be Amiable to my Faith.
Make me therefore by all holy Acts and Cares of Faith and Godly Life to Assure
my Being with Christ, that I may Entertain the Messenger with joy, which comes
to bring me to Him. What Thou see good for the Comforts or Crosses of my
life, for the lengthening or shortning of my days, That do in Thy Wisdom;
Only let my End be so Blessed as to make me be with Him which is Best of all.
Unprepared let not Death find me, lest it leave me unblessed. O Lord God of all
Goodness and Comfort, Grant me this Grace and mercy in life and death, for His
sake who did live and die for my Salvation and Comfort, Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
The Period of the Book, and Prayer of the Author.
My Pen is at a Period, and if thy Heart answer my Aim, at a full and good
Point. For so my Meditations and Prayers will have both their Bound and Bliss.
If thy Devotion be more Churchlike, and thy Conversation more God-like, That
Quicker, and This Better, they will. For then Gods Glory will be more Advanced,
and thy best Good Promoted. Thy Conscience more clear and right, and thy
Comfort more sound and firm. Conscience like a Clock (set and kept well)
strikes true Peace. And is best when it observes Church- Times and Rules,
because (as the Moon) she takes her light from the Sun of Righteousness. If
none of this in thee be their Issue, in effect all is endless. If any good
Service be done to thy Soul, look not at the poor Pen which writ, but the holy
Hand which guided it. The first Mover and blessed Author of all (if we Think,
Intend, Desire, Endeavor, Speak, Do, or Receive any Good.) And by the favor
of Gods Providence and Assistance, thou may have more Blessing by The Hand,
and see more of the Pen. For what is past, if any thing have been Done or
Received to thy Benefit in order to Gods Will and Thy Soul, My Request, which I
know thy Devotion and Conscience will easily Grant (and I pray God to Seal) is,
Give the Instrument thy Prayer, and the Author thy Praise.

Glory be to Thee O God.
FINIS.
Besides the mis-pointing and misplacing of words and Quotations, which thy
Reason will rectify, and thy Charity pardon, thou shall do well to amend these
with thy pen, that thy Devotion be not disturbed, or thy self puzzled.

ERRATA.
PAge 40. line 22. read it in for it it. p. 42. l. 15. r. Wit-sunday for
Whit-sunday. p. 46. In Marg. r. Tatius de Mortif. p. 60. l. 12. r. else for
also. p. 94. l. 17. r. my for me. p. 150. l. 11. r. Sun for Son. 210. l. 3. r.
a Spirit (left out after that Spirit.) p. 231. l. 12. r. Incarnate for
Uncarnate. p. 238. l. 24. r. breeds for brood. p. 241. l. 13. r. many for may.
p. 287.. l. 23. r. Petty for Pity. p. 384. l. 6. r. Apple for Apostle.

The Stationer to the Reader.
WHereas I have printed a Manual of Devotions, called Sacred Principles, etc.
by no other Name of the Author but Philo-Christianus; I have got leave to tell
thee, that Those Devotions and These have both one Father, who calls himself in
Them, and shows himself in These One and the Same, and hopes ever shall appear
and be no other then a Lover of all that love Christ, and profess His Name,

Philo-christianus.

A Particular of the Meditations and Scriptures on which they are grounded.
The Subject. The Text. The Page. Sunday's Meditations for The Lords day, Rev.
1. 10. 1 Palm Sunday, Mat. 21. 8. 7 Easter Day, Mat. 27. 65. 13 Monday, Luke
24. 34. 21 Tuesday, Luke 24. 39. 27 Rogation Sunday, Joh. 16. 23. 33
Whitsunday, Acts 2. 3. 42 Monday, Acts 10. 44. 48 Tuesday, Acts 19. 6. 54
Trinity Sunday, Mat. 28. 19. 61 Holy day Meditations for S. Andrews Day, Mat.
4. 20. 76 S. Thomas Day, Joh. 20. 29. 80 Christmas Day, Luke 2. 10. 85 S.
Stephens Day, Acts 7. 59. 90 S. John's Day, Rev. 1. 9. 95 Innocents Day, Mat. 2.
18. 100 Circumcision, Luc. 2. 31. 105 Epiphany, Mat. 2. 11. 110 S. Paul's Day,
Acts 9. 5. 116 Purification, Luke 2. 22. 121 Holy day's Meditations for S.
Matthias Day, Acts 1. 26. 126 Annunciation. Luke 1. 28. 131 S. Marks Day, 2 Timothy 4 12. 143 S. Phil. and Jac. D. Joh. 14. 8. 148 Ascension Day, Psalm. 47 4.
154 S. Barnabas D. Acts 4. 30. 160 S. Joh. Bapt. D. Luke 1. 63. 166 S. Peter's
Day, Mat. 16. 18. 170 S. James' s Day. Acts 12. 2. 178 S. Bartholom. D. Mat.
10. 3. 183 S. Matthews Day, Mat. 9. 9. 183 Michaelmas Day, Heb. 1. 14. 195 S.
Lukes Day, 2 Timothy 4. 11. 200 S Sim. and Jud. D. Jude ver. 1. 205 All Saints
Day, Psalm. 149 9. 209 Holy Fasts Meditations for Wednesday, Mat. 27. 50. 222
Friday, 1 Pet. 2. 14. 231 Ashw. and Lent, Luke 4. 2. 240 Ember weeks, Acts 13.
3. 249 Eves of Holy Da. Mark 15. 42. 258 Holy Week, before Easter, 266 Monday,
Luke 22. 44. 270 Tuesday, Luke 22. 48. 277 Wednesday, Joh. 11. 50. 288
Thursday, Mat. 27. 24. 291 Good Friday, Mat. 27. 46. 298 Saturday (Easter Eve,)
Mat. 27. 61. 308 Meditations Sacred upon Baptism, Gal. 3. 26. 324 H.
Communion, 1 Cor. 11. 34. 330 Marriage, Mar. 10. 8. 339 Penitential, upon Haunt
of Guilt, Psalm. 51. 3. 351 Early Dooms. Day, 1 Cor. 11. 31. 357 Sinners Hope,
Luke 7. 367 Preservative in Truth and Grace Against Apostasy In Religion, Joh 6
68. 378 In Goodness, 2 Pet. 2. 22. 389 Against Inconstancy in Faith. Ephesians 4.
14. 398 Cordial for Sickness Jobs Consumption. Job 19 25, etc. 411 David's
Ulcer, Ps. 38. 5, etc. 419 Hezekiahs Plague, Isa. 38. 13. 4^7 Preparative for
Death The Good of Death. In it, In Simeon, Luc. 2. 29, etc. 437 At it, From S.
John, Rev. 14. 13. 443 After it, By S. Paul, Phil. 1. 23. 449

The several Prayers upon all these Subjects see after the Meditations.

Prayer for the Lords Day. page 5.

After the Meditation, and so for the rest, etc.

The Substance of the several Advertisements.
1. Touching the Dominicall Feasts after the Preface. 2. Touching the use of
the Holy Days. 70 3. Touching their Number and Choice. 138 4. Touching the
Churches Fasts. 216 5. Touching the Holy Week. 265 6. Touching the Sacraments,
and other sacred Subjects. 317
A Sum of the Particulars and Contents in all, by way of Alphabet.
Accusations of Saints old. page 91 Angels our Curats, Keepers. 137 Against
them no Arms. 181 Apostasy, in life worst. 391 392 Apprehension of Christ, how
Hellish, how a Holy one. 227 Applause, no Bliss. 10 Avarice, all Ill. 219 Bath
for Sin. 354 Baptism of Infants. 106 Baptism. Our Honor. Holy Influence on
life. 325 Baptist. v. Meditation on Day. Bloody Sweat. 271 Calling of Christ to
be answered. 76 Charter of Christ and Seal. 33 Christ His Po^p poor, page 8.
Power. 9 His Cry on the Cross, whence. 300 What ^^ cries. 302 His Sepulcher, v.
Sepulcher. 308
Church Catholic fails not. 175 Church of England Rightly Reformed. Truly
Catholic. 381 Church of Rome, v. Rome. Church the Forge of the Holy Ghost. 46
Churching of Women good.* 222 Holy Communion Requires Preparation. 331
Profanation dangerous. ibid. Comfort. A Divine work (not for all.) ib. 162
Conscience a Court of Justice. 163 Consumptions, Comfort 414 Conveyances of the
Holy Ghost. By Preaching. 51 Baptism. 54 Laying on Hands. 56
Cordialls in Sickness Job' s. 414 David' s. 422 Hezekiah' s. 430
Day of the Lord. v. Lords Day. Death of Christ how Just, Good. 443 Death, how
Desirable. 450 The Good of it, p. 437. 443. 449 Blessed, if life good, p. 38.
443 Plea against it, v. plea.
Dooming others, ill. 191 Easter Day, v. Resurrection. Monday. p. 21. Tuesday
22 Elixir for the Sick. 433 Establishment 1. Truth. 406 in 2. Goodness. 406
Eternity, Comfort of Misery. 416 Eves Fasts, fit and good. 258 Faith best,
when without sense. Above Reason. Not Assurance. 81. 83 Fasting. Virtues of it.
244 Fasts of the Church. 215 Their Reasonableness. 217 Fast of Lent. 218 Folly
of Sin. 420 Friends three, never failing a Saint 201 Gain by Loss: 186 Gift
for God (the Heart.) 108 Gifts of H. Ghost, which best. 45 Guilts Haunt. 351
Purge. 354
God. How visible. 141 Center of the soul. 406 All sufficient. 151
Good-Friday-devotion: 291 Good Works make good Ends. 445 Grave. v. Sepulcher.
Holy Days good. 70 Their Number and Choice. 138
Holy Ghost, v. Spirit. Hope for Sinners. p. 191. and 363 Inconstancy in
Religion, ill. 398 Imposition of Hands, Apostolic. 56 How and when Required.
ib. Ill Neglected, Opposed. 57
Innocence of Christ. Necessary. Evident. 291 Innocents find Butchers. 102
Judging our selves prevents judgment. 351 Kiss of Judas. 277 Cover of
mischief. 379
Laying on Hands, us Imposition. Lent Fast, old, pious, how possible. 240 Life
in Heaven the only life. 450 Best plea for life. 430
Lords day. How it Ros^. How of old famous. 2, 3 The Spirits Market day. 4
Loss for Christ, gain. 186 Lets Religious use. 126 Magdalens Repentance and
Release. 371 Schoolmistress of Repentance. 373 The penitent ^inners Hope. 363
Mahomets Imposture. 25 Makebates in Married, Devils. 347 Marriage Union. 341
Thoughts. 342 Duties. 343
Martyrdom, Kinds of it. 100 Ministers How to be qualified, called. 250 Not to
be forsaken. 202 And P^iests, indifferent Names. 246
Ministry Of Word and Spirit One. 49 Dangerously divided. 50
Mediator of Prayer. Christ. 36 None like Him. None but Him. 36
Names and not out of Scripture, not ill. 449 Offerings to Christ best most
fit. 111 Ordinations of Ministers require our Prayers. 252 Parity. None in
Angels. 196 People Fickle. 10 Penances, not to be Excessive. 363 Perambulations
of good use. 38 S. Peter Not Rock of the Church. 174 No Prerogative at
Pentecost. 44
Polygamy, suffered, not ordered. 340 Preservative of God above all malice. 98
Popularity, v. Applause. Prayers Charter great for all Good, Eternal,
Spiritual, Temporal. Limited. Sealed by Christ. 35 By Christ Most Noble,
Effectual, Only sufficient, 36
Providence, served by all persons* Things. 284 Purgatory. None after Death.
446 Religion. Cl^kes and Covers of it. 169 How it binds to God. 406
Reluctance, no sign of grace, but guilt, how. 293, 295, and 297 Repentance
Fruits of it. 363 Process in it. 357 Discretion limits it. 360 374 Aggravat^s
Sin. 359 Judas, how far his repentance went. 280 Peter's our Pattern. 374
Resurrection of Christ, Power, 19 Grounds, p. 15. fruits of it. 17 Our
Resurrection from Sinn^, Woe, Death. 18 Evidence for it. To Ear, Eye^ Hand,
Touch. 27
Resurrection spiritual how to appear. 30 Rock of the Church, Christ. 173
Rogation-Sunday week. 33 Vsages how old, good. 38
Rome. No promise of H. Ghost like Jerusalem. 44 Not the Catholic, but a
particular Church. 173 As Differing from us not good. 384
Sabbath Day Buried, Deposed, p. 28. 312 Saints Prerogatives. 434 Honors just.
210
Sepulcher of Christ, Burial of our Sins, Woes. 310 Comforts, Lessons of it.
312
Service of God, best. 206 Servant of Christ, great: 205 Sins pardonable,
though great, many. 369 Sinners hope, v. Hope. Sins weight. 23 Best Fruit
Repentance. 421 Spirit of Giddiness. 405 Spirit, v. Gifts, Ministry. How
Discerned. p. 50. and 403 Conveyed. p. 51* and 55
By what Ministers, Means. ib. Not severed from the Word. 400 Falls not by
Chance. 157 Not in every Mouth. 400
Tongues of fire, why? 43 Trinity a Mystery. 63 Revelation of it. Feast to it.
65 When and why? Observation. How best, good. 66 Enemies to it. 62 B. Virgins 1
Honor, good. 133 2. Adoration, ill, 135

Unity of the Godhead, Evidence of it. 63 Enemies to it. 61
Unity of Churchmen good. 143 Whitsunday. How Wit-Sunday. 42 White-Sunday. 43
To the Gentiles also. 49
Word of God and Spirit One. 50 What it is. A Pulpit makes it not. 49
Zeal, mask of Fury. 91
FINIS.

