A rare PATTERN OF Justice and Mercy; Exemplified in The many notable, and
charitable Legacies of Sr. James Cambel, Knight, and Alderman of London,
deceased: Worthy imitation. Whereunto is annexed A Meteor, and a Star: OR,
Brief and pleasant Meditations of Gods Providence to his Chosen, of the
Education of Children, and of the virtue of Love; with other Poems. By Edw:
Brown.

Psalm. 19. 1. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows
his handiworke. Printed at London for William Ley at Paul's Chain, near
Doctors Commons. M DC XLII.

engraved portrait of James Campbell, wearing the robes and chain of the Lord
Mayor of London, by George Glover The Effigies of the right worss Sr James
Cambell Knight sometime Lo: Mayor, and Senior Aldrn^ of London etc.


To the Right Worshipful his virtuous and religious Lady, Dame Rachel Cambel,
Relict Executrix of the last Will and Testament of Sir James Cambel, Knight,
and Alderman of London, deceased.
And to the Right Worshipful his honored friends, Sir Thomas Abdy, Knight and
Baronet, and Mr. James Cambel Esquire, joint Executors with the said Lady:
Grace and peace be multiplied.
Right Worshipful:
DEtraction, that ugly deformed Hell-borne Monster, has of late cast her
poisoning envious breath upon my best actions, even upon these harmless
papers, and would feign beget in you an evil opinion of me, and of my honest
endeavors, thereby to work my utter ruin. But I hope the Lord, who knows
the integrity of my heart, and the cleanness of my hands, from doing wrong to
any, especially to my late Judicious loving-Master; will work in you such an
heroical and magnanimous spirit, that you will not be infected with such
pestiferous venom, your Worships knowing very well, that such Detractors like
ravenous Vultures, eat and gnaw upon the very life and livelihood of others;
only for their own ends, viz. that they may grow fat and rich thereby, for
they care not how they impair the good name, fame, or reputation of others, so
they themselves may get honor and esteem, though there be little worth in
them, deserving the same. Therefore for vindication of my credit in this
particular (which now lies a bleeding) I am enforced to publish that, I
intended to keep private; to show to your Worships and all other my friends,
that I have been so far from intending the least disgrace, that as I am in
duty bound, so I have ever sought the honor of my judicious loving Master: And
I am confident if in these works of mine he had found any thing to his
disparagement, he would in his life time have shown me my errors, (upon my
request) which he never did, as your Ladyship very well knows. And as it is
very well known throughout this City, that my Master in his life did much
good to others, especially in Iusticiarie affairs; so, I do humbly
acknowledge, that he did always delight to do me good, even to the day of his
death. And therefore I think it part of my duty, now he is departed this
transitory life, to express my thankful heart for the same; which I can no
better way perform being I have alread^e been^ so presumptuous as to cast my
unlearned works into the Press) then to publish without flattery his many
worthy and imparalleled works to his never-dying memory: That they may be a
means to excite and stir up others of his quality to do works of charity
to the poor, and judicious benevolence to the rich. Yet I do ingenuously
confess, that they deserve to be engraven in Pillars of durable Marble by
some learned and eloquent Cicero, rather then by my rustic quill on these
timeperishing papers. For my works, I commit them to your gracious acceptance,
and judicious censure, hoping that what I have done amiss herein, you will be
pleased favorably to pass by, because you know the attractive cause from
whence these cloudie and muddie vapors did arise; therefore I doubt not but
the sunshine of your favorable aspects will expel such mistie exhalations,
and ever remain upon the poor and weak, yet honest and willing endeavors of

Your unworthy, yet truly faithful servant, Edward Brown.
19. Maii. 1642.
A RARE PATTERN of Justice and Mercy. Exemplified in the many judicious, noble,
and charitable Legacies given and bequeathed in the last Will and testament of
that grave Iudicous Senator Sir James Cambel, Knight, sometime Lord Mayor and
senior Alderman of London, who departed this transitory life upon Wednesday the
fifth day of January, Anno Dom. 1641. and was buried in the Parish Church of
Saint Olaves Iewry, London the 8. day of February following being Tuesday.
Obiit sine prole, Aetatis suae 72.
THe memory of the just is blessed, says the Wiseman, but the name of the the
wicked shall rot. And surely the righteous shall be had in everlasting
remembrance, says holy DAVID. Yet the Prophet ESAIAS complains, That the
righteous perish, and no man considers it in heart: and merciful men are
taken away, and no man understands, That the righteous are taken away from
the evil to come. In consideration whereof, that I may not be culpable of the
like reproof, I will with the Psalmist, mark the upright man, and behold the
just, for the end of that man is peace. For thereby I shall learn how to dye
comfortably. It may be as a pattern or example to direct me and others in the
hour of death. For eth wicked they dye either sottishly, impatiently, or
desperately.

First, sottishly like blocks and idiots, having neither penitent feeling of
their sins, nor comfortable assurance of salvation. Being like to Nabal, whose
heart ten days before his death, died within him, and he was like a stone.
Such men die like lambs, and yet shall be a prey for the devouring Lion; they
go quietly like fools to the stocks for correction.

Secondly, others die impatiently, who do not willingly bear the Lords
correction deserved by their sins; but rage, fret, and murmr, as if God dealt
too rigorously with them, and through impatiency will use unlawful means for
their recovery: as Ahaziah did, who being sick, sent messengers to enquire of
Baal zebub the god of Ekren, if he should recover of his disease.

Thirdly, others die desperately, their consciences accusing them most terribly
for their sins, without any hope of pardon; as Cain, who said, my sin is
greater then can be forgiven; or Judas, who despairing of pardon for his sin,
in betraying our Savior, went and hanged himself. The consciences of many
wicked men lie quietly, and never trouble them all their life time, but are
stirred up at their death, and then rage and torment them like a mad dog
which is lately awaked out of sleep. But the righteous die most comfortably,
they believing in Christ, and having repented of their sins, are assured in
their own souls that all their sins are pardoned in Christ: they will make
confession of their faith, and give testimony of their repentance unto others,
for their comfort and example. They will patiently endure all the pains of
their sickness, as Job did, knowing that all comes from the Lord, and that it
is his fatherly correction, and a sign of his love, because ^e chasteneth whom
he loves: yea, they receive their sickness as the Lords messenger, speaking
to their souls, as the Prophet Isaiah did to Hezekiah, Put thine house in
order, for thou shall die and not live; and therefore they prepare themselves
for another world. Ye^ further, in their sickness they can pray most
fervently, as King Hezekiah did, Isaiah 38. and then they will give most
fruitful and comfortable instructions to those which they leave behind. As
the Swan sings most sweetly a little before his death; so the righteous speak
most divinely a little before their end. Whosoever searches the Scriptures,
may read the divine prophecy of Jacob unto the twelve Patriarchs, Genes. 49.
the holy blessing of Moses upon the twelve tribes, Deuteronomy 33. the godly
exhortation of Joshua to the people of Israel plac^d by him in Canaan, Ios. 23.
the wise counsel of David unto Solomon, who was to succeed him in the
kingdom: 1 King. 2. Whosoever reads the Ecclesiastical histories, may not
only see the virtuous lives, but also the Christian like ends of the Saints
and Martyrs in the Church. And whosoever will be present at the death of those
which truly fear God, may thereby learn how they themselves ought to die: for
when the outward man does decay, the inward man is renewed more and more. They
show, that the nearer they do approach unto their end, the nearer they draw
toward heaven.

But in these our days many may be found, who either do not at all consider
the death of the righteous, or else do consider it amiss. Though it be a
matter worth consideration; yet some do not consider it at all: because they
see so many dye, they make the less reckoning of it: till death knock at
their own doors, they never regard it: they must needs dye themselves, before
they can be brought to consider of death: they care not who sink, so they
swim; nor how many die, so they may live: yea this is greatly to be lamented,
that some do regard the death of a Christian, no more then they regard the
death of a dog. But seeing we may learn so many profitable instructions by
their death, let us now begin to consider it better then ever we did before.

Others do consider it, but yet amiss; either fondly, or frowardly. Fondly,
through natural affection arising from kindred, affinity, or familiarity. If
a stranger die, it nothing moves them: but if one of their own friends dye,
they sigh and sob, they howl and lament. If the father lose his son, he cries
most pitifully, as David did for Absalom, O my son Absalom, my son, my son
Absalom: would God I had died for thee: O Absalom my son, my son. If the
mother lose her children, she behaveth her self like Rachel weeping for her
children, and would not be comforted, because they were not. If children lose
their parents, they cry after them as Elisha did after Elias, when he was taken
up, my father, my father. If a sister lose her brother, she weepeth for him, as
Mary did for Lazarus. If the husband lose his wife, he weepeth for her, as
Abraham wept for Sarah: yea he mourns like a Turtle Dove which has lost his
marrow. If the wife lose her husband, she deals like Naomi, who would not be
called Naomi, that is, beautiful: but Mara, that is, bitter, because the Lord
had given her much bitterness. If one familiar friend lose another, he
lamenteth his death, as David did the death of Jonathan: Woe is me for thee, my
brother Jonathan: very kind have thou been unto me: thy love to me was
wonderful, passing the love of women.

Indeed I cannot deny, but that we ought in a special manner to consider the
death of those which are near and dear unto us: for it may be they are taken
from us, because we were unworthy of them; or because we gloried and trusted
over much in them, and were not so thankful for them as we ought. If we had
any help by them, we must consider, whether God have not deptived us of them,
for the punishment of our sins, as the widow of Sarepta did at the death of
her son, saying unto Eliah: Art thou come unto me to call my sin to
remembrance, and to slay my son? Yet this consideration must be ordered by
wisdom, it must not be joined with excessive sorrow. Neither must we
consider their death alone, but also the death of others which dye in the Lord,
and to learn to make an holy use thereof. For as Sampson found sweet honey in
the carcass of a dead Lion; so we may find some sweet instructions in the
dead corpse of every righteous man: yea the more righteous that they are which
do die, the more should their death be considered, because it may yield
greater store of instruction unto us. And it may be, that God does take away
those which are near unto us, because we do carelessly regard the death of
those which be far off.

Again, some consider the death of the righteous very frowardly and peevishly,
yea I may say maliciously and preposterously. For if any of them be taken away
by a sudden and extraordinary death, they presently censure them as plagued of
God, and condemn their former profession, thinking that God would not have so
dealt with them, if he approved either of them or their profession. But they
must be instructed in this point by wise Solomon, who says: that no man
knows love or hatred of all that is before him. All things come alike to all:
and the same condition is to the just and the wicked, to the good and the pure,
and to the polluted: to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not.
Eli was a Priest, and a good man; yet brake his neck by falling backward from
his seat. Jonathan was a sworn brother unto David, a godly and faithful
friend; yet was he slain in battle by the hands of the Philistims. That
Prophet of God which came out of Judah to Bethel, to speak with Jeroboam, and
the altars which he had built for idolatry, was no doubt an holy man; yet was
he killed in the way by a Lion? Josiah was a good King, like unto him there
was no King before him, neither after him rose any like him: yet was he slain
in the valley of Megiddo, by Necho King of Egypt. Jobs children were well
brought up by their godly father, and it is said that before Job offered
sacrifice for them, they were sanctified: yet within a while after, as they
were eating and drinking in their eldest brothers house, a violent wind
overthrew the house, and killed them all.

We must not therefore judge of men by their death, but rather by their life.
Though sometime a good death may follow an evil life: yet an evil death can
never follow a good life. Correct thine evil life, and fear not an evil
death: he cannot die ill, that lives well, says Augustine. And afterward
answers the objections of these men, and makes this the foot of his song* Thou will say unto me, have not many just men perished by shipwreck? certainly, he
cannot die ill, which live^ well. Have not many just men been^ slain by the
enemies sword? Certainly, he cannot die ill, which lived well Have not many
just men been kille^ by thieves? Have not many righteou^ men been torn in
pieces by wild^ beasts? Certainly, he cannot die il^ which lived well, etc.
But I will say unto such as censure the righteous for their strange and violen^
death, as Christ said of thos^ eighteen, upon whom the wa(...) of Siloam fell
and slew them: Think ye that these were greater sinners then others? I tell
you nay; but except ye repent, ye all shall likewise perish.

As for sudden death, it is evil to them which lead an evil life, because it
finds them unpr^pared, it carries them away suddenly unto torment: but it is
not evil to them which live well; because it finds them prepared: it frees
them from much pain which others endure through long sickness, and carries
them forthwith to the place where they desire to be. The righteous do so
dispose of themselves in the morning, as if they might die before night; and at
night, as if they might die before morning: and therefore whenever death
comes, it finds them prepared, and is a benefit unto them.

2 Again, if the righteous a little before death, be dangerously tempted by
Satan, and show their infirmity by uttering some speeches which tend to
doubting or desperation (though afterward they get victory, and triumph over
the devil) carnal people think there is no peace of conscience, and therefore
no salvation to be had, by that religion: and so speak evil of it. Let such
consider the estate of Job in his misery, who cursing the day of his birth,
said, that the arrows of the Almighty did stick in him, the venom whereof
had drunk up his spirit: that the terrors of God did fight against him, that
the Lord was his enemy: did write bitter things against him: and did set him
as a butt to shoot at. As also the estate of David, through terror of
conscience, while he concealed his ^inne: His bones consumed, he roared all the
day long, his moisture was turned into the drought of summer.

Again, let them know, that the devil does most tempt the best. He then
tempted Christ, when he was baptized and filled with the holy Ghost: so will
he most tempt Christians, when they have received greatest gifts of Gods
Spirit. As thieves labor to break down and rob those houses only, where
great store of treasure or wealth is laid up; and as Pirates desire to take
that ship which is best laden with the dearest merchandise: so the Devil does
most seek to make a prey of them, which are endued with the greatest measure
of spiritual graces. When the strong man armed keeps the house, the things
that he possesses are in peace; but when a stronger then he, overcommeth him,
then he gathers greater forces, and makes a new assault to enter again. In
any commotion whom do Rebels kill and spoil? not those which submit themselves
unto them, and join with them in their rebellion: but those which are
faithful unto their Prince, and fight for their Prince against them, as does
appear now in the Rebels of Ireland. Now the Devil is as a Rebel in the
Lords Kingdom; whom then will he most trouble and assault? not the wicked
which submit themselves unto him, and join with him in rebellion against God,
but the godly which abide faithful, and fight under the Lords banners against
him. Whosoever would reign with Christ in heaven, must overcome the Devil on
earth: for he promises, To him that overcommeth will I grant to sit with me in
my throne, even as I overcame, and sit with my Father in his Throne. How can
there be a victory, where there is no battle? And how can there be any
battle, where there is not assaulting and resisting? And no marvel though the
Devil do most assault the righteous at their death for he takes the
opportunity of the time, his wrath is then great: knowing that he has but a
short time. He must either overcome them at that instant, or else not at all:
yea, he takes the advantage of their present weakness, and those sins which
before he persuaded people to be small and light, at the time of death he
makes great and heavy. Even as a tree or piece of wood, while it swims in a
river seems to be light, and one may easily draw it; but when it comes to the
shore, and is laid upon dry ground, can scarcely be drawn by ten men: so sin
is made light by the Devil so long as men live; that so he may still
encourage them to practice it: but when it comes to the shore of death, then
he makes it heavy, and begins most to trouble their consciences with it, that
if it were possible they might by it be brought to desperation. In the midst
of the tentation, when the godly seem most to overcome, who lies as though he
were dead; yet he has life in him: and therefore as Paul saw that life was in
Eutiches, embraced him, and delivered him alive, when the people took him up
for dead: and he will at last so restore them, as that they shall live for ever.

3 Lastly, others beholding them which were reputed righteous, to die very
strangely, to rave, to blaspheme, to utter many idle and impious speeches, to
be unruly, and behave themselves very foolishly, they begin to suspect their
profession: but let them know, that these things may arise from the extremity
of their disease. For in hot Fevers and burning Agues, the choler ascending
into the brain, will hinder the use of understanding, and so cause them thus
to misbehave themselves rather like mad men then Christians. And therefore as
Paul said of himself after regeneration, It is no more I that do it, but the
sin that dwells in me: so may I say of them, it is not they which do it, but
the disease which is upon them. All sins committed by the righteous in those
extremities, are but sins of ignorance, because they want the use of reason
to judge of sin: they are also sins of infirmity, arising from the frailty
of their flesh: and for them they will afterward repent, if they recover the use
of reason, and be able to know them to be sins: or if they do not, they are
freely pardoned in the death of Christ, as well as other sins be. Wherefore
I say to those which censure them uncharitably for that their end, as Christ
said to the Jews for their carnal censure of him, Judge not according to the
appearance, but judge righteous judgment: yea, judge not, that ye be not
judged. For rather then rashly judge of others, those which survive the
righteous have just cause to fear some present evils, and labor by unfeigned
repentance, if it be possible, to prevent them. Their death is a plain
prognostication of some evils to come, and should be as a trumpet to awaken
others out of the sleep of sin. Many of the wicked rejoice when the godly
are taken away from them; they love their rooms better then their company;
they hated them and their profession in their life time, because, as they say,
they are not for our profit, and they are contrary to our doings; they check
us for offending against the law; it grieves us to look upon them; for their
lives are not like other men; and therefore at their death they are glad that
they are rid of them; when indeed they have greater cause to howl and weep
for the miseries that shall come upon them. The righteous need not to imitate
the ungodly practice of Herod, who being ready to die, and thinking that his
death would be a great joy to many, shut up in prison some Noblemen in every
town; and required his sister Salome, and her husband Alexa, that so soon as
he was dead, they should kill those Noblemen, and then all Judea would lament
his death. The Lord himself does often make the death of the righteous to be
lamented, by sending of extraordinary judgments immediately after their death.
When Noah entered into the Arc, the world is drowned with the flood; when Lot
departs out of Sodom, it is burnt with fire.

2 In this respect also the righteous have no cause to fear death, but rather
to desire it; for what is it but an ending of some troubles and a preventing of
others? They may with Paul, desire to be loosed and to be with Christ, which is
best of all. It is true which Solomon says, That the day of a man's death is
better then the day of his birth. For the day of a godly man's birth is the
beginning of his misery; but the day of his death is the end of his misery.
Indeed the day of a wicked man's death is the most woeful day that ever be^ell
him; for he is not taken away from the evil to come, but he is taken unto
evil, to be tormented in hell for evermore. And therefore he fears death as
much as a malefactor fears a Sergeant that comes to carry him to prison,
where he is like to abide till the day of execution. That is true in them which
the Devil said, Skin for skin, and all that ever a man has, will he give for
his life. And as the Gibeonites were content rather to be bondmen, and hewers
of wood, and drawers of water, then to be killed by the Israelites as other
nations were: So they had rather endure any kind of misery, then to die as
others do, because they fear a worse estate after death, and therefore must
be pulled from the earth with as great violence, as Ioab was pulled from the
horns of the altar, unto which he had fled as to a place of refuge. But the
godly knowing what an happy exchange they make by death, they desire to die so
soon as it pleases the Lord. Indeed none ought for the ending of present
calamities, or preventing of future miseries, to shorten their own days, as
Saul did by falling on his own sword; nor yet for the present enjoying of
eternal happiness, procure their own death; as Cleombrotus did, who reading
Plato his book of the immortality of the soul, cast himself headlong from a
wall, that he might change this life for a better. He only who gave life, must
take it away: and the Lord may say to such, I will receive no souls, which
against my will have gone out of the body; the Philosophers which did so, were
martyrs of foolish Philosophy. Yet seeing that death freeth the righteous from
present and future miseries, they may be most willing to die, so soon as the
Lord calls for them; and when death approaches, may say with Simeon, Lord
now let thou thy servant depart in peace.

3 Lastly, in this respect we must learn not to mourn immoderately for the
death of the righteous Though we received great comfort, and enjoyed some
benefit by them while they were alive; as I did by my late Master Sir James
Cambel; yet seeing that death is an advantage unto them, we should ^ee content
patiently to bear our own loss, in respect of their great gain. If two
friends should lie in prison together, or should dwell together in a strange
Country, where both of them were hardly used, were many ways injured, endured
great want, and sustained much misery; though they loved one another dearly,
and the one were an he^pe and comfort to the other; yet if the one should be
taken from the other, and brought to his chiefest friends, and among them be
not only freed from all such miseries as before he had endured, but also be
advanced to great preferment; will the other which is left behind him, be
discontented at it? Will he not rather wish himself to be there with him in
the like; then desire, that either he had stayed with him, or might return
again? This our life is as a prison, or strange Country, in which we endure
great misery, and may every day look for more: if therefore our dearest
friends be taken from us, freed from these miseries, and advanced to great
glory with Christ and his Saints in the Kingdom of heaven; we have no cause
to wish, that either they had stayed longer with us, or might return again
unto us; but rather desire that we might quickly go unto them, to be
glorified in like sort. Though we may think that they died too soon for us,
yet they died not too soon for themselves: for the sooner they come to rest
and happiness, the better it is for them. Their condition is far better then
ours, for they are freed from misery; we are reserved for further misery:
they are already arrived at the haven of eternal rest: and we are still tossed
on the sea of this world, with troublesome waves, and dangerous tempests: they
have ended their journey with lesser travel, and making a shorter cut: and we
are yet traveling with wearisomnes in our journey. If any one of them could
speak after their death, he would say unto them which weep for him, as Christ
said to the daughters of Jerusalem, Weep not for me, but weep for your
selves, and for your children; because of the dangerous days that shall ensue:
Or as Christ said unto his Disciples, If ye loved me, ye would verily rejoice,
because I go unto the Father.

But if examples do move any thing at all, I may apply all that has been
spoken to this present occasion. A righteous man is perished; a merciful man
is taken away; for God has made me seriously to consider, and lay close to my
heart the loss of my late ^udicious loving Master, Sir James Cambel. Therefore
for a memorial of him I have presumed to set forth his unparalled Legacies.
Which though they be unskilfully performed, yet God may work such an effect in
some rich men's hearts, that they may be induced thereby to do such like
actions, to Gods praise and glory, poor peoples comfort, and their own honor
here, and happiness hereafter.

And to prove Sir James both a just and merciful minded Gentleman, I shall
write little of things done by him in his life time, for ^hen I should run into
an endless Labyrinth, and overwhelm my self in an ocean of matter; for all
that knew him cannot otherwise judge, but that he was a rare example of Justice
m^derated by Mercy*And in Justice and Mercy I comprehend all other Graces, as
Piety and Devotion, Wisdom and Policy, Temperance and Moderation, Fortitude
and Courage, Frugality and good Husbandry, Long suffering and Patience, all
^hese were most eminent in Sir James while he lived.

First, for his piety and devotion, his constant early rising on the Lords day
to hear Gods word sincerely preached, and to join himself in the publiqu^
worship of God, with the rest o^ the Congregation in the house of prayer. As
also his often reading the word of God, and earnest zealous prayer with his
family all the days in the week, can testify the same, of which I have been
an eye witness these 18. years and upwards.

2 For his Wisdom and Policy in public affairs as well as private, I will
prove first by the testimony of all the whole Senate of this famous City
London, over which he was sometime supreme, and 4. years, or thereabouts,
senior Alderman. Secondly, I will produce the French Merchants of this City,
over whom he has been Governor above 20. years. And in that Trade he was
brought up from his minority under his father. Thirdly, I will prove his
wisdom and skill in the choice of cloth and wool, the chief commodity of
this kingdom, famous above other nations for that golden fleece, from the
testimony of all the Merchants of the Staple by whom he was chosen Mayor or
chief Governor, which in former times was a place of great honor, though now
not so much esteemed.

Fourthly, I will prove his wisdom and sage advice from the testimony of all
the Governors of the Hospital, of Saint Thomas in Southwarke, over whom he
was President near 18. years. And last of all I will prove his wisdom in
all his Judiciary affairs, from the testimony of many thousands in this City,
as well as from his own kindred, my self and others of his family.

Thirdly, for his temperance and moderation, first in apparel, it is well
known that as he was no follower himself, so he did not approve that others
should be attired in vain, foolish, and fantastic apparel. Secondly, in his
diet he was very temperate, so that as he did abhor drunkenness, and gluttony in
others, so he was a strict observer himself. What, and in what measure he did
eat or drink, for I never saw him overtaken with excess, since I came unto
him. Thirdly, in his words he was a Moses, a man of slow speech, and did not
delight in vain babbling. But when he did speak he would be sure it should
be to good purpose.

Fourthly, for his fortitude and courage, I shall only take notice that what
business soever he undertook, either public or private upon good and
warrantable foundation, he would be sure to prosecute, maintain, and hold, as
in all these places of Judicature where he was seated, it is well known.

Fifthly, for his frugality and good husbandry, though in some it may be
esteemed covetousness and avarice, when they shall oppress their neighbor,
and grind the face of the poor debtor for the maintenance of pride and
prodigality in their children and kindred. Yet in Sir James it was a rare
virtue: for he was so far from oppressing any with tedious suits in law, that
to my knowledge during the time that I lived with him, he was very unwilling
that any should be cast into prison at his suit, and would rather agree upon a
small composition, then take the rigor of the Law against any, though he lost
thereby. For I do not remember that he caused above one or two to be arrested,
though he has had many bad debtors, as his Executors shall find.

But admit he had been a near, austere, and hard man, as is reputed, yet that
should not be any disparagement to his other rare virtues, but rather a
commendation. For we read that God himself, (whose example he followed) in
Justice will look for a severe account of all his servants, though he be
reputed by the unthankful wretch a severe and hard man for the same, reaping
where he sowed not, and gathering where he strowed not. And it is but reason
that he should have the glory of his own graces: for he gives the talents of
spiritual graces and temporal blessings unto the children of men, to use and
profit thereby, and not to be bound up in a napkin, or thrown under a bushel.
And he commands that our light should so shine before men, that they may see
our good works, and glorify our Father which is in heaven. Therefore shall
any be reputed covetous or an oppressor, for looking to have his own goods
restored according to law, that he may husband them himself, for the glory of
God, and good of others, as Sir James did, of whom I may truly say without
flattery, that if any were, he was a steward for heaven, in making friends of
his unrighteous Mammon, in thus casting his bread upon those waters, and in
being thus merciful unto the poor, surely he is received into everlasting
habitations. He has found the reward of his labors, and God has showed mercy
unto his soul (through Christ) as he has had mercy on the poor.

And last of all for his patience and long suffering, I shall only write this
for any judicious reader to judge, that notwithstanding all my Satyricall
writing, yet he was never moved therewith, but as I thought did affect me the
better for expending my spare time in such divine meditations, and did say that
God had put into his heart to do me good, which he has done accordingly, for
if he had given me a large portion of wealth, I should have been proud and
idle, but leaving me so small a portion for my long service, it has made me
humble and industrious to publish his charitable Legacies for the good of
others, to his eternal memory, though I debase my self thereby. And although
he was grievously pained with the stone in the bladder, of which he dyed, yet
for my good he was willing to do any thing which I thought would procure me
profit, and never seemed to be impatient, as many would have been, had they
felt such pain as he did.

What shall I say more? for in him all graces seemed to be concatinated and
linked together, so that in him they became a chain of graces, even grace upon
grace, which continually increased from his birth to his death, for ought I
know, because the end crowns all actions, for as a tree grows, so it falls,
and as man lives, so for the most part he dies, except God work a miracle, as
he did at the hour of death upon the Thief upon the Cross. And the most
safest way to judge of a man's actions while he lived, is to consider his
behavior at his death: yet let us take heed how we rashly judge any, as is
before specified, and rather judge charitably of all, then uncharitably of any.
But Christ's words are most certainly true, that a bad tree cannot bring forth
good fruit, neither can a good tree bring forth evil fruit, for men do not
gather grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles, therefore by their fruits you
shall know them.

Now it was not my happiness to be with him at the hour of his death, neither
did I continue long in his presence during the time of his sickness, because I
had given him just cause of offense by some misdemeanors. And likewise because
I was sensible of my great loss of him in whom I thought my livelihood did
consist, for I did ever doubt that he would not bestow upon me any great
benevolence at his death, because he was so willing ^o do me good in his
life. Yet this I can testify, that he as Hezekiah, having set his house in
order, by composing of his Will, did prepare himself for death, shall I say a
month or two? nay I may affirm a year or two before he died: during which
time he seldom went abroad, but kept in his house, and spent his spare time
in reading the Bible, and other good books, and in singing of Psalms, and
especially the 39. Psalm. which he did often sing with very much chearfulnes.
And upon Newyeares day last, perceiving his hour draw near, sealed his Will,
and went quietly to bed, as to his grave, from which place he would not be
removed till the hour of his death, which was upon the Wednesday following
between six and seven of the clock in the morning.

And one thing I cannot but observe, that when any came to visit him during
those four days, viz. from Saturday to Wednesday, and demanded how he did, he
would answer, Sick, as a prisoner in hope: which me thinks was a heavenly
speech, for he knew his soul was imprisoned in a brittle house of clay, out
of which he hoped she should shortly be delivered, and carried by the Angels
of God into a heavenly habitation, to enjoy everlasting freedom which I hope
he has found.

But all this while I have ceased to treat of Justice and Mercy, which was the
chief of my intention: for though they may be comprehended in the other
forenamed virtues, yet they are more conspicuous and apparent in his many
judiciary and charitable Legacies bequeathed in his last Will and Testament,
which might I have leave to publish in his own words, and make a commentary
thereon according to my fancy, me thinks I could describe Justice and Mercy in
most lively colors. For first, unto his Lady Justice and Mercy met together.
Justice in performance of his agreement, mercy in remembrance of his love. But
in this could have wished that mercy had exceeded justice, for as she^ has
been a loving wife to him near 24. years, so it is wel^ known that she is a
charitabl^ woman; and for that cause Si^ James made her the executrix o^ his
Will, which otherwise he^ would not have done. For I am confident (says he in
one clause o^ his Testament) that she will see thi^ my Will really performed.

Secondly, Justice appears in his other bequests to his kindred and alliance.
In that he has given most to them he did least for in his life, so that there
might be an equivolence amongst all, and none to take exception against the
other.

Thirdly, Justice appears in his other bequests, especially to his poor
servants and retainers, that he has forgot none, but remembered all in a lump
of 300. pound, to be disposed at such times, in such parcels, and to such
persons as his Lady pleases, some of them being such as deserved nothing, are
his own words in one clause of his will, where they are thus mentioned. And
herein was a point of policy, to keep them under subjection, in depending upon
her favor. After them he remembers me with 20. pound, on purpose to make me,
as I ever thought my self to be in some sort like Jacob, to depend upon Gods
providence on my own endeavors, that I should strive against such opposition
that should be made against me in being an actor in the execution of these
famous Legacies, and if I shall deserve nothing for my pains therein,
(according to Sir James his will) I will have nothing. But letting justice and
mercy remain with him in the actions of his life, behold mercy shall flourish
after his death. And as she is over all Gods works, so she has pre-eminence
over all Sir James his bequests, in a more eminent manner. For he has not
only given ^eliefe to the poor and needy for the present, but for the future.
So that these 7. works of Mercy appertaining to the body, according to this
verse, Visito, poto, cibo, redimo, tego, colligo, condo, are accomplished by
Sir James in his charitable Legacies, for therein if you do observe, he has
visited the sick, given drink to the thirsty, fed the hungry, redeemed
captives and prisoners, clothed the naked, lodged the harbourlesse, and buried
the dead: nay more, he has not only provided relief for the body, but he
has had regard to the soul, according to this ve^se:

Co^sul^, castiga, solare, remitte, fer, ora. He has instructed the ignorant,
corrected the sinner, comforted the heavy hearted, forgiven offenses, borne
with the weak, and prayed for all. Therefore there is no question to be made,
but that he has received his reward in part, with an Euge bone serve, well
done good and faithful servant, come and receive the kingdom prepared for you
from the beginning of the world: for I was hungry, etc.

First, that poor children should be well educated, and brought up in good
learning, he has given one thousand Marks for the erection and maintenance
of a Free-Schoole in the town of Barking in Essex.

Secondly, to keep youth from beggary and theevery, which is begot by sloth
and idleness, the root of all evil, he has bequeathed two thousand pounds
for a stock to keep such at labor and work in Bridewell, that they as others
should labor with their own hands, and in the sweat of their brows eat
their bread, according as God commanded Adams posterity, and this stock is to
be ordered and disposed by the advice and counsel of the sagest and gravest
Senators of this City.

Thirdly, to enable young beginners to go on cheerfully in their callings, in
works of good husbandry, he has left thirteen hundred pounds to be lent to
poor freemen of the company of Ironmongers, 100. pound a man upon good
security, at 4. li. per centum for a year.

Fourthly, for the relief of poor helpless children in Christ hospital he
has given 500. pound To enlarge the hospital of Saint Thomas in Southwark
with more lodging for poor sick diseased persons, he has given 1500. li. And
for a further relief of the poor, blind, lame, diseased, and lunatique
persons in Bridewell, St. Bartholomewes, and Bethlehem Hospitalls, he has
given 300. li. viz. 100. li. to each.

Fifthly, for redemption of poor Captives under Turkish slavery, where they are
enforced by cruel torments to forsake their Religion, he has given one
thousand pounds. And for the release and relief of poor distressed prisoners
that lie in miserable bondage by means of merciless creditors, in nine
prisons in and about London, he has given one thousand pounds. What shall I
say more? I am amazed at so many charitable bequests of one man, for he has
not only remembered the Laity, but the Clergy also, not only the valiant
Soldiers, the Gentlemen of the Artillery Garden, with one hundred pounds
toward their stock, and one hundred marks for a dinner or supper, because he
was once chosen a Colonel of this City: but poor honest preaching Ministers
also, with 500. li. toward the supply of their necessities, not to exceed 5.
li. nor less then 40. shillings a man, because he would nourish learning and
religion, for he knew learning to be a maine prop to uphold religion in its
purity, and therefore not to be despised, as now it is, for the infirmities of
some few men. And not only mankind in general, but such things as conduce to
his honor and livelihood, this judicious charitable Gentleman has thought on
in the composure of his Testament, first to comfort and refresh the poor
destitute in cold weather, he has followed his fathers steps, and left 500.
pounds for a further supply of a stock of Coals, which his said father Sir
Thomas Cambel Knight, and sometime Lord Mayor of London began with three
hundred pounds: secondly, to make ways passable, to abridge long journeyes,
and to ease labor, he has left 250. pounds for the erection of a new bridge
over the Foord near Wansted in Essex: and last of al, that we as he should
delight to be in the Church of God, which is the congregation of the
faithful, the house of prayer, where with one heart we should hear God
speak unto us by his word, and we unto him by humble confession, earnest
supplication, and hearty thanksgiving, he has given one thousand pounds
toward the repair of the mother Church the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul,
which evidently shows he was a man that did approve all things in the worship
of God should be decent and in good order. And lest he himself should forget
any that were capable of charity, he has left the overplus of his estate
(which by his computation will be ten thousand pounds, if not impaired by bad
debts, or otherwise) in his Executors discretion to dispose of in some such
piou and charitable work or works, thing or things, as they shall think fit,
which I hope will be to the glory of God, the relief of the poor, the honor
of the deceased, and to the comfort and joy of the Executors themselves. Yet I
have not mentioned all his charitable Legacies, for I have not made relation of
120. l. to 120. poor men in money or gowns, and 12. d. a piece for their
dinner upon the day of his Funeral. 200. l. to poor beggars to avoid trouble
on the same day. 200. l. to the poor of the Parishes of Saint Peter's Poor,
and Saint Olaves Jewry London, and of Barking in Essex. Besides 100. l. to the
parishioners of the Parish of Saint Olaves Jewry, for their good will to erect
his monument by his fathers and his brothers Master Robert Cambel, late
Alderman of London. And being he was so careful for his honor while he lived
I thought it part of my duty to take some labor for the augmentation thereof
now he is dead, which I could no better way perform, then by publishing those
his unparalleled Legacies: for though that may be more solid and durable, yet
this my labor may be as profitable and useful for the stirring up of some
charitable men's heart to do works of this nature. For if they be truly just
while they live, they will show the fruits thereof at their death, because such
men do seldom any great work of charity till their death, if they do any
then, as I have been told by some; for every rich man is not as Sir James,
because he brought Justice and Mercy with him from his cradle, charactered on
his name.

Therefore I cease to wonder that he has left such a pattern at his death,
when his name which was given him presently after his birth demonstrated the
same, as appears in the Acrosticke verses and Anagrams following, made by me
near three years since, and presented.

To his ever honored Master.
Sir.
Just is the Lord, in all his ways,
And merciful unto the poor:
Man likewise should in all Assaies
Ever be Just, but loving more:
Such are rare birds, in these our days
Can balance these, in all their ways.
And yet I doubt not, but some are
Merciful, and righteous both:
But I fear they are very rare
Even such to find, in ripefull growth
Let Us then with Justice, mercy join,
Lest we be paid in the same coin.
James Cambel Anagrammatized, Se I came Balm.
AS Balm is of a fragrant sent,
So, are those Graces God has lent
Unto mankind; sit to set forth
Gods glory, and his servants worth.
As Balm applied well to a sore
Does heal, and cure, so, are the pour
Relieved, recur'd by Mercies oil
Which now I find springs in my soil:
Se I came Balm, for this same cause
Even to fulfill my Makers Laws,
That both my life, and death set forth,
Justice, and Mercies royal worth.
Another ANNAGRAM. James Cambell, I came Blamles.
NO man (but Christ) in this world e're could
I came (in) blamles, and so go away.
My thoughts are pure, words holy, and works say
From sin original, and actual stailesse:
For sins forbidden fruit Adam did eat, blamles
Has caused his children crave sin, as their meat.
So, that young babes no sooner borne but cry,
As feeling sins thrall, and life's misery.
But yet I read in Gods most sacred word,
Many were termed Righteous by the Lord,
Such were good Noah, Daniel, Job the Just,
Not that they were so, for they had a lust
To do ill, some of their works did show it,
But God in Mercy, let not's Justice know it,
So now, as then, some righteous men there be
Not innocent from sin, to God; yet free
From foul, notorious, nefarious crimes,
Such as are now the Custom of the times,
To do their Neighbor wrong, the poor oppress
And make a Trade of all ungodlynesse.
But, the true Innocent is like a child,
Who in all Actions is both meek and mild,
And though sometimes, by hap, they go astray
And wander little, in an unknown Way;
Then does he make inquiry, and is sorry,
That he did so, his erring self misearry;
Likewise, sometimes God does his grace restrain
From rarest Saints, to show they are but vain
Wiithout his aid; also to see and try
What bidden Graces, in their hearts do lie.
So, fell King David, Peter, and Saint Paul
To humble them, us to Repentance call,
In which respests (by Christ) some men may say
I come (in) blamles, and so go away.
Now consider, I pray, if what David spoke in another sense, Psalm. 85. 10, 11.
verses, may not be truly said of Sir James Cambel, Mercy and Truth are met
together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other: Truth shall flourish
out of the earth, and Righteousness has looked down from heaven. Only in
stead of Truth read Justice in the 10. verse, and Mercy in the 11. verse, and
then it is plain enough that mercy shall spring or bud out of the earth, that
is, as I apply it Sir James Cambels name was given him by earthly parents, so
it sprung out of the earth, and that signifies mercy, as is before specified in
the Anagram, Se I came balm: and Righteousness has looked down from heaven,
that is, the Sun of Righteousness has infused the Graces of his holy Spirit
into his heart to do righteousness, as in his life, so at his death: and that
likewise may be applied to the Anagram on his name, I came blamles, so that it
is evident by these Anagrams and Acrosticke verses, that in Sir James Cambel
Justice and Mercy met together, according to this saying of the Prophet David,
for now I shall not need to change the words in either verse, for Truth, which
is Fides, as Tremelius translates it, is the root from whence justice and Mercy
spring: and without justice and mercy, faith is dead, and truth is falsehood.
But if these two branches of Mercy and Justice spring from the root of a true,
lively, and justifying faith, the fruit that they bear will be peace of
conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost. Thus will I sing with holy David, as in
a spiritual sense, so in remembrance of my late honored Master, Mercy and
Truth have met together, Righteousness and Peace have ki^^ed each other, Truth
shall flourish out of the earth, and Righteousness has looked down from
heaven. Therefore I will conclude with these verses following.

Justice and Mercy were at great debate,
Who should in Sir James most predominate:
True Faith came in, and said, it was most meet
That Mercy, she, should have the upper seat:
For she is the Queen of Grace, and for that cause
She is to moderate Gods Righteous Laws.
So 'twas concluded to appease the brall,
Sweet, lovely Mercy should be principal:
For from true saving Faith, Sir James did bring
Mercy, and Justice like a living spring
Of heavenly water, to refresh and glad
All ^ood men's hearts, his loss maks me full sad*
For Justice ceased with his vital breath;
But Mercy will endure long after death.
And sure his Justice, and his Pious ways,
Shall ever live to his eternal praise
For an example* though in act it cease,
But Mercy now in act does still increase
And shows her beauty, in most brave array
To poor distressed people whose decay
She greatly pitying, does give supply
To their necessities, and misery.
Oh had I art I would set forth the praise
Of Sir James Cambels pious, righteous ways;
But being my learning's small conclude will I
In mournful Epitaph and Elegy.
An Acrostick Elegy.
IF loss of friends be cause of grief; then I,
And all good people have some cause to cry;
Many good men there are, I hope, but yet
Even as Sir James was, are full hard to get*
Such was his Prudence, and his Pious care,
Could order all things well, which to declare
And show, his virtues all, in e^ch degree
Might mase the Muses nine, and much more me.
But this I do, by my unskilful Art
Eternally, to show my thankful heart.
Losses I have, how can I choose but cry?
Loss has this City, can our eyes be dry?
Yet though he is lost to us he is found in heaven*
Because his Mamon to the poor is given*
Whose Friends are there, for to receive and keep
His blessed soul, although his body sleep.
Our Friend Lazarus sleeps John 11. 11. Precious, in the sight of the Lord,
is the death of his Saints. Psalm. 116. 15. Blessed are the dead, that die in
the Lord, even so says the Spirit, for they rest from their Labors; and their
works follow them. Apoc. 14. 13.
An Acrostick Epitaph.
IN this same Casket lies a Jewel rare
And will you know the great worth of the same^
Mark well these words, his vertu^s pass compare,
Eternal honor, shall raise to his name.
So Just, and equal were his virtuous ways
Constant in Prastice thereof, all his days.
A man that always stood for common good,
Made him belev'd of all men, far^e and near.
By Prudent Justice, he all vice withstood,
Equal to him, where shall we find his peer?
Lo now he is laid up, in this earthen mould
Like as a Jewel, in a case of gold.
This is the monument upon his name
Which I erected by my rustic quill,
But there is a thing of cost, and curious frame
Rarely contrived, by industrious skill:
In Olaves Jewry Church it is to stand,
A more compleater thing's not in this land.
Sir James is there to lie in stately port,
Clad all in armor, like a Martial man.
Like a grave Senator, in gallant sort
He Is wrapped in robes, even as an Alderman,
Courage, and Wisdom in him did remain,
And now he is dead, this Figure shows the same.
Most Just, and equal were his P^ous ways,
And therefore at his feet does Justice stand,
And at his head, to his eternal praise,
Mercy is fixed with her Babe in hand.
In him stern Justice, did sweet mercy meet,
And now he is dead they stand at's head and fe^t.
Close by him kneeles his Lady much lamenting
The loss of her dear Pheer, this pious man;
A true Character, lively representing,
The sad Condition of this good woman:
For, she is truly like the Turtle dove,
Daily bewayling the loss of her Love.
But let her cease to grieve, for from above
Behold an Angel bright, descending down,
And for the ^ood deeds, done by her true Love,
With Laurel Garland will his Temples crowne^s
To learn by their examples all men may,
Justice, and Mercy draws the Veil away.
Therefore is Fame, and Time his Arms supporters
To show to all that in the world do live,
That virtuous Actions cannot want reporters:
For Fame, will Time to such man surely give,
That in good works do spend the pain, and time,
And, now I did intend to cease my Rhyme:
But that Fame calls to show the cost and skill
Of this rare structures Fabric, stately brave,
Contrived and composed; but my quill
Is blunt and dull, for I no learning have;
Therefore I Will cease, and say it is rich and fair,
Marble, and Alablaster carved most rare.
Of the favor of man.
Favor of great men, in this world's a Flower
Hardly in long time got, lost in an hour.
He, then that builds his hope upon a prop
That is so weak, must needs expect it drop:
For, though he spend his time, his care, his skill,
In dunging, dressing, keeping it from ill
That might annoy it, yet the ^eate of rashness
Cold of neglect, or wind of its own harshnesse
May wither, nip, or blow it quite away,
Such is the fruit of such a rotten stay.
Oh! happy then, in this world's he that well
Can live, and breath without this flowers smell.
But there is none on earth, that truly can.
Live, or subsist without the help of man:
For Lawyers live upon their Clients fees,
And some rich men, on poor men's miseries.
So Clergy men, upon the lay depend,
And each to other must needs be a friend:
For, sellers live upon the buyers gains,
And rich men do grow proud, on poor folks pains.
Why then, should I think it more stange to me
When I see others i^ the same degree:
A bad bargain, sometimes has the buyer,
And poor men are not always paid their ^yer:
For, though sometimes, I do displeasur^ gain
By some rash word, or deed, which breeds my p^ine,
Yet: after, I am sorry, and do fear
How I do in the self same kind appear:
So though to some Favor a Flower be,
Yet unto me, it is a well grown Tree,
Which I will labor for to keep and cherrish.
That neither me, nor mine may come to perrish*
And therefore never will I cease to pray
That God may guide me, in fair virtues way:
For therein surely, I shall find the Grace
And Favor of good men, as time and place
Shall give occasion; in this hope I Will rest
Not doubting, but in the end I shall be blessed
With all such things, as God sees good for me
According to my calling, and degree.
An Acrostick Elegy, ON The deaths of the right worshipful Mr. Anthony Abdie,
Alderman of London, who departed this transitory life, on Thursday the 10. of
September, 1640. and Mistress Abigail his wife, who died the Friday before,
ALL men are borne to die, that is most true;
No man can hinder death, not I, nor you,
Though we were wise, rich, lusty, storng and faier
He Is such a Sergeant, for Bribes he will not care:
Oh! he is too cruel; neither man, nor wife
No King, nor Keysar can make him spare life:
Yet, why should he so cruel be to these?
Alas! could not the wife alone him please
But must he presently the husband take?
Did death think much, he should his wife for sake?
In Hymen's day, they promised never to part
Even unt^ll Death did strike them to the heart;
And so they did perform that solemn vow,
By living both together until now.
In thirty years, she was his wedded wife,
God made them rich, in blessings of this life;
And so, to make them happy, children ten
I know they had, three maids, the other men,
Like Olive plants about their Table spread,
And two of them are married, three are dead:
But here is the cause of this my riming quill,
Death, at one in^^ant should this couple kill
In midst of joy, this makes me mourn, yet learn,
Even as to poor folk, so, to rich 'Death's stern*
An Acrostick Epitaph.
ALL mortal men that by us pass
Note well, consider, life's as grass
That seems fresh and fair all day,
Hew'n down by death, soon ^ades away*
On earthly things set not your love,
Nature's adverse to things above*
Yield therefore unto God your heart,
And after death you will feel no smart;
But, if you do in sin delight,
Death then will make you feel his might
In dolor great, in pain so fell,
Even as the torments are in hell.
And thus we show what we do find,
By our example bend your mind
(In wisdoms school) to learn, and know
Gods will; and in good works it show
As we two did, and made it shine
In Pious deeds, in Love divine;
Like to the Turtle and his mate,
Always we lived in quiet state,
But cruel death with his sharp knife,
Did mow the Grass of my wives life:
I followed her, then sease to weep,
Even as in Bed, we sweetly sleep.
They were both buried together upon the first day of October, 1640. in the
Parish Church of Saint Andrew Undershaft.

IN MEMORIAM,
PRudentissimi Senator is Jacobi Cambel Mil* it is nuper Major i^ Civitatis
Londinensis, a^tea Senior is Aldermani and unius Pacis Iusticiarum in Civitate
predicta. Major is insuper Privilegiorum Civitatis Westmonasterii, Praesidis
Hospitalis seu Xenodochii Divi Thomae in Burgo Southwarke and Galicorum
Mercatorum Rector is Memoriale Edwardi Brown eidem devotissimi dum vixit Ratio
Operis.

TO make my Sun and Moon shine clear,
My Star and Mete or thus appear
Within bright favors firmament:
I hope my time is not misspent.
In useles works, in fruitless pain,
For little Credit, much less gain,
Because my Masters praise and worth
In these Books like wise is set forth*
Yet howsoever, I know this
Spes and Proemium in Coelis.
FINIS.
engraving representing the tomb of James Cambell by William Marshall In
Memoriam Prudentissimi Senator Iacobi Cambell Militis etc.

For prudent justice, and true Piety Here lies a Pattern; pray observe him well
And for true Love without Hypocrisy He was a Mirror: In his soul did dwell
True Faith, the Mother of the Graces three Of Justice, Holiness, and Charity. So
though his Corpse seems herein to ly His Virtues rare, shall live and never
die.



A METEOR. OR, Brief and pleasant MEDITATIONS Of the Providence of God toward
His CHOSEN: And Of the education of Children.

printer's device of William Ley or Lee, a circle featuring the heavens (stars,
a meteor, the sun and the moon), clouds, rain and the sea Conscientia bona non
timet pericula.


EXODUS 9. 23. 24.
And the Lord rained hail upon the Land of Egypt, so there was hail, and fire
mingled with hail very grievous, such as there was none like it in all the
Land of Egypt since it became a Nation.

To His judicious-loving, and ever-honoured Master, the right Worshipful Sir
James Cambel Knight and senior Alderman of London, etc.
INgratitude* as it stops the stream of Gods mercy from descending upon his
people, so, it dams up the current of charitable men's bounty toward the poor;
for he that is not thankful for former benefits, is unworthy to receive any
future good. In consideration whereof, I, having received from your Worship
many undeserved favors for the space of these 16. years service under you,
did bethink with my self which way I might really express my thankful heart
for the same. But when ^ considered my own penury and insufficiency for the
performance of any work, worthy your judicious and grave inspection; I was
afraid that in stead of favor, I might incur d^spleasure: And therefore
rested my self in contemplation of m^ne own works* which after some
ple^sing* pain I h^d conce^ved in my mind. But having often observed you
reading diverse famous men's writ^ngs, as Perkins, Greenham^, and others, the
latchet of whose shoes I am unworthy to unloose* I am bold to entreat your
Worship not to d^sd^^ne to peruse these imperfect works of your unworthy
servant, for therein you shall see how I have spent most p^rt of my spare t^me
since I have been a widower. For I having according to my small ability
patched the fin^^ spun cloth of the Prince of Poets Du Bar^as smooth eloquence,
with my home spun rags, and course materials, and framed thereof a piece of
rough Poetry, for my retired thoughts to repose in. I was imboldened to present
the same to your Worship in private, as a token or pledge of my gratitude for
your former favors extended toward me. Now as the Tw^ns did strive and
struggle within the womb of Rebecca, and the first borne was no sconer brought
forth, but the younger followed, taking his Brother fast hold by the heel: so
my Annual World so closely followed those Poetical Meditations, that I could
not rest satisfied in my mind till I had likewise brought it forth. And so,
after some labor and travel in English Authors for your Worship knows I am
no Linguist* I have brought it to m^turity, and placed the younger before the
elder, as Jacob was by his father preferred before Esau; But the first being
not approved but greatly disl^ked contrary to my expectation, and the opinion
of men, riper in judgment then my self, upon the 17. of April last I received
the same again* to satisfy the desire of some, to have the perusal thereof.
Before which time, as I informed your Worship. I had finished my Annual World
to the second story, and therefore would not leave off in the midst of my
work, contrary to your Worships direction, who advised me to surcease and
leave, lest I might come to be as some have been, and receive such punishment
as Phaeton brought upon himse^fe, by being too busy in things above my
learning and st^ength. But by the inablement of Gods spirit in me, I have, as I
writ, notwithstanding all my other affairs, given vent to this new wine, which
otherwise might have damnified the vessel. Now because the former had no
relish in your palate, I was afraid that my Annual World would have proved
displeasing to your taste, and therefore, having fully finished that I am
advised to put them both into print, and to dedicate the same not only to your
self, but to all the Senators of this famous City, of whom you are the most
ancient, for God has prolonged your life, to enjoy that honorable title of
Pater Civitatis, and I do humbly acknowledge, that you are Alumnus men's.
Therefore you being the Master of the time which I have borrowed to accomplish
all these works: All my labors and endeavors are properly yours, coming
from the sweet and wholesome nourishment they receive from you, hoping that as
the little chamber, which the affectionate Shunamite prepared for the Prophet
Elisha, was more accepted, th^n the gold, silver, and changes of raiment
offered by Naaman the Syrian: so these unlearned works of mine, being nothing
else but an expression of my affection, will be more acceptable now in your
old age then a present of greater cost and worth. For in my apprehension as
your body declines to the earth, so, your soul ascends into heaven, and
therefore it is that you disburden your self of worldly cares, by disposing of
your substance while you live, to your own and my Ladies kindred, in Felix and
Clayhall, which evidently shows that you are out of love with earthly fading
happiness. That you may more freely apply your mind in seeking after heavenly
and everlasting Treasure, by contemplation and meditation of the wondrous works
of God; which is* from many learned men's works, briefly comprised in these
Books, the first as your Worship knows, I compared to a Star, as Orion, and
the Pleiades, disasterous and ominous to forewarne me, (as an evident sign) of
some ensuing tempest: or as Castor and Pollux fortunate and successful, to
lead me (or a token that I shall arrive) in a safe harbor. The second I
compared to the Moon, because it is most part borrowed from that glorious Sun
divine Du Bartas. And the last to the Sun, because it treats of divine
Meditations throughout the year, as Sol illuminat mundum. Now to make these
lights shine the clearer; I have framed this Meteor; for my Star, that was not
firmly fixed, my Moon I have changed, but my Sun will shine the brighter,
after this foggy and drowsy m^st has displayed it self; for after a tempest
comes fair weather, and the Sun shines pleasantly after a shower of rain. All
these fruitless labors of my brain I am bold to present to your Worship not
out of any hope to draw any of your earthly substance from y^u, neither do I
hereby cog, flatter, or sooth you, or any other, in hope to get some great
preferment thereby, for I scorn such flatteries, neither do I herein meddle
with other folks matters its enough for me to look to my self, and my own
business. For throughout these Books I still reflect upon my self, knowing
very well the old saying, That every tub must stand upon his own bottom, and
every man's labor will either praise or dispraise the workman. But I only writ
them for the ease of my mind, and to express my gratitude for all your
favors extendea towar^^ me. Therefore I am not fearful who has the perusal
hereof, for I hope it will hold trial, bear touch and prove good met all. Yet
as it is too well known I am far unworthy to appropriate to my self the
laborious industry and care of J^cob, or the wisdom and sanctity of David,
so I would not have your Worship surm^se, that I mean you have or ever had the
venomous qualities of the Serpent, or the sharp cr^gginesse of the Rock,
which is likewise very well known to the contrary But because I made use of
those ex^mples in some of my writings, for which I fear your Worship took
d^staste I am bold to clear my self thus: That as in respect of my long
service under you, I may in some sort compare my self to Jacob, and in regard
of my penury be like unto David; so for providentiall wisdom you are as a
Serpent, and for solid gravitie as a Rock. Therefore in confidence of your
favorable acceptance, I humbly present this, with my self, and all my
endeavors, to your Worsh^ps service, never ceasing to pray, that God would so
bless you, and your loving Consort, my virtuous Lady; with the graces of his
blessed Spirit, and temporal blessings in this life* that you may enjoy
eternal happiness in the life to come: and will ever remain,

Your humble and grateful servant, Edw. Brown.
29. October. 1640.
engraved portrait of Edward Brown seated at a table, writing, with two
children nearby, by William Marshall Spes and Praemium in Coelis.

In Hevenly Light I will Delight.

My Portion sure Will ever dure.

W. M. Sculp:


A Fantastic Lover.
BEhold, how vainly I have spent my time*
By making Books, in fruitless prose, and rhyme
To win a Damsells love, with Pen and Ink,
I wonder why, I should so fo^dly think
Some win their Mistress by sweet words and rimes,
But such are rare to find, in these our times;
Others like Jupiter on Danaes Tower
Do purchasse love, in such a golden shower,
But most, and that is the way thy Love to meet
As Par^s, Hellen; Mars did Venus greet;
These things I know* and yet my troubled mind
Did urge me to make Books* true Love to find
In Virtues breast; but not for form, or pelf,
Because like Jacob I compared my self,
That, as he having neither house nor lands,
By Gods great Providence, became two bands*
So, I that have been very weak and poor
Might come in better state I was before,
Did think to g^t a Rachel for my mate,
And by my child^n come in double state;
But I Am not like to him, neither is she
Like Rachel, fair though Bright her name may be,
Neither have I served Laban, though it is true
In eighteen years, eleven pound paid my due
For Salarie, my bargain was no more,
Why should I care, or too much grieve therefore;
Yet, such like wordly losses breeds pain
Unto man's mind, and does much hurt the brain;
But I Will give thanks to God, for he has brought
My Labor to an end, for still I thought
Whether I lost or got, my hope was this
To have Gods Love: for Proemium in Coelis.
Liber ad Lectorem.
REad to the end,
Lest I offend.
Pray mark, and Judge,
Before you grudge.
And you shall find
How I Am inclind,
To show the crimes
Of these last times.
In Labans case,
And Nab^ls face;
How Esaus Pride,
May be espide,
And, how to find
A virtuous mind.
Therefore I pray
Cast spleen away.
Then read with ease,
I shall you please.
A METEOR. OR, A brief and pleasant Meditation of the Providence of God
toward his chosen: and of the education of children.
THe consideration of the power of natural love in the heart of Mankind, has
of late induced me to write of diverse things gathered out of the word of God,
and other writings. But now having by the assisting grace of the Almighty,
fully finished three Books, viz. Liber Amoris, Sacred P^emes, and an Annual
World, I thought good, for the ease of my mind, as my Vultimum vale to writing
of such mysteries, too high for my capacity to demonstrate, to set down these
confused notions following. The first shall be the consideration of Gods
Providence toward his chosen, in the examples of Jacob and David.

In the second place, because I began to write of the love of young men, I will
conclude with the love of old men toward their children, in the examples of
Isaac and Jacob.

In the first I will show, how God turned a Serpent, to a staff of support,
for the preservation of Jacob, and also how he made water to flow out of the
hard Rock* for the relief and refreshment of David.

In the second, I will declare and set forth, how aged parents (as in a glass)
may see how to place and fix their love toward their children and kindred. In
Isaacs love toward Esau, and in Jacobs love toward Joseph. But because all
these things are directly against the worldly-wise Politicians, especially in
these dangerous days, who are in best esteem, I thought it more safe for me,
to desist and stay my pen, lest I too roughly handling that which is Noli me
tangere, might incur just reproof and punishment for my labor. Yet because I
mentioned these things in Libro Amo^ is, and other writings, and for that I do
not intend to stray from the Text of Scripture, but keep close to the genuine
sense of the word of God, so that none may find fault therewith, but they that
applying it to themselves find their galled backs hurt, or too grossly touched. I
will not fear to go forward, lest it should be said, I have written that I
was not able to make good. Therefore I will declare how the Serpent became a
Rod, or staff of support to Jacob. It is plain that I do not mean that which
was first a Rod, then a Serpent, and last of all a Rod again in the hand of
Moses: neither do I mean the Serpent that beguiled our first parents, or any
other natural Serpent. But I will write of Laban, as a Serpent: and to prove
that he had the properties and qualities that are in a Serpent, and so very
well compared thereunto, I will divide him into three parts: first his head,
secondly his skin, and last of all his sting. First, that Laban had the head
of a Serpent, viz. he was wise politic, and very crafty, is plain. The
Scripture testifies that the Serpent was more subtle then any beast of the
field. And Christ exhorts us to be wise as Serpents, both for the defense of
our selves, and offense of our enemies. The Serpents wisdom consists in four
things. First, in the Spring she casts off her old skin, and puts on a new:
secondly, she defends her head above all things: thirdly, she stops her ears
at the voice of the charmer: and lastly, she always carries poison in her
mouth, which she exposes before she drinks. The application of this
serpentine wisdom I pass by. But affirm, that political wisdom for every
man to be provident. First, for his own souls salvation: secondly, for his
own bodies health: and thirdly, for the welfare of his own family, is so far
from reproof, that it is worthy high commendation. And chiefly the first. But
how Laban was thus qualified, there is the quaere. For first, it is plain he was
not so wise as he should be, he did want that which is the true wisdom,
viz. fiduciall knowledge of the true God. He went astray out of the right way,
according as his father Nahor before him had done and worshipped Images, the
work of men's hands, wood and stone. For when Rachel had stolen some of those
Images, he did exclaim against Jacob, that he had stolen his gods: so when be
made a covenant of peace with Jacob, he confirmed it with an oath, taking the
god of Nahor to be his witness. So that its plain he was an idolater, and
therefore not wise for his souls salvation, for no Idolater shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven.

Secondly, for the welfare of his own body, there is no question but that he
as all worldly minded men are, and all godly men should, was careful to
preserve that, if he did not take too much care thereupon.

And last of all, for the provision of his own family, he was very careful,
and he that is not so, is worse then an infidel, even worse then Laban, for he
was very covetous, and that appears throughout the story: for when Jacob had
told him his arrand, viz. that he had purchased the birthright of his elder
brother, that he had obtained the blessing of his father, that he was sent to
him by his father and mother for a wife, that he had seen a vision by the way;
and having according to his own agreement performed seven years for Rachel, he
out of a base covetous desire, because he would not lose the benefit of Jacobs
service, cheated him with blear-eyed Lea, and made him serve 7. years more for
Rachel; for he thought, if Jacob had obtained his love, he would have served
him no longer. Therefore finding that God blessed him for Jacobs sake, and as
Jacob told him, saying, for the little that thou had before I came, is
increased to a multitude, was very unwilling to part with Jacob, and therefore
agreed with him upon a certain bargain of wages. But when he saw that Jacob
got too much that way, he abridged him of that, and changed his wages ten
times: like many covetous masters in these days, that for fear their servants
should thrive under them, grow proud, or fit for better services, do what they
can, as well in abridging them of that which is their just due, as sometimes in
those things they may get without them, I mean without any damage or great
trouble to them, as a word of their mouth, a note of their hand, or in
performing the will of the dead. But I have no cause to complain in this
particular, for I do humbly acknowledge, my Master has and does more good for
me then I deserve. Yet I presume to touch those Masters that care not for their
own credit or their servants good. Therefore leaving the politic head of
Laban, I come to his skin. The skin of a Serpent is beautiful and
glistering, and seems more amiable then hurtful; and Laban as his name
signifies White, the most beautiful color, so he seemed to be a very fair
dealing honest man, as by his oration to Jacob appears, in these words: What
have thou done? thou have even stolen away my heart, and carried away my
daughters as though they had been taken captives with the sword: wherefore
did thou fly so secretly, and steal away from me, and did not tell me,
that I might have sent thee forth with mirth, and with songs, with Timbrell,
and with Harp: But thou have not suffered me to kiss my sons and my
daughters. Now thou have done foolishly in a^ng so: yet though thou w^ntest
away because thou greatly longest after thy fathers house, wherefore have thou
stolen away my gods? By which words any man of a reasonable capacity would not
otherwise apprehend, but that Jacob had done him a great deal of wrong, and he
no way faulty. But when he could not prove what he said, then he was feign to
condescend to the accusation which Jacob laid to his charge. Yet because he
would seem faultlesse, he claims propriety in his estate of all that he had,
in these words: These daughters are my daughters, these sonne^ are my sons,
and these sheep are my sheep, and all that thou have is mine, and what can I
not do this day unto these my daughters, or to their sons which they have
borne? Like many Masters in these our days, that at their servants departure
in stead of preferring or doing any good for them, charge them with such things
they cannot prove: then if they quit themselves in that, they claim propriety
in their estate, even as Laban in these or the like words, All these goods are
ours, you have got them by us, and now you have got a little, you grow proud,
but consider, that if it had not been by our means, you could never have come
to this state, as if they could divine how God would otherwise provide for
them, and so seem to be very just, righteous, and conscionable themselves. The
last part of Laban is his sting, and that has a poisonous and venomous
quality, and wounds deadly. Which was the envious heart of Laban his intents to
hurt Jacob. But how shall I find them? first, in his face by his looks Jacob
perceived it well, for speaking to his wives he said, I perceive your fathers
countenance is not toward me, as it was wont. Secondly, by his words, his
envy appeared in this saying, I am able to do thee hurt. As much as if he
should have said, I could find in my heart to take to my self all these
sheep, and droves of cattle that are mine, and what can I not do? yea, I am
able to do thee evil, viz. to kill thee my intention is good, But. This But
spoiled all: But God forewarned me. Thirdly, his malice appeared by his
actions, besides his coming to him, and pursuing him with his brethren, the
altering of his wages, and other hard services, which he put him unto; it was
very conspicuous, in requiring of Jacob those things which were lost by
casuality and mischance, as himself testifies. Whether it were torn by
beasts, or stolen by thieves, by night, or by day, he was forced to make it
good. Like many masters in these our days, that force their poor servants to
pay for things that are broke, or lost by casuality, and their pretense is to
make them more careful, when it is plain, it is to secure their own goods,
and keep their servants the poorer, that they may detain them the longer in
subjection. But yet wilful negligence in servants ought to be punished, else
they will not care what spoil they make of their masters goods, so that by this
hard dealing of Laban, Jacob told him to his face, that except God had been
with him, he should have been sent away empty, as many servants are by such
masters. And thus much I thought good to write, to prove Laban a Serpent. And
now I should show how this Serpent came to be a staff of support to Jacob. But
before I write any further, I will note the reasons why Isaac should send his
son, that he had made Lord of his brethren, so poorly to seek him a wife:
did he forget how his father sent Eleazar of Damasus, the Steward, and eldest
servant of his house in great state, with 10. Camels, richly laden, and
servants to attend them, to his brother Nahor to provide him a wife? or was
Isaac now at this time poorer then his father Abraham? for answer to the first
question, it could not be that Isaac being a godly man, and so brought up from
his youth, could forget a matter of such consequence. To the second, it is
plain that he was not poorer then his father, but rather richer. For
Abimeleck King of the Philistines said unto him, Get thee from us, for thou are
mightier then we a great deal. But the reasons as I conceive why Isaac should
send his son Jacob away without any attendance, or other riches, but his
staff only, as himself testifies, was, first for secrefie, that he might not
be prevented of his journey by his brother Esau, who had before vowed his
death: for if Jacob should have taken any servants or treasure, it would have
been declared to his brother, who, as I surmise, was Lord of the house and
servants, while his father lived. But secondly, his father sent him away thus
poorly, to teach Jacob that he should not depend upon his fathers substance,
but upon the blessing of God on his own endeavors, according to these words,
and God alsufficient bless thee, and make thee to increase, etc. Now having
cleared the way, I will show you Jacob walking with his staff. A man uses a
staff for one of these ends, either to support him from falling, or else to
defend him from dangers. An old man uses a staff to support his weak body,
and a young man he uses a staff to defend himself, and offend his enemy. In
the first exception God made this Serpent Laban a staff to Jacob, for when he
came to Laban, he was so poor and weak, that he was not of himself able to
subsist, as by his vow appears, when he did at that time desire no more then
clothes to wear, and bread to eat: so that it seems he was not very well
stored at that time either with money or provision, as he afterward
acknowledged in these words, That he came over Jordan with his staff only:
and in this exigent he was refreshed and supported by Laban. First, according
to his wish, viz. with convenient sustenance; for I read nothing to the
contrary, and therefore judge that Laban kept a good house for his own family:
secondly, with two wives, two maids, twelve sons and one daughter. And last
of all, with a multitude of riches; so that in this he acknowledged Gods great
blessing toward him, for whereas he came to Laban with no more then a staff,
now he is become into two bands. But was there not as good supporters as Laban?
could not Jacob find as good masters as he? yes certainly, for he might have
done as well, if not better, with some other. But it was his father and mothers
pleasure he should take a wife from among their brethren. Therefore in
obedience to their will he came to serve Laban. Thus have I briefly declared
how Jacob was supported by a Serpent. But from hence I would have none to
infer, that because he serves a Laban, therefore he must have the blessing of
Jacob; for it was by the providence of God, and not by Labans goodness that
Jacob became so rich: for Laban, as a Serpent, if he had found any of his
servants idle, or careless, he would be sure to sting them. Therefore he that
intends to have the blessing of Jacob, must be qualified as he was, viz.
First, he must be a pious servant, and begin his service with Jacobs wish in
hearty prayer, that God would bless him therein with food convenient, and
clothes to put on, viz. such things as are necessary for him. Secondly, he
must be wise to make his bargain, lest after much labor, and long time spent,
he be not sent away worse then he came, as the Proverb is, a young Servingman,
and an old beggar. For Jacob made his bargain wisely, for the love of Rache^
he served 14. years, and after for the provision of his own house he made
such a bargain, that by policy he got all Labans strong cattle, and left him
the feebler.

Thirdly, he must be diligent, as in his own, so in his masters business
(but it is fit he should know what his employment is) so was Jacob; for thus
he answers Laban, Thou know what service I have done thee, and in what
taking thy cattle have been under me (and not under another) thy ewes and thy
goats have not cast their young, and the rams of thy flock have I not eaten. I
was in the day consumed with heat, and in the night with frost, and my sleep
departed from mine eyes.

He did according to the Apostles rule, serve, not with eye-service of
pleasing men, but in singleness of heart, as unto the Lord, viz. he would do
his work as well behind his masters back, as before his f^ce.

And lastly, a good servant ought to be wise, as to lead an unblameable life,
so to keep himself from danger, for in such a service other servants, or it
may be sometimes the master himself, as here, perceiving that he thrives or
grows rich, presently grumble or grutch, and seek by some ways or other to
defeat him, as here it was: but Jacob was wise, and could perceive though
Labans sons uttered that their father thought: for they complained that Jacob
had taken all that was their fathers, and of his goods he had got all his
honors: yet Jacob perceived that the countenance of Laban himself was not
toward him as in times past, therefore he thought it was time to look about
him, to avoid such traps and snares as might be laid for him: for he knew if he
did not prevent them, they would either entangle him in his words, or have such
a strict eye over his actions, that one way or other they would find some cause
to quarrel. Therefore at the commandment of God, by the counsel of his
wives, he departed with great riches: so that he was able to give his brother
200. she goats, and 20. he goats, 200. ewes, and 20. rams, 30. milch camels,
with their colts, 40. kine, and 10. bullockes, 20. she asses, and 10. foales,
and yet not hurt himself. And thus have I briefly showed how the Serpent was
turned to a rod of support, beating away the enemies of Jacobs welfare, penury,
poverty, and misery: wherein I have displayed the prope^ties of a churlish
master, and the qualities of a profitable servant.

But such as Jacob's hard to find,
Though many men have Labans mind.
In the consideration of Gods providence, I am likewise to show how God for the
relief of David made wate^ to flow out of the hard rock. But in this as in
the Serpent, I would not be understood to mean a natural, but a metaphorical
Rock. And such a Rock was Nabal. And to prove him to be so, I will not
divide him as I did Laban, but I will consider him in the whole, by these
properties. First by his magnitude; secondly, by his obduration; and thirdly,
by his sharp craggednesse. First, a Rock is a huge bulk of stone gathered up
to a great height, and Nabal was exceeding mighty, there is his height; and had
3000. sheep, an 1000. goats, there is his bulk. Secondly, a Rock is a hard
stony place, so that nothing can be got out of it, but by exceeding hard and
dangerous labor: and Nabal, as his name shows, was of a hard temper, for,
Bray a fool (says Solomon) in a mortar, and he will not leave his
foolishness: he thinks himself so wise that he needs not, or so rich and
potent that he cares not, or so churlish that he will not hear any
persuasions against his foolish humor. For all the persuasive arguments David
could use to draw some refreshment for himself and his men out of this Rock,
would not work upon him, but in stead of relief, like many in these days,
scorns and reviles at him in these words: Who is David? and who is the son
of Ishai? that I should give my bread, and my water, and my flesh that I have
killed for my shearers, and give it unto men whom I know not whence they be.
And yet I am persuaded he was not ignorant that God by Samuel had ordained him
to be King^ over Israel, for that was not done in a^ corner, all the Elders of
the city of Bethlehem were called to his anointing. And Abigail, Nabals wife
was confident, That God would make him a sure house. But in this Nabal was very
politic, for he did pretend that David was a rebel against the Prince, and
a^ disturber of the peace of the Commonwealth, for so much his words import,
viz. There be many servants that now adays run away from their masters. And so
much for his obduration.

Thirdly, a Rock as it is a hard stony place, so it is a steepy, craggy, and
dangerous place, either to go up, or come down, for man or horse, if it be
on the land, and in the sea if a ship lights ^n a Rock, it is surely torn in
pieces. Now I cannot tell whether Nabal was ^uch a covetous churl, that ships
rich^y laden, I mean men of great estates, were undone by him, in taking the
pre^ent forfeiture of bonds, or other pledges; I do not read that he did so
grind ^he face of the poor debtor. Bu^ it is ^laine he was very dangerous for
(...)gle ^oore men to come near: his own ^ervants could not give him a good
word in truth, for in his absence thus ^hey spoke to their mistress, Our
master ^s of such a currish, dogged, wicked disposi^ion, that no man may speak
to him but he ^^leth at them. And so much I thought good to write, to prove
Nabal a Rock. And now I am to declare how God made water to flow out of this
Rock: but as I did not describe a natural rock, so I do not mean natural
water, but metaphorical, something in the likeness of water; for as water is
welcome to a ^hirsty body, so is relief to the poor; and as water refreshes
the parched ground, so does joy and comfort the pensive spirit. In both which
respects* you shall behold water to flow out of this Rock. First, for the
water of relief, that is plain by the Text, for now David being pursued by
Saul, arose, and went down to the wilderness of Pacun, a barren place, where
being destitute of provision for himself and 600. men, struck this Rock with
the rod of his mouth, in a fair and gentle manner, by friendly and loving
salutations, thus: Both thou and thy house, and all that thou have, be in
peace, wealth, and prosperity. Behold, I have heard that thou ^ast shearers:
Now thy shepherds were with us, and we did them no hurt, neither did they
miss any thing all the while they were in Carmel: ask thy servants and they
shall show thee: wherefore let these young men find favor in thine eyes, for
we come in a good season. Give I pray whatsoever comes to thy hand unto thy
servants, and to thy son David. But no water issuing forth of this Rock, he
did intend to hew it in pieces, as appears by these words: Indeed I have kept
in vain all that this fellow had in the wilderness, so that nothing was
missed of all that pertained unto him, for he has required me evil for good:
so and more also do God unto the enemies of David, for surely I will not leave
of all that he has by the dawning of the day, any that pisseth against the
wall. And herein David was like unto Moses, for God commanded Moses but to
speak to the Rock, and he presently strikes it. But God prevented David's
striking, for before he could come to have a view of the rock, the water of
relief and refreshment, (200. cakes, and two bottles of wine, 5. sheep ready
dressed, and 5. measures of parched corn, 100. frailes of Reisons, and 200. of
figs, came purling down by a secret place of the mountain, in a fair and
lovely pipe, I mean by the means of discreet and beautiful Abigail.

Se^^ndly, for the water of comfort, mark I pray how that flowed from this
Rock. Time was when David was had in honor and reputation for his wisdom,
valor, and skill in music; so that he was praised of the women in their
songs* ^aul has slain his thousand and David h^^ ten thousand, loved of all
Israel and Judah, because he went out and in before them, and honored of S^ul
himself, though more for fear, then for love, because the Lord was with him,
and that he behaved himself more wisely then any of his servants, who promised
him his eldest daughter in marriage to be a snare unto him, but deceived him of
Merab, as Laban deceived Jacob of Rachel, yet when it was told him, that Michol
his daughter loved David, he was well pleased that he should purchase her with
the hazard of his life, yet whereas Sa^l bargained but for a hundred of the
Philistines fore-skins, David paid him two hundred, so just are the godly in all
their dealings. But he enjoyed the comfort of his dear purchase but a short
time, for then Saul's malice began to flame, and plainly to show it self* which
a long time before lay hid in the straw of dissimulation and hypocrisy, for
after that time Saul hunted after him as a Partridge on the mountains, as
himself complains, so that his soul was even parched and dried up with
grief and sorrow. Now ^^ the midst of these troubles, behold how God comforted
him, for after he ^aw that he was bereaved of Michol his ^oving wife, whom
Saul gave to Phaltiel; and after that God had slain his enemy ^^bal, who ten
days before his death ^ade a Feast like a King. Yet that is ^range, for how
could he being a churl ^s the Scripture affirms, spare so much ^ost, and come
into such a merry humor, ^s to drink himself drunk? Me thinks ^e should be
rather termed a generous Gentleman, a good fellow, and a joviall Companion. Oh
me! I have found it he as a churl for all that, for he made a ^^st like Dives,
to the rich and mighty, ^ch as himself, and was merry with ^em, to keep
himself in good reputati^ with great men of the world, but had ^ care of poor
Lazarus that was ready starve at his gate for want of clothes cover his naked,
diseased body, and bread and drink to satisfy his hungr^ and thirsty
appetite, he did not rememb(...) the afflictions of Joseph, nor the troubles ^
David, and for his servants he could o^der them well enough, so that as he live
snarling, and barking like a dog, so he dyed grumbling and grunting like a
hog and for ought I know without any repentance of his former evil life,
because it said his heart dyed within him, and became like a stone, which was
more f^ fear of the danger he was in, then for an^ remorse he had of his
sins: yet out ^ this stony hard rock God brought the water of comfort to
David in a loving beautiful and religious wife, whose nam^ Abigail signifies
the fathers joy, and ^ she became the joy, solace, and comfo^ of David's soul,
an helper in all ex(...)gents by wise and godly counsel, for David had
experence of her great godllin^ wisdom, and humility: And what gre^ter comfort
is there in this world the such a woman? Surely none. All the(...) things by a
learned pen might be fu^ther enlarged, amplified, and illustrated ^ut it is
enough for me by this, to con^^der Gods providence toward his ^hosen.

Therefore I will conclude, and pray ^ God, that it would please him to
in(...)se into my heart the graces of his holy spirit to be so qualified as
Jacob and David, viz. fervent in prayer, and hum^le in heart, sorrowful for my
sins ^s David, righteous in my actions as ^acob, loving to my enemies as
David, (...)evalent with God as Jacob; so shall not need to fear the
churlessenesse of ^abal, or malice of Laban, which is ^ one being both churles,
for read ^aban backwards its Nabal forwards, ^or the power of Esau, or envy of
Saul, and what need I to care, though Shemei ^ile, or Labans children murmr,
for have hereby learned that God can, ^d will for the support, relief and
^omfort of his children, make poyso^ous things wholesome, and bitter ^ings
sweet, turn Serpents into rods, ^d rocks and hard stony places into a ^ft and
gentle temper, as it is in the 107. Psalm. He makes the wilderness a standing
water, and water springs of a dry g^ound etc. to the end of that Psalm. And so
much I thought good to write o^ the providence of God toward his chosen.

The second part of this Discourse is like a pair of Balances, for in the one
scale, you may behold the love of Isaac toward Esau, and in the other you ^^y
see the love of Jacob toward Joseph. In the first, I will set the pride of the
world, and in the other, I shall fix the humility of the godly; so that the
light vanity of the one, and the true validity of the other may easily be
discerned. But this theme is more harde^ then the rock I last handled, and
he had need of more then a serpentine wisdom, that shall undertake to unfold
the knotty windings in such a Labyrinth. Yet because God has blessed me with
two children, I will write something in my youth which I ought to perform if
it shall please God to bless me with old age. Therefore in Isaacks love
toward Esau, I will note three things. First, what Esau was, and how Isaac
^rought him up. Secondly, what Esau ^id, and how his father approved his
^ctions; and thirdly, I will briefly declare how Esau was prevented of that ^e
sought for, and how his father retarded him. For the first, which was Esaus
minority, it cannot be thought o^herwise, but that Isaac according to his
Fathers example, did bring up his children in the fear of the Lord, and
especially him, that he thought to make Lord of his brethren, for this is the
Testimony of God concerning Abraham, I know him, that he will command his
household after him, that they keep the way ^f the Lord, to do righteousness
and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that he has spoken unto
him.

Therefore I believe that Isaac did often tell Esau and the rest of his family
that God had done: how he had created the world of nothing, how he upholds and
guides the frame thereof by his providence: how the Angels for their pride and
ambition were thrown down into hell: how Adam brough^ sin upon himself and
all his posterity: how God had promised to restore^ fallen man to his former
happiness by Christ, the seed of the woman: how his fathers lived in hope of
that promise^ a godly, righteous and sober life. And how God blessed them with
temporal blessings, and spiritual graces, for their faith and obedience. But
all those instructions would not take effect in Esau. His very name signifies,
that he sough^ more after earthly fading happiness then for spiritual and
heavenly graces for Edom signifies a piece of red earth and Esau working; and
as his name is, even so is he: for notwithstanding all the godly precepts and
religious practices of his father, whose custom was to go out into the fields
to pray and meditate on the wondrous works of God. Esau Edom was still working
in the earth, giving his mind to sensuality and pleasure, for so much his
desire after Lentill potage, and cunning hunting import: yet it may be he as
many others of his conditions made a semblance and show before his father of
godly and pious qualities, being endued with much knowledge, and could talk
prettily to his father thereof, and it may be gained the love of his father
before his brother in this respect, as well as for his activity and skill in
hunting in his youth: so that his father doted too much upon him, for this has
been the quality of many godly parents in all ages, to humor their children
too much in their youth, which they perceiving, know very well how to plot and
bring to pass their designs: for by nature mankind is more apt and prone for
the obtaining of earthly fading transitory treasure, then for heavenly,
durable, and everlasting felicity. But this natural promptitude is very hard
and difficult to discern: Isaac could not descry it in Esau, and therefore I
cease to wonder that aged people who are far inferior to Isaac in spiritual
speculation, cannot discern it in this age. Therefore leaving the education of
Es^u, I come ^o his youth, the ac^ions of Esau's life, the Text says He became
a cunning huntter, and (...) (...) Now I read in sacred W(...) before him, and
(...) after him: therefore I surmise that he as N^mrod, the mighty hunter
before the Lord, sought more after worldly honor and glory then celestial
treasure, for they are alike in many things. First in their names, N^mrod
signifies Rebellious, to note his pride, cruelty, and rebellious courses, in
erecting a Babel, whose top might reach unto heaven: for many authors affirm,
that he out of his pride and ambition spoke to the people these words, Come let
us build us a City and a Tower whose top may reach unto heaven, that we may
get us a name, lest we be scattered upon the whole earth, and so compelled
the people to hard labor, lest they being idle, should reject the tyrannical
jurisdiction which was so great, that God confounded his enterprise, and so
insufferable, that all men abhorred his insolency, so that it came into a
Proverb, when people saw proud tyrants to bear rule, to say He was as Nimrod
the mighty hunter before the Lord; agreeable hereunto is the surname of Esau,
Edom, which signifies bloody or red, to note his revengefull and bloody mind,
for after he had a long time hunted beasts, he began to hunt after the lives of
men, as appears by his threatening to kill Jacob, and by his fathers words at
the denouncing of his blessing, By thy sword shall thou live.

But as Nimrod, so Esau, for all his plotting and threatening was confounded in
his enterprise, for he was his brothers servant in posterity. Again, Nimrod
was a great and mighty King, and his Territories of a large extent, even from
Babel to the end of the earth for ought I know, because it is not specified;
and Esau was a mighty man, the Captain of four hundred men, a great company
in those days, and from him sprang many Dukes and Kings, the first that I read
of Dukes in sacred writ, as appears in his Genealogy, so it is very
conspicuous, that Esau bent all his mind for the obtaining worldly honor and
applause, yet note it further in the story, rather then he would want good
cheer to fulfill his wanton appetite, he would sell his birthright, like many
flourishing gallants in our days, that rather then they will leave their
lascivious courses in gaming, revelling, and swaggering, will make sale of all
that their parents and friends left them; for what cared Esau for his fathers
blessing, so he might fare well, and go bravely, according to the fashion of
the Country. Here I might touch the vanity of phantasticke apparel in these
days, but I know it is a thing indifferent, and thererefore pass it over, and
come to consider how Isaac liked all this, alas good man! he could not perceive
it, the love of venison had blinded his eyes. Now I would gladly know what
venison it was that Isaac loved. I read that Rebeccas savory meat was two Kids,
and for ought I know Esau launted for a Bucke or a Do, a Stag or a Hind, but
because it is not expressed in a metaphorical exposition, I surmise it was his
flattering, insinuating and colloguing disposition, for surely Isaac could not
choose but see that Esau was worldly minded, both by his habit and behavior;
but especially in the choice of his wife, whose Idolatrous and rebellious
courses were a grief of mind to him, and Rebecca, so that she complained,
that she was weary of her life for the daughters of Heth, yet Isaac for the
love of Venison (so powerful is natural affection in the heart of mankind)
called to give him the blessing of the elder brother, and forgot Jacob who had
before purchased that Birthright, of which I believe his father was not
ignorant, like many rich men in these days, that as the Proverb is, love to
have their elbows clawed, and delight to think their posterity shall flourish
in the world after their decease, care not what they give to maintain pride
and prodigality, but take little or no care at all for the poor and destitute.
In the last place, I am to show how Esau was prevented in that he intended, and
how Isaac rewarded him for his Venison: for the first, while Esau was hunting
to get savoury meat, such as his father loved; Rebecca that knew her husbands
appetite, as well as Esau, and could blind his judgment, as well as his
sight, daintily cheated him, because she loved Jacob, in whom she saw the
graces of Gods Spirit shined bright, and did believe, that he was the Son of
Promise, according as God told her at his birth, That the elder should serve
the younger; and as she perceived by his religious and godly exercises in the
course of his life, therefore she prepared savoury meat, such as she knew her
husband loved, and compelled Jacob her younger son, to present it to his
father in the name of his brother, who very fearful of a curse, rather then a
blessing, did perform her will; for he knew such cunning plotting, and
indirect means by hypocrisy, and dissimulation to accomplish their designs,
was both hateful to men, and abhomin^ble in the sight of God, yet I note it,
to show the subtilty of a woman to obtain her desires, for it is very likely
that she persuaded Isaac that Jacob was her elder son though his voice
declared the contrary.

But p^ssing by that also, I am in the last place to demonstrate what was the
reward that Esau received for his great labor in hunting. It Is plain he did
desire with Balaam to have the blessing that Jacob supplanted him in, and
sought it with tears.

But seeing be could not obtain that, he desired one blessing of his father:
and so according to his request enjoyed the fatness of the earth, and dew of
heaven from above, viz. he lived in a fertile and fruitful country, he did
not want for any earthly blessing, and was a man of great power and authority,
for from his stock came many famous Kings, as is before expressed, so that as
he hunted for worldly honor, he did enjoy it.

Now to make a conclusion of the whole matter, I should show the love of Jacob
toward Joseph, the first borne of Rachel his first love. But what should be
the reason that Jacob fixed his love more on him then all his brethren? Was it
because he brought to their father their evil sayings? No surely, for Jacob as
a godly man did not delight to hear any slanderous reports, for he knew that
tale-bearers and busy bodies in other folks matters, do set houses and
commonwealths in divisions. The Text renders the reason thus, because he begot
him in his old age, and that might very well be, for experience shows, old
folk love little children more then young do, because there is a sympathizing
affection between them, as the proverb is, An old man is twice a child. But
the reason as I conceive, why Jacob loved Joseph more then all his brethren,
was, because he saw in him a promptitude to the service of God, and divine
speculation, more then in his brethren, and that he was of a harmless,
innocent, and sweet disposition, appears plainly; for though he knew his
brethren hated him, because of their fathers love toward him; yet he loved
them, and would be telling them his dreams, for which they hated him so much
the more, which in my opinion was very improvidently done; for we ought to
avoid, and not to run headlong into danger, and this rash conversing with his
enemies, almost cost him his life: first, by putting him into a pit, and then
selling him to perpetual slavery. Yet this is, and was ever for the most part
the practice of the most zealous godly, to speak or do something at which the
worldly wise taking advantage of, bring them into great persecution and
trouble, as it was here. But what care they for such affliction, if God see it
good for them? And what cared Joseph for his brethrens spleen, so his father
noted his sayings. Now if from hence I could learn according to Salomons rule,
to train and bring up my children in the fear of the Lord in their youth,
that so they might not forget it when they be old: to bend the twig while it is
young, lest when it is grown to a tree, it be past my strength to bow or
govern, as Esau was for Jacob, Hophni and Phinehas for Eli, etc. then I should
think my self a happy man. And this is the principal reason why I spend all
this labor in looking after a discreet and virtuous woman, to help me as
well in the education of these two Infants I have, as those that it shall
please the Lord to send me by her, that so having for the duration of my
service lived as Jacob, I may likewise as he become into two bands.

Thus have I given vent to this new wine, and because it is new, some flying
lees may be found therein: but if it be well settled upon a sound judgment,
the lees will sink to the bottom, and being clearly rackt, the pure liquor
may be exercised for many profitable uses. The pure liquor, if there be any
found therein, I do humbly acknowledge is Gods work, but the filthy lees and
unwholesome dregs is mine. Let God have the praise of the good, but let me have
the blame and shame of what is ill done: so shall the glory and praise of God
be the Alpha and Omega of all my works. Therefore Oh! that God would work in
me both the will and the deed, of his own good pleasure, that it would please
him to gr^nt the desires of my heart, and request of my lips, that all men's
thoughts, words, and actions, and mine especially, may redound to the praise
and glory of God, and not for any vain applause before men, to the good and
welfare of Gods chosen, and not for any by-respects, and to the joy and comfort
of our own souls in the day of the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ in
glory, when he shall render to every one according to the works he has done
in this life: that every conscionable Saint may then hear that joyful welcome
of his Savior and Judge, Well done good and faithful servant, enter into thy
Masters joy* Which blessed happiness God in mercy grant to me, and all his
chosen, not for any merit of our own, which is nothing but damnation of soul
and body for the best good that ever we have done o^ can do. But for the
alsufficiency and meritorious sufferings of Christ Jesus in our nature here
upon earth. To whom, with his all-glorious Father, and soule-sanctifying
Spirit, three Persons, and yet but one true essential God, be ascribed by me,
and all creatures, as is most due, all honor, glory, praise, thanksgiving,
adoration, and obedience, from this time forth, and for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.
A STAR. OR, Brief and pleasant Meditations of Love.

Judge. 5. 20. The stars in their courses fought against Sisera. printer's
device of William Ley or Lee, featuring a star Stella effulget in noctu


The Proem.
Primo Die Januarii, 1640.
GReat Julius Caesar, did ordain,
Compose, and frame the Julian year,
And was the first that gave the name
Unto this day, as may appear;
And called it New-yeares day, thereby to show
How we in Virtue should begin to grow.
Now of all Virtue Love's the Queen,
Which is comprised in this Book,
And in her Liverie I am seen,
Wherefore do not disdain to look
Into this same, which is a New-yeares Gift
From a kind friend whose love does seldom shift,
Vale
Invocation.
O Holy glorious, ever loving God,
Who art the fountain, and the living spring
Of Godly Love; distill it all abroad
Into my Soul, that I from thence may bring,
Such liquor good, that I therewith may cheer
My Godly friends that are to me most dear.
O thou that art the Sun of holy Love,
Inflame my heart, by thy bright beams of light,
That I may sole delight in things above;
Let this same holy fire burn day, and night
Within my Soul; that stubble, chaff, and hay
Of hate, and envy may soon wast away.
But what am I, that dare so boldly write
Upon so holy and divine a thing?
I have no judgment or wit to indite,
O thou can water out of hard Rock bring.
Pardon my error, guide me by thy sprite,
Direct my judgment, in that I shall write, Amen.
A STAR. A brief Meditation of Gods Love in general, and in special to me.
OH what a task have I here ta^ne in hand?
Under whose weight Atlas could hardly stand;
No stout Alcides, or great Sampson strong
Were able to sustain this burden long:
Then What am I, that I should dare to write
Of the great Love o^ God, that is infinite?
I might as well, number the Oceans sand,
Count the grass piles, that grow upon the land;
Give the true sum of all the spangled stars,
Or truly show the total of our hairs;
Nay, I could sooner empty The Ocean dry
With a small spoone, then tell this mystery
Of Gods great Love to man, how should I then
With unlearned wit, and an untutr'd Pen,
Dare to set forth, even in the least degree
His Love to all, but most of all to me?
And yet, because God in his word has shown
His Love to man; and therein made it known
It is his will, that we should make relation
Of all his favors to the generation
That shall succed us, I will truly show
What I of Love out of Gods word do know.
And yet I cannot tell how to begin,
In such a Sea of Love I Am plunged in:
For whether I look on the ^arth below,
Or up to heaven God does his great Love show,
In three great streams me thinks his Love does run
Upon mankind, in t^mporall blessings some,
The Others Spiritual Grace, the third is Glory,
Oh where, or how shall I begin this story?
For, if I should of earthly blessings speak,
My Brain's too shallow, and my wit's too weak;
But much more unfit to relate a story
Of spiritual Graces, or eternal Glory;
Yet what unto my mind God has me shown
I hope he will assist me to make known:
And, first of all there comes into my mind
The wonderful creation of mankind;
And here, the Love of God did great appears
Before mankind was made a house to rear,
Like to a loving Friend unto his Guest,
He would prepare his house and s^e it dr^st,
And all things very neat for his delight,
All this to welcome an unworthy wight;
For God made earth man's footestoole, heavenly light
As a fair Canopie both day and night:
But when he was to make man's noble features,
He did not say as unto other Creatures,
Be made, and it was so; but he did call
A Council with himself, and then he all
Man's body made, and did his breath infuse.
^t upon what things speaks my unlearned Muse?
^y that desire more of this thing to know,
^armed Du-Bartas will divinely show:
^ is enough that my unlearned Pen
^ this can show Gods kindness unto men,
^d unto me, for he has well endu'de
^y mind with knowledge, his similitude
^stampt in me, my bodi's right and straight,
^d every part (though little) has its weight;
and this, by Gods great Love I do enjoy
^un many are perplexed with much annoy.
^e next great blessing that from Gods Love flows
^ preservation, as in years man grows,
^om many perils, and great dangers strange,
^ich in the universe by course do range:
^ be preserved from the disastrous storms
^ weathers tempest, which do bring great harms
^on mankind, and from the wrackfull water,
^m fiery flames, and from the banefull slaughter
^umane Creatures make, freed from War,
^m hungry famine, and Plagues deadly skarre,
^e tokens sure of Gods mere Grace and Love,
^ which sometimes he does his Children prove:
^t Gods great preservation is not all
^s Love to Man in blessings temporal.
^ he has on them providentiall care
^t only to keep safe, but to prepare
^uch earthly comforts in this present life,
^d the chief of them is a Godly wife;
Because that she the mind does help and ease,
But health and wealth the body only please,
Yet health and wealth, honor and liberty,
Are the rare gifts of Gods benignity:
So are good friends a comfortable stay
Unto a poor man, in an honest way.
And all these favors God has given me,
For which I never can too thankful be.
For first, when I was naked, weak, and poor,
And by my Parents turned out of door:
There did the Lord of me take care and charge,
And out of misery did me enlarge
And brought me in a comfortable place,
Where I did first begin to long for Grace.
Yet there, three years I followed vain play,
But at the last I did break off that way
And went about a new work to upreare,
But in the same I was scant half a year;
And I no sooner came to know the parts
Of Latin Language, the true grounds of Arts
For me the Lord a Master did provide,
With whom this sixteen year I did abide,
Yet many times I did occasion sind
To search and try what was hid in his mind;
But when by all the means I could devise,
I could not bring to pass mine enterprise,
Yet still imploide to rub, to scrape, and sweep,
And so for six years space he did me keep;
I gave him just offense; and fled away
But there it was not Gods will I should stay.
Then after nine years with him was spent out,
I did begin again, to look about
For some provision, of which I had hope
For to obtain, whereto I bent my scope,
And so by prayer, entreaty, and persuasion
God did even bend, and bow Wills inclination
(By Aexholmes accident, and french affairs,
By bodies grievance, and some other cares)
Yo do some good, for me, and my kind mate,
Whom God has taken from this mortal state:
Here did appear the wondrous work of God;
In turning of the Serpent to a Rod:
Now had I brains, or wit I could well show
How God made water from the Rock to flow:
For humbly I confess by his kind favor,
And Gods blessing on my poor endeavor,
I got provision for my loving mate,
My self, and children in contented state,
And still enjoy the blessings of this life
As health, and wealth, I only want a wife,
Of whom I hope I should much comfort find
To ease and give relief my troubled mind;
But I am like a Mole hid in hard earth,
If once go^ in, I hardly can get forth:
Therefore to God with winged prayer I'lesly,
That he would raise my mind to things on high*
Oh Lord do thou infuse into my mind
Such sacred wit, that I thy Love may find
That Is spiritual, but this is Infinite;
There Is no man able to descry that light,
Then how shall I, that am an unlearned wight?
Yet what learned men from Gods word has reve^
I may as well declare as keep conceild,
Especially if it be to make a story.
Of Gods eternal Mercy, Love, and Glory,
Therefore seeing that my unlearned quill
Has thus begun, it shall continue still
This Love to show, by the assisting might
Of God, who out of darkness can bring light.
And first of all there is great manifestation
Of Gods great Love, in man's predestination;
That he should Esau hate, and Jacob Love,
It only came of mercy from above,
But against Charybdis and Caphorian Rock,
My shallow vessel I mean not to knock:
But longst the shore with sails of faith I Will coast
My Star the Bible, Steer-man the holy Ghost
For I too bold, will not ask how or why
God has ordained thus man's destiny:
For me, It Is enough, to know that my estate
Is firm in Christ, else I am reprobate.
But secondly, in our sacred vocation,
Of Gods great love, there is clearer demonstration;
For was it not great Love, in God, to choose
From other Nations the unthankefull Jews?
To give them Laws, Statutes, and Sacraments
Of future Blessings, and to show the events
Of the Messiah, by Prophets inspiration?
But it is a greater happiness unto our Nation,
That we are free from the whores woeful wrack,
That unto error we have turned our back,
That God has brought us into wondrous light,
That of his Gospel we have the clear sight,
That we suck nourishment from sacred Writ,
That we enjoy such special benefit
As are the Sacraments, and word of God
In peace, and joy free from the afflicting Ro^
Of Gods just wrath; but whither do I go
^have much more of Gods great Love to s(...),
In the Redemption of sinful mankind,
But how, or which way shall I bend my mind*
The wondrous Love of God, therein, to show
How to begin, or end, I do not know.
Wast not great Love that God became a man,
That that Infinite should be within a span,
That Deity, should become flesh and bone,
This cannot by a mortal man be shown,
^et it is true, God did descend from high
And took on him sinful man's misery.
His Birth was rare, his life was mean and poor,
And in his body all man's sins he bore:
But oh! what greater Love can there be shown
Then for a friends life to lay down his own:
(...) this did Christ, sinful man's debt to pay*
His Fathers wrath, and ^^^ry ^o allay?
And by his death, he did full well expel*
The power of sin, and the dread pains of hell;
If I could write of all the wondrous Asts
Of Christ our Savior, and his noble facts,
I then should want both Paper, Pen, and Ink
To utter that which my poor heart does think:
I am not able fully to relate
The rare example of his earthly state:
Oh! how shall I then into heaven fly,
There to behold this lorious mystery?
How that he rose from death I cannot show,
But how he did ascend, I feign would know,
For I was borne upon Ascension day,
Therefore to follow him I daily pray;
But there is such Plumets tied unto my h^ele
That draws me backward, that I cannot feel
His Godly motions, yet his love I find
Deeply ingraved in my sinful mind:
I did intend to write of faith in Christ,
How thereby justified, how that did consist
In free forgiveness of our former crimes
To live more Godly, in the after times:
Then, did I purpose for to make relation,
How for to know our free justification,
Not by man's works, but by the holy Ghost
Inspiring saving faith; but I almost
In this most sacred Theme, my self had lost;
Then how wee're justifi'de, therein to show
What Graces in Repentance Garden grow:
How in the heart springs sorrowful Contrition;
How in the lips does sprout humble Confession,
How satisfaction from the hands d^ flow
To them we wronged, Rep^^^ance true to show
How we should die to sin, and live to God,
But in this Theme I make too long abode.
Yet not too long, but that my Wit's unable,
My Brain's too shallow, and my self unstable;
Therefore i will leave it unto all Divines,
That in such things should spend their pains and times:
For ^ have small skill in me to reveal
The Love of God which I must needs conceile,
For that bright glory, I cannot express;
It is encit^h, that my we^ke shallowness
Can only think of that same mighty power
Which is prepared in that heavenly Bower;
For to describe it, fully, any man
By pen and ink never be able can,
Therefore ^^e draw a v^il^ before mine eyes,
Not d^ring to behold such mysteri^s
Which is so great, the like never eye saw
This well is deep, I have no pale to draw;
Ear h(...)h not hard, nor the heart understood
What God prepara'hath, for his childrens good,
How, as his earthly Globe does f^r surpass
In beauty and a^lights that darkesome place
Of our Nativity, so, heavenly bliss
Does far ^urmount all that in this world is.
How mortal bodies subjest to corruption,
Shall Be immortal without interruption:
How that the soul shall be filled with the sight
Of God, and Saints, in that Celestial light;
And there I hope for to behold my wife,
For here she lived a Godly quiet life.
Oh* here is Love past all man's apprehension,
And therefore far beyond my dull invention.
Therefore I Will cease in this discourse and pray,
That God may keep me in a virtuous way;
That I in God may comprehended be,
For I Am not able to hold him in me.
Yet why thus say I, if I living be,
I truly dwell in God, and he in me:
For God is Love, and he that dwells in Love
Does dwell in God; but this is far above
My apprehension, fully to relate,
The rare conjunction of this hapy state.
Oh* Lord I pray thee, send thy Love in me
That I again may return mine to thee,
Then shall I praise thee, with a thankful heart,
When thou thy Love, thus to me does impart:
Now I Will conclude with praise unto thy might,
For thus inabling my weak hand to write.
Soli Deo Honor and Gloria
A brief Meditation of Man's Love.
LOve is a Passion of the heart seated in the affections, and called by the
Philosophers A menta^^ virtue; because it is a longing desire of the mind to
be united to the beloved object. There are three kinds or species of Love. The
first is divine, spiritual, and heavenly. The second is carnal, earthly, and
sinful. The third is humane, civil, and natural. The first love is pious,
and only makes happy. The second is sinful, and only makes miserable. The
third is virtuous, and commendable. The first love, is proper to the pious
Religious man. The second, is proper to the sinful wicked man. The third, is
proper to the civil honest man.

Thus Love may be compared to water conveied from the fountain of the heart in
these three pipes; first, if we consider this liquor running in the first
channel, then we shall find it to be pure, clear, and the only saving
water of life: In whose heart soever this divine, spiritual and heavenly
liquor springs, shall never thirst, but rests always satisfied; in prospe^^ty
^^ is ^^mper^te and humble, and in adversity he is patient and meek; in what
state of life soever he is in, he is therewith content: He is in this world,
but is not of this world: He uses the things of this life, as though he used
them not; his delight is in grace and goodness, and all evil ways he utterly
abhorres; for although he walks upon the earth, his conversation is in
heaven; he is truly a heavenly minded man, he really fulfilleth the
commandments of the first Table in the Decalogue, he loves the Lord with all
his heart, with all his mind, and with all his strength; nothing is so
comfortable to him as the favor of God, nothing so fearful as his
displeasure, nothing so desirable as grace, and nothing so ha^efull as sin,
while the ship of his soul does sail upon the troublesome waves of this
miserable world: no storm of persecution can stay or hinder his heavenly
course of godliness, till it arive at the haven of eternal happiness:
because the anchor of this ship is a steadfast hope cast upon the firm rock
Christ Jesus; her cables are a strong confidence fast bound to the maine mast
of a lively, saving and justifying faith, her lading is no vain merchandise or
trumperies, but rare jewels, and cost^y ornaments, even the rich treasury of
the graces of Gods Spirit. The Pilot is the word of God which at the last will
guide her to the desired haven. This man wa^kes upon the earth as a stranger
and pilgrim. The world is but his Inn, wherein he lodging for a night,
departs in the morning; Heaven is his Country, there rests his love, there
lies his treasure, there is his heart; here he has many enemies, the lust of
the flesh, lust of the eyes, and pride of life. The world, the flesh and the
Devil, against these he is strongly armed with the whole armor of God, for
the defense of the head, the helmet of salvation, for the defense of the heart;
the brestplate of righteousness for the loins, the girdle of verity; for the
safeguard of the feet, shoos of the preparation of the Gospel of peace, and
^or the defense of the whole man, the shield of faith, wherewith he quenches
all the fiery darts of Satan's suggestions, blunteth the edge of the worlds
allurements, and dulleth the heat of fleshly temptations; his offensive weapon
is only the sword of the Spirit, which he cunningly using cutteth off all
sin, for the word of God is lively, and mighty in operation, sharper then any
two edged sword, for it cutteth through even to the dividing assunder of the
soul, and the spirit, and of the joints* and the marrow: It is an axe with
which the whole tree of sin, with his forbidden fruit is hewn down with
these weapons, the man that is inflamed with the love of God, will trample upon
the flesh, despise and contemn the world, resist the Devil; and at the day of
death by the assisting grace of his Captain Christ Jesus, will conquer and
overcome sin, death and hell, and be carried by the Angels of God into
heaven, the place of happiness, where he shall hold a perpetual feast, sing
an everlasting song, wear an incorruptible Crown, possess an eternal
Inheritance, and fully enjoy his love, with endless joy, content and rest.

Secondly, if we consider this liquor running in the second current, then we
shall find it to be muddy, foul, loathsome, and the only poisonous and
soulkilling water, in whose heart soever this carnal, earthly, and sinful
liquor springs, shall ever thirst, and never be satisfied: he is in every thing
contrary to the former lover, he is never contented with his estate: In
prosperity he is proud, presumptuous, and cruel; and in adversity he is
desperate, fretfull, and envious. His mind is only upon earth, and fading
transitory riches: he cares for no heavenly grace, so he may have carnal
pleasure: he takes no care for his soul, but all his care is to pamper his
body: he accounts the godly simple fools, and esteems them as the
off-scowring among the people: he boasts himself in the multitude of his
riches, and solaceth himself in his pleasures: he thinks he shall live for
ever upon e^^th, and puts the day of death a farr^ off: he ca^eth not by what
means he gets ^is riches, so he may go bravely, and fare deliciously
every day. Thus the lover of carnal and fl^shly delights will not fear to
commit adultery, gluttony, drunkenness, etc. fulfill the desire or lust of the
flesh. And thus the l^ver of the world will venture to comm^t cove^ousnesse,
oppression, cruelty, etc. to fulfill and satisfy the lust of the eyes, and
pride of li^e. The man that is inflamed with this love, lives upon ^he earth
as a Citizen in his own C(...) and (...) the world dandleth (...) child^,
(...)ding his desire with rich^^ (...): (...) flesh p^mpere^h him as (...),
^^eding his desire with pl^^sure and d^l(...); and the Devil fostereth him as
his father, by persuading him that he is in a happy condition, yet he is in
subjection to the world, a servant to the flesh, and a slave to the devil.
Thus he lives in seeming happiness, and dies in real misery, and or one drop
of the shadow of comfort, loses an Ocean of true consolation.

Thirdly and lastly, if we look upon this liquor running in the third pipe,
we shall find it to be clean good, and wholesome wa^er. I^ whose heart soever
this humane ^vi^l, and natural liquor springs, may rest satisfied for a time,
but this cannot give the heart any true content, except it proceed from the
first love, which in a good Christian are never separate: for he that truly
loves God, will love his brother also; but he that has not this charitable
love, for so we may term it, cannot have the first love, as the Apostle
testifies, saying, If any man says he loves God and hates his brother, he
is a liar; for how can he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, love
God whom he has not seen? Yet this love may be without the first, as
appears in diverse of the Heathen Philosophers, who have exceeded many
Christians in moral virtues, yet were without the divine, spiritual, and
heavenly love, for they did not know God, nor the mystery of godliness: and
therefore had no faith, and consequently could not have the first love, which
proceeds from faith. The man that is inflamed with this love, does really
fulfill the commandments of the second Table in the moral Law; he loves his
neighbor as himself, this is a true charitable man; he has dispersed abroad
and given to the poor, he does much good in the world, he relieves the needy,
helps the oppressed, feeds the hungry, instructs the ignorant, comforts the
comfortless, etc. he lays for himself here a good foundation by good works,
and shall at the last receive the reward of his labor, if he faint not. This
love does in large it self into three several species or pipes. In the first
runs that humane love wherewith we love all mankind, as they are men of one
common nature with us. In the second runs that civil love wherewith we love
our own Country and Nation, as they are men brought up under one civil
government in Laws and Religion with us: and in the third pipe runs that
natural love wherewith we love our kindred or friends as they are of the
blood, or to whom we are bound by some special obligation of amity. To let
the humane and civil love run out as men are pleased to convey it forth from
the fountain of their heart, I will only fix my meditations upon this
natural love, and of that I will not write any thing of the love of parents to
their children, or brother to brother, etc. although I know their love may be
very great. But I will only insist to write what that natural love is
wherewith a man is affected to a woman. And herein I would not be understood
to mean that lustful love which is commonly covered under this title,
although experience shows that it is very powerful in whose heart soever it
is kindled, and is a raging passion, as all love is, if it be not kept in, as
fire within the chimny, and the sea within his bounds: It is a foolish
madness, a labyrinth of error, and a miserable thraldom before it can be
obtained. But if the lover does fulfill his desire, what has he got but a
rack to his mind, a torture to his soul, a gibbet to his conscience, a
stain to his reputation, and a pleasing, yet fatal poison. This breeds a
consumption in his purse, rottenness in his bones, and a blot in his good
name. But if this love be in the lawful way of marriage, as this kind is
seldom to that effect, then if the lover does make his choice only for the
beauty of the body, without any respect to the qualities of the mind, he may
find one that may please his eye, but commonly she proves a wanton Hellen or a
traiterous Dallila, one that will consume his wealth, and work his
destruction: or else such a one that will make him a scoffing stock to the
world, by cunning planting upon his head Acteons livery. Thus for pleasure he
gets misery, and for a beautiful outside embraces a snake in his bosom,
poison in his meat, and gall in his drink. Again, I would not be understood
to mean that covetous desire which is also commonly clothed with this title,
and in these days chiefly embraced, when a man does only choose a wife for
riches, although he cannot like her person, much less love her. Such may meet
with one that may fulfill his desire with wealth, but commonly she proves a
scolding Xantippe, one that will be always scolding, railing, and taunting
him, and with whom he shall never live one quiet hour. Thus for a little
wealth he is always pinched with a strait shoe, lives in continual vexation,
and at the last is forced to leave her, because he cannot live quietly with
her. But this is not the love which I purpose to describe, for this is carnal,
earthly, and sinful, but the other is natural, honest, and commendable, which
is an honest desire of the mind to be joined to a woman, not so much for her
outward perfections, as for her inward virtues; not only for her wealth, but
for the love of her person, so it goes equally between these two, and exceeds
in neither, for it is grounded upon the true causes for which matrimony was
ordained, viz. for the prevention of sin, for the mutual society, comfort,
aid, assistance, counsel, and advice of a discreet, virtuous, and loving
companion, in all exigents; and to be careful in the bringing up or education
of their children in the fear of God, that they prove not curses rather then
blessings. I did consider all the kinds of love in the metaphor of water, I
will now turn the phrase, and write of this in the metaphor of fire. Indeed
the pious love which was the first, and the charitable love which was the last,
may very well be compared unto water, which is of a heavy nature, for it runs
very slowly in the hearts of the children of men, and cannot be drawn out of
the fountain of the heart without great force, and strong pumping: the reason
is because it does not spring there, for it is infused by the Spirit of God.
But* the other love, which is carnal, earthly, and sinful, does flow from
thence in great abundance, because it naturally springs there, and may better
be compared to fire, which is of a light nature, for wickedness burns as a
fire, which will consume both body and soul, if it be not prevented by
repentance. So also this natural love burns as a fire in an honest heart,
which is infused by a divine power, and not by our own corrupt reason or
judgment. Now as fire I will consider it in 4. things: in its smoke, or
manifestation; in its fire, or augmentation; in its flame, or confirmation; and
in its ashes, or consummation. First, consider this fire of true love in its
smoke: it is a common proverb, Where there is smoke there is fire; so where
there are apparent manifestations of love, there is love. The signs of love
are these, in the tongue, delightful speeches; in the eyes, amorous looks; in
the countenance, modest bashfulnesse; in the hands, liberal presents; and in
the face, active nimblenesse to obtain the beloved object. But if this love
goes no further, then it is easily quenched with a drop of the water of
rejection, or trod out with the foot of disdain.

But in the second place, if fuel be added to this fire, viz. if there be a
mutual and sympathizing affection between the lover and his love, then it
burns mightily, and shows it self to be true love; then the lover with his
love ha^h but one heart, though two bodies. The lover is even molded into the
substance of his love. If it come to this height, no water of adversity can
quench it, or wind o^ peoples tongues blow it out: the fear of pove^ty, the
persuasions of friends, the allurements of riches, or the in^i^ements of
pleasures, cannot move, much les^e rem^ve it. There is no way to extingu^sh
this fi^e, but to take away the fuel, and then it dies: But the place will be
s^ene where it has been, the heart will grieve, the eye weep, etc. to think
how foolishly passionate he has been, and for the time to come, the lover
will learn to be more wary in his choice.

But in the third place, if this fire continues still burning, that it comes to
flame, if it continue to be confi^med, either by a real contract before God
and their own conscience, which is commendable: for we read that Joseph and
Mary were thus contracted before they were married. And it is grounded upon
this reason, to breed in them a longing desire ^o enjoy the fruition of their
hopes; or by public ceremony of the Church before men, for there is little
difference between these, in effect they are all one. But it is very fit every
thing amongst Christians should be done in decent order, and not like bruit
beasts, or the heathen that know not God: then there is no putting of it out,
not all the fa^re pretenses in the world can salve such a breach, and they
themselves shall find it to be a clog to their conscience, a burden to their
ears, and a web in their eyes, to think of, hear, or see the beloved party.
To violate faith and troth in this kind especially, is a thing odious in the
sight of God, abominable in the sight of men, and a most intolerable vexation
to themselves. Oh! let all honest people take heed lest they make shipwreck of
faith and a good conscience.

Fourthly and lastly* if this flaming fire goes not out, but continues in its
bright luster, till the fuel be quite consumed, viz. till death depart: the
ashes that is left behind is the rare example of virtuous love and mutual
society: like that of the Turtle with his mate.

Thus have I briefly declared the power of man's love, I pray God grant I may
embrace the best, and cast the worst from me, so I shall be truly happy.

Amen.
FINIS.

