HEAVEN ON EARTH; OR A Serious Discourse touching a wel-grounded ASSURANCE of
Men's Everlasting Happiness and Blessedness.

Discovering the Nature of Assurance, the possibility of attaining it, the
Causes, Springs, and Degrees of it, with the resolution of several weighty
Questions.

By THOMAS BROOKS, Preacher of the Gospel at Margarets Fishstreet-Hill.

That their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto
all riches of the full Assurance of understanding, Col. 2. 2. Qui fidei suae
sensum in cord habet, hic scit Christum Iesum in se esse. Ambros. 2 ad
Corinth. c. 13. 5. London, Printed by R. I. for John Hancock, and are to be
sold at the first Shop in Pope's Head Alley in Cornhill. 1654.

Mr. Brooks on Assurance.

To the Right Honorable The Generals of the Fleets OF THE Commonwealth of
England, And to those Gallant Worthies (my much Honored Friends) who with the
Noble Generals have deeply jeoparded their Lives unto many deaths upon the
Seas, out of love to their Countries good, and out of respect to the Interest
of Christ, and the faithful people of this Commonwealth, Such Honor and
Happiness as is promised to all that Love and Honor the Lord Jesus.
Renowned Sirs,
THe better any thing is, the more communicative it will be, for bonum est sui
communicativum. There are two sorts of goods, ^here are Bona Throni, and there
are Bona Scabelli, Goods of the Throne, as God, Christ, Grace, Assurance, etc.
Nihil bonum sine summo bono. Aug* Nothing is good, without the chiefest good.
Omne bonum in summo bono, All good is in the chiefest good.
And Goods of the Footstool, as Honors, Riches, etc. A man may have enough of
the goods of the Footstool to sink him, but he can never have enough to
satisfy him. Man's Happiness and Blessedness, his Felicity and Glory, lies in
his possessing the Goods of the Throne, which that you may, I humbly desire you
seriously to view over the ensuing Treatise.

It was an excellent saying of Lew is of Bavyer, Emperor of Germany, Hujusmodi
comparandae sunt opes, quae cum naufragio simul enatent: Such goods are worth
getting and owning, as will not sink, nor wash away, if a shipwreck happen, but
will wade and swim out with us. Such are the goods that are here presented in
this following Discourse; in all storms, tempests, and shipwracks, they will
abide with the Soul, they will walk and lie down with the Soul, yea, they will
to the Grave* to Heaven, with the Soul, they will in the greatest storms be an
Ark to the Soul. I have observed in some A Philosopher could say in d^nger of
shipwreck in a ligh* starry night, Surely I shall not perish, there are so many
eyes of providence ^ver me. But these had neither so much faith nor courage,
these men of might had lost their hands and hearts. Psa 76. 5. vide.
terrible storms that I have been in, that the Mariners and the Passengers want
of Assurance, and of those other Pearls of price that in this Treatise are
prepresented to public view, has caused their countenance to change, their
hearts to melt; it has made them to stagger and reel to and fro like drunken
men, like men at their wits ends; whereas others that have had Assurance, and
their pardon in their bosoms, etc. have bore up bravely, and slept quietly, and
walked cheerfully, and practically have said as Alexander once did, when he was
in a great danger, Now (says he) here is a danger fit for the spirit of
Alexander to encounter withal; so they now here are storms and dangers fit for
assured, pardoned Souls to encounter withal, etc.

Gentlemen, This following Discourse I do not present to you as a thing that
needs your protection, for Veritas stat in aperto campo, truth stands in the
open Fields, I, and it will make the lovers of it to stand, triumph, and
overcome, Magna est veritas and valebit, Great is truth, and shall prevail:
but, upon these following grounds, I tender it to you.

First, You have honored the Almighty by helping him against the high and
mighty, and he has honored you, by owning of you, by standing by 1 Samuel 2. 30.
As it was sa^d of Caes^r, that while here* stored the Statue of Pompey, he
estab^ished his own; so while men honor God, they preserve their own.
you, by acting for you, and by making of you prosperous and victorious (over a
near enemy, a powerful enemy, an enraged enemy, a resolved enemy, a subtle
enemy, a prepared enemy, a lofty enemy) and therefore I cannot but desire to
honor you by dedicating the following Treatise to the service of your Souls.

Secondly, Because you are my Magnes amo^is, amor, Love is the load^^o^e of
love, and therefore he said right, Si vis ama i, ama, if th^n wilt love, thou
shall be loved.
Friends, and that cordial love and friendship which I have found from you has
stamped in my affections a very high valuation of you. The Ancients painted
Friendship a fair young man bare headed, in a poor garment, at the bottom
whereof was written Life and Death, in the upper part Summer and Winter, his
bosom was open, so that his heart might be seen, whereupon was written long,
prope, a Friend at hand, and a far off. Verily your undeserved love and
respects have made me willing to open my bosom to you in this Epistle, and in
the following Treatise, as to Friends that I love and honor. When one came to
Alexander and desired him that he might see his Treasure, he bid one of his
servants take him, and show him, not (...) his Money, but (...) his Friends. It
seems he put a higher value Secrates preferred the Kings countenance above his
coin.
upon them, then he did upon all the wealth which he had. Faithful Friends are
an unvaluable Treasure, and the rarity of them does much inhaunce the price of
them.

Thirdly, Because of its exceeding usefulness and suitableness to your
conditions. I have been some years at Sea, and through Grace I can say, that I
would not exchange my Sea Experiences Psalm. 107. 24. It is between Christian
and Christian, as between two Lute strings that are tuned one to another; no
sooner one is struck, but the other trembles.
for Englands Riches; I am not altogether ignorant of the troubles, trials,
temptations, dangers, and deaths, that do attend you: And therefore I have been
the more stirred in my spirit to present the following Discourse to you,
wherein is discovered the nature of Assurance, the possibility of attaining
Assurance, the causes, springs, degrees, excellencies, and properties of
Assurance; also the special seasons and times of Gods giving Assurance, with
the resolution of several weighty Questions touching Assurance; further, in
this Treatise, as in a glass, you may see these ten special things, clearly and
fully opened and manifested.

1. What Knowledge that is that accompanies Salvation.

2. What Faith that is that accompanies Salvation.

3. What Repentance that is that accompanies Salvation.

4. What Obedience that is that accompanies Salvation*

5. What Love that is that accompanies Salvation.

6. What Prayer that is that accompanies Salvation.

7. What Perseverance that is that accompanies.

8. What Hope that is that accompanies Salvation.

9. The difference between true Assurance, and that which is counterfeit.

10. The wide difference there is between the witness of the Spirit, and the
hissing of the old Serpent.

Gentlemen and Friends, you have Say with that famous Painter Zeux^s,
Aeternitati pingo, I paint for eternity, I provide for eternity. Eternity is
that unum perpetuum body, that one perpetual day.
your lives in your hands, there is but a short step between you and eternity,
I would fain have you all happy for ever; to that purpose, I humbly beseech you
spare so much time (from your many great and weighty occasions) as to read this
Treatise, that in all humility I lay at your feet, and follow this counsel that
in all love and faithfulness I shall now give unto you. For my design in all is
your happiness here, and your blessedness hereafter.

First, Get and keep Communion Communion with God will make a man as courageous
and bold as a Lion, yea, as a young Lion that is in his hot blood, and fearless
of any creature, Prove. 28. 1. (...) Now the proverb is ( Tutiores C^rvi duce
Leone, quam Leones duce Cervo) it is more likely that Hearts will get victory
with a ^yon to their leader, then Lions with a leading Heart, Joshua, Captain of
the Lords battles must be of a Lion like courage, and what will make them so,
but communion with God? It was the saying of the old Earl of Essex, That he was
never afraid to fight but when he was conscious of some sin with which he had
provoked God, and left communion with God.
with God; your strength to stand, and your strength to withstand all assaults,
is from your Communion with God. Communion with God is that that will make you
stand fast and triumph over all enemies, difficulties, dangers, and deaths.
While Sampson kept his Communion with God, no enemy could stand before him, he
goes on conquering and to conquer, he lays heaps upon heaps; but when he was
fallen in his Communion with God, he falls presently, easily, and sadly before
his enemies. So long as David kept up his Communion with God, no enemies could
stand before him; but when he was fallen in his Communion with God, he flies
before the son of his bowels. Job keeps up his Communion with God, and conquers
Satan upon the Dunghill; Adam loses his Communion with God, and falls before
Satan in Paradise. Communion is the result of Union, Communion is a reciprocal
exchange between Christ and a gracious Soul; Communion is Jacobs Ladder, where
you have Christ sweetly descending down into the Soul, and the soul by divine
influences sweetly ascending up to Christ; Communion with God is a Shield upon
Land, and an Anchor at Sea; it is a sword to defend you, and a staff to support
you; it is balm to heal you, and a cordial to strengthen you; high Communion
with Christ will yield you two heavens, a heaven upon earth, and a heaven after
death; He injoyes nothing that wants Communion with God, he wants nothing that
injoys communion with God; therefore above all gettings get Communion with
Christ, and above all keepings keep Communion with Christ; all other losses are
not comparable to the loss of Communion with Christ; he that has lost his
Communion has lost his Comfort, his strength, his all, and it will not be long
before the Philistims take him and put out his eyes, and bind him with fetters
of brass, and make him grind in a prison, as they did Sampson, Judge. 16. 20, 21.

Secondly, Make a speedy and a through Bonus servatius facit bonum bonifacium.
improvement of all opportunities of grace and mercy, sleep not in Harvest
time; trifle not away your Market hours, your golden seasons, you have much
work to do in a short time; you have Petrach tells of one who being invited
to dinner the next day, answered, Ego a multis a^nis crastinum non habui, I
have not had a morrow for this many years.
a God to honor, a Christ to rest on, a Race to run, a Crown to win, a Hell to
escape, a Heaven to obtain; you have weak Graces to strengthen, and strong
Corruptions to weaken; you have many Temptations to withstand, and Afflictions
to bear; you have many Mercies to improve, and many Services to perform, etc.
Therefore take hold on all opportunities and advantages, whereby you may be
strengthened and bettered in your noble Heb. 3-7, 8 A man, faith Luther, lives
forty years before he knows himself a fool, and by that time he sees his folly*
his life is ended, etc.
part. Take heed of crying cras, cras, tomorrow, tomorrow, when God says, to
day if you will hear my voice harden not your hearts. Manna must be gathered in
the morning, and the orient pearl is generated of the morning dew. It is a
very sad thing for a man to begin to die, before he begins to live. He that
neglects a golden opportunity does but create to himself a great deal of
misery, as Saul, and many others, have found by sad experience. He that would
to the purpose do a good action, must not neglect his season. The men of
Issachar were 1 Chronicles. 12. 32
famous in David's account for wisdom, because they acted seasonably and
opportunely. God will repute and write that man a wise man, who knows and
observes his seasons of doing. Such there have been, who, by giving a glass of
water opportunely, have obtained a Kingdom, as you may see in the story of
Thaumastus and King Agrippa. Bernard.
Time, says one, were a good commodity It was the commendations of blessed
Hooper that he was spare of diet, sparer of words, and sparest of time,
in hell, and the traffic of it most gainful, where for one day a man would
give ten thousand worlds if he had them. One passing through the streets of
Rome, and seeing many of the women playing and delighting themselves with
Monkies and Baboons, and such like things, asked whether they had no children
to play and delight themselves with? So when men triffle away their precious
time, and golden opportunities, playing, and toying with this vanity, and that,
we may ask, whether these men have no God, no Christ, no Scripture, no
Promises, no Blessed Experiences, no hopes of Heavens glories to delight and
entertain themselves with? Certainly, we should not reckon any time into the
account of our lives, but that which we carefully pass, and well spend, seeing
the Heathen could say, ( Diu fuit, non diu vixit) He was long, D^mascen.
he did not live long. I have read of one Blessed Bradford the Martyr, counted
that hour lost wherein he did not some good with his Tongue, Pen, or Purse.
Barlaam, who being asked, How old he was? answered, Five and forty years old,
to whom Josaphah replied, Thou seem to be seventy: Truth (says he) if you
reckon ever since I was born, but I count not those years that were spent in
vanity.

Most men spend the greatest part of their time about things that are by the
by, that are of little or no value; as And Solomon the great Turk spent his
time in making of notches of Horn for Bow^.
Domitian the Roman Emperor spent his time in stabbing of Flies; and Artaxerxes
spent his time in making Hefts for Knives; and Archimedes spent his time in
drawing lines on the ground, when that famous City Syracuse was taken; and
Myrmecides spent more time to make a Be, then some men do to build a house.

Sirs, I beseech you remember that it was Cato, a Heathen, that said, That
Chilo one of the seven Sages being asked, What was the hardest thing in the
world to be done? Answered, To use and employ a man's time well. Alexander the
Great gave him a check, and not a reward, that boasted that he could throw a
Pease at a great distance upon the point of a Needle. Ah how will God at last
check those that spend their precious* time, as it were with throwing Pease
upon the point of a Needle?
account must be given, not only of our labor, but also of our leisure; and in
affirming this, he affirms no more then what the Scripture speaks. But O what a
sad account then have some to make? Well, as Cleopatra said to Mark Anthony, It
is not for you to be fishing for Gugeons, but for Towns, Forts, and Castles: So
say I, Right Honorable, and Beloved, It is not for you to spend your time about
poor low contemptible things, but about those high and noble things that make
most for the interest of Christ, and the good of your Country. It was Titus, a
Pagan Emperor, that uttered this memorable and praiseworthy Apothegm ( Amici,
diem perdidi,) my Friends, I have lost a day, when he had spent it in company
without doing good. The Egyptians drew the Picture of Time with three Heads, to
represent the three differences, The first of a greedy Wolf gaping, for time
past, because it has ravenously devoured even the memory of so many things
past recalling: The second, of a crowned Lion roaring, for time present;
because it has the principality of all action for which it calls aloud: The
third, of a deceitful Dog fawning, for time to come; because it feeds fond men
with many flattering hopes to their own undoing. I have read of a man, who upon
his dying bed would have given a world for time, he still crying out day and
night, call time again, call time again; So a great Lady of this land on her
death bed cried out, time, time, a world of wealth for an inch of time. One
Hermanus a great Courtier in the Kingdom of Bohemia, being at point of death,
did most lamentably Lamacus a Commander said to his offending Soldier, non
licet in bello bis peccare, no man must offend twice in war; So God sometimes
will not suffer men again and again to neglect the day of grace.
cry out, That he had spent more time in the Palace then in the Temple, and
that he had added to the riotousness and vices of the Court, which he should
have sought to have reformed, and so dyed to the horror of those that were
about him. I have been the longer upon this, because I have been a sad
Spactator of men's mispending their time, and trifling away golden
opportunities, at Sea as well as at Land, and though I thus speak (knowing that
this Treatise will come into other hands besides your own) yet I hope better
things of Heb. 6. 8, 9.
you, to whom I dedicate it, even such as do accompany salvation.

Thirdly, Take no Truths upon trust, but all upon trial, 1 John 4. 10.
Beloved, (...) Satan may more easily disturb the truth, then subvert it. Aug.
believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God; because
many false Prophets are gone out into the world. This age is very full of
Impostors, therefore try the spirits, as Lapidaries do their stones, or as
Goldsmiths do their metals; a Bristol stone may look as well as an Indian
Diamond, and many things glister besides gold. It was the glorious
commendations of the Bereans, That they searche^ Acts 17. 10, 11 (...) better
born and bred, of a more noble disposition. They were more Noble, not by civil
descent, but by spiritual advancemet.
the Scriptures daily whether those things that Paul and Silas had delivered
were so, and this act of theirs made them more Noble, then those of
Thessalonica. Christian Nobility is the best and truest, where God himself is
the top of the Kin, and Religion the root, in regard whereof, all other things
are but shadows and shapes of nobleness. A Father that had three Sons was
desirous to try their discretions, which he did by giving to each of them an
Apple, that had some part of it rotten: The first eats up his rotten and all;
the second throws all his away, because some part of it was rotten; the third
picks out the rotten, and eats that which was good; the third was the wisest.
Some in these days swallow down every thing, rotten and sound together; others
throw away all Truth, because every thing that is presented to them, is not
truth; but surely they are the wisest that know Isai. 7. 15.
how to choose the good, and refuse the evil.

You must not with Pythagoras Amicus Socrates, amicus Plato, Amicior veritas,
Socrates is my Friend, and ^lato is my Friend, but above all, Truth is my
Friend.
Scholars, magnify the ( Ipse dixerit) of the greatest Clerks, especially in
those things that are of eternal concernment to your Souls. You will try, and
tell, and weigh Gold after your Fathers; deal so by the Truth you hear, and let
no man bind you to believe with Anaxagoras, that Snow is black. Truth, says
Basil, is hard to be taken by hunting, and must be found out by a narrow
observing of her footsteps on every side. Many are like those in Clemens, that
thought Truth to be Cruelty.

Fourthly, Be exemplary to those The complaint in Seneca is ancient, That
commonly men live not Ad rationem, but Ad similitudinem. Seneca de vita beata.
among whom you walk, and over whom you command: Bonus dux, bonus comes, a good
Leader makes a good Follower; Praecepta aocent, exempla movent, Precepts may
instruct, but examples do persuade. Verily Gentlemen, your examples will have a
very great influence upon those that are under you. It is natural to Inferiors
to mind more what their Superiors do, then what they say; therefore you had
need be Angelical in your walkings, and actings; you are lights upon a Hill,
you are Sea-marks, and therefore every eye will be upon you. Those that can
find no ears to hear what you say, will find many eyes to see what you do.
Scripture and Experience do abundantly evidence, that good men's examples have
done a world of good in the world; and verily, the evil examples of great men
(especially) are very dangerous. Charles the fifth was wont to say, That as the
Eclipse of the Sun is a token of great commotions; so the errors and evils of
great men, bring with them great perturbations and evils to the places and
persons where they live. O therefore be exemplary in lip and life, in word and
work, that others seeing your good works, may glorify Matthew. 5. 16. Plutarch
said of Demosthenes, that he was excellent at praising the worthy acts of his
Ancestors, but not so at imitating them. You may easily apply it.
your Father which is in Heaven. O look that your lives be as a Commentary upon
Christ's life. ( Tace lingua, loquere vita) Talk not of a good life, but let thy
life speak, said the Philosopher. Alexander willed that the Grecians and the
Barbarians should no longer be distinguished by their Garments, but by their
Manners; so should Christians be distinguished from all others by their lives,
and by their examples. 2 Samuel 23. 3. The God of Israel said, The Rock of Israel
spoke to me, he that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of the
Lord. An excellent Lord is always better then an excellent Law; let your Laws
be never so good, if the Law* makers are bad, all will come to nothing. The
peoples eyes are much John 7. 48. It was a good Law that the Ephesians made,
That men should propound to themselves the best patterns, and ever bear in
mind some eminent man.
upon that Scripture, Have any of the Rulers believed on him? etc. Abraham was
an example of Righteousness in Chaldaea, Lot was just in Sodom, Daniel was an
example of Holiness in Babylon, Job was an example of Uprightness in the Land
of Huss, which was a Land of much Profaneness and Superstition, Nehemiah was
an example of Zeal in Damasco, and Moses was an example of Meekness among the
muttering and murmuring Israelites. Above all examples, Christ was exemplary in
all Piety and Sanctity, in all Righteousness and Holiness, in the midst of a
crooked and perverse Generation. And why then should not you be ex(mplary The
Arabian^, if their King be sick or lame, they all feign themselves so.
among those poor Creatures ethose black Angels, I had almost said) among whom
you walk? It was the saying of Trajanus, a Spaniard (the first stranger that
reigned among the Italians) Qualis Rex, tali^ grex, Subjects prove good, by a
good Kings example; so do Soldiers, so do Sailers, by the good examples of
their Superior Commanders. Such Commanders as are examples of Righteousness and
Holiness to others, are certainly high in worth, and humble in heart, they are
the glory of Christ, and the honor of Religion.

Fifthly, As you are in public places, I have read of one that had rather
beautify Italy, then his own house; there is very little of this spirit abroad
in the world.
so lay out your selves impartially for the common good of all that have
interest in you, or dependence upon you: So did Abraham, Moses, Joshua,
Nehemiah, Ezra, Daniel, but above all Christ himself. You are more for the
peoples sake, then the people are for yours: Magistrates are Rulers over the
persons of the people, but they are servants to the good of the people. As it
is the duty of all to serve them, so it is their office to serve all. It is no
Paradox to affirm, That Rulers are the greatest Servants. The Ancients were
wont to place the Statues of their Princes by their Fountains, intimating that
they were, or at least should be, Fountains of the Public good. The Counselor
says, That a man in public place should give his will to God, his love to his
Master, his heart to his Country, his secrets to his Friends, his time to
Business. It is a base and unworthy spirit, for a man to make himself the
Center of all his actions. The very Heathen man could say, A Man's Country, and
his Friends and others challenge a great part of him. The Sun that is the
Prince of lights, So does the Sea feed and refresh the smalest fish, as well as
the greatest Leviathan; the Trees do shade and shelter from heat the least
Bird, as well as the greatest Beast.
does impartially serve all, the Peasant as well as the Prince, the poor as
well as the rich, the weak as well as the strong; you must be like the Sun. The
Sun of Righteousness was of a brave Public Spirit, he healed others, but was
hurt himself, he filled others, but was hungry himself, he laid out himself,
and he laid down himself for a Public good. That Pilot dies nobly (says
Seneca) who perishes in the storm with the Helm in his hand. It is really your
praise among the Saints, that you have ventured killing, burning, drowning, and
all to save the Ship of the Commonwealth from sinking.

Sirs, Be not weary of Public Work, it is honor enough that God will make any
use of you to carry on his design in the world; he is a faithful Play Master,
Heaven at last will make amends for all; you shall reap, if you faint not. I do
verily believe, God will make use of you to do greater things on the Sea, then
yet have been done. The Lord has now begun to set a foot upon the Sea, let his
enemies tremble, God will not suffer his glory to be buried in the deeps; he is
a shaking the Nations, and will not leave shaking them, till he that is the
desire of all Nations come. The Lord has said, That he will overturn,
overturn, overturn until he comes, whose right it is to wear the Crown, and the
Diadem, and he will give it him, Ezekiel. 21. 25, 26, 27. Till then there will be
little else, but plucking up and breaking down. Jere. 45. 4.
Therefore be courageous and follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes. You need fear
no enemies, that have Christ the Conqueror on your sides.

Sixthly and lastly, Make it more O anim^ Dei insig^^ta imagine, desponsata
fidie, donata spiritu, etc. Bern. O divine Soul invested with the Image of God,
espoused to him by Faith.
and more your chiefest work to make plentiful provisions for the eternal
welfare of your Souls. Your Souls are more worth then ten thousand worlds. All
is well, if the Soul be well; if that be safe, all is safe, if that be lost,
all is lost, God, Christ, and Glory is lost, if the Soul be lost.

Worthy Sirs, Though others play the Courtiers with their Souls, yet do not
you: The Courtier does all things late, he rises late, and dines late, and sups
late, and repents late.

Sirs, Is it madness to feast the Slave, and starve the Wife, and is it not
greater madness to feast the Body, and starve the Soul? To make liberal
provision for the Body, and none for the Soul? Do not they deserve double
damnation, that prefer their Bodies above their Souls? Me thinks our Souls
should be One of the chiefest mirrors to behold God in, is a reasonable Soul
which finds it self out, says one.
like to a Ship, which is made little, and narrow downwards, but more wide and
broad upwards. Before all, and above all, look to your Souls, watch your Souls,
make provision for your Souls: When this is done, all is done, till this is
done, there is nothing done that will yield a man comfort in life, joy in
death, and boldness before a Judgment Seat. Callenuceus tells of a Nobleman of
Naples, that was wont profanely to say, He had two souls in Had I a purse
suitable to my heart, not a poor godly Soldier or Sailor in England, who
carries his life in one hand, but should have one of these Books in the other,
etc.
his body, one for God, and another for whosoever would buy it. Verily, they
will make but a bad bargain of it, that to gain the World, shall sell their
Souls.

Dear Sirs, I had much more to say, but I am afraid that I have already kept
you too long from sucking of the Honey Comb, from drinking at the Fountain; I
have held you too long in the Porch, and therefore I shall only crave, That
you will bear with my plainness, and overlook my weakness; Remembering, that
other Addresses would savor more of flattery then of sincerity, more of policy
then of piety, and would be both unlovely in me, and displeasing to you.

Now the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, bless you and yours with all
Spiritual blessings in Heavenly places, and make you yet more and more
Instrument al for his glory, and this Nations good; that your names may be for
ever precious among his people, that they may bear you still upon their hearts
before the Lord; which is, and shall be, the earnest and constant Prayer of
him, who is

Right Honorable and worthy Sirs, Yours in all Christian observance, Thomas
Brooks.

TO All Saints, that hold to CHRIST the Head AND That walk according to the
Laws of the New Creature, Grace, Mercy, and Peace be multiplied from God the
Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ,
Beloved in our dearest Lord,
YOu are those Worthies of whom this world is not worthy; Heb. 11. 38.
You are the Princes that prevail with God; You are Genesis 32. 28:
those exellent ones in whom Psalm. 16. 3.
is all Christ's delight; You are his glory. Isa. 4. 5.
You are his picked, culled, prime Instruments which he will make use of to
car^yon Rev. 17. 14. and 19. 8. 14. Cant. 8. 6. Isa. 49. 16.
his best and greatest Work against ^is worst and greatest Enemies in these
latter days; You are a Seal upon Christ's heart, you are engraven on the palms
of his hand; Your names are Exodus 28. 29. 2 Cor. 2. 3. 1 John 2. 27. 1 Cor. 2.
10, 12, 15, 16. You will not with Pythagoras his Scholars magnify the ipse
dixerit of the greatest Clerks, neither will you believe with Anaxagoras, that
Snow is black, nor yet will you say as Antipater King of Macedonia did (when one
presented him with a book treating of happiness) (...), I have no leisure;
neither will you judge like those that like nothing but the Manerva's of their
own brains.
written upon his Breasts, as the names of the Children of Israel were upon
Aarons Breast Plate; You are the Epistle of Christ; You are the anointed of
Christ; You have the spirit of discerning; You have the mind of Christ; You
have the greatest advantages, and the choycest privileges to enable you to try
Truth, to taste Truth, to apply Truth, to defend Truth, to strengthen Truth, to
uphold Truth, and to improve Truth; and therefore to whom should I dedicate
this following Discourse but to your selves? you have the next place to Christ
in my heart; your good, your gain, your glory, your edification, your
satisfaction, your confirmation, your consolation, your salvation, has put me
upon casting in my little, little mite, into your treasure.

Beloved You know that in the time of the Law God did as kindly accept of Goats
hair, and Badgers skins, of Turtle Doves, and young Pigeons* they being the
best things that some of his children had then to offer, as he did accept of
Gold, Jewels, Silk, and Purple from other^ I hope you will show out the same
God-like disposition toward me, in a kind accepting of what is offered in this
Treatise to your wise and serious consideration. I could wish it better for
your sakes; yet such a^ it is I do in all love and humility present you with,
desiring the Lord to make it an internal and eternal advantage t^ you.

I shall briefly acquaint you with the Reasons that have moved poor me,
unworthy I (who am the least of all Saints* who am not worthy to be reckoned
among the Saints) to present this following Discourse to public view; and they
are these that follow.

First, To answer the desires, and gratify the earnest and pious requests of
several precious souls, who long to have these things printed upon their hearts
(by the The Philosopher could say, that desires are properly ((...),) to what
is necessary.
hand of the Spirit) that are printed in this Book. God speaks aloud through
the serious and affectionate desires of the Saints; and this has made me
willing to echo to their desires. If great men's desires are to be looked upon
as commands, why should good men's desires be looked upon with a squint eye?
Seneca (a Heathen) could say that (ipse aspectus boni viri delectat,) The very
looks of a good man delight one. How much more then should the desires of a
good man overcome one?

Secondly, The good acceptance, the fair quarter that my Labors of the like
Them that are extant are sold by the same man that sels this, at the first shop
in Popeshead-Alley next to Cornhill.
nature have found among those that fear the Lord (especially that Treatise
called Precious Remedies against Satan's devices) has encouraged me to present
this to public view, not doubting but that the Lord will bless it to the good
of many, as I know he has done the former. Which that he may, I shall not
cease to pray, that Romans 15. 21.
my weak service may be accepted of the Phil. 1. 9, 10, 11
Saints, and that their love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and in
all sense, that they may approve things that are excellent; that they (...)
Sense,
may be sincere, and without offense til the day of Christ, Being filled with
the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and
praise of God.

Thirdly, It is exceeding useful to the Saints at all times, but especially in
changing times, in times wherein every one calls out, Watchman, what of the
night, Watchman, what of the night? Isa. 21. 11, 12.
and the watchman answers, the morning comes, and also the night. Ah Joel 3.
16. Hag. 26. Isa. 23. 9. Isa. 63. 2, 3.
Christians, the Lord is a shaking heaven and earth, he is a staining the pride
of all glory, he is a staining his garments with the blood of his enemies; he
is renting and tearing, he is burning and breaking, he is pulling up, and
throwing down: Now in Jerm. 45. 4, 5.
the midst of all these Concussions and Revolutions, thrice happy are those
souls that have gained a wel-grounded Assurance of* Caelestial Heb. 10. 34.
things; such souls will not faint, sink, nor shrink in an hour of temptation,
Rev. 3. 4. and 14. 4.
such souls will keep their garments pure and white, and will follow the Lamb
wheresoever he goes. Assurance is a Believers Ark, where he sits Noah-like
quiet and still in the midst of all distractions Psalm. 23. 3, 4.
and destructions, combustions and confusions. Rev. 6. 12. ult.
They are doubly miserable that have neither Heaven nor Earth, temporals nor
eternals made sure to them in changing times.

The fourth ground of my presenting this Treatise to public view, is, that
little welgrounded Assurance that is to be found among Christians; most
Christians living Every unsettled Christian is Magor missahib, a terror to
himself, yea, his life is a very hell, fears and doubts are his chiefest
companions, and so he judges himself unfit and unworthy to live, and yet he is
afraid to die; and verily this is the sad condition of most Christians.
between fears and hopes, and hanging as it were between Heaven and Hell:
Sometimes they hope that their State is good, at othertimes they fear that
their state is bad; Now they hope that all is well, and that it shall go well
with them for ever; anon they fear that they shall perish by the hand of such or
such a corruption, or by the prevalency of such or such a temptation; and so
they are like a ship in a storm, tossed here and there, etc. Now that these weak
souls may be strengthened, that these unstable souls may be established, that
these disconsolate souls may be comforted, etc. I have presented this Tract to
the world, not doubting but that if the Lord shall draw out their spirits to a
serious perusal of it, they shall find (through the blessing of Jehovah) that
it will contribute very much to their attaining of a full Assurance of their
everlasting happiness and blessedness, as also to the keeping and maintaining
of that full and blessed Assurance; which that it may, I shall follow it with my
prayers.

Fifthly, I have published this following Discourse, remembering that my life is
Jam. 4. 14. Psalm 39. 12.
but a vanishing vapor, and that the time of my sojourning in this world will
be but short. Man's life is so short, that Austine doubts, whether to call it
a dying life, or a living death. Man's life is but the shadow of smoke, the
dream of a shadow. This present life is not (vita, sed via ad vitam) Bernard.
life, but a motion, a journey toward life; the life of a Christian is rather
(via then vita) a step toward life, then life: Yet do I believe that that is
not a death, but life, that joins the dying man to Christ, and that is not a
life, but death, that separates the living man from Christ.

I know I shall not speak long to Friends, Saints, or Sinners, therefore I was
the more willing to take the opportunity of Preaching Heb. 11. 4.
to you when I am dead; As Abel by his faith (he being dead) yet speaks: So
this Treatise may speak, and live, when I shall return to my long home, and
fall asleep Eccles. 12. 5. Acts 7. 60.
in the bosom of Christ. Christ his Prophets, and Apostles, though they are now
in Heaven, yet by their Doctrines, Examples, and Writings, they still Preach to
the Saints on Earth. Zisca desired his skin might serve the Bohemians in their
Wars, when his body could no more do it: O that poor I, that have been but a
little serviceable to the Saints in my life, might by this, and my former weak
Labors, be much serviceable to them after my death! Books may Preach, when the
Author cannot, when the Author may not, when the Author dares not; yea, and
which is more, when the Author i^ not.

Sixthly, To testify my cordial love and affection to all the true lovers of
Christ, Phil. 4. 21. Col. 1. 4. 2 These. 1. 3. Marcellinus a Heathen Historian,
taxes the Christians of his time, for their dissentions, biting and devouring
one another, till they were even consumed one of another; a sad thing that a
Heathen should see such miscarriages among Christ's followers.
and to let them know, That they are all (though under different forms)
precious in my eyes, and very near and dear unto my heart. I bless God I am,
and I desire more and more to be, one with every one that is one with Christ. I
would fain have as free, as large, and as sweet a heart toward Saints, as
Christ has. For a Wolf to worry a Lamb, is usual; but for a Lamb to worry a
Lamb, is unnatural: For Christ's Lillies to be among Thorns, is ordinary; but
for these Lillies to become Thorns, to tear and fetch blood of one another, is
monstrous and strange. Ah Christians, can Turks and Pagans agree? can Herod and
Pilat agree? can Moab and Ammon agree? can Bears and Lions, can Wolves and
Tigers agree? yea, which is more, can a legion of Devils agree in one body, and
shall not the Saints, whom one Heaven must hold at last, agree? Pancirollus
Cap. 7. de G^mmis.
tells us, That the most precious Pearl the Romans had, was called Unio. O, the
union of the Saints is an unvaluable Pearl! The Heathen man by the light of
Nature could say, That the thickest Wall of a City in Peace, and the safest
Rampire in War, is Unity. Verily, all Saints are one in Christ, all Saints
partake of the same Spirit, Promises, Graces, and Privileges: All Saints are
Fellow Members, Fellow Soldiers, Fellow-Travellers, Fellow* Heirs,
Fellow Sufferers, and Fellow-Citizens; and therefore, I cannot, I dare not, but
love them all, and prize them all; and to evidence it, I have dedicated this
Treatise to the service of all their Souls.

Seventhly and lastly, To fence and fortify the Souls of real, serious
Christians, against those Brainsick Notions, and those Airy Speculations, and
imaginary Revelations and Enthusiastical fancies, etc. with which many are
sadly deluded and deceived, even to their eternal overthrow, I had almost said.

Thus have I given you a brief account I had not thought to have pressed into the
Press, had I not been soundly pressed thereunto.
of the Reasons that have prevailed with me to publish this Treatise to the
World, and to dedicate it to your selves. Let your hearts dwell on Truth, as
the Be does upon the Flower; every Truth being a Flower of Paradise, that is
more worth then a World.

Now the God of all Grace fill your Hearts and Souls with all the Fruits of
Righteousness and Holiness, that you may attain unto a full Assurance of your
Everlasting Happiness and Blessedness; which that you may, is the sincere,
earnest, and constant desire of him, who is

Your Souls Servant, Thomas Brooks.

THE PREFACE touching the nature of Assurance.
TO be in a state of true Grace, is to be miserable no more; it Psalm. 144. 15.
Mal. 3. 17. Romans 8. 16, 17.
is to be happy for ever. A Soul in this state, is a Soul near and dear to God;
it is a Soul much beloved, and very highly valued of God; it is a Soul housed
in God; it is a Soul safe in everlasting Arms; Deuteronomy. 33. 26, 27. 1 Cor. 3. 22,
23.
it is a Soul fully and eminently interested in all the highest and noblest
Privileges. The being A man may be Gods, and yet not know it, his estate may
be good, and yet he not see it. Ephesians. 1. 13. 1 John 5. 13. Gal 4. 6.
in a state of Grace makes a man's condition happy, safe, and sure; but the
seeing, the knowing of himself to be in such a state, is, that which renders
his life sweet and comfortable. The being in a state of Grace will yield a man
a Heaven hereafter, but the seeing of himself in this state will yield him both
a Heaven here, and a Heaven hereafter; it will render him doubly blessed, blessed
in Heaven, and blessed in his own Conscience.

Now Assurance is a reflex act of a gracious Soul, whereby he clearly and
evidently sees himself in a gracious, blessed, and happy state; it is a
sensible feeling, and an experimental discerning of a man's being in a state of
Grace, and of his having a right to a Crown of Glory; and this rises from the
seeing A man cannot see the Sun, but by the light of the Sun.
in himself, the special, peculiar, and distinguishing* Graces of Christ, in
the light of the Spirit of Christ, or from the testimony and report of the
Spirit of God, the Spirit bearing witness with his Spirit, that Romans 8. 16, 17.
he is a Son, and an Heir apparent to Glory.

It is one thing for me to have It is one thing to be an Heir, and another
thing to know that one is an Heir; the child in the Womb, or in the Arms, may
be an Heir to a Crown, and yet understands it not.
Grace, it is another thing for me to see my Grace; it is one thing for me to
believe, and another thing for me to believe that I do believe; it is one thing
for me to have Faith, and another thing for me to know that I have Faith: Now
Assurance flows from a clear, certain, evident knowledge that I have Grace, and
that I do believe, etc.

Now this Assurance is the beauty and top of a Christians glory in this life;
it is usually attended with the strongest joy, with the sweetest comforts, and
with the greatest peace. It is a Pearl that most want, a Crown that few wear.
His state is safe and happy, whose Soul is adorned with Grace, though he sees
it not, though he knows it not.

Assurance is not of the essence of a Christian; it is required to the been
esse, to the welbeing, to the comfortable and joyful Being of a Christian, but
it is not required to the esse, to the being of a Christian. A man may be a
true Believer, and yet would give all the World, were it in his power, to know
that he is a Believer; to have Grace, and to be sure that we have Grace, is
glory upon the Throne, it is Heaven a this side Heaven. But more of these
things you will find in the following Discourse, to which I refer you.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Preface, touching the Nature of Assurance.

CHAP. I.
PRoving by Ten Arguments, that Persons may in this life attain to a
wel-grounded Assurance of their Everlasting Happiness and Blessedness Page 1 to
30 This truth improved against Papists and Arminians P. 30. to p. 35.
CHAP. II.
COntaining several weighty Propositions about Assurance P. 35. to p. 77
Further in this Chapter is showed, Ten special Seasons and Times, wherein the
Lord is pleased to give to his people a sweet Assurance of his favor and love
p. 77. to p. 155
CHAP. III.
COntaining Ten Hindrances and Impediments that keep poor Souls from
Assurance, with the means and helps to remove those Impediments and Hindrances
p. 155. to p. 207 Further, in this Chapter is laid down Six Motives to provoke
Christians to put out all their strength and might against bosom sins, against
the iniquity of their heels, against the sins that do so easily beset them p.
207. to p. 218 Also Five Means to help on the Mortification and Destruction of
bosom sins p. 218. to p. 224
CHAP. IV.
COntaining Ten Motives or Incentives to provoke all that want Assurance, to be
restless in their spirits, till they have obtained it p. 225. to p. 251 Also in
this Chapter you have Ten Advantages that will redound to such Souls that get a
wel-grounded Assurance of their Everlasting Happiness and Blessedness p. 251.
to p. 270
CHAP. V.
Showing Nine Ways and Means of gaining a wel-grounded Assurance, etc. In the
handling of which; several considerable Questions are also resolved p. 272 to
p. 320 Also in this Chapter Eight special things are discovered. As first, What
knowledge that is that does accompany Salvation p. 320. to p. 362 Secondly,
What Faith that is that accompanies Salvation, that borders upon Salvation p.
362 to p. 399 Also several Hints are given, both concerning strong, and weak
Faith p. 399 to p. 405 Thirdly, What Repentance that is that accompanies
Salvation p. 405. to p. 424 Fourthly, What Obedience that is that accompanies
Salvation p. 424. to p. 445 Fifthly, What Love that is that accompanies
Salvation p. 445. to p. 460 Fourteen ways, whereby that love that accompanies
Salvation does display and manifest it self p. 460. to p. 487 Sixthly, What
Prayer that is that does accompany Salvation p. 487 to p. 504 Eight Differences
betwixt the Prayers of Souls in Christ, and Souls out of Christ, betwixt the
Prayers of Believers and Unbelievers p. 504 to p. 516 Seventhly, What
Perseverance that is that does accompany Salvation p. 516 to. p. 522 Eighthly,
What Hope that is that does accompany Salvation p. 522 to p. 544 Two Cautions
upon the whole p. 544, 545
CHAP. VI.
Showing Eight notable Differences between a true and a counterfeit Assurance,
etc. p. 546 to p. 565 Also in this Chapter is set forth in Nine special things,
the difference between the Whisperings of the Holy Spirit, and the Hissings of
the old Serpent, etc. p. 565. to p. 578
CHAP. VII.
COntaining Answers to several special Questions about Assurance. As first, How
those should strengthen and maintain their Assurance that have obtained it?
etc. This Question is answered Nine ways p. 579. to p. 589 The second Question
is, How such sad Souls may be supported from fainting and languishing, that
have lost that sweet and blessed Assurance that once they had. Six Answers are
given to the Question p. 589 to p. 597 The third Question is, How such Souls
may recover Assurance, who once had it, but have now lost it. Five Answers
given to this Question p. 597. to p. 602 Some Uses of the Point, from p. 603 ^o
the end.
THe greatest thing that we can desire (next the glory of God) is our own
Salvation; and the sweetest thing we can desire, is the Assurance of our
Salvation. In this life we cannot get higher, then to be assured of that, which
in the next life is to be enjoyed. All Saints shall enjoy a Heaven when they
leave this Earth: Some Saints enjoy a Heaven while they are here on Earth. That
Saints might enjoy Two Heavens, is the project of this Book; that this project
may be published, and (by a Blessing from the Third Heaven) prospered, The Book
is Licensed by

Joseph Caryl
The nineth of the first Mneth, commonly called March. 1653.
A Serious Discourse, touching A Well-grounded Assurance.
CHAP. I. Showing that believers may in this life attain unto a Well-grounded
Assurance of their everlasting happiness, and blessedness.
FIrst, The ground on which the Apostle Paul builds his Assurance, is not any
special Revelation, but such a foundation as is common to all Believers, as
clearly appears in that Romans 8. 32, 33, 34. He that spared not his own Son,
but delivered Romans 8. 32, 33, 34.
him up for us all; how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifies,
who is he that condemns? It is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for
us. It is clear from these words, that this blessed Apostle Immediate
Revelations are fleeting and inconstant, and therefore men had need be careful
how they build upon them.
had not that glorious Assurance that he speaks of in the two last verses of
this Chapter, by immediate Revelation, for he concludes it from such arguments
as are general, or common to all the godly; and therefore it roundly follows,
that believers may in this life attain unto a Well-grounded Assurance of their
everlasting happiness, and blessedness. So Hezekiahs assurance did spring
from a principle that is common to all believers, 2 King. 20. 3. Ergo.

Secondly, It is the very scope and end of the Scripture, to help believers to
a well-grounded Assurance of their everlasting happiness, and blessedness.
These things (says John) have I written unto you that believe on the name 1 John 5. 13.
of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life. These
precious Tit 1. 2.
souls did believe, and they had eternal life, in respect of the promise of
eternal life, and in respect Ephesians. 2. 6.
of Christ their head (who had taken up their rooms aforehand in heaven, and
who as a public person Surely glory is nothing else but a bright constellation
of grace; happiness, is nothing but the quintessence of holiness^.
does represent all his people) and they had eternal life in respect of the
beginnings of it; for what is grace but glory begun? and what is glory, but
grace perfected? Grace is Glory in the bud, and Glory is Grace at the full. Now
though they had eternal life in all these respects, yet they did not know it;
though they did believe, yet they did not believe, that they did believe;
therefore the Apostle in those precious Epistles of his, does make it his
business by variety and plenty of arguments to help all, but especially such
as are weak in the faith, to a Well-grounded Assurance of their eternal welfare.

It is the very drift and design of the Gregory calls the Scripture ( Cor and
animam Dei) the heart and soul of God.
whole Scripture to bring souls first to an acquaintance with Christ, and then
to an acceptance of Christ, and then to build them up in a sweet assurance of
their actual interest in Christ; which made Luther to say, That he would not
live in Paradise if he might, without the word, but with the word, he could
live in hell it self. Adoro plenitudinem Scripturarum, I adore the fullness of
the Scripture. Tertul.
No Histories are comparable to the Histories of the Scripture; First, For
Antiquity; Secondly, For Rarity; Thirdly, For Variety; Fourthly, For Brevity;
Fifthly, For Perspicuity; Sixthly, For Harmony. And seventhly, For Verity. The
Word evidences truth, it evinces falsehood; it fights against folly; it opens
the bowels of mercy, and it assures believing souls of eternal felicity. That
is a precious word Heb. 6. 18. Assurance produces such strong consolations, as
swallows up all worldly griefs, As Moses Serpent did the Sorcerers Serpents, or
as the fire does the fuel.
in that Heb. 6. 18. God has given us his word, his oath, his seal, that our
consolation may be strong, and that our salvation may be sure. Now what
comfort can a believer have without Assurance. It is the assurance of my
interest in the land of Canaan, in Gospel cordials, in precious promises, and
in a precious Christ that comforts and delights my soul. It is not enough to
raise strong consolation in my soul, barely to know that there are Mines of
gold, mountains of pearl, heaps of treasures, a land flowing with milk and
honey; but it is the knowledge of my interest in these that raises joy in my
soul. To know that there are such things, and that I have no interest in them,
is rather a vexation, Non in honorum cognitione, sed fruitione.
then a consolation to me. To know that there is a feast of choicest Delicates,
but not a taste for me, that there are pleasant fountains and streams, but I
must perish for thirst in a wilderness; to know that there are royal Robes
for such and such, but I must dye in my rags; to know that there is a pardon
for such and such, but I must be turned off the ladder of life; to know that
there is preferment for such and such, but I must still lie with Lazarus at
Dives door; such knowledge as this may well add to my vexation, but it will
not add to my consolation. It was rather matter of sorrow, then joy to the men
Spira cried our, Christ is to me a grief, a torment, because I despised him, I
rejected him, and I have no part in him.
of the old world, to know that there was an Arc, when they were shut out, and
to the Israelites to know that there was a Brazen-serpent set up whereby others
were cured, when they died with the stinging of the Fiery serpents. So how can
it comfort me to know that there is peace in Christ, and pardon in Christ, and
righteousness in Christ, and riches in Christ, and happiness in Christ, etc.
for others, but not for me. Ah, this knowledge Psalm. 15. Ps. 24. Ps 119. Ps. 1,
2, 3
will rather be a hell to torment me, then a ground of joy and comfort to me.
But now God has in the Scripture discovered, who they are that shall be
eternally happy, and how they may reach to an assurance of their felicity and
glory; which made One to say, That he would not take all the world Luther.
for one leaf of the Bible. The Bible is a Christians Magna Charta, his chief
evidence for heaven. Men highly prize, and carefully keep their Charters,
Privileges, Conveyances, and Assurances of their Lands: And shall not the
Saints much more highly prize, and carefully keep in the closet of their
hearts, the precious word of God, which is to them instead of all assurances
for their maintenance, Psalm. 119, 11. and 12. verses compared.
deliverance, protection, confirmation, consolation, and eternal salvation.

Thirdly, Other believers have in an ordinary way attained to a sweet assurance
of their everlasting happiness, and blessedness. We know (says the Apostle
in the name of the 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2.
Saints) that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have
a building of God, ^n house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens; for in
this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with our house, which is
from Nec Christus, nee C^lum, patitur hyperbolem Neither Christ nor heaven,
hyperbolized.
heaven. Their assurance sets them in triumph upon the Throne. We have a house,
a house above, a house in heaven, a house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens: We have a house, a heavenly house, a house made by the greatest
wisdom, and the highest Love, a house that for honor, pleasures, riches,
safety, stability, glory, and perpetuity, transcends all the royal Palaces in
the world. It is a house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens. So
the Church Can. 2. 16.
in that Solomon's Song, 2. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am his. I know says
the Spouse, that Jesus Christ is mine; I can with the greatest confidence, Ephesians.
1. 22, 23. 1 Cor. 1. 30. c. 6. 26. Ps. 110. 3. Joh. 10. 29. Joh. 5. 16. Ezekiel.
16, 8. Hos. 2. 19, 20,
and boldness affirm it, he is my head, my husband, my Lord, my Redeemer, my
Justifier, my Savior; And I am his. I am as sure that I am his, as I am sure
that I live. I am his by purchase, and I am his by conquest, I am his by
donation, and I am his by election, I am his by covenant, and I am his by
marriage; I am wholly his, I am peculiarly his, I am universally his, I am
eternally his: This I well know, and the knowledge thereof is my joy in life,
and my strength and crown in death. So the Church in that Isa. Jsa. 63. 16 vide
Calvin. Psalm. 73. 25, 26. Psalm. 19. 94. Job 19. 25. Ioh. 20. 28.
63. 16. Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and
Israel acknowledge us not: Thou, O Lord, art our Father, and our Redeemer, thy
name is from everlasting. David could say, The Lord is my portion for ever; And
at another time he could sweetly sing it out, I am thine, save me. Job could
look through the darkest cloud, and see that his Redeemer lives. Thomas cries
out, My Lord, and my God; And Paul trumpets it out, That nothing Romans 8. 38. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
should separate him from the love of Christ; and that he had fought a good
fight, and finished his course, and that there was Quicquid fie^i potuit,
potest, that which has been done, may be done.
laid up for him a crown of Righteousness. By what has been said, it clearly
appears that other believers have obtained assurance in an ordinary way, and
therefore believers now may attain to a sweet assurance of their everlasting
happiness and blessedness. Certainly, God is as loving, and his bowels of
compassion are as strong toward Heb. 13. 8. Rev. 1. 8. 11. Plato, a heathen
says, that God is one and the same, and always like himself.
Believers now, as ever they were to Believers of old; and it makes as much for
the honor of God, the lifting up of Christ, the stopping of the mouths of the
wicked, and the rejoicing of the hearts of the righteous, for God to give
assurance now, as it did for God to give it then.

Fourthly, God has by promise engaged himself to assure his people of their
happiness, and blessedness, The Psalm. 84. 11. Antiochus promised often, but
seldom gave; but God gives as much, and as often as he promises, he has a
kings heart, as well as a kings purse.
Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withold from them
that walk uprightly. If he will withold no good thing, then certainly he
will not always withhold assurance, which is the great good thing, the only
thing, the chiefest thing, the peculiar thing that believers seek after. So in
that thirty fourth of Ezekiel. 30, 31. Thus shall they know that I the Lord their
God am with them, and that they, even the house of Israel are my people, says
the Lord God. And ye my flock, the flock of my pasture, are men, and I am your
God, says the Lord God. So in that, John 14. 21. 23. He that has my
Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he that loves me
shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my Nil Deo
diffi^ilo there is nothing hard for God. Tully an heathen frequently called God
( optimum maximum) the best and greatest. 2 Cor. 1. 20. Plato called God the
Horn of plenty, and the Ocean of beauty, without the least spot of injustice.
Isa. 64 4. 1 Cor. 2. 9. Psalm. 21. 3. Isa. 65. 24.
self to him. If any man love me (says Christ) he will keep my words, and my
Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him.
Now has the Lord spoken it, and shall it not come to pass? Men say, and
unsay, they eat their words as soon as they have spoken them: but will God do
so? Surely no, He is faithful that has promised. All the Promises of God in
him are yea, and in him Amen, that is, they are stable and firm, and shall
really be made good. The Promises are a precious Book, every leaf drops Myrrh
and Mercy: Therefore, set down and suck at these breasts, warm thy self at
this fire: God has been always as good as his word; yea, he has sometimes
been better then his word; he has ever performed, and he has over performed;
he promised the children of Israel only the Land of Canaan, but he gave them,
besides the whole Land of Canaan, two other Kingdoms which he never promised.
Ah! how often has God prevented us with his blessings? and has given Vi^es
reports of a Jew, that having gone over a deep river on a narrow planck, in a
dark night, and coming the next day to see what danger he had escaped, fell
down dead with astonishment. Ah the astonishing mercies that we have had in
these late years.
us in such mercies, as have been as far beyond our hopes as our deserts? How
has God in these days of darkness and blood, gone beyond the prayers,
desires, hopes, and confidences of his people in this Land? and beyond what we
could read in the Book of the Promises. Satan promises the best, but pays with
the worst: he promises honor, and pays with disgrace; he promises pleasure,
and pays with pain; he promises profit, and pays with loss; he promises life,
and pays with death: But God pays as he promises, all his payments are made in
pure gold; therefore take these promises wherein God has engaged himself to
assure thee of his love, and spread them before the Lord, and tell him, that it
makes as well for his honor as thy comfort, for his glory as for thy peace,
that he should assure thee of thy everlasting happiness and blessedness.

Fifthly, There is in all the Saints the springs of assurance; and therefore
they may attain to assurance: precious Faith is one spring of assurance, and
this is in all the Saints, though in different degrees, (...). Obtained by lo^.
I may say of Faith, as Luther says of Prayer, it has a kind of Omnipotency in
it, it is able to do all things Est quaedam omnipotentia pre^um. Tantum
possumus, quantum credimus, Cyp.
2 Pet. 1. 1. Simon Peter, a Servant and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to them
that have obtained like precious faith with us, through the righteousness of
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. Faith in time will of its own accord raise
and advance it self to assurance. Faith is an appropriating grace, it looks
upon God, and says with David, this God is my God for ever and ever, and he
shall be my guide unto the death. It looks upon Christ, and says with the
Spouse, I am my Beloveds, and his desire is toward me. It looks upon an
immortal crown and says with Paul, Henceforth is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness. It looks upon the righteousness of Christ, and says, this
righteousness is mine to cover me: It looks upon the Mercy of Christ, and
says, this mercy is mine to pardon me: It looks upon the Power of Christ, and
says, this power is mine to support me: It looks upon the Wisdom of Christ,
and says, this wisdom is mine to direct me: It looks upon the blood of
Christ, and says, this blood is mine to save me, etc.

As Faith, so Hope is another spring of Assurance, Col. 1. 27. Christ in you
(says Paul) the hope of glory. So Heb. 6. 19. which hope we have as an anchor
of the soul, both sure and steadfast, and which enters into that within the
veil. Hope takes fast hold upon heaven it self, upon the sanctum sanctorum.
A Christians hope is not like that of Pandora, which may fly out A Saints
motio is, Spero meliora, the hypocrites hope is like the morning dew, Job 8.
13, 14. Job 20. 11. Prove. 7.
of the box, and bid the soul farewell, as the hope of the hypocrites do; no,
it is like the morning light, the least beam of it shall commence into a
complete Sunshine, it shall shine forth brighter and brighter till perfect
day. When Alexander went upon a hopeful expedition, he gave away his gold,
and when he was asked what he kept for himself, he answered ( Spem majorum and
meliorum) the hope of greater and better things. So a Christian will part with
any thing rather then with his hope; he knows that hope will keep the heart
both from aching, and breaking, from fainting, and sinking; he knows that hope
is a beam of God, a spark of glory, and that nothing shall extinguish it,
till the soul be filled with glory. Souls that are big in hope, will not be
long without sweet assurance. God loves not to see the hopeing soul go always
up and down sighing, and mourning for want of a good word from heaven, for
want of possessing what it hopes in time to enjoy: hold out hope and patience,
a little, little longer, and he that has promised to Heb. 10. 37. (...).
come, will come, and will not tarry.

Again, a good conscience is another spring of assurance, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Toll
conscientiam, Toll omnia.
For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of
God, we have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly Conscientia
pura semper secura.
to you wards. So in that 1 John 3. 21. Beloved, if our heart condemn us not,
then have we confidence toward God. A good conscience has sure confidence; he
that has it, sits, Noah-like, in the midst of all combustions and
distractions, sincerity, and serenity, uprightness and boldness; a good
conscience, and a good confidence go together. What the probationer Disciple
said to our Savior in that Mat. 8. 19. Master, I will follow thee
whithersoever It is a notable speech of Salvi^. Such as are truly blessed in
their own consciences, cannot be miserable by the false judgments of others.
thou go; that a good conscience says to the believing soul, I will follow
thee from duty to duty, from ordinance to ordinance; I will stand by thee, I
will strengthen thee, I will uphold thee, I will be a comfort to thee in life,
and a friend to thee in death; though all should leave thee, yet I will never
forsake thee: A good conscience will look through the blackest clouds, and see
a smiling God. Look as an evil conscience is attended with the greatest fears
and doubts; so a good conscience is attended with the Innocence is bulwark
enough if you be not guilty, says Seneca.
greatest clearness and sweetness; And as there is no hell in this world to
an evil conscience, so there is no heaven in this world to a good conscience;
He that has a good conscience, has one of the choysest springs of Assurance.
And it will not be long before God will whisper such a man in the ear, and say
unto him, Son be of good Matthew. 9. 2.
cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee.

Again, real Love to the Saints is another spring of Assurance, and this spring
is a never failing spring; this spring is in the weakest, as well as in the
strongest Saints. Joh. 3. 14. We know (...), to know certainly we are as
certain of it, as we are certain that we live.
that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren; he
that loves not his brother, abides in death. The Apostle does not say, we
think, we hope, etc. that we are translated from death to life; but we know
that we are translated from death to life, because we love the brethren: Love
to the brethren, is not the cause of our passing from death to life, that is,
from a natural state, to a spiritual state; from hell to heaven, but an
evidence thereof. I confess it is very sad to consider how this precious
stream of love is even dried up in many. It was wont to be a Proverb, ( Homo
homini Deus) One man is a God to another: But now it may be truly said, ( Homo
homini Demon) One man is a Or Homo homini Leo, one man is a Lion to another.
Devil to another. He that wants love to his brethren, wants one of the
sweetest springs from whence Assurance flows. A greater hell I would not wish
any man, then to live, and not to love the beloved of God.

Now is it not as easy a thing as it is pleasant, for a man that has several
sweet Springs in his Garden, to sit Joh. 4. 14.
down, draw water, and drink. O believing souls there are Springs, there are
Wels of living water not only near Genesis 21. 15. to the 19. ver.
you, but in you; why then do you with Hagar sit down sorrowing, and weeping,
when you should be a tasting, or a drinking, not only of the springs above you,
but also of the springs within you. A man that has Gal. 5. 22, 23
fruit in his Garden may both delight his eye, and refresh his spirit with
tasting of it; certainly we may both eye and taste the fruits of the Spirit in
us, they being the first fruits of eternal life; I think none but mad souls
will say, that grace is that forbidden fruit that God would have us neither
Col. 1 27 Solomon's Song, 1. 5. Solomon's Song, 4. 7. Psalm. 45. 13.
see, nor taste; we ought not so to mind a Christ in heaven, as not to mind
Christ in us the hope of glory: Christ would not have his Spouse so to mind
her own blackness, as to forget that she is all fair and glorious within.

Sixthly, The Holy Ghost exhorts us to give all diligence to make our calling
and election sure, and presses us to look to the obtaining of a full
assurance, therefore Believers may attain unto an assurance of their
everlasting happiness and blessedness. Wherefore 2 Pet. 1. 10.
the rather Brethren (says the Apostle) give diligence to make your calling
and election sure, for if you do these things you shall never fall. The Greek
word (...) Vide Beza and Jansen. Luther says, he had rather obey, then work
Miracles.
translated, give diligence, signifies two things; 1. All possible haste and
speed; 2. All manner of seriousness and intention in doing; make it your maine
business, your chiefest study, your greatest care, to make your calling and
election sure, says the Apostle; when this is done, your all is done, till
this be done, there is nothing done: and to show the necessity, utility,
excellency, and possibility of it, the Apostle puts a rather upon it, wherefore
the rather give all (...) firm or stable; God loves curristas, not quaeristas,
the runner, not the questioner; he is taken most with them that are more for
motion then notion, for doing then talking.
diligence to make your calling and election sure; or as it is in the
Original, firm, or stable; it is the one thing necessary, it is of an
internal and eternal concernment, to make firm and sure work for your souls.
Assurance is a jewel of that worth, a pearl of that price, that he that will
have it, must work and sweat, and weep and wait to obtain it; he must not only
use diligence, but he must use all diligence; not only dig, but he must dig
deep, before he can come to this golden Mine. Assurance is that white stone,
that new name, that hidden Manna, that none can obtain, but such as labor for
it as for life; Assurance is such precious gold, that a man must win it before
he can wear it: win gold and wear gold is the language both of heaven and earth.

The Riches, Honors, Languages, Psalm. 127. 1, 2. Luke 5. 5. Prove. 14. 23
and favors of this world cannot be obtained without much trouble and
travel, without rising early, and going to bed late, etc. and do you think
that assurance, which is more worth then heaven and earth, can be obtained by
cold, lazy, heart-lesse services, if you do, you do but deceive your own
souls. There are five things that God Qui fecit te sine te, non salvabit t^
sine te. Aug.
will never sell at a cheap rate, Christ, Truth, his Honor, Heaven, and
Assurance; he that will have these must ^ay a good price for them, or go for
ever without them.

And as Peter exhorts you to give all ^iligence to make your calling and
election sure. So Paul presses you to look to the obtaining of full
assurance, which does clearly evidence, that there is a possibility of
attaining unto a full assurance of our happiness and blessedness in this
life. And we desire (says Heb. 6. 11. 12 Vide Calvin and Piscator on the text.
Praecepta decent, exempla movent. Precepts may instruct, but examples do
persuade, See from the 13. verse. to the 19 ver. of this chapter.
the Apostle) that every one of you do show the same diligence, to the full
assurance of hope unto the end, that ye be not slothful, but followers of
them, who through faith and patience inherit the Promises. We must not only
strive after assurance, but we must strive and show all diligence to the
attaining of that rich and full assurance which will scatter all fears and
doubts, which will make a soul patient in waiting, courageous in doing, and
cheerful in suffering, and which will make a heaven in a man's heart on this side
heaven, and make him go singing into Paradise in despite of all calamities
and miseries. And certainly it can never stand with the holiness,
righteousness, faithfulness, and goodness of God, to put his people upon
making their calling It was a good saying, ^a quod ju^es and jube quod vis.
and election sure, and upon obtaining full assurance, if there were not a
possibility of obtaining a full and wellgrounded assurance of their happiness
and blessedness in this life, and therefore it does undeniably follow that they
may attain unto a blessed assurance of their felicity and glory, whilst they
are in this vale of misery. The contrary opinion we make a man's life a hell
here, though he should escape a hell hereafter.

Seventhly, The Lord has (in much mercy and love) propounded in his Word the
ways and means whereby Believers may obtain a welgrounded assurance of their
everlasting happiness and blessedness, and therefore it may be obtained; take
three Scriptures to evidence this: The first is in that, 2 Pet. 1. chap. 5-13.
if you 2 Pet. 1. chapter 5. 13.
turn to the words, you shall find that the Lord does not only press them to
give all diligence to make their calling and election sure, but he shows them
plainly the way, and means whereby this may be done, namely, by adding to your
faith, virtue, and to virtue knowledge, etc. The second Scripture is 1 Cor. 11.
28
that, in the 1 Cor. 11. 28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. By examination, the Soul comes to
see what right it has to Christ, and all the precious things of his House, and
beleevingly to eat so of that Bread of Life, of that heavenly Manna, as that
it may live for ever. The third Scripture is that, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine 2 Cor.
13. 5. (...), as the Goldsmith does the gold in the fire. (...), i. e.
unapproved, or counterfeit, not reprobates, as it is translated. vide Gr^tius.
your selves whether ye be in the faith, prove your selves, know ye not your
own selves how that Christ is in you except ye be reprobates? or unapproved,
or rejected; by a serious examination of a man's own estate, he may know
whether he has faith or not, whether he be Christ's Spouse, or the Devils
strumpet, whether there be a work of grace upon his heart or not; and
certainly it cannot stand with the glorious wisdom, unspotted righteousness,
and transcendent holiness of God, to put men upon the use of such E^od. 15. 11.
and such means, in order to the obtaining of such an end, if that end could
not be obtained by the use of the means prescribed. Man, that has but a
spark of that wisdom, righteousness, Job 38. 5. 5. 18. 21. 33. verses
compared.
and holiness that is in God, will not put any upon the use of such o^ such
means for the obtaining of health, wealth, or the like, unless there be a
proper tendency in the use of those means prescribed to reach such Abstracts do
better express God, then concretes, and adjectives.
ends; and will God, who is wisdom, righteousness, and holiness in the
abstract? Surely no: God is one infinite perfection in himself, which is
eminently, and virtually all perfections of the creatures; and therefore it is
impossible that God should act below the creature; which he should do if he
should put the creature upon the use of those means that would not reach the
ends, for which the means were used. Thus you clearly see by this seventh
Argument, that believers may in this life attain to a Well-grounded Assurance
of their everlasting happiness, and blessedness.

Eighthly, It was the principal end of Christ's institution of the Sacrament of
the Supper, that he might assure them of his love, and that he might seal up
to them the forgiveness Matthew. 26, 27, 28.
of their sins, the acceptance of their persons, and the salvation of their
souls. The nature of a Seal is to make things sure and firm among Dan. 6 8.
Mat. 27. 66.
men; So the Supper of the Lord is Christ's Broad-seal; it is Christ's
Privyseale, whereby he seals and assures his people, that they are happy here,
that they shall be more happy hereafter, that they are everlastingly beloved of
God, that his heart is set upon them, that their names are written in the 2 Timothy 4. 8.
Book of life, That there is laid up for them a crown of righteousness, and
that nothing shall be able to separate them from him* who is their light, their
life, their Col 3. 11.
crown, their all in all. In this Sacrament Christ comes forth, and shows his
love, his heart, his bowels, his blood, that his children may no longer say,
Does the Lord Jesus love us? does he delight in us, etc? but that they may say
with the Spouse, I am my beloveds, Ca^. 7. 10. (...)
and his desire is toward me. Many precious Christians there are, that have
lain long under fears His desirous affection is toward me, as the wive^ is
toward her dearest husband. So the Hebrew word signifies.
and doubts, sighing and mourning, and that have run from Minister to Minister,
and from one duty to another, etc. and yet could never be persuaded of the love
of Christ to their poor souls, but still their fears and doubts have followed
them, till they have waited upon the Lord in this glorious Ordinance, by which
the Lord has assured them of the remission of their sins, and the salvation of
their souls. In this Ordinance God has given Rev 2. 17.
them mannah to eat, and a white stone, and new name, which no man knows, but
he that receives it. Tell me, you precious believing souls, whether you have
not found God in this Ordinance, often whispering of you in the ear, saying,
Sons and daughters be of Mat. 9. 2.
good cheer, your sins are forgiven you? I know you have.

Those Scriptures that do expressly require Saints to be abundant, and constant
in rejoicing, and in praising of God, to have always harps in their Nulla
verior miseria qu^m falsa laetitia, there is no ^^uer misery then false joy^.
hands, and Hallelujahs in their mouths, do clearly evidence that believers
may attain to a well-grounded Assurance in this life. How can they rejoice and
glory in God, that do not know whether he will be an everlasting friend, or
an everlasting enemy to them, whether he will always breath out love, or
wrath upon them; how can they Psalm. 13 7. 2.
but hang their harps on the Willows that do not know, but that they may live
in a strange land, yea in a land of darkness) all their days? How can they be
cheerful, or thankful, that do not know but that they may at last hear that
heartbreaking, that conscience-wounding, that soul-slaying word, Depart from
me ye cursed into everlasting Matthew. 25. 4. It would even be an endless
business to cite every Scripture wherein this duty is enjoined. It is a duty
that is much pressed in both Testaments, and as little practiced by all
whimpering Christians.
fire, prepared for the devil and his Angels. Now there is no duty in the whole
Book of God, that is more frequently and abundantly pressed upon believers then
this of joy and rejoicing, of praise and thanksgiving, as all know that know
any thing of the Scripture, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16. Rejoice evermore. God would not
have his children always a putting finger in the eye. Ah Christians, remember
what Christ has done for you, and what he is still a doing for you in heaven,
and what he will do for you to all eternity, and spend your days in whining
and mourning if Psalm. 32. 1. Psalm. 33 11. The word notes a fair and comely
grace, for which a thing is to be liked and desired, Ainsw.
you can, Ps. 32. 11. Be glad in the Lord and rejoice ye righteous, and shout
for joy, all ye that are upright in heart, Psalm. 33. 1. Rejoice in the Lord, O
ye Righteous; for praise is comely for the upright. Christians, are not your
mercies greater then your miseries? yes; is your greatest sufferings comparable
to the least spark of grace, or beam of glory revealed in you, or to you? No:
will not one Aeterna erit exultatio qu^ bono l^tatur aeter^o. Their joy lasts
for ever, whose object remains for ever.
hours being in the bosom of Christ recompense you for all your trouble and
travel? Yes; Why then do you spend more time in sighing then in rejoicing,
and why do you by your not rejoicing, sad those precious hearts that God would
not have sadded, and glad those graceless hearts that God would not have
gladded.

A beautiful face is at all times pleasing to the eye, but then especially
when there is joy manifested in the countenance: joy in the face puts a new
beauty, and makes that which before was beautiful to be exceeding beautiful,
it puts a luster and glory upon beauty; so does joy in the face, heart, and
life of a Christian, cast a general splendour and glory upon him, and the ways
of God wherein he walks. The joy of the Lord is not Nehem. 8. 10.
only the strength, but also the beauty and glory of Christians.

Joy and rejoicing is a consequent and effect of assurance, as many believers
by experience find, and therefore Mrs. Kath. Brettergh under the power of
assurance cries out, O the joys, the joys, the unconceiveable joys my heart
is filled with.
without all peradventure believers may attain unto a well-grounded assurance
of their everlasting happiness, else it is impossible that they should rejoice
evermore; so that by this argument, as by the former, it clearly appears, that
believers may in this life be assured of their eternal well being.

The tenth and last Argument to prove, that believers may in this life attain
to a well-grounded assurance, is this, That God would never have made such a
broad difference in the Scripture between the seed of the Genesis 3. 15. Ezeck.
18. Mat. 25. Mat. 3. 12. 2 Cor. 6. 14.
Woman, and the seed of the Serpent, between the righteous and the wicked,
between Saints and sinners, between Sons and Slaves, Sheep and Goats, between
Lions and Lambs, between Wheat and Chafe, Light and Darkness, etc. if it were
impossible for men to know which of these two estates they are in: therefore
they may know whether they are in a state of life, or in a state of death, in a
state of misery, or in a state of felicity; in Mat. 13.
a state of wrath, or in a state of love. O it is much below the grace of God!
it is repugnant to the wisdom of God, to make such a wide difference Joh. 8.
44.
between his own Children and Satan's; if it were not possible for every Child
to know his own Father, and his interest in him, Jer. 3. 19. And Jer. 3. 19.
The Saints Motto is, Tam pius nemo, tam pater nemo; no Father is like our
Father, Romans 8. 15.
I said, thou shall call me, my Father, and shall not turn away from me. Here
God ingages himself that his people shall know him, account him, and
acknowledge him for their Father. Thou shall call me, my Father, Isa. 63. 16.
Doubtless thou art my Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
acknowledge us not; thou O Lord art our Father, and Redeemer, thy name is from
everlasting. The weakest Saint can say, Ioh. 14. 18. (...), God has no child
so young but can more or less call him Father.
Abba, Father; the Lord will not leave his Children comfortless, or as Orphans,
and fatherless children, as it is in the Greek; though the salvation of
believers do not depend upon their knowledge of God to be their Father, yet
their consolation does: Ier. 3. 4. We say he is a wise child that knows his
Father, such wise ones believers are.
therefore the Lord will not be only a Father to Israel, but he will make Israel
know that he is his Father, Jer. 3. 4. Will thou not from this time cry unto
me, my Father, thou art the guide of my youth? By these ten Arguments, it does
evidently appear, that believers may in this life attain unto a well-grounded
Assurance of their everlasting happiness, and blessedness. I shall apply this
a little, and then close up this Chapter.

Use. This precious truth thus proved, looks sourely and wishly upon all those
that affirm that believers cannot in this life attain unto a certain
well-grounded Assurance of their everlasting happiness and blessedness: As
Papists, and Arminians; all know that know their writings, and teachings, that
they are in Arms against this Christ-exalting, and soule-cheering Doctrine of
Assurance. I know no such thing, as Assurance of Heaven in this life, says
Greevinchovius, the Arminian. Assurance is a Pearl that Sensum electionis ad
gloriam in hac vita nullam agnosco, Greevinchov.
they trample under feet; it is a beam of Heaven that has so much light,
brightness, and shining glory in it, that their bleer eyes cannot behold it.
Assurance is glory in the bud, it is the Suburbs of Paradise; it is a cluster
of the land of Promise; it is a spark of God; it is the joy and crown of a
Christian, the greater is their impiety and folly that deny assurance, that cry
down assurance under any names or notions whatsoever. They are rather
tormenters then comforters, that say, poor souls may know, that there is a
crown of Righteousness, but they must not presume to know, that they shall
have the honor to wear that Crown: Is the surety of the New Covenant grown
so poor* Heb. 7. 22. 2. Is the promise now come to be yea and nay? 2 Cor. 1.
20. 3 Is the power of God grown so weak? 1 Pet. 1. 5. 4 Is the decreeing will
of God become mutable, 2 Timothy 2. 19. 5 Is the free eternal, and everlasting
love of God become changeable, Jer. 31. 3. Joh. 13. 1. that these things can
be? Ezekiel. 13. 22.
and that makes God like King Xerxes, who crowned his Steersman in the morning,
and beheaded him in the evening of the same day. Arminians are not ashamed to
say that God may crown a man one hour, and uncrowne him the next; they blush
not to say that a man may be happy and miserable under love, and under wrath,
an heir of heaven, and a firebrand of hell, a child of light, and a child of
darkness, and all in an hour. O what miserable comforters are these? what is
this, but to torment the weary soul? to disspirit the wounded spirit, and to
make them most sad, whom God would have most glad. Ah, how sad is it for men to
affirm, that wounded souls may know, That the Son of righteousness Mal. 4. 2.
has healing in his wings, but they cannot be assured that they shall be
healed. The hungry soul may Luke 15. 17.
know that there is bread enough in his Fathers house, but cannot know that he
shall taste of that bread: The naked soul may know that Christ has Rev. 3. 18.
Robes of righteousness to cover all the spots, sores, defects, and deformities
of it, but may not presume to know that Christ will put those royal Robes upon
it: The impoverished soul may know that there be unsearchable Ephesians. 3. 8.
(...), not to b^ traced out.
riches in Christ, but cannot be assured that ever it shall partake of those
riches; all that these men allow poor fowls, is guesses, and conjectures that
it may be well with them; they will not allow souls to say with Thomas, My
Lord, and my God; nor with Job, to say, My Redeemer lives; nor with Joh. 20 28.
Job 19. 25. Can. 7. 10.
the Church, I am my beloveds, and his desire is toward me: And so they leave
souls in a cloudy, questioning, doubting, hovering condition, hanging like
Mahomets Tomb at Mecha, between two Load* stones; or like Erasmus, as the
Papists paint him, hanging betwixt heaven and hell. They make the poor soul ( a
magor missabib) a terror to it self.

What more uncomfortable Doctrine then this? what more soule-disquieting, and
soul-unsetling doctrine then this? Thou art this moment in a state of life,
thou may the next moment be in a state of death; thou art now gracious,
thou may the next hour be graceless: Thou art now in the promised Land,
yet thou may dye in the wilderness: Thou art to day a habitation for God,
thou may The heathens used to absolve men by giving them white stones, and
condemn them by giving them black ones.
tomorrow be a Synagogue of Satan: Thou have to day received the Whitestone of
absolution, thou may tomorrow receive the Black-stone of condemnation. Thou
art now in thy Saviors Arms, thou may tomorrow be in Satan's Paws: Thou art
now Christ's free man, thou may tomorrow be Satan's bondman: Thou art now a
vessel of honor, thou may suddenly become a vessel of wrath: Thou art now
greatly beloved, thou may soon be as greatly loathed* This day thy name is
fairly written in the Book of life, tomorrow the Book may be crossed, and thy
name blotted out for ever. This is the Arminians doctrine; and if this be not
to keep souls in a doubting and trembling, and shivering condition, what is
it? Well, Christians, Remember this is your happiness and blessedness, That
none can pluck you out of your Fathers hand; That you are kept (as in a
Garrison, or as with a Guard) by the power of God through faith unto salvation:
That the Mountains shall depart, Ioh. 10. 29. 1 Pet. 1. 5. (...) kept safe, and
fast as in a strong Garrison. Isa. 54. 10. Heb. 7. 25.
and the hills be removed, but the kindness of the Lord shall not depart from
you, neither shall the Covenant of peace be removed, says the Lord, that has
mercy on you: That Christ ever lives to make intercession for you: And that men
and devils are as able, and shall as soon make a world, dethrone God, pluck the
Sun out of the Firmament, and Christ out of the bosom of the Father as they
shall pluck a believer out of the everlasting Arms of Christ, or rob him of one
of his precious Jewels. I shall close up this Chapter, with an Deuteronomy. 33. 26, 27
Mal 3. 17.
excellent saying of Luther. The whole Scripture, says he, does principally
aim at this thing, that we should not doubt, but that we should hope, that we
should trust, that we should believe, that God is a merciful, a bountiful, a
gracious, and a patient God to his people.

CHAP. II. Containing several weighty Propositions concerning Assurance.
THE first Proposition that I shall lay down concerning Assurance, is this,
That God denies Assurance for a time to his dearest and choysest ones, and that
upon many considerable grounds.

As first, for the exercise of their grace; a gracious soul would always be
upon Mount Tabor, looking into Canaan, he would always be in his Fathers
arms, and under his Fathers smiles, he would always be in the Sunshine of
divine favor, he would always have the heavens open, that Tam pater nemo,
tum pius nemo, Tertul.
he might always see his Christ and his Crown, he would, with Peter, be
always upon the Mount, he is loath to walk through the valley of darkness,
through the valley of Baca. As Genesis 14. 21. If Saints should always have
Assurance, they would be too apt to say ( bonum est esse hic) it is good for us
to be here.
the King of Sodom said once to Abraham, Give me the persons, and take the
goods to thy self. So gracious souls are apt to say, Give me joy, give me
peace, give me Assurance, and do you take trials, afflictions, and
temptations, to your selves. But pray what use would there be of the Stars,
if the Sun did always shine? why none; why no more use would there be of
your graces, if Assurance should be always continued; therefore the Lord for
the exercise of his childrens faith, hope, patience, etc. is pleased (at least
for a time) to deny them Assurance, though they seek it by earnest prayer, and
with a flood of penitent tears.

Secondly, The Lord denies Assurance to his dearest ones, that he may keep them
in the exercise of those Religious duties that are most costly, and contrary to
flesh and blood, as to mourning, repenting, selfe-judging, selfe-loathing,
selfe-abhorring, and selfe-searching; As that 1 Samuel 16. For these things I
weep, mine eye, mine eye runs down with water, because the comforter that
should relieve my soul, is far from me, Chap. 3. verse 2, 3. He has led me,
and brought me into darkness, (...)
not into light; Surely against me he is Bring back my soul, or fetch again
my soul i. e. Comfort, refresh, and rejoice me as in former times. (...)
turned, he turns his hand against* me all the day, verse 17. And thou have
removed my soul far off from peace: I forgot prosperity. Now what this sad
dealings of God puts the Church upon, you may see in verse 40. Let us search
and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord: And if you look throughout (...)
the book, you shall find the These two Hebrew words are joined together to
intimate to us, that diligent narrow and accurate enquiry that they should make
into their ways to search as men do into the bowels of the earth for the
discovery of rich mines and treasures; Which made one of the Rabbis cry out, (
veniat Messiah at ego non videam) let the Messiah come, but let not me see him.
Church much in selfe-examining, selfe-judging, selfe-loathing, etc. upon this
ground, That God had hid his face, and drawn a curtain between him and them,
and stood at a distance from them, and would not speak comfortably, and
friendly to them.

Now if you ask me why God will put his children upon those duties of Religion
that are most costly and contrary to flesh and blood:

I answer first, That his strength and power may appear in their weakness, 2
Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9.

2 To discover not only the truth, but also the strength of their graces; a
little grace will put a man upon those Religious duties that are easy, and
pleasing to flesh and blood, and not chargeable, but rather profitable, and
pleasureable, but it must be strength of grace that puts a man upon those
services that are costly and cross to the Old man.

3 That they may be more fully and eminently conformable to Christ their Head,
who from first to last, who even from the cradle to the cross was most
exercised in those duties and services that were most costly and cross to
flesh and blood, as is most evident to all that study the writings of the Holy
Ghost, more then the writings of men.

4 Because in the performance of such duties they do in a more singular way
bear up the name and credit, the honor and glory of God, Christ and the Gospel
in the world; the very world will cry out, Ah these are Christians indeed.

5 Because the more they are in the exercise of such duties, the greater, at
last, will be their reward.

6 That Satan's plots, and designs Heb. 11. 7.
may be the better prevented, and the wicked world more justly condemned, who
do not only despise the hardest duties of Religion, but also neglect Mat. 25.
4. 46.
the easiest.

The third Reason why God denies Assurance to his most precious ones, is, Ier.
2. 19.
that they may be the more clearly and fully convinced of that exceeding
sinfulness, and bitterness that is in sin. Ah Lord, says the soul, that
sits sighing and mourning, under the want of Assurance, I see now that sin is
not only evil, but the greatest evil in the world, in that it keeps me from
an Assurance of my interest in thee who art the greatest good in the world, and
from an Assurance of that favor of thine that is better then life, Sin is,
Malum Catholicum; It Is aeterna macula; It Is corruption optimi pessima. Ps. 63. 3,
4. Ps. 4 7.
and from the light of thy sweet countenance, that is better then corn and
wine, and oil; and from those joys and comforts that can only make a
Paradise in my soul. Ah This made one cry out, Quid restat O peccator, nisi ut
in tota vita tua deplores rotam vitam tuam; O what then remains but in our
whole life to lament the sins of our whole life.
Lord now I find sin not only to be bitter, but to be the very
quintessence of bitterness: Ah, no bitterness so bitter as sin, that keeps
my soul from that sweet assurance, that is not only the top and crown of
mercy, but also the sweetner of all mercy, misery, and glory. Oh what
unspeakable evil do I now see in that evil that keeps me from the most
desirable good. Oh what bitterness do I now find in that which Satan, the Heb.
3. 13. Sin has its original from a deceitful subtle Serpent, and is the
ground of all the deceit in the world, and is the great couzner of souls. Yea
peccatum est Deicidium, Sin is a killing of God.
world, and my own deluded heart told me I should find sweetness in. Ah, now
I find by experience, that to be true, which long since the faithful
Messengers of the Lord have told me, viz. That sin debaseth the soul of man,
that it defiles and pollutes the soul of man, that it renders the soul most
unlike to God, (who is optimum maximum) the best and greatest, who is ( omnia
super omnia) all, and above all, and renders it most like to Satan, who is a
very sea and sink of sin. That it has robbed the soul of the image of God,
the holiness of God, the beauty of God, the glory of God, the righteousness
of God, and that keeps the soul from wearing this Golden Chain of Assurance.

A fourth reason, why God denies Assurance to his dearest ones, is, because
Christus op er nostra non tam actibus quam finibus pensat. Zanchius, The glory
of God must consume all other ends, as the Sun puts our the light of the fire.
they seek Assurance more for themselves, then they do for his honor and
glory; more that they may have joy without sorrow, comfort without torment,
peace without trouble, sweet without bitter, light without darkness, and day
without night; then that he may be exalted and admired, and his name alone
made great and glorious in the world.

Many Christians are like the Be that flies into the field to seek honey to
eat, but brings it not into the Masters hive; So they seek for Assurance, that
they may feed upon that sweet honycomb, more, then to fill their Lord and
Masters hive with thanks and praise.

That servant that minds his wages more then his work, must not wonder if his
Master be slack in paying; no more should he that minds comfort, more then
obedience, that minds It was a notable saying of Nazianzen, Let me (says he)
be cast into the Sea, let me lose my place rather then the name of Christ
should suffer; so tender was he of the honor and glory of Christ.
assurance more then divine honor, wonder that God delays the givings in of
assurance, though it be sought with many prayers and tears. He that is most
tender of Gods honor, shall find by experience that God is most mindful of
his comfort. God will not see that soul fit long in sackcloath and ashes, that
makes it his business to set him up upon his Throne. He that minds Gods glory,
more then his own good, shall quickly find that God will even obscure his
own glory to do him good. If we are not wanting to Gods glory, he will not
long be wanting to our joy.

A fifth reason why God denies Assurance to his children, is, that when they
have it, they may the more highly prize it, the more carefully keep it, the
more wisely improve it, and the more affectionately and effectually bless God
for it; none sets such a price upon light, as he that has lain long in a
Dungeon of darkness: Life without light, is but a life-lesse life. Mich 7. 8,
9.
So none sets such a price upon Assurance, as those children of light that have
walked most in spiritual darkness. Ah! how sweet was the Jonah 2 2.
light to Jonah that had been in the belly of hell; so is Assurance to those
that (through slavish fears, and unbelief) have made their beds in hell, as
the Psalmist speaks. Gold that is Psalm. 139. 8.
far fetched, and dearly bought, is Socrates prized the Kings countenance above
his coin his good looks above his gold; so do Saints prize Assurance above all
worldly enjoyments.
most highly esteemed; so that Assurance that costs the soul most pains and
patience, most waiting and weeping, most striving, and wrestling, is most
highly valued, and most wisely improved. As by the want of temporals, God
teaches his people the better to prize them, and improve them when they enjoy
them; so by the want of spirituals, God teaches his people the better to prize
them, and improve them, when they enjoy them. Numb. 14. 33. 34. Exodus 11. Ezra
1.
Ah, how sweet was Canaan to those that had been long in a wilderness. How
precious was the gold and earrings to Israel, that had been long in Egypt, and
the gifts and Jewels to the Jews that had been long in Babylon? so is
Assurance to those precious souls The longer I stay for the Empire, said the
Emperors son, the greater it will be: So the longer a Saint stays for
Assurance, the greater at last it will be.
that have been long without it, but at last come to enjoy it. After the
Trojans had been wandering a long time in the Mediterranean Sea, as soon as they
espied land, they cried out with exulting joy, Italy, Italy; so when poor
souls shall come to enjoy Assurance, who have been long tossed up and down in
a sea of sorrow and trouble, how will they with joy cry out, Assurance,
Assurance, Assurance.

The sixth reason, why God denies Assurance to his dearest ones (at Humility
is, Conservatrix virtutum, says On^^
least for a time) is, that they be kept humble and low in their own eyes; as
the enjoyment of mercy glads us, so the want of mercy humbles us. David's heart
was never more low, then when he had a Crown only in hope, but not in hand.
No sooner was the Crown set upon his head, but his blood rises with his
outward good, and in the pride of his heart, he says, I shall never be
removed. Hezekiah was Psalm. 30. 6. 2 Chronicles. 32. The whole Chapter is worthy of
reading.
a holy man, yet he swells big under mercy: No sooner does God lift up his
house higher then others, but he lifts up his heart in pride, higher then
others. When God had made him As I get good by my sins, so I get hurt by my
graces, said Mr. Fox, they being accidental occasions of pride to him.
high in honors, riches, victories, I, and in spiritual experiences, then his
heart flies high, and he forgets God, and forgets himself, and forgets that
all his mercies were from free mercy, that all his mercies were but borrowed
mercies. Surely, it is better to want any mercy, then an humble heart, it is
better to have no mercy, then want an humble heart. A little, Augustine says
that the first, second, and third virtue of a Christian is humility.
little mercy with an humble heart, is far better then the greatest mercies
with a proud heart. I had rather have Paul's coat with his humble heart, then
Hezekiahs lifted up heart with his rich Treasures, and royal Robes. Well
Christians, remember this, God has two strings to his bow; if your hearts will
not lie humble and low under the sense of sin and misery, he will God has
two hands, a hand open, and a hand shut, and he makes use of both to keep souls
humble.
make them lie low under the want of some desired mercy. The want of Assurance
tends to bow and humble the soul, as the enjoyment of Assurance does to raise
and rejoice the soul, and therefore do not wonder why precious souls are so
long without assurance, why Christ's Charet ( Assurance) Judge. 5 28.
is so long a coming.

The seventh, and last reason, why God denies Assurance (for a time) even to
his dearest ones, is, that they may live clearly and fully upon Jesus Christ,
that Jesus Christ may be seen Col. 3. 11. ( Omne bonum in summo bono) All good
is in the chiefest good; Christ is all things to a Christian, he is bread to
feed them, a* fountain to refresh them, a Physician to heal them, a rock to
shelter them, a light to guide them, and a crown to crown them.
to be all in all. It is natural to the soul, to rest upon every thing below
Christ, to rest upon creatures, to rest upon graces, to rest upon duties, to
rest upon divine manifestations, to rest upon celestial consolations, to rest
upon gracious evidences, and to rest upon sweet Assurances. Now the Lord to
cure his people of this weakness, (and to bring them to live wholly and solely
upon Jesus Christ) denies comfort, and denies assurance, etc. and for a time
leaves his children of light to walk in darkness. Christians, this you are
always to remember, that though the enjoyment of assurance makes most for your
consolation, yet the living purely upon Christ in the want of assurance makes
most for his Heb 11. 27. Isa. 60. 19. Mic. 7. 3. 9. John 20. 28, 29
exaltation. No Christian to him that in the want of visibles, can live upon an
invisible God, that in thick darkness can live upon God as an everlasting
light. He is happy that believes upon seeing, upon feeling; but thrice happy
are those souls that believe when they do not see, that love when they do
not know that they are beloved, and that in the Christ is omni^ super omnia.
want of all (comfort and assurance) can live upon Christ as their only all.
He that has learned this holy art cannot be miserable; he that is ignorant
of this art cannot be happy.

The second Proposition is this, That the Scripture has many sweet significant
words to express that well-grounded Assurance by, which believers may attain
to in this life: sometimes it is called a persuasion, Romans 8. 38. I am
persuaded that neither 1 There is a natural persuasion; namral principles may
persuade a man that there is a God, and that this God is a great God: a
beauteous God, etc. but this will not make a man happy. 2 There is a moral
persuasion. 3 There is a traditional persuasion.
death, nor life, etc. shall be able to separate us from the love of God which
is ^n Christ Jesus our Lord. It is rendered a perspicuous and peculiar
manifestation of Christ to the soul, John 14. 21, 22, 23, 24. It is often
rendered to know, as in that 1 John 3. chap. 2. 14. 19. 24. verses, and chap. 5.
13. 19, etc. but the word that the Scripture does most fully express this by,
is ( plerophoria) full assurance, that is, when the soul (by the Spirit and
word) is so fully persuaded of its eternal happiness and blessedness; that
its carried like 4 There is a divine persuasion that flows from divine
principles and causes.
Noah's* Arc above al waves, doubts and fears, and Noah-like fits still and
quiet, and can with the Apostle Paul triumph over sin, hell, wrath, death,
and devil. This is sometimes called Col. 2. 2. Heb. 6 11. 18, 19 cha. 10. 22.
full assurance of understanding, sometimes it is called full assurance of
hope; and sometimes it is called full assurance of faith, because these are the
choice and pleasant springs, from whence assurance flows. Now though this full
assurance is earnestly desired, and highly This full Assurance is the maximum
quod sic, the highest pinnacle of Assurance.
prized, and the want of it much lamented, and the enjoyment of it much
endeavored after by all Saints, yet it is only obtained by a few. Assurance is a
mercy too good for most men's hearts; it is a Crown too weighty for most men's
heads. Assurance is optimum maximum, the best and greatest mercy, and therefore
God will only give it to his best and dearest friends.

Augustus in his solemn feasts, gave trifles to some, but gold to others;
honors, and riches, etc. are trifles that God gives to the worst of men; Rev.
3. 18.
But Assurance is that tried gold, that God only gives to tried friends. Among
those few that have a share or Most Saints I believe can give aloud testimony
to this truth. I shall rejoice when their experiences shall confute ^r
portion in the special love and favor of God, there are but a very few that
have an assurance of his love. It is one mercy for God to love the soul, and
another mercy for God to assure the soul of his love. God writes many a man's
name in the Book of life, and yet will not let him know it till his hour of
death, as the experience of many precious souls does clearly evidence.
Assurance is a flower of Paradise that God sticks but Romans 8. 16, 17.
in a few men's bosoms. It is one thing to be an heir of heaven, and another
thing for a man to know, or see himself an heir of heaven. The child in the
arms may be heir to a Crown, a Kingdom, and yet not understand it; so many a
Saint may be heir to a Crown, a Kingdom of glory, and yet not know it. As
the babes that passes the pangs of the first birth, do not presently cry
Father, Father; so the newborn Babes in Christ that have 1 Pet. 2. 2.
past the pangs of the second birth, do not presently cry Abba Father, they
do not presently cry out, Heaven, Heaven is ours; Glory, Glory is ours.

The third Proposition is this, That The third Proposition.
a man may have true grace that has not Assurance of the love and favor The
blind man in the Gospel called his faith unbeleef.
of God, or of the remission of his sins, and salvation of his soul. A man may
be truly holy, and yet not have assurance that he shall be eternally happy. A
man may be Gods, and yet he not know it; his estate may be good, and yet he not
see it; he may Mat. 15. 22. 29.
be in a safe condition, when he is not in a comfortable condition: All may be
well with him in the Court of glory, when he would give a thousand worlds,
that all were but well in the court of conscience.

The Canaanite woman showed much love, wisdom, zeal, humility, and faith, yea
such strength of faith, as makes Christ admire her, and yield to her, grace
her, and gratify her, and yet she had no assurance that we read of. So Paul
speaking of the believing Ephesians 1. 13. They that honor God by sealing to his
truth, those God will honor by sealing them with his Spirit.
Ephesians says, In whom ye also trusted after that ye heard the word of
truth, the Gospel of your salvation; in whom also after that ye believed, ye
were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise. First, They heard the word; and
then secondly, they believed; and then thirdly, they were sealed, that is fully
assured of a heavenly inheritance, of a Saints have eternal life, 1 In praetio,
2 In promisso, 3 In primitiis.
purchased possession. So 1 John, 5. 13. These things have I written unto you
that believe on the name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have
eternal life, and that ye may believe on the name of the Son of God. So in
that Isa. 50. 10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the
voice of his servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light? let him
trust in the name of the Lord, and stay himself upon his God. So in that Mich.
7. 8. 9. verses, Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, when I fall, I shall
arise, when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me: I will bear
the indignation (...)
of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and
Zagnaph Signifies vehement anger, with a sad and lowering countenance, Dan. 1.
10. vide Mer^.
execute judgment for me; he will bring me forth to the light, and I shall
behold his Righteousness. Asaph was a very holy man, a man eminent in grace,
and yet without assurance, as may be seen at large in that 77. Ps. Heman
(doubtless) was a very precious soul, and yet from his youth up, he was
(even) distracted with terrors, Psalm 88. There are thousand Christians that
are in a state of grace, and shall be Isa. 8. 17. Chap. 49. 14, 15, 16. Chapter
54, 6 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
saved, that want assurance, and the proper effects of it, as high joy, pure
comfort, glorious peace, and vehement longings after the coming of Christ.

Assurance is requisite to the wellbeing of a Christian, but not to the being,
it is requisite to the consolation of a Christian, but not to the salvation of
a Christian; it is requisite to the well-being of Grace, but not to the mere
being of Grace. Though a man cannot be saved without faith, yet he may be
saved without assurance. God has in many places of the Scripture declared,
that without faith God never said except you be assured, I will pardon you, I
will never pardon you, except you are assured, I will save you, I will never
save you; this is language God never spoke, and why then should men speak it?
there is no salvation; but God has not in any one place of Scripture
declared, that without assurance there is no salvation. A man must first be
saved, before he can be assured of his salvation; for he cannot be assured of
that which is not: and a man must have saving grace, before he can be saved;
for he cannot be saved by that which he has not. Again, a man must be
ingrafted into Christ, before he can be assured of remission, or salvation, but
this he cannot be before he has faith, therefore there may be grace, where
there is no assurance. Christ went to heaven in a cloud, and the Angel went up
to heaven in the smoke and flame of the sacrifice, and so I doubt not, but many
precious souls do ascend to heaven in clouds Act. 1. 9. Judge. 13. 20.
and darkness. Now a man may have grace, and yet want assurance, and that may
arise from these causes.

First, from his cavilling spirit, and Cease cavilling thou weak soul, and say
( Quod fui Demine ignosce, quod sum corrige quod ero dirige) O Lord forgive
what I have been, correct what I am, direct what I shall be.
from his siding with the old man against the new, with the flesh against the
spirit, with corruption against grace, with the house of Saul, against the
house of David, with the work of Satan, against the work of God. Sin is
Satan's work, grace, holiness, is Gods; yet such is the weakness, yea madness
of many poor souls, that they will fall in, and side with Satan's work,
rather then with Gods against their own souls. Ah Christians, will you
condemn that Judge for injustice, and unrighteousness, that shall open his
ears to the complaints of the Plaintiff, but stop his ears against When John
Prostiborski Baron of Schanow was laid on the rack, he with an heroical
indignation cut out his tongue, and cast it away, being demanded why he did so,
set down his answer with a quill on the wall, I did it (said he) because I
would not be brought by any tortures to say any thing, that is false against my
self, or others. Ah, cavilling souls, I had almost said, that you were better
cut out your tongues then suffer them to be still a cavilling against the grace
of God, the image of God, that is stamped upon you.
the answers of the Defendant; and will you not condemn your selves for that
you do with both ears hear what Sin and Satan has to say against the
soul, but have not one ear open to hear what the Spirit, what grace, what
the New-man, what the noble part of man, what the regenerate man can say for
the justification, satisfaction, and consolation of the soul. Let me tell
thee, O thou cavilling soul, that it is thy wisdom, and thy duty to remember
that that command of God, that does prohibit thee from bearing false witness
against thy neighbor, that same command does enjoyne thee not to bear false
witness against the work of grace upon thy own heart, against the precious
and glorious things that God has done for thy soul. And thou should make as
much conscience of bearing false witness against any thing the Lord has
wrought in thee, and for thee, as thou do make conscience of bearing false
witness against thy neighbor. It cannot but be sad with the soul, but be
night with the soul, when it makes much conscience of the one, and no
conscience of the other. Many heathens have been so loving and faithful one to
another, that they would rather dye, then they would bear false witness one
against another: How dare you cavilling souls then to bear false witness
against your own souls, and the gracious work of the Lord upon them. If this
be not the way to keep off assurance, and keep the soul in darkness, yea in
a hell, I know nothing.

Again, a man may have grace, and yet want assurance, and that may arise in
the second place from the exceeding littleness, and weakness of Matthew. 14.
30, 31. Mark 9. 24.
his grace. A little Candle yields but a little light, and a little grace
yields but a little evidence: Great measures of grace carries with them great
and clear evidences, but little measures carries with them but little evidence.
Some Stars are so small that they are scarce discernable; So some Saints Luke
13 18, 19. Pythagoras says, That Mustard Seed has the preeminence among those
things whose power is to ascend upwards Pli^. in h^s Rhet. Hist. lib. 20. cha.
22. speaks more of this grain, vide.
graces are so small, that they can hardly see their graces to be graces. A
little fire will yield but a little heat; a little grace will yield but a
little comfort, a little evidence: A little grace will yield a man a heaven
hereafter; but it is a great deal of grace that must yield us heaven here. A
little stock will bring in but a little profit, a little grace will bring in
but a little peace: A little Jewel yields but a little luster, a little glory;
no more does a little grace; and therefore it is that Christians that have but
a little grace, have but a little of the shine and luster of Assurance, they
have but little joy and comfort in this world. Yet that the spirits of weak
Christians may not utterly faint, let me give them this hint, viz. That the
weakest Christian The Babe in the arms, as much propriety in the Father, as he
that is grown up to ripe years, though he cannot make such improvement of it,
as the other.
is as much justified, as much pardoned, as much adopted, and as much united to
Christ as the strongest, and has as much interest and propriety in Christ, as
the highest and noblest Christian that breaths, though he cannot make so much
advantage and improvement of his interest and propriety as the strong
Christian, who has a greater degree of grace.

Hierom observes upon the Beatitudes, that there are many of the promises made
to weak grace, Mat. 5. A child's hand may receive a pearl, as well as the hand
of a Giant; so may a weak faith, a Christ as well as a strong.
3. 4. Blessed are the poor in spirit; v. 4. Blessed are they that mourn; and
v. 5. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst. Weak Saints, remember this, the
promise is a ring of gold, and Christ is the precious tried stone in that ring,
and upon that stone must you rest, as you would have grace to thrive, and your
souls to be safe and happy. Weak souls, remember this; as Joseph sent
Chariots to bring his Father, Genesis 45.
and his brethren to him, so God would have your weak graces to be as
Chariots to bring you to himself who is the cherisher, strengthner, and
increaser of grace: He that makes his graces to be servants, and handmaids to
convey him to Christ, the It would very much discomfort us, and terrify us, to
see one haunt us that was long since laid in the grave, whose resurrection we
did neither fear, nor repent till the sounding of the last Trumpet.
fountain of grace; he shall find the greatest sweetness in grace, and the
greatest increase of grace.

Again, a man may have true grace, and yet want assurance, and this may arise
from the resurrection of old sins; Ah when those sins which were long since
committed, and long since lamented, and long since loathed, and long since
crucified, when those old sins, which has cost a soul many prayers, and many
tears, and many sighs, and may groans, and many complaints, when those sins
that have been long buried, shall be again revived, and meet the soul, and
stare upon the soul, and say to the soul, We are thine, and we will follow
thee, we are thine, and we will haunt thee: Ah, how will this cause a man's
countenance to be changed, his thoughts to be troubled, his joints to be
loosed, and his heart to be amazed; David, and Job meeting with the sins of
their youth (long after they were Psalm. 25. 7. Job 13 26.
lamented and pardoned) makes their hearts startle and tremble. Upon the new
risings of old sins, the soul begins to question all, and thus to
expostulate the case, Surely my estate is not good, my pardon is not sealed, if
it be, how comes these sins to be revived, to be remembered? has not God
engaged himself in the promises Isa. 43. 25: Jer. 31. 34.
of Grace, that those sins that are pardoned, shall never be remembered? and
surely if these sins be not pardoned, I have reason to fear that others be
not pardoned; and if my sins be not pardoned, how shall I escape being
destroyed: Surely my repentance was not sound; my sorrow was not sincere, the
blow, the wound I gave sin, was not mortal, if it had, how comes it to pass
that it now meets me like an armed enemy. Thus these new risings of old sins
keeps many a man's soul, and assurance asunder.

Again, a man may have grace, and yet want assurance, and this may arise
Perfection is desirable on earth, but shall be only enjoyed in heaven. It was
a sweet saying of One ( In libro t^o scribuntur omnes qui quod possunt faciunt
si quod debent non possunt) They are surely written all* in Gods Book, that do
what they can, though they cannot but under do.
from his falling short of that perfection that the word requires, and that
other Saints have attained to: Ah, says such a soul, surely I have no grace!
Oh how short do I fall of such and such righteous rules, and of such and such
precious Christians! Ah how clear are they in their light, how strong are they
in their love; how high are they in their seize; how are their hearts
filled with grace, and their lives with holiness; all their motions toward
God, and toward man, speaks out Grace, Grace; they pray indeed like Saints,
and live indeed like Angels. Now many poor souls comparing themselves with
the perfect rule of righteousness, and with those that are in the highest
forms in Christ's School, and that are the noblest and choicest patterns for
purity, and sanctity, and finding such a vast disproportion between their
hearts, and the rule between their actions and lives, and the lives and actions
of others, they are apt to fit down sadded and discouraged.

Suetonius reports of Julius Caesar, that seeing Alexanders statue, he fetched
a deep sigh, because he at that age had none so little; So many precious
Remember this. Though your consolation depends upon degrees of grace, yet your
salvation depends upon the truth of grace.
souls sit down sighing and weeping, that they have lived so long, and done
so little for God, and for their own internal, and eternal good. This wounds
and sinkes their spirits, that they are so unlike to those in Grace, that they
desire to be like unto in Glory; and that they are so far below such and such
in spirituals, whom they are so far above in temporals.

5 Again, a man may have true grace, and yet want assurance; and this may arise
from that smoke and clouds, those fears and doubts that corruption raises in
the soul; so that the soul cannot see those excellent The being of grace is a
different thing from the seeing of grace. The blind man, you know in the
Gospel, calls his faith, unbeleef.
graces that otherwise might be discerned, though there may be many precious
gems and jewels in the house, yet the smoke may hinder a man from seeing them
sparkle and shine: So though there be many precious graces in the souls of
Saints, yet corruption may raise such a dust, such a smoke in the soul, that
the soul is not able to see them in the beauty and glory. Genesis 21. 19, 20
The Well of water was near Hagar, but she saw it not till her eyes were opened
by the Lord. So grace is near the soul, yea in the soul sometimes, and yet the
soul does not see it till God opens the Genesis 28.
eye and shows it. The Lord was in this Yet a Saint at worst, is not like him
in Plutarch, who would not be resolved of his doubts, because he would not
lose the pleasure in seeking for resolution. No he loves and looks, and longs
for resolution to all his doubts.
place, said Jacob, and I knew it not; so many a precious soul may say, Grace
was in my heart, and I knew it not, I saw it not. Blessed Bradford in one of
his Epistles, says thus, O Lord, meethinks, I feel it so with me, sometimes as
if there were no difference between my heart and the heart of the wicked; my
mind is as blind as theirs, my spirit as stout, stubborn, and rebellious as
theirs, and my thoughts as confused as theirs, and my affections as disordered
as theirs, and s^rvices as formal as theirs, etc. Ah, Christians, have not many
of your souls found it so? Surely yes; no wonder then, that though you have
grace, yet you have not seen it sparkling and shining in your souls, as some
have thought that their fields have had no corn, because they have been so
full of weeds, and that their heap has no wheat, because nothing has appeared
but chafe, and that their pile has no gold, because it has been covered with
much dross: So some have thought that their hearts have been void of grace,
because they have been so full of Matthew. 14 30 Mat. 12. 15. Gen 20. Chap.
fears and doubts. Peter at one time believes, and walks, at another time he
doubts and sinkes; Abraham believes, and offers up Isaac at one time, he
fears and falls at another time, Say thou art my sister lest they kill me. So
David and Job, they had their shufflings, tremblings, faintings, shakings,
Psalm. 116. 11. Psalm 31. 22.
and questionings. It is not always high water with Saints, sometimes they are
reduced to a very low ebb. The best of Saints are like the Rara hora, brevis
mora, Ber.
Arc tossed up and down with waves, with fears, and doubts; and so it will
be till they are quite in the bosom of Christ.

6 Lastly, a man may have grace, and yet not see it, yet not know it; and this
may arise from his non-searching, his non-examining, his non-ransacking of his
own soul; there is gold in the Mine, and men might find it, if they would
but dig and search diligently after it. There is grace in the heart, and you
might see it, if you would but take the candle of the Lord, and look narrowly
after it. Look as many a man upon a diligent search, may find his temporal
estate to be better then he apprehends Worthless Dayses grow in sight upon
the surface of the earth, but the precious and richest rarities are hid within
the bowels of the earth. You are wise, and know how to apply it.
it: So many choice souls upon a diligent search may find their spiritual
estate to be far better then they conceived or judged it to be; therefore
souls cease from complaining, cease from rash judging, and dooming of your
selves to hell, and be diligent in enquiring what the Lord has done, and what
the Lord is a doing in you, and for you; compare the books together, compare
his working upon you, and others together; what is there no light? no love, no
longings, no hungrings, no thirstings after God; what is there no The cry that
was heard in the Temple was ( migremus hinc) Let us go hence, Let us go hence.
sighing, no complaining, no mourning under the sense of sin, and under the
want of divine favor: Surely if you search, you will find some of these
things; and if you do, prize them as jewels that are more worth then a world.
God will not despise the day of small things; and will you? will you, dare you
say that that is little, that is more worth then heaven? the least spark of
grace shall at last be turned into a crown of glory. Well, remember this, that
as the least grace, if true, and sincere, is sufficient to salvation; so the
sense of the least grace should be sufficient to your consolation.

The fourth Proposition is this, viz. The fourth Proposition.
That God may deny assurance long, and yet give it in to his children at last,
after patient waiting. God appears to David, and brings him out of an horrible
pit (or out of a pit of noise) and Psalm. 4. 1, 2, 3* 4.
sets his feet upon a rock, and puts a new song into his mouth. After the
Church in the Canticles had run through Chap. 3. 5.
many hazards and hardships; many difficulties and dangers, she finds him whom
her soul loved. The Prophet sits Psalm. 69. 2, 3.
down, and bewayles his sad condition Verse. 20.
thus, I am weary of my crying, my throat is dried, mine eyes fail while I
wait for my God. And I am full of heaviness, and I looked for some to take
pity, but there was none, and for comforters, but I found none. I but at last,
God appears, and then says he, I will praise the name of Verse. 30. Job 8. 9.
God with a song, and will magnify him, with thanksgiving. Job sighs it out,
Behold, I go forward, but he is not there, and backward, but I cannot perceive
him: On the left hand where he does work, but I cannot behold him; he hides
himself on the right hand, that I cannot see him. Chap. 27. 5, 6.
But after this sighing, he sings it out, Till I dye I will not remove my
integrity from me: My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go; my
heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.

Mr. Frogmorten was as holy, and as choice a Preacher as most was in England in
those days, and he lived seven and thirty years without assurance, and then
dyed, having assurance but an hour before he dyed; he went to dye at Mr. Dods
(who is now with the Lord) and did dye there in full Assurance of the
justification of his person, Experience does abundantly evidence that this is
the manner of Gods dealing with abundance of those precious souls, of whom this
world is not worthy. I could say much to this point from my own knowledge, but
I must forbear lighting a candle to see the Sun at noon.
the remission of his sins, and the salvation of his soul. God denied
assurance a great while to Mr. Glover, though he sought it with many prayers
and tears; and yet when he was in sight of the fire, the Lord shined forth in
his favor so sweerly upon him, that he cries out to his friend, He is come, he
is come, meaning the Comforter. So Mrs. Katherine Bretterge after many bitter
conflicts with Satan, the day before she dyed, she had sweet assurance of that
Kingdom that shakes not, of those riches that corrupt not, and of that Crown
of righteousness that sades not away. I have read of three Martyrs that were
bound and brought to the stake, and one of them gets from under his chain to
admiration, and falls down upon the ground, and wrastles earnestly with God
for the sense of his love, and God gave it him then at that instant, and so he
came, and embraced the stake, and died cheerfully, and resolutely, a glorious
Martyr. God delayed till he was bound, and then lets out himself sweetly and
gloriously to him.

Now God does delay the giving in of assurance to his dearest ones, and that
partly to let them know that he will be waited on, and that assurance Voluntas
Dei necessitas rei, God will have every child of his to put his fiat, his
places to Gods, go it never so much against the hair.
is a jewel worth waiting for. The least smile from God when our last glass is
running will make our souls amends for all their waiting; and partly that we
may know that he is free in his workings, and that he is not tied to any
proportions or qualifications in the creature, but is free to come when he
will, and go when he will, and stay as long as he will, though the soul
does sigh it out, How long Lord, how long will it be before my mourning be
turned into rejoicing.

Again, God delays the giving in of assurance, not because he delights to keep
his children in fears and doubts, nor because he thinks that assurance is too
rare, too great, too choice a jewel to bestow upon them, Isa. 59. 1, 2. Jer. 5.
25.
but it is either because he thinks their souls do not stand at a sufficient
distance from sin, or because their souls are so taken up and filled with
creature-enjoyments, as that Christ is put to lodge in an out-house, or else
Luke 2. 7.
it is because they pursue not after assurance with all their might, they give
not all diligence to make their calling, 2 Pet. 2. 5.
and election sure; or else it is because their hearts are not prepared, are
not low enough for so high a favor.

Now Gods delaying assurance upon these weighty grounds, should rather work us
to admire him, to justify him, and quietly to wait for him, then to have any
hard thoughts of him, or to carry it unkindly to him, or impatiently Jud 5 28.
to say, Why is his Chariot so long a coming.

The fifth Proposition is this, That The fifth Proposition.
those choice souls that have assurance, may lose it, they may forfeit it, the
freshness and greenness, the beauty, luster, and glory of assurance may be
lost. It is true, believers cannot lose the habits, the seeds, the root of
grace, yet they may lose assurance, which is the beauty and fragrancy, the
crown and glory of Grace. These two lovers, Grace and Assurance, are not by 1 John 3. 9. 1 Per 1. 5.
God so nearly joined together, but that they may by sin on our side, and
justice on Gods, be put asunder. It is wonderful rare (if possible) for a man
that ever had a wellgrounded Assurance, not to exper^ence this truth at first
or last.
The keeping of these two Lovers, Grace, and Assurance together, will yield the
soul two heavens, a heaven of joy and peace here, and a heaven of happiness
and blessedness hereafter; but the putting these two Lovers asunder, will put
the soul into a hell here, though it escape a hell hereafter. This Chrysostom
knew well, when he professed that the want of the enjoyment of God, would be
a A separation between the body and the soul, will not so torment the soul as
separation between grace and assurance.
far greater hell to him then the feeling of any punishment. As you would keep
your Christ, as you would keep your Comfort, as you would keep your Crown,
keep Grace and Assurance together, and neither by lip, nor life, by word, nor
works, let these be put asunder. It is possible for the best men so to blot and
blur their Evidences for felicity and glory, as that they may not be able to
read them, nor understand them. They may so vex and grieve the Spirit (either
by gross enormities, or by refusing his Spiritus Sanctus est res delicata; the
Holy Spirit is a very render thing.
comforts and cordials, or by neglecting, or sleighting his gracious actings in
themselves and others, or by mis-judging his work, as calling faith fancy, or
sincerity hypocrisy, etc. or by fathering those brats upon him that are the
children of their own distempered hearts) as that he may refuse to witness
their interest in him, 1 Samuel 16. Joh. 14.
though he be a witnessing Spirit, and refuse to comfort them, though he be the
only Comforter.

The best believer that breaths, What Latimer said of the spirit, it is going
and coming, may be truly said of Assurance and joy, it is coming and going.
may have his Summer-day turned into a Winter-night, his rejoicing into
sighing, his singing into weeping, his wedding Robes into mourning weeds, his
wine into water, his sweet into bitter; his Mannah, his Angelsfood into husks,
his pleasant grapes into the grapes of Sodom, his fruitful Canaan, his
delightful Paradise into a barren and unlovely wilderness. Look as faith is
often attended with unbeleef, and sincerity, with hypocrisy, and humility,
with vain glory; so is Assurance, with fears and doubts. Blessed Hooker lived
near So d^d Mr. Buroughs of blessed memory go to heaven in a cloud.
thirty years in close communion with God, without any considerable
withdrawings of God, all that while; and yet upon his dying-bed, he went away
without any sense of assurance, or discoveries of the smiles of God; to the
wonder, and deceiving of the expectation of many precious souls, and without
doubt in judgment to wicked men. Look as many a man loses the sight of the
City when he comes near to it: So many a choice soul loses the sight of
heaven, even then when he is nearest to heaven. Abraham (you know) had
assurance in an extraordinary way concerning his protection from God, and yet
says Gen 12. 19. Chap. 20. 2. We should rather dye then lie, we are not to
tell an officious lie, to tell a lie for no hurt, but for good, though it were
to save all the world, said Austin.
Abraham, say thou art my sister, for otherwise they will kill me. Ah, how was
the freshness, the greenness, the beauty and glory of his assurance wore off,
that he should out of slavish fears, expose his wife to other men's pleasure,
and himself, and his neighbor to Gods displeasure, that he should wound
four at once, the honor of God, his wives chastity, his own conscience, and
Pharoahs soul. David, you know, sometimes sings it out sweetly, The Lord is my
portion, and the lot of mine inheritance, he is my salvation, of whom shall I
be afraid, he is my Psalm. 18. 2.
Rock, and fortress, and my deliverer, my God, my strength, my trust, my
buckler and my high Tower. At other times you have him sighing it out, Why art
thou cast down, O my soul, why art thou disquieted in me, why have thou
forgotten me, O God, my Rock, why go I mourning? Verse. 9.
Thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore. There is no
soundness Psalm. 38. 2.
in my flesh, because of thine Verse. 3. Verse. 4*
anger, neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin; for mine
iniquities Verse. 6.
are gone over my head, as an heavy burden they are too heavy for me. Psalm.
30. 7. Ps 51. 8. to 13.
I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly: I go mourning all the day long. Thou
did hide thy face, and I was troubled. Restore to me the joy of my
salvation, that the bones that thou have broken may rejoice. His heart was more
often out of tune then his harp: He begins many of his Psalms sighing, and
ends them singing; and others he begins in joy, and ends in sorrow: So that one
would think (says one) that Peter Moulin.
those Psalms had been composed by two men of a contrary humor. Yea, it is very
observable, that though David had assurance in an extraordinary way, that he
should be King, being ano^nted by that great Prophet Samuel; yet the luster and
glory of this assurance wears off, and he (overcome by slavish fears) Psalm.
116. 11. (...)
cries out, That all men are liars, (even Samuel, as well as others,) and that
he shall one day perish by the hand of In my trembling, or in my affrightment,
I said all men are liars.
Saul. It is true, says David, I have a Crown, a Kingdom, in a promise, but I
must swim to the Crown through blood, I must win the Crown before I wear it; and
the truth is, I am like to die, before I attain it. Yea, and after he was King,
when King Jesus did but hide his face, he was sorely troubled; Psalm. 30. 6, 7.
(...)
so that neither his glorious Bahal, I was troubled like a withered flower that
loos^th sap and vigor. So it is used in Exodus 15. 15.
Throne, nor his Royal Robes, nor his Golden Crown, nor his glistering
Courtiers, nor his large Revenues, nor his cheerful temper, nor his former
Experiences could quiet him, or satisfy him, when God had turned his back upon
him. Look as all lights When God is gone, it is night with the soul.
cannot make up the want of the light of the Sun, so all temporal comforts
cannot make up the want of one spiritual comfort. So Job sometimes sings Job
16. 19. and 19. 25. Job 6. 4.
it out, My Witness is in Heaven, and my Record is on high, and my Redeemer
lives, etc. At other times you have him complaining, The Arrows of the Almighty
stick fast in me, and their poison drinks up my spirit; the terrors of God do
set themselves in array against me. And in the 29 Chapter, you have him sighing
Job 29. 2, 3, 4, 5. Tota vita boni Christiani sanctum desiderium est. The whole
life of a good Christian, is an holy wish, says One.
it out thus, O that I were as in months past, as in the days when God
preserved me; when his candle shined up on my head, and when by his light I
walked through darkness. As I was in the days of my youth, when the secret of
God was upon my Tabernacle; when the Almighty was yet with me, etc. Now by all
these clear instances, and by many others Saints Experiences, it is evident,
That the choicest Saints may loose their assurance, and the luster and glory of
it may decay and wither. What the Soul should do in such a case, and how it
should be recovered out of this sad state, I shall show you toward the close
of this Discourse.

The sixth Proposition is this, That The sixth Proposition.
the certainty and infallibility of a Christians assurance, cannot be made
known to any, but his own heart. He can say as the blind man once said, This I
know, John 9. 25.
that once I was blind, but now I see; once I was a slave, but now I am a son;
once I was dead, but now I am alive; Romans 8. and 6. 11, 13.
once I was darkness, but now I am light in the Lord; once I was a child of
wrath, Ephesians. 5. 8: and 2. 3. John 8. 36.
an heir of Hell, but now I am an heir of Heaven; once I was Satan's bondsman,
but now I am Gods freeman; once I 2 Cor. 3. 17.
was under the spirit of bondage, but Gal. 5. 1, 13. Ephesians. 1. 13, 14.
now I am under the spirit of adoption, that seals up to me the remission of my
sins, the justification of my person, and the salvation of my soul. All this I
Can you compass the Heavens with a span, or contain the Sea in a Nut-shel, then
may you fully evidence your assurance to others.
know, says the assured Saint; but I cannot make you know it certainly, and
infallibly. if you would give me a thousand worlds. What I have found and felt,
and what I do find and feel, is wonderfully beyond what I am able to express;
I am as well able to tell the Stars of Heaven, and to number the Sand of the
Sea, as I am able to declare to you, the joy, the joy, the unconceivable joy,
the assurance, the glorious 1 Pet. 1. 8. So my young Lord Harrington, and
Nazianzen, and Vincentius, and Fani^us, an Italian Martyr, with many more that
might be named.
assurance that God has given me. Severinus the Indian Saint, under the power
of assurance, was heard to say, O my God, do not for pity so ever joy me, if I
must still live, and have such consolations, take me to Heaven, etc. So say
souls under the power of assurance. Lord, we are so filled with joy and
comfort, with delight and content, that we are not able to express it here on
Earth, and therefore take us to Heaven, that we may have that glory put upon
us, that may enable us to declare and manifest those glorious things that thou
have wrought in us.

Parents do by experience feel such soundings, such meltings, such rowlings,
such sweet workings of their affections, and bowels, toward their children,
that for their lives they cannot to the life describe to others what it is to
be a Father, to be a Mother; what it is to have such rowlings of bowels toward
children. Assurance is that white stone that none knows, Vide Beza,
Bullenger, Pererius, and Brightman, on the words.
but he that has it, Revel. 2. 17. To him that overcomes, will I give to eat
of the hidden Manna, and I will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new
name written, which no man knows, saving he that receives it. White stones
were in great use among the Romans. 1. In white stones they used to write the
names of such as were victorious and Conquerors; so in that Text, To him that
overcomes, will I give a white stone. 2. They used to acquit the innocent And
they gave black stones to note their condemnation.
in Courts of Justice, by giving them a white stone; and so here the white
stone points out absolution and remission. 3. They used to give a white stone
to those that were chosen to any places of honor; so the white stone of
assurance Heb. 12. 28. Matthew. 6. 20. 1 Pet. 1. 4.
is an evidence of our Election, of our being chosen to a Kingdom that shakes
not, to riches that corrupt not, and to a crown of glory that fades not. And
thus much for this sixth Proposition, viz. That the certainty and infallabillity
of a Christians assurance cannot be made known to any but his own heart.

The seventh Proposition is this, That The seventh Proposition.
there are some special seasons and times, wherein the Lord is graciously
pleased to give to his children a sweet assurance of his favor and love, and
they are these that follow.

First, Sometimes (I say not always) at first conversion, the Lord is pleased
to make out sweet manifestations of his love to the penitent soul; when the
soul has been long under guilt and wrath; when the soul has been long under
the frowns and displeasure of God, and has long seen the gates of Heaven
barred against him, and the mouth of Hell open to receive him; when the soul
has said, surely there is no hope, there is no help, surely I shall loose God,
Christ, and Heaven for ever: Then God comes in, and speaks peace to the soul;
then he says, I will blot out thy iniquities for my name sake, and will
remember thy sins no more. Hark soul, hark, says Christ, My Isai. 55. 8, 9.
thoughts are not as your thoughts, nor my ways as your ways. My thoughts
toward you, are thoughts of peace, and thoughts of love. Hark soul, here is
Mercy to pardon thee, and here is Grace to adorn thee; here is a Righteousness
1 Cor. 1. 30.
to justify thee, here is eyesalve to enlighten thee, and gold to Revel. 3. 18.
enrich thee, and raiment to cloth thee, and balm to heal thee, and bread to
nourish thee, and wine upon the lees to cheer thee, and happiness to Isai. 25.
6.
crown thee, and my self to satisfy thee. Ah souls! have not some of you found
it so? surely you have. God deals sometimes with rebellious sinners, as Princes
do with those that are in arms, that are in open rebellion against them. You
know Princes will This h^^h b^^n a practice among all Princes, whether they
have been Christians or Heathens.
put such hard to it, they shall fare hard, and lie hard. Chains and Racks, and
what not shall attend them; and yet after the sentence is past upon them, and
they are upon the last step of the Ladder of Life, ready to be turned off, and
all hope of escape is gone, then the Princes pardon is put into their hand: So
the Lord brings many poor souls to the last steps of the Ladder, to a hopeless
condition, and then he puts their pardon into their bosoms, then he says, Be
of good cheer, I have received you into favor, I have set my love upon you, I
am reconciled to you, and will never be separated from you. You know how God
dealt with Paul, after he had awakned Acts 9. 3, 4, 5, 6. Vide Bezam, and
Grotium, and Calvin.
and convinced him, after he had unhorsed him, and overthrown him, after he had
amazed and astonished him, then he shows himself graciously and favorably to
him, then he takes him up into the third Heaven, and makes such manifestations
of his love and favor, of his beauty and glory, of his mercy and majesty, as he
is not able to utter. So upon the prodigals return the fatted Calf is killed,
Luke 15. 22, 23.
and the best Robe is put upon his back, and the Ring is put on his hand, and
shoes on his feet. Some understand by the Robe, the Royalty of Adam, others,
The dignity which Adam lost; nay, I think in this parable God sets forth his
goodness, and our happiness in restoring to us more by the death of the second
Adam, then we lost by the sin of the first Adam.
the Righteousness of Christ; and by the Ring, some understand the pledges of
Gods love, Rings being given as pledges of love; some the seal of Gods Spirit,
men using to seal with their Rings. Among the Romans the Ring was an ensign of
Virtue, Honor, and Nobility, whereby they that wore them, were distinguished
from the common people. I think the main thing intended by all these passages,
is to show us, That God sometimes upon the sinners first conversion, and
returning to him, is graciously pleased to give him some choice and signal
manifestations of his love, and favor, of his good will and pleasure, and that
upon these following Grounds.

First, That they may not be swallowed up of sorrow, nor give up the ghost
under the pangs and throws of the new birth: Ah, did not the Lord set in some
beams of love upon the soul, when it is ( magor Missabib) a terror to its
self, when the heart is a hell of horror, the conscience an An awakned
conscience is like Prometheus Vulture, it lies ever gnawing.
Acheldema, a Field of black blood, when the soul is neither quiet at home, nor
abroad, neither at Bed, nor Board, neither in company, nor out of company,
neither in the use of Ordinances, nor in the neglect of Ordinances, how would
the soul faint, sink, and despair for ever? But now when it is thus night with
the soul, the Lord sweetly comes in, and tells the soul, that all is well, that
he has found a ransom for Job 33. 24.
the soul, that the Books are crossed, that all debts are discharged, and that
his favor and love upon the soul is fixed: And so God by his sweet and still
voice, speaking thus to the soul, quiets and satisfies it, and keeps it from
sinking and despairing.

Secondly, God gives in assurance sometimes at first conversion, that he may
the more raise and inflame their love and affections to him. Ah! How does a
pardon given in, when a man is ready to be turned off, draw out his love, and
raise his affections to that Prince that shows bowels of mercy, when he is upon
the brink of misery: So when a poor sinner is upon the last Titus Motro was,
Pri^c^ps bonus orbis amor. All the world falls in love with a good Prince, with
a merciful Prince.
step of the Ladder, upon the very brink of Hell, and misery; now for God to
come in, and speak peace and pardon to the soul, Ah how does it inflame the
soul, and works the soul to a holy admiration of God, and to a spiritual
delighting in God. King Antigonus his pulling a sheep with his own hands out of
a dirty ditch (as he was passing by) drew his Subjects exceedingly to commend
him, and love him. So King Jesus pulling of poor souls out of their sins, and
as it were out of Hell, cannot but draw them to be much in the commendations of
Christ, and strong in their love to Christ. Christ has nothing more in his
eye, nor upon his heart, then to act toward his people in such ways, and at
such seasons as may most win upon their affections. And therefore it is, that
sometimes he gives the strongest consolation at first conversion.

Thirdly, Christ sometimes at first conversion grants to his people the
sweetest manifestations of his love, that they may be the more active,
servent, abundant, and constant in Amor Dei ^unquam otiosus est operatur enim
magna si est fi vero operari renuit amor non est; the love of God is never
idle, for if it is, it works great things, but if it resuse to work, it is
not love.
ways of grace and holiness; he knows that divine manifestations of love,
will most awaken, quicken, and engage the soul to ways of piety and sanctity.
Look what wings are to the bird, oil to the wheels, weights to the clock, a
reward to the coward, and the lodestone to the needle, that is the smiles and
discoveries of God to a poor soul at his conversion: The manifestations of
divine So said Bradford, and other blessed souls.
love puts heat and life into the soul, it makes the soul very serious, and
studious how to act for God, and live to God and walk with God: Ah, says a
soul, under the beams of divine love: It is my meat and drink, it is my joy
and crown to do all I can, for that God that has done so much for me, as to
know me in darkness, and to speak love to me when I was most unlovely, to turn
my mourning into rejoicing, and my hell into a heaven.

Fourthly, Christ sometimes at first conversion gives his people the sweetest
manifestations of his love, to fence, and fortify them against Satan's fiery
temptations, before Christ shall be led into the wilderness to be tempted
Mat. 3. 16, 17. (...) is an emphatical word, and signifies that infinite
affection, delight, and contentt hat God the Father did take in Christ. Ephesians. 6.
16.
by the devil, the Spirit of the Lord shall descend upon him, like a Dove, and
he shall hear a voice from heaven saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am
well-pleased, that so he may be strong in resisting, and glorious in triumphing
over all the assaults and temptations of Satan; So many times at first
conversion, the Lord makes out sweet manifestations of his love to the soul,
that so the soul may stand fast, and not give ground; and in the sense of
divine love may so manage the shield of faith, as to quench all the fiery darts
of the Devil. The Lord knows that when he sets upon the delivering of a poor
soul from the Kingdom of darkness, and translating it into the Kingdom of
his dear Son, that Satan will roar and Col. 1. 13.
rage, rend and tear, as he did him in. Pharaoh in his furious and violent
pursuing after Israel, when he saw that God would bring them from under his
power was a type of Satan.
Mark 9. 25, 26. When Jesus saw that the people came ranning together, he
rebuked the foul spirit, saying unto him, Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I charge
thee to come out of him; and the spirit cried, and rent him sore, and came out
of him, and he was as one dead; in so much, that many said, He is dead. No
sooner did Jesus Christ look with an eye of love, pity, and compassion, upon
the Boy, but the Devil in his rage, and wrath, The Greek word (...) signifies
to tear and rent, as the dog does.
falls a renting and tearing of him, as mad dogs do those things they fasten
upon. This poor child had never so sore a fit as now he was nearest the cure;
when rich Mercy, and Glorious power is nearest the soul, then Satan most
storms, and rages against the soul. The more the Bowels of Christ do work
toward a sinner, the more furious will Satan assault that sinner. Therefore
Divine Wisdom and Goodness, does the more eminently shine, in giving the poor
soul some sight of Canaan, and some Bunches and Clusters of that Land, upon its
first coming out of the Wilderness of Sin and Sorrow. But that no soul may
mistake this last Proposition, give me leave to premise these two Cautions.

First, That God does manifest his Caut. 1.
love only to some, at their first conversion, not to all: Though he dearly
loves every penitent soul, yet he does not manifest his love, at first
conversion, to every penitent soul. God is a free Agent to work where he will,
and when he will, and to reveal his love, how he will, and when he will, and to
whom he will. It is one thing for A man may enjoy the warmth and heat of the
Sun, when he cannot see the Sun; so a man may have grace, when he cannot see
that he has grace.
God to work a work of Grace upon the soul, and another thing for God to show
the soul that work. God oftentimes works Grace in a silent and secret way, and
takes sometimes five, sometimes ten, sometimes fifteen, sometimes twenty years,
yea, sometimes more, before he will make a clear and satisfying report of his
own work upon the soul. Though our Graces be our best Jewels, yet they are
sometimes, at first conversion, so weak and imperfect, that we are not able to
see their luster. The being of Grace, makes our estates safe and sure, the
seeing of Grace, makes our lives sweet and comfortable.

The second Caution is this: A man Caut. 2. I have conversed with several
precious souls, that have found this true by experience, and upon this very
ground have questioned all, and strongly doubted, whether they have not taken
Satan's delusions, for divine manifestations.
may, at first conversion, have such a clear, glorious manifestation of Gods
love to him, and of his interest in God, and his right to glory, that he may
not have the like all his days after. The fatted Calf is not every day slain,
the Robe of Kings is not every day put on, every day must not be a Feastival
day, a Marriage day; the wife is not every day in the bosom, the child is not
every day in the arms, the friend is not every day at the table, nor the soul
every day under the manifestations of Divine Love. Jacob did not every day see
the Angels ascending and descending; Steven did not every day see the Heavens
open, and Christ standing on the right hand of God. Paul was not every day
caught up to Heaven; nor John was not every day rapt up in the Spirit. No Saint
can every day cry out, I have my Christ, I have my Comfort, I have my
Assurance; as the Persian King cried out in his dream, I have Themistocles, I
have Themistocles. Job had his Job 30. 31.
Harp turned into mourning, and his Organ into the voice of them that weep. The
best of Saints are sometimes put, to hang their Harps upon the Willows, and
Psalm. 137. 2.
cry out, Has God forgotten to be gracious, Psalm. 77. 7, 8. 9.
and will he be favorable no more.

The second special season or time, wherein the Lord is pleased to give to his
children, a sweet assurance of his 2 Cor. 5. 14.
favor and love, and that is, when he intends to put them upon some high and
hard, some difficult and dangerous service; O then he gives them some (...)
Divine love has a compulsive faculty, it is very powerful to put the soul upon
acting in the highest and hardest services for Christ.
sweet taste of Heaven before hand: Now he smiles, now he kisses, now he
embraces the soul, now he takes a Saint by the hand, now he causes his goodness
and glory to pass before the soul, now he opens his bosom to the soul, now the
soul shall be of his Court and Council, now the Clouds shall be scattered, now
it shall be no longer night with the soul, now the soul shall sit no longer
mourning in the valley of darkness, now Christ will carry the soul up into the
Mount, and there reveal his glory to it, that it may act high and brave, noble
and glorious, in the face of difficulties and discouragements. Christ did
intend to Matthew. 17. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
put Peter, James, and John, upon hard and difficult service; and therefore
brings them up into an high mountain, and there gives them a vision of his
Beauty and Glory; there they see him transfigured, metamorphosed, or
transformed, there they see his face shining as the Sun, and his Raiment
glistering. In the Mount, he shows them such beams of his Deity, such sparkling
glory, as did even amuse them, and amaze them, transport them, and astonish
them; and all this Grace and Glory, this Goodness and Sweetness Christ shows
them, to hearten and encourage them, to own him and his truth, to stand by him
and truth, to make him and his truth known to the world, though hatred, bonds,
and contempt did attend them in so doing. Thus God dealt with Paul, before he
Acts 9. 1, to 23.
put him upon that hard and dangerous service, that he had cut out for him; he
takes him up into Heaven, and sheds abroad his love into his heart, and tells
him, That he is a chosen Vessel; he appears to him in the way, and fills him
with the Holy Ghost, that is, with the gifts, graces, and comforts of the Holy
Ghost. And straightway he Chrysostom says, that he was Insatiabilis Dei
cultor, an unsatiable server of God.
falls upon Preaching of Christ, upon exalting of Christ, to the amazing and
astonishing of all that heard him. And as he had more clear, full, and glorious
manifestations of Gods love and favor, then others; so he was more frequent,
more abundant, and more constant in 2 Cor. 11. 21, ult.
the work and service of Christ, then others.

And this has been the constant It is sufficient to point at these instances,
they are so notoriously known to all that know any thing of the Scripture in
power. As he in Plutarch said of the Scythians, that although they had no
music, nor vines among them, (yet as better things) they had gods; so the
Saints, though they may want this, and that outward encouragement in the
service of God; yet they shall enjoy his presence, that is better then all
other things in the world.
dealing of God with the Patriarks; as with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc. and
with the Prophets; as with Moses, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, etc. when he has
put them upon weighty services, he has shed abroad his love into their hearts,
he has set his seal upon their spirits, and made them to know, that he has
set them as a seal upon his hand, he has assured them of his countenance, and
of his presence, and of his assistance; he has told them, though others should
desert them, yet he will stand by them, and strengthen them, and support them,
and uphold them with the right hand of his Righteousness; he has told them,
that his power should be theirs to defend them, and his wisdom should be theirs
to direct them, and his goodness should be theirs to supply them, and his grace
should be theirs to heal them, and his mercy should be theirs to pardon them,
and his joy should be theirs to strengthen them, and his promises should be
theirs to cheer them, and his spirit should be theirs to lead them. And this
has made them as bold as Lions, this has made them stand fast, and stand
close to the work of God, in the face of all dangers and difficulties, this
has made them with stout Nehemiah, scorn to desist or fly from the work of
the Lord, this has made their Bows to abide in strength, though the Archers
have shot sore at them. Now there are considerable Reasons, why God is pleased
to give his Children some sweet tastes of his love, some assurance of his
favor, when he puts them upon some hard and difficult service, and they are
these that follow.

First, That they may not faint nor Apollonius, as Philostratus reports, being
asked if he did not tremble at the sight of the Tyrant, made this answer, God
which has given him a terrible countenance, has given also unto me an
undaunted heart, etc.
resolutely and bravely, in the face of all difficulties and oppositions. When
God put Joshua upon that hard service of leading and governing his people
Israel, he assures him of his love, and of his presence: Fear not, be of good
courage, I am with thee. And this makes him hold on, and hold out in the
service of the Lord bravely and resolutely, in the face of all discouragements.
Choose you whom you will serve, whether your fathers gods, or the gods of the
Amorites; but as for me, and my house, we will serve the Lord. So when the Lord
put Paul upon such service that Acts 20. 23.
occasioned bonds and afflictions to abide him in every City, he gives him a
taste of Heaven before hand, and lifts up the light of his countenance upon
him; and this makes him resolute and bold in the work of the Lord. Now Paul
will not consult with flesh and blood; Gal. 1. 15, 16, 17.
now it is not reproaches, nor stripes, nor prisons, nor whips, nor perils, nor
deaths, that can make him look back, having put his hand to the Lords plough.
O, the beamings forth of Divine Love upon his soul filled him with that courage
and resolution, that with Shammah (one of David's worthies) he stands and
defends the field, 2 Timothy 4. 16, 17.
when others fall, and fly, and quit the field.

Secondly, God gives his people etc. But also act below his poor weak
Creatures: For And to imagine that ever the great God will act below the wisdom
of those that are foolishness in the very abstract, is the greatest madness and
blasphemy in the world.
what Husband will put his Wife, what Father will put his child, what Master
will put his Servant, what Captain will put his Soldier, what Prince will put
his Ambassadors upon hard and difficult services, but they will smile upon
them, and speak kindly to them, and make large promises to honor their persons,
and kindly to accept, and nobly to reward their services? etc. Surely none. And
will God, Isa. 42. 8. and 48. 11.
will God, who will not give his glory to those that have the most glorious
Beings, suffer his glory to be clouded, and eclipsed by the prudent actings of
weak worms? Surely no.

Thirdly, God lifts up the light of Solus amor nesci^ difficultates. Love knows
no difficulties.
he puts them upon hard and difficult services, that they may never repent of
listing themselves in his service. Ah, did not the Lord warm the hearts of his
people, with the glorious beams of his love, when he puts them upon hard work,
they would be ready, when they meet with oppositions, and hazards, to throw up
all, and to sit down lamenting and repenting, that ever they were engaged in
his service, they would be as peevish and froward as Jonah, and with him venture
a drowning, to shift off Gods service. Ah, Melancthon was such a man whom
Luther encourages thus, Why should we fear a conquered world that have Christ
the Conqueror on our side, etc.
but now the Lord by letting his goodness drop upon their hearts, and by
putting an earnest-penny into their hands, he causes them to go cheerfully on
in his work, without sighing or repenting. The kisses and embraces of God, do
put such life, such spirit, such mettle into their souls, as makes them bid
defiance to the greatest dangers, and as Crowns them Conquerors of the greatest
difficulties. Ah, says a soul, that has walked some turns in Paradise; what is
dross to gold, what is darkness to light, what is Hell to Heaven; no more is
all difficulties and oppositions to me, who have found As they said once of the
Grecians in the Epigramme, whom they thought invulnerable; we shoot at them,
but they f^ll not down; we wound them, and yet not kill them, etc.
the sweetness of Divine Grace, and have had the happiness to lie in the bosom
of God. Dioclesian, the worst, and last Persecutor in all the Ten Persecutions,
observed, That the more he sought to blot out the name of Christ, the more it
became legible; and to block up the way of Christ, the more it became passible;
and whatever of Christ he thought to root out, it rooted the deeper, and rose
the higher in the hearts and lives of the Saints, among whom he had scattered
the beams of his love, and the rich pearls of his grace. Such souls as have
once been in the arms of God, in the midst of all oppositions, they are as men
made all of fire, walking in stubble, they consume and overcome all
oppositions; all difficulties are but as whetstones to their Fortitude. The
Moon will run her course, though the Dogs bark at it; so will all those choice
souls that have found warmth under Christ's wings, run their Christian race, in
spite of all difficulties and dangers. The Horse neighs at the Trumpet; the
Leviathan laughs at the Spear; so does a Saint, under the power of assurance,
laugh at all hazards and dangers that he meets with, in the Lords service. The
sense of Gods love, and goodness, makes him to triumph over the greatest
difficulties.

Fourthly and lastly, God gives his may be stopped; should God lay heavy burdens
upon his peoples shoulders; and not put under his finger to give some ease;
should God double their tale of brick, and yet deny them straw; should God
engage them against a potent enemy, and then desert them; should God send them
upon some weighty embassage, and not give proportionable encouragements to
them; what would the world say? would Exodus 32. 12. Number. 14. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
they not say, That he is a hard Master, and that his ways are not equal; would
they not say, Verily they are liars, that say he is glorious in power, and
wonderful in counsel, and infinite in mercy, and admirable in goodness, and
rich in grace, and unsearchable in his understanding? for surely, were he, he
could not, he would not put his children upon such hard, and dangerous
services, but he would own them, and stand by them, he would assist them, and
smile upon them, he would be as careful to bring them bravely off, as he has
been ready to bring them freely on. O, he could not see them in garments rouled
in blood, but his bowels would yern toward them, and he would arise, and have
compassion on them.

Then thirdly, Waiting times, are times wherein God is pleased to give his
people some sweet tastes of his love, and to lift up the light of his
countenance upon them. I waited patiently Psalm 40. 1, 2, 3. (...)
for the Lord (says David) and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry: Waiting
I waited.
He brought me up also out of an horrible pit (or out of a pit of noise,) out
of the miry clay, and set my feet upon a rock, and established my goings: And
he has put a new song in my mouth, even praise unto our God. After God had
exercised David's patience in waiting, he sweetly breaks in upon him, and knocks
off his bolts, and opens the prison doors, and takes him by the hand, and leads
him out of the pit of noise and confusion, in which he was, and causes his love
and goodness so to beam forth upon him, as causes his heart to rejoice, and his
tongue to sing. So after devout Simeon had waited for the consolation Luke 2.
25, to 33.
of Israel, that is, for Christ's coming, the Holy Ghost falls upon him, and
leads him to a sight of Christ in the Temple; and this makes the good old man
sing, ( nunc dimittas) Now let thy servant depart in peace. Ah says Simeon, I
have lived long enough, now I have got Christ in my heart, and Christ in my
arms; who is my light, my life, my love, my joy, my crown; let me depart
according to thy Word. Ah Saints, I appeal to you, have not many of you found
by experience, the sweet breathings of Christ upon you, even whilst you have
been waiting at the door of Mercy; while you have been weeping and waiting,
has not the Lord Jesus come in, and said, Peace be to you, waiting souls, be
of good cheer, it is I, be of good cheer, your sins are pardoned? surely you
have: Has not God made that word good unto you, Wait Psalm. 37. 14.
on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart. Wait, I
say, on the Lord; yes. And has he Isa. 49. 23. These words, Shall not be
ashamed, in the Hebrew Dialect, do not simply import, that such shall not be
brought to shame, or shall not perish, but that he shall be advanced to great
dignity and glory, to everlasting happiness and blessedness. Isai. 30. 18. Lam
3. 25.
not made that good to you, They shall not be ashamed that wait for me; that
is, they shall not be deceived, or disappointed of their hopes and
expectations, that wait for me? yes. And have you not found that word made
sweet to your souls, Therefore will the Lord wait, that he may be gracious;
blessed are all they that wait for him? Yes. And has not the Lord made that
word good to you, The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the soul
that seeks him? Yes. Waiting souls, remember this assurance is yours, but the
time of giving it, is the Lords; the Jewel is yours, but the season, in which
he will give it, is in his own hand; the Gold Chain is yours, but he only
knows the hour wherein he will put it about your necks. Well, wait patiently
and quietly, wait expectingly, wait believingly, wait affectionately, and wait
diligently, and you shall find that Scripture made good in power upon your
souls. Yet a Heb. 10. 37. (...). Hab. 2. 3. Mal 3. 1.
little little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry; he
will certainly come, he will seasonably come, he will suddenly come, as the
Prophet Malachi speaks, Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare
the way before me; and the Lord whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his
Temple; even the messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in. Behold, he
shall come, says the Lord of hosts. Well, I will say but this, If assurance of
Gods love be not a Jewel worth a waiting for, it is worth nothing.

Fourthly, Suffering times are times Non poenae sed causa facit martyrem.
wherein the Lord is pleased to give his people some sense of his favor; when
they are in sufferings for Righteousness sake, for the Gospels sake, then
usually God causes his face to shine upon them. Now they shall hear best news
Adversus gentes, gratias agimus quod a molestis dominis liberemur, says One.
We thank you for delivering us from hard taskmasters, that we may enjoy more
sweetly the bosom of Christ.
from Heaven, when they hear worst from Earth; God loves to smile most upon his
people, when the world frowns most, when the world puts their Iron chains upon
their legs, then God puts his Golden chains about their necks; when the world
puts a bitter Cup into their hands, then God drops some of his honey, some of
his goodness and sweetness into it; when the world is ready to stone them, then
God gives them the white stone, and when the world is a tearing their good
names, then he gives them a new name, that none knows but he that has it, a
name that is better then that of sons and daughters; when the world cries out,
Crucify them, crucify them, then they hear that sweet voice from Heaven,
These are my beloved ones, in whom I am well pleased; when the world clothes
them with rags, then the Lord puts on his Royal Robes, and makes a secret
Proclamation to their spirits, Thus shall it be done to the men whom the King
is pleased to honor; when the world gives into one hand a Cup of Water, God
gives into the other a Cup of Nectar, a Cup of Ambrosia; when the world
gnasheth upon them, and presents all imaginary tortures before them, then the
Lord opens paradise to them, as he did to Stephen; when Paul and Silas were in
prison for the Acts 7. 50. and 16. 23, 24. Me thinks, said one, I tread upon
pearls, when he trod upon hot burning coals; and I feel no more pain, then if I
lay in a bed of down, and yet he lay in flames of fi^e. Revel. 1 9, 10. He was
banished thither by Domitian the Tyrant. Vide Eusebius. l. 3. c. 18. Vide Pli^. l.
4. c. 12.
Gospel sake, then God fills them with such unspeakable joy, that they cannot
but be singing; when others were sleeping, God turns their prison into a
palace, a paradise, and they turn his mercies into praises. Paul and Silas
found more pleasure then pain, more joy then sorrow, more sweet then bitter,
more day then night in the prison. God will make some beams of his goodness and
glory to break through stone walls, to warm and glad the hearts of his
suffering-ones. When John was banished into the Isle of Fathmos, for the Word
of God, and the testimony of Jesus, then he is filled with the Spirit, and has
the choicest manifestations, and the most glorious Revelations that ever he had
all his days. Now God makes him one of his Court and Counsel, and tells him
what glorious and mighty things shall be in the latter days. Now he is in a
Spiritual rapture, and ecstasy, and carried above himself, and above all
outward things, to attend those glorious Visions, that God would make known to
him. It was Gods lifting up the light of his countenance that made the Martyrs
to sing in the fire, to clap their hands in the flames, and to tread upon hot
burning coals, as upon Beds of Roses. This made one say, when he felt the flame
come to Vincentius.
his Beard, What a small pain is this, to be compared to the glory to come?
what is a drop of vinegar, put into an ocean of wine? what is it for one to
have a rainy day, that is going to take possession of a Kingdom. The smiles of
God made another to sing under dreadful sufferings, ( Christianus sum) I am a
Christian. Sanctus.
And this made the Christians to sing in Tertullians time, ( Crudelitas vestra
gloria nostra) Your cruelty is our glory. This made a French Martyr to say,
when the rope was about his fellows neck, Give me that golden chain, and dub me
a Knight of that noble order. This made another to desire, when he was to die,
the favor of having his chains buried with him, as the ensigns of his honor.
This made Basil to say, Fire, Nihil seutit erux in nervo, quando animus est in
caelo.
sword, prison, famine, are all a pleasure, a delight unto me. This made Paul
to rattle his Iron chains, and to glory in it, more then worldly men glory in
all their outward glory. This made Theodoret to complain that his persecuters
did him wrong, when they took him off the Rack, and ceased tormenting of him;
for said he, All the while that I was on the Rack I found, me thought, there
was a young man in white, an Angel stood by me, which wiped off the sweat; and I
found a great deal of sweetness in it, which now I have lost. To Sufferings are
the ensigns of heavenly nobisiry; no^ wonder then that the Saints are so joyful
under them.
conclude, the smiles of God upon the prisoners of hope, is that which makes
them more cheerful and delightful in their sufferings then Jesus Christ was in
his. When Faninus an Italian Martyr was asked by one, why he was so merry at
his death, since Christ himself was so sorrowful, Christ, said he, sustained in
his soul all the sorrows and conflicts with Hell and Death, due to us, by whose
sufferings we are delivered from sorrow, and fear of them all; and therefore we
have cause of rejoicing, in the greatest sufferings.

Now there are these special Reasons to be given, why the Lord is pleased in
suffering times, to visit his people with his loving kindness, and to lift up
the light of his countenance upon them.

Christian fortitude is in ferendo n^n in ferierdo, not in smiting, but
suffering.
under the Cross, may be invincible: God knows right well, That if his left
hand in suffering times, be not under his people, and his right hand over them;
if he does not give them some sips of sweetness, some rellishes of goodness,
they would quickly grow impatient and inconstant. O, but now the smiles of God,
William Flower, Appolo^^us, Basil, Fulgentius, Giles of Brussels, Alexander
Hales, Polyca^^us, Calvin, Luther, Brentius, Bullinger; these and many more
have been eminent in patience under sore trials.
the gracious discoveries of God, makes their patience and constancy
invincible, as it did Vincentius, who by his patience and constancy, madded his
tormentors; wherefore they stripped him stark naked, whipped his body all over
to a gore blood, sprinkled Salt and Vinegar over all his wounds, set his feet
on burning coals, then cast him naked into a loathsome Dungeon, the pavement
whereof was sharp shells, and his bed to lie on a bundle of thorns. All which
this blessed Martyr received, without so much as a groan, breathing out his
spirit in these words, Vincentius is my name, and by the grace of God I will be
still Vincentius, inspight of all your torments. Persecution brings death in
one hand, and life in the other; for while it kills the body, it crowns the
soul. The most cruel Martyrdom, is but a crafty trick to escape death, to pass
from life to life, from the prison to paradise, from the cross to the crown.
Justin Martyr says that when the Romans did immortalize their Emperors (as they
called it) they brought one to swear, that he see him go to Heaven out of the
fire. But we may see (by an eye of Faith) the blessed Souls of suffering Saints
fly to Heaven, like Elias in his fiery Judge. 13. 20.
chariot, like the Angel that appeared to Manoah in the flames. John Hus
Martyr, had such choice discoveries of God, and such sweet in-comes of the
Spirit, as made his patience and constancy A patient man under reproaches, is
like a man with a Sword in one hand, and a Salve in the other, he could wound,
but he will heal.
invincible: When he was brought forth to be burned, they put on his head a
Triple Crown of Paper painted over with ugly Devils, but when he saw it, he
said, My Lord Jesus Christ, for my sake, did were a Crown of Thorns, why should
not I then, for his sake, wear this light crown, be it never so ignominious?
truly, I will do it, and that willingly. And as they tied his neck with a chain
to the stake, smiling, he said, That he would willingly receive the The Motto
of patient souls is ( plura pro Christo toleranda) we must suffer more then so
for Christ.
same chain for Jesus Christ's sake, who he knew was bound with a far worse
chain for his sake. Well, remember this, their names, that by a patient
suffering, are written in Red Letters of blood in the Churches Calender, are
written in Golden Letters in Christ's Register, in the Book of Life.

A second Reason, why the Lord of their adversaries, who wonder, and are like
men amazed when they see the comfort, and the courage of the Saints in
suffering times. Paul's choice carriage in his bonds, was the Phil. 1. 14. vide
Estius.
confirmation of many. And many of the Brethren in the Lord, waxing confident
by my bonds, are much more bold to speak the Word without fear. And as the
sufferings of the Saints do contribute to the confirmation of some, so by the
blessing of God, they contribute to the conversion of others. I beseech thee
(says Paul) for Philem. v. 10.
my son Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my bonds. It was a notable saying of
Luther (Ecclesia totum mundum convert^t sanguine and oratione,) The Church
converteth the whole world by blood and prayer. Basil affirms, That the They
knew it could be but a days journey between the cross and paradise, between
that short storm, and an eternal calm.
Primitive Saints showed so much comfort and courage, so much Heroic zeal and
constancy, that many of the Heathens turned Christians; so that choice spirit
that the Saints have showed in their sufferings (when Christ has overshadowed
them with his love, and stayed them with flagons, and comforted them with
apples) has madded, grieved, vexed, and extremely It would be too tedious to
give you an account of all particular persecutors in this case whom the
courage, faith, and patience of the Saints have tired out, tormented, and made
weaty of their lives, and also bred wonder and astonishment, in beholders and
readers.
tormented their tormentors. Lactantius boasts of the braveness of the Martyrs
in his time; our children and women (not to speak of men) do in silence
overcome their tormentors, and the fire cannot so much as fetch a sigh from
them. Hegesippus reports an observation of Antoninus the Emperor, viz. That the
Christians were most courageous and confident always in Earthquakes, whilst
his own Heathen Soldiers were at such accidents most fearful and dis-spirited.
Certainly no Earthquakes can make any Heartquakes among the suffering Saints,
so long as the countenance of God shines upon their face, and his love lies
warm upon their Hearts. The suffering Saint may be assaulted, but not
vanquished; he may be troubled, but can never be conquered; he may lose his
head, but he cannot lose his Crown, which the 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
righteous Lord has prepared and laid up for him. The suffering Saint shall
still be master of the day, though they Mori posse, vinci non posse.
kill him, they cannot hurt him; he may suffer death, but never conquest. And
they overcame him by the blood of Rev. 12. 11.
the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony, O Lord Jesus, said one, I love
thee (plusquam mea, plusquam meos, plusquam me,) more then all my goods, more
then all my friends, yea, more then my very life.
and they loved not their lives unto the death. They love not their lives, that
love Christ and his truth, more then their lives; they that slight, contemn,
and despise their lives, when they stand in competition with Christ, may be
truly said not to love their lives. In these words you see, that the Saints by
dying, do overcome, They may kill me, said Socrates of his enemies, but they
cannot hurt me; A Saint may say this, and more. The Herb Heliotropium does turn
about and open it self, according to the motion of the Sun; so do the Saints in
their sufferings, according to the internal motions of the Sun of Righteousness
upon them.

A third Reason, Why the Lord dirt, the scorn, the contempt, that Exodus 32. 12.
Number. 14. 13.
vain men would cast upon God. Look as our greatest good comes through the
sufferings of Christ, so Gods greatest glory (that he has from his Saints)
comes through their sufferings. If ye be reproached for the name of Christ. 1
Pe^. 4. 14. Vide Bezam.
happy are ye, for the Spirit of glory, and of God, rests upon you: On their
part, he is evil spoken of, but on your part, he is glorified. It makes much
for the glory of God, that his people are cleared and comforted, quickened and
raised, spiritualized and elevated in the day Dan. 3. 28, 29, 30.
of their sufferings. O, the sight of so noble a spirit in the Saints, cause
others Dan. 6. 25, 26, 27.
to admire God, to lift up God, to fall in love with God, and to glorify God;
for owning his people, and for being a light to them in darkness, a joy to them
in sorrow, and a palace to them in a prison. God is very sensible of the many
praises and prayers that he should lose, did he not cause his love, and his
glory to rest upon his people in suffering times. There is Isa. 48. 11*
nothing that God is so tender of, as he is of his glory, and that his heart is
so much set upon as his glory; and therefore he will visit them in a prison,
Genesis 39. 20. ult.
and feast them in a dungeon, and walk with them in a fiery furnace; and show
kindness to them in a Lions den, that every one may shot and cry, Dan, 6.
Grace, Grace. God loves to act in Zech 4. 7.
such ways of Grace toward his suffering ones, as may stop the mouths of their
enemies, and cause the hearts of his friends to rejoice.

Fourthly, Believing times are times Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom ye also trusted, after
that ye heard the Word of Truth, the Gospel of your Salvation: In whom also,
after that ye believed. ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise; or, In
whom believing (...). Vide Beza and Calvin.
ye were sealed, that is, As you were in the very Excrcise and Actings of Faith
upon the Lord Jesus Christ, the Spirit of the Lord made sure, and sealed up to
you, your Adoption, your Reconciliation, your Pardon, and everlasting
Inheritance. Him that honors Christ, by believing, by fresh and frequent
actings of Faith upon him, him will Christ certainly honor and secure by
setting his seal and mark upon him, and by assuring of him of a Kingdom that
shakes not, of riches that corrupt not, and of glory that fades not. Ah
Christians, you wrong two at once, Christ and your own souls, whilst you thus
reason, Lord give me first assurance, and then I will believe in thee, and rest
upon thee; whereas your great work is to believe, and to hold on believing and
acting of Faith on the Lord Jesus, till you come to be assured and sealed up to
the day of Redemption. This is the surest and the shortest way to assurance.
That is a remarkable passage of the Apostle in Romans 15. 13. Now the God of hope
fill you with (...)* Shall fill you; from signifies to be filled with joy and
peace, as the sails of a ship are fill^d with wind.
all joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope, through the power
of the Holy Ghost. The God of hope (says the Apostle) shall fill you with all
joy and peace in believing, that is, whilst you are in the Exercise and
Actings of Faith, the God of hope shall fill you with that joy that is
unspeakable, and full of glory, and with that peace that passes understanding.
Faith is the Key that unlocks paradise, and lets in a flood of joy into the
soul. Faith is an appropriating Grace, it appropriates all to it self, it looks
upon God, and says with the Psalmist, This God is my God, for ever and Psalm 63.
1. and 48. 14.
ever; it looks upon Christ, and says, My beloved is mine, and his desires are
toward Can. 7. 10.
me; it looks upon the precious promises, and says, these precious promises are
2 Pet. 1. 4.
mine; it looks upon Heaven, and says, Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of
2 Timothy 4 8.
Righteousness; and this fills the soul with joy and peace. Faith has an
influence upon other graces; it is like a silver thread Tantum possumus, quanium
credimus.
that runs through a chain of Pearl; it puts strength and vivacity in to all
other virtues; it made Abraham to rejoice, and it made Noah sit still and quiet
in the midst of a deluge. Faith is the first pin that moves the soul, it is
the spring in the Watch that sets all the Golden Wheels of Love, Joy, Comfort,
and Peace a going. Faith is a root of Grace, from whence springs all the sweet
flowers of joy, and peace. Faith is like the Be, it will suck sweetness out of
every flower, it will extract light out of darkness, comforts out of
distresses, mercies out of miseries, wine out of Judge. 14. 14.
water, honey out of the rock, and meat out of the eater. 1 Pet. 1. 8. Whom
having not seen, ye love, in whom though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye
rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory. Upon the Exercise of Faith,
their hearts are filled with joy, with unspeakable joy, with glorious joy.
Faith sees in Christ ( Plenitudo abundantiae, There is in Christ not only (
plenitudo vasis, but plenitudo fontis) the fullness of a vessel, but the fullness
of a fountain, and this makes the heart of a Saint leap, when he sees it by an
eye of Faith.
and plenitudo redundantiae) a fullness of abundance, and a fullness of
redundancy; and this fills the heart with glorious joy. Ah Christians,
believing, believing is the ready way, the safest way, the sweetest way, the
shortest way, the only way, to a wel-grounded assurance, and to that
unspeakable joy and peace, that flows from it, as the effect from the cause,
the fruit from the root, the stream from the fountain. There is such assurance,
and such joy, that springs from the fresh, and frequent actings of Faith, that
cannot be expressed, that cannot be painted; no man can paint the sweetness of
the honey comb, the sweetness of a clustre of Canaan, the sweetness of
paradise, the fragrancy of the Rose of Sharon. As the being of things cannot be
painted, and as sweetness of things cannot be painted, no more can that
assurance, and joy, that flows from believing, be painted or expressed; it is
too great, and too glorious for weak man Romans 4. 18.
to paint or set forth. When Abraham believed in hope, against hope, and when
in the face of all dangers and difficulties, he put forth such noble and
glorious acts of Faith, as to conclude, That the Lord would provide himself a
Genesis 22. 8. Dominus providebit, the Lord will provide, was Maximilians pious
Motto, and should be every Saints Motto in straits and troubles.
Lamb for a burnt-offering, and that in the Mount, he would be seen; God is so
taken with the actings of his Faith, and the effects of it, that he swears by
himself, That in blessing, he would bless him (that is, I will certainty bless
him, and will bless his blessing, to him) and in multiplying, he would multiply
his seed as the stars of Heaven, and as the sand which is upon the Sea shore.
Now the Angel of the Lord ( viz. the Lord Jesus, as his own words show, Verse
12, 15, 16.) calls unto Abraham out of Heaven, not once, but twice; and now he
shows his admirable love in countermanding of Abraham, and in providing a Ram
(even to a miracle) for a burntoffering. And thus you see, that believing times
are times wherein the Lord is graciously pleased to reveal his love, and make
known his favor to his people, and to look from Heaven upon them, and to speak
again and again in love and sweetness to them.

Fifthly, Hearing and receiving Psalm. 63. 3, 4.
breaking the Bread of Life, then God comes in upon them, and declares to them
that love that is better then life, Acts 10. 44. While Peter yet spoke these
words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the Word. As Peter was Also
by the Holy Ghost is meant the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit. Verse. 45, 46.
Acts 11. 15. Therefore, says the Apostle, do not leave the substance for a
shadow, the Sun for a Candle, and
speaking, the Holy Ghost (that is, the graces of the Holy Ghost, viz. the joy,
the comfort, the love, the peace, etc. of the Holy Ghost) fell upon them. So in
that Gal. 3. 2. This only would I learn of you, received ye the Spirit by the
works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? By the Spirit here, Calvin and
Bullinger, and other Expositors, do understand the joy, the peace, the
assurance that is wrought in the heart, solid Meat for Milk, which none would
do, except they were bewitched, Gal. 3. 1.
by the hearing of Faith, that is, by the Doctrine of the Gospel; for in these
words of the Apostle, hearing is put for the thing heard, and Faith for the
Doctrine of the Gospel, because the Gospel is the ordinary means of working
Faith: Faith comes by hearing, says the Apostle. So in that 1 These. 1. 5, 6.
By the Holy Ghost in this Text cannot be meant the extraordinary gifts of the
Spirit, and that first, because they were no evidences of Election; secondly*,
because many vessels of wrath have been partakers of them; thirdly, many of
Gods choice and chosen ones, have been destitute of those extraordinary gifts.
For our Gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power, and in the
Holy Ghost, and in much assurance, as ye know what manner of men we were among
you for your sake. And ye became followers of us, and of the Lord, having
received the Word in much affliction, with joy of the Holy Ghost. In these
words you have a Divine Power attending Paul's Ministry, a power convincing,
enlightening, humbling, raising, delighting, reforming, renouncing, and
transforming of them that heard him. Also you have the sweet and blessed
testimony of the Spirit attending his Ministry, and assuring those of their
Effectual Calling and Election, upon whom the Word came in power, and raising
up their spirits to joy in the midst of sorrow. Ah you precious Sons and
Daughters of Sion, that have sat waiting and trembling at Wisdoms door, tell
me, tell me, Has not God rained down Manna upon your souls, whilst you have
been hearing the Word? Yes. Has not God come in with power upon you, and by
his Spirit sealed up to you your Election, the Remission of your sins, the
Justification of your persons, and the Salvation of your souls? Yes. Without
controversy, many Saints have found Christ's lips (in this Ordinance) to drop
honey and sweetness, marrow and fatness.

And as Christ in hearing times, when his people are a hearing the Word of
Life, does lift up the light of his countenance upon them; so when they are a
receiving the Bread of Life, he makes known his love to them, and their
interest in him, in this feast of fat This Ordinance is a Cabine^ of Jewels, in
it are abundance of Spiritual Springs, and rich Mines, heavenly Treasures.
things, the Master of the Feast, the Lord Jesus comes in the midst of his
guests, saying, Peace be here. Here the beams of his glory do so shine, as that
they cause the hearts of his Children to burn within them, and as scatters all
that thick darkness and clouds that are gathered about them. When Saints are in
this Wine Celler, Christ's Banner over them is Love. When they are in this
Canaan, then he feeds them with Milk and Honey. When they are in this Paradise,
then they shall taste of Angels Food. When they are at this Gate of Heaven,
then they shall see Christ at the right hand of the Father. When they are
before this Mercy Seat, then they shall see the Bowels of Mercy, rolling
toward them. In this Ordinance they see that, and taste that, and feel that of
Christ, that they are not able to declare and manifest to others: In this
Ordinance Saints shall see the truth of their graces, and feel the increase of
their graces, and rejoice in the clearness of their evidences: In this
Ordinance Christ will seal up the Promises, and seal up the Covenant, and seal
up his Love, and seal up their pardon sensibly to their souls. Many precious
souls there be, that have found Christ in this Ordinance, when they could not
find him in other Ordinances, though they have sought him sorrowingly: Many a
cold soul has been warmed in this Ordinance, and many a hungry soul has been
fed with Every gracious soul may say not only ( credo vitam aeternam, and edo
vitam aeternam) I believe life eternal, but I receive, I eat life eternal.
Manna in this Ordinance, and many a thirsty soul has been refreshed with Wine
upon the Lees in this Ordinance, and many a dull soul has been quickened in
this Ordinance, ( Every wicked soul that takes the cup, may say ( Calix vitae,
calix mortis) the Cup of Life is made my death. 1 Cor. 11. 27.
I do not say, That ever a dead soul has been in livened in this Ordinance,
this being an Ordinance appointed by Christ, not to beget Spiritual Life where
there was none, but to increase it where the Spirit has formerly begun it.) In
this Ordinance, weak hands, and feeble knees have been strengthened, and
fainting hearts have been comforted, and questioning souls have been resolved,
and staggering souls have been settled, and falling souls have been supported.
Ah Christians, if you will but stand up* and speak out, you must say, That in
this Ordinance* there has been between Christ and you, such mutual smiles,
such mutual kisses, such mutual embraces, such mutual opening and shutting of
hands, such mutual opening and closing of hearts, as has made such a Heaven in
your hearts as cannot be expressed, as cannot be declared. Christ in this
Ordinance opens such boxes of precious Ointments, as fill the Saints with a
spiritual savor; he gives them a cluster of the Grapes of Number. 13. 23, 24, 25.
Canaan, that makes them earnestly look and long to be in Canaan. The Cypr. l
4. ep. 6 Aug. in John, Tract. 27, etc.
Christians in the Primitive times upon their receiving the Sacrament, were
wont to be filled with that zeal and fervor, with that joy and comfort, with
that faith, fortitude, and assurance, that made them to appear before the
Tyrants with transcendent boldness and cheerfulness, as many Writers do
testify. Now there are these Reasons, why God is pleased to lift up the light
of his countenance upon his people, when they are a hearing the Word of Life,
and a breaking the Bread of Life.

First, That they may highly prize Psalm. 63. 2, 3. Cant 2 3. Psalm. 19. 10. This
age is full of careless Gallioes, (Acts ^8. 17.) that care not for these things.
price upon them. O, say such souls, we cannot but prize them, we cannot but
affect them for what of God we have enjoyed in them. Many there are that are
like old Barzillai, that had lost his taste and hearing, and so cared not for
David's feasts and music; so many there are that can see nothing of God, nor
taste nothing of God in Ordinances; they care not for Ordinances, they slight
Ordinances. O but souls Psalm. 84. 10, 11.
that have seen, and heard, and tasted of the goodness of the Lord in
Ordinances, they dearly love them, and highly prize them. I have esteemed thy
Word, says Job, above my necessary food: Job 23. 12. Better that the Sun shine
not, then that Chrysostom Preach not.
And David sings it out, The Law of thy mouth is better unto me, then thousands
of gold and silver. Luther prized the Word at such a high rate, that he says,
He would not live in Paradise, if he might, without the Word; ( At cum verbo
etiam in inferno facile est vivere) but with the Word he could live in Hell it
self.

Secondly, God lifts up the light of Psalm. 27. 4.
close to Ordinances, and constant in Ordinances; the soul shall hear good news
from Heaven, when it is waiting at Wisdoms door. God will acquaint Prove. 8. 34,
35.
the soul with Spiritual Mysteries, and feed it with the droppings of the Honey
Comb, that the soul may cleave to them, as Ruth did to Naomi, Ruth 1. 15, 16,
17.
and say of them, as she said of her, Where these go, I will go, where these
lodge, I will lodge; and nothing but death shall make a separation between
Ordinances and my soul. After Joshua Josh. 1. 5.
had had a choice presence of God, with his spirit in the service he was put
upon, he makes a Proclamation; Choose you whom you will serve, I and my Josh.
24. 15.
household will serve the Lord. Let the issue be what it will, I will cleave to
the service of my God. I will set my soul under Gods spout, I will wait for him
Mal. 3. 1.
in his Temple. I will look for him in Revel. 2. 1.
the midst of the seven Golden Candlesticks, I have found him a good Master, I
will live and dye in his service, I have found his work to be better then
wages, I have found a reward, not only for keeping, but also in keeping his
Commandments, as the Psalm. 19. 11:
Psalmist speaks. The good words, the sweet aspects, the choice hints; the
heavenly intercourse that has been between the Lord Jesus, and my soul, in his
service, has put such great and glorious engagements upon my soul, that I
cannot but say with the servant in the Law, I love my Master, Exodus 21. 5.
Deuteronomy. 15. 16, 17.
and I will not quit his service, because it is well with me; my ear is bored,
and I will be his servant for ever.

The third Reason, Why the Lord Ephesians. 4. 14. (...) signifies cogging with a
Die, such slights as cheaters and false-gamesters use at D^ce.
instruments, that lie in wait to deceive, and by their cunning craftiness,
endeavor with all their might, to work men first to have low thoughts of
Ordinances, and then to neglect them, and then to despise them. Now the Lord
Chrysostom says, That by the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, we are so armed
against Satan's temptations, that he flees from us, as if we were so many (
Leones ignem expuentes) Lions that spit fire.
by the sweet discoveries of himself, by the kisses, and love tokens that he
gives to his people in Ordinances, does so indear and engage their hearts to
them, that they are able not only to withstand temptations, but also to
triumph over temptations, through him that has loved them, and in Ordinances
manifested his presence, and the riches of his grace and goodness to them; the
sweet converse, the blessed turns and walks, that the Saints have with God in
Ordinances, makes them strong in resisting, and happy in conquering of those
temptations that tend to lead them from the Ordinances, which are Christ's
bankquetting-house, Can 2. 4. Beith Haiin is Domus vini, the House of Wine.
where he sets before his people, all the dainties and sweetmeats of Heaven,
and bids them eat and drink abundantly, there being no danger of surfeiting, in
eating, or drinking of Christ's delicates. Truly, many a soul has surfeited of
the worlds dainties, and died for ever; but there is not a soul that has had
the honor and happiness to be brought into Christ's bankquettinghouse, and to
eat and drink of his dainties, but they have lived for ever.

The fourth Reason, Why the Lord Isa. 64. 5.
and manifesting of himself to them in his ways, does more and more fit those
Vessels of Mercy for Glory. Ah Christians, tell me, do not those Holy
Influences, those Spiritual Breathings, those Divine In-comes, that you meet
with in Ordinances, make your souls cry out with David, As the Heart pants
after the water Psalm. 42. 1, 2. The Greeks derive their word for* desire; from
a root that signifies to burn. Now if one should heap never so much fuel upon
a fire, it would not quench it, but kindle it the more; so nothing can satisfy
the desires of a Saint, but a full celestial enjoyment of God.
brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God. My soul thirsts for God, even
for the living God: When shall I come and appear before the presence of God? So
in that Psalm. 63. 1, 2. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee; my soul
thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty Land, where
no water is. To see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the
Sanctuary. In these words you have David's strong, earnest, and vehement
desires; here you have desire upon desire; here you have the very flower and
vigor of his spirit, the strength and sinews of his soul, the prime and top of
his enflamed affections, all strongly working after a fuller enjoyment of God.
Look as the espoused Maid longs for the marriage day, the Apprentice for his
freedom, the Captive for his ransom, the condemned man for his pardon, the
Traveller for his Inn, and the Mariner for his Haven; so does a soul, that has
met with God in his Ordinances, long to meet with God in Heaven: It is It is
not drops, but swimming in the Ocean, that will satisfy a soul that has
looked into paradise.
not a drop, it is not a lap and away, a sip and away, that will suffice such a
soul: No. This soul will never be quiet, till it sees God face to face, till it
be quiet in the bosom of God. The more a Saint tastes of God in an Ordinance,
the more are his desires raised and whetted, and the more are his teeth set on
edge for more and more of God. Plutarch faith, That Plutarch in vita Camilli.
when once the Gauls had tasted of the sweet Wine, that was made of the Grapes
of Italy, nothing would satisfy them, but Italy, Italy. So a soul A full
enjoyment of God is the most sparkling Diamond in the Ring of Glory.
that has tasted of the sweetness and goodness of God, in Ordinances, nothing
will satisfy it, but more of that goodness and sweetness; a little mercy may
save the soul, but it must be a great deal of mercy that must satisfy the
soul: The least glimps of Gods countenance may be a staff to support the soul,
and a cordial to cherish and comfort the soul, and an ark to secure the soul,
and a cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night to guide the soul; but it
must be much, very much of God, that must be enough to satisfy the soul.

The fifth and last Reason, Why the assurance of his favor in Ordinances, is,
That they may have wherewithal to silence, and stop the mouths of wicked and
ungodly men, whose words are Mal. 3. 13, 14.
stout against the Lord; who say, it is in vain to serve God, and what profit
is there in keeping his Statutes and Ordinances, and in walking mournfully
before the Lord of Hosts. Now the The Saints by the gracious Experiences that
they have of the sweet breathings of God upon them in Ordinances, are able to
confute, muzzle, halter, or button up the mouths of vain and wicked men, who
say unto the Lord, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.
Lord causes his face to shine upon his people in Ordinances, that they may
stand up, and bear him witness before the wicked world, that he is no hard
Master, that he reaps not where he sows not. In Ordinances he kisses them, and
there he gives them his love, and makes known his goodness and glory, that his
Children may from their own experiences, be able to confute all the lies and
clamors of wicked men against God and his ways. And blessed be God, that has
not left himself without witness, but has many thousands that can stand up
before all the What is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit
should we have if we pray unto him? Job 21. 14, 15.
world, and declare, That they have seen the beauty and glory of God in his
Sanctuary, that they have met with those joys and comforts in the ways of God,
that do as far surpass all other joys and comforts, as light does darkness, as
Heaven does Hell: That they have met with such heart meltings, such heart
humblings, such heart revivings, such heart cheerings, as they never met with
before, in all their days. Ah, say these Souls, One day in his Courts, is
better then a thousand years elsewhere. O! we had rather with Moses, loose all,
and be whipped and stripped of all, then lose the sweet enjoyments of God in
Ordinances. O! in them, God has been Light and Life, a Joy and a Crown to our
Souls. God is tender of his own glory, and of his Childrens comfort; and
therefore he gives them, such choice aspects, and such sweet visits in
Ordinances, that they may have Arguments at hand to stop the mouths of sinners,
and to declare from their own experience, that all the ways of God are ways of
pleasantness, Prove* 3. 17. Psalm 65. 11.
and that all his paths drops fatness. And thus much for the Reasons, Why God
lifts up the light of his countenance upon his people in Ordinances; before I
pass to the next particular, it will be necessary, that I lay down these
Cautions to prevent weak Saints from stumbling and doubting, who have not yet
found the Lord giving out his favors, and making known his Grace and Love, in
such a sensible way to their souls, in breaking the Bread of Life, as others
have found.

Now the first Caution I shall lay Caut. 1.
down, is this, That even Believers may sometimes come and go from this
Ordinance, without that comfort, that assurance, that joy* that refreshment,
that others have, and may meet with. And this may arise, partly from their 2
Chro. 30. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 11. 20. to ult.
unpreparedness and unfitness, to meet with God in the Ordinance, and partly
from their playing, and dallying with some bosom sin; or else it may arise from
their not stirring up themselves, to lay hold on God, as the Prophet Isaiah
complains, There is none Isa. 64. 7.
that calls upon thy name, that stirs up himself to take hold of thee; or
else it may arise from the Spirits standing at Sam. 1. 16.
a distance from the Soul; it may be, O soul, that thou have set the Comforter,
the Spirit a mourning; and therefore it is, that he refuses to comfort thee,
and to be a sealing and witnessing spirit unto thee. Thou have grieved him with
thy sins, and he will now vex thee by his silence; thou have thrown his
Cordials against the Psalm. 77. 2.
wall; thou have trampled his Manna under thy feet, and therefore it is, that
he has veiled his face, and changed Genesis 31. 5.
his countenance and carriage toward thee; thou have been unkind to the
Spirit, and therefore he carries it toward thee as an enemy, and not as a
friend.

The second Caution is this, That Caut. 2. The longer mercy is a coming, the
greater, the sweeter, and the better usually it is when it come^. Many a child
has got a Benjamins portion, a Hannahs portion, a double pot^ion by waiting;
so has many a Saint got a worthy po^tion, a double portion of comfort, and
assurance by waiting. Ergo, wait patiently, and work heartily.
though God does in this Ordinance withhold comfort and assurance from thee,
yet thou must hold on in thy duty, thou must wait at Hopes hospital; at this
heavenly Pool, thou must lie till the Angel of the Covenant, the Lord Jesus
comes and breaths upon thee; at the^e waters of the Sanctuary, thou must lie,
till the Spirit moves upon thy soul; thou must not neglect thy work, though God
delays thy comfort; thou must be as obedient in the want of assurance, as thou
art thankful under the enjoyment of assurance. Laban often changed Jacobs
wages, yet Jacob never changed nor neglected his work; though God should change
thy wages (thy comforts into discomforts, thy Spring into an Autumn, etc.) yet
thou must never change, nor neglect thy work, which is obeying, believing, and
waiting, till God (in his Ordinances) shall lift up the light of his
countenance upon thee, and turn thy night into day, and thy mourning into
rejoicing. God is the same, and the commands of the Gospel are the same, and
therefore thy work is the same, whether it be night or day with thy soul,
whether thou art under frowns or smiles, in the Arms, or at the Feet of God.

A third Caution is this, Many of Caut. 3.
the precious Sons and Daughters of Sion, have had, and may have so much
comfort and sweetness, so much life and heat, so much reviving and quickening,
so much marrow and fatness in this Ordinance, as may clearly evidence the
special presence of God with their spirits; and as they would not exchange for
all the world, and yet would give a world (were it in their power) for those
strong comforts and full assurance, that others enjoy in this Ordinance: In
this Ordinance King Cyrus gave a kiss to Chrysa^tes, and a golden cup to
Artabazus.
Christ looks upon one, and kisses another; he gives a nod to one, and his hand
to another: Some in this Ordinance shall have but sips of mercy, others shall
have large draughts of mercy; some in this Ordinance shall see but the back
parts of Christ, others shall see him face to face; to one he gives silver, to
another he gives gold, to one he gives but a glass of Cant* 2. 5.
consolation, to another he gives flaggons of consolation; some shall have The
least star gives light, the least drop moystens, the least pearl sparkles, and
the least dram of special Grace saves.
but drops, others shall swim in the Ocean; some shall have a large harvest,
others shall have but a few gleanings, and yet they, if rightly valued, are
more worth then a world. The Sun of Righteousness is a free Agent, and he will
work and shine forth as he pleases, and when he pleases, and on whom he
pleases; and who art thou, that dare say to Christ, why do thou so? Ah
Christians, you may not, you must not say, we have not met with Christ in the
Sacrament, because we have not met with joy and assurance in the Sacrament; for
you may enjoy very much of Christ in that Ordinance, and yet not so much as may
boil up to full assurance, and make you go a way singing, My beloved is Cant.
^. 16.
mine, and I am his. We may enjoy the warmth and heat of the Sun, when we
cannot see the Sun; so souls may enjoy much of Christ (by holy influences) in
the Sacrament, when they cannot see Christ in the Sacrament.

Seventhly, Times of personal afflictions, are times wherein the Lord is
graciously pleased to vouchsafe to his people sweet manifestations of his love
and favor, when his hand is heavy on them, then he lifts up the light of his
countenance upon them, Psalm. 71. 20, 21. Thou which have showed me great, and
sore troubles, shall quicken me again; and shall bring me up again from the
depths of the Earth. Thou shall increase my greatness^, and comfort me on every
side. So in that Psalm. 94. 19. In the (...)
multitude of my careful troubled thoughts, My cogitations, i. e. My careful
troubled thoughts perplexed, as the branches of a tree, by a strong wind. It
comes from (...) a Branch, by interposing (...).
thy comforts delight my soul. Ah Christians, has not God by all afflictions
lifted up your souls nearer Heaven, as Noah's Ark was lifted up nearer and
nearer Heaven, by the rising of the water higher and higher. The Ball in the
Emblem says, ( percussa surgo) The harder you beat me down in affliction, the
higher I shall bound in affection toward Heaven, and heavenly things; so
afflictions do but elevate and raise a Saints affections to Heaven; and
heavenly things. When Munster lay sick, and his friends asked him, how he did,
and how he felt himself, he pointed to his sores and ulcers, (whereof he was
full,) and said, These are Gods gems and Qui non est crucianus, non est
Christianus, says Luther. The Proverb is, Smart makes wit, and vexation gives
understanding.
jewels, wherewith he decketh his best friends, and to me they are more
precious then all the gold and silver in the world. (Afflictiones
benedictiones) Afflictions are blessings. Gods corrections are our
instructions, his lashes our lessons, his scourges our schoolmasters, his
chastisements our advertisements; and to note this; the Hebrews and Greeks
both, do express chastning and teaching by one and the same word ((...), Musar,
^aideia,) because the latter is the true end of the former. Ah I bless God I
know several precious souls, of whom this world is not worthy that have found
more of God in afflictions, then in any other gracious dispensation. Manasses
got more by his Iron chain, then ever he got by his Golden Crown. (...) Oculos
quos peccatum claudit poena apcrit. P^r issem nisi per^issem. I had perished,
if I had not perished.
you afflicted Sons and Daughters of Zion, have you not had such sweet
discoveries of God, such sensible demonstrations of his love, such bowels of
affections working in him toward you, have you not had such gracious visits,
and such glorious visions, that you would not exchange for all the world? yes.
Have you not had the precious presence of God with you, quieting and stilling
your souls, supporting and upholding your souls, chearing and refreshing your
souls? yes. And have you not had the Lord applying precious promises, and
suitable remedies to all your maladies? Have you not found God a bringing in
unexpected mercy in the day of your adversity, suitable to that promise, Hosea
2. 14. I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak
comfortably to her (or, I will earnestly speak to her heart, as the Hebrew
reads it?) yes. Have you not found, that God has so sweetened and sanctified
afflictions to you, as to make them a means to discover many sins that lay hid,
and to purge you from many sins that cleaved close unto you, and to prevent you
from falling into many sins, that would have been the breaking of your bones,
and the loss of your comfort? yes. Have you not found, that you have Musk,
says one, when it has lost its sweetness, if it be put into the sink amongst
filth, it recovers it; so does afflictions recover and revive decayed graces.
been like the Walnut tree, the better for beating; and like the Vine, the
better for bleeding; and like the ingenious child, the better for whiping?
yes. Have you not found afflictions to revive, quicken, and recover your
decayed graces? have they not inflamed that love that has been cold, and put
life into that Faith that has been dying, and quickened those hopes that have
been withering, and put spirits into those joys and comforts that have been
languishing? yes. O then stand up, and declare to all the world, That times of
affliction have been the times, wherein you have seen the face of God, and
heard the voice of God, and sucked sweetness from the breasts of God, and fed
upon the delicates of God, and drunk deep of the consolations of God, and have
been most satisfied and delighted with the presence and in-comes of God. When
Hezekiah in his great affliction lamentingly said, I shall go mourning Isai.
38. 9. to 21.
to my grave, I shall not see the Lord in the Land of the living; he will cut
me off with pining sickness, he will break all my bones. Like a Crane, or a
Swallow, so did I chatter; I did mourn as a Dove; mine eyes fail with looking
upward. O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me. So now, God comes in a way of
mercy to him, and prints his love upon his heart, Verse. 17. Thou have, in love
to my soul, delivered it from the pit of corruption, or rather as the Hebrew
reads (...)
it, Thou have loved my soul from the grave; for thou have cast all my sins
behind thy back. Ah, says Hezekiah, I have now found, that in my afflictions,
thy affections have been most strongly carried toward me, as toward one whom
thou art exceedingly taken with. O, now, thou have warmed me with thy love, and
visited me with thy grace, thou have made my darkness to be light, and turned
my sighing into singing, and my mourning into rejoicing. So when Habakkuks
belly trembled, Hab 3. 16, 17, 18.
and his lips quivered, and rottenness entered into his bones, and all Creature
comforts failed, yet then had he such a sweet presence of God with his Spirit,
as makes him to rejoice in the midst of sorrows: Yet (says he) I will rejoice
in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. And thus you see it clear,
That in times of affliction God makes sweet manifestations of his love and
favor to his Childrens souls.

Eighthly, Praying times are times wherein the Lord is graciously pleased to
give his people some sweet and comfortable assurance, of his love and favor
toward them. Prayer crowns Nunquam abs te, absque te recedo, Bern. ep. 116. O
Lord, says he, I never go away from thee, without thee. He was a man very much
in prayer, as some Writers observe.
God with the honor and glory that is due to his Name; and God crowns prayer
with assurance and comfort; usually the most praying souls, are the most
assured souls. There is no service wherein souls have such a near familiar and
friendly intercourse with God, as in this of prayer; neither is there any
service, wherein God does more delight to make known his grace and goodness,
his mercy and bounty, his beauty and glory, to poor souls, then this of prayer.
The best and sweetest flowers of paradise, God gives to his people when they
are upon their knees. Prayer is ( Porta coeli, clavis padisi) the Gate of
Heaven, a Key to let us into paradise: when John was weeping (in prayer,
doubtless) the Sealed Book was open to him. Many Christians have found by
experience, praying times to be sealing times, times wherein God has sealed up
to them the remission of their sins, and the salvation of their souls: They
have found prayer to be a shelter to their souls, a sacrifice to God, a sweet
savor to Christ, a scourge to Satan, and an inlet to assurance. God loves to
lade the wings of prayer with the choicest, and chiefest blessings. Ah! how
often, Christians, has God kissed you at the beginning of prayer, and spoke
peace to you in the midst of prayer, and filled you with joy and assurance,
upon the close of prayer. That nineth of Daniel, from the seventeenth to the
four and twentieth verse, is full to the point in hand. I shall only cite the
words of the four last Verses. And whilst I was speaking, and praying, Dan. 9.
20.
and confessing my sin, and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my
supplication before the Lord my God, for the Holy Mountain of my God: Yea,
whilst I was speaking in prayer, even the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the
vision at the beginning, (...) With weariness, or flight, tired as it were with
his making speed.
being caused to fly swiftly, touched me about the time of the Evening
Oblation. And he informed me, and talked with me, and said, O Daniel; I am now
come forth to give thee skill and understanding. At the beginning of thy
supplications, the commandment came forth, and I am come to show thee, for thou
art greatly beloved; therefore understand the Matter, and consider the Vision.
In these words you see, whilst Daniel was in prayer, the Lord appears to him,
and gives him a Divine touch, and tells him, That he is a man greatly beloved,
or as the Hebrew has it, a man of desires. So (...) Chamudoth, a man of
desires, that is, one singularly beloved of God; one that is very pleasing and
delightful to God.
Act, 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. There was a certain man in Caesarea, called Cornelius, a
Centurion, of the Band, called the Italian Band, a devout man, and one that
feared God with all his house, which gave much alms to the people, and prayed
to God always. He saw in a vision evidently, about the ninth hour of the day, an
Angel of God coming in to him, and saying unto him, Cornelius. And when he
looked on him, he was afraid, and said, What is it Lord? And he said unto him,
Thy prayers, and thine alms, are come up for a memorial before God. Praying
Vide Calvin: and Oecume^ius on these words.
Cornelius you see is remembered by God, and visited sensibly and evidently by
an Angel, and assured, that his prayers and good deeds, are not only anodor, a
sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable and well-pleasing to God, but also that
they shall be gloriously rewarded by God. So when Peter was Verse 9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16, of Acts 1.
praying, he fell into a trance, and saw Heaven opened, and had his mind
elevated, and all the faculties of his soul filled with a Divine Revelation; so
when Paul was a praying, he sees a Acts 9 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 19.
vision, Ananias; a coming and laying his hands on him, that he might receive
his sight. Paul had not been long at prayer, before it was revealed to him,
that he was a chosen Vessel, before he was filled with the voice and comforts
of the Holy Ghost; so our Savior Luke 17.
was transfigured as he was praying. Thus you see, that praying times are
times, wherein the Lord is graciously pleased to lift up the light of his
countenance upon his people, and to cause his grace and favor, his goodness and
kindness to rest on them, as the spirit of Elijah did rest on Elisha. 2 Kings
2. 15.


But some may object and say, We have been at the door of mercy, early and
late, for assurance, and yet we have not obtained it; we have prayed, and
waited, and we have waited, and prayed; we have prayed, and mourned, and we
have (...)ed, and prayed, and yet we cannot get a good word from God, a smile
from God, he has covered himself with a cloud; and after all that we have
done, it is still night with our souls. God seems not to ^e at home, he seems
not to value our prayers; we call, and cry, and shout out for assurance; and
Lam. 3. 8.
yet he shuts out our prayer. We are sure, That we have not found praying
times to be times of assurance to our souls, etc.

Now to this Objection, I shall give It is better to ask, and not receive, then
to receive, and no^ ask. Cl^m.
these answers; first, that it may be, you have been more earnest and vehement
for assurance, and the effects of it, viz. Joy, comfort, and pe^ce, then you
have been for grace and holiness, for communion with God, and conformity to
God; it may be your requests for assurance have been full of life and spirits,
when your request for grace and holiness, for communion with God, and
conformity to God, have been liveness and spiritless: If so, no wonder that
assurance is denied you. Assurance makes most for your comfort, but holiness
makes most for Gods honor; man's holiness is now his greatest happiness, and in
Heaven man's greatest happiness will be his perfect holiness. Assurance is the
daughter of Holiness, and he that shall more highly prize, and more earnestly
press after the enjoyment of the daughter, then the mother, it is not a wonder,
if God shuts the door upon him, and crosses him in the thing he most desires.
The surest, and the shortest way to assurance, is to wrestle and contend with
God for holiness, as the Angel contended Judge. 2. 9.
with the Devil about the body of Moses. When the stream and cream of a man's
spirit runs after holiness, it will not be long night with that man, the Sun of
Righteousness will shine Mal. 4. 2.
forth upon that man, and turn his winter into summer, and crown him with the
Diadem of Assurance. The more holy any person is, the more excellent The Jews
have a saying, That those seventy souls that went down to Egypt, were more
worth then the seventy Nations of the world.
he is; all corruptions are diminutions of excellency, (the more mixed any thing
is, the more it is abased; as if Gold and Tin be mixed; and the more pure it
is, as mere Gold, the more glorious it is.) Now the more divinely excellent any
man is, the more fit he is to enjoy the choicest, and the highest favors.
Assurance is a Jewel of that value, that he will bestow Psalm. 16* 3. Revel. 3.
18.
it upon none but his excellent ones: Assurance is that tried gold, that none
can wear, but those that win it in a way of grace and holiness. It may be, if
thou had minded, and endeavored more after communion with God, and conformity
to God, thou might before this time have looked upward, and seen God in
Christ smiling upon thee, and have looked inward (into thy own soul) and seen
the Spirit of Grace witnessing to thy spirit, Rom 8. 15, 16 17.
that thou were a Son, an Heir, an Heir of God, and a joint heir with Christ.
But thou have minded more thy own comfort, then Christ's honor; thou have minded
the blossoms, and the fruit (Assurance and Peace) more then Christ, the Root;
thou have minded the Springs of comfort, more then Christ, the Fountain of
life; thou have minded the beams of the Sun, more then the Sun of
Righteousness; and therefore it is but a righteous thing with God, to leave
thee to walk in a valley of darkness, to hide his face from thee, and to seem
to be as an enemy to thee.

But secondly, I answer, It may be Job 15. 11. Divine comfort is a delicate
thing, and it is not given to him that admits of any other.
of God are wrung out into this golden cup of assurance, and can you drink of
this cup, and not stammer nor stagger? Believe it, assurance is meat for strong
men, few babes (if any) are able to bear it, and digest it. The Apostle says,
That strong meat belongs Heb. 5. 12, 14. (...).
to them that are of full age, (or, that are comparatively perfect, or full
grown) even those, who by reason of use, (Greek, by reason of habit, which is
got by continual custom, and long practice) have their senses exercised to
discorn both good and evil. The Greek word properly signifies such an exercise,
as wrestlers, or such as contend for victory do use, which is with all their
might and strength, being trained up unto it by long exercise. It may be, O
complaining 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2, 3.
Christian, that thou art but a scrub, a babe in grace; happily thou art not
yet got beyond the breast, or if thou art, yet thou art not past the Spoon. Ah
Christian, if it be thus Invalidum omne natura querulum, Seneca. Weak spirits
are ever quarrelling and contending.
with thee, cease complaining of the want of assurance, and be up and growing,
be more aged in grace and holiness, and thou shall find assurance growing upon
thee. Divine Wisdom sparkles much in this, in giving milk to Babes (that are
more carnal then spiritual) and meat, i. e. Assurance to strong men, that have
more skill and will, that have a greater ability, and choicer faculty, to prize
and improve this Jewel Assurance, then babes have. The Hebrew word Chabodh
signifies, (...) So the Chaldee. (...)
both weight, and glory; and verily, glory is such a weight, that if the body
were not upheld by that glorious power that raised Jesus Christ from the grave,
if it were not bore up by everlasting Arms, it were impossible it Deuteronomy. 33. 27.
should bear it. Now assurance is the top of glory, it is the glory of glory;
Psalm. 45. 13.
then certainly, they had need be very glorious within, that shall be crowned
with such a weight of glory, as assurance is. Well, remember this, It is mercy
to want mercy, till we are fit for mercy, till we are able to bear the weight
of mercy, and make a divine improvement of mercy.

Thirdly, You must distinguish between Every audience increases love, thanks,
and trust, Psa. 116. 1, 2, 3. And those mercies are best improved, which we
receive after we have been long upon our knees.
delays and denials: God may delay us, when he does not deny us; he may defer
the giving in of a mercy, and yet, at last, give the very mercy begged. Barren
Hannah prays, year after year, for a mercy. God delays her long, but at last
gives her her desire; and the Text says expressly, that her countenance was no
more sad, 1 Samuel 1. 18. After many prayers and tears, the Lord comes in, and
assures her, that she should have the desire of her soul; and now she mourns no
more, but sits down satisfied, comforted and cheered. After much praying,
waiting, and weeping, God usually comes with his hands, and his heart full of
mercy to his people. He loves not to come ( Vacuis manibus) empty handed to
those that have sat long with wet eyes at Mercies door. Christ tries the
faith, patience, and constancy of the Canaanite woman, he deferred Matthew. 15.
21, to 29.
and delayed her, he reproached and repulsed her; and yet, at last, is overcome
by her, as not being able any longer to withstand her importunate requests. O
woman, great is thy faith, Be Exclamat tanquam victus. Brugensis. He cries out
as conquered.
it unto thee, even as thou will. Christ puts her off at first, but closes with
her at last; at first, a good word, a good look is too good for her, but at
last, good words, and good looks are too little for her, Be it unto thee, even
as thou will. At first, Christ carries himself to her as a churlish stranger,
but at last, as an amorous lover; though at first, he had not an ear to hear
her, yet at last he had a heart to grant her, not only her desires, but even
what else she would desire over and above, what she had desired. God heard
Daniel at Dan. 9. 15. to 25.
the beginning of his supplications, and his bowels of lo^^ was working
strongly toward him, but the Angel Gabriel does not inform Daniel of this till
afterward. Praying souls, you say that you have prayed long for assurance, and
yet you have not obtained it. Well, pray still, O pray and wait, wait and pray,
the Vision is for Hab. 2. 3.
an appointed time, but at the end, it shall speak, and not lie; though it
tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry. God has
never, God will never fail the praying soul; at the long run, thou shall be
sure to obtain that assurance that will richly recompense thee, for all thy
praying, waiting, and weeping; therefore hold up, and hold on praying (though
God does delay thee) and my soul for thine, thou shall reap in due season such
a harvest of Gal. 6. 9.
joy, and comfort, as will sufficiently pay thee for all thy pains. Shall the
Husbandman wait patiently for the precious fruits of the Earth; and wilt Jam.
5. 7.
not thou wait patiently for assurance, which is a Jewel more worth then Heaven
and Earth. Praying souls remember this, It is but weakness to think that men
shall reap as soon as they sow, that they shall reap in the Evening, when they
have but sowed in the Morning. Titus Vespasian never Suelonius.
dismissed any Petitioner with a tear in his eye, or with a heavy heart; and
shall we think, that the God of compassions will always dismiss the Petitioners
of Heaven with tears in their eyes? Surely no.

Ninthly, Sometimes before the This truth many choice Christians have found by
experience.
soul is deeply engaged in fore conflicts with Satan, the Lord is graciously
pleased to visit his people with his loving kindness, and to give them some
sweet assurance, That though they are tempted, yet they shall not be worsted;
though they are tried, yet they shall be crowned; though Satan does roar as a
Lion upon the soul, yet he shall not make a prey of the soul; for the Lion
Revel. 5. 5. John 10. 28.
of the Tribe of Judah will hold it fast, and none shall pluck it out of his
hand. God first fed Israel with Manna from Heaven, and gave them water to Ex^d
17. 8, etc.
drink out of the Rock, before their fore fight with Amalek. Before Paul 2 Cor.
12. 1. to 8.
was buffetted by Satan, he was caught up into the third Heaven, where he had
very glorious visions, and revelations of the Lord, even such, as he was not
able to utter. Before Jesus Christ Matthew. 3: ult.
was led into the wilderness to be tempted by Satan, to question and doubt of
his Sonship, he heard a voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am wel-pleased. The Spirit of the Lord did first descend upon him as a
Dove, before Satan fell upon him as a Lion. God walks with his people some
turns in paradise, and gives them some tastes of his right hand pleasures,
before Psalm. 16. ult.
Satan by his tempting shall do them a displeasure: But I must hasten to a
close of this Chapter; and therefore

Tenthly and lastly, After some sharp conflicts with Satan, God is graciously
pleased to lift up the light of his countenance upon his people, and to warm
and cheer their hearts with the beams of his love. Matthew. 4. 11. Then the Non
tanquam misericordes indigenti, sed tanquam subjecti om ipotenti, Aug. Hom. 8.
Devil leaves him, and behold, Angels came and ministered unto him. When Christ
had even spent himself in soiling and quelling, in resisting and scattering
Satan's temptations; then the Angels come and minister cordials and comforts
unto him. So after Paul had 2 Cor. 12. 7, ^ ^ 10.
been buffetted by Satan, he heard that sweet word from Heaven, My grace is
sufficient for thee; for my strength is made perfect in weakness; which filled
his heart with joy and gladness. The hidden Manna, the New name, and the Revel.
2. 17.
White stone, is given to the conqueror, to him that has fought with
principalities, Ephesians. 6. 12.
and powers, and spiritual wickedness in high places, and is come off with his
garments dipped in blood. After the Roman Generals had gotten victory over their
enemies, the Senate did use not one way, but many ways to express their loves
to them. So after our Faith has gotten victory over Satan, God usually takes
the soul in his arms, and courts it, and shows much kindness to it. Now the
soul shall be carried in triumph, now the Chariot of state attends the soul,
now White Revel. 3. 5. and 7. 9.
raiment is put upon the soul, now Palms are put into the Conquerors hands, now
the Garland is set upon the Conquerors head, and now a Royal feast is provided,
where God will set the Conqueror at the upper end of the Table, and speak
kindly, and carry it sweetly toward him, as one much affected and taken with
his victory over the Prince of darkness. Conflicts with Satan, are usually the
As many have found by experience.
sharpest, and the hottest; they spend, and waste most, the vital and noble
spirits of the Saints; and therefore, the Lord after such conflicts, does
ordinarily give his people his choicest, and his strongest Cordials.

And thus, by Divine assistance, we have showed you the special times and
seasons, wherein the Lord is graciously pleased to give his people some tastes
of his love, some sweet assurance, that they are his favorites, that all is
well, and shall be for ever well between him and them; and that though many
things may trouble them, yet nothing shall separate them from their God, their
Christ, their Crown.

CHAP. III. Containing the several Hindrances and Impediments that keep poor
souls from Assurance, with the Means and Helps to remove those Impediments and
Hindrances.
NOw the first impediment 1. Impediment.
and hinderance to Assurance, that we shall instance in, is, Despairing
thoughts of mercy. O these imprison the Soul, and make it always dark night
with the Soul; these shut the windows of the Soul, that no light can come in to
cheer it. Despairing There is a threefold Despair. 1. Worldly. 2. Moral. 3.
Spiritual. And this last is the worst and greatest.
thoughts make a man fight against God with his own weapons; they make a man
cast all the Cordials of the Spirit against the wall, as things of no value;
they make a man suck poison out of the sweetest promises; they make a man
eminent in nothing, unless it be in having hard thoughts of God, and in arguing
against his own Soul, and happiness, and in turning his greatest advantages
into disadvantages, his greatest helps into his greatest hindrances.
Despairing It makes a man call good evil, and evil good, light darkness, and
darkness light, sweet bitter, and bitter sweet, a Savior, a destroyer; a
Redeemer, a revenger, etc.
thoughts of mercy, make a man a beast; yea, below the beast that perishes.
Pliny speaks of the Scorpion, that there is not one minute wherein it does not
put forth the sting, as being unwilling to lose any opportunity of doing
mischief: Such Scorpions are despairing souls, they are still a putting out
their sting, a rangling with God, or Christ, or the Scripture, or the Saints,
or Ordinances, or their own Souls. A despairing soul is ( Magor Missabib) a
terror to himself, it cannot rest, but like Noah's Ark is always tossed here and
there, it is troubled on every side, it is full of fears and fightings. A
despairing soul is a burden to others, but the greatest burden to it self, it
is still a vexing, terrifying, tormenting, condemning, and perplexing it self:
Despair makes every sweet A despairing soul is like the spider that draws
poison out of the sweetest flowers.
bitter, and every bitter exceeding bitter, it puts Gall and Wormwood into the
sweetest Wine, and it puts a sting, a cross into every cross. Now whilst the
soul is under these despairing thoughts of mercy, how is it possible that it
should attain to a wellgrounded assurance; therefore for the helping of the
soul out of this despairing condition, give me leave a little to expostulate
with despairing souls.

Tell me, O despairing souls, is not despair an exceeding vile and contemptible
sin, is it not a dishonor to God, a reproach to Christ, and a murderer of
souls, is it not a belying of God, a denying of Christ, and a crowning of
Satan; it does without doubt proclaim the Devil, a Conqueror, and lifts him up
above Christ himself. Despair is an evil that flows Despair is Satan's
masterpiece, it carries men he adlong to hell, it makes a man twice told a
child of hell; it is a Viper, that has stinged many a man to death.
from the greatest evil in the world, it flows from unbelief, from ignorance,
and mis-apprehensions of God, and his Grace, and from mistakes of Scripture,
and from Satan, who being for ever cast out of paradise, labors with all his
art and might to work poor souls to despair of ever entering into paradise. O
despairing souls, let the greatness of this sin effectually awaken you, and
provoke you to labor as for life, to come out of this condition, which is as
sinful as it is doleful, and as much to be hated, as to be lamented.

Again, tell me, O despairing souls, Acts 2. Plus peccavit Judas desperando
quam prodendo Christum, says one.
has not despairing Judas perished; when as the murderers of Christ believing
on him were saved. Did not Judas sin more hainously by despairing, then by
betraying of Christ? Despairing Spira is damned, when repentting Manasseh is
saved. O despairing souls, the arms of mercy are open to receive a Manasseh, a
Monster, a Devil incarnate; he caused that Gospel Prophet Isaiah to be sawed in
the midst with a Saw (as some Rabbis say;) he turned aside from the Lord to
commit 2 Chro 33. 1, to 15.
Idolatry, and caused his sons to pass through the fire, and dealt with familiar
spirits, and made the streets of Jerusalem to overflow with innocent blood. The
soul of Mary Magdalen Mark 6. 9.
was full of Devils, and yet Christ casts them out, and made her heart, his
house, his presence Chamber; why do thou then say there is no hope for thee,
O despairing soul? Paul was full Acts 1. 1, 2. and 26. 11.
of rage and malice against Christ, his people, and ways, and he was full of
blasphemy, and impiety, and yet behold, Paul is a chosen Vessel, Paul is 1 Timothy
1. 13, 15, 16.
caught up into the third Heaven, and he is filled with the gifts and graces of
the Holy Ghost. Why should thou then say, there is for thee no help? O
despairing soul! Though the Prodigal Luke 15. 13, 14.
had run from his Father, and spent, and wasted all his estate in ways of
baseness, and wickedness, yet upon his resolution to return, his Father meets
him, and instead of killing him, he kisses him, instead of kicking him, Verse.
22, 23.
he embraces him, instead of shutting the door upon him, he makes sumptuous
provisions for him. And how then do thou dare to say, O despairing soul! that
God will never cast an eye of love upon thee, nor bestow a crumb of mercy on
thee. The Apostle tells you of some monstrous miscreants that were unrighteous,
fornicators, idolaters, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11.
adulterers, effeminate, abusers of themselves with mankind, thieves,
covetous, drunkards, revilers, extortioners; and yet these monsters of
mankind, through the instant goodness and freegrace of God, are washed from the
filth, and guilt of their sins, and justified by the Righteousness of Christ,
and sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, and decked, and adorned with the
precious Graces of Christ. Therefore O despairing souls, are you good at
burning, that you have no mercy on your selves, but to argue to your own
undoing.
do not say, O despairing soul, that thou shall die in thy sins, and lie down
at last in everlasting sorrow. Did it make for the honor and glory of his free
grace to pardon them; and will it be a reproach to his free grace, to pardon
thee? Could God be just in justifying such ungodly ones, and shall he be unjust
in justifying of thee? Did not their unworthiness and unfitness for mercy, turn
the stream of mercy from them? No. Why then, O despairing soul, should thou
fear that thy unworthiness, and unfitness for mercy, will so stop and turn the
stream of mercy, as that thou must perish eternally for want of one drop of
special Grace and Mercy.

Again, tell me, O despairing soul! Is not the Grace of God free grace, is Sub
laudibus naturae latent inimici gratiae. Aug. The Patrons of man's freewil, are
enemies to Gods freegrace.
not man's salvation of free grace. By grace ye are saved, Ephesians. 2. 8. Every
link of this golden chain, is Grace. It is free grace that chose us, Romans 11.
5. Even so then, at this present time also, there is a remnant according to the
election of Grace. It is free grace that chooses some to be Jewels from all
eternity, that chooses some to life, when others are left in darkness. The Lord
Jesus Christ is a gift of free grace; Christ is the greatest, the sweetest, the
choicest, the chiefest gift that ever God gave; and yet this gift is given by a
hand of love. God so loved the John. 3 16. Isa. 9. 6.
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. Here is a sic without a
sicut, God Joh^ 4 10. But God, O thou desp^i^ing soul, is Pater mis^rationum,
he is als b^wels, he will not stand upon giving his most lovely Son to most
unlovely souls.
so loved the world; so freely, so vehemently, so fully, so admirably, so
unconceivably, That he gave his only Son. His Son, not his servant, his
begotten Son, not his adopted son, yea, his only begotten Son. I have read of
one that had four sons, and in a Famine being sore oppressed with hunger, the
Parents resolved to sell one for relief; but then they considered with
themselves which of the four they should sell: they said, The eldest was the
first of their strength, therefore loath they were to sell him; the second was
the very picture of the Father, and therefore loath they were to part with him;
the third was like the Mother, and therefore they were not willing to part with
him; the fourth, and the youngest, was the child of their old age, their
Benjamin, the dearly beloved of them both, and therefore they were resolved not
to part with any of them; and so would rather suffer themselves to perish, then
to part with any of their children. O but Gods heart is so strongly set upon
sinners, Heb. 1. 1, 2, 3. Matthew. 3. ul^.
that he freely gives Jesus Christ, who is his firstborn, who is his very
picture, who is his beloved Benjamin, who is his chiefest joy, who is his
greatest delight, as Solomon speaks, Then I was Prove. 8. 30.
by him as one brought up with him, and I was daily his delight, (in the
Hebrew, (...)
his delights, that is, his greatest delight) rejoicing always before him; or,
sporting greatly before him, as little ones do before their parents. Why then,
O despairing soul, do thou sit down sighing, and walk up and down mourning,
and sadly concluding, that there is no mercy for thee? Hold up thy head, O
despairing Christ is called the gift of God, and the free gift of God five
times together in Romans 5. 15, 16, 17, 18.
soul, Jesus Christ himself is a gift of free grace; the consideration of his
free, boundless, bottomless, and endless love, may afford thee much matter of
admiration and consolation, but none of despairation? And as Jesus Christ is a
gift of free grace, or a free grace gift, so the precious Covenant of Grace is
a gift of grace. Genesis 17. 2. I will make my Covenant betwixt me and thee; but
in the Original (...)
it is, I will give thee my Covenant. Here you see that the Covenant of Grace,
is a free gift of grace. God gave the Covenant of the Priesthood unto Phineas
as a gift, so God gives the Number 25. 12,
Covenant of Grace as a gift of favor and grace, to all that he takes into
Covenant with himself; from first to last, all is from free grace. God loves
Hosea 14 4.
freely; I will heal their back sliding, I will love them freely, etc. So
Moses. The Lord (says he) set his love upon you Deuteronomy 7. 7, 8.
to take you into Covenant with him; not because you were more in number then
other people, but because he loved you, and chose your Fathers. The only
ground God will have all blessings and happiness to flow from free grace. 1.
That the worst of sinners may have strong grounds for hope and comfort.
of Gods love, is his love; the ground of Gods love, is only and wholly in
himself. There is neither portion, nor proportion in us, to draw his love;
there is no love, nor loveliness in us, that should cause a beam of his love to
shine upon us; there is that enmity, that filthiness, that treacherousness, 2.
For the praise of his own glory. 3. That vain man may not boast. 4. That our
mercies and blessings may be sure to us.
unfaithfulness to be found in every man's bosom, as might justly put God upon
glorifying himself in their eternal ruin, and to write their names in his
black Book, in characters of blood and wrath. And as God loves freely, so God
justifies us freely, Romans 3. 24. Being justified freely by his grace, through
the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ. And as poor sinners are justified
freely, so they are pardoned freely, Acts 5. 31. Him has God exalted (speaking
of Christ) with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior; for to give
repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. And as they are pardoned freely,
so (...) The gracious gift of God. Charisma signifies a gift flowing from the
free grace and favor of God. John 10. 28.
they shall be saved freely, Romans 6. ult. For the wages of sin is death, but
the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Thus you see, O
despairing souls, that all is of free grace, from the lowest to the highest
round in Jacobs Ladder, all is of Grace. Christ is a Donative, the Covenant of
grace is a Donative, Pardon of sin is a Donative, Heaven and Salvation is a
Donative. Why then, O despairing souls, should you sit down sighing under such
black, sad, and dismal apprehensions of God, and your own state and condition.
Verily seeing all happiness and blessedness comes in a way of freegrace, and
not in a way of doing, not in a way of works, you should arise, Revel. 21. 6.
and 22. 18.
O despairing souls, and cast off all despairing thoughts, and drink of the
waters of life freely. What though thy heart be dead, and hard, and sad? what
though thy sins be many, and thy fears great? yet behold, here is glorious
grace, rich grace, wondrous grace, matchless and incomparable riches of
free grace, spread before thee. O let this fire warm thee, let these waters
refresh thee, let these Cordials strengthen thee, that it may be day, and no
longer night with thee, that thy mourning may be turned into rejoicing, and
that thy beautiful garments Isa. 52. 1.
may be put on; that so the rest of thy days may be days of gladness, and
sweetness, and free grace may be an everlasting shade, shelter, and rest unto
thee.

Again, tell me, O despairing souls, do you understand, and most seriously, and
frequently ponder upon those particular Scriptures that do most clearly,
sweetly, and fully discover the mercies of God, the bowels of God, the grace
and favor of God to poor sinners, as that Psalm. 86. 5. For thou Lord art good,
and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy, unto all them that call upon
thee. Gods mercies are above all his works, and above all ours too; his mercy
is without measures and rules. All the acts and attributes of God, sit at the
feet of mercy; the weapons of Gods artillery are turned The Rainbow is signum
gratiae and foederis.
into the Rainbow; a Bow indeed, but without an Arrow, bent, but without a
string. The Rainbow is an emblem of mercy, it is a sign of grace and favor, and
an assurance that God will remember his Covenant, it is fresh and green to note
to us, that Gods mercy and grace to poot sinners, is always fresh and green.
Again, tell me, O despairing souls, have you seriously pondered upon Nehe. 9.
16, 17. But they and our Fathers dealt proudly, and hardened their necks, and
hearkened not to thy Commandments: And refused to obey, neither were mindful of
the wonders that thou did among them, but hardened their necks, and in their
rebellion appointed a Captain to return to their bondage; but thou art a God
ready to pardon, gracious, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness,
and forsookest them not. Thou art a God (says he) ready to pardon, or rather,
as it is in the Original, and (...)
thou a God of pardons: There is a very great emphasis in this Hebraism, a God
of pardons; it shows us, that mercy is essential unto God, and that he is
incomparable in forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin. Here Nehemiah sets
Micah 7. 18.
him forth as one made up all of pardoning grace and mercy; as a circle begins
every where, but ends no where, so do the mercies of God. When Alexander did
sit down before a City, he did use to set up a light, to give those within
notice, that if they came forth to him whilst that light lasted, they might
have quarter, if otherwise, no mercy was to be expected. O but Luke 13. 7.
Jere. 3 1. to 15.
such is the mercy and patience of God to sinners, that he sets up light after
light, and waits year after year upon them: When they have done their worst
against him, yet then he comes with his heart full of love, and his hands full
of pardons, and makes a proclamation of Grace, that if now at last they will
accept of mercy, they shall have it. Why then, O despairing soul, do thou
make thy life a hell, by having such low and mean thoughts of Gods mercy, and
by measuring of the mercies, and bowels of God, by the narrow scantling of thy
weak and dark understanding?

Again, tell me, O despairing souls, have you seriously pondered upon those
words in Isai. 55. 7, 8, 9. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous
(...) Veish Aven, The man of iniquity, i. e. One that makes a trade of sin.
man (or rather, as it is in the Original, the man of iniquity) his thoughts:
And let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our
God, for he will abundantly pardon; or as it is in the Original, (...) He will
multiply to pardon, or he will increase his pardons, as the sinner increases
his sins.
He will multiply to pardon. For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are
your ways my ways, says the Lord. For as the Heavens are higher then the
Earth, so are my ways higher then your ways, and my thoughts, then your
thoughts. Turn, O despairing souls, to these Scriptures, Numb. 14. 19, 20.
Exodus 34. 6, 7. Micah 7. 18, 19. Isai. 30. 18, 19. Psalm 78. 34, to 40. and
103. 8. to 13. Jere. 3. 1. to 12. Luke 15. 20. to 24. 1 Timothy 1. 13. to 17. and
tell me, whether you have seriously and frequently pondered upon them.

O how can you look so much grace and mercy, so much love and favor, and such
tender bowels of compassion in the face, as appears in these Scriptures, and
yet rack and tear your precious souls with despairing thoughts!

O there is so much grace and goodness, so much love and favor, so much mercy
and glory, sparkling and shining through these Scriptures, as may allay the
strongest fears, and scatter the thickest darkness, and cheer up the saddest
spirits, etc.

Again, tell me, O despairing souls, do you not do infinite wrong to the 1 Pet.
1. 19.
precious blood of the Lord Jesus? Three things are called precious in the
Scripture, the blood of Christ is called precious blood, and faith is called
precious 2 Pet. 1. 1, 4.
faith, and the promises are called precious promises. Now what a reproach is
it to this precious blood, that speaks better things, then the blood of Abel,
Heb. 12. 24.
for you to faint and sink under the power of delpair? what does this speak
out? O, does it not proclaim to all the world, that there is no such worth and
virtue, no such power and Una gu^tula plus valet quam caelum and terra. Luther.
efficacy in the blood of Christ, as indeed there is? O, how will you answer
this to Christ in that day wherein his blood shall speak and plead, not only
with the profane that have trodden it under their feet, but also with
despairing Heb. 10. 29.
souls that have undervalued the power, virtue, and merit of it? Has not the
blood of Jesus Christ washed 1 John 1. 7, 8, 9.
away the sins of a world of notorious sinners, and is it not of virtue to wash
away the sins of one sinner? Has it Sanguis Christi clavis coeli. The blood of
Christ is the Key of Heaven, that has let in millions. Revel. 7 9. Isai 66 8.
A nation shall be born in a day. When the Jews shall be converted, a very
glorious converting power shall accompany the means of salvation, that Christ
may rain from Sea to Sea, etc.
had that virtue and power in it, as to bring many thousands to glory already,
and is there not so much virtue left in it, as to bring thy soul to glory? Has
it actually delivered such a multitude from wrath to come, as cannot be
numbered, and is the virtue of it so far spent, as that it cannot reach to thy
deliverance. Are there not yet millions of thousands that shall hereafter be
actually saved and justified by this blood? Why then should thou despair of
being justified, and saved from wrath to come, by the virtue and power of this
precious blood? There were five Monks that were studying, what was the best
means to mortify sin: One said, To meditate on death; the second, To meditate
on judgment; the third, To meditate of the joys of Heaven; the fourth, To
meditate on the torments of Hell; the fifth, To meditate on the blood and
sufferings of Jesus Christ; and certainly, the last is the choicest and
strongest motive of all to the mortifying of sin. O despairing souls,
despairing souls! if ever you would cast off your despairing thoughts, and get
out of your present hell, then dwell much, muse much, and apply much this
precious blood to your own souls: So shall sorrow and mourning flee Isai. 5.
11. and 56. 5. and 60. 19, 20. and 62. 4, 5.
away, and everlasting joy shall rest upon you, and the Lord shall give you an
everlasting name, and be everlasting light and glory to you, and you shall be
no more called Forsaken; for the Lord will rejoice over you, and be a
wel-spring John 4. 21, 23.
of life unto you, and make his abode with you, and turn your sighing into
singing, your trembling into rejoicing, and your prison into a paradise of
pleasure; so that your souls shall be able to stand up, and say, O blessed be
God for Jesus Christ, blessed be God for that precious blood that has
justified our persons, and quieted our consciences, and scattered our fears,
and answered our doubts, and given us to triumph over Sin, Hell, and Death. Who
is Rom 8. 33, to 38.
he that condemns? it is Christ that died. The Apostle upon the account of
Christ's death, of Christ's blood, cries out, Victory, Victory; he looks upon all
his Enemies, and sings it sweetly out, Over all these we (...) is
Supervincimus. We do over-overcome.
are more then conquerors, or, above conquerors.

O despairing souls, to all your former sins, do not add this, Of making light
and slight of the blood of Christ; as there is no blood, that saves souls like
the blood of Christ, so there is no blood that sinks souls like the blood of
Christ; a drop of this blood upon a man's head at last, will make him miserable
for ever; but a drop of it upon a man's heart at last, will make him happy for
ever. In the day of vengeance, the Exodus 12. 7.
destroying Angel will spare you, if this blood be found upon the door posts of
your hearts, otherwise you are lost for ever.

Lastly, I can tell you, O despairing souls, that God has brought some out of
the very gulf of despair, out of the very belly of hell; and therefore thou
may hope that thy sins, that are thy present burden, shall not be thy future
ruin. Does not Asaph resemble the despairing soul to the life? My soul Psalm 77.
refused to be comforted, I remembered God, and was troubled, I complained, and
my spirit was overwhelmed. Thou hold mine eyes waking, I am so troubled,
that I cannot speak. Will the Lord cast off for ever, and will he be favorable
no more? is his mercy clean gone for ever, and will his promise fail for
evermore. Has God forgotten to be gracious, has he in anger shut up his
tender mercies? Now out of this gulf God delivers him, Verse 10. And I said,
This is my infirmity, or, this makes (...)
me sick, as it is in the Original. Here Asaph checks himself for casting the
cordials, the comforts of the Spirit against the wall, and for his having such
hard, sad, and black thoughts of God. And in the thirteenth Verse, he speaks
like one dropped out of Heaven. Thy way, O God, is in the sanctuary, who is so
great a God, as our God? Formerly the thoughts of God troubled him, and
overwhelmed him; but now at last the thoughts of the greatness of God, and of
his interest in God is matter of admiration and consolation to him. So Heman
sighs it out thus, My Psalm. 88. All conclude that he was very holy, and his
soul very happy, even while he was in this gulf of misery.
soul is full of troubles, and my life draws nigh unto the grave. Thou have
laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deeps. Thy wrath lies hard upon
me, and thou have afflicted me with all thy waves. Lord why castest thou off my
soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? I am afflicted, and ready to die from
my youth up, while I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted. Thy fierce wrath
goes over me, thy terrors have cut me off. And yet for all this, Hemans state
was good, his soul was safe and happy; he calls God in the same Psalm, The God
of his salvation. So Jonah, when he was in the belly of Jonah 2. (...) Garash
signifies to expulse and cast out, as Adam was expulsed out of paradise. Gen 3.
24. It signifies an ignominious expulsion.
Hell, concludes, That he was cast out of the sight of God. The sense of his
sin, and of Gods anger and wrath, was so eminent and transcendent upon him,
that it even distracts him, and makes him speak like a despairing soul, I am
cast out from the presence of the Lord, I am expulsed out of Gods sight, as
Moses was expulsed out of Egypt. God has cast me out, as one in whom he can
take no pleasure, nor delight; as a Husband does a Wife that has been false
and unfaithful to him; and yet Gods heart and love is so set upon Jonah, that
he will save him by a miracle, rather then he shall not be saved. Jonah was
much in the heart of God, and God made his faith at last victorious. To these I
shall add some other famous instances. In King James his time, there was one
Mistress Honiwood of Kent, an ancient and religious Gentlewoman, who lived many
years in much horror and terror of Conscience, for want of assurance of the
favor of God, and of her eternal welbeing. She would very often cry out, She
was damned; she was damned. Several men of eminent piety and parts, left no
means unattempted, whereby her doubts might be answered, her conscience
pacified, and her soul satisfied and cheared; yet she being strongly under the
power of despair, persisted in crying out, O she was damned, she was damned.
When these Gentlemen The truth of this whole story is notoriously known.
were about to depart, she called for a Cup of Wine for them, which being
brought, she drank to one of them a glass of the Wine, and as soon as she had
done, in an extreme passion she threw the Venice-glass against the ground,
saying, As sure as this glass will break, so surely am I damned. The glass
rebounded from the ground without any harm, which one of the Ministers suddenly
caught in his hand, and said, Behold, a miracle from Heaven to confute your
unbelief, O tempt God no more, tempt God no more. Both the Gentlewoman, and all
the company, were mightily amazed at this strange accident, and all glorified
God for what was done; and the Gentlewoman by the grace and mercy of God, was
delivered out of her Hell of despair, and was filled with much comfort, and
joy, and lived, and died full of peace and assurance.

Take another instance. There lived lately at Tilbury in Essex, a Gentleman who
was a long time under such an eminent degree of despair, that he rejected all
comfort that was tendered to him by any hand, and would not suffer any to pray
with him; nay, he sent to the Ministers and Christians that lived near him, and
did desire them that as they would not increase his torments in Hell, they
would cease praying for him; he would not suffer any religious service to be
performed in his family, though formerly himself was much in the use of them;
yet God gave him at last such inward refreshings, and by degrees filled him
with such abundance of heavenly comsorts (as he told all that came to him) that
it was impossible for any tongue to utter, or heart to imagine, that did not
feel them; at last God gave him the new name, and the white stone, that none
knows, but he that has it. He lived about three quarters of a year enjoying
Heaven upon Earth, and then breathed out his last in the bosom of Christ.

Poor I, that am but of yesterday, have known some that have been so deeply
plunged in the gulf of despair, that they would throw all the Spiritual
Cordials that have been tendered to them against the walls; they were strong in
reasoning against their own souls, and resolved against every thing that might
be a comfort and support unto them; they have been much set against all
Ordinances and Religious Services; they have cast off holy Duties themselves,
and peremptorily refused to join with others in them; yea, they have out of a
sense of sin and wrath, which has lain hard upon them, refused the necessary
comforts of this life, even to the overthrow of natural life: And yet out of
this horrible Pit, this Hell upon Earth, has God delivered their souls, and
given them such manifestations of his grace and favor, that they would not
exchange them for a thousand worlds. O despairing souls, despairing souls, you
see that others, whose conditions have been as bad, if not worse then yours,
have obtained mercy, God has turned their Hell into a Heaven, he has
remembered them in their low estate, he has pacified their raging consciences,
and quieted their distracted souls, he has wiped all tears from their eyes,
and he has been a wellspring of life unto their hearts: Therefore be not
discouraged, O despairing souls, but look up to the Mercy-seat, remember who is
your Rest, and kick no more by despair, against the bowels of Divine love.

Now the second Impediment to 2. Impediment. 2 Samuel 14. 19. Is not the hand of
Joab with thee in all this? You know how to apply it.
assurance, is, Men's entering into the lists of dispute with Satan about those
things that are above their reach, as about the Decrees and Counsel of God. O
by this Satan keeps many precious souls off from assurance, since God has cast
him out of paradise, and bound him in chains of darkness, he will make use of
all his skill, power, and experience, to draw men into the same misery with
himself; and if he cannot prevent their entering at last into paradise above, he
will labor might and main to make their life a wilderness here below. And to
this purpose Eorum qua scire nec datur, nec fas est, docta est ignorantia,
scientiae appetentis insaniae species. Aug.
he will busy their thoughts and hearts about the Decrees of God, and about
their particular elections; as, whether God has decreed them to Eternal
Happiness, or chosen them to Everlasting Blessedness, etc. That so by this
means, he may keep them from that desirable assurance, that may yield believers
two Heavens, a Heaven of joy and comfort here, and a Heaven of felicity and
glory hereafter. It is said of Marcellus, the Roman General, that he could not
be quiet ( nec victor, nec victus) neither conquered, nor conqueror. Such a one
is Satan, if he be conquered (by Faith) yet he will be assaying; if he
conquers, he will be roaring and triumphing. Satan's great design, is eternally
to ruin souls; and where he cannot do that, there he will endeavor to
discomfit souls, by busying them about the secret Decrees and Counsels of God;
if the soul break through his temptations, as David's ^ Sam. 24.
Worthies did break through the Hosts of the Philistims, and snap his snares
Judge. 15. 13, 14.
in sunder, as Samson did his Cords; then his next shift is to engage them in
such debates and disputes, that neither men nor Angels can certainly and
infallibly determine, that so he may spoil their comforts, when he cannot take
away their Crown.

Now thy wisdom, and thy work, O doubting soul, lies not in disputing, but in
believing, praying, and waiting on God. No way to Heaven, no way to assurance
like this; Adam disputes with Satan, and falls, and loses Paradise; Job
believes, and resists Satan, and stands, and conquers upon the Dunghill. When
Satan, O trembling soul, would engage thee in disputes about this or that, say
to him, Satan, Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
Revealed things belong to me, but secret things belong to the Lord. It is
dangerous to be curious in prying into hidden matters, and careless, and
negligent in observing known Laws: say to him, Satan, thou have been a liar,
and a murderer John 8.
from the beginning; thou art a professed enemy to the Saints confidence, and
assurance, to their consolation and salvation: If thou have any thing to say,
say it to my Christ, he is my comfort and crown, my joy and strength, my
redeemer and intercessor, and he shall plead for me. Ah Christians, if you
would but leave disputing, and be much in believing, and in obeying, assurance
would attend you; and you should Lie down in peace, and take Job 11. 13. to 20.
your rest, and none should make you afraid.

The third Impediment that keeps 3. Impediment.
poor souls from Assurance, is the want of a through search, and examination of
their own souls, and of what God has done, and is a doing in them. Some there
be that can read better in Conradus Motto was a notable rule ( Omnium mores,
tues imprimis observato,) observe all men's carriages, but especially thy own.
other men's Books, then in their own, and some there be that are more critical
and curious in observing and studying other men's tempers, hearts, words, works,
and ways, then their own. This is a sad evil, and causes many souls to sit down
in darkness, even days without number. He that will not seriously and
frequently observe the internal motions, and actings of God, in, and upon his
noble part, his immortal soul, may talk of assurance, and complain of the want
of assurance, but it will be long before he shall obtain assurance. O you
staggering, wavering souls, you tossed, and disquieted souls, know for a
certain, that you will never come to experience the sweetness of assurance,
till your eyes be turned inward, till you live more at home then abroad, till
you dig and search for the Mines, that be in your own hearts, till you come to
discern between a work of Nature, and a work of Grace, till you come to put a
difference between the precious and the vile, between Gods work, and Satan's
work. When this is done, you will find the clouds to scatter, and the Sun of
Righteousness to shine upon you, and the Daystar of assurance to rise in you.
Doubting, trembling souls, do not deceive your selves, it is not a careless,
slight, slender searching into your own hearts, that will enable you to see the
deep, the secret, the curious, the mysterious work of God upon you. If you do
not seek as for silver, and search for Prove. 2. 3, 4, 5.
Christ and grace as for hid treasures, you will not find them. Your richest
So says Pliny, Seneca, and others.
metals lie lowest, your choicest gems are in the bowels of the Earth, and
they that will have them, must search diligently, and dig deep, or else they
must go without them. Doubting souls, you must search, and search again, and
dig, and dig again; you must work, and sweat, and sweat, and work, if ever you
will find those Spiritual Treasures, those Pearls of price that are hid,
(under the ashes of corruption) that lie low in the very bowels of your souls.

Tell me, O doubting souls, has that sweet word of the Apostle been ever made
to stick in power upon you, (...), from (...), to pierce t^orow, etc. (...), to
prove and try; as Goldsmiths try their metal by the fire and the touchstone.
God brings not a pair of scales to weigh our graces, but a touchstone to try
our graces; if our gold be true, though it be never so little, it will pass
current with him, He will not quench the smoking flax, etc.
2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves, whether you be in the Faith (or, Whether
Faith be in you) prove your selves, etc. The precept is here doubted, to show
the necessity, excellency, and difficulty of the work; to show, that it is not
a superficial, but a through, serious, substantial Examination, that must enable
a man to know, whether he has precious Faith, or no; whether he be Christ's
Spouse, or the Devils strumpet. All is not gold that glisters, all is not Faith
that men call Faith; therefore he that would not prove a cheater to his own
soul, must take some pains to search and examine, how all is within. Climacus
reports, that the Ancients used to keep in a little Book, a memorial of what
they did in the day, against their night reckoning. But ah, how few be there in
these days, that keeps a Diary of Gods mercies, and their own infirmities, of
Spiritual Experiences, and the inward operations of Heavenly Graces? Seneca
reports of a Heathen man that would every night ask himself these three
Questions: First, What evil have thou healed this day; secondly, What vice have
thou stood against this day; thirdly, In what part art thou bettered this day.
And shall not Christians take pains with their own hearts, and search day and
night to find out what God has done, and is a doing there. God has his doing
hand, his working hand in every man's heart; either he is a working there in
ways of mercy, or in ways of wrath; either he is a building up, or a plucking
down; either he is a making all glorious within, or else he is a turning all
into a Hell. Well, doubting souls, remember this, That the soundest joy, the
strongest consolations flow from a through examination of things within. This is
the way to know how it is with you for the present, and how it is like to go
with you for the future: This is the way to put an end to all the wranglings of
your hearts, and to put you into a possession of Heaven, on this side Heaven.

The fourth Impediment that keeps 4. Impediment.
many precious souls from Assurance is, their mistakes about the work of grace.
Look, as many Hypocrites do take a good nature for grace; and those common
gifts and graces that may be in a Saul, a Jehu, a Judas, for a special
distinguishing grace, etc. So the dear Saints of God are very apt to take grace
for a good nature, to take Pearls of price for stones of no value, Mark 9. 24.
to take special grace for common grace. Many trembling souls are apt to call
their Faith, unbelief, with the man in the Gospel, and their Confidence,
presumption, and their Zeal, passion, etc. And by this means many are kept off
from Assurance. Now the way to remove this Impediment, is, wisely and seriously
to distinguish between renewing grace, and restraining grace, betwixt common
grace, and special grace, betwixt temporary grace, and sanctifying grace. Now
the difference betwixt the one, and the other, I have showed in Ten particulars
in my The same man sells that, that sells this:
Treatise, called Precious remedies against Satan's devices, from page 217. to
page 230. And to that I refer thee for full and complete satisfaction; if thou will cast thy eye upon the particulars, I doubt not, but thou will find that
profit and content, that will recompense More to that point, I cannot easily
say.
thee for thy pains. And this I thought more convenient to hint to thee, then
to write over the same things, that there thou will find to thy delight and
settlement.

The fifth Impediment to Assurance 5. Impediment.
is, their grieving and vexing the Spirit of grace, by not harkning to his
voice, Nil nisi sanctum a sanct^ spiritu prodire potest. Nothing can come from
the holy Spirit, but that which is holy.
by refusing his counsel, by stopping the ear, by throwing water upon that fire
he kindles in their souls, and by attributing that to the Spirit, that is to be
attributed to men's own passions, and distempers, and to the Prince of Smoke
drives away Bees, and an ill savor drives away Doves. Sin is such a smoke, such
an ill savor, as drives away this Dove-like spirit.
darkness, and his associates. By these and such like ways, they sad that
precious Spirit that alone can glad them; they set him a mourning, that alone
can set them a rejoicing; they set him a grieving, that alone can set them a
singing; and therefore it is, that they sigh it out with Jeremiah, Lam. 1. 16.
Behold, he that should comfort our souls, stands afar off. Ah doubting souls,
if ever you would have Assurance, you must observe the motions of the Spirit,
and give up your selves to his guidance, you must live by his Laws, and tread
in his steps, you must live in the Spirit, and walk in the Spirit, you must let
him be chief in your souls. This is the way to have him to be a sealing Spirit,
a witnessing Spirit, and an assuring Spirit to your hearts. Believe it souls,
if this be not done, you will be far off from quietness and settlement. The
word that in (...), The soul will not quite leave wrangling, till it be quiet
in the bosom of Christ.
1 John 3. 19. is rendered assure, signifies to persuade, to note to us, that
our hearts are very froward, and peevish, and apt to wrangle, and raise
objections against God, against Christ, against the Scripture, against our own
and others experiences, and against the sweet hints and joyings of the Spirit;
and this they will do, especially when we omit what the Spirit persuades us to;
(omissions raises fears, and doubts, and makes work for Hell, or for the Spirit
and Physician of souls,) or else, when we do that which the Spirit disswades us
from. If you be kind and obedient to the Spirit, it will not be long night
with your souls, but if you rebel and vex him, he will make your Isai. 63. 10.
life a hell, by withholding his ordinary influences, by denying to seal you to
the day of redemption, and by giving you up to conflict with horrors and
terrors, etc. Therefore be at the Spirits beck, and check; and assurance, and
joy will ere long attend you.

The sixth Impediment to Assurance, 6. Impediment.
is, doubting souls, making their Sense, Reason, and Feeling, the judges of
their Spiritual Conditions: Now so long as they take this course, they will
never reach to Assurance; Reasons arm is too short to reach this Jewel
Assurance: This Pearl of price, is put into no hand, but that hand of Faith
that reaches from Earth to Heaven. What tongue can express, or heart conceive,
the fears, the doubts, the clouds, the darkness, the perplexities, that will
arise from the souls reasoning thus. I find not that the countenance Genesis 31.
5.
of God is toward me as before, therefore, surely my condition is bad; I feel
not those warmings, those quicknings, those cheerings, those meltings as
before; I am not sensible of those secret stirrings, and actings of the Spirit,
and Grace in my soul as before; I do not hear such good news from Heaven as
before, therefore certainly God is not my God; I am not beloved, I am not in
the state of Grace, I have but deceived my self and others; and therefore the
issue will be, that I shall die in my sins, etc. To make Sense, and Feeling,
the Judges of our Spiritual Conditions, what is it but to make our selves happy
and miserable, righteous and unrighteous, saved and damned in one day, I, in
one hour, when Sense and Reason sit as Judges upon the Bench? Has God made
Sense and Feeling the Judges of your Conditions? No. Why then will you? Is your
Reason Scripture, is your Sense Scripture, is your Feeling Scripture? No. Why
then will you make them Judges of your Spiritual Estate? Is not the Word the
Judge, by which all men and their actions shall be judged at last? The word
that I have spoken John 12. 43.
(says Christ) shall judge you in the last day. To the Law, and to the
Testimony, Isa. 8. 20. (...)
if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no light, or
no morning in them. Why then, O doubting souls, will you make your Sense and
Feeling the Judge, not only of your conditions, but of the truth it self? What
is this, but to dethrone God, and to make a god of your Sense and Feeling? What
is this, but to limit and bind up the Holy One of Israel? What is this, but to
toss the soul to and fro, and to expose it to a labyrinth of fears, and
scruples? What is this, but to cast a reproach upon Christ, to gratify Satan,
and to keep your selves upon the rack? Well, doubting souls, the counsel that I
shall give you, is this, Be much in believing, and make only the Scripture the
judge of your condition, maintain the judgment Inclinavit Deus Scripturas ad
infantium and lactentium capacitatem, says one. God has bowed down the
Scriptures to the capacity, even of Babes and Sucklings. Id agit tota Scriptura
ut credamus Deum esse misericordem. Luth. Psalm. 119. 24. (...)
of the Word, against the judgment of Sense and Feeling; and if upon a
serious, sincere, and impartial comparing of thy heart and the Word together,
of thy ways and the Word together, the Word speaks thee out to be sincere, to
be a Nathanael, to be a new Creature, to be born again, to have an immortal
seed in thee, etc. Cleave to the Testimony of the Word, joy in it, rest upon
it, and give no more way to Fears and Doubts; Let thy countenance be no more
sad, for nothing can speak or make that soul miserable, that the Word speaks
out to be happy. Constantine would have all differences and disputes in the
Nicene Council, ended by the Bible. O doubting souls, look cheerfully to this,
That all differences and controversies that arise in your hearts, be ended by
the Word; there is danger in looking beside the Scripture, or beyond the
Scripture, or short of the Scripture, or upon sense and feeling, so much as
upon the Scripture; therefore, let the Word be always the man of thy counsel:
No way to assurance and joy, to settlement and establishment like this. If you
are resolved to make Sense and Feeling the Judge of your conditions, you must
resolve to live in fears, and lie down in tears.

The seventh Impediment to Assurance 7. Impediment.
is, Men's remisness, carelessness, laziness, and overliness in Religious
Services, and in the Exercise of their graces. Ah, how active and lively are
men The active Christian goes to Heaven, Alacri animo ac plena fiducia.
in pursuing after the world; but how liveless, and unactive in the ways of
Grace and Holiness. Ah, doubting Christians, remember this, That the promise of
Assurance and Comfort is made over, not to lazy, but laborious Christians, not
to idle, but to active Labor omnia vincit.
Christians, not to negligent, but to diligent Christians. John 14. 21, 22, 23.
He that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me: And he
that loves me, shall be loved of Non amat qui non zelat. Aug.
my Father; and I will love him, and will manifest my self to him. Now Judas
says unto him, (not Iscariot) Lord, How is it that thou will manifest thy self
unto us, and not to the world? Jesus answered, and said unto him, If any man
love me, he will keep my words; and my Father will love him, and we will come
unto him, and make our abode with him. So in that 2 Pet. 1. 10, 11. Wherefore
the rather Brethren, (...), is a significant word, it signifies all manner of
earnestness, scriousness, and continuance in doing. Also it signifies a speedy
and swift putting of things in execution.
give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure: For if you do these
things, ye shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the Everlasting Kingdom
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. A lazy Christian shall always want four
things, viz. Comfort and Content, Confidence and Assurance. God has made a
separation between Joy and Idleness, between Assurance and Laziness; and
therefore it is impossible for thee to bring these together, that God has put
so far a sunder. Assurance and Joy are choice Donatives that Christ gives only
to laborious Christians. The lazy Christian has his mouth full of complaints,
when the active Christian has his heart full of comforts. God would have the
hearts of his children to be hot in Religious Services, be fervent (or,
seething hot, as it is in the Romans 12. 11. (...) signifies seething hot.
Original) in spirit, serving the Lord. That service that has not heavenly
heat, that has not Divine fire in it, is no service, it is lost service. A
lazy spirit, is always a losing spirit. O! Remember lazy Christians, that God
is a pure act, therefore he loves activeness in Religious services. Remember
the Angels, those Princes of Ezekiel. 1 6. Marth. 18. 10.
glory are full of life and activity, and they always behold the Fathers face
in glory. Remember, he that will find rich Minerals, must dig deep; he that
Prove. 2. 4, 5, 6.
will be rich, must sweat for it; he that will taste the Kirnel, must crack the
shell; he that will have the Marrow, must break the bone; he that will wear the
Garland, must run the race; he that will ride in triumph, must get the victory;
so he that will get Assurance, must be active and lively in duty. It is only
fervent prayer that is effectual Jam ^ 16. (...). The working prayer.
prayer, it is only the working prayer that works wonders in Heaven, and that
brings down wonderful Assurance into the heart. Cold prayers shall never have
any warm Answers, God will suit his returns to our requests; liveless services
shall have liveless Answers; when men are dull, God will be dumb. Elias prayed
earnestly, (...), He prayed in prayer.
or as it is in the Greek, He prayed in prayer, and God answered him. Most men
have more heat in their brains, then in their hearts and services; and
therefore it is that they walk in darkness, that they want assurance.
Many there be that pray, but they do not pray in prayer, they are not lively
and earnest with God in prayer; and therefore Justice shuts out their prayers.
When one desired to know what kind of man Basil was, there was (says the
History) presented to him in a dream, a Pillar of fire with this Motto ( Talis
est Basilius) Basil is such a one, all on a light fire for God. Ah lazy
doubting Christians, were you all on a light fire, in hearing, in praying, etc.
It would not be long before the Windows of Heaven would be open, before God
would rain down Manna, before he would drop down Assurance into your bosoms.

My advice to you, lazy Christians, is this, Cease complaining of the want of
Assurance, and be no more formal, slight, and superficial in Religious God shot
Anastasius the Emperor to death with a thunderbolt for his lukewarmness, says
the Historian.
services, but stir up your selves, and put out all your might and strength in
holy actions, and you shall experimentally find, that it will not be long
before you shall have such good news from Heaven, as will fill you with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory.

The eighth Impediment to Assurance, 8. Impediment.
is, Men's living in the neglect of some Ordinance, or in the omission Omission
of Diet breeds diseases, and makes the life uncomfortable, yea, sometimes a
bur^en to a man So the omission of holy duties and services, breeds many fears,
doubts, and questions in the soul, about its own sincerity, about its interest
in Christ, about its finding audience, and acceptance with God; and so makes
the life of a Christian very uncomfortable, yea, a burden to him.
of some Religious duties; they seek Christ in some of his ways, but not in
all; they wait upon him in this and that Ordinance, but not in every Ordinance.
Are there not many doubting souls that wait upon God, in hearing the Word of
Life, and yet neglect, and make light of waiting upon Christ, in breaking the
Bread of Life? Are there not many that are very careful daily to perform Family
duties, and yet are very rarely found in Closet services? Some there be that
are all ear, all for hearing; and others there be, that are all tongue, all for
speaking and praying; and others there be, that are all eye, all for believing,
all for searching, all for enquiring into this, and that; and others there be,
that are all hand, all for receiving the Lords Supper, etc. And seriously, when
I consider these things, I cease wondering, that so many want Assurance, and do
rather wonder, that any obtain Assurance, considering how few there be, that
are conscientious and ingenuous in waiting upon God in every way and service,
wherein he is pleased to manifest his grace and favor to poor souls.

Well doubting souls, remember this, God will give Assurance in one Ordinance,
when he will deny it in another, that you may seek his face in all. God loves
as well, that you should wait on him, as that you should wrestle with him. He
that will not give God the honor of attending him, in every duty, in every
Ordinance, may long enough complain of the want of Assurance, before God will
give him the white stone, and the new name, that none knows but he that has
it. Many of the precious Sons of Zion have found God giving Assurance in one
Ordinance, others have found him giving Assurance in another Ordinance. God
speaks peace to some in such and such services, and comfort to others in such
and such duties: Therefore as you would have Assurance, O doubting souls, seek
the Lord in every way and service* wherein he is pleased to make known his
glory and goodness. In hearing Christ opens his Box of Ointments to some, and
in praying and breaking of Bread he lets his sweet myrrh fall upon the hearts
of others. Some have seen the glory of the Lord in the Sanctuary, that have
been clouded in their Closets; others have heard a sweet still voice in their
Closets, that have sat long trembling in the Sanctuary. Remember Deuteronomy. 23. 3,
4. Here the Proverb is most false, that says ( Modi cum non nocet) A little
hurts not. Ah this or that little omission, as you call it, may expose men to a
great deal of wrath. Matthew. 25. 41, ult.
doubting souls, Moab and Ammon were banished the Sanctuary to the Tenth
Generation, for a mere omission, because they met not Gods Israel in the
Wilderness with Bread and Water. And I verily believe, that God does banish (as
I may say) many from his favorable presence, (as Absalom did David) for their
sinful omissions, for their non-attendance upon him in all his ways. Therefore,
if They did not rob the Saints, but omitted the relieving of them, which was
their ruin.
ever you would have Assurance, seek the Lord, not only while he may be found,
but also in every gracious dispensation where he may be found; Then shall the
joy of the Lord be your strength, and his glory shall rest upon you. The days
of your mourning shall be ended, and you shall lie down in peace, and none
shall make you afraid. I would earnestly desire you, O doubting souls,
seriously to consider, That all the ways of Christ, are ways of pleasantness
(as Solomon speaks,) not only this Prove. 3. 17.
way, or that way, but every way of Christ is a way of pleasantness; every way
is strowed with Roses, every way is paved with Gold, every way is attended with
comfort and refreshing. So the Psalmist, Thy paths drop fatness, Psalm. 65. 11,
12.
not only this or that path, but all the paths of God drops fatness. O then
walk in every way, tread in every path of God, as you would have your souls
filled with marrow and fatness, Psalm. 63. 5.
and never forget that choice saying of the Prophet Isaiah, Thou meetest him
Isa. 64. 5. (...)
that rejoices, and works righteousness, those that remember thee in thy
ways. To run and meet the soul as the father of the Prodigal run, and met him
afar off, with bowels of love and pity.
They that would have God to meet with them in a way of Peace and
Reconciliation, in a way of Grace and Favor, must remember God in all his ways;
not only in this or that particular way, but in every way wherein he is
pleased to cause his glory to shine: Therefore doubting souls, Cease
complaining, and be more conscientious and ingenuous, in waiting upon God in
all his appointments, and it will not be long night with you.

The ninth Impediment that keeps 9. Impediment. Multi amando res noxias sunt
miseri, habendo miseriores. Many are miserable by loving hurtful things, but
are more miserable by having them.
Christians from Assurance, is, An immoderate love of the World; their thoughts
and hearts are so busied about getting the World, and keeping the World, that
they neither seek Assurance as they should, nor prize Assurance as they should,
nor lament the want of Assurance as they should, nor study the worth and
excellency of Assurance as they should; and therefore it is no wonder, that
such are without Assurance. As it is very hard Matthew. 19. 23, 24.
for a rich man to enter into Heaven, so it is very hard for a worldly
Christian Hab. 2. 6. Divitibus ide^ pietas deest, quia nihil deest. Rich men's
wealth proves an hinderance to their happiness.
to get Assurance of Heaven. The thick clay of this world does so affect him,
and take him, so satisfy him, and sink him, that he is not able to pursue
after Assurance, with that life and love, with that fervency and frequency, as
those must do that will obtain it. It is said, Genesis 13. 2. That Abraham was
very rich in Cattle, in Silver, and in Gold; according to the Hebrew (...)
Abraham was very heavy, to show (says one) that riches are a heavy burden, and
a hinderance many times to a Christians comfort, and confidence, to his
happiness and assurance. Solomon got more hurt by his Di^^^ia corporales
paupertatis plen^ sunt. Aug. Earth by riches are full of poverty.
wealth, then he got good by his wisdom; such a fire rise out of his worldly
enjoyments, as did even consume and burn up his choicest spirits, and his
noblest virtues; under all his Royal Robes, he had but a threadbare soul.
Sicily, says one, is so full of sweet Diodorus Si^ulus. The same says
Aristotle.
flowers, that dogs cannot hunt there, the sent of the sweet flowers diverteth
their smell: And ah what does all Quam sordet mihi terra cum ^lum intueor?
Adrian.
the sweet delights and contents of this world, but make men lose the sent of
Heaven, but divert men from hunting after Assurance, and from running after
Christ, in the sweetness of his ointments.

The Creature is all shadow, and vanity of vanities, (vanity is the very
quintessence of the Creature, and all that can possibly be extracted out of
it.) It is filia noctis, like Jonahs gourd, a man may sit under its shadow for
a while, but it soon decays and dies. Why should thou set thy heart upon
that Prove. 23. 5.
which is not. Were ever riches true Si t^rram am as terra es; si deum* amas,
quid vis ut di^am Deus es. Aug. If thou love the Earth, thou art earthly, but
if thou love God, thou shall have whatever thou will ask of God.
to them that trusted them; as the Bird hops from twig to twig, so does riches
hop from man to man, etc. Worldly Christians, cease complaining of the want of
Assurance, and sincerely humble and abase your souls before the Lord; for that
you have so eagerly pursued after lying vanities; for that you have in so great
a measure forsaken the Fountain of living water; for that with Martha you have
been busied about many things, when Christ and Assurance, the two things
necessary, have been so much neglected and disregarded by you. Get this World,
this Moon, under your feet, take no rest till you have broken through this
silken net, till you have got off these Golden Fetters. A heart that is full of
the world, is a heart full of wants. Ah the Joy, the Peace, the Comfort, the
Confidence, the Assurance that such hearts wants. The Stars which have least
circuit, are nearest the Pole; and men whose hearts are least entangled with
the world, are always nearest to God, and to the Assurance of his Favor.
Worldly Christians, remember ^his, You and Mundus cadaver est, and petentes ^um
sunt ca^es, (is an Arabic Proverb) that is, The world is a carcass, and those
that hunt after it are dogs. This Proverb makes a great many of our glistering
Professors to be but dogs.
the world must part, or else assurance and your souls will never meet. When a
worldly Christian is saved, he is saved as by fire; and before ever he shall be
assured of his salvation, he must cry out, ( Omnes humanae consolationes, sunt
desolationes,) All humane consolations are but desolations. God will not give
the Sweet meats of Heaven, to those that are gorged and surfetted with the
delicates of the Earth. The Cock upon the Dunghill prefers a Barley Corn above
the choicest Pearl; such Dunghill Christians that prefer a little Barley Corn
above this Pearl of price, Assurance; that with Esau prefer Heb 12. 16, 17.
a morsel of meat before this Blessing of blessings, that prefer Paris above
Paradise, Gods coin above his countenance, may at last with Esau seek, and seek
with tears this Heavenly Jewel Assurance, and yet, as he, be rejected and
repulsed.

The tenth and last Impediment that 10. Impediment.
keeps Christians from Assurance, is, The secret cherishing, and running out of
their hearts, to some bosom darling sin: It is dark night with the soul, when
the soul will cast a propitious eye upon this, or that bosom sin, and secretly
say, Is it not a little one, and my soul shall live, though God and Conscience
has formerly checked and whipped the soul for so doing. Ah how many be there,
that dally and play with sin, even after they have put up many prayers and
complaints against sin, and after they have lamented, and bitterly mourned over
their sins: Many there be that complain of their deadness, barrenness,
frowardness, conceitedness, cenforiousness, and other baseness; and yet are
ready at every turn to gratify, if not to justify those very sins that they
complain against: No wonder that such want Assurance. After the Israelites had
eat Manna in the Wilderness, and drunk water out of the Rock, after God had
been to them a cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night, after he had led
them by the arms, and kept them as the apple of his eye, after he had made them
spectators of his wonders, they hankered after the fleshpots of Egypt; so
when, after God has given a man a new name, and a white stone, after he has
made a report of his love to the soul, after he has taken a man up into
paradise, after he has set a man upon his knee, and carried him in his bosom,
after he has spoke peace and pardon to the soul, Psalm. 85. 8.
for the soul to return to folly, O this cannot but prove a woeful hinderance to
Assurance, this will provoke God to change his countenance, and to carry it not
as a Friend, but as an enemy: When Love is abused, Justice takes up the Iron
Rod, God will strike hard and home, when men kick against the Bowels of Mercy.
God has made an Everlasting separation betwixt Sin and Peace, betwixt Sin and
Joy, and betwixt Sin and Assurance. God will be out with that man, that is in
with his sin; if sin and the soul be one, God and the soul must needs be two:
He that is resolved to dally with any sin, he must resolve to live in many
fears. Never forget this; he that favoreth any one sin, though he forgoeth
many, does but as Benadab, recover of one disease, and die of another; yea, he
takes pains to plunge himself unto two hells, a hell here, and a hell
hereafter. Therefore, as ever thou would have Assurance, offer up thy Isaac,
part with thy Benjamin, pull out thy right eye, cut off thy right hand,
otherwise Assurance and Joy will not be thy portion.

Now that I may remove this Impediment which is of such a dangerous consequence
to Christians souls, and keeps Christians for ever from smiling upon any bosom
sin, I shall first lay down a few considerations to provoke them to dally and
play no more with sin, but to put off that sin that does so easily beset them,
that sticks so close Heb. 12. 1. (...).
unto them; and then in the second place, I shall propound some means, that may
contribute to the bringing under of bosom sins, that so it may be no longer
night with the soul.

The first Motive to provoke you to Motive 1.
put out all your strength and might against bosom sins, that you are so apt to
play withal, is, Seriously to consider, that this will be a strong, and choice
Demonstration, and evidence (...) Gnimme, With him.
of the Sincerity, and uprightness of your hearts. Psalm. 18. 23. I was also
upright with him, and I kept my self from mine iniquity. I kept a strict and
diligent watch upon that particular sin that I found my self most inclined
unto. And this, says David, is a clear evidence to me of the uprightness of my
heart with God. The truth is, there is no Hypocrite in the world, but does
dandle and dally with some Job 20. 12, 13.
bosom sin, or other: And though at times, and upon carnal accounts, they seem
to be very zealous against this and that sin, yet at the very same time their
hearts stand strongly and affectionately engaged to some bosom sin, as might be
showed in Saul, Jehu, Judas, and Herod; therefore as ever you would have a sure
Argument of your uprightness, trample upon your Dalilaes. This very evidence of
thy uprightness, may yield thee more comfort and refreshing in a day of trouble
and darkness, then for the present thou do apprehend, or have Faith to
believe. Some there be that can tell thee, that the joy of the Bridegroom, nor
the joy of the Harvest, is not to be compared with that joy that arises in the
soul, from the sense and evidence 2 Cor. 1. 12.
of a man's own uprightness. Sincerity is the very queen of virtues, she holds
the throne, and will be sure to keep it; yea, the very sight of it, in the
soul, makes a man sit cheerful and thankful ( Noah-like) in the midst of all
tempests and storms. Look, as the playing with a bosom sin, speaks out
Hypocrisy, so the mortifying of a bosom sin, speaks ou^ Sincerity.

The second Motive to provoke Motive 2.
doubting souls to trample upon their bosom sins, is, Solemnly to consider,
that the conquests of their darling sins, will render the conquests of other
sins easy. When Goliath was slain, the rest 1 Samuel 17. 51, 52.
of the Philistims fled; when a General in an Army is cut off, the common
Soldiers are easily routed and destroyed. Ah complaining, doubting The
Lacedemonia^s in all battles, resolved to go home conquerors, or to die
conquered.
souls, did you but take the courage and resolution to fall with all your
might, and spiritual strength, upon those particular sins that stick so close
unto you, and that do so easily captivate you; you would find, that the great
Mountains Zach 4 7.
that are before you, would soon be made a Plain: Other sins will not be long
lived, when Justice is done upon your bosom sins; thrust but a dart through the
heart of Absalom, 2 Samuel 18. 14. ult.
and a complete conquest will follow.

The third Motive to provoke you Motive 3.
to crucify your bosom sins, be they what they will, is, Seriously to consider
the very great damage that your souls have already sustained by your bosom
sins. Saul by casting an amorous Some there be that had rather lose their
hearts, then their conceits: others had rather lose their souls, then their
sins; these shall be chronicled in hell for Fools and Bedlams.
eye upon Agag, lost his Crown and Kingdom. Samson by dallying with his
Delilah, lost his strength, sight, light, liberty, and life. But what are these
losses to thy loss of Spiritual strength, to thy loss of communion with God, to
thy loss of the Spirit of Light, Life, Liberty, and Glory, to thy loss of Joy
unspeakable, and Peace that passes understanding, and to thy loss of those
fresh and sparkling hopes of glory, that were once sparkling in thy Breast? Mark
Anthony was so far bewitched with his Cleopatra, that in the heat of the battle
of Actium, when the Empire of the world, his life, and all lay at stake, that
he fled from Augustus to pursue her, to the ruin and loss of all. So, many
there are so bewitched to some Cleopatra, to some darling sin, or other, that
they pursue the enjoyment of them to the loss of God, Christ, Heaven, and their
Souls for ever.

Ah Christians, that the sense of what you have formerly lost, and of what you
daily loose, by your playing with sin, might provoke you to set upon some
effectual course for the mortifying of them. It was a blasphemous speech of
Henry the second, who said, when Mentz, his City was taken, That he should
never love God any more, who suffered a City so dear to him, to be taken from
him. But it will be a blessed and a happy thing for you, in uprightness, to
say, O, we will never love, we will never favor, we will never dally with our
bosom sins more; for they have damnified us in our Spiritual enjoyments, and in
our Spiritual returns from Heaven. Shall the sense Nay, how many in these days
are mad against public Instruments for seeming losses.
of outward losses by this and that instrument, work us out of love with them;
and shall not the sen^e of our Spiritual losses by bosom sins, work us much
more out with them. Ah Lord, of what Iron metal is that heart that can look
upon those sad losses that has attended playing with bosom sins, and yet still
dally with those Delilahs?

The fourth Motive to provoke you Motive 4. The Heathens (as many Professors
now) had not the right art of mortifying sin, ( Sapientia eorum plerumque
abscondit vitia, non abscindit.) All their wisdom was to hide a lust, not to
quench it; therefore their joy was like the crackling of thorns under a pot.
to be the death of your darling sins, is, Solemnly to consider, that the
conquest, and effectual mortifying of one bosom sin, will yield a Christian
more glorious joy, comfort, and peace, then ever he has found in the
gratifying, and committing of all other sins. The pleasure and sweetness that
follows victory over sin, is a thousand times beyond that seeming sweetness
that is in the gratifying of sin: The joy that attends the subduing of sin, is
a noble joy, a pure joy, a peculiar joy, an increasing joy, and a lasting joy;
but that joy that attends the committing of sin, is an ignoble joy, a corrupt
joy, a decreasing joy, a dying joy; the truth is, were there the least real joy
in sin, there could be no perfect Hell, where men shall most perfectly sin, and
be most perfectly tormented with their sin. Ah doubting Christians, as ever The
Leper under the Law, was still to keep his hair shaven. Levit. 14 5. So should
we be still a cutting and shaving, that though the roots of sin remain, yet
they may not grow and sprout.
you would have good days, as ever you would walk in the light, as ever you
would like the Angels, have always Harps in your hands, and Allelujahs in your
mouths, be restless, till in the Spirit and Power of Jesus, you have brought
under the sin that sticks so close unto you. Remember this, nothing below the
conquest of bosom sins, can make a jubilee in the heart; it is not a man's
whining and complaining over sin, but his mortifying of sin that will make his
life a paradise of pleasure. If notwithstanding all that has been said, you
are still resolved to dally with sin, then you must resolve to live as a
stranger to God, and as a stranger to assurance and peace. You must expect sad
trials without, and sore troubles within; you must expect to find Satan
playing his part both as a Lion, and as a Serpent, both as a Devil, and as an
Angel of light; you must expect either no news from Heaven, or but bad news
from Heaven; and you must expect that Conscience Conscience is Index, Judex,
Vindex.
will play the part, both of a scolding Wife, and of a Lion, that wants his
prey. And this shall be your just reward for playing with sin; if you like the
reward, then take your course, and dally with sin still; if otherwise, then
sacrifice your Isaac.

The fifth Motive to work you to Motive 5. Some Heathens, and many profane
persons have earnestly desired, that they had done that at first, that they
would fain have done at last, but could not; the worst would be good, and do
good at last. But at last they will be found the best and wisest, who have made
it their business to do that every day, that every one would do upon a dying
day.
trample upon your bosom sins, is, Wisely to consider that it is your duty and
glory to do that every day, that you would willingly do upon a dying day. Ah,
how would you live and love upon a dying day? how would you admire God, rest
upon God, delight in God, long for God, and walk with God upon a dying day? how
would you hate, loath, and abhor your bosom sins upon a dying day? how would
you complain of your bosom sins, and pray against your bosom sins, and mourn
over your bosom sins, and watch against your bosom sins, and fly from all
occasions that should tend to draw you to close with your bosom sins, upon a
dying day? Ah doubting souls, would you not for all the world gratify your
bosom sins upon a dying day, and will you gratify them on other days; which
for any thing you know to the contrary, may prove your dying days? Thrice happy
is that soul that labors with all his might, to do that at first that he would
fain do at last; that does that on every day, that he would give a thousand
worlds to do on a dying day. No way to Assurance like this; no way to joy and
comfort, like this; no way to rest and peace, like this; no way to the Kingdom,
to the Crown, like this. I earnestly beseech you trembling souls, when you
find your spirits running out to bosom sins, that you would lay your hands
upon your hearts, and thus expostulate the case: O our souls, would you thus
dally and play with sin upon a dying day? would you thus stroke and hug sin
upon a dying day? would you not rather show all the dislike and hatred that is
imaginable against it? would you not tremble at sin more then at Hell, and
abhor the very occasions of sin, more then the most venomous Serpent in all the
world? would you not rather suffer the worst and greatest punishments, then to
smile upon a darling sin upon a dying day? Yes. O would you fain do this upon a
dying day; why not then every day? why not then every day, O our souls?

The sixth and last Motive to provoke Motive 6. One flaw in a Diamond does not
only take away the beauty, glory, and price of it; but it puts men to
question, whither it be a Diamond. Psalm. 40. 12.
you to fall with all your might upon bosom sins, is, Seriously to consider
that till this be done, fears and doubts will still haunt the soul; the soul
will still be fearing that surely all is naught, and that, that work that is
wrought upon it, is not a real, but a counterfeit work, that it is not a
peculiar and special work, but a common work; that a man may have and perish.
Till (...)
this be done, the soul can never be able I am not able to see, sin had put out
David's eyes.
to see grace in its own native beauty, and glory; the hugging of sin in a
corner, will raise such a dust in the soul, that it cannot be able to see those
Pearls of glory sparkling and shining. Till this be done, doubting souls, you
will be but Babes, and Shrubs, and Dwarfs in Christianity, the hankering of
the soul after sin, is the casting of water upon the Spirit, it is the laming
of Grace, it is the clipping the wings of Faith and Prayer; so that the soul
can neither be confident, nor fervent, frequent nor constant in religious
services; so that it will unavoidably follow, such souls will be like Pharaohs
Gideon had seventy sons, and but one Bastard, and yet that one Bastard
destroyed all the rest; you may easily apply it.
lean Kine, poor and starveling. Look as many men are kept low in their outward
estates, by having a back door to some Herodians; so many doubting souls are
kept low in spirituals, by their hankering after some particular sin.

Remember Christians, sin is the souls sickness, the souls weakness; if the
body be weak and diseased, it grows not, sin is poison that turns all
nourishment into corruption, and so hinders the growth of the soul in grace and
holiness. Ah Christians, as ever you would be rid of your fears and doubts, as
ever you would see the beauty and glory of grace, as ever you would be eminent
and excellent in grace and holiness, see that effectual justice be done upon
that Achan, that Jonah, that darling sin, that has occasioned storms within,
and tempests without. It was a grievous vexation If there be but one crack in
the honeyglass, there the Wasp will be buzzing; and where there is but some one
sin favored, there Satan will be rempting and upbraiding.
to King Lysimachus, that his staying to drink one draught of water, lost him
his Kingdom. Ah Christians, it will grievously vex you; when you come to your
selves, and when you come to taste of the admirable pleasure that attends the
conquest of sin, to consider that your hankering after this or that particular
sin, has been the loss of that joy and comfort, that peace and assurance that
is infinitely more worth then all the Kingdoms of the world.

But you may say to me, O! we would fain have our bosom sins subdued, we desire
above all that they may be effectually mortified; these sons of Zerviah we
would have slain to choose: But what course must we take to bring under our
darling sins, to get off our Golden Fetters, to get out of these Silken Snares?
To this Question I shall give these Answers.

First, If ever thou would have Means 1.
masterie over this, or that bosom sin, then engage all thy power and might
against thy bosom sin, draw up thy spiritual forces, and engage them wholly
against the sin that does so easily beset thee. As the King of Syria said to
his Captains, Fight neither 2 Chro. 8. 30.
with small nor great, save only with the King of Israel: So I say, your
wisdom, and your work, O doubting souls, lies not in skirmishing with this, or
that sin, but in coming up to a close sharp fight with the King of Israel, with
that darling sin that has a Kingly interest in you, and a Kingly power over
you. Constantine the Great his Symbol was ( Immedicabile vulnus ense
rescindendum est) when there is no hope of curing, men must fall a cutting.
Believe it souls, you must fall a cutting your bosom sins in pieces by the
Sword of the Spirit, as Samuel cut Agag in 1 Samuel 15. 33.
pieces in Gilgal before the Lord, or else you will never obtain a perfect
cure. Slight skirmishes will not do it, you must pursue your bosom sins to the
death, or they will be the death of your souls.

The second Means to bring under a Means 2. As when one Bucket of a Well goes
up, the other goes down; as when one of the two Laurels in Rome flourishes, the
other withers; so when grace gets up, sin goes down; when grace flourishes, sin
withers.
bosom sin, is, To labor to be most eminent and excellent in that particular
grace that is most opposite to a man's bosom sin. As it is a Christians glory to
be eminent in every grace, so it is a Christians special duty to excel in that
particular grace that is most contrary to his darling sins. Is it pride, is it
the world, is it hypocrisy, etc. that is thy bosom sin, that is the chief
favorite in thy soul? O then labor above all, to be clothed with humility, to
abound in Heavenly-mindedness, to transcend in sincerity, etc. I know no
surer, no choicer, no sweeter way, effectually to crucify a bosom sin, then
this. He that comes up to this counsel, will not be long held in golden
fetters; it will not be long before such a soul cries out, Victory, victory.

The third Means to help us to trample Means 3.
upon bosom sins, is, To look upon bosom sins now, as they will appear to us at
last; to look upon them in the time of health, as they will appear to us in
times of sickness; to look upon them in the time of our life, as they will
appear to us in the day of our death. Ah souls! of all unpardoned sins, your
bosom sins will be presented by God, Conscience, and Satan at last, as the most
filthy and ugly, as the most terrible and dreadful; your bosom sins at
last-will appear to be those Many there be that have found these things by
woeful experience. Woe, woe to that soul that shall put it to the trial.
monsters, those fiends of Hell that have most provoked God against you, that
have shut up Christ's bowels of Love and Compassion from you, that have armed
Conscience against you, that have barred the Gates of Glory against you, that
have prepared the hottest place in Hell for you, and that have given Satan the
greatest advantage, eternally to triumph over you. Ah Souls! at last your bosom
sins will more press and oppress you, more sad and sink you, more terrify and
amaze you, then all your other transgressions. Those sins that seem most sweet
in life, will prove most bitter Job 20. 11, to ult.
at death; those pleasant morsels, will prove thy greatest Hell, when there is
but a short step between thy soul and eternity. Ah Christians, never look upon
bosom sins, but with that eye which within a few hours you must behold them;
and this you will find by experience, will be a singular means to bring under
your bosom sins.

The fourth Means to subdue bosom Means 4.
sins, is, To apply your selves to extraordinary means, as Fasting and Prayer,
etc. Ordinary Physic will not remove extraordinary distempers, nor ordinary
duties will not remove bosom sins; who by long and familiar acquaintance with
the soul, are exceedingly strengthened and advantaged. You read of some devils
in the Gospel, that could not be cast out, but Matthew. 17. 14, to 22.
by Prayer and Fasting. So bosom sins, are those white devils, that will not,
that cannot be cast out, but by fervent and constant Prayer, joined with
Fasting and Humiliation. Souls that are serious and conscientious in observing
of this rule, will find such a Divine power to at^end their endeavors, as will
give them to lead captivity captive, and to triumph Col. 2. 14, 15.
over those white devils within, as Christ triumphed over Principalities and
Powers upon the Cross.

Fifthly and lastly, As you would Means 5.
have victory over bosoms sins, keep off from all those occasions that tend to
lead thee to the gratifying of them. He that shuns not the occasions of sin,
tempts two at once, Satan and his own heart; he tempts Satan to tempt him to
taste of forbidden fruit; and he tempts his own heart to feed upon forbidden
fruit. Abstain from all appearance of 1 These. 5. 22. Jude v. 23.
evil; hate the garment spotted by the flesh. What ever carries with it an ill
show or shadow, savor or suspicion, that abstain from, that you may neither
wound God, nor the Gospel, your own Consciences, nor others: If there be any
fuel to feed thy bosom sin in thy house, remove it; or before thine eye, remove
it; or in thy hand, remove it, put it far away; thy soul cannot be safe, it
cannot be secure, so long as the occasions of sin are thy companions. Would
thou have a clear evidence of the truth of thy grace, then shun the occasions
of sin; would thou imitate the choicest Saints, then shun the Genesis 39. 10.
Job 31. 1. Psalm. 26. 4, 5, 6.
occasions of sin; would thou stand in shaking times, then keep off from the
occasions of sin; would thou keep always peace with God, and peace with
Conscience, then keep of^ from the occasions of sin; would thou frustrate
Satan's greatest designs and countermine him in his deep(...) plots, then keep
off from the occasion of sin; would thou keep thy bones from breaking, and
thy heart from bleeding? then keep off from the occasions of sin; would thou
keep down fears and doubts, and keep up faith and hope? then keep off from the
occasions of sin; would thou have assurance in life, and joy, and peace in
death? then keep off from the occasions of sin. Do this, and you do all; if you
do not this, you do nothing at all. And thus I have done with the Impediments
that hinder Souls from Assurance; as also with the Means to remove those
Impediments.

CHAP. IV. Containing several Motives to provoke Christians to be restless,
till they have obtained a wel-grounded Assurance of their Eternal Happiness and
Blessedness.
NOw the first Motive that Motive 1.
I shall lay down, to provoke you to get a welgrounded Assurance, is, Solemnly
to consider that many are now dropped into Hell that have formerly presumed of
their going to Heaven; as those that came bouncing at Heaven gate, crying out,
Lord, Lord, open to us, for we have prophesied Matthew. 7. 22, 26, 27. So few in
the old world feared an eternal miscarriage. Matthew 25. So were the Jews that
cried out, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord.
in thy Name; and in thy Name have cast out devils, and in thy Name have done
many wonderful works; and yet that direful and dreadful sentence is past upon
them, Depart from me, ye workers of iniquities. The foolish Virgins were in a
golden dream, that they were as happy as the best, and yet when they were
awakned, they found the Bridegroom entered into his glory, and the door of mercy
shut against them. Men are naturally prone to Isa. 40. 27. Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
flatter themselves, that their sins are not sins, when indeed they be, and
that they are but small sins, when they are great and grievous; and they are
apt to flatter themselves, that they have grace, when they have none, and that
Prove. 30. 12.
their grace is true, when it is but counterfeit, and that their condition is
not Revel 3. 17, 18.
so bad as others, when it is worse, and with Agag, that the bitterness of
Micah. 3. 11*
death is past, when God has his Sword in his hand ready to execute the
vengeance written. I have read I judge as in this world, so in Hell, the most
self flattering souls will be the most miserable souls.
of a madman at Athens that laid claim to every rich ship that came into the
Harbor, when as he was poor, and had no part in any. Ah, this age is full of
such mad souls, that lay claim to God and Christ, and the Promises, and Gospel
Privileges, and all the glory of another world, when they are poor, and
blind, and miserable, and wretched, and naked, when they are Christless, and
Graceless, etc. Ah Christians, does it not therefore stand you much upon to
labor for a wel-grounded Assurance, that so you may not miscarry to all
eternity, but may at last be found worthy to receive a Crown Mat^h. 25. 21, 23.
of glory, and to enter into your Masters joy; which is a joy too great and too
glorious to enter into you, and therefore you must enter into it.

The second Motive to provoke Motive 2.
Christians to get a wel-grounded Assurance, is this, Consider that there be a
great many soul-flatterers, souldeceivers, and soul-cheaters in the world; the
Devil has put his angelical Leo the Emperor used to say, ( Occulti immici
pessim^) A close enemy is far worse then an open.
robes upon many of his chief factors, that they may the more easily, and the
more effectually deceive, and delude the souls of men: This age affords many
sad testimonies of this. Ah what multitudes be there, that to some bleer-eies
appear as Angels of light, and yet in their principles and practices are but
servants to the Prince Matthew. 23. 15.
of darkness, laboring with all their might to make Proselytes for Hell, and to
draw men to those wild notions, opinions, and conceits that will leave them
short of Heaven, yea, bring them down to the hottest, darkest, and lowest place
in Hell, if God do not by a miracle prevent it; therefore you had need look
about you, and see that you get a welgrounded Assurance, and suffer not Satan
to put a cheat upon your immortal souls. Christ has foretold us, That in the
last days there shall arise false Matthew. 24. 23, 24.
Christ's, and false Prophets, that shall say, Lo, here is Christ, and lo, there
is Christ. Luke 4. 21.
And verily this Scripture is this day fulfilled in your ears. Ah how many
blasphemous wretches have there been in these days, that have asserted
themselves to be the very Christ; and it is to me no little miracle, that the
very Earth has not opened her mouth, and swallowed up such monsters, such
firebrands of Hell. The Apostle tells Ephesians. 4. 14 (...) signifies Cogging with
a Die. (...).
you of some that lie in wait to deceive by such slights, as cheaters, and
false gamesters use at Dice; he tells you of cunning crafty men that do
diligently watch all advantages, to work, draw, and win weak and unstable souls
to those opinions, principles, and practices, that tend to drown them in
everlasting perdition. Satan's disciples (...).
and agents are notable methodmongers, they have a method of deceiving, they
are Doctors in all the Arts of cousenage, and they will leave no means
unattempted, whereby they may draw men to build upon hay 1 Cor. 3. 15.
and stubble, upon this opinion, and that notion, etc. that so men and their
works may burn for ever together. It is reported of King Canutus, that he
promised to make him the highest man in England, who should kill King Edmund
Ironside his corrival; which when one had performed, and expected his reward,
he commanded him to be hung on the highest Tower in London. So Satan and his
factors they promise poor souls, that such and such opinions and notions, etc.
will thus and thus advantage them, and advance them; but in the close, poor
Valerians word was ( Non acerba sed blanda) Not bitter, but flattering words,
do all the misch^if. This many have found true, by woeful experience.
souls shall find the promised Crown turned into a halter, the promised
comfort turned into torment, the promised glory turned into ignominy, the
promised exaltation turned into desolation, the promised Heaven turned into a
Hell. This age is full of soulflatterers, of soul-undoers, who like evil
Chyrurgions skin over the wound, but kill the patient. Flattery undid Ahab, and
Herod, and Nero, and Alexander. Those flatterers that told Dionysius, that his
Epistle was as sweet as Anastasius his Motto was ( Mellitum venenum blanda
oration) Smooth talk often proves sweet poison. Many in these days have found it
so.
Honey, undid him; and those flatterers that told Caesar, that his freckles in
his face were like the Stars in the Firmament, ruined him. And ah how many young
and old in these days have been lost and undone, by those soulflatterers that
lie in wait to ensnare and deceive the souls of men. Oh that this very
consideration might be set home by the hand of the Spirit, with that life and
power, upon your souls, as effectually to stir and provoke you to get a
wel-grounded assurance of your happiness and blessedness, that so you may stand
fast, like the house built upon the Rock, in the midst of all Matthew 7. 24, 25.
tempests and storms, that nothing may unsettle you, nor disquiet you, and that
none may take away your Crown. Revel 3. 11.


The third Motive to stir you up to Motive 3.
get a wel-grounded assurance, is this, Consider that a wel-grounded assurance
of your happiness and blessedness will ease you, and free you of a threefold
burden: It will free you, first, from a burden of cares; secondly, from a
burden of fears; thirdly, from a burden of doubts. Now the burden of cares, Ah
Christian* causes thee to sit down sighing and groaning; Matthew. 13. 22.
ah, how does the cares of getting this and that, and the cares of keeping this
and that worldly content, disturb and distract, vex and rack the souls of men,
that live under the power of carking cares. Oh, but now assurance of better
things* makes the soul sing care away, as that Martyr said, My John Careless in
a Letter to Mr. Philpot. Acts and Mon. fol. 1743.
soul is turned to her rest, I have taken a sweet nap in Christ's lap; and
therefore, I will now sing away care, and will be careless according to my
name. Assurance of a Kingdom, of a Crown, is a fire that burns up all those
cares that ordinarily fill the head and distract the heart. There is no way to
get off the burden of cares, but by getting assurance. Again, Assurance will
free you from the burden of fears, as well as from the burden of cares. Now
your hearts are filled with fears of possessing the Creature, with fears of
wanting the Creature, with fears of losing the Creature, etc. And these fears
makes many men turn like the Chamelion, into all coulors, forms, and And men
are apt to make Elephants of Flies, and Giants of Pigmies, till men reach
assurance they will still crea^e fears, rather then want them. Psalm 23. 3.
fashions, yea, they make their lives a Hell. Oh, but now assurance will
scatter all these fears, as the Sun does the Clouds; it will extinguish these
fears, as the Sun does the Fire. Assurance made David divinely fearless, and
divinely careless: Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death,
I will fear no evil; for thou art with me, thy rod, and thy staff, they comfort
me. Ah, how full of fears, and perplexities Genesis 21. 16, 19. Vide.
was Hagar, till the Lord opened her eyes to see the Well of Water that was
near her. So the soul will be full of fears and perplexities, till it comes to
see assurance, to enjoy assurance. Christians, When all is said, that can be,
this will be found at last a most certain truth, That there is no way to be
effectually rid of your fears, but by obtaining a wel-grounded assurance of
your happiness and blessedness. Again, Assurance will rid you of your burden of
doubts; now you are still a doubting; sometimes you doubt, whether that you are
a through Christian, and Remember Christians, first, that doubts are bred and
fed by ignorance, and unbelief, and therefore are sinful. Secondly, that they
rob the soul of all joy, comfort, and content. Thirdly, they render Men Babes
in Christianity. Fourthly, they throw reproach upon God, Christ, and the
Promises. Fifthly, they give Satan the greatest advantage against us.
not an Agrippa, an almost-Christian, an half-Christian, as most Professors
are; sometimes you doubt of your Sonship, and that leads you to doubt of your
Heirship; sometimes you doubt of your acquaintance with God, and that leads you
to doubt of your access to God, and acceptance with God; sometimes you doubt of
your union with God, and those doubts lead you to doubt of the truth of your
communion with God, etc. The truth is, your whole life is a life of doubting,
and so it will be, till you reach to a wel-grounded assurance. Though the two
Disciples had Christ for their companion, yet their hearts were full of fears
and doubts, whilst their eyes were held, that they should not know him, Luke
24. 14, 15, etc. Till a Christians eyes be open to see his assurance, his heart
will be full of doubts and perplexities. Though John 20. 13, 14, 15, 16.
Mary Magdalen was very near to Christ, yet she stands sighing, mourning, and
complaining, that they had stolen away her Lord, because she did not see him.
Christians, though you may be very near and dear to Christ, yet till you come
to see your assurance, you will spend your days in doubting, mourning, and
complaining. The sum of all, is this, As you would be rid of your burden of
cares, your burden of fears, and your burden of doubts, get a welgrounded
assurance of your happiness and blessedness; but if you are in love with your
burdens, then neglect but the making of your Calling and Election sure, and you
shall certainly make sure your burdens; they shall rise with you, and walk with
you, and lie down with you, till they make your lives a Hell.

The fourth Motive to provoke you Motive 4.
to labor after a wel-grounded assurance, is, To consider that Satan will labor
with all his art and craft, with all his power and might, to keep you from
attaining a well grounded assurance of your happiness and blessedness. Such is
Satan's envy and enmity against a Christians joy and comfort, that he cannot but
act to the utmost of his line, to keep poor souls in doubts and darkness. Satan
knows that assurance is a Pearl of price that will make the soul happy for
ever; he knows that assurance makes a Christians wilderness to be a paradise;
he knows that assurance begets in Christians, the most noble and generous
spirits; he knows that assurance is that which will make men strong to do
exploits, to shake his tottering Kingdom about his ears, etc. And therefore he
is very studious and industrious to keep souls It is said of Marcellus the
Roman General, that he could not be quiet ( Nec victor, nec victus,) neither
conquered nor conqueror. Satan's envy is such against the joy and comfort of the
Saints, that he cannot rest, nor cease from making use of all his wiles,
whereby poor souls may be kept off from assurance, and their lives made a
burden to them.
off from assurance, as he was to cast Adam out of Paradise. It is no wonder,
that Satan, who envied the first seeds of Grace, that divine Love sowed in thy
soul, that he should envy the increase of thy grace, yea, thy assurance, which
is the top and royalty of grace. When thou wast a Babe, Satan cast water upon
thy smoking flax, that it might not flame forth into assurance; and now thou
art grown up to some more maturity, he is raised in his enmity; so that he
cannot but put out his power and policy to keep thee from assurance of
felicity and glory. Satan envies thy candlelight, thy torch-light, thy
starlight, how much more, that the Sun should shine upon thee. Satan envies
thy eating of the crumbs of Mercy under the Table, how much more, that as a
child thou should sit at Wisdoms Table, and eat and drink abundantly of
Wisdoms delicates. Satan envies thy feeding upon Husks among the Swine, how
much more that thou should eat of the fatted Calf. Satan envies thy fitting
with Mordecai at the Kings Gate, how much more that thou should wear the
Kings Robes. Satan envies thy tasting of the least drop of comfort, how much
more thy swimming in those pleasures that be at Gods right hand for evermore.
He envies thy sitting upon Gods knee, how much more then thy lying in his
bosom. He envies thy being admitted into his service, how much more that thou
should be of his Court and Counsel. Some say of the Crystal, that it has
such a virtue in it, that the very touching of it quickens other stones, and
puts a luster and beauty upon them. Assurance is that Heavenly Crystal that
quickens souls, and that casts a beauty and a glory upon souls; and this makes
the Devil mad. Satan knows that assurance is Manna in a Wilderness, it is water
out of a Rock, it is a cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night: He knows
that assurance is Salve for all sores, and Physic for all diseases, and a
Remedy against every malady: He knows that assurance is a Christians Anchor at
Sea, and his Shield upon Land; and that it is a Staff to support him, and a
Sword to defend him, and a Pavillion to hide him, and a Cordial to cheer him.
And therefore it is, that he labors, both as a Lion, and as a Serpent, to keep
poor souls from a wel-grounded assurance. This Son of the Morning is fallen from
the top of Glory, to the bottom of misery; and therefore he strives to make all
as miserable and unhappy as himself.

Ah Christians, have not you need It is a true Maxim, He finds his enemy
strong, at a dear rate, who contemns him as weak.
to seek Assurance with all your might, who have to do with so mighty an
adversary, who cares not what torments he heaps upon himself, so he may prove
your tormentor, by keeping your souls and assurance asunder. O that this very
consideration might make you restless, till you have got this White Stone in
your bosoms.

The fifth Motive to provoke you to Motive 5.
get a wel-grounded assurance, is this, Consider that a wel-grounded assurance
is a Jewel of that incomparable value; it is such a Pearl of price, as will
abundantly recompense the soul for all the cost and charge it shall be at, to
enjoy it; I, the enjoyment of Hujusmodi lucri dulcis odor. The smell of this
gain is sweet to many; then what is assurance it self? etc.
assurance in that hour, when the soul shall sit upon thy trembling lips, ready
to take her leave of thee; and all the world will richly recompense thee for
all those prayers, tears, sighs, and groans, that thou have breathed out in one
place or another, in one service or another. Surely the Gold in the Mine will
recompense the Digger, the Crown at the end will recompense the Runner, the
Fruit in the Vineyard will recompense the Dresser, the Corn in the Barn will
recompense the Reaper, and the increase of the Flock will recompense the
Shepherd; so Assurance at last will abundantly recompense the soul for all its
knocking, weeping, and waiting at Mercies door. God will never suffer the Seed
Isai. 45. 19.
of Jacob to seek his face in vain: There is a reward not only in keeping,
Psalm. 19. 11.
but also for keeping of his commands. Joseph for his thirteen years Matthew. 25.
34, to 41. Revel 3. 11, 12
imprisonment, had the honor to reign fourscore years like a King. David for
his seven years banishment had a glorious reign of forty years continuance.
Daniel for his lying a few hours among the Lions, is made chief President over
a hundred and twenty Princes. The three Children for taking a few turns in the
Fiery Furnace, are advanced to great dignity and glory. Ah doubting souls,
pray hard, pull hard, work hard for Assurance, the pay will answer the pains,
Christ will sooner or later say to thee, as the King of Israel said to the King
of Syria, I am 1 Kings 20. 4.
thine, and all that I have. I am thine, O doubting soul, says Christ, and
Assurance is thine, and Joy is thine, my Merit is thine, my Spirit is thine,
and my Glory is thine; all I am is thine, and all I have is thine. O this is (
Alvearium Divini Mellis) an Hive full of Divine Comfort: O this will recompense
thee for all thy wrestling, and sweating to obtain Assurance. Augustine in his
Confessions has this notable expression. How sweet was it to me of a sudden,
to be without those sweet vanities; and those things which I was afraid to
loose, with joy I let go; for thou who art the true and only sweetness, did
cast out those from me, and instead of them did enter in thy self, who art
more delightful, then all pleasure, and more clear then all light. Ah
Christians, do but hold up, and hold on and assurance, and joy will come, and
thou shall after all thy working and waiting, sit down and sing it out with old
Simeon, Mine eyes have seen thy Salvation; my heart has found the sweetness of
Assurance; and now Lord, let thy servant depart in peace.

The sixth Motive to provoke you Motive 6.
to get Assurance, is this, Consider what labor, and pains, worldlings take
Scripture and Histories abounds with instances of this kind, as all know that
know any thing of the one, or of the other.
to make sure the things of this life, to them and theirs. Ah what riding,
running, plotting, lying, swearing, stabbing, and poisoning, is used by men of
this world, to make sure the poor things of this world, that are but shadows,
and dreams, and mere nothings? How do many with Samson lay heap upon heap, to
make their Crowns and Kingdoms sure, to make the tottering glory of this world
sure to themselves? what bloody butchers do they prove, they will have the
Crown, though they swim to it through blood? Men will venture life and limb, to
make sure these things that hops from man to man, as the Bird hops from twig to
twig. O, how should this stir and provoke us to be up and doing, to labor as
for life, to make sure spiritual and eternal things. Is Earth better then
Heaven? is the Matthew 6. 19, 20. The laborious, the active Christian is tempted
but by one Devil, but the idle slothful Christian is tempted by all, says one.
It is very sad when worldlings are a reaping, that Saints as to spirituals,
should be slumbering and sleeping.
glory of this World, greater then the glory of the World to come. Are these
riches more durable then those that corrupt not* that are laid up in Heaven,
where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and where thieves do^not break
through, nor steal? No. O then be ashamed Christians, that worldlings are more
studious and industrious to make sure Pibbles, then you are to make sure Pearls
to make sure those things, that at last will be their burden, their bane, their
plague, their hell, then you are to make sure those things that would be your
joy and crown, in life, in death, and in the day of your account. Pambus in the
Ecclesiastical History, wept when he saw a Harlot dressed with much care and
cost, partly to see one take so much pains to go to Hell, and partly because he
had not been so careful to please God, as she had been to please a wanton
lover. Ah Christians, what great reason have you to sit down and weep bitterly,
that worldlings take so much pains to make themselves miserable, and that you
have taken no more pains to get assurance, to get a pardon in your bosoms, to
get more of Christ into your hearts?

The seventh Motive to provoke you Motive 7.
to get Assurance, is, To consider that Assurance will enable you to bear a
burden without a burden. As in Heb. 10. 34. For ye had compassion of So Moses,
and all those Worthies in the eleventh chapter.
me in my bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your
selves that ye have in Heaven a better, and an enduring substance. Here you see
that assurance of Heavenly things, makes these Worthies, patiently, and
joyfully bear a burden without a burden. So the Apostles knowing, that they 2
Cor. 5. 1. and 6. 8, 9, 10, 11.
had a house not made with hands eternal in the Heavens, went through honor and
dishonor, evil report, and good report. They went through many weaknesses,
sicknesses, wants, and deaths; they had nothing, and yet possessed all things;
they had burden upon burden, cast upon them by the Churches, by false Apostles,
and by an uncharitable world; and yet they cheerfully bore all burdens without
a burden, through the power of a wel-grounded assurance. Assurance makes heavy
afflictions 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18.
light, long afflictions short, bitter afflictions sweet. Where a man wants
assurance, there the shadow of a burden frights him, and the weight of the
least burden sinks him; such a man is still a crying out, No man's burdens to my
burden, my burden is greater then others, my burden is heavier then others. The
want of assurance often times makes men's very mercies a burden, their comforts
a burden, their relations a burden, yea, their very lives a burden unto them.
Job 7 20.
Ah Christians, you will never bear burdens without a burden, till you come to
attain an assurance of better things: This will enable you to leap under the
weight of any cross, to rejoice under the weight of any Mountain. Assurance
fits a man's heart to his condition, and when a man's heart is fitted to his
condition, nothing proves a burden to him. Assurance of better I have read of
Albas Paulus who handled Serpents and Scorpions, and cut them in pieces without
any hurt, and said, If a man be holy, all things are subject to him as to Adam,
before his sin in paradise. Surely assurance will enable a man to do much this
way.
things takes away the sting, the poison that attends these lower things; and
the sting, and the poison being taken away, the very worst of these things, are
so far from being a burden to a man, that they become rather a pleasure, and a
delight unto him. When the sting is taken out of this, or that venomous
Creature, a man may play with it, and put it in his bosom. Ah, assurance pulls
out the sting that is in every cross, loss, etc. And this makes the assured
soul to sit down singing, when others under far less crosses and losses, sits
down sighing, mourning and complaining, Our burdens are greater then we are
able to bear. If there were but more assurance of better things among
Christians, there would be less complaints among them of this burden, and that
Mole-hills then would be no longer Mountains. Christians, it is not new
notions, new opinions, new nothings (as I may say) in your heads, but the
gaining of a wel-grounded assurance in your hearts, that will enable you to
bear all kind of burdens without a burden.

The eighth Motive to provoke you Motive 8.
to get assurance, is drawn from those particular commands of God, whereby he
engages Christians to get assurance; The Saints in Heaven have felix necessitas
an happy necessity of obeying God always, but we infelix necessitas an unhappy
necessity of disobeying continually. The precepts of God, says Lactantius, do
so change the whole man, and make him new, that you can hardly know him to be
the same. Lactant. de falsa sapient. lib. 3. cap. 27. A thing which Philosophy
has much labored in, but could never archieve Christians. The pressing of
those very commands last cited upon your own hearts, may produce that comfort
and peace; and make such a blessed change in your inward condition, as may
bespeak much admiration.
as that in the 2 Pet. 1. 10. Wherefore the rather Brethren, give diligence to
make your Calling and Election sure; for if ye do these things, ye shall never
fall. So 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith; prove
your own selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you;
except ye be reprobates, or unapproved, as the Greek imports. So Heb. 6. 11.
And we desire, that every one of you do show the same diligence, to the full
assurance of hope unto the end. Ah you dull, doubting, drousie Christians, you
should take all these commands of God, and press them with all the power and
authority you can, upon your hearts, to awaken them, and provoke them to get
assurance of your eternal wel-being. Take one command, and charge that upon the
heart; if the heart be stout, and will not yield, then take another command,
and press that upon the heart; if that will not do it, then take another, and
lay that home upon the heart, and never leave this work, till your souls be
effectually stirred up to labor for assurance, with all your might.
Christians,) on should tell your souls, that the commands of God, binds
directly and immediately, that they bind absolutely and universally. You must
obey God intuitu voluntatis, upon the bare sight of his Will, and in one thing
as well as another. Christians, if I am not much mistaken, you should make as
much conscience of those commands of God, that requires you to get assurance of
your future happiness, as you do of those commands that requires you to pray,
to hear, etc. It is very sad to consider, that many that complain much of the
want of assurance, should make no more care and conscience of those commands of
God, that requires them to get assurance, then some of the Heathens have done
of the commands of their gods; who when they have called for a man, have
offered a candle, or as Hercules, who offered a painted man, in stead of a
living. Verily Christians, while you make light of any of Gods commands, God
will make as light of your comforts. Did you make more conscience to act
answerable to the forementioned commands, I am very apt to believe, that the
Sun of Righteousness, would certainly and speedily cause his love, and glory to
beam out upon you. Mind Gods commands more then your own wants and complaints,
and light will break in upon you. By obeying Christ's commands, you shall gain
more then you can give, by kissing the Son you shall even command him, and make
him and assurance yours.

The ninth Motive to provoke you Motive 9.
to get assurance, is this, You cannot gratify Satan more, nor injury your
selves more, then by living without assurance; by living without assurance, you
lay your selves open to all Satan's snares and temptations; yea, you do
instigate and provoke Satan to tempt you to the worst of sins, to tempt you to
the greatest neglects, to tempt you to the strangest shifts, and to reduce you
to the saddest straits. Ah Christians, in what, in what has Satan so gratified
you, that you should thus gratify him; has he not robed you of your glory in
innocence? has he not kept your souls and your Savior long asunder? when with
Joshua you have been standing before Zech. 3. 1, 2.
the Lord? has not he stood at your right hand, as an adversary to resist you?
has he not often set the glory Matthew. 4.
of the world before you, that he might bewitch you, and ensnare you? has he
not often cast water upon those Divine Motions, that has been 1 These. 2. 18.
kindled in you? have you not often ^ound him a Lion and a Serpent, a tempter
and a deceiver, a liar and a murderer? Yes. O then never gratify him any
longer by living without assurance. He that lives without assurance, lives
without a comfortable fruition of God, and so gratifies Satan: He that lives
without assurance, lives upon some Creature-enjoyment, more then upon God, and
so gratifies Satan: He that lives without assurance, lives not like the beloved
of God, and so gratifies Satan: He that lives without assurance, is very apt to
gratify Satan, sometimes by complying with him, sometimes by following after
him, and sometimes by acting his part for him, etc. Verily Christians, there is
no way effectually to prevent this sore evil, but by getting a welgrounded
assurance of your Everlasting Happiness and Blessedness. Assurance will make a
man stand upon terms of defiance with Satan, it will make the soul constant in
resisting, and happy in overcoming the evil one. And assured soul will fight
it out to the death with Satan; an assured soul will not fly like a coward,
but will stand and triumph like a David.

And as you gratify Satan by living without Assurance, so you wrong your own
souls by living without assurance, Rapit animam sua^. He plundreth his own soul.
1 In the point of comfort and joy, you wrong your own souls. 2 In the point of
peace and content, you wrong your own souls. 3 In the point of boldness and
confidence, you wrong your own souls. A man that lives without assurance lies
his precious soul open to many blows and knocks, to many frowns and wounds,
from God, from the world, from carnal friends, from hypocrites, and from
Satan. Therefore as you would not, Christians, gratify Satan, and wrong your
own souls, and exercise over your selves, spiritual cruelty and tyranny,
which is the very worst of all cruelty and tyranny; give God no rest till he
has made known to you the sweetness of his love, and the secrets of his
bosom; till he has gathered you up into himself; till he has set you as a
seal upon C^nt. 8. 6.
his heart, as a seal upon his arm.

The tenth Motive to provoke you Motive 10.
to get a wel-grounded assurance, is this, consider the sweet profit and
glorious advantage that will redown to you by gaining assurance, and if the
gain that will certainly redown to you by assurance, will not provoke you to
get assurance, I know not what will.

First, It will bring down Heaven into your bosoms, it will give you a Heb.
11. 1
possession of Heaven, on this side heaven; an assured soul lives in Paradise
and walks in Paradise, and works in Paradise, and eats in Paradise, and rests
in Paradise; he has Heaven within him, and Heaven about him, and Heaven over
him, all his language is Heaven, heaven; Glory, glory.

Secondly, Assurance will exceedingly sweeten all the changes of this life;
this life is full of changes, Assurance will sweeten sickness and health,
weakness 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18.
and strength, wants and abundance, disgrace and honor, etc. while a man lives
in the sense of unchangeable loves, no outward changes can make any
considerable change in his spirit; Let times change, let men change, le^ powers
change, let Nations change; yet a man under the power of assurance, will not
change his countenance, nor change his Master, nor change his work, nor change
his hopes; though others under changes, turn like the Camelion into all colors
Souls that want assurance are like him in Aesop, that blew hot and cold with
the same breath. The wind is not more subject to change, and shift from one
quarter to another, from one corner to another, then they are subject to change
and shift in changing times.
to save their little all, yet the assured soul under all changes is ( semper
idem) always the same. Antistines a Philosopher, to make his life happy,
desired only, that he might have the spirit of Socrates, who was always in a
quiet temper of spirit, what ever wrongs, injuries, crosses, losses, etc. befell
him. Let the trials be what they would, that did attend him, yet he continued
one and the same. Ah Christians, the want of assurance has made many
changlings in these days; but if ever you would be like Socrates, if ever you
would be like the Philosophers good man, that is, ((...), Tetragonos)
Apiece, that cast him where you will, like a Die, he falls always sure and
square, then get assurance of Everlasting Happiness.

Assurance will make your souls like the Laws of the Medes and Persians, that
alters not, it will sweeten the darkest day, and the longest night, under
variety of changes, it will Hab. 3. 17, 8, 19.
make a man sit down with Habakkuk, and rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God
of his Salvation.

Thirdly, Assurance will keep the heart from an inordinate running out after
the World, and the glory thereof. Moses having an assurance of the recompense
of a reward, and Heb 11. 24, 25, 26, 27.
of his love and favor, that is invisible, could not be drawn by all the
honors, pleasures, and treasures of Egypt: He slights all, and tramples upon
all the glory of the world, as men trample upon things of no worth. So after
Paul had been in the 2 Cor. 12. 1, 2, 3. Romans 8.
Third Heaven, and had assurance, that no thing should separate him from the
love of God in Christ; he looks upon the world, as a crucified thing. The world
is crucified to me (says Gal. 6. 14.
he) and I am crucified unto the world. The world is dead to me, and I am dead
to it; the world and I am well agreed; the world cares not a pin for me, and I
care not a pin for the world.

The Loadstone cannot draw the Iron So when God gave Gol^acius that Italian
Ma^quess an assurance of everlasting happiness; he withstood many golden
temptations, and cried out, Cursed be he that prefers all the glory of the
world to one days communion with Christ, etc.
when the Diamond is in presence, no more cannot the vanities of this world
draw the soul after them, when Assurance, that choice Pearl of price is in
presence. I have read of Lazarus, that after he was raised from the Grave, he
was never seen to smile; the assurance that he had of more glorious things, did
deaden his heart to the things of this world; he saw nothing in them worthy of
a smile. Ah were there more assurance among Christians, there would not be such
tugging for the world, and such greedy hunting and pursuing after it, as is in
these days, to the dishonor of God, the reproach of Christ, and the shame of
the Gospel. Justice would not be sold and bought, as it is in these days, were
there more assurance in the world.
Get but more assurance, and less money will serve your turns; get but more
assurance, and less places of honor and profit will serve your turns; get but
assurance, and then you will neither transgress for a morsel of Bread, nor yet
violently pursue after the Golden Wedge, etc.

Fourthly, Assurance will exceedingly heighten you in your communion with God,
and it will exceedingly 1 John 1. 1, 2, 3, 4.
sweeten your communion with God. Assurance of a man's propriety in God raises
him high in his fellowship with God: There are none that have such choice and
sweet communion with God, as those that have the clearest assurance of their
interest in God; as may be seen thorowout the whole Book of Solomon's Song. My
beloved Cant. 2. 16.
is mine, and I am his, says the Spouse. I am assured of my propriety in him,
says she, and therefore he shall lie all night betwixt my Breasts; and upon
Chap. 1. 13. Chap 7. 5.
this account it is, that she holds King Jesus in the Galleries, that she is
sick of love, that she is raised and ravished with his kisses and embraces. His
left Chap. 2. 6.
hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace me. None had more
assurance of her interest in Christ, then she, and none higher and closer in
communion with Christ then she. The Wives assurance of her interest in her
Husband, sweetens and heightens her communion with her Husband* The Childs
assurance of his interest in his Father, sweetens his commerce and fellowship
with his Father: So the Believers assurance of his interest in God, will
exceedingly heighten and sweeten his communion and fellowship with God.
Assurance of a man's interest in God, sweetens every thought of God, and every
sight of God, and every taste of God, and every good Word of God. God is as
Habet omnia qui habet habentem omnia. He has all that, has the honor of all.
sweet to the assured soul, when he has a sword in his hand, as when he has a
Scepter; when he has the rod of indignation, as when he has the cup of
consolation; when his garments are rolled and dyed in blood, as when he
appears in his Wedding Robes; when he acts the part of a Judge, as when he
acts the part of a Father, etc.

Fifthly, Assurance will be a choice preservative to keep you from backsliding
from God and his ways: Ah Assurance will glue the soul to God and his ways,
as Ruth was glued to her Mother Naomi; It will make a man stand fast in the
Faith, and quit himself like a good Soldier of Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 10, 11.
Wherefore the rather Brethren, give Luther writing to his friend Melancthon
troubled with fears, says ( Si nos ruimas ruit and Christus) If we fall, says
he, Christ falls.
diligence to make your calling and election sure; for if ye do these things*
ye shall never fall. Stumble ye may, and he that does but stumble, gets
ground by his stumbling. Assurance will keep a man from falling foully, and
from falling utterly. Verily, the reason why there is so many Apostates in
these days, is, because there are so few that have a wel-grounded assurance in
these days. Pliny speaks of some fishes that swim back-ward. Ah many Professors
Pulchrior inpralio occisus miles quam fuga salvus. Better be slain in the Bed
of Honor, then be safe by running away.
in these days swim back-ward, they swim from God, and Christ, and Conscience,
yea, they swim from the very principles of morallity, and common honesty.
Believe it Friends, it is not high notions in the Brain, but found assurance in
the heart, that will keep a man close to Christ, when others back-slide from
Christ. An assured Christian will not exchange his Gold for Copper, he knows
that one old piece of Gold is worth a thousand new Counters: One old truth of
Christ, is worth a thousand new errors, though clothed with glistering Robes;
and therefore he will prize the truth, and own the truth, and keep close to the
truth, when others that want a sound assurance, make merchandise of Christ,
precious 2 Pet. 2. 3.
truths, and of their own and others immortal souls. Get assurance, and thou will stand, when seeming Cedars fall; want assurance, and thou can not but
fall to the breaking of thy bones, if not to the utter loss of thy precious
soul.

Sixthly, Assurance will very much imbolden the foul with God, it will make a
man divinely familiar with God, it will make a man knock boldly at the door of
Free Grace, it will make a man come boldly before the Mercy-seat, it will make
a man enter boldly within the Holy of Holies, Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near
with a true (...), Such full assurance as fills all the sails of the soul.
heart, in full assurance of Faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. Assurance makes the soul top
and top gallant, it makes the soul converse with God, as a Favorit with his
Prince, as a Bride with her Bridegroom, as a Joseph with a Jacob. Luther under
the power of assurance, lets fall this transcendent rapture of a during Faith (
Fiat mea voluntas,) Let my will be done, and then falls off sweetly ( Mea
voluntas domine quia tua,) My will Lord, because thy will. It is the want of
assurance that makes the countenance sad, the hands hang down, the knees
feeble, and the heart full of Heb. 12. 12.
fears and tremblings. O therefore get assurance, and that will scatter your
fears, and raise your hopes, and cheer your spirits, and give wings to Faith,
and make you humbly bold with God. You will not then stand at the door of
Mercy, with a may I knock, with a may I go in, with a may I find audience and
acceptance; but you will with Esther, boldly adventure your selves upon the
Mercy and Goodness of God.

Now verily I think (says one, speaking of Christ) he cannot despise me, who
is bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh; for if he neglect me as a brother,
yet he will love me as a husband, that is my comfort. Assurance will remove all
strangeness from between Christ and the Soul, of two, it will make Christ and
the Soul one.

Seventhly, Assurance will sweeten the thoughts of death, and all the Nemo ante
s^nera f^lin. Solon.
aches, pains, weaknesses, sicknesses, and diseases, that are the forerunners
of it; yea, it will make a man look and long for that day, it will make a man
fick of his absence from Christ, it makes a man smile upon the King of terrors,
it makes a man laugh at the shaking of the Spear, at the noise of the battle,
at the garments of the Isa 9. 5, 6. Nazianzen said to the King of Terrors,
Devour me, devour me. Death cures all diseases, the aching head, and the
unbelieving heart. Ultimus morborum medicus mors.
Warriors rolled in blood; it made the Martyrs to complement with Lions, to
dare and tire their persecutors, to kiss the stake, to sing, and clap their
hands in the flames, to tread upon hot burning coals, as upon Beds of Roses.

The assured Soul knows, that Death shall be the Funeral of all his sins and
sorrows, of all afflictions and temptations, of all desertions and oppositions.
He knows that Death shall be the Resurrection of his joys, he knows that death
is both an outlet, and an inlet, an outlet to sin, and an inlet to the
souls clear, full, and constant enjoyment of God. And this makes the assured
soul to sing it sweetly out, O 1 Cor. 15. 35, 36, 37.
death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? I desire to be
dissolved. Phil. 1. 23:
Make haste my beloved. Come Cant. 8. ult. Revel. 22.
Lord Jesus, come quickly. Now Death is more desirable then life: Now says the
Soul, ( Ejus est timere mortem, qui ad Christum nolit ire.) Let him fear Death,
that is loath to go to Christ. So I may be with Christ, though I go in a Cloud,
I care not, says the assured soul; so I may be with Christ, I care not, though
I go in a Fiery Chariot, says the assured soul. The Persians had a certain
day in the year, in which they used to kill all Serpents, and venomous
Creatures; The assured Christian knows, that the day of Death will be such a
day to him, and that makes Death lovely and desirable; he knows that Sin
Morimur dum non morimur.
was the Midwife that brought Death into the World, and that Death shall be the
Grave to bury Sin. Ambrose said to his friends about him, when he was dying, I
have not so lived, that I am ashamed to live; nor yet fear I death, because I
have a good Lord, etc.


And therefore Death is not a terror, but a delight unto him; he fears it not
as an enemy, but welcomes it as a friend. As Crookback Richard the Third, in
his distress cried, A Kingdom for a Horse, a Kingdom for a Horse: So souls that
want assurance when they come to die, will cry out, A Kingdom for Assurance, a
Kingdom for Assurance. And as Severus said, If I had a thousand worlds, I would
now give them all for Christ; So a Soul that wants Assurance when he comes to
enter upon a state of eternity, will cry out, O had I now a thousand worlds, I
would give them all for assurance; whereas the assured soul would not for a
thousand worlds but die. When his glass is out, and his sun is set, he cries
not out, as that Lady did, A World, a World, for an inch of time; but rather,
why is it, why is it Lord, that thy chariots be so long a coming?

Eighthly, Assurance will very much sweeten that little oil that is in the 1
King. 17. 12, etc.
Cruse, and that handful of meal that is in the Barrel. Assurance will be sauce
to all meats, it will make all thy mercies to taste like mercies, it will make
Daniels pulse to be as sweet as Princes Dan. 1.
delicates, it will make Lazarus Rags Luke 16.
as pleasurable as Dives Robes, it will make Jacobs bed upon the stones, to be
Genesis 28. Amos 6. 4.
as soft as those Beds of Down and Ivory, that sinful great ones stretch
themselves upon.

Look as the want of assurance imbitters all a sinners mercies, that he cannot
taste the sweetness and the goodness of them; so the enjoyment of assurance
casts a general beauty and glory upon the Believers meanest mercy.

And hence it is, that assured souls Prove. 15. 16.
live so sweetly, and walk so cheerfully, when their little all is upon their
backs, and in their hands; whereas the great men of the world, that have the
world at will, but want this assurance (that is more worth then the world) live
as slaves and servants to their mercies; in the midst of all their abundance
they are in straits and perplexities, Job 20. 22.
full of fears, and cares, and nothing pleases them; nor is sweet unto them,
because they want that A Believer knows, 1. That his little mercies are from
great love. Secondly, That they are pledges of greater. Thirdly, That his
blessings are blessed unto him Fourthly, That they shall not at last be witnesses
against him.
assurance that sweetens to a Believer the ground he stands on, the air he
breaths in, the seat he sits on, the bed he lies on, the bread he eats, the
clothes he wears, etc. Ah were there more assurance among Christians, they
would not count great mercies, small mercies, and small mercies no mercies; no,
no, then every mercy on this side hell, would be a great mercy, then every
mercy would be a sugared mercy, a perfumed mercy. Look as the Tree that Moses
cast into the Exodus 15. 23, 24, 25.
waters of Marah, made those bitter waters sweet; so Assurance is that Tree of
Life, that makes every bitter, sweet, and every sweet, more sweet.

Ninthly, Assurance will make a man The Rabbis say, That the Angels attend in
all Judicatories.
very Angelical, it will make him full of motion, full of action, it will make
him imitate the Angels; those Princes of glory that are always busy and
active, to advance the glory of Christ; they are still a singing the Song of
the Lamb; they are still pitching their Tents about them that Psalm. 34. 7. Heb.
1. ult.
fear the Lord; they are Ministering Spirits, sent forth for the good of them
that are Heirs of Salvation. Assurance will make a man fervent, constant, and
abundant in the Work of the Lord, as you may see in Paul. The Assurance makes a
Saint all fire, it makes him like ^he burning Seraphims. Isal 6. 2, 3, 4.
assured Christian is more motion then notion, more work then word, more life
then lip, more hand then tongue: When he has done one work, he is a calling
out for another. What is next Lord, says the assured soul, what is next. His
head, and his heart is set upon his work; and what he does, he does it with all
his might, because there is no working in the Grave. An assured Christian
Bellarmi^^ is of opinion, that one glimpse of Hell were enough to make a man
not only turn Christian, but a Monk, to live after the strictest rules, to be
abounding in well-doing. Surely assurance of Heaven will make a man do more.
will put his hand to any work, he will put his shoulder to any burden, he will
put his neck in any yoke for Christ; he never thinks that he has done enough,
he always thinks that he has done too little; and when he has done all he
can, he sits down, sighing it out, I am but an unprofitable servant.

In a word, Assurance will have a powerful influence upon thy heart; in all the
duties and services of Religion, nothing will make a man love like this, and
live like this; nothing will make a man humble and thankful, contented, and
cheerful like this; nothing will make a man more serious in Prayer, nor
ingenuous in praises then this; nothing will make ^ man more cheerful and
joyful then this; nothing will make a man fit to live, and more willing to die,
then this.

Ah Christians, if ever you would act as Angels in this world, get an assurance
of another world, then you shall be dumb no more, nor dull no more, but be
active and lively, like those whose hopes, and whose hearts are in Heaven.

Tenthly, Assurance will sweeten Christ, and all the precious things of Christ
to thy soul. Ah, how sweet is Ipse Deus sufficit ad praemium. Bern. It is
Heaven enough to see your interest in Christ.
the Person of Christ, the Natures of Christ, the Names of Christ, the Offices
of Christ, the Benefits of Christ, the Blood of Christ, the Word of Christ, the
Threatenings of Christ, the Spirit of Christ, the Ordinances of Christ, the
Smiles of Christ, the Kisses of Christ, to an assured soul? Now thy Meditations
on Christ, will be no more a terror, nor a horror to thee; nay, now thy heart
will be always best, when you are most in pondering upon the sweetness and
goodness, the kindness and loveliness of the Lord Jesus. Now all the
Institutions and Administrations of Christ will be precious to thee upon every
thing; where Christ has set his Name, there thou will set thy heart. Now thou will call things, as Christ calls them, and count things as Christ counts them;
that shall not be little in thy eye, that is great in the eye of Christ; nor
that shall not be great in thy eye, that is but little in the eye of Christ.
Assurance will also exceedingly sweeten your carriage to all that bear the
Image of Christ; nothing Romans 14. Assurance is like fire very operative, Si non
operatur, non est, if it do not work, it is an argument it is not at all.
will make men bear with those weak Saints, whose light is not so clear as
yours, whose parts are not so strong as yours, whose enjoyments are not so high
as yours, whose judgments are not so well informed as yours, whose consciences
are not so well satisfied as yours, and whose lives are not so amiable as
yours. Assurance We are united in the same Head and Hope, ( Eodem sanguine
Christi glutinati.) We are cemented with the same blood of Christ, as Augustine
said of his friend Alypius, and himself.
makes men of a God-like disposition, easy to pardon, ready to forgive,
abundant in goodness, admirable in patience: It makes men to study the good of
others, and joy in all opportunities, wherein they may strengthen the feeble,
and comfort the dejected, and enrich the impoverished, and recover the seduced,
and enlarge the straightened, and build up the wasted. Verily, the reason why men
are so bitter, and sour, and censorious, is, Because God has not given into
their bosoms this sweet flower of delight, Assurance.

Ah were their souls fully assured, that God had loved them freely, and
received them graciously, and justified them perfectly, and pardoned them
absolutely, and would glorify them everlastingly. They could not but love
where God loves, and own where God owns, and embrace where God embraces, and be
one with every one, that is one with Jesus. Were there Magnes amoris est amor.
Love is the attractive Loadstone of love.
more assurance among Christians, there would be more of David's and Jonathans
spirit, among Christians, then there is this day; were there more assurance
among Christians, there would be more life, and more love, more sweetness, and
more tenderness; were there more assurance, there would be less noise, less
contention, less division, less distraction, less biting, and less devouring
among the Saints. Assurance will make the Lion and the Calf, the Wolf and Isai.
11. 6, 7, 8.
the Lamb, the Leopard and the Kid, the Bear and the Cow, lie down together,
and feed together. Men that want assurance, love their Brethren as Flies love
the Pot; so long as there is any meat in the Pot, the Flies love it; so those
men will love, as long as there is an external motive to draw love, but when
that ceases, their love ceases. Dionysius loved his bottles, when they were
full, but hurled them away when they were empty; so many that want assurance,
love the Saints while their bags are full, and their houses full of the good
things of this life; but when they are empty, then they throw them away, then
they cast them off, as Jobs friends did him.

Ah but assurance will make a man love as God loves, and love as long as God
loves. The assured Christian will not cease to love, so long as the least Buds
and Blossoms of Grace appears. Lazarus in his rags, is as lovely to an assured
Christian, as Solomon in his robes. Job is as delightful to him upon the
dung-hil, as David is upon his throne. It is not the outward pomp and bravery,
but the inward beauty and glory of Saints that takes the assured Christian.

The last Motive to provoke you to Motive 11.
get a wel-grounded assurance of your Everlasting Happiness, is this, Consider,
that as there is a great deal of counterfeit knowledge, counterfeit faith,
counterfeit love, counterfeit repentance, etc. in the world, so there is a
great deal of counterfeit assurance in the world: Many there be that talk high,
and look big, and bear it out bravely, that they are thus and thus, and that
they have such and such glorious assurance; whereas when their assurance comes
to be weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, it is found too light; and when
it comes to withstand temptations, it is found too weak; and when it should put
the soul upon Divine action, it is found to be but a lazy presumption. Shall
the counterfeit gold that is in the world, make men active and diligent to get
that which is current, and that will abide the Touchstone, and the Fire? and
shall not that counterfeit assurance, that is in the world, provoke your hearts
to be so much the more careful and active to get such a wel-grounded assurance,
that God accounts as current, and that will abide his Touchstone in the day of
discovery, and that will keep a man from shame and blushing, when the Thrones
shall be set, and the Books shall be opened? I have been the longer upon these
Motives to provoke your souls to get a welgrounded assurance, because it is of
an eternal concernment to you, and a work, to which men's he arts are too
backward, though assurance carries a reward in its own bosom, yet few look out
after it; though the pains of getting it, be nothing to the profit that
accompanies it; yet few will sweat to gain it. If the inducements laid down,
will not awaken and provoke you to be restless, till you have got the White
stone, and New name, till you have got the assurance of your pardon in your
bosoms, I know not what will.

CHAP. V. Showing the several Ways and Means of gaining a wel-grounded
Assurance.
FIrst, if ever you will attain Means 1.
to Assurance, then be much in the Exercise and Actings of Grace, as the
believing Ephesians were Ephesians. 1* 13. A Christian that would have assurance,
must never leave blowing his little spark, till he has blowed it into a flame.
in the very Exercise and Actings of Grace; the Spirit of the Lord sealed them
up to the day of Redemption. Assurance flows in upon the actings of Grace;
assurance is bred, and fed, it is raised and maintained in the soul by the
actings of Grace. Grace is most discernable, when it is most in action; and
Grace is made more and more perfect by acting: Neglect of your Graces, is the
ground of their decrease. Wells are the sweeter for drawing; you get nothing by
dead and useless Habits. Talents hid in a Napkin, gather rust; the noblest
faculties are imbased, when not improved. Grace in the habit, is no more
discernable, then fire under the ashes, then gold in the Ore, then a dead man
in the grave; but Grace in its lively actings and operations, is as a Prince
upon his throne, sparkling and shining. Ah Christians, were your grace more
active, it would be more visible; and were your grace more visible, your
assurance would be more clear and full. As Saint Paul once spoke to Timothy,
Stir up the gift 2 Timothy 1. 6. The words are an allusion to the fire in the
Temple, which was always to be kept burning. Vide Calvin upon the Text.
of God that is in thee. So I say to you, if ever you would have assurance,
stir up the grace of God that is in you, blow up that heavenly fire, raise up
those noble spirits, never cease believing, nor repenting, till it be clearly
given into your bosom, that you are sure that you do believe, and that you do
repent, as you are sure that you live, as you are sure that God rules in Jacob,
and dwells in Zion. Remember Christians, all the honor that God has from you
in this life, is from the actings and the exercise of your grace, and not from
the habits of grace. Remember Christians, that all your consolations flow not
from the habits, but from the acts of grace. Remember Christians, that the want
of the exercise of grace, is the reason why you do not discern your grace, and
why you have no more assurance of your future happiness. He that will be rich,
must still be turning the penny, and he that will attain unto the riches of
assurance, Col. 2. 2.
must still be acting his graces; there are none but lively active Christians,
that knows and feels those joys, comforts, and contents, that attends the
exercise of grace. If thou would not be always a Babe in Grace, and a
stranger to Assurance, then see that thy Lamp be always burning, see that the
Golden Wheels of Grace be always going.

Secondly, If you would, Christians, Means 2.
attain unto assurance, then you must mind your work more then your wages; you
must be better at obeying, then at disputing; at doing, at walking, then at
talking, and wrangling. Assurance is heavenly wages that Christ gives, not to
loyterers, but to holy laborers; though no man merits assurance by his
obedience, yet God usually crowns obedience with assurance. John 14. 21, 22,
23. He that Non enim passibus ad Deum sed affectibas currimus. Ambulas si amas.
Thou walk if thou love to walk.
has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he that
loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest
my self to him. Verse. 22. Judas says unto him, (not Iscariot) Lord, how is it
that thou will manifest thy self unto us, and not unto the world? Verse. 23.
Jesus answered and said unto him, If any man love me, he will keep my words;
and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with
him. In these words you see, that doing Christians, working Christians, are the
only Christians that shall have most of the love of the Father and the Son;
and that shall have the choicest manifestations of grace and favor, and that
shall have most of their presence and company. So in Psalm. 50. 23* Unto him
(...)
that orders his conversation aright, That disposes his way, as God ha^h
prescribed.
will I declare the salvation of God: That is, I will declare my self to be his
Savior. I will show him Salvation, and I will show him his interest i^
Salvation, I will save him, and I will make him see, that I have saved him; he
shall see the worth of Salvation, and taste the sweetness of Salvation. So in
Gal. 6. 16. And as many as walk according to this rule, (that is, the rule of
the new Creature) Peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. The
Greek word that is here rendered (...). Vide Bezam, and Pareus on the Text.
walk, signifies not simply to walk, but to walk by rule, in order, and
measure, without treading aside, but making straight steps to our feet. Now
those choice souls that thus walks according to the Law of the new Creature,
shall have peace and mercy in them, and peace and mercy with them, and peace
and mercy on them: As many as walk according to this rule, peace and mercy be
on them. Assurance is a jewel of too high a price, to be cast into any of their
bosoms that walk contrary to the Laws of the new Creature; such may talk of
assurance, and make a stir and a noise about assurance, but it is the close
walking Christian that shall be crowned with assurance. Assurance is a choice
part of a Believers Vis nunquam esse tristis been vive. Would thou never be
fact, then live well, says Bernard.
happiness, and therefore God will never give it out of a way of holiness. The
Lord has set apart for himself, the man that is godly, Psalm. 4. 3. None are
favorites in Gods Court, nor none are admitted to be of his Counsel, but those
who are all glorious within, and whose raiment is of imbroidered gold: That is,
such whose principles are full of spiritual glory, and whose practices are
amiable and answerable in purity and sanctity. These are the persons that shall
have the honor to have Gods ear, and the happiness to know his heart.

The third Means to gain assurance, Means 3.
is, To be kind to the Spirit, hear his voice, follow his counsel, live up to
his Laws: The Spirit is the great Revealer of the Fathers secrets; he lies in
the bosom of the Father; he knows every name that is written in the Book of
Life; he is best acquainted with the inward workings of the heart of God,
toward poor sinners; Romans 8. John 14.
he is the great Comforter, and the only Sealer up of souls to the day of
Redemption. If you set him a mourning Ephesians. 1. 13.
by your wilful sinnings, that alone can glad you, by whom will you be gladed.
Verily, Christians, when you turn your back upon the Spirit, he will not turn
his face upon your souls; your vexing of the Spirit will Isai. 63. 10.
be but the disquieting of your selves. Look as all lights cannot make up the
want of the light of the Sun, so all Creatures cannot make up the want of the
testimony of the Spirit. Let me speak to you, as God once spoke to his people
in that of Exodus 23. 20, 21, This Angel is the Lord Jesus, as Expositors do
generally agree. (...)
22, 23. Behold, (says God) I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in thy
way, and to bring thee into the place, which I have prepared. Beware of him,
and obey his voice, provoke him not; for he will Malachi, which Hebrew word is
here rendered Angel, is by transposition of letters Michael, as some of the
Rabbis have observed.
not pardon your transgressions; for my name is in him, and^. So I say, Behold,
the Spirit of the Lord, that is, your guide and guard, he also is only able to
make a soul satisfying report of the love and favor of the Father to you;
therefore as ever you would have assurance, beware of him, and obey his voice,
provoke him not; for if you do by wilful transgressions, he will neither
comfort you, nor counsel you; he will neither be a sealing, nor a witnessing
spirit unto you; nay, he will raise storms and tempests in your souls; he will
present to you the Father frowning, and your Savior bleeding, and himself as
grieving; and these sights will certainly rack and torture your doubting souls.
The Spirit of the Lord is a delicate thing, a holy thing, a blessed guest, that
makes every soul happy where he lodges. Therefore Ep^es. 4. 30. This phrase is
Tropically to be understood. The Greek cannot be fully expressed in our tongue.
(...). i. e. The Spirit, the holy, of that God. To show the transcendent
excellency and glory of the Holy* Spirit.
grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of
Redemption. You will not grieve your guests, your friends, but courteously and
friendly entertain them; Why then do you make so little conscience of grieving
that holy Spirit, that alone can stamp the Image of the Father upon you, and
seal you up to life and glory.

Ah Christians, the way to assurance, is, Not to sit down sighing and
complaining of the want of assurance, but it lies in your eying of the Spirit,
in your complying with the Spirit, in your cleaving to the Spirit, in your
following of the Spirit, in your welcoming of the Spirit, and in your honoring
and obeying of the Spirit. As he said of the sword of Galiah, none like to
that. So I say, no man's like to this, to gain a wel-grounded Assurance of a
man's Happiness and Blessedness. And as he said, If there be any way to Heaven
on horseback, it is by Prayer: So I say, If there be any way in the world to
assurance, it is by being fearful to offend, and careful to please the Spirit
of the Lord; whose office it is, to witness to poor souls, the remission of
their sins, and the salvation of their souls.

Fourthly, If you would obtain Assurance, Means 4.
then be sincere, be diligent and constant in assuring Ordinances: He that will
meet the King, must wait Isai. 64. 5. Revel. 2. 1.
on him in his walks; Christ's Ordinances, are Christ's walks; and he that would
see the beauty of Christ, and taste of the sweetness of Christ, and be ravished
with the love of Christ, must wait at Wisdoms door, they Prove. 8. 34, 35.
must attend Christ in his own appointments and institutions, that comfort and
assurance that flows not in through the Golden Pipes of the Sanctuary, Hos. 6.
4. 1 Pet. 1. 24.
will not better the soul, nor long abide with the soul, it will be as the
morning dew, and as the flower of the field that soon fades away. I have in
the former Discourse, showed at large, How the Lord is graciously pleased to
cause his love and glory, to beam forth upon souls in Ordinances; and
therefore, I shall say no more unto this particular at this time.

The fifth Means to obtain Assurance, Means 5.
is, wisely and seriously to observe, What gift of God there is in thee that
brings thee within the compass of the promises of eternal mercy? Now let the
gift, be this or that, if it be a gift that brings thee within the compass of
the promise of Eternal Mercy? that gift is an infallible evidence of thy
Salvation: For the better and further opening of this Truth, premise with me
these two things.

First, No man can have any sure evidence to himself of his Happiness and
Blessedness, from absolute promises: Absolute promises do not describe to whom
Salvation, and all Eternal Isai 42. 6. and 49. 8. Joel 2. 28. Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27.
Jere. 32. 40. Heb. 8, 10, 11, 12. Isai. 23. 25.
Blessings, do belong; the promise of giving Christ, of giving the Spirit, of
giving a new heart, and of pardoning and blotting out sin, are all absolute
promises. Now God is free to make good these to whom he pleases; therefore he
often steps over the rich, and chooses the poor; the learned, and chooses the
ignorant; the 1 Cor. 1. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.
strong, and chooses the weak; the noble, and chooses the ignoble; the sweet
nature, and chooses the rugged nature, etc. That no flesh may glory, and that
all may shout out Grace, Grace.

Secondly, Though no man can have any sure evidence of his Happiness and
Blessedness from absolute promises, because absolute promises do not describe
the persons to whom Salvation, and all Eternal Blessings, do belong; yet
absolute promises are of most choice and singular use: First, In that they
discover to us, that our Salvation is only from Free Grace, and not from any
thing in us, or done by us. Secondly, They are a most sure and glorious
foundation, for the very worst of sinners to stay their filthy, guilty,
wearied, burdened, perplexed souls upon; seeing, that God looks not for any
penny or peniworth, for Isai. 55. 1, 2.
any portion, or proportion in the Creature to draw his love; but he will
justify, pardon, and save, for his Name sake; seeing all the Motives that
moves God to show mercy, are in his Deuteronomy. 7. 7, 8. Psalm. 68. 18,
own bosom; seeing they are all within doors, there is no reason why the vilest
of sinners should sit down, and say, There is no hope, there is no help.
Thirdly, Absolute promises may, and doubtless often are choice Cordials to many
precious souls, who happily have lost the sense and feeling of Divine favor.
Absolute promises Bilney was much comforted in a great conflict, by that
promise 1 Timothy 1. 15. And Vrsine by that in John 10. 29. Another by that in
Isai. 57. 15. Another by that in Isai. 26. 3. Mr. Wheatley with that in Heb.
10. 37, etc.
are waters of life to many precious sons of Zion; they are a heavenly fire, at
which they can sit down and warm themselves, when they cannot blow their own
spark into a flame, and when all Candlelight, Torch-light, and Starlight
fails them; when all other comforts can yield a perplexed, distressed soul no
comfort; yet then absolute promises will prove full Breasts of Consolation to
the distressed soul.

These things being premised, see now what gift of God there is in thee, that
brings thee within the compass of the promise of Everlasting Happiness and
Blessedness; and to help you a little in this, I shall put you in mind of
these following particulars.

First, Faith is a gift of God that brings the soul within the promise of
Everlasting Blessedness, as the Scripture does every where evidence, He Mark.
16. 16. John 3. 15, 16, etc.
that believes shall be saved; he that believes, shall not come into
condemnation, he shall not perish, he shall have eternal life, etc. Now
believing is nothing else, but the accepting of Christ John 1. 12. vide.
for thy Lord and Savior, as he is offered to thee in the Gospel; and this
accepting is principally (if not only) the act of thy will; so that if thou
art sincerely and cordially willing to have Christ upon his own terms, upon
Gospel terms, that is, to save thee, and rule thee, to redeem thee, and to
reign over thee, then thou art a Believer, thy sincere willingness to believe,
is thy Faith; and this gift brings thee within the compass of the promise of
Eternal Happiness, and Blessedness. Christian Reader, in the following
Discourse thou will find the nature, the properties, and the excellencies of a
found saving Faith, clearly and largely laid open before thee; and therefore I
shall say no more to it in this place, but refer thee to what follows.

Secondly, Waiting patiently on God, is a gift that brings thee within the
promise of Everlasting Happiness and Blessedness. And he that has but a
waiting frame of heart, has that, that God will eternally own and crown. Isa.
30. 18. And therefore will the Lord wait, that he may be gracious unto you; and
therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you; for the Lord is
a God of judgment. Blessed are all they that wait for him. Verily, it is no
iniquity to pronounce them blessed, that God pronounces blessed; it is no
piety, but cruelty and inhumanity, for any not to be as merciful to themselves,
as God is merciful to them; not to have as sweet and precious thoughts of their
present condition, as God has. If God says the waiting soul is blessed, who
dares judge, who dares say, it is not blessed? Let God be true, and every man a
liar. Isa. 64. 4. For since the beginning of the world, men have not heard, nor
perceived by the ear, neither has the eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he
has prepared for him that waits for him. Prove. 8. 34. Blessed is the man
that hears me; watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.
Isai. 49. 23. They shall not be ashamed that wait for me: That is, I will never
fail the waiting soul, I will never put him to blushing, by frustrating his
patient waiting on me. The waiting soul shall bear the Bell, and carry away the
Crown at last. Verily, glorious love and power, is as much seen in keeping up a
poor soul, in a patient waiting on God, as it was in raising Christ from the
Grave, and as it is in bringing souls to glory. Nothing can make the waiting
soul miserable. Hold out Faith and patience, but a little, and Revel. 22. 11,
12.
he that shall come, will come, and bring his reward with him.

Thirdly, Hungering and thirsting after Righteousness, is a gift that brings
the soul within the compass of the promise of Everlasting Happiness and
Blessedness. Matthew. 5. 6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after
Righteousness; for they shall be filled, or (...).
as it runs in the Greek, Blessed are they that are hungring and thirsting.
Intimating, that where ever this is the present disposition of men's souls, they
are blessed, and may expect spiritual repletions. Considerable to this purpose
is that of Isai. 44. 2, 3, 4, 5. Thus says the Lord that made thee, and formed
thee from the Womb, which will help thee: Fear not, O Jacob my servant, and
thou Jesurun, whom I have chosen. For I will pour water upon him that is
thirsty, By Water is meant the Spirit, say some; others understand it of the
Spiritual Waters of Grace, That God will power out upon those that thirst, and
long after an abundance of Grace, etc.
and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my
Blessing upon thy Offspring: And they shall spring up as among the grass, as
Willows by the Watercourse. One shall say, I am the Lords; and another shall
call himself by the name of Jacob; and another shall subscribe with his hand
unto the Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel. Of the like
consideration is that of Isa. 35. 6, 7. Then shall the lame man leap as a Heart,
and the tongue of the dumb sing; for in the Wilderness shall waters break
forth, and streams in the desert. And the parched ground shall become a Pool,
and the thirsty Land springs of Water: In the habitation of Dragons, where each
lay, shall be Gross, with Reeds and Rushes. To the like purpose is that in
Psalm. 107. 9. For he satisfies the longing soul; and fills the hungry soul
with goodness. But that none may mistake, nor miscarry in this business, that
is of an eternal concernment to them; I shall desire them to premise with me
these following things, for a better and fuller clearing of this particular
truth that is under our present consideration.

First, Premise this with me. All real hungerings and thirstings after
Righteousness, are earnest and vehement thirstings and longings, they are like
Rachels longing for children, and like Samsons longing for water. Psalm. 42. 1,
2. As the Heart pants after the waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee, O
God: My soul thirsts for God, for the living God, when shall I come and
appear before God? Philosophers observe, That of all Beasts the Heart is most
thirsty by nature, but most of all thirsty, when she is hunted and pursued by
Dogs: Says David, As the hunted Heart, as the wounded Heart, yea, as the
She-hart, in whom the passions of thirst are strongest, pants after the
waterbrooks; so does my soul pant after thee, O God. A gracious soul pants
and faints, it Psalm. 119. 20.
breaths and breaks for the longing it has at all times, after the
Righteousness of Christ, imputed and infuled. The Greeks derive their word for
desire, from a Root that signifies to burn.

Ah Christians, real desires, are burning desires, they set the soul all in a
holy flame after God and Christ; if they are not vehement, if they do not put
an edge upon thy affections, if they do not make thee like a burning Seraphim.
Christ will take no pleasure in them, they shall return into thy own bosom
without working any wonders in Heaven, as those desires do that flow from the
souls, being touched with a coal from the Altar.

Secondly, Premise this with me, Psalm. 63. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 27 4. Cant. 1. 2.
Phil 3 7, 8, 9; 10.
All real longings and hungerings in the soul after Righteousness, arises from
Spiritual and Heavenly Considerations; they spring in the soul from some
convictions, some apprehensions, some persuasions, that the soul has of a real
worth, of a real beauty, glory, and excellency that is in Christ, and in his
Righteousness, imputed and impar^ed. Such desires after Righteousness, that
flow from external considerations, are of no worth, weight, or continuance; but
those desires after Righteousness, that flow from Spiritual considerations, are
full of spirit, life, and glory; they are such that Psalm. 145. 19.
God will not only observe, but accept; not only record, but reward.

Thirdly, Real hungerings and thirstings after Christ and his Righteousness,
etc. will put the soul upon lively endeavors: If they are true born desires,
they will not make the soul idle but active, not negligent but diligent in the
use of all holy means, whereby the soul may enjoy Christ and his Righteousness.
Isa. 26. 9. With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea, with my spirit
within me, will I se^k thee early. Real desires will make men earnest and early
in seeking to obtain the thing desired, as the Hebrew word (...) from (...)
imports. A thirsty man will not only long for drink, but labor for it; the
which signifies to seek in the morning, when it is but dim and dusky, scarce
twilight; for of duskiness it has its name, and it notes both an earnest and
an early seeking.
condemned man will not only desire his pardon, but he will write, and
entreat, and weep, and set this friend and that to solicit for him; the
covetous man does not only wish for wealth, but will rise early, and go to bed
late; he will turn every stone, and make attempts upon all hopeful
opportunities, whereby he may fill his bags, and fill his Barns. Even so, all
holy desires will put souls upon the use of the means, whereby the mercy
desired may be gained. And thus to run, is to attain; thus to will, is to work;
thus to desire, is to do the will of our Father, who accepts of pence for
pounds, of mites for millions. The Persian Monarch was not so famous for
accepting a little water from the hand of a loving Subject, as our God is, for
accepting of a handful of Meal, Levit 2. 2. Ex^d. 35 6 2 Cor. 8 12.
for a Sacrifice, and a gripe of Goatshair, for an oblation, for accepting of
that little we have, and for accounting our little, much. Noah's Sacrifice could
not be great, and yet it was greatly accepted, and highly accounted off by God.
Such is Gods condiscending love to weak worms, that he looks more at their
will, then at their work; he minds more what they would do, then what they do
do; he always prefer the willing mind, before the worthiest work; and where
desires and endeavors are sincere, there God judges such to be, as good as they
desire and endeavor to be.

Fourthly, Spiritual hungerings and thirstings, are only satisfied with
Spiritual things. John 14. 8. Show us the Father, and it suffic^th us. All the
things in the world cannot suffice us, but a sight of the Father, that will
satisfy us. Psalm. 63. 5, 6. My soul shall be satisfied, as with marrow and
fatness; and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips. When I remember thee
upon my bed, and Christus est mihi pro omnibus. Says one.
meditate on thee in the night watches. Psalm. 65. 4. We shall be satisfied with
the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy Temple. It is only God, and the
precious things of his house, that can satifie a thirsty soul. It was a sweet
sayof one, As what I have, if offered to thee, pleases thee not, O Lord,
without my self; so the good things we have from thee, though they may refresh
us, yet they cannot satisfy us, without thy self. The Rattle without the
Breast, will not satisfy the Child; the House without the Husband, will not
satisfy the Wife; the Cabinet without the Jewel, will not satisfy the Virgin;
nor the World without Christ, will not satisfy the Soul. Luther in a time of
wants, Valde protestatus sum, me nolle fic satiari ab eo. Luth.
receiving unexpectedly a good sum of money from the Elector of Germany, at
which, being somewhat amazed, he turned himself to God, and protested, That
God should not put him off with such poor low things. The hungry soul will not
be put off with any Bread, but with the Bread of Life. The thirsty soul will
not be put off with any Water, but with the Well-springs of Life. As the King
of Sodom said once, Gen 14. 21.
Take you the goods, give me the persons; so says the hungry soul, take you
the goods, take you honors, and riches, and the favor of Creatures; take you
the Corn, the Oil, and the Wine; give me Christ, give me the light of his
countenance, give me the joy of his Spirit, etc. O the answering of Spiritual
breathings, is very sweet to the soul. Prove. 13. 19. The desire accomplished,
is sweet to the soul. Returns from Heaven makes a paradise in the soul. I have
read of Darius, that when he fled from his enemy, and being in great thirst, he
met with a dirty puddle of water with Carrion lying in it; and he sucked in,
and drunk very heartily of it, and professed, That it was the sweetest draught
that ever he drunk in his life. Ah how sweet then are those Waters of Life that
be at Gods right hand? how sweet are the droppings of Gods Honeycomb upon the
hungry soul? Water out of the Rock, and Manna in the Wilderness, was not so
sweet to the hungry thirsty Israelites, as Spiritual answers, and Spiritual
returns, are to those that hunger and thirst after Spiritual things.

The sixth Means to obtain a welgrounded Means 6. Many may be much, in and for
Church-Ordinances, whose hearts are very carnal* and whose liv^s are very vain.
Ezekiel 24* 21, 22. You have seven expressions of carnal hearts, prizing Church
privileges* So Jer 7. 4. Ezekiel. 33. 30, 31, 32, 33. Isa* 1. 11, 12, 13, 14.
Zach 7. 4, 5, 6, 7. Isa. 58. 1, 2, 3, etc.
Assurance of your Everlasting Happiness, is, to be much, yea, to excel in
those choice particular things, that may clearly and sully, difference and
distinguish you, not only from the profane, but also from the highest and
most glistering Hypocrites in all the world. It is nothing to be much in those
duties and performances, wherein the worst of sinners may equalize, yea, go
beyond the best of Saints. O but to excel in those things, that the most
refined Hypocrites cannot reach to. This cannot but much help you on in
assurance: He that has those Jewels in his bosom, that God gives only to his
choicest favorites, needs not question, whether he be a favorite, etc. If he
does it, it is his sin, and will hereafter be his shame. But you may say to me,
What are those choice particular things that may difference and distinguish
Christ's true Nathaniels from all other persons in the world? Now to this
question, I shall give these following answers.

First, A true Nathaniel in his constant course, labors in all duties and
services to be approved and accepted of God; he is most stud^ous and in
dustrious to approve his heart to God in all that he puts his hand to. So
David, Search me, O God, and know my Psalm. 139. 23, 24 (...)
heart; try me, and know my thoughts; and see if there be any wicked way in me;
and lead me in the way everlasting. So Peter To make a strict search and
inquisition. John 21. 15, 16, 17.
approves his heart to Christ three several times together. Lord, thou know
that I love thee; Lord thou know that I love thee; Lord, thou know all
things, thou know that I love thee. Thou know the sincerity and reality
of my love, and therefore to thee I do appeal; to the same purpose the Apostle
speaks in 2 Cor. 5. 9. Wherefore we labor, that whether present or absent, we
may be accepted of him. The Greek word that is here translated labor, is a (...)
very emphatical word, it signifies to labor, or endeavor with all earnestness
and might, to endeavor with a high and holy ambition, to be accepted of God;
judging it the greatest honor in the world, to be owned and accepted of the
Lord. Ambitious men are not more diligent, earnest, studious, and laborious to
get honor among men, then we are (says the Apostle) to get acceptance with
God. Ah but your most Ma^th. 6. and 23. Also it is Chrysostoms observation,
that she that paints tears and blubberings, is worse then a wanton woman that
paints to seem fair. Hom. 6. in Matthew.
refined Hypocrites labor only to approve themselves to men in their Praying,
Fasting, Talking, Hearing, Giving, etc. Let them have but man's eye to see them,
and man's ear to hear them, and man's tongue to commend them, and man's hand to
reward them, and they will sit down and bless themselves, saying it is enough;
Ah, ha, so would we have it. They say of the Nightingale, that when she is
solitary in the Woods, she is careless of her note, but when she conceives that
she has any auditors, or is near houses, then she composes her self more
quaintly and elegantly. Verily this is the frame and temper of the best of
Hypocrites. O but a sincere Nathaniel Noli peccare, Deus videt, angeli astant.
Take ^eed what thou do, God beholds thee, Angels observe thee, says one
labors in all places, and in all cases and services to approve himself to God;
he labors as much to approve himself to God in a Wood, where no eye sees him,
as he does when the eyes of thousands are fixed upon him. The Sun would shine
bright, though all men were a sleep at High noon, and no eyes open to see the
glory of his Beams; so a sincere heart will shine, he will labor to do good,
though all the world should shut their eyes; yet he will eye his work, and eye
his God; he knows that God is totus oculus, all eye; and therefore he cares
not, though others have never an eye to observe him, to applaud him. Let God
but secretly whisper him in the ear, and say, Well done good and faithful
servant, and it is enough to his soul, enough to satisfy him, enough to cheer
him, and enough to encourage him in the ways, and the work of his God.

Secondly, He labors to get up to He cannot be satisfied with so much grace, as
will keep him from dropping into Hell; but he must have so much Grace as will
make him shine gloriously in Heaven.
the very top of Holiness; he labors to live up to his own Principles: He
cannot be satisfied with so much Grace, as will bring him to glory; but he
labors to be high in Grace, that he may be high in glory. Phil. 3. 11. I
desire, if by any means, I might attain unto the Resurrection of the Dead. That
is, to that perfection that the dead shall attain to, in the morning of the
Resurrection. Verily, that man is ripe for Heaven, who counts it his greatest
happiness to be high in holiness; that man shall never be low in Heaven, a
doorkeeper in Heaven; that cannot be satisfied, till he be got up to the very
top of Jacobs Ladder, till he has attained to the highest perfection in Grace
and Holiness. Psalm. 45* 13. The Kings daughter is all glorious within; her
clothing is of wrought gold. Her inward principles are all glorious, and her
outward practice echoes to her inward principles, her clothing is of wrought
gold. It was the honor, and glory of Joshua and Caleb, that they Number. 14. 24.
followed the Lord fully. That is, they lived up to their own principles; So
those Virgins in Revel. 14. 4, 5. that were without spot before the Throne of
God, They followed the Lamb, wheresoever he went: That is, they lived up to
their Profession; there was a sweet harmony betwixt their principles, and
practices. And thus the Apostles Vivimus praceptis non factis) We live by
precepts, not by deeds, ( Legibus Dei, non e^emplis homi^um) by the Laws of
God, not by the examples of men.
lived, 2 Cor. 1. 12. For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity; not with fleshly wisdom,
but by the Grace of God; we have had our conversation in the world, and more
abundantly to you wards. 1 These. 2. 10. Ye are witnesses, and God also; how
holily, and justly, and unblameably, we behaved our selves among you that
believe? Thus we see these worthies living up to their own Principles. Blested
Bradford and Bucer lived so up to their principles, that their friends could
not sufficiently praise them, nor their foes find any thing justly to fasten
on them. Believers know, first, That their living up to their own principles,
does best evidence Christ living Gal. 2. 20.
in them, and their union with him; secondly, They know that it is not their
profession, but living up to their principles, that will effectually stop the
mouths, and convince the consciences of vain men. 1 Pet. 2. 15. For so is the
Will of God, that by well-doing (that is, by living up to your own principles)
you may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. There is no such way in
the world, to still and silence wicked men, to make them dumb and speechless,
to muzzle and tie up their mouths (as the Greek word notes) as by living up
(...).
to your own principles. The lives of men convince more strongly, then their
words; the tongue persuades, but the life commands; thirdly, They know by
living up to their principles, they cast a general glory upon Christ and Matthew.
5. 16. 1 Pet. 2. 11, 12.
his ways: This makes Christ and his ways to be well thought on, and well spoke
on; fourthly, They know that the ready way, the only way to get 2 Pet. 1, 5.
to 13.
and keep Assurance, Joy, Peace, etc. is to live up to their principles;
fifthly, They know that by their living below their own principles, or contrary
to their own principles, they do but gratify Satan, and provoke wicked men to
blaspheme that worthy Name, by which they are called: They know Jam. 2. 7. The
very Heathen, as Salvian observes, did thus reproach Christians that walked
contrary to their principles. Where is that good law which they do believe?
they read and hear the holy Scriptures, and yet are drunk and unclean; they
follow Christ, and yet disobey Christ; they profess a Holy Law, and yet do lead
impure lives.
that by their not living up to their own principles, they do but multiply
their own fears and doubts, and put a sword into the hand of Conscience, and
make sad work for future Repentance.

Now these, and such like Considerations, do exceedingly stir and provoke
Believers to labor with all their might, to live up to their own principles, to
get to the very top of Holiness; to be more and more a pressing toward the
mark, and to think that nothing is done, till they have attained to the highest
perfections, that are attainable in this life. It is true, many Hypocrites may
go up some rounds of Jacobs Ladder, such as make for their Genesis 28. 12.
profit, pleasure, applause, etc. and yet tumble down at last to the bottom of
Hell, as Judas and others have done. Hypocrites do not look, nor like* nor
love, to come up to the top of Jacobs Ladder, to the top of Holiness; as you
may see in the Scribes and Pharisees, and all other Hypocrites that the
Scripture speaks of.

Thirdly, It is their greatest desire and endeavor that sin may be cured,
rather then covered. Sin most afflicts a gracious soul; David cries not perii,
Psalm. 51.
out peccavi; not I am undone, but I have done foolishly. Daniel complains Dan.
9. 5.
not, we are reproached and oppressed, but we have rebelled. Paul cries not
Romans 7 23. If a Snake should sting thy dearly beloved Sp^use to death, would
thou preserve it alive, warm it at the fire, hug it in thy bosom, and not
rather stab it with a thousand wounds? You are wise, and know how to apply it.
out of his Persecutors, but of the law in his members, rebelling against the
law of his mind. A gracious soul grieves more that God by his sin is grieved
and dishonored, then that for it he is afflicted and chastned. The heart
feeling within her, the operation of the Serpents poison, runs from the thorns
and thickets, and runs over he green and pleasant Pastures, that she may drink
of the Fountain, and be cured: So gracious souls being sensible of the poison
and venom of sin, runs from the Creatures that are but as thorns and thickets,
and runs over their own duties and righteousness; which are but as pleasant
Pastures to come to Christ the Fountain of Life, that they may drink of those
Waters of Consolation, of those Wells of Salvation that be in him, and cast up,
and cast out their spiritual poison, and be cured for ever. Believers know that
their sins do most pierce and grieve the Lord, they lie hardest and heaviest
Amos 2. 13.
upon his heart, and are most obvious to his eye. The sin of Judah is written
Jere. 17. 1.
with a Pen of Iron, and with the point of a Diamond; their sins are When
Brutus went to stab Julius Caesar, he cried out, What thou my sen Brutus, etc.
So may God well cry out, (what thou my Son) what will thou stab me with thy
sins? is it not enough that others stab my honor? but will thou my Son?
against beams of strongest light, they are against the bowels of tenderest
mercy, they are against the manifestations of greatest love, they are against
the nearest and dearest relations, they are against the choicest and highest
expectations. And this makes believing souls cry out, O a cure Lord! a cure
Lord! O give me purging grace, give me purging grace; though I should never
taste of pardoning mercy, yet give me purging grace. It was a notable Speech of
C^smus Duke o^ ^lorence, I have read (says he) that I must forgive my enemies,
but never that I must forgive my friends. The sins of Gods friends, of Gods
people, provoke him most, and sad him most; and this makes them sigh and groan
it out, Who shall deliver us from this body of death. O but now wicked men
labor, not that sin may be cured, but only that sin might be covered, and that
the consequents of sin, viz. Afflictions, and the stingings Hosea 7. 10. to ult.
of Conscience may be removed, as you may see in Cain, Saul, Judas, and diverse
others. In their affliction they Hosea 5. 14, 15.
will seek me early (says God;) they w^ll then seek to be rid of their
affliction, but not to be rid of their sins, that has brought down the
affliction upon them. Like the patient that would fain be rid of his pain and
torment, under which he groans, but cares not to be rid of those evil habits
that has brought the pain and torment Sin does ill in the eye, worse in the
tongue, worser in the heart; but worst of all in the life.
upon them. Psalm. 78. 34, 35, 36, 37. When he slew them, then they sought him;
and they returned, and enquired early after God. And they remembered that God
was their Rock, and the High God their Redeemer: Nevertheless, they did flatter
him with their mouth; and they lied unto him with their tongues. For their
heart was not right with him; neither were they steadfast in his Covenant. In
these words Ah England, England, as face answers faee, so does thy carri^ge
toward God, answer the carriage of these people, whose baseness and falseness
God has put upon record to this very day, etc.
you see plainly, that these people are very early and earnest in seeking God,
to take off his hand, to remove the judgment that were upon them; but not that
God would cure them of those sins that provoked him to draw his sword, and to
make it drunk with their blood; for notwithstanding the sad slaughters that
Divine Justice had made among them, they did but flatter, and lie, and play the
Hipocrites with God; they would fain be rid of their sufferings, but did not
care to be rid of their sins. Ah but a gracious soul cries out, Lord do but
take away my sins, and it will satisfy me, and cheer me, though thou should
never take off thy* heavy hand. A true Nathaniel sighs it out under his
greatest affliction, as that good man did ( A me, me salus Domine.) Deliver me,
O Lord, from that evil man my self. No burden to the burden of sin, Lord, says
the believing soul, deliver me but from my inward burden, and lay upon me what
outward burden thou please.

Fourthly, Are not your souls taken with Christ as chief? is he not in your eye
the chiefest of ten thousand, is Cant. 5. 10, 16. Prove. 3. 15. Psalm 73 25, 26.
Phil. 3. 7, 8.
he not altogether lovely? Yes. Have you any in Heaven but he, and is there any
on Earth that you desire, in comparison of him? No. Do not you lift up Jesus
Christ as high as God the Father lifts him; God the Father lists up Christ
above all principalities and Ephesians. 1. 21. Phil. 2. 9.
powers; he lifts up Christ above all your duties, above all your privileges,
above all your mercies, above all your graces, above all your contentments,
above all your enjoyments. Do not you thus lift up Jesus Christ? Yes. As he is
the Fathers chiefest Jewel, so None but Christ, none but Christ, cries the
Martyr.
he is your choicest Jewel, is he not? Yes. Verily none can lift up Christ as
chief, unless Christ have their hearts, and they dearly love him, and believe
in him; for Christ is only precious to them that believe* 1 Pet. 2. 7. Luther
Amat Deus non ali unde hoc h^bet, s^d ipse est unde amat. Aug.
had rather be in Hell with Christ, then in Heaven without him: Is not that the
frame of thy heart? Yes. Why then do thou say, thou have no grace, thou have
no Christ; surely none but those that have union with Christ, and that shall
eternally reign with Christ, can set such a high price upon the person of
Christ. The true believer ( Amat Christum propter Christum) loves Christ for
Christ; he loves Christ for his personal excellencies, Cant. 5. 10. to ult.
What Alexander said of his two friends, is applicable to When one asked Catoes
daughter why she would not marry again, she being young when her husband died,
answered, because she could not find a man that loved her more then her goods.
Few there are that love Christ more then his Goods, etc.
many in our days, says he, Haphestion loves me as I am Alexander, but
Craterus loves me as I am King Alexander. One loved him for his person, the
other for the benefits he received by him. So some Nathaniels there be that
love Christ for his person, for his personal excellency, for his personal
beauty, for his personal glory, they see those perfections of grace and
holiness in Christ, that would render him very lovely and desirable in their
eyes, though they should never get a Kingdom, or a Crown by him: But most of
those that bear any love and good will to Christ, do it only in respect of the
benefits they receive by him. It was Augustines complaint of old ( Vix
deligitur Jesus propter Jesum) that scarce any loves Christ, but for his
rewards. Few follow him for love, but John 6. 26.
for loaves; few follow him for his inward excellencies, many follow him for
their outward advantages; few follow him, that they may be made good by him,
but many follow him, that they may be great by him. Certainly, you are the
bosom Friends of Christ, you are in the very heart of Christ, who prizes Christ
above all, who lifts up Jesus Christ as high as God the Father lifts him, and
that because of his rich anointings, and because all his garments smell of
Myrrh, Psalm. 45. 6, 7, 8.
Aloes, and Casha. This is a work too high, and too hard, too great, and too
noble, for all that are not new born, that are not twice born, that are not of
the Blood Royal, that are not partakers of the Divine Nature.

Fifthly, Is not your greatest, and your hottest conflicts, against inward
pollutions, against those secret sins, It was a good prayer of him that said
Lord, Libera me amalo homine, a meipso.
that are only obvious to the eye of God, and your own souls? The light of
natures education, and some common convictions of the Spirit, may put men upon
combating with those sins that are obvious to every eye; but it must be a
supernatural power and principle, that puts men upon conflicting with the
inward motions, and secret operations of sin, Romans 7. 23. the Apostle complains
of a law in his members warring against the Law of his mind. The war was
within doors, the fight was inward, the Apostle was deeply engaged against a
law within him, which made him sigh it out, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death? So David cries Psalm. 19. 12.
out, Who can understand his error? cleanse thou me from secret faults. So
Hezekiah humbled himself for the 2 Chro. 32. 26.
pride of his heart, or for the lifting up of his heart, as the Hebrew has it.
(...)
His recovery from sickness, his victories over his enemies, and his rich
treasures lifts up his heart. O but for those inward risings, and vauntings of
heart. Hezekiah humbles himself, he abases and lays himself low before the
Lord. A sincere heart weeps and The Persian Kings reign powerfully, and yet are
seldom seen in public. Secret sins reign in many men's soul, powerfully and
dangerously, when least apparently.
laments bitterly over those secret and inward corruptions, that others will
scarce acknowledge to be sins: Many a man there is that bleeds inwardly, and
dies for ever; many a soul is eternally slain by the inward workings of sin;
and he sees it not, he knows it not till it be too late. O but a true Nathaniel
mourns over the inward motions, and first risings of sin in his soul, and so
prevents an eternal danger. Upon every stirring of sin in the soul, the
Believer cries out, O Lord help, O Lord undertake for me. O dash these brats of
Babylon in pieces; O stifle the first motions of sin, that they may never
conceive, and bring forth, to the wounding of two at once, thy Honor, and my
own Conscience.

Sixthly, Are you not subject to Christ as a head? Yes. Devils and wicked men
are subject to Christ as a Lord, but those that are by Faith united to him, and
that have a spiritual interest in him are subject to him as a head. I shall
open this particular thus unto you.

First, The Members are willingly Every true Nathaniels motto is ( omnia ^x
voluntate D^i) all must be as God will have it.
and sweetly subject to the head, their subjection is voluntary, not
compulsory; it is so with a believing soul, Psalm. 27. 8. When thou said, seek
ye my face, my heart said unto thee, thy face Lord will I seek. So in Psalm.
110. 3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of
holiness. So ^aul cries Acts 9. 6.
out, What will thou have me to do. And professes that he is willing, not to be
Acts 21. 13.
bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of Christ. A gracious
soul is in some measure naturalized to the work of Christ, and Christ's work is
in some measure naturalized to the soul.

Secondly, The Members are subject Their obedience is universal. First, In
respect of the act of esch^wing al evil, doing all good. Secondly, In respect
of the rule, the whole Word of God. Thirdly, In respect of their general and
particular callings.
to the head universally, they do all the head enjoyneth, so the real Members
of Christ do in sincerity endeavor universally to subject to all that Christ
their head requires, without any exception or reservation, Luke 1. 5, 6.
Zacharias and Elizabeth walked in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the
Lord blameless. They walked without halting or halving of it with God; they
fell in with every part and point of Gods revealed Will, without prejudice or
partiality, without tilting the balance on one side or another, Acts 13. 22. I
have found David the son of Jesse, a man after my own heart, which shall fulfill
all my will: Or rather all my wills as the Greek has (...).
it, to note the universality and sincerity of his obedience.

Thirdly, The Members are subject to the head constantly, unweariedly; the
Members are never weary of obeying the head; they obey in all places* cases,
and times; so are the real Members of Christ, Acts 24. 16. And herein do I
exercise my self, to have always (...). Always, or throughout in all cases, or
at all times.
a conscience void of offense, toward God, and toward men. I use all diligence,
skill, cunning, and conscience to be sincere and inoffensive, in all my motions
and actions toward God, and toward men. So David in Psalm. 119. 112. I have
inclined my heart (or rather as the Hebrew word signifies, I have stretched
(...)
out my heart, as a man would do a piece of parchment) to do thy statutes (the
Hebrew (...) from (...)
word signifies to do accurately, exactly, perfectly) always, even unto the end.
A gracious soul is not like a deceitful bow, nor like the morning dew; but he
is like the Sun that rejoices to run his race; he is like the stone in
Thracia, that neither burns in the fire, nor sinketh in the water. Now tell
me, pray tell me, O you doubting souls, whether you do not, First, Labor in all
duties and services to approve your hearts to God? Secondly, Whether you do not
endeavor to get up to the very top of holiness, and to live up to your own
principles? Thirdly, Whether it be not your greatest desire and endeavor, that
sin may be cured rather then covered* Fourthly, Whether you are not taken with
Christ as chief? whether you do not in your judgments and affections, lift up
Christ above all, as God the Father does? Fifthly, Whether your greatest, and
hottest conflicts, and combats, be not against inward polutions against those
secret stirrings and operations of sin, which are only obvious to the eye of
God, and your own souls? Sixthly, Whether you do not (in respect of the general
bent and frame of your hearts) subject to Christ, as your Head? 1. Freely and
sweetly? 2. Universally, in one thing as well as another, without any exception
or reservation? 3. Constantly and unwearily? Yes, we do these things, we should
belie the grace of God, if we should say otherwise, these things the Lord has
wrought in us, and for Isa. 26. 12.
us. Well then, know first, that your estate is good, you have certainly a
blessed interest in the Lord Jesus. None can do these things but souls that
have union with Christ, that are interessed in Christ, that are acted by the
peculiar, and special influences of Christ, and that are highly beloved of
Christ; Verily If these things could be found in the most shining hypocrites,
or any others but real Saints, they could not possibly be either a first or
second evidence, though a man could see them in the light of the Spirit, this
is carefully to be observed against those that hold these good second
evidences, etc.
these are such flowers of Paradise that cannot be gathered in Natures Garden;
they are Pearls of that price, that God bestows them upon none but those that
are the price of Christ's blood. All the men in the world cannot prove by the
Scripture, that these Jewels can be found in any men's breasts, but in theirs
that have union and communion with Christ, and that shall reign for ever with
Christ. Secondly, Know, that it is no iniquity, but rather your duty for you to
suck sweetness out of these hony-combs, and to look upon these things as
infallible pledges, and evidences of divine favor, and of your everlasting
happiness, and blessedness. Some there be that make the witness of the
Spirit (of which I shall toward the close of this Discourse speak at large)
the only evidence of our interest in Christ, and deny all other evidences from
the fruit of the Spirit; but this is to deny the fruit growing upon the tree,
to be an evedience that the tree is alive; whereas all know, that the fruit
growing upon the tree, is an infallible and undeniable evidence, that there is
life We have cause enough to keep off doubtings, and distress of Spirit upon
the bare sight of our evidences, this complaining, cavilling souls will not
understand.
in the tree. Certainly it is one thing to judge by our Graces, and another
thing to rest upon our Graces, or to put trust in our Graces: When one argues
from the beams of the Sun, that there is a Sun, one would think that the most
cavilling spirit in the world should lie quiet and still.

Now the seventh Means to get a Means 7. Though our graces be our best Jewels,
yet they are imperfect, and do not give out their full luster, they are like the
moon, which when it shines brightest, has a dark spot. Therefore we should
add still grace to grace. (...)
well-grounded Assurance of your everlasting happiness, and blessedness, is,
to grow and increase more and more in grace, 2 Pet. 1. 5. to 11. Add to your
Faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge, etc. to v. 11. for so an entrance
shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. By entrance into the everlasting Kingdom of
Christ, is not meant a local entrance into Heaven; for Heaven is no where
called the Kingdom of Christ, but the Fathers Kingdom, the opposition, ver. 9.
shows clearly that it is meant of Assurance. Now the way to full Assurance is
by adding grace to grace: The Greek word that is here rendered add, has a
greater emphasis, it signifies to link our graces together, as Virgins in a
Dance do link their hands together. O we must be still a joining grace to
grace, we must still be adding one grace to another; We must still be a leading
up the dance of graces. Great measures of grace carry with them great evidence
If moral virtue, says Plato could be seen with mortal eyes, it would soon draw
all hearts to it self O how much the more should our hearts be drawn out after
the highest measures of grace, the least dram of grace being more worth then
all moral virtue.
of truth; little measures, carry with them but little evidence; great measures
of grace carries with them the greatest evidence of the souls union and
communion with Christ, and the more evident your union and communion with
Christ is, the more clear and full will your Assurance be.

Great measures of grace, carries with them the greatest and the clearest
evidences of the glorious indwellings of the Spirit in you, and the more you
are persuaded of the real indwellings of the Spirit in you; The higher will
your Assurance rise. Great measures of grace will be a fire that will consume
and burn up the dross, the stubble, the fears, and doubts that perplex the
soul, and that causes darkness to surround the soul; Now the more you are
rid of your fears, doubts, and darkness, the more easily, and the more
effectually will your hearts be persuaded that the thoughts of God toward you,
are thoughts of love; that you are precious in his Jere. 32. 41.
eyes, and that he will rejoice over you to do you good for ever, etc.

The eighth Means to gain a welgrounded Means 8.
Assurance of your everlasting happiness and blessedness, is, to take your
hearts when they are in the best and most spiritual frame and temper God-wards,
Heaven-wards, and Holinesse-wards: Times of temptation, and desertion, etc. are
praying times, hearing times, mourning times; and believing times; but they are
not trying times, they are not seasonable times for doubting souls to set
themselves about so great and so solemn a work as that is, of searching and
examining how things stand, and are like to stand between God and them for ever:

Be diligent, and constant, be studious 2 Cor. 13 5.
and conscientious in observing the frame and temper of your own Our hearts
are ponderous, multum trahit de terra, de carnum multum: therefore we had need
take them when they are in the best temper, etc.
hearts, and when you find them most plain, most melting, most yielding, most
tender, most humble, most sweetly raised, and most divinely composed, then, O
then is the time to single out the most convenient place where thou may with
greatest freedom open thy bosom to God, and plead with him, as for thy life,
that he would show thee how things stand between him and thee, and how it must
fare with thy soul for ever. And when thou have thus set thy self before God
and opened thy bosom to God, then wisely observe what report God, and thy own
renewed conscience do make concerning thy eternal condition. I will hear what
God the Lord will speak (says Psalm. 85. 8, 9. (...)
David) for he will speak peace unto his people, and they shall not return to
folly, (so the Hebrew may be read) O so must thou stand still (when thou have
sincerely unbowelled thy self before the Lord) and listen, and hearken what
God will say unto thee. Surely he will speak peace unto thee, he will say, Son
be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee, thy heart is upright with me, my
soul is set upon thee; I have already blessed thee, and I will hereafter glorify
thee.

I have read of one who was kept A good conscience is mill testes, a thousand
witnesses; therefore make much of its testimony.
from destroying of himself (being much tempted by Satan thereunto) by
remembering that there was a time, when he solemnly set himself in prayer and
self-examination before the Lord, and made a diligent enquiry into his
spiritual condition; and in the close of that work it was evidenced to him,
that his heart was upright with God; and this kept him from laying of violent
hands upon himself. O, a wise and serious observing what that testimony is,
that God, Conscience, and the Word, gives in upon solemn Prayer, and
self-examination, may beget strong consolation, and support the soul under the
greatest affliction, and strengthen the soul against the most violent
temptations, and make the soul look, and long for the day of desolution, as
Princes do for their day of Coronation.

Lastly, The last Means to gain a Means 9.
wel-grounded Assurance, is, To make a diligent enquiry, whether thou have
those things that do accompany eternal salvation, Heb. 6. 9. But beloved we are
persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany salvation; or as it
is in the Greek that have salvation; (...).
as it were in the very bowels of them that comprehend salvation, and that
touch upon salvation.

O Beloved, If you have those things that accompany salvation, that comprehend
salvation, you may be abundantly assured of your salvation. But you may say to
me, What are those things that accompany salvation? To this Question I shall
give this answer, viz. That there are seven special things that accompany
salvation, and they are these. First, Knowledge: Secondly, Faith: Thirdly,
Repentance: Fourthly, Obedience: Fifthly, Love: Sixthly, Prayer: Seventhly,
Perseverance.

First, Knowledge is one of those special things that accompanies salvation,
John 17. 3. And this is life eternal, Vide Piscat. on the words.
that they may know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have
sent. Divine Knowledge is the beginning of eternal life, it is a spark of glory;
It is called Eternal life, Quia radix and erigo vitae. In legend is libris non
quaeramus scientiam, sed saporum. Bern. In reading Books, let us not look so
much for Science, as a Savoriness of the truth upon our own hearts.
it works life in the soul, it is a taste and pledge of eternal life. 1 John 5.
20. And we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an
understanding, that we may know him that is true: And we are in him that is
true, even in his Son Jesus Christ; this is the true God, and eternal life. 2
Pet. 1. 3. According as his Divine power has given unto us all things that
pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledge of him that has called
us to glory and virtue. What this Knowledge is that accompanies Salvation, I
shall show you anon.

Secondly, Faith is another of those special things that accompanies Salvation.
1 These. 2. 13. But we are bound to give thanks always to God for you, Brethren,
Beloved of the Lord; because God has from the beginning chosen you to
salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth. 1 Pet.
1. 5. You Vide Parcus Esteum, and Gerhardum on the Text.
who are kept by the power of God, through Faith unto Salvation. Verse. 9.
Receiving the end of your Faith, even the salvation of your souls. Heb. 10. 30.
But we are not of them who draw back to perdition; but of them that believe to
the saving of the soul. John 3 14, 15, 16. Mark 16. 16. Acts 16. 31. Romans 10.
9. Isa. 45. 22. Phil. 2. 8. Joh 11. 25, 26. 1 John 5. 10. All ^hese and many
more Scriptures speaks out the same truth. This d^uble asseveration, or
protestation, is used only in matters of we^ght, and unhappy are we, that we
cannot believe without them.
And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even so must the Son of
Man be lifted up; that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
eternal life; for God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son;
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.
Verse. 36 He that believes on the Son has everlasting life. Chap. 5. 24.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my Word, and believes on him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; but
is passed from death unto life. Chap. 6. 40. And this is the will of him that
sent me, that every one that sees he Son, and believes on him, may have
everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Verse. 47. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, he that believes on me, has everlasting life.

Thirdly, Repentance is another of those choice things that accompanies
salvation. 2 Cor. 7. 10. For godly sorrow The very word rep^nt was very
displeasing to Luther, till his conversion; but afterward he took delight in
the work, ( Paehitens de peccato dolet and de dolor, gaudet. Luth) to sorrow
for his sin, and then rejoice in his sorrow.
works repentance to salvation, not to be repented of, but the sorrow of the
world works death. Jere. 4. 14. O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness,
that thou may be saved. Acts 11. 18. When they heard these things, they held
their peace, and glorified God, saying, Then has God also to the Gentiles
granted repentance unto life. Matthew. 18. 3. And Jesus said, verily I say unto
you, except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. Acts 3. 19. Repent ye therefore; and be converted,
that your sins may be blotted out, when the time of refreshing shall come from
the presence of the Lord.

Fourthly, Obedience is another of those precious things that accompanies
salvation. Heb. 5. 9. And being Vide B. Dew^h. of Justification. 17. c. 7.
made perfect. (speaking of Christ) he became the Author of Eternal Salvation
unto all them that obey him. Psalm. 50. 23. whosoever offers praise, glorifieth
me; and to him that orders his conversation aright, will I declare the
Salvation of God.

Fifthly, Love is another of those singular things that accompanies salvation.
Deus nihil corenat nisi dona sui, August. When God c^own^th us, he does but
crown h^s own gifts in us.
2 Timothy 4. 8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness,
which the Lord the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day; and not to me
only, but unto them also that love his appearing. James 2. 5. Hearken my
beloved brethren, ha^h not God chosen the poor of this world to be rich in
faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him?
1 Cor. 2. 9. It is written, eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that
love him. James 1. 12. Blessed is the man that indureth temptation: for when
The word Crown notes to us the perpetuity of that life the Apostle speaks of,
for a Crown has neither beginning nor ending. 2. It notes plenty, the Crown
fetches a compass on every side, 3. It notes dignity, it notes majesty Eternal
life is a coronation day. It notes all joys, all delights, in a word, it notes
all good, it notes all glory
he is tried he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised
to them that love him. Matthew. 19. 28, 29. And Jesus said unto them, verily I
say unto you, that ye which have followed me in the regeneration. When the Son
of Man shall sit in the Throne of his glory, ye shall sit upon twelve Thrones
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. And every one that has forsaken houses,
or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands
for my name sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting
life. The whole is as if Christ had said, whosoever shall show love to me,
this way or that, in one thing or another, out of respect to my Name, to my
Honor; mercy shall be his portion here, and glory shall be his portion
hereafter.

Sixthly, Prayer is another of those sweet things that accompanies salvation,
Romans 10. 10. 13. For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with
the mouth confession is made unto salvation. For whosoever shall call on the
name of the Lord shall be saved. Act. 2. 21. And it shall come to pass, that
whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved. That is says one,
he shall be certainly sealed up to salvation. Or as another says, he that
has this grace of Prayer, it is an evident sign and assurance to him that he
shall be saved: Therefore to have grace to pray is a better and a greater
mercy, then to have gifts to prophecy, Matthew. 7. 22. Praying souls shall find
the gates of heaven open to them, when prophesying souls shall find them shut
against them.

Seventhly and lastly, Perseverance is another of those prime things that
accompanies salvation, Matthew. 10. 22. And ye shall be hated of all men for my
name sake: but he that indureth to the end the same shall be saved. Chap. 24.
12, 13. And because iniquity shall abound, the love The same words you have in
Mark 13. 13.
of many shall wax cold, but he that indureth unto the end the same shall be
saved. Rev. 2. 10. Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer: behold
the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye
shall have tribulation ten days; be thou A crown without cares, fears,
co^rivals, envy, end. God turns the crown of thorns into a crown of glory
Pericula non respicit Martyr, coronas respicit. Basil.
faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a crown of life. Chap. 3. 5. He
that overcommeth, the same shall be clothed in white raiment, and I will not
blot out his name out of the book of life, but I will confess his name before
my Father and before his Angels. To him that overcommeth, will I grant to sit
with me in my Throne, as I also overcome and am set down with my Father in his
Throne. Thus you see these seven choice things that accompanies salvation. But
for your further and fuller edification, satisfaction, confirmation, and
consolation, it will be very necessary that I show you,

1. What Knowledge that is, that accompanies Salvation, that borders, that
touches upon salvation. 2. What Faith that is, that accompanies salvation. 3.
What Repentance that is, that accompanies salvation. 4. What Obedience that is,
that accompanies salva^ion. 5. What Love that is, that accompan^es salvation.
6. What Prayer that is, that accompanies salvation. 7. What Perseverance that
is, that accompanies salvation. I hope when I have fully opened these precious
things to you, that you will be able to sit down much satisfied and cheated in
a holy confidence and blessed assurance of your everlasting wel-being.

I shall begin with the first, and show you what that Knowledge is, that
accompanies salvation, that comprehends salvation, that touches upon salvation;
and that I shall open in these following particulars.

First, That Knowledge that accompanies salvation, is a working Knowledge,
Knowledge that swims in the head only, and sinks not down into the heart, does
no more good then rain inth m^ddle re^ion or then the Un^corns horn i^ the
Unicorns head.
an operative Knowledge, 2 Cor. 11. 6. God who commanded the light to shine out
of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give us the light of the knowledge
of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ: Divine light reaches the
heart as well as the head. The beams of Divine light shining in upon the soul
through the glorious face of Christ, are very working; they warm the heart, they
affect the heart, they new mould the heart. Divine knowledge masters the heart,
it guides the heart, it governs the heart, it sustains the heart, it relieves
the heart. Romans 6. 6. We know that our old man is crucified with him, that the
body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth 1 John 3 6. Whosoever sins (
viz. Customarily, habitually, delightfully) has not seen him, neither known
him.
we should not serve sin. Divine knowledge puts a man upon crucifying of sin,
it keeps a man from being a servant, a slave to sin, which no other knowledge
can do. Under all other knowledge, men remain servants to their lusts, and are
taken prisoners by Satan at his will. No knowledge lifts a man up above his
lusts, but that which accompanies salvation. The wisest Philosophers, and the
greatest As Socrates and others.
Doctors, under all their sublime notions, and rare speculations, have been
kept in bondage by their lusts. That knowledge that accompanies salvation, is
operative knowledge. 1 John 2. 3, 4. And hereby we do know, that we know him,
if we keep his Commandments. He that says I know him, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a lier, and the He is a lier in a double respect. 1. In that
he says he has that knowledge which he has not. 2. In that he denies that in
his works, which he affirms in his words.
truth is not in him. By keeping his Commandments they did know, that they did
know him; that is, they were assured that they did know him. To know that we
know, is to be assured that we know. So in Jam. 3. 17. But the wisdom that is
from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated;
full of mercy, and good fruits; without partiality, and without hypocrisy.
Verse 13. Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge amongst you? Let him
show out of a good conversation, his works with meekness of wisdom. Divine
knowledge fills a man full of spiritual activity, it will make a man work, as
if he would be saved by his works; and yet it will make a man believe that he
is saved only upon the Ephesians. 2. 8.
account of Free Grace. That knowledge that is not operative and working, will
only serve to light souls to Hell, and to double damn all that Matthew. 23. 14.
have it.

Secondly, That Knowledge that accompanies Salvation, is transforming
knowledge, it is metamorphosing knowledge, it is knowledge that transforms,
that metamorphosies the soul. 2 Cor. 3. 18. But we with open face beholding
(...).
the glory of the Lord, as in a glass, are changed into the same image, from
glory to glory. Divine light beating on the heart, warms it, and betters it; it
transforms and changes it; it moulds and fashions it into the very likeness of
Christ. The Naturalists observe, That the Pearl by the often beating of the Sun
beams upon it, becomes radiant; so the often beating and shining of the Sun of
Righteousness, with his divine beams upon the Saints, causes them to glister
and shine in Holiness, Righteousness Heavenly-mindedness, Humbleness, etc.
Divine light casts a general beauty and glory upon the soul, it transforms a
man more and more into the glorious Image of Christ. Look as the Child
receives from A Father stands obliged not only in point of honor, bu^ also by
the Law of nature to receive his child that bears his image, so does Christ to
receive those that by divine light have his image stamped upon them.
his Parents, Member for Member, Limb for Limb; or as the Paper from the Press
receives Letter for Letter, the Wax from the Seal, Print for Print, or as the
Face in the Glass answers to the face of the man, or as Indenture answers to
Indenture; so the beams of Divine Light and Knowledge, shining into the soul,
stamps the lively Image of Christ upon the soul, and makes it put on the Lord
Jesus, and resemble him to the life. Notional knowledge may make a man
excellent at praising the glorious and worthy acts and virtues of Christ; but
that transforming knowledge that accompanies salvation, will work a man
divinely to imitate the glorious acts and virtues of Christ. 1 Pet. 2. 9. But
ye are a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar
People, that ye should show forth the praises of him ((...), the virtues of
him) who has called you out of darkness, into his mavelous light. When God
causes his Divine light, his mavelous light, to shine in upon the soul, then
a Christian will ((...)) preach forth the virtues of Christ in an imitable
practice; and till then a man under all other knowledge, will remain an
incarnate Devil. When a beam of Divine Light shined from Heaven upon Paul, Ah
how did it Acts 9. 3, etc. Divine light lays upon a man, Felix necessitas, a
happy necessity of obeying God, etc.
change and metomorphise him? how did it alter and transform him? it made his
rebellious soul obedient? Acts 9. 6. Lord, what will thou have me to do? God
bids him arise and go into the City, and it should be told him what he should
do; and he obeyes the Heavenly vision. Chap. 26. 19. Divine light makes this
Lion a Lamb, this Persecutor a Preacher, this Destroyer of the Saints, a
Builder up of the Saints, this Tormentor a Comforter, this Monster an Angel,
this Notorious Blasphemer, a very great admirer of God, and the actings of his
Free Grace, as you may see by comparing the nineth, and twenty sixth Chapters of
the Acts together. So when a spark of this Heavenly fire fell upon the heart of
Mary Magdalen, Luke 7. O what a change, what a turn does it make in her; now
she loves much, and believes much, and repents much, and weeps much. O what a
change did Divine light make in Zacheus, and in the Jailor. Verily, if thy
light, thy knowledge does not better thee? if it does not change and transform
thee? if under all thy light and knowledge thou remainest as vile and base as
ever? thy light, thy knowledge, thy notions, thy speculations, will be like to
fire not on the Hearth, but in the Room, that will burn the House, and the
Inhabitant too; it will be like mettle in a blind horse, that serves for
nothing but to break the neck of the rider. That knowledge that is not a
transforming knowledge, will torment a man at last more then all the Devils in
Hell; it will be a Sword to cut him, a Rod to lash him, a Serpent to bite him,
a Scorpion to sting him, and a Vulture, a Worm eternally gnawing him. When
Tamberlain was in his wars, one having found and dug up a great pot of Gold,
brought it to him, Tamberlain asked whether it had his Fathers stamp upon it;
but when he saw it had the Roman stamp, and not his Fathers, he would not own
it. So God at last will own no knowledge, but that which leaves the stamp of
Christ, the print of Christ, the image of Christ upon the heart. But that which
changes and transforms the soul, that makes a man a new man, another man, then
what he was before Divine light shined upon him.

Thirdly, That Knowledge that accompanies salvation, is experimental Knowledge;
it is knowledge that springs from a spiritual sense and taste of holy and
heavenly things. Cant. 1. 2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth; for
thy loves is better then wine. The Spouse had experienced the (...) By loves,
his plural loves, she means all the fruits of his love, viz. Righteousness,
Holiness, Joy, Peace, Assurance, etc.
sweetness of Christ's loves; his loves, says she, is better then wine. (Though
wine is an excellent creature, a useful creature, a comfortable and delightful
creature, a reviving and restorative creature;) and this draws out her heart,
and makes her insatiable in longing, and very earnest in courting not a kiss,
but kisses, not a little, but much of Christ: Her knowledge being experimental,
she is impatient and restless, till she was drawn into the nearest and highest
communion and fellowship with Christ. So in Verse 13. A bundle of myrrh is my
wel-beloved Psalm. 45. 8. Prove. 7. 17. So Plin. l. 12. c. 15, 16, etc.
unto me; he shall lie all night betwixt my breasts. Myrrh is mavelous sweet
and savory, so is my wel-beloved unto me, says the Spouse, I have found Jesus
Christ to be mavelous sweet, and savory to my soul. Myrrh is bitter Every
good man has in him two men. Rom 7. 15, ult Gal. 5. 17.
to the taste, though it be sweet to the sm^ll; so is my wel-beloved unto me,
says the Spouse, I have found him to be bitter and bloody to the old man, to
the ignoble and worser part of man. And I have found him to be sweet and lovely
to the New Man, to the Regenerate Man, to the noble part of man, I have found
him to be a bitter, and a bloody enemy to my sins; and at the same time to be a
sweet and precious friend unto my soul. Myrrh is of a preserving nature, it is
hot and dry in the second degree, as the Naturalists observe; so is my
wel-beloved unto me, says the Spouse, O I have found the Lord Jesus Austin
thanks God that his heart and the temptation did not meet together.
preserving my soul from closing with such and such temptations, and from
falling under the power of such and such corruptions, and from fainting under
such and such afflictions, etc. Considerable to the same purpose is that of
Phil. 1. 9. And this I pray that your love may abound yet more and more in
knowledge, and in all judgeme(...) The Greek word that is here rendr(...)
judgment, (...), Sense. The soul has her senses, as well as the body, and
they must be exercised. Heb* 5. 14.
properly signifies sense; not a corporal, but a spiritual sense and taste, an
inward experimental knowledge of holy and heavenly things. The Apostle well
knew that all notional and speculative knowledge would leave men on this side
Heaven, and therefore he earnestly prays that their knowledge might be
experimental, that being the knowledge that accompanies What is the Scholars
knowledge of the strength, riches, glories, and sweetnesses of far Countries
obrained by Maps and Books, to their knowledge that daily see and enjoy those
things?
salvation, that will give a man at last a possession of salvation. Verily that
knowledge that is only notional, speculative, and general, that is gathered
out of books, discourses, and other outward advantages, is such a knowledge,
that will make men sit down on this side salvation, as it did Judas, Demas, the
Scribes, and Pharisees, etc. Christ will at last shut the door of hope, of
help, of consolation, and salvation upon all those that know much of him
notionally, but nothing feelingly, as you may see in his shutting the door of
happiness against the foolish Virgins, Matthew. 25. and against Surgunt in docti
and rapiu^t coelum, and Nos cum doctrinis detrudimur in Geheunam. Aus.
those forward Professors, Preachers, and workers of Miracles, Mat. 7. who had
much speculative knowledge, but no experimental knowledge, who had much outward
general knowledge of Christ; but no spiritual, inward acquaintance with Christ.
A man that has that experimental knowledge that accompanies salvation, will
from his experience tell you, That sin is the Romans 7.
greatest evil in the world, for he has found it so; That Christ is the one
Psalm. 27. 4.
thing necessary, for he has found him so; That the favor of God is Psalm.
63. 3.
better then life, for he has found it Psalm. 32. 1, 2.
so; That pardoning mercy only makes a man happy, for he has found it so; a
That wounded spirit is such Prove. 18. 14.
a burden that none can bear, for he Psalm. 51. 17.
has found it so; That an humble and a broken heart is an acceptable sacrifice
to God, for he has found it so; That the Promises are precious pearls, for 2
Pet. 1. 4.
he has found them so; That the smiles of God will make up the want Psalm. 4.
6, 7.
of any outward mercy, for he has found it so; that communion with Psalm. 48.
10.
God can only make a Heaven in a Believers heart, for he has found it so;
John 16.
That if the Spirit be pleased and obeyed, he will be a comforter to the soul,
for he has found it so: But if his motions and laws be slighted, and
neglected, Lam. 1. 16. Isa. 63. 10. 11.
he will stand far off from the soul, he will vex and gall the soul. Well
souls remember this, That knowledge that is not experimental will never turn to
your account; it will only increase your guilt, and torment, as it did the
Scribes and Pharisees. What advantage had the men of the old world, by their
knowing that there was an Arc, or by their clambering about the Arc, when
they were shut out and drowned in the flood. What does it profit a man to see
heaps of Jewels, and Pearls, and mountains of Gold and Silver, when he is
monylesse and pennilesse? It is rather a torment then a comfort to know that
there is a pardon for other malefactors, but none for me; that there is bread
for such and such hungry souls, but none for me; that there is water and wine
to cheer, comfort, and refresh such and such, but not a sip a drop for me; my
bottle is empty, and I may die for thirst, whilst others are a drinking at the
fountain head: That there is houses and clothes to shelter such and such from
colds, storms, and tempests, whilst I lie naked with Lazarus at Dives door
exposed to the miseries of all weathers. This kind of knowledge does rather
torment men then comfort them, it does but add fuel, to the fire, and make
their hell the hotter* the knowledge that Devils and Apostates have of God,
Christ, and the Scriptures, etc. being only notional, is so far from being a
comfort to them, that it is their greatest torment, James 2. 19. (...),
signifies, so roars the Sea, and to tremble and shake horribly.
it is a worm that is eternally gnawing them, it makes them ten thousand times
more miserable then otherwise they would be: They are still a crying out, O
that our light, our light were put out; O that our knowledge, our knowledge
were extinguished. O that we might but change rooms, change places with the
Heathens, with the Barbarians that never knew what we have known. O how happy
would damned Devils and Apostates judge themselves in hell, if they should
escape with those dreadful stripes that shall be eternally laid upon the backs
of fools. Remember Reader, that a little heart knowledge, a little experimental
knowledge, is of greater efficacy and worth then the highest notions of the
most acutest wits. He does well that discourses of Christ; but he does
infinitely better, that by experimental knowledge feeds, and lives on Christ.
It was not Adams seeing ^ut his tasting of forbidden fruit that made him
miserable; and it is not your seeing Psalm. 34. 8.
of Christ, but your experimental tasting of Christ that will make you truly
happy. As no knowledge will save you but what is experimental, so let no
knowledge satisfy you but what is experimental.

Fourthly, that Knowledge that accompanies salvation is a
heart-affecting-knowledge; it affects the heart with Christ and all spiritual
things. O it does wonderfully 1 John 4. 7, 8.
indear Christ and the things of Christ to the soul, Can. 2. 5. Stay me with
flaggons, and comfort me with apples for I am sick of love. O says the Spouse,
my heart is taken with Christ, it is raised and ravished with his love, my
soul is burning, my soul is beating toward Christ; O none but Christ, none
but Christ. I cannot live in my self, I Plusquam mea, plusquam meos, plusquam
me, Ber.
cannot live in my Duties, I cannot live in external Privileges, I cannot
live in outward Mercies, I cannot live in common Providence; I Col. 3. 3, 4.
Ignatius cried out, amor meus crucifixus, my love, my love is crucified, etc.
can live only in Christ, who is my Life, my Love, my Joy, my Crown, my all in
all. O the hearing of Christ affects me, the seeing of Christ affects me, the
taste of Christ affects me, the glimmerings of Christ affects me; the more I
come to know him in his Natures, in his Names, in his Offices, in his
discoveries, in his appearances, in his beauties, the more I find my heart and
affections to prize Christ, to Psalm 73. 23, 25, 26.
run after Christ, to be affected with Christ, and to be wonderfully indeared
to Christ, Cant. 5. 10. He is white and ruddy the chiefest of ten thousand: The
knowledge that she had of Christ did so affect and indear her heart to Christ
that she cannot but make use of all her Rhetoric to set forth Christ in the
most lovely and lively colors. Gal. 6. 14. God forbid that I should glory in
any thing, save in Christ Jesus. O God forbid that my heart should be affected
or taken with any thing in comparison of Christ: The more I know him, the more
I like him; the more I know him, the more I love him; the more I know him, the
more I desire him; the more I know him, the more my heart is knit unto him His
Beauty is taking, his Love is ravishing, his Goodness is drawing, his
Manifestations are enticing, and his Person is inamoring. His lovely Looks
pleases me, his pleasant Voice delights me, his precious Spirit comforts me,
his holy Word rules me; and these things make Christ to be a Heaven unto me. O
but now, all that notionall knowledge, that speculative knowledge, that leaves
a man on this side salvation; never affects the heart, it never draws it, it
never indears the heart to Christ, or to the precious things of Christ. Hence
it is, that such men under all their notions, under all their light and
knowledge, have no affection to Christ, no delight in Christ, no workings of
heart after Christ. Well Reader, remember this, if thy knowledge does not now
affect thy heart, it will at last with a witness afflict thy heart; if it does
not now indear Christ to thee, it will at last the more provoke Christ against
thee; if it does not make all the things of Christ to be very precious in thy
eyes, it will at last make thee the more vile in Christ's eyes. A little
knowledge that divinely affects the heart, is infinitely better then a world of
that swimming knowledge that swims in the head, but never sinks down into the
heart, to the bettering to the warming, and to the affecting of it. Therefore
strive not so much to know, as to have thy heart affected with what thou
know. For heart-affecting knowledge is the only knowledge that accompanies
salvation, that will possess thee of salvation.

Fifthly, That Knowledge that accompanies 2 Cor. 5. 16. Divine knowledge made
the Apostle easily overlook all the world as a man does easily overlook other
things, that looks to find a Jewel, a Peal of price, etc.
Salvation, is a world delpising, a world crucifying, and a world contemning
knowledge; it makes a man have low, poor, mean thoughts of the world; it makes
a man slight it, and trample upon it, as a thing of no value. That Divine light
that accompanies salvation, makes a man to look upon the world, as mixed, as
mutable, as momentary; it makes a man look upon the world, as a lier, as a
deceiver, as a flat^erer, as a murderer, and as a witch that has bewitched the
souls of thousands to their eternal overthrow, by her golden offers and
proffers. Divine knowledge put Paul upon trampling upon all the bravery and
glory of the world. Phil. 3. 4, to 9. I shall only transcribe the seventh and
eighth verses, and leave you to turn to the rest. But what things were gain to
me, those I counted loss for Christ. Yea doubtless, and I count all things but
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus, my Lord: For whom I
have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, ((...) (...)
Dicuntur quasi, (...) micae quae canibus projiciuntur.
dogs dung, or dogs meat, course and contemptible) that I may win Christ.
Divine knowledge raises his heart so high above the World, that he looks upon
it with an eye of scorn and disdain, and makes him count it as an excrement,
yea, as the very worst of excrements, as dogs dung, as dogs meat. Of the like
import is that of Heb. 10. 34. For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and
took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves, that ye have
in Heaven a better, and an enduring substance. Divine knowledge will make a man
rejoice, when his enemies makes a bonfire of his goods. This man has bills of
exchange under Gods own hand, to receive a pound for every penny, a million for
every mite, that he looses for him: And Matthew. 19, 27, to ult.
this makes him to rejoice, and to trample upon all the glory of this world, as
one did upon the Philosophers Crown. It was heavenly knowledge that made Moses
to disdain and Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26. Greek, Grown a great one.
scorn, the pomp and pleasures, the bravery and glory, the riches and
advantages of Egypt and Ethiopia too, as some Writers observe. So when a beam
of divine light had shined upon Zacheus. O how does it work him to Luke 19. 2,
to 10.
part with the world, to cast off the world, to slight it and trample upon it,
as a thing of naught. And Zacheus Many Turks and Heathens will rise in
judgment against those Professors that act not as Zacheus did.
stood, and said unto the Lord, Behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the
poor; and if I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I restore
him fourfold. And Jesus said unto him, This day is Salvation come to this
house, for so much as he also is the son of Abraham. Before the Candle of the
Lord was set up in Zacheus soul, he dearly loved the world, he highly prized
the world, he eagerly pursued after the world; he would have it right or wrong,
his heart was set upon it, he was resolved to gather riches, though it was out
of others ruins. I, but when once he was divinely enlightened, he throws off
the world, he easily parts with it, he sets very light by it he looks with an
eye of disdain upon it: His knowledge lifts him up above the smiles of the
world, and above the frowns of the world; the world is no longer a snare, a
bait, a temptation to him; he knows that it is more to be a son of Abraham
(that is, to be taken into covenant with Abraham, to Rom 4. 12, 16. and 9 1.
tread in the steps of Abraham's faith, as children tread in the steps of their
fathers, and to lie and rest in the bosom of Abraham, as sons do in their
fathers bosoms,) then to be rich, great, and honorable in the world. And this
made him shake hands with the world, Isa. 30. 22. Hos. 14. 8.
and say to it, as he to his Idols, Get you hence, for what have I more to do
with you. Verily, that light, that knowledge, will never lead thee to Heaven,
it will never possess thee of salvation, that 1 John 2. 15. Jam. 4. 4.
leaves thee under the power of the world, that leaves thee in league and
friendship with the world: If thy knowledge does not put the world under thy
feet, it will never put a crown of glory upon thy head. The Church has the
Moon under her feet ( Revel. 12. 1.) that is, clothed with the Sun, and that
has a Crown upon her Head.

Ah knowing Souls, knowing Souls! do not deceive your selves; verily, if you
are clothed with the comeliness and righteousness of the Sun, which is Jesus
Christ, and have a crown of victory and glory upon your heads? You will have
the Moon under your feet, you will tread and trample upon the trash of this
world; all the riches, glories, and braveries of this world, will be under your
feet, in respect of your non-subjection to it, and your holy contempt of it. If
thy knowledge does not enable thee to set thy feet upon those things that most
set their hearts? thou art undone for ever, thy knowledge will be so far from
lifting thee up to Heaven, that it will cast thee the lower into Hell.
Therefore let no knowledge satisfy thee, but that which lifts thee above the
world, but that which weans thee from the world, but that which makes the world
a footstool: This knowledge, this light will at last lead thee into
Everlasting Light.

Sixthly, That Knowledge that accompanies salvation, is, Soul-abasing,
soul-humbling knowledge, it makes a man very, very little, and low in his own
eyes, as you may see in the most knowing Apostle, Ephesians. 3. 8. Unto me, (...),
a Comparative made of a Superlative.
who am less then the least of all Saints, is this grace given, that I should
preach among the Gentiles, the unsearchable riches of Christ. Paul's great light
makes him very little; though he was the greatest Apostle, yet he looks upon
himself, a^ less then the least of all Saints. Of all the Evangelists, John was
most sharpsighted, John in the Hebrew signifies The grace of God. This
Barbarian, said the Philosopher, has comprised more in three lines, then we
have done in all our volumnious discourses. Matthew. 11. 9, 10, 11. Christ
wonderfully extols John: Says Christ, he is a Prophet, yea, and more then a
Prophet, yea, a greater is not born of women: But the greatest wonder of all
is, that John is so low in his own eyes.
most Eagle-eyed, he had the clearest sight of Christ, he lay most in the bosom
of Christ, he knew most of the mind of Christ, he had the fullest
manifestations, and revelations of Christ; and yet, O how little, how low is
John in his own eyes. John 1. 26, 27. John answered them, saying, I baptize
with water, but there stands one among you, whom ye know not: He it is, who
coming after me, is preferred before me, whose shoes latchet I am not worthy
to unloose. In this phrase, John alludes to the custom of the Hebrews, those
among them which were more noble then others, had Boys who carried their
shoes, and untied them when they laid them by. O, says John, I am a poor
weak, worthless Creature, I am not worthy to be admitted to the meanest, to the
lowest service under Christ, I am not worthy to carry his shoes, to unloose
his shoes. After Peter had been in the Mount, and instructed and enlightened by
Christ, he cries out, Depart from me, O Lord, for I am a sinful man. ((...).) A
man, a sinner, a very mixture, and compound of dirt and sin, of vileness, and
baseness; as you may see in comparing Matthew. 17. 1, 2, 3, 4. with Luke 5. 8.
Abraham under Genesis 18. 27.
all his light and knowledge, acknowledges himself to be but dust and ashes.
Jacob under all his knowledge, Genesis 32. 10.
acknowledges himself to be less then the least of all mercies. David under
Psalm. 22. 2. and 73 22.
all his knowledge, acknowledges him self to be a worm, and no man; he
acknowledges himself to be foolish and ignorant, and as a beast before the
Lord. Job under all his knowledge, Job 42, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
acknowledges that he has much reason to abhor himself in dust and ashes. Agur
was very good, and his knowledge very great, and yet under all his knowledge. O
how does he villifie, yea, nullify himself. Surely (says he) I am more
brutish then any man, and Prove. 30. 1, 2, 3, 4.
have not the understanding of a man. I neither learned wisdom, nor have the
knowledge of the holy. The Evangelical Prophet Isaiah under all his knowledge
Isa. 6. 1. to 8, etc.
and visions, which were very great and glorious, acknowledges himself to be a
man of unclean lips, and to dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips.
Divine and heavenly knowledge brings a man The light that the Moon borrows from
the Sun, discovers her own spots, and makes them the more conspicuous. Isa 6.
near to God, it gives a man the clearest, and the fullest fight of God, and
the nearer any man comes to God, and the clearer visions he has of God, the
more low and humble will that man lie before God. None so humble, as they that
have nearest communion with God. The Angels that are near unto him, cover their
faces with their wings, in token of humility. Divine knowledge makes a man look
inwards, it anatomizes a man to himself; it is a glass that shows a man the
spots of his own soul; and this makes him little and low in his own eyes. In
the beams of this heavenly When a beam of Divine light had shined upon
Augustine, he cried out, Teneo in memoria, scribo in charta, sed non habeo i^
vita. Gal. 6 3. Many in these days are like the Chinese, who use to say, That
they only did see with two eyes, all others but with one.
light, a Christian comes to see his own pride, ignorance, impatience,
unworthiness, conceitedness, worthlesness, frowardness, and nothingness. That
knowledge that swells thee, will undo thee; that knowledge that puffs thee,
will sink thee; that knowledge that makes thee delightful in thy own eyes, will
make thee despicable in God and good men's eyes. 1 Cor. 8. 1, 2. Knowledge
puffs up, (that is, Notional knowledge, Speculative knowledge, Knowledge that
ripens a man for destruction, that will leave him short of salvation; this
knowledge puffs and swells a man, and makes him think himself something, when
he is nothing.) And if any man thinks that he knows any thing, he knows
nothing yet as he ought to know, says the Apostle. Will not that Philosopher
rise in judgment against many of our high-flown Professors (who swell, who
look big, and talk big, under their notional knowledge) who said under all his
knowledge (which was very great) ( Hoc tantum scio, quod nihil scio.) This
only do I know, that I know nothing. Well, if that knowledge thou have, be
that knowledge that accompanies salvation, it is a soul humbling, and a soul
abasing knowledge; if it be otherwise, then will thy knowledge make thee both
a Prisoner and a Slave to the Devil at once.

Seventhly, That Knowledge that accompanies salvation is an appropriating
knowledge; a knowledge that appropriates and applies spiritual, and heavenly
benefits to a man's own particular soul. As you may see in Job, my Job 19: 25.
and 16. 19.
Redeemer lives, and my witness is in Heaven, and my record is on high: So
David, the Lord is my portion, in Psalm. Psalm. 16. 5.
18. 2. he uses this word of propriety eight times together, The Lord is my
rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer, my God, my strength, in whom I will
trust, my buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my high Tower. So the
Spouse, my Beloved is mine, and I am Cant. 2. 16. John 20. 28.
his. So Thomas, My Lord and my God. So Paul, I am crucified with Christ,
nevertheless, This is the pith and power of heavenly knowledge to appropriate
Christ to a man's self.
I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in
the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who has loved me and gave
himself for me. Applicatory knowledge, is the sweetest knowledge, it revives
the heart, it chears the spirits, it rejoices the soul, it makes a man go
singing to duties, and go singing to his grave, and singing to Heaven. Whereas
others Those that have a blemish in their eye think the Sky to be ever cloudy,
and nothing is more common to weak spirits then to be criticizing, and
contending, etc.
(though gracious) that want this applicatory knowledge, have their hearts full
of fears, and their lives full of sorrows, and so go sighing and mourning to
Heaven. But lest any precious soul should turn this Truth into a sword to cut
and wound himself, let me desire him to remember that every Believer that has
such knowledge that accompanies salvation, has not It is commonly said of
knowledge ( non habet inimicum praeter ignorantem) that it has not a greater
enemy then ignorance, etc.
this applicatory knowledge that makes so much for the souls consolation, and
that does accompany some men's salvation (I say not all men's salvation.) if thou
find thy knowledge to be such a knowledge as is before described in the six
former particulars, though thou have not attained to this applicatory
knowledge, yet have thou attained to that knowledge that accompanies salvation,
and that will (my soul for thine) give thee a possession of salvation. This
applicatory knowledge that accompanies salvation, is only to be found in such
eminent Saints that are high in their communion with God, and that have
attained some considerable assurance of their interest in God. Many men's
salvation is accompanied with an applicatory knowledge, but all men's salvation
is not accompanied with an applicatory knowledge of a man's particular interest
in Christ, and those blessed favors and benefits that comes by him: thy Soul
may be safe, and thy salvation may be sure, though thou have not attained
unto this appropriating knowledge; but thy life cannot A man does not attain to
health by reading Galen or Hippocrates his Aphorisms, but by the practical
application of them (...) move his diseases. You know how to apply it.
be comfortable without this appropriating knowledge. Therefore if thou have it
not, labor for it as for life, it is a pearl of price, and if thou find it,
it will make thy soul amends for all thy digging, seeking, working, sweating,
weeping, etc.

Eighthly, and lastly, that Knowledge that accompanies salvation, is accompanied
and attended with these things.

First; that Knowledge that accompanies salvation is attended with holy
endeavors, and with heavenly desires, thirstings, and pantings after a further
knowledge of God, after clearer visions of God, Prove. 15. 14. The heart of him
that has understanding seeks (...)
knowledge, but the mouth of fools feeds on foolishness. The Hebrew word
that is here rendered seeks (^ebakkesh) is in pihil, and signif^es an earnest
and diligent seeking; to seek as an hungry man seeks for meat, or as a covetous
man for gold; the more he has, the more he desires; or as a condemned man
seeks for his pardon, or as the diseased man seeks for his cure. The word in
the Text is from a root ( (...)ash) that signifies (...)
to seek studiously, laboriously, industriously, to seek by s^ing, praying,
enquiring, and walking up and down, that we may find what we seek. So in (...)
that Prove. 18. 15. The heart of the prudent gets knowledge, and the ear of
Seeks as men do for hid treasure, etc.
the wise seeks knowledge. A man that divinely knows, will set his heart and
his ear, his inward and outward man, to know more and more. Divine knowledge is
mavelous sweet, pleasing, comforting, satisfying, refreshing* strengthening,
and supporting; and souls that have found the sweetness and usefulness of it,
cannot but look and long, breath and pant after more and more of it. The
newborn 1 Pet. 2. 2, 3.
Babe does not more naturally, and more earnestly long for the breasts, then a
soul that has tasted that the Lord is gracious, does long for further, and
further tastes of God. David under all Psalm. 119. 18, 19.
his knowledge, cries out, I am a stranger in the Land, hide not thy
Commandments from me. Open mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of
thy Law. Job under all his knowledge, Job 34. 32.
which was very great, cries out, That which I see not, teach thou me: if I
have done iniquity, I will do no more.

A second thing that attends and accompanies that knowledge that accompanies
salvation, is holy endeavors, The way to get more knowledge, is to communicate
that we have, according to that, Habenti dabitur.
to edify others, to instruct others, to enlighten, and inform others in the
knowledge of spiritual and heavenly things. Heavenly light cannot be hid under
a bushel; you may as easily hinder the Sun from shining, as you may hinder a
gracious soul from diffusing, and spreading abroad that knowledge and light
that God has given him. Divine light in the soul is like a light in a bright
Lanthorn, that shines forth every way, or like a light in a room, or on a
Beacon that gives light to others. A Christian that divinely knows, is like the
Lamp in the story, that was always burning and shining, and never went out. So
in Genesis 18. 17, Thus did Philip of Bethsaida. John 1. 45. Thus did the woman of
Samaria, John 4. 28, 29. Thus did the Spouse, Cant. 5. 10. to ult. Thus did
that Scraphical Preacher St. Paul, Acts 26. 29.
19. And the Lord said, shall I hide from Abraham, that which I do; for I know
him, that he will command his children, and his household after him, and they
shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment, that the Lord may
bring upon Abraham, that which he has spoken of him. He that communicates his
knowledge to others, shall be both of Gods court and council; he shall lie in
the bosom of God; he shall know the secrets of God. Prove. 15. 7. The lips of
the wise disperse knowledge; but the heart of the foolish does not so. The
Hebrew word that is here rendered disperse, is a metaphor taken from Seedsmens
scattering abroad of their seed in the furrows of the field. Heavenly Augustine
accounted nothing his own, that he did not communicate to others.
knowledge is very spreading and diffusive, it is like the Sun; the Sun casts
his beams upward and downward, upon good and upon bad, so divine light in a
gracious soul will break forth, for the advantage and profit of friends, and
enemies of those that be in a state of nature, and of those that be in a state
of grace. Acts 4. 18, 19, 20. And they called them, and Opposition is the black
angel that dogs the Gospel at the heels. Divine knowledge is like new wine, it
must have vent, it is heavenly fire that will break forth. Jer. 5. 14. and 20.
9.
commanded them not to speak at all, nor teach in the Name in Jesus. But Peter
and John answered, and said unto them, Whether it be right in the sight of God,
to hearken unto you, more then unto God, judge ye* For we cannot but speak the
things, that we have seen and heard. The Be does store her Hive out of all
sorts of flowers for the common benefit; so a heavenly Christian sucks
sweetness out of every mercy, and every duty; out of every providence, and out
of every ordinance; out of every promise, and out of every privilege, that he
may give out the more sweetness to others. L^^mod (...) a^^^ed, we therefore
learn, that we may touch, is a Proverb among the Rabbis. And I do therefore
lay in, and lay up (says the Socrates, etc.
Heathen) that I may draw forth a gain, and lay out for the good of many. This
Heathen will rise in judgment against those that monopolize knowledge to
themselves, that imprison their light within their own breasts, least others
should outshine and darken them. Synesius speaks of some, who having Some such
there be in these days.
a treasure of rare-abilities in themselves, would as soon part with their
hearts, as with their conceptions. Verily such men are far off from that
knowledge that accompanies salvation; 2 Cor. 6. 10. Gal 4. 19.
for that knowledge will make a man willing to spend, and be spent for the
edification, consolation, and salvation of others. Prove. 10. 21. The lips of
the righteous feed many.

A third thing that attends and accompanies that knowledge that accompanies
salvation, is holy zeal* courage, Prove. 28. 1.
and resolution for God. Divine knowledge makes a man as bold as a Lion. Dan.
11. 32. And such as do wickedly against the Covenant shall be corrupt by
flatteries; but the people that do know their God shall be strong, and do
exploits. So Prove. 24. 5. A wise man is strong, yea, and a man of knowledge
increases (...)
strength, or, he strengthens might, in strength (...)
as it is in the Hebrew. Divine light makes a man full of mettle for God, it
makes the soul divinely fearless, and divinely careless. Josh. 24. 15. Choose
you whom you will serve, I and my household will serve the Lord. Come what will
on it, we will never change our Master, nor quit his service. Those The
heavenly light and knowledge that the Prophets and Apostles had, made them very
zealous and courageous for their God, in the face of all difficulties and
deaths, as might be shown in very many Scriptures.
beams of light that shined in upon Chrysostom, did so heat and warm his
heart, that he stoutly tells Eudoxia the Empress, that for her covetousness she
would be called a second Jezabel; whereupon she sent him a threatening Message:
To which, he returned this Answer, go tell her, ( Nil nisi peccatum timeo,) I
fear nothing but sin. A Prophetical man in the Ecclesiastical History, went to
the Pillars a little before an Earthquake, and bad them stand fast, for they
should shortly be shaken. Ah Christians, there is an Earthquake a coming, and
therefore as you would stand fast, as you would not have any Earthquakes to
make your hearts quake, get this zeal and courage that attends Divine
knowledge, and then you shall in the midst of all Earthquakes Psalm. 125. 1, 2.
be as Mount Zion that cannot be removed. They that write the story of the
Travels of the Apostles, report, That Simon Zelotes Preached here in England.
Ah England, England, Epiphanius says that Eliah sucked fire our of his Mothers
Breasts, there are very few such Eliahs in these days.
if ever thou need some Zelotes, it is now. O how secure, how dull, how
drowsy, how sleepy in the midst of dangers art thou? For this and other of thy
abominations, I desire my soul may weep in secret.

The fourth and last thing that attends Knowledge and Faith are Twins, they
live and lodge, and act together, they are two lovers that may be distinguished
one from another, but they cannot be separated one from another.
or accompanies that knowledge that accompanies salvation, is, Faith and
confidence in God. Psalm. 9. 10. They that know thy Name, will put their trust
in thee; for thou, Lord, have not forsaken them that seek thee. 2 Timothy 1. 12.
For the which cause I also suffer these things, nevertheless, I am not ashamed;
for I know whom I have believed; and I am persuaded, that he is able to keep
that which I have committed unto him against that day. I shall not enlarge upon
this Branch, because I shall speak at large concerning Faith, in the next
particular.

And thus I have showed you from the Scriptures, what that Knowledge is that
accompanies Salvation. Now the second thing I am to show you, is, What that
Faith is that accompanies Salvation, I have formerly showed you that Faith does
accompany salvation; but now I shall show you what Faith that is, that does
accompany Salvation, and that I shall do by Divine assistance thus.

First, That Faith that accompanies Fides est interdum id quod credimus,
interdum id quo credimus. Aug.
Salvation, that comprehends Salvation, that will possess a man of Salvation,
is know first by the objects about which it is exercised, and secondly, by the
properties of it. First, By the objects about which it is exercised. Now the
objects of Faith are these.

First, The person of Christ is the Christ as Redeemer, is the mediate object
of Faith, and God is the ultimate; for we believe in God through Christ. Rom 6.
11. 1 Pet. 1. 21. 2 Cor. 3. 4.
object of Faith, it is Christ in the Promises that Faith deals with. The
Promise is but the Shell, Christ is the Kernel; the Promise is but the Casket,
Christ is the Jewel in it; the Promise is but the field, Christ is the Treasure
that is hid in that field; the promise is a Ring of Gold, and Christ is the
Pearl in that Ring; and upon this sparkling, shining Pearl, Faith delights
Faiths M^rto is, Nolo benedictionem tuam, sed te.
most to look. Cant. 3. 4. It was but a little that I passed from them, but I
found him whom my soul loves. I held him, and I would not let him go, until I
had brought him into my Mothers house, and into the chamber of her that
conceived me. So in Cant. 7. 5. The King is held Not but that the Father is
also the object of Believers faith. John 14. 1. Isa. 63. 15, 16. with many
other Scriptures, but Christ is the object held forth by the Father, for our
faith to close with, in respect of our justification and salvation. God is (
objectum ultimum fidei) the ultimate or highest object of Faith; and Christ (
objectum mediaeum) the mediate object thereof.
in the Galleries. Faith has two hands, and with both she lays earnest and
fast hold on King Jesus. Christ's beauty and glory is very taking, and drawing,
Faith cannot see it, but it will lay hold on it. Christ is the principal object
about which Faith is exercised, for the obtaining of Righteousness, and
Everlasting Happiness. Acts 16. 30, 31. And the Jailor said, Sirs, what must I
do to be saved? And they said, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall
be saved. Christ is in a world of Scriptures held forth to be the object about
which Faith is most conversant; and the more Faith is exercised upon the person
of Christ, the more it buds and blossoms like Aarons Rod. Faith looks upon him,
as the express Image and Character of his Father: Faith beholds him as the
chiefest of ten thousand: Faith sees him to be the most glorious object in all
the World.

The second object that Faith is exercised about, is the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ. Phil. 3. 9. I desire to be found in Christ, not having my own
Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of
Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. Paul would not be found in
a legal righteousness, for he knew all his legal righteousness was but as
filthy rags, Isa. 64. 6.
all his legal righteousness sowed together, would but make up a coat of
patches, a beggars coat, that is good for nothing, but to be cast away;
therefore he desired to be found in the righteousness of Christ by Faith; he
knew that Christ's righteousness was a pure righteousness, a spotless
righteteousness, a matchless righteousness, a complete righteousness, a perfect
Col. 2. 10.
righteousness, an absolute righteousness, a glorious righteousness. Faith
loves to fix her eye upon that rich and royal Robe, that blameless and spotless
Cant. 4. 7. Revel. 145. Ephesians. 5. 27.
righteousness of Christ, wherewith the soul stands gloriously clothed before
God, as being all fair, as being without spot or wrinkle in divine account. O
it is the actings of Faith upon this blessed object, this glorious
righteousness of Christ, that makes a man familiar and bold with God, that
makes a man active, and resolute for God, that strengthens a man against
temptations, that supports a man under afflictions, that makes a man long for
the day of his dissolution, that makes him prefer his Coffin above a Princes
Crown, the day of his death above the day of his birth, that makes him triumph
over Sin and Satan, Hell and Wrath. Adams righteousness Romans 3. 21. and 10. 3.
was but the righteousness of a Creature, but the righteousness about which
Faith is exercised, is the righteousness 2 Cor. 5. 21.
of a God. Adams righteousness was The righteousness of Angels, is but the
righteousness of Creatures, but the righteousness that the Saints are clothed
with, is the very righteousness of God; and in this respect the meanest Saint
is more excellent and glorious, then the most glorious Angel.
a mutable righteousness, a righteousness that might be sinned away; but the
righteousness that a Believers Faith is exercised about, is an Everlasting
Righteousness, a righteousness that cannot be sinned away. Prove. 8. 18. vide
Dan. 9. 24. Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy
City, to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in Everlasting Righteousness, and to
seal up the vision and prophecy, and to anoint the most holy. Psalm. 119. 142.
Thy Righteousness is an Everlasting Righteousness; and thy Law is the Truth.
The righteousness of Adam was a righteousness subject to shaking, and we know
that Satan did shake all his righteousness about his ears, as I may say; O but
that glorious Righteousness about which Faith is conversant, is an unshaken
Righteousness, a Righteousness that cannot be shaken. Psalm. 36. 6. Thy
righteousness is like the great mountains, or rather as it is in the Hebrew,
(...)
Thy righteousness is like the mountains of God. What more stable then a
mountain, The Hebrew uses to note excellent things, by adding the name of God;
as Cedars of God, Psalm. 80. 11. Rivers of God, Psalm. 65. 10. Wrastlings of God,
Gen 30. 5. Harps of God, Revel. 15. 2.
and what Mountain so stable as the Mountain of God. The Mountains cannot be
shaken, no more can that glorious Righteousness of Christ about which a
Believers faith is exercised. Adams righteousness was a low righteousness, a
righteousness within his own reach, and a righteousness within Satan's reach; it
was not so high, but Adam could lay his hand upon it, as I may say; it was not
so high but Satan could reach to the top of it, yea, to the over-topping of it,
as we have all found by woeful experience. O but that righteousness that Faith
is conversant about, is a righteousness of such a height, as that neither
Satan, nor the world can reach to it. Psalm. 71. 15, 16, 19: My mouth shall show
forth thy righteousness, and thy salvation all the day: For I know not the
numbers thereof. I will go in the strength of the Lord God, I will make mention
of thy righteousness, even of thine only. Thy righteousness also, O God, is
very high, who has done great things. O God, who is like unto thee. This
glorious Righteousness of Christ about which Faith is busied, is called The
Righteousness of Faith, Romans 3 28.
because Faith apprehends it, and applies it, and feeds upon it, and delights
in it. Romans 4. 13. For the promise that he should be the Heir of the World, was
not to Abraham, or to his Seed through the Law, but through the Righteousness of
Faith. Chap. 9. 30. What shall we say then? That the Gentiles which followed
not after righteousness, have attained to righteousness, even the righteousness
which is of faith. The Righteousness of Romans 10. 6. But the righteousness which
is of Faith. i. e. Which is appr^hended by Faith, etc.
Christ about which Faith is employed, is called The Righteousness of Faith,
because Faith puts on this Righteousness upon the Soul. Faith wraps the soul up
in this Righteousness of Christ, and so justifies it before God
instrumentally. The actings of Faith Mark, Faith is only the instrument, it
cannot be the substance of that righteousness, as it were, whereby we are
justified and saved. First, Because it is imperfect Secondly, The acts of Faith
are transient. Thirdly, Then should man have something within him whereof to
boast. Fourthly, faith is a part of inherent holiness. Fifthly, Then some men
should be justified more, and some less, according to the different measures of
Faith in them.
on this glorious Righteousness, does most strengthen the soul. Isai. 45. 24.
Surely shall one say, In the Lord have I righteousness and strength. The
actings of Faith on this blessed Righteousness, does most glad and rejoice the
soul. Isa. 61. 10. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful
in my God, for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation, he has
covered me with the robe of righteousness. The actings of Faith upon this
complete Righteousness of Christ, renders souls just and righteous, pure and
holy, in the account of God. Romans 10. 4. For Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness, to every one that believes. Christ fulfils the Law for
Believers, and they by believing do fulfill the Law in him; and so Christ by
doing, and they by believing in him, that does it, do fulfill the Law, and so
are reputed fair and spotless, complete and perfect, before the Throne of God.
Faiths putting this righteousness on the soul, brings down blessings upon the
soul: When Jacob had put on his elder Brothers Genesis 27. 15.
garment, he carried the blessing away. The actings of Faith upon this Pearless
Righteousness of Christ, brings down the blessing of Peace, and the Rom 5. 1. 1
Pet. 1. 8. Acts 10. 43.
blessing of Joy, and the blessing of Remission of sins; and in a word, all
other blessings that contributes to the making us blessed here, and happy
hereafter, etc.

The third object that Faith is exercised about, is the precious promises, 2
Pet. 1. 4. Mark, the whole Word of God is the object of Faith, but the
promises, more especially are the prime object about which Fa^^h, is most
conversant.
which are a Christians Magna Charta. As every precious stone has an ^gregious
virtue in it, so has every promise: The promises are a precious Book, every
Leaf drops Myrrh and Mercy; and upon these precious promises, precious Faith
looks and lives. From these Breasts Faith sucks comfort and sweetness. Psalm.
119. 49, 50. Remember thy word (that is, thy promise) unto thy servant; upon
which, thou have caused me to hope. This is my comfort in my affliction, for
thy word has quickened me. So in Psalm 27. 13. I had fainted, unless I had
believed, to see the goodness of the Lord, in the Land of the living. Heb. 11.
13. These all died in faith (or according to faith) not having received the
promises, but having seen them a far off, and were persuaded of them, and
embraced them (or as the Greek has it, (...), i. e. Persevering in Faith.
(...), some think that it is an allusion to the custom of saluting one another,
by embracing or laying hold of each other.
saluted them by Faith, they kissed the promises, and kissed Christ in the
promises) and confessed that they were strangers, and pilgrims on the Earth. It
would be an endless thing to show you, how the faith of the Patriarks,
Prophets, Apostles, and other Saints, have been acted and exercised upon
promises of Sanctification, upon promises of Justification, upon promises of
Salvation, upon promises of Glorification, upon promises of Protection, upon
promises for Direction, upon promises for Supportation, etc. Look as the Lamp
lives upon the Oil, and the Child upon the Breasts, so does Faith upon the
promises. For the further advantage and comfort of your souls* in eyeing the
promises, let me give you these two sweet hints.

First, In your looking upon the promises, mind most, eye most spiritual
promises, absolute promises, viz. Those and suchlike that you see in Jere. 32.
40, 41. Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20.
the Margent. These spiritual and absolute promises are of nearest and Ezekiel.
36. 25, 26, 27. I a 42. 1. Ezekiel 20. 41, 42, 43. Psalm 91. 15. Isa 65. 24. Jere.
33. 3. Isa. 32 15. Ezekiel 34 30, 31. with many others of the like import.
greatest concernment to you; these carry in them most of the heart of Christ,
the love of Christ, the good will of Christ; these are of greatest use, to
satisfy you, and to settle you; when you are wavering, to support you; when
you are falling, to reduce you; when you are wandering, to comfort you; when
you are fainting, to counsel you; when you are staggering, etc. Therefore make
these your choicest, and your chiefest companions, especially when it is night
within your souls, when you are sensible of much sin, and but a little grace,
of much corruption, but of little consolation, of much deadness, but of little
quickness, of much hardness, but of little tenderness, of many fears, and but a
little Spiritual and absolute promises, are the most precious Mines to enrich
you; in them you will find he greatest Pearls of price.
Faith. The Jews under the Law, had more temporal promises then spiritual, but
we under the Gospel, have far more spiritual promises then temporal; therefore
sit down at this fire, and be warmed; drink of these springs, and be satisfied;
taste of these delicates, and be cheered. Let the eye of Faith be cast upon all
the promises, but fixed upon spiritual promises, upon absolute promises; they
will have the greatest influence upon the heart to holiness, and to prepare it
for Everlasting happiness.

Look not only upon some of the Haman took notice, yea, and would have his
friends take notice of all his greatness, honors, and riches. Esth. 5. 10, 11,
12. And will not you stir up your hearts to see all those riches and pleasures
that be in precious promises.
riches, the Jewels, the Pearls, that be rwapped up in the promises, but
enlarge and expatiate your understandings to an effectual contemplation of all
those riches and treasures that God has laid up in the promises. Cast not the
eye of your Faith only, upon one beam of the Sun, but endeavor to see all the
beams of the Sun: Look not upon one branch of the Tree of Life, but upon every
branch of that Tree; look not upon one bunch of the Grapes of Canaan, but look
upon the whole Land. As understanding Heirs, when they come to read over their
Evidences and Writings, they will see what they have in Houses, what in Goods,
what in Lands, what in Money, what in Jewels, what at home, what abroad. They
will not sit down, and say, Well, we find in our Evidences, that such and such
Land is ours, and look no further; no, no, they will look all over, and take
exact notice of every thing; they will say, We have so much Land, and so much
Money, etc. O beloved, there is much Marrow and Fatness, there is much Honey
and sweetness, much Grace and Glory wrapped up in the promises. O press them,
and oppress them, till you have got forth all the riches, and sweetness that is
in them.

Ah Christians, did you this, God would be more honored, the promises more
prized, your Graces more strengthened, your fears more abated, your hearts more
warmed and engaged, and your lives more regulated, and Satan more easily and
frequently vanquished. And so much for this third object, about which Faith is
exercised.

The fourth object (and last that I shall mention) that Faith is set and fixed
upon, is, That Glory, Blessedness, and 2 Timothy 4. 8. Faith antedates glory.
Life, which God has laid up for them that love him. The things of eternity,
are the greatest things; they are the most excellent things, they are most
excellent in their natures, in their causes, in their operations, in their
effects in their ends; and upon these, Faith looks and lives; Faith Heb. 11. 1.
(...), the Subsistence. i. e. That which gives a substantial being to the
things of eternal life. Faith alters the Tensis, it puts the Future into the
Present. Psalm. 60. 6. Heb. 12. 2.
realizeth things, it makes absent things present; Faith is the substance of
things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen; Faith makes absent glory
present, absent riches present, absent pleasures present, absent favors
present; Faith brings an invisible God, and sets him before the soul, Moses by
Faith saw him that was invisible; Faith brings down the recompense of reward,
and sets it really, though spiritually before the soul; Faith sets Divine favor
before the soul, it sets peace, it sets pardon of sin, it sets the
Righteousness of Christ, it sets the Joy of Heaven, it sets Salvation before
the soul; it makes all these things very near and obvious to the soul. Faith is
the evidence of things not seen. Faith makes invisible things visible, (...),
the Index or clear conviction by disputation.
absent things present, things that are afar off, to be very near unto the
soul. By convincing Demonstrations, by Arguments, and Reasons drawn from the
Word, as the Greek word signifies. 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. For our light affliction,
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding, and eternal
weight of glory; while we look not at the (...), To look with a diligent eye,
as men do at the mark, whereat they shoot.
things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: For the things
which are seen, are temporal, but the things which are not seen, are eternal.
Faith trades in invisible things, in eternal things; its eye is always upwards,
like the Fish called (by Galen) Urano Scopos, that has but one eye, and yet
looks continually up to Heaven. Faith Heb 6. 19. Romans 8. 18. Heb. 10. 34. Acts
7. 55, 56. An adopted Heir to a Crown, cannot but have his heart at Court, his
mind and thoughts will be upon his future glorious condition. He will be still
a creating Idea's and Images of it.
enters within the vail, and fixes her eye upon those glorious things of
eternity, that are so many, that they exceed number; so great, that they exceed
measure; so precious, that they are above all estimation. Says Faith, the
spangled Firmament is but the Footstool of my Fathers house; and if the
Footstool* the outside, be so glorious, O how glorious is his Throne. Verily,
in Heaven there is that life that cannot be expressed, that light that cannot
be comprehended, that joy that cannot be fadomed, that sweetness that cannot be
dissipated, that feast that cannot be consumed; and upon these Pearls of glory,
I look and live, says Faith.

And thus I have showed you the choice and precious objects, about which, that
Faith is exercised that accompanies Salvation. I shall now in the next place
show you the Properties of that Faith that accompanies Salvation, and they are
these that follow.

The first Property of that Faith Quid est igitur fides? Opinior fideliter
hominem, Christi creder^, i. e. Fidelem esse, boc est fideliter Dei mandata
servare, says one.
that accompanies Salvation, is this, It puts forth it self into vital
operations, it makes a man full of life and activity for God; it will make a
man diligent and venturous in the work, and ways of God. Faith is a most
active quality in it self, and so it makes a Christian most active; it is a
doing thing, and it makes the person doing, Faith will not suffer the soul to
be idle; Faith is like the virtuous Woman in the last of the Proverbs, who put
her hand to every work, who would suffer none of her Handmaids to be idle;
Faith puts the soul upon grieving for Zach. 12. 10.
sin, upon combating with sin, upon weeping over sin, upon trembling at the
occasions of sin, upon resisting temptations that leads to sin, upon fighting
it out to the death with sin: Faith puts a man upon walking with The eleventh
of the Hebrews is a full proof of these things. Gal. 2. 20.
God, upon waiting on God, upon working for God, upon wrestling with God, upon
bearing for God, and upon parting with any thing for God: Faith makes Religious
duties to be easy to the soul, to be delightful to the soul, to be profitable
to the soul: Faith makes the soul to be serious and conscientious in doing, to
be careful and faithful in doing, to be delightful and cheerful in doing, to be
diligent and faithful in doing. Jam. 2. 17. to the end. Faith looks to
precepts, as well as to promises. Psalm. 119. 66. Teach me good judgment and
knowledge, for I have believed thy Commandments.
That faith that is not a working faith, is no faith; that faith that is not a
working faith, is a dead faith; that faith that is not a working faith, is a
deluding faith; that faith that is not a working faith, is a worthless faith;
that faith that is not a working faith, will leave a man short of Heaven and
happiness, in the latter day. Faith that accompanies Salvation, is better at
doing, then at thinking, at obeying, then at disputing, at walking, then at
talking. Tit. 3. 8. This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that
thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God, might be careful
to maintain good works. Faith will make a man endeavor to be good, yea, to be
best at (...), the word signifies, to bend their wits, and beat their brains to
maintain good works.
every thing he undertakes: It is not leaves, but fruit; not words, but works
that God expects; and if we cross his expectation, we frustrate our own
Salvation, we further our own condemnation. Faith makes the soul Isa 65 24.
Genesis 4 4. 1 Pet. 3. 11. Cant. 2. 14. Luther prefers the meanest work of a
Country Christian, or poor Maid, above all the victories and triumphs of
Alexander, and of Julius Caesar. Matthew. 27. ult. Isa. 41. 10, 11. Heb. 13 5, 6.
Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27, etc.
much in doing, abundant in working, and that partly by persuading the soul,
that all its works, all its duties, and services, shall be owned and accepted
of God; as in Isa. 56. 7. Even them will I bring to my holy Mountain, and make
them joyful in my House of prayer: Their burnt-offerings, and their sacrifices,
shall be accepted upon mine Altar; for mine House shall be called an House of
prayer for all people. Faith assures the soul, that every prayer, every sigh,
every groan, every tear is accepted: And this makes the soul pray much, and
sign much, and mourn much. Again, Faith spreads the promises of Divine
assistance before the soul; O says Faith, here O soul, is assistance suitable
to the work required: And this makes a man work, as for life; it makes a man
work and sweat, and sweat and work. Again, Faith sets the Recompense, the
Reward, before the soul. O Heb. 11. 25, 26. One good work of a Christian, is
more precious then Heaven and Earth, says Luther.
says Faith, Look here soul, here is a great reward, for a little work; here
is great wages, for weak and imperfect services; here is an infinite reward,
for a finite work. Work, yea, work hard, says Faith, O believing soul, for thy
actions in passing, pass not away; every good work is a grain of Seed for
eternal life. There is a Resurrection Rev. 14. 13.
of works, as well as of persons, and in that day, wicked men shall see, that
it is not a vain thing to serve God; they shall see the most doing souls, to be
the most shining souls, to be most advanced and rewarded. O the sight of this
Crown, of this Recompense, makes souls to abound in the work of the Lord, they
knowing 1 Cor. 15. ult.
that their labor is not in vain in the Lord. Again, Faith draws from Christ's
fullness, it sucks virtue and strength John 1. 16.
from Christ's breasts: Faith looks upon Christ as a Head, and so draws from him;
it looks upon Christ as a Husband, and so draws from him; it looks upon him as
a Fountain, and so draws from him; it looks upon him as a Sea, as an Ocean of
goodness, and Col. 1. 19.
so draws from him; it looks upon him as a Father, and so draws from him; it
looks upon him as a Friend, and so draws from him; and this Divine power and
strength, sets the soul a working hard for God, it makes the soul full of
motion, full of action. In a word, Faith is such a working Grace, as sets all
other graces a working. Faith has an influence upon every Grace, it is like a
silver thread that runs through a chain of Pearl, it puts strength and vivacity
into all other virtues. Love touched by a hand of Faith, flames forth; hope fed
at Faiths table, grows strong, and casts anckor within the vail. Joy, courage,
Acts 5. and 16. Romans 15. 13.
and zeal, being smiled upon by Faith, is made invincible, and unconquerable*
etc. Look what Oil is to the wheels* what weights are to the clock, what wings
are to the bird, what sails are Except it be winter with the soul.
to the ship, that Faith is to all Religious duties and services.

And thus you see, that that Faith that accompanies Salvation, is a working
faith, a lively faith, and not such a dead faith, as most please, and deceive
themselves with, for ever.

The second Property of that Faith that accompanies Salvation, is this, It is
of a growing and increasing nature; it is like the waters of the Sanctuary,
that rise higher and higher, as Ezekiel speaks; it is like a tender Plant that
naturally grows higher and higher; Matthew. 13. 32. The righteous shall flourish
like the Palm tree. Psalm. 92. 12, 13, 14. Now the Palm tree never loses his
leaf, or fruit, says pliny.
it is like a grain of Mustard Seed, which though it be the least of all Seeds,
yet by a Divine power it grows up beyond all humane expectations. Faith is
imperfect, as all other graces are, but yet it grows and increases gradually.
Romans 1. 17. For therein is the righteousness of God revealed, from Faith to
faith: As it is written, The just shall live by Faith. As a gracious soul is
still a adding knowledge to knowledge, love to love, fear to fear, zeal to
zeal; so he is a adding faith to faith. A gracious soul knows, That if he be
rich in Faith, he cannot be poor in other Graces; he knows the growth of faith,
will be as the former and the latter rain, to all other graces; he knows that
there is no way to out-grow his fears, but by growing in Faith; he knows that
all the pleasant fruits of paradise, viz. Joy, comfort, and peace, flourishes
as faith flourishes; he knows that he has much work An old man being once
asked, If he grew in grace, answered, Yea, doubtless I believe I do, for God
has said in his Word, that we shall flourish and bring forth fruit in old age.
Ille non est bonus, qui non vult esse melior.
upon his hands, that he has many things to do, many temptations to withstand,
many mercies to improve, many burdens to bear, many corruptions to conquer,
many duties to perform: And this makes the believing soul thus to reason with
God; Ah Lord, whatever I am weak in, let me be strong in Faith, whatever dies,
let Faith live, whatever decays, let Faith flourish: Lord, let me be low in
repute, low in parts, low in estate; so thou will make me high in Faith: Lord,
let me be poor in any thing, poor in every thing; so thou will but make me rich
in Faith: Lord, let the eye of Faith be more opened, let the eye of Faith be
more quick-sighted, let the eye of Faith be the more raised, and it shall be
enough to me, though Joseph 2 Th^s. 1. 3. That is but a Wooden leg, that grows
not, no more is that any more but a Wooden faith, a counterfeit faith, that
grows not.
be not, though Benjamin be not. It was the glory of the Thessalonians, that
their faith growed exceedingly: A growth in Faith, will render a man glorious
in life, lovely in death, and twice blessed in the morning of the Resurrection;
so will not a growth in honors, a growth in riches, a growth in notions, a
growth in opinions. That Faith that accompanies Salvation, The union between
Christ and the Saints, is the nearest and the highest union; and so it
advantages their graces, and advances them to a higher degree of happiness,
then any other Creatures whatsoever. John 17. Christ would have his people one
with him, and the Father, though no^ essentially, nor personally, yet really
and spiritually.
unites the soul to Christ, and keeps the soul up in communion with Christ. And
from that union and communion that the soul has with Christ, flows such a
Divine power, and virtue, that causes Faith to grow: Yet that no weak Believers
may be stumbled, or sadded, Let them remember, First, That though that Faith
that accompanies Salvation, be a growing faith; yet there are some certain
seasons, and cases, wherein a man may decay in his faith, and wherein he may
not have the exercise, and the actings of his faith. This blessed Babe of Grace
may be cast into a deep slumber; this Heavenly Pearl may be so buried under the
thick clay of this world, and under the ashes of corruption and temptation, as
that for a time, it may neither stir, nor grow, as might be shown in Abraham,
David, Solomon, Peter, and others. Secondly, Remember this, That the strongest
faith at times, is subject to shakings, as the strongest men are to faintings,
as the stoutest ships are to tossings, as the wisest men are to doubtings, as
the brightest stars are to twinklings, etc. Therefore if at certain times, thou
should not be sensible of the growth of thy faith, yet do not conclude, that
thou have no faith: Faith may be in the habit, when it is not in the act; there
may be life in the root of the Tree, when there is neither leaves, blossoms,
nor fruit upon the Tree; the life that is in the root* will show it self at the
Spring, and so will the habits of Faith break forth into acts, when the Sun of
Righteousness shall shine forth, and make it a pleasant spring to thy soul. And
thus much for this second particular.

The third Property of that Faith that accompanies Salvation, is this, It makes
those things that are great and glorious in the worlds account, to be very
little and low in the eyes of a Believer. Faith makes a Believer to Heb. 11. 9.
live in the Land of Promise, as in a strange Country; it is nothing to live as
a stranger in a strange Land, but to live as a stranger in the Land of Promise,
this is the excellency and glory of Faith. Faith will make a man set his feet,
where other men sets their hearts. Faith looks with an eye of scorn and
disdain, upon the things of this world: What, says Faith, are earthly
treasures, to the treasures of Matthew 6. 19, 20.
Heaven? what are stones to silver, dross to gold, darkness to light, Hell to
Heaven? No more, says Faith, are all the treasures, pleasures, and delights of
this world, to the light of Psalm. 4. 6, 7.
thy countenance, to the joy of thy spirit, to the influences of thy grace. I
see nothing, says David, in this wide world, only thy Commandments are
exceeding Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26.
broad. Faith makes David account his Crown nothing, his treasures nothing, his
victories nothing, his attendants nothing, etc. Faith will make a man write
nothing upon the best of worldly things; it will make a man trample upon the
Pearls of this Phil. 3. 8.
world, as upon dross and dung. Faith deadens a man's heart, to the things of
this world, I am crucified to the world, Gal. 6.
and the world is crucified to me, says Paul. This world, says Faith, is not
my house, my habitation, my home, I 2 Cor 5. 1, 2.
look for a better Country, for a better City, for a better home. He that is
adopted Heir to a Crown, a Kingdom, looks with an eye of scorn, and disdain,
upon every thing below a Kingdom, below a Crown. Faith tells the soul, that it
has a Crown, a Kingdom 2 Timothy 4. 8.
in reversion; and this makes the soul to set light by the things of this
world. Faith raises and sets the soul high; And has raised us up together,
Ephesians. 2. 6.
and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, says the
Apostle. Faith makes a man live high, our conversation Phil. 3. 20.
is in Heaven; and the higher any man lives, the less, the lower will the
things of this world be in his eye. The fancy of Lucian is very pleasant, who
places Charon on the top of an high Hill, viewing all the affairs of men, and
looking on their greatest, richest, and most glorious Cities, as little Birds
Nests. Faith sets the soul upon the Hill of God, the Mountain of God, that is,
A high Mountain; and from thence, Faith gives the soul a sight, a prospect of
all things here below. And, ah how like Birds Nests does all the riches,
braveries, and glories of this world look, and appear to them, that Faith has
set upon Gods high Hill. Faith having set Luther upon this high Hill, he
protests, that God should not put him off with these poor, low things. Faith
set Moses Heb. 11.
high, it set him among invisibles, and that made him look upon all the
treasures, pleasures, riches, and glories of Egypt, as little Birds-Nests, as
Mole-hills, as dross and dung; as things that were too little, and too low for
him to set his heart upon. Verily, when once Faith has given a man a sight, a
prospect of Heaven, all things on Earth will be looked upon, as little and low.
And so much for this third Property of Faith.

The fourth Property of that Faith that accompanies Salvation, is this, It
purifies the heart, it is a heart-purifying Acts 15. 9.
faith: Purifying their hearts by faith. Faith has two hands, one to lay hold
on Christ, and another to sweep the heart, which is Christ's house. Faith knows
that Christ is of a Dovelike nature, he loves to lie clean, and sweet; Faith
has a neat Huswifes hand, as well as an Eagles eye; Faith is as good at
purging out of sin, as it is at discovering of sin. There is a cleansing
quality in Faith, as well as a healing quality in Faith. Sound faith will purge
the soul from the love of sin, from a delight in sin, and from the Ezekiel. 16.
reign and dominion of sin. Sin shall not have dominion over you; for ye are
Romans 6. 14, 21.
not under the Law, but under Grace. Now Faith purges and cleanses the heart
from sin; sometimes by pressing, and putting God to make good the promises of
Sanctification. Faith takes that promise in Jere. 33. 8. And I will (...) I
will purify them, is an allusion to the purifications prescribed in the Law,
for the cleansing of polluted persons, till which purifications were performed,
they could not be admitted into the Camp, or Congregation, etc.
cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby they have sinned against me; and
that promise in Micah. 7. 19. He will turn again, he will have compassion upon
us; he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins into the
bottom of the sea. And that promise in Psalm. 65. 3. Iniquities prevail against
me; as for our transgressions, thou shall purge them away. And that promise in
Isai. 1. 25. And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy
dross, and take away all thy Tin. And spreads them before the Lord, and will
never leave urging and pressing, seeking and suing, till God makes them good.
Faith makes the soul divinely impudent, divinely shameless. Lord, says Faith,
are not these thine own words; have thou said it, and shall it not come to
pass? art thou no^ a faithful God? is not thine honor engaged to make good the
promises that thou have made? Arise, O God, and let my sins be scattered; turn
thy hand upon me, and let my sins be purged. And thus Faith purifies the heart.
Again, sometimes Faith purifies the heart from sin, by engaging against sin in
Christ's strength, as David engaged against Goliath, not in 1 Samuel 17. 45.
his own strength, but in the strength and name of the Lord of Hosts. Faith
leads the soul directly to God, and engages God against sin; so as that the
combat, by the wisdom of Faith, is changed and made now rather between God and
sin, then between sin and the soul; and so sin comes to fall before the power,
and glorious presence of God; that is a choice word. Psalm. 61. 2. From the ends
of the earth, will I cry to thee* When my heart is overwhelmed, lead me to the
Rock that is higher then I. Look as a child that is set upon by one that is
stronger then he, cries out to his Father, to help him, to stand by him, and to
engage for him against his enemy; so Faith being sensible of its own weakness
and inability, to get the victory over sin, cries out to Christ, and engages
Christ, who is stronger then the strong man; and so Christ binds the strong
man, and casts him out. Faith tells the soul, That all purposes, resolutions,
and endeavors, without Christ be engaged, will never set the soul above its
sins; they will never purify the heart from sin. Therefore Faith engages
Christ, and casts the main of the work upon Christ, and so it purges the soul
from sin. Luther reports of Staupicius, a German Divine, that he acknowledged,
that before he came to understand the free and powerful grace of Christ, that
he vowed and resolved an hundred times against some particular sin, and could
never get power over it; he could never get his heart purified from it, till he
came to see that he trusted too much to his own resolutions, and too little to
Jesus Christ: But when his faith had engaged Christ against his sin, he had the
victory. Again, Faith purifies the heart from sin; by the application of
Christ's Blood. Faith makes a plaster It is the excellency of Faith, that it
can turn the Blood of Christ, both into food and into Physic.
of Christ's blessed Blood, and lays it on upon the souls soars, and so cures
it. Faith makes a heavenly vomit of this blessed Blood, and gives it to the
soul, and so makes it cast up that poison that it has drunk in. Faith tells
the soul, that it is not all the tears in the world, nor all the water in the
Sea, that can wash away the uncleanness of the soul; it is only the Blood of
Christ that can make a Blackmoor white; it is only the Blood of Christ that
can cure a Leprous Naaman, that can cure a Leprous soul. This Fountain of
Blood, says Faith, is the only Fountain for Judah and Jerusalem, to wash Zach
13. 1.
themselves, to wash their hearts from all uncleanness, and filthiness of flesh
and spirit. Those spots a Christian finds in his own heart, can only be
washed out in the Blood of the Lamb by a hand of Faith. Again, Faith purifieth
the soul from sin, by putting the soul upon heart-purifying Ordinances, and by
mixing and mingling it self with Ordinances. The word profited Heb. 4 2.
them not (says the Apostle) because it was not mixed with faith in them that
heard it. Faith is such an excellent ingredient, that it makes all potions work
for the good of the soul, for the purifying of the soul, and for the bettering
of the soul, and no potion, no means will profit the soul, if this heavenly
ingredient be not mixed with it. Now Faith puts a man upon praying, upon
hearing, upon the fellowship of the Saints, upon public duties, upon family
duties, and upon Closet duties; and Faith in these, comes and joins with the
soul, and mixes her self As Christ came and joined himself to his Disciples.
with these soul-purifying Ordinances, and so makes them effectual for the
purifying of the soul, more and more, from all filthiness and uncleanness.
Faith puts out all her virtue and efficacy in Ordinances, to the purging of Sin
is like the wild Fig Tree, or Ivy in the Wall, cut off stump, body, bough, and
branches; yet some sprigs or other will sprout out again, till the Wall be
plucked down, etc.
souls from their dross and Tin: Not that Faith in this life shall wholly
purify the soul from the being of sin, or from the motions or operations of
sin, no; for then we should have our Heaven in this world, and then we might
bid Ordinances adue; but that faith that accompanies Salvation, does naturally
purify and cleanse the heart from the remainders of sin by degrees. Sound
Faith is still a making the heart more and more, neat and clean, that the King
of glory may delight in his habitation, that he may not remove his Court, but
may abide with the soul for ever. And thus you see that that Faith that
accompanies Salvation, is a heart-purifying Faith.

The fifth Property of that Faith that accompanies Salvation, is this, It is
soul softning, soul mollifying, O nothing breaks the heart of a sinner, like
Faith. Peter believes soundly, and Matthew. 26. ult. Luke 7.
weeps bitterly, Mary Magdalen believes much, and weeps much. Faith sets a
wounded Christ, a bruised Christ, a despised Christ, a peirced Christ, a
bleeding Christ before the soul; and this makes the soul sit down and weep
bitterly. I will pour upon the Zach. 12. 10, etc.
house of David, the Spirit of Grace, and of Supplications: And they shall look
upon him, whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him (All
Gospel-mourning flows from believing) as one mourns for his only son, and
shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his
firstborn. O the sight of those wounds, that their sins have made, will wound
their hearts, through and through, it will make them lament over Christ, with a
bitter lamentation. They say, nothing will dissolve the Adamant, but the Blood
of a Goat. Ah, nothing will kindly, sweetly, and effectually break the hardened
heart of a sinner, but Faiths beholding the Blood of Christ trickling down his
sides. Pliny reports of a Serpent, That when it stings, it fetches all the
blood out of the body; but it was never heard that ever any sweat blood, but
Christ; and the very thoughts of this, makes the believing soul to sit down
sweating, and weeping, That Christ should love man, when he was most unlovely;
that man's extreme misery, should but inflame Christ's bowels of love and mercy:
This melts the believing soul, that Christ should leave the eternal bosom of
his Father; that he tha was equal with God, should come in the form of a
servant; that he that was clothed with glory, and born a King, should be
wrapped in rags; that he that the Heaven of Heavens could not contain, should
be cradled in a Manger; that from his Cradle, to his Cross, his whole life
should be a life of sorrows and sufferings; that the Judge of all flesh, should
be condemned; that the Lord of Life, should be put to death; that he that was
his Fathers joy, should in anguish of Spirit, cry out, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me. That that head that was crowned with honor, should be crowned
with thorns; that those eyes that were as a flame of fire, that were clearer
then the Sun, should be closed up by the darkness of death; that those ears
which were wont to hear nothing but Hallelujahs, should hear nothing but
Blasphemies; that that face that was white and ruddy, should be spit upon by
the beastly Jews; that that tongue that spoke, as never man spoke, yea, as
never Angel spoke, should be accused of blasphemy; that those hands which
swayed both a Golden Scepter, and an Iron Rod; and those feet that were as
fine-brass, should be nailed to the Cross; and all this for man's transgression,
for man's rebellion. O the sight of these things, the believing of these things,
the acting of Faith on these things, makes a gracious soul to break and bleed,
to sigh and groan, to mourn and lament: That Faith that accompanies Salvation,
is more or less a heartbreaking, a heart-melting Faith.

The sixth Property of that Faith that accompanies Salvation, is this, It is a
world-conquering faith, it is a world overcoming faith. 1 John 5. 4. For
whatsoever is born of God, over-cometh the world; and this is the victory that
over-cometh the world, even our Faith. Faith overcomes the frowning world, and
the fawning world, the tempting world, and the persecuting world, and that it
does thus. First, Faith by uniting the soul to Christ, does interest the soul
in all the victories and conquests of Christ, and so makes the soul a conqueror
with Christ. John 16. ult. These things have I spoken unto you, that in me ye
might have peace, in the world you shall have tribulation; but be of good
cheer, I have overcome the world. We have to deal but with a conquered enemy,
our Jesus has given the world a mortal wound; we have nothing to do, but to
set our feet upon a subdued enemy, and to sing it out with the Apostle, Over
all these, we are more then Romans 8. 37.
conquerors. Secondly, Faith overcomes the world by out-bidding fights, Faith
out-bids the world, and so makes the soul victorious. The world set honors,
pleasures, etc. before Moses, but his Faith out-bid the world, it presents the
recompense of reward, it brings down all the glory, pleasures, and treasures of
Heaven, of that other world, and sets them before the soul; and so it over-tops
and overcomes the world by out-bidding it; so Christ for the joy that was set
before him, endured the Cross, despising Heb. 12. 2.
the shame. Thirdly, Faith overcomes the world by telling the soul, that all
things are its own; says Faith, This God is thy God, this Christ is thy
Christ, this Righteousness is thy Righteousness, this Promise is thy Promise,
this Crown is thy Crown, this Glory is thy Glory; these Treasures are thy
Treasures, these pleasures 1 Cor. 3. 22.
are thy pleasures. All things are yours (says the Apostle) things present
(are yours) and things to come are yours. Thus the Faith of the Martyrs acted,
Heb. 11. 35.
and so made them victorious over a tempting, and a persecuting world.
Fourthly, Faith overcomes the world by valuing the things of this world as they
are; most men overvalue them, they put too great a price upon them, they make
the world a god, and then they cry, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. O but
Faith now turns the inside of all Creatures outward; Faith presents all worldly
things, as impotent, as mixed, as mutable, as momentary to the soul, and so
makes the soul victorious; Faith makes a man to see the prickles that be in
every Rose, the thorns that be in every Crown, the scabs that be under every
Gown, the poison that is in the Golden Cup, the snare that is in the delicate
dish, the spot that is in the shining Pearl, and so makes a Christian count and
call all these things, as indeed they are, vanity of vanity; and so the
believing soul Omnis vita infidelium peccatum est, and nibil bonum fine summo
bono. Aug. There is no good without Christ, the chiefest good.
slights the world, and tramples upon it, as dung and dross. Fifthly and
lastly, Faith overcomes the world by presenting Jesus Christ to the soul, as a
most excellent, glorious, and comprehensive good, as such a good that
comprehends all good. Christ is that one good that comprehends all good, that
one thing that comprehends all things. All the beauties, all the rarities, all
the excellencies, all the riches, all the glories of all created Creatures are
comprehended in Christ. As the worth and value of many pieces of silver, is
connected in one piece of Gold, or in one precious Jewel, so all the whole
volume of perfections which is spread through Heaven and Earth, is epitomized in
Christ; and the sight and sense of this makes the soul to triumph over the
world. Faith presents more excellencies, and better excellencies in Christ,
then can be lost for Christ, and so it makes the soul a conqueror. I have been
long upon these things, because they are of much weight, and worth, I shall be
the briefer in what follows; but before I leave this point, I shall give you
these hints.

In the first place, I shall give you some hints concerning strong Faith; in
the second place, I shall give you some hints concerning weak Faith. My design
in both, is to keep precious souls from mistaking and fainting, concerning
strong Faith, I shall give you these short hints.

First, Strong Faith will make a soul resolute in resisting, and happy in
conquering the strongest temptations. Heb. 11. 3. Dan. 6.

Secondly, It will make a man own God, and cleave to God, and hang upon God, in
the face of the greatest difficulties and dangers. Romans 4. 18, etc. Psalm. 44.
16, 17, 18. So Job will trust Job 13. 15, 16.
in God, though he slay him.

Thirdly, It will enable men to prefer Christ's Cross, before the worlds crown,
to prefer tortures, before deliverance. Heb. 11.

Fourthly, Strong Faith will make a soul divinely fearless, and divinely
careless, it will make a man live as the child lives in the family, without
fear or care. Psalm. 23. 4. Dan. 3. We are not careful to answer thee, O King,
our God whom we serve, is able to deliver us, and he will deliver us, etc.
Micah 7. 7, 8, 9.

Fifthly, Strong Faith will make a man cleave to the promise, when providence
runs cross to the promise. Number. 10. 29. 2 Chro. 20. 9, 10, 11. Psalm. 60. 6, 7.
God has spoken in his holiness (says David) So Joshua and Caleb. Numb. 14.
22, 23, 24.
I will rejoice, I will divide Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth:
Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine, etc. Though David was in his Banishment,
yet his faith accounts all his, as if he had all in possession, and that
because God had spoken in his holiness. His faith hangs upon the promise,
though present Providence did run cross to the Promise, etc.

6. Strong faith will make men comply with those commands that do most cross
them, in their most desirable comforts, Heb. 11. 8, 9. and 10. 34. Genesis 22.

Now, O precious Souls, you are not to argue against your own souls, that
surely you have no faith, because that As it is dangerous to make false
definitions of sin; so it is dangerous to make false definitions of grace.
your faith does not lead you forth to such and such noble things; thou may
have true faith, though thou have not so great faith, as others of the Lords
Worthies have had. The Philosophers say, That there are eight degrees of heat;
we discern three. Now if a man should define heat only by the highest degree,
then all other degrees will be cast out from being heat: So if a man should
define Faith only by the highest degrees and operations of it, then that will
be denied from being faith, that indeed is faith, as I shall presently show.

In the second place, I shall give you some hints concerning weak faith.

1. A weak faith does as much justify, and as much unite a man to Christ, as a
strong faith; It gives a man as much propriety and interest in Christ, as the
strongest faith in the world. The Babe has as much interest But a Babe cannot
improve his interest, as he that is of grown years. 2 Pet. 1. 1.
in the Father, as he that is of grown years. A weak faith gives a man as good
a title to Christ, and all the precious things of Eternity, as the strongest
faith in the world. A weak hand may receive a Pearl, as well as the strong hand
of a Giant. Faith is a receiving of Christ, John 1. 12.

2. The promises of Eternal Happiness and Blessedness are not made over to the
strength of Faith, but to the truth of Faith; not to the degrees of Faith, but
to the reality of Faith. He that believes shall be saved, though he has not
such a strength of Faith, as to stop the mouth of Lions, as to work Miracles,
as to remove Mountains, Heb. 11. 33, 34, 35.
as to subdue Kingdoms, as to quench the violence of Fire, as to resist strong
Temptations, as to rejoice under great persecutions. No man that is saved, is
saved upon the account of the strength of his faith, but upon the account of
the truth of his faith. In the great day Christ will not bring balances to
weigh men's graces, but a touchstone to try their graces; He will not look so
much at the strength, as at the truth of their graces.

3. The weakest faith shall grow stronger and stronger. A weak Believer shall
Romans 1. 17. Heb. 12. 2.
go on from Faith to Faith. Christ is the finisher, as well as the Author of
our Faith. Christ will nurse up this blessed Babe, and will not suffer it to be
strangled in its infancy. He that has begun a good work, will perfect it.
Christ is as Phil. 1. 6.
well bound to look after our graces, as he is to look after our souls. Grace
is 1 Pet. 1. 5.
Christ's work, therefore it must prosper in his hand; he is the great Builder
and Repairer of our Graces; he will turn thy spark into a flame, thy drop
Mat^h. 12. 20. and 13. 32.
into an Ocean, thy penny into a pound, thy mite into a million: Therefore do
not sit down discouraged, because thy faith is weak. That which is sowed in
weakness, shall rise in power; Thy weak faith shall have a glorious
Resurrection: Christ will not suffer such a Pearl of price to be buried under a
clod of Earth.

4. A little faith is faith, as a spark of fire is fire, a drop of water is
water, a little Star is a Star, a little Pearl is a Pearl. Verily, thy little
faith is a Jewel that God does highly prize and Matthew. 18. 10.
value; and thy little faith will make thee put a higher price upon Christ, 1
Pet. 2. 7.
and Grace, then upon all the world. Well, remember this, That the least
measure of true faith will bring thee to Salvation, and possess thee of
Salvation, as well as the greatest measure. A little faith accompanies
Salvation, as well as a great faith; a weak faith as well a strong. Therefore
do not say, O precious Soul, That thou have not that faith that accompanies
Salvation, because thou have not such a strong faith, or such and such degrees
of faith. A great faith will yield a man a Heaven here; a little faith will
yield him a Heaven hereafter.

The third thing that I am to show you, is, What Repentance that is that
accompanies Salvation. That Repentance does accompany Salvation, I have
formerly showed. Now I shall manifest in the following particulars what
Repentance that is that does accompany Salvation, that comprehends Salvation,
that boarders upon Salvation.

First, That Repentance that accompanies Salvation, is a general, a universal
change of the whole man; a change in every part, though it be but in part. That
Repentance that accompanies Salvation, changes both heart and life, word and
work; it makes an Ethiopian an Israelite, a Leaper an Angel. Wash ye, make you
clean; there is the change of your hearts: Put away the Isa. 1. 16, 17, 18.
evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well;
there is the change of their practices. So the Prophet Ezekiel, Cast Ezekiel. 18.
30, 31, 32. True Repentance is a through change both of the mind and manners.
away all your transgressions (says he) whereby you have transgressed; there
is the change of the life: And make you a new heart, and a new spirit; there is
the change of the heart. That Repentance that accompanies Salvation, Optima and
aptissima paenitentia est nova vita, says Luther. It is said, that upon ones
Preaching, Repent, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, There followed
almost every where, Delictorum paenitentiae, morum reformatio, omnium
contritio, cessabant blasphemiae, aleae ludi, etc.
works a change in the whole man; in all the qualities of the inward man, and
in all the actions of the outward man. The Understanding is turned from
darkness to light; the Will from a sinful servility, to a holy liberty; the
Affections from disorder into order; the Heart from hardness into softness: So
in the outward man, the wanton eye is turned into an eye of chastity; the
uncircumcised ear is turned into an obedient ear; the hands of bribery are
turned into hands of liberality; and the wandering feet of vanity, are turned
into ways of purity. And verily, that Repentance that changes a man in some
part, but not in every part, that only makes a man a Herod, or an Agrippa, a
half Christian, an almost Christian. That Repentance will never bring down
Heaven into a man's bosom here, nor never bring a man up to Heaven hereafter.
That Repentance that accompanies Salvation, makes a man all glorious within,
and his raiment Psalm. 45. 13.
to be of imbroidered gold; it stamps the Image of God, both upon the inward,
and the outward man; it makes the heart like the Ark, all Gold within; and it
makes the life like the Sun, all glorious without.

Secondly, That Repentance that accompanies Salvation, is, a total turning, as
well as an universal turning; a turning from all sin, without any reservation
or exception. I hate and abhor every false way, but thy Law do Psalm. 119. True
hatred is ((...)) to the whole kind. Arist. And God has engaged himself to
cleanse the hearts of his people from all, and to set their soul^ against all.
Jere. 33. 8 Ezekiel. 36. 25, 29, 33. 1 John 1. 9. Repentance for sin; is nothing
worth, without repentance from sin.
I love. So in Ezekiel. 18. 30. Therefore I will judge you, O house of Israel,
every one according to his ways, says the Lord God, Repent and turn your
selves from all your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruin. So in
Ezekiel. 33. 11. As Noah's flood drowned his nearest, and his dearest friends; so
the flood of penitent tears drowns men's nearest and their dearest lusts. Be
they Isaacs or Benjamins, be they right eyes, or right hands, Repentance that
accompanies Salvation, puts all to the Sword; it spares neither Father nor
Mother, neither Agag nor Achan; it casts off all the rags of old Adam; it
leaves not a Horn, nor a Hoof behind; it throws down every stone of the old
building; it scrapes off all Leviathans skales: it washes away all leprous
spots. Ezekiel. 14. 6. Therefore say unto the house of Israel, thus says the Lord
God, Repent, and turn your selves from your Idols, and turn away your faces
from all your abominations. Sin is a turning the back upon God, and the face
toward Hell; but Repentance is a turning the back upon sin, and a setting the
face toward God. He that looks upon Jerusalem, and upon Thus did Herod and
Judas to their eternal ruin. Jam. 2. 10.
Babylon, with a learing eye at the same time; He that looks upon God, and at
the same time looks upon any sin with a learing eye, has not yet reached unto
this Repentance that accompanies Salvation; his Repentance and Profession
cannot secure him from double damnation: He that serves God in somethings, and
his lusts in other things, says to God as David 1 Samuel 19. One stab ar the
heart kills, one hole in the ship sinks her, one act of treason makes a
Traitor: So one sin not forsaken, not turned from, will undo a soul for ever.
Sin ever ends tragically, and this puts the penitent in battle array against
every sin.
said to Mephibosheth concerning his Lands, Thou and Ziba divide the Lands, So
thou and Satan divide my soul, my heart between you: Ah does not such a soul
deserve a double Hell? Christ takes every sin at a penitent man's hands, as
Caesar did his wounds from him, of whom he merited better usage, with (...),
And thou my son? What thou wound me? what thou stob me? that should venture
thy own blood to save mine. There are no wounds that are so grievous and
terrible to Christ, as those that he receives in the house of his friends. And
this sets the penitent man's heart and hand against every thing that makes
against Christ. A true penitent looks upon every sin as poison, as the vomit of
a dog, as the mire of the Isa. 30. 22. Nihil in lege menstruato immundius.
Hieron.
street, as the menstruous cloth, which of all things in the Law was most
unclean, defiling, and polluting, ( Pliny says, that the very Trees with
touching of it, would become barren.) And his looking thus upon every sin,
turns his heart against every sin, and makes him not only to refrain from sin,
but to forsake it, and to loath it more then Hell.

Thirdly, That Repentance that accompanies Salvation, is, not only a Isa. 1.
The Hebrew word for Repentance is from (...) Shob, which signifies to return,
implying a going back from what a man had done.
turning from all sin, but it is also a turning unto God; it is not only a
ceasing from doing evil, but it is also a learning to do well; it is not only
a turning from darkness, but it is also a turning to light, as the Apostle
speaks, Acts 26. 18. To open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to
light, and It notes a returning or converting from one thing to another, as
from sin to God, from evil to good, from Hell to Heaven.
from the power of Satan unto God: So in Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his
way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord,
etc. It is not enough for the man of iniquity to forsake his evil way, but he
must also return unto the Lord; he must subject his heart to the power of
Divine Grace, and his life to the Will and Word of God. As Negative goodness
can never satisfy a gracious soul, so Negative goodness can never save a
sinful soul. It is not enough that thou art not thus and thus bad, but thou
must be thus and thus good, or thou art undone for ever. Ezekiel. 18. 21. But if
the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep all my
Statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he shall
not die. Negative Righteousness and Holiness is no Righteousness no Holiness,
in the account of God. It was not the Pharisees Negative Righteousness, nor
Luke 18. 5. Matthew. 20. 13, 14.
his Comparative Goodness, that could prevent his being rejected of God, his
being shut out of Heaven, his burning in Hell. It is not enough that the Tree
hears no ill fruit, but it must bring forth good fruit, else it must be cut
down and cast into the fire; that Tree that is not for fruit is for the fire.
Every Matthew. 7. 19. He that holds nor wholly with Christ, does very shamefully
neglect Christ. Aut totum mecum tene, aut totum omit. Greg. Nazian. And
therefore if Christ trample upon them at last, it is just.
tree that brings not forth good fruit (says Christ) is hewn down and cast
into the fire. Men that content themselves with Negative Righteousness, shall
find at last Heaven Gates bolted upon them with a double bolt. All that
Negative Righteousness and Holiness can do, is to help a man to one of the best
Chambers, and easiest Beds in Hell: That Repentance that accompanies Salvation,
brings the heart and life, not only off from sin, but on to God; it makes a
man not only cease from walking in the ways of death, but it makes him walk
in the ways of life. They do no iniquity, they walk in his ways. Psalm. 119. 3.

Fourthly, That Repentance that accompanies Salvation, strikes most Augustine a
great sinner wrote Twelve Books of Repentance, and walked most cross to the
particular sins he had most lived in.
effectually, and particularly, against that sin or sins, that the sinner was
most apt and prone to before his Conversion. The hand of Repentance is most
against that sin, it is most upon that sin that the soul has looked most with
a learing eye upon. The chief and principal sins that Israel was guilty of, was
idolatry and sinful compliance; Now when God works kindly upon them, they put
the hand of Repentance upon those particular sins, as you may see Isa. 27. 9.
By this therefore shall the This was the great sin of Israel, but after their
return out of captivity, they never set up Idols more, but were wonderful
zealous to keep their Temple from such defilements, both in the time of
Antiochus Epiphanes, and of the Romans, and do accunt them as a menstruous
cloth* to this very day.
iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away his sin:
When he makes all the stones of the Altar, as Chalk stones, that are beaten in
sunder, the groves and images shall not stand up. Here you see, when God
appears, and acts graciously for, and toward his people, they put the hand of
Repentance upon their Groves and Images, these must down, these must no longer
stand: The Groves and the Images shall not stand up, they shall be utterly
abandoned and destroyed, demolished and abolished. So in Isa. 30. 22. Ye shall
defile also the covering of thy graven Images of Silver, and the ornament of
thy molten Images of Gold: Thou shall cast them away as a menstruous cloth;
thou shall say unto it, Get thee hence. Here you see the hand of Repentance is
against their Idols of Silver and Gold, and not only against their Idols, but
also against whatsoever had any relation to them. Now they show nothing but a
detestation of their Idols, and a holy indignation against them; Get you The
Jews were willing in the Romans time, rather to die then to suffer the Eagle,
the Imperial Arms, to be set up in the Temple.
hence. The hand of Repentance makes a divorce between them and their Idols,
between their Souls and their especial Sins. Now they are as much in hating,
abhorring, abominating, and contemning their Idols and Images, as they were
formerly in adoring, worshipping, and honoring of them. So Mary Magdalen in the
seventh of Luke, walks quite cross and contrary to her former self, her sinful
self, she crosses the flesh, in those very things wherein formerly she did
gratify the flesh. So the penitent Jailor in that sixteenth of the Acts,
washes those very wounds that his own bloody hands had made: He acts in ways
of mercy, quite contrary to his former cruelty: At first there was none so
fierce, so furious, so cruel, so bloody, so inhumane in his carriage to the
Apostles; at last, none so gentle, so soft, so sweet, so courteous, so
affectionate to them. The same you may see in Zacheus in the nineteenth of
Luke; In Paul, Acts the ninth; and in Manasse, in that of the second of
Chronicles, chap. 33. 6.

Fifthly, That Repentance that accompanies Salvation, is, very large and
comprehensive; it comprehends and takes in these following particulars, besides
those already named.

1. It takes in a sight and sense of sin. Men must first see their sins, they
must be sensible of their sins, before they can repent of their sins. Ephraim
had first a sight of his sin, and then he repents and turns from his sin. After
I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh, Jer. 31. 18, 19. A man first sees
himself It was so with Paul, who thought himself in as good a way for Heaven as
any, Acts 9. and 26. compared.
out of the way, before he returns into the way; till he sees that he is out of
the way, he walks still on, but when he perceives that he is out of the way,
then he begins to make inquiry after the right way: So when the sinner comes to
see his way to be a way of death, then he cries out, O lead me in the way of
life, lead me in the way everlasting, Psalm. 139. 24.

2. (For I shall but touch upon these things) That Repentance that accompanies
Salvation, does include not only a sight and sense of sin, but also
confession, and acknowledgment Act 19. 18. Confessio peccati est vomitus
sordium anim^* Aug.
of sin. Psalm. 51. and 32. 3, 4, 5. While I kept close my sin, my bones
consumed; but I said, I will confess my sin, and thou forgavest the iniquity of
my sin. Job 33. 21, 27. The promise of remission is made to confession, 1 John
1. 9. If we Non dico ut confitearis conservo tuo peccata tu^, diceto Deo, qui
curet ca. Chrysostom. in Psa. 50.
confess our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins. So Prove.
28. 13. He that hides his sin, shall not prosper; but he that confesses, and
forsakes it, shall find mercy. If we confess our sins sincerely, seriously,
humbly, cordially, pardon attend us; Homo agnoscit, Deus ignoscit. Confession
of sin must be joined with confusion of sin, or all is lost; God is lost,
Christ is lost, Heaven lost, and the Soul lost for ever. The true Penitent can
say with Vivaldus, I hide not my sins, but I show them; I wipe them not away,
but I sprinkle them; I do not excuse them, but I accuse them; ( Peccata enim
non nocent, si non placent,) My sins hurt me not, if I like them not: The
beginning of my Salvation is the knowledge of my transgression.

3. That Repentance that accompanies Salvation, does include not only
confession of sin, but also contrition Jer. 13. 17. Joel 2. 13. David cries not
perii, but peecavi, not, I am undone, but I have done foolishly. Basil wept
when he saw the Rose, because it brought to his mind the first sin, from
whence it had the prickles, which it had not while man continued in innocence,
as he thought. You know how to apply it.
for sin, Psalm. 51. 4. 1 Samuel 7. 2. Zach. 12. 10, 11. Ezra 10. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 7.
11, etc. It breaks the heart with sighs, sobs, and groans, for that a loving
Father is offended, a blessed Savior crucified, and the sweet Comforter
grieved. Penitent Mary Magdalen weeps much, as well as loves much, Luke 7.
Tears instead of gems were the ornaments of Penitent David's Bed, and surely
that sweet Singer, never sung more melodiously, then when his heart was broken
most penitentially. How shall God wipe away my tears in Heaven, if I shed none
in Earth? And how shall I reap in joy, if I sow not in tears? I was born with
tears, and shall die with tears; why should I then live without them in this
valley of tears? says the true Penitent. The sweetest joys are from the
sourest tears. Penitent tears are the breeders of spiritual joy. When Hannah
had wept, she 1 Samuel 1. 18.
went away, and was no more sad. The True Repentance is a sorrowing for sin, as
it is Offensivum Dei, aversivum a Deo.
Be gathers the best Honey of the bitterest Herbs. Christ made the best Wine
of Water; the strongest, the purest, the truest, the most permanent, and the
most excellent joy is Peter's was for sin, Judas his for punishment. Peter
grieves because Christ was grieved, Judas grieved because he should be damned.
Psalm. 42. 5.
made of the Waters of Repentance. If God be God, they that sow in tears shall
reap in joy. But that no mourner may drown himself in his own tears, let me
give this Caution, viz. That there is nothing beyond remedy, but the tears of
the damned. A man who may persist in the way to Paradise, should not place
himself in the condition of a little Hell; and he that may, or can hope for
that great all, ought not to be dejected, nor overwhelmed for any thing.

4. That Repentance that accompanies Salvation, does include, not only
contrition for sin, but also a holy shame and blushing for sin. Ezra 9. 6. Jer.
3. 24, 25. and 31. 19. Ezekiel. 16. 61, 63. And thou shall be confounded, and
never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward
thee for all that thou have done, says (...) Bosh, to blush, to be abashed, to
wax pale and wan, etc. Quantum displicet Deo immundi^ia peccati, in tantum
placet Deo erubiscentia paenitentis. Ber.
the Lord God. When the Penitent Soul sees his sins pardoned, the anger of God
pacified, and Divine Justice satisfied, then he sits down ashamed. So in Romans
6. 21. What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? Sin
and shame are inseparable companions: So much the more God has been di^pleased
with the blackness of sin, the more will he be well pleased with ^he blushing
of the sinner.
A man cannot have the seeming sweet of sin, but he shall have the real shame
that accompanies sin; These two God has joined together, and all the world
cannot put them asunder. It was an impenitent Caligula, that said of himself,
that he loved nothing better in himself, then that he could not be ashamed.
Justinus Motto was, ( Quod pudet hoc pigeat) that should grieve most which is
shameful in it self, and done against conscience. And doubtless those things
are only shameful, that are sinful: A soul that has sinned away all shame, is
a soul ripe for Hell, and given up to Satan. A greater plague cannot befall a
man in this life, then to sin, and not to blush.

Fifthly, That Repentance that accompanies Salvation, comprehends loathing and
abhorring of sin, and of Vis magnus esse? incipe ab imo. Will thou be great?
begin from below, says one. It is very observable, that those brave Creatures,
the E^gle, and the Lion, were not offered in sacrifice unto God, but the poor
Lamb and Dove, to note, That God regards not your brave high lofty spirits, but
poor meek and contemptible spirits.
our selves for sin, as well as shame, and blushing for sin. Job 42. 6. Ezekiel.
16. 61, 62, 63. Amos 5. 15. Ezekiel. 20. 41, 42, 43. And ye shall remember your
ways, and all your doings, wherein ye have been defiled; and ye shall loath
your selves in your own sight, for ^all the evils that you have committed. The
sincere penitent loathes his sins, and he loathes himself also, because of his
sins. He cries out, O these wanton eyes, O these wicked hands, O this deceiptful
tongue, O this crooked will, O this corrupt heart! O how do I loath my sins,
how do I loath my self, how do I loath sinful-self, and how do I loath my
natural-self, because of sinful-self! My sins are a burden to me, and they make
me a burden to my self; my sins are an abhorring to me, and they make me abhor
my self in dust and ashes. A true Penitent has not only low thoughts of
himself, but loathsome thoughts of himself; none can think or speak so vilely
of him, as he does, and will think and speak of himself. Ezekiel. 6. 9. And they
that escape of you, shall remember me among the Nations, whither they shall be
carried captives, because I am broken with their whorish heart, (as the heart
of a Husband is at the adulterous carriage of his wife) which has departed
from me, and with their eyes, which go a whoring after their Idols; and they
shall loath themselves for evils which they have committed in all their
abominations. If thy Repentance do not work thee out with Some people can shed
tears for nothing, some for any thing, but a sound penitent sheds more tears
for his sins, then he does for his sufferings.
thy sins, and thy sins work thee out of love with thy self, thy Repentance is
not that Repentance that accompanies Salvation. And thus you see the particular
things that that Repentance that does accompany Salvation does comprehend and
include.

Sixthly, That Repentance that accompanies Salvation, has these choice
companions attending of it. First, Faith. Zach. 12. 10, 11. They shall look
upon him whom they have pierced, and mourn, etc. Mourning and believing go
together. So in Matthew. 4. 17. Mark 1. 14, 15. Now after that John was put in
prison, Jesus came into Galilee, Preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God;
And saying, The time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at hand: Repent
ye, and believe the Gospel. Secondly, Love to Christ does always accompany that
Repentance that accompanies Salvation, as you may see in Mary Magdalen, in that
seventh of Luke. Thirdly, A filial fear of offending God, and a holy care to
honor God, does always accompany that Repentance that accompanies Salvation. 2
Cor. 7. 11. For godly sorrow works Repentance to Salvation, Repentance is,
post naufragium tabula, the fair daughter of a foul mother. Repentance is a
fruitful Womb.
not to be repented of; for behold this self same thing that ye sorrowed after
a godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of your
selves, yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea,
what zeal, yea, what revenge: In all things ye have approved your selves to be
clear in this matter. Verily, Repentance to life has all these lively
companions attending of it; they are born together, and will live together,
till the penitent soul changes Earth for Heaven, Grace for Glory.

Seventhly and lastly, That Repentance that accompanies Salvation, is a
continued act, a Repentance never to be 2 Cor. 7. 10.
repented of. Repentance is a continual spring, where the waters of godly
sorrow are always flowing. A sound Penitent is still a turning nearer and
nearer to God; he is still a turning further and further from sin: This makes
the Penitent Soul to sigh and Romans 7.
mourn, that he can get no nearer to God, that he can get no further from sin:
The work of Repentance is not the work of an hour, a day, a year, but the work
of this life. A sincere Penitent makes as much conscience of repenting Quid
restat o peccator nisi ut in tota vita tua deplores totam vitam tuam. Anselmus.
O then, what then remains, but in our whole life, to lament the sins of our
whole life.
daily, as he does of believing daily; and he can as easily content himself
with one act of Faith, or Love, or Joy, as he can content himself with one act
of Repentance. My sins are ever before me, says David. Next to my being kept
from sin, I count it the greatest mercy in the world, to be still a mourning
over sin, says the Penitent soul. The Penitent soul never ceases repenting,
till he ceases living. He goes to Heaven with the joyful tears of Repentance in
his eyes: He knows that his whole life is but a day of sowing tears, that he
may at last reap everlasting joys. That Repentance that accompanies
Salvatition, is a final forsaking of sin; It is a bidding sin an everlasting
adieu; it is a taking an eternal farwell of sin, a never turning to folly more,
What have I to do any more with Idols? says Ephraim, Hos. 14. 8. I have tasted
of the bitterness that is in sin, I have tasted of the sweetness of divine
mercy in pardoning of sin; therefore away sin, I will never have to do with you
more; you have robbed Christ of his service, and me of my comfort and crown:
Away, away sin, you shall never be courted, nor countenanced by me more. That
man that only puts off his sins in the day of adversity, as he does his
garments at night when he goes to bed, with an intent to put them on again in
the morning of prosperity, never yet truly repented. He is a dog that returns
to the vomit again, he is a swine that returns to the wallowing in the mire;
such a dog was Judas, such a swine was Demas. It is an extraordinary vanity in
some men, to lay aside their sins before solemn duties, but with a purpose to
return to them again; as the Serpent lays aside his poison when he goes to
drink, and when he has drunk, he returns to it again, as they fable it. It is
sad when men say to their lusts, as Abraham said to his servants, Abide you
here, and I will go and worship and return again to you, Genesis 22. 5. Verily
such souls are far off from that Repentance that accompanies Salvation, for
that makes a final and everlasting separation between sin and the soul; it
makes such a divorce between sin and the soul, and puts them so far a sunder,
that all the world can never bring them to meet as two lovers together. The
Penitent Soul looks upon sin, and deals with sin, not as a friend, but as an
enemy; it deals with sin as Amnon dealt with Tamar, 2 Samuel 13. 15. And Amnon
hated her exceedingly, so that the hatred wherewith he hated her, was greater
then the love wherewith he had loved her: And Amnon said unto her, Arise, be
gone. Just thus does the Penitent Soul carry it self toward sin.

And thus you see what Repentance that is that accompanies Salvation.

The fourth thing I am to show, is, What Obedience that is that does accompany
Salvation: That Obedience does accompany Salvation, I have formerly proved. Now
what this Obedience is that does accompany or comprehend Salvation, I shall
show you in these following particulars.

First, That Obedience that accompanies Salvation, is cordial and hearty, the
heart, the inward man does answer and echo to the Word and Will of God. The
Believer knows, That no Obedience, but hearty Obedience is acceptable to
Christ; he knows Isa. 29. 13. Matthew. 15. 7, 8, 9. The heart is ( Cam^ra
omnipotentis regis,) i. e. The presence chamber of the King of Heaven, and that
upon which his eye, his hand, his heart is most set.
that nothing takes Christ's heart, but what comes from the heart. Christ was
hearty in his obedience for me (says the Believer) and shall not I be hearty
in my obedience to him? Christ will lay his hand of love, his hand of
acceptance, upon no obedience, but what flows from the heart. Romans 6. 9. Ye
have obeyed from the heart, that form of doctrine which was delivered you. So
in Romans 7. ult. So then with the mind, I myself serve the Law of God. My heart
says Paul, is in my obedience. So in Romans 1. 9. God is my witness, whom I
serve with my spirit in the Gospel of his Son. Many serve God with their
bodies, but I serve him with my spirit; many serve him with the outward man,
but I serve him with my inward man. God has written his Law in Ezekiel. 36. 26,
27.
Believers hearts, and therefore they cannot but obey it from the heart. I
delight to do thy will, O my God (how so?) why thy Law is within my heart; or,
in the midst of my bowels, as the Hebrew (...)
has it. The heart within echoes and answers to the Commandments without, as
a Book written answers to his mind that writes it; as face answers to face, as
the impression on the wax answers to the character engraven on the seal. The
Scribes and Pharisees were much in the outward obedience of the Law, but their
hearts were not in their obedience; and therefore all they did, signified
nothing in the account of Christ, who is only taken with outward actions as
they flow from the heart and affections; their souls were not in their
services, and therefore all their services were lost services. They were very
glorious in Matthew. 23.
their outward profession, but their hearts were as filthy Sepulchers; their
outsides shined as the Sun, but their in-sides were as black as Hell. They
were like the Egyptians Temples, beautiful without, but filthy within. Well,
remember this, No action, no service goes for current in Heaven, but that which
is sealed up with integrity of heart. God will not be put off with the shell,
when we give the Devil the Kernel.

Secondly, That Obedience that accompanies Salvation, is universal as well as
cordial; the soul falls in with every part and point of Gods will, so far as he
knows it, without prejudice or partiality, without tilting the balance on one
side or another. A soul Non eligit mandata, He does not pick and choose. He
obeyes all in respect of his sincere purpose, desire, and endeavor; and this
God accepts in Christ, for perfect and complete Obedience, etc.
sincerely obedient, will not pick and choose what commands to obey, and what to
reject, as Hypocrites do; he has an eye to see, an ear to hear, and a heart to
obey the first Table as well as the second, and the second as well as the
first; he does not adhere to the first and neglect the second, as Hypocrites
do; neither does he adhere to the second and contemn the first, as profane men
do; he obeys not out of humor, but out of duty; he obeys not out of choice, but
out of conscience. Psalm. 119. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have
respect unto all thy Commandments. Look as Faith never singles out his object,
but lays hold on every object God holds forth for it to close with; Faith does
not choose this truth, and reject that, it does not close with one, and reject
another; Faith does not say, I will trust God in this case, but not in that; I
will trust him for this mercy, but not for that mercy; I will trust him in this
way, but not in that way; Faith does not choose its object; Faith knows that he
is powerful and faithful that has promised, and therefore Faith closes with
one object, as well as another: So a true obedient soul singles not out the
commands of God, as to obey one, and rebel against another; it dares not, it
cannot say, I will serve God in this command, but not in that. No: In an
Evangelical sense it obeyes all, Luke 1. 5, 6. Zacharias and Elizabeth were
both righteous before God, walking in all (...), Without complaint. An obedient
soul is like a crystal glass with a light in the midst, which shines forth
through every part thereof: So that Royal Law that is written upon his heart,
shines forth into every parcel of his life; his outward works do echo to a Law
within.
the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord, blameless. They walked not only
in Commandments, but also in Ordinances; nor only in Ordinances, but also in
Commandments. They were good souls, and good at both. A man sincerely obedient
lays such a charge upon his whole man, as Mary, the Mother of Christ, did upon
all the servants at the Feast, John 2. 5. Whatever the Lord says unto you, do
it. Eyes, ears, hands, heart, lips, legs, body, and soul, do you all seriously
and affectionately observe what ever Jesus Christ says unto you, and do it: So
David does, Psalm. 119. 34, 69. Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy Law;
yea, I shall observe it with my whole heart. The proud have forged a lie
against me; but I will keep thy Precepts with my whole heart. The whole heart
includes all the faculties of the soul, and all the members of the body; says
David, I will put hand and heart, body and soul, all within me, and all without
me, to the keeping and observing of thy Precepts. Here is a soul thorow-paced
in his obedience, he stands not halting nor halving of it; he knows the Lord
loves to be served truly and totally, and therefore he obeys with an entire
heart, and a sincere spirit. I have read of a very strange speech that dropped
out of the mouth of Epictetus, a Heathen, If it be thy will (says he) O Lord,
command me what thou will, send me whither thou will, I will not withdraw my
self from any thing that seems good to thee. Ah how will this Heathen at last
rise in judgment against all Saul's, Jehues, Judases, Demases, Scribes,
Pharisees, Temporaries, who are partial in their obedience, who while they
yield obedience to some commands, live in the habitual breach of other
commands? Verily, he that lives in the habitual breach of one command, shall at
last be reputed by God guilty of the breach Jam. 2. 10.
of every command, and God accordingly will in a way of Justice proceed against
him, Ezekiel. 18. 10, 11, 12, 13. It was the glory of Caleb and Joshua, Number. 14.
24.
that they followed the Lord fully in one thing, as well as another. So
Cornelius, Acts 10. 33.
We are present before God to hear whatsoever shall be commanded us of God; He
does not pick and choose: So in Acts 13. 22. I have found David the son of
Jesse, a man after mine own heart, which shall fulfill all my will; or rather as
it is in the Greek, he shall fulfill all my (...) wills. He minds not only
general duties of Religion, but also particular duties, as a Magistrate, as a
Minister, as a Father, as a Master, as a Son, as a Servant.
wills: To note the universallity and sincerity of his Obedience. A sincere
heart loves all commands of God, and prizes all commands of God, and sees a
Divine Image stamped upon all the commands of God, and therefore the main bent
and disposition of his soul, is to obey all, to subject to all. God commands
universal obedience, Josh. 1. 8. Deuteronomy. 5. 29. Ezekiel. 18. The Promise of Reward
is made over to Universal Obedience, Psalm. 19. 11. Josh. 1. 8. Universal
Obedience is a Jewel that all will wish for, or rejoice in, at the day of
death, and the day of account; And the remembrance of these things, with others
of the like nature, provokes all upright souls to be impartial, to be universal
in their Obedience.

Thirdly, That Obedience that accompanies Salvation, springs from inward
Spiritual causes, and from holy and heavenly Motives, it flows from Faith.
Hence it is called, The obedience of Faith, Romans 16. 26. So in 1 Timothy 1. 5. Now
the end of the Commandment, is Love out of a pure Heart, and of a good
Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned. Faith draws down that Divine Virtue and
Power into the soul, that makes it lively and active, abundant and constant in
the work and way of the Lord. And Where Love is, the Soul says of every
command, Bonus Sermo, it is a good saying; but where Love is wanting, the man
cries out, Durus Sermo, It is a hard saying, who can bear it.
as Faith, so Love puts the Soul forward in ways of Obedience. John 14. 21, 23.
If any man love me, he will keep my Commandments. So Psalm. 119. 48. My hands
also will I lift up to thy Commandments, which I have loved. Divine Love is
said to be the keeping of the Commandments, because it puts the Soul upon
keeping them. Divine Love makes every weight light, every yoke easy, every
command joyous; it knows no difficulties, it facilitates obedience, it divinely
constrains the soul to obey, to walk, to run the ways of Gods commands. And as
sound Obedience springs from Faith and Love, so it flows from a filial Fear of
God, Psalm. 118. 119. Mine heart stands in aw of thy Word. So Heb. 11. 7. Noah
being warned of God, touching things not seen, as yet, moved with fear,
prepared an Ark.

Ah but Hypocrites and Temporaries are not carried forth in their Obedience,
from such precious, and glorious principles; and therefore it is, that God
casts all their services as dung in Isa. 1. 11.
their faces. And as that Obedience which accompanies Salvation flows from
inward Spiritual Principles, so it flows from holy and heavenly Motives, as
from the tastes of Divine Love, and the sweetness and excellency of communion
with God, and the choice and precious discoveries that the soul in ways of
Obedience has Isa. 64. 5.
had of the beauty and glory of God. The sweet looks, the heavenly words, the
glorious kisses, the holy embraces that the obedient soul has had, makes it
freely and fully obedient to the Word and Will of God. Ah! but all the Motives
that move Hypocrites and carnal Professors to Obedience, are only external and
carnal, as the eye of Matthew. 6.
the Creature, the ear of the Creature, the applause of the Creature, the
rewards of the Creature; either the love of the loaves, or the gain of John 6.
custom, or the desire of ambition: sometimes they are moved to obedience from
the fear of the Creature, and sometimes from the want of the Hos. 7. 14.
Creature, and sometimes from the example of the Creature, and sometimes from
vows made to the Creature; sometimes the frowns of God, Hos. 5. ult. Psalm. 78.
34.
the displeasure of God, the rod of God moves them to obedience; sometimes the
quieting and stilling of Conscience, the stopping of the mouth of Conscience,
and the disarming of Conscience of all her whipping, racking, wounding,
condemning, terrifying, and torturing power, puts them upon some ways of
Obedience. Their Obedience always flows from some low, base, carnal, corrupt
consideration, or other. O but that Obedience that accompanies Salvation, does
always flow (as you see) from inward and Spiritual causes, and from holy and
heavenly Motives.

Fourthly, That Obedience that accompanies Salvation, is a ready, free,
willing, and cheerful Obedience. First; It is ready Obedience. Psalm. 27. 8.
When thou said, Seek ye my face, my heart said unto thee, Thy face, Lord,
will I seek. Psalm. 119. 60. I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy
Commandments. Psalm. 18. 44. As Soon as they hear of me, they shall obey me; the
strangers shall submit themselves unto me. I have read of one who Cassianus,
lib. 4. c. 24.
readily fetched water near two miles every day, for a whole year together, to
pour upon a dry stick, upon the bare command of a Superior, when no reason
could be given for the thing. O how ready then does Grace make the Soul, to
obey those Divine commands that are backed with the highest, strongest, and
choicest Arguments! Secondly* As that Obedience that accompanies Salvation, is
ready Obedience; so it is free and willing Obedience. Acts 21. 13. Then Paul
answered, Voluntaes semiplena est voluntas; An half will, an incomplete will,
an unwilling will, is a will in Divine account.
What mean ye to weep, and to break mine heart? For I am willing, not to be
bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus. The
beamings out of Divine love and glory, make gracious souls willing in the day
of his power, Psalm. 110. 3. Those Divine principles that be in them, make them
willingly obey, without coaction or compulsion. So 2 Cor. 8. 3. The Macedonians
were willingly obedient, or as the Greek has it, They were volunteers, (...).
not only to their power, but beyond their power. All the motions and actings
of Christ toward his people, for his people, and in his people, are free; He
loves them freely, he pardons them freely, he intercedes for them freely, he
acts them freely, and he saves them freely; and so they move and act toward
Christ freely; they heat, they pray, they wait, they weep, they work, they
watch, freely and willingly, that Spirit of Grace and 1 Chronicles. 29. 6-18. 1 Timothy
6. 18. 1 These. 2. 8. A Saint at worst is obedient, either
Holiness that is in them, makes them Volunteers in all Religious duties and
services. It is reported of Socrates, that when the Tyrant threatened death unto
him, he answered, He was willing; ( Voluntate plena, or semi-plena) with a will
or an unwilling will, like the Merchant that is unwillingly willing to throw
his goods over board, into the tempestuous Sea, to save his life.
nay, then says the Tyrant, You shall live against your will; he answered
again, Nay, whatsoever you do with me, it shall be my will. Yet nature a little
raised and refined, will enable a man to do this; will not Grace, will not
Union and Communion with Christ, enable a man to do as much, yea infinitely
more? Thirdly, As that Obedience that accompanies Salvation, is free and
willing Obedience, so it is cheerful and delightful Obedience; it is a
Believers meat and drink, it is his joy and crown, it is a pleasure, a paradise
to his soul, to be still obeying his Fathers will, to be still found about his
Fathers business. Psalm. 40. 8. I delight to do thy will, O my God; yea, thy Law
is in my heart. As the Sun rejoices to Psalm. 19. 5, 11. compared. Tanto magis
delectat opus bonum, quanto magis diligitur Deus, summum and incommutabile
bonum. Aug. A good work, so much the more delights, by how much the more God
the chiefest and unchangable Good is loved. In hoc cognoscitur amor Christi, si
quis servat praecepta Christi. Bern.
run his race, so do the Saints rejoice to run the race of Obedience. Gods work
is wages, yea, it is better then wages; therefore they cannot but delight in
it; not only for keeping, but also in keeping of his commands, there is great
reward. Psalm. 112. 1. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, that delights
greatly in his Commandments; that is, in the studying and obeying of his
Commandments. Psalm. 119. 16. I will delight my self in thy Statutes; I will not
forget thy Word. Verse. 35. Make me to go in the path of thy Commandments; for
therein do I delight. V. 47. And I will delight my self in thy Commandments,
which I have loved. V. 143. Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me; yet thy
Commandments are my delight. Divine commands are not grievous to a lover of
Christ; for nihil difficile amanti, nothing is difficult to him that loves.
The love of Christ, the discoveries of Christ, the embraces of Christ, make a
gracious soul studious and industrious to keep the Commandments of Christ, in
lip and life, in word and work, in head and heart, in book and breast.

Thus you see that that Obedience that accompanies Salvation, is, Ready, Free,
and Cheerful Obedience.

Fifthly, That Obedience that accompanies Salvation, is, Peremptory Obedience,
Josh. 24. 15. I and my Josephus reports of such resolute Christians, that in
the face of al reproaches and difficulties, followed Christ to the Cross.
household will serve the Lord. He is fully resolved upon it, come what come
can, in the face of all dangers, difficulties, impediments, and
discouragements, he will obey the Lord, he will follow the Lord; so those
Worthies in the eleventh of the Hebrews (of whom this world was not worthy)
obeyed Divine commands peremptorily, resolvedly, in the face of all manner of
deaths and miseries. So Paul was obedient to Acts 20. 23. Gal. 1. 15, 16. You
may as well stop the Sun from running his race, as you are able to hinder
gracious souls from obeying Divine commands. Psalm. 44. 13. 24. As a wicked
nature makes the wicked peremptory in their disobedience: Jer. 44. 15, 16, 17.
So the Divine nature makes gracious souls peremptory in their Obedience.
the heavenly vision, though bonds did attend him in every place; he is better
at obeying, then at disputing; I conferred not (says he) with flesh and blood:
So Peter and John, and the rest of the Apostles, in despite of all threatenings
and beatings, they obey the Lord, they keep fast and close to their Masters
work. Whether it be right in the fight of God, to hearken more unto you, then
unto God, judge ye; for we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and
heard. And now Lord, behold their threatenings, and grant unto thy servants,
that with all boldness they may speak thy Word. And when they had called the
Apostles, and beaten them, they commanded that they should not speak in the
Name of Jesus, and let them go. And they departed from the presence of the
Council, rejoicing, that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name.
And daily in the Temple, and in every House, they ceased not to Teach and
Preach Jesus Christ. Acts 4. 19, 20, 29. and 5. 40, 41, 42. compared.

Thus you see, no trials, no troubles, no terrors, no threats, no dangers, no
deaths, could deter them from peremptory Obedience to Divine precepts. It is
not the Fiery Furnace, nor the Lions Den, nor the Bloody Sword, nor the
Torturing Wrack that can fright gracious Souls from their Obedience to their
dearest Lord. Psalm. 119. 106. I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will
keep thy righteous judgments.

Sixthly, The end of that Obedience that accompanies Salvation, is, Divine
Propter te domine, propter te, Is every godly man's Motto. Quicquid agas,
propter D^um agas, Was an Eastern Apophthegm. Drusius.
glory; the Eye of the obedient Soul, in prayer and praises, in talking and
walking, in giving and receiving, in living and doing, is Divine glory. Romans
14. 7, 8. For none of us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself; for
whether we live, we live unto the Lord, and whether we die, we die unto the
Lord; whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lords. In all actions, the
obedient Soul intends and attends most Divine glory: If Satan, the World, or
the Old man, do at any time propound other ends to the Finis movet ad agendum,
The End moves to doing.
Soul, this great end, Divine glory, works out all those ends; for this is most
certain, That which a man makes his greatest, and his highest end, will work
out all other ends. Look as the light of the Sun does extinguish, and put out
the light of the fire; so when a man makes the glory of God his end, that end
will extinguish and put out all carnal, low, base ends. That man that makes
himself the end of his actions, that makes honor, riches, applause, etc. the
end of his actions, he must at last lie down in eternal sorrow, he must dwell
in everlasting burnings; Isai 50. ult. and 33. 14.
the man is as his end is, and his work is as his end is; if that be naught,
all is naught; if that be good, all is good, and the man is happy for ever.

Seventhly, That Obedience that accompanies Salvation, that borders upon
Salvation, that comprehends Si dixisti sufficit, teriisti. Aug. If once thou
said it is enough, thou art undone.
Salvation, is a constant Obedience. Psalm. 119. 112. I have inclined my heart
to do thy Statutes always, even unto the end. The Causes, Springs, and Motives
of holy Obedience, are lasting and permanent, and therefore the Obedience of a
sound Christian, is not like the morning dew, or a deceitful bow. Psalm. 44. 17,
18, 19. All this is come upon us, History reports, that it has been the
ancient custom of pious Christians, under persecuting Emperors, to meet, and by
the Sacrament to bind themselves for ever, to fly what was evil, and follow
what was good, what ever it cost them.
yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant.
Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy ways.
Though thou have sore broken us in the place of Dragons, and covered us with
the shadow of death. The love of Christ, the promises of Christ, the presence
of Christ, the discoveries of Christ, the example of Christ, and the recompense
of reward held forth by Christ, makes a sound Christian hold on, and hold out,
in ways of Obedience, in the face of all dangers and deaths: Neither the hope
of life, nor the fear of death, can make a sincere Christian, either change his
Master, or decline his Work. Phil. 2. 12. Wherefore, my beloved, as ye have
always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but how much more in my absence:
Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. This was the Philippians
glory, That they were constant in their Obedience, whether Paul was present or
absent, they constantly minded their work.

Ah but Hypocrites and Temporaries, Such Hypocrites may well cry out as
Ecebolius did, who was only constant in inconstaney, (...). Tread upon me that
am unsavory Salt.
are but passionate, transient, and inconstant in their Obedience; they talk of
Obedience, they commend Obedience, and now and then in a fit, they step in the
way of Obedience, but they do not walk in a way of Obedience, they are only
constant in inconstancy, Job, chap. 27. verse. 10. Will the Hypocrite delight
himself in the Almighty? Will he always call upon God? Or as the Hebrew has
it, Will (...)
he in every time call upon God? will he call upon God in time of prosperity,
and in time of adversity; in time of health, and in time of sickness; in time
of strength, and in time of weakness; in time of honor, and in time of
disgrace; in time of liberty, and in time of durance, etc? The answer to be
given in, is, He will not always, he will not in every time call upon God. As a
lame Horse, when he is heated, will go well enough, but when he cools, he halts
downright; even so an Hypocrite, though for a time, he may go on fairly in a
Religious way, yet when he has attained his ends, he will halt downright, and
be able to The Monk in the Fable being a poor Fisher-mans son, still spread a
Net over his Table, as a remembrance of his mean original, till he had by these
shows of humility attained to the highest preferments; which when he had
attained, he laid away the Net, because the Fish was caught.
go no further. The Abbot, in Melancton, lived strictly, and walked demurely,
and looked humbly, so long as he was but a Monk; but when by his seeming
extraordinary sanctity he got to be made Abbot, he grew intolerably proud and
insolent; and being asked the reason of it, confessed, That his former carriage,
and lowly looks, was but to see if he could find the Keys of the Abbey. Ah!
many unsound hearts there be, that will put on the Cloak of Religion, and speak
like Angels, and look like Saints, to find the Keys of Preferment, and when
they have found them, none prove more proud, base, and vain, then they. Ah! but
that Obedience that accompanies Salvation, is constant and durable: A Christian
in his course goes strait on Heaven-wards. The two milch Kine, 1 Samuel 6. 12.
took the strait way to the way of Bethshemesh, and went along the highway,
loughing as they went, and turned not aside to the right hand, or to the left:
So gracious Souls go strait along the Highway to Heaven, which A Christians
emblem should be an house moving toward Heaven, says Clemens.
is the way of Obedience; though they go loughing and weeping, yet they still
go on, and turn not aside to the right hand, nor to the left: If by the
violence of temptation or corruption they are thrust out of the way at any
time, they quickly return into it again. They may sometimes step out of the way
of Obedience, but they cannot walk out of the way of Obedience. Psalm. 119. 3, 4.
The honest Traveller may step out of his way, but he soon returns into it
again, and so does the honest Soul.

Eighthly and lastly, Passive Obedience accompanies Salvation, as well as
Active. Every one that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer
persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 12. and 2. 12. Romans 8. 17, 18. Acts 14. 22.
from Tongue or Pen, from Hand or Heart. If we suffer with him, we shall reign
with him; there is no passing into Paradise, but under the flaming Sword.
Through many afflictions we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. A sincere
heart is as willing I might produce a cloud of witnesses that have been
excellent at suffering, at burning.
to obey Christ Passively as Actively. Acts 21. 13. I am ready, not to be bound
only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus. I am
willing, says Paul, to lofe my comforts for Christ, I am ready to endure any
dolors for Christ, I am willing to lose the Creature, and to leave the Creature
for Christ. Paul, Phil. 3. 8. speaks of himself as having been like one in a
Sea tempest, that had cast out all his precious wares and goods for Christ's
sake; For whom, says he, I have suffered the loss of all. So must we in stormy
times, cast all overboard for Christ, and swim to an Immortal Crown, through
sorrows, blood, and death. But because I have in this Treatise, spoke at large
of the sufferings of the Saints, I shall say no more of it in this place. And
thus you see what that Obedience is that accompanies Salvation. The fifth thing
that I am to show you, is, What Love that is that accompanies Salvation.

That Love does accompany Salvation, I have formerly showed you; but now I
shall show you what that Love is, that does accompany Salvation, and that I
shall do in these following particulars. I shall not speak of the firstness,
freeness, fullness, sweetness, and greatness of Christ's love to us, but of that
Love of ours that accompanies Salvation, concerning which I shall say thus.

First, That Love that accompanies Salvation, is a Superlative Love, a
Transcendent Love. True love to Christ does wonderfully transcend Matthew. 10.
37, 38. Luke 14. 26, 27, 34.
and surpass the Love of all relations; The love of Father, Mother, Wife,
Child, Brother, Sister, yea, Life it self. Psalm. 73. and 25. Whom have I in
Heaven, but thee? And there is none upon Earth, that I desire besides thee.
Christ Friends may have the Milk of a Believers love, but Christ has the Cream.
will be Alexander or Nemo, he will be all or nothing at all: There are the
greatest causes of love, there are the highest causes of love, there are all
the causes of love to be found in Christ; in Angels and Men, there are only
some particular causes of love; all causes of love are eminently and only to
be found in Christ. Col. 1. 19. It pleased (...).
the Father, that in him should all Fullness dwell. There is not only plenitudo
abundantiae, but plenitudo redundantiae, an overflowing of Fullness in Jesus
Col. 2. 3.
Christ. All Wisdom, all Knowledge, all Light, all Life, all Love, all
Goodness, all Sweetness, all Blessedness, all Joys, all Delights, all
Pleasures, all Beauties, all Beatitudes, all Excellencies, all Glories, are in
Christ. The true lovers of Christ, know that Christ We so far love as we know,
Tantum diligimus, quantum cognoscimus.
loves as a Head, as a King, as a Father, as a Husband, as a Brother, as a
Kinsman, as a Friend: The love of all relations meets in the Love of Christ;
and this raises up a Believer to love Christ with a transcendent love: They
know that Christ loves them more, then they love themselves; yea, that he loves
them above his very life. Joh. 10. 11, 17, 18. And Magnes amor is amor, Certe
non amant illi Christum, qui aliquid plusquam Christum amant. Aug. Certainly
they do not love Christ, who love any thing more then Christ.
Love is the Loadstone of Love. Christ is amiable and lovely; he is famous and
conspicuous; he is spotless and matchless in his Names, in his Natures, in his
Offices, in his Graces, in his Gifts, in his Discoveries, in his Appearances,
in his Ordinances; he is full of Gravity, Majesty, Mercy, and Glory; He is
white and ruddy, the chiefest Cant 5. 10. ult.
among ten thousand. His mouth is (...) sweetnesses; yea, (...) all of him is
desires, or all of He that holds not wholly with Christ, does very shamefully
neglect Christ. Aut totum mecum tene, aut totum omit. Greg. Nazian.
him is delights. Christ is wholly delectable, he is altogether desirable from
top to toe, he is amiable and lovely, he is glorious and excellent: Christ is
lovely, Christ is very lovely, Christ is most lovely, Christ is always lovely,
Christ is altogether lovely: He is the express Image of God, he is the
brightness of his Fathers glory; if the soul can but anatomize him, it shall
find in him all high Perfections and supereminent Excellencies. And upon these
and suchlike considerations, the Saints are led forth to love Jesus Christ
with a most transcendent Love.

Secondly, That Love that accompanies Salvation, is Obediential Love, it is
Operative and Working Love; the Love of Christ makes a man subject to the
commands of Christ; If any John 14. 21, 22, 23.
man love me, he will keep my Commandments. And again, He that has my
Commandments and keeps them, he it is that I have read a story of an
Elephant, who being f^ln down and unable to help himself, or get up again, by
reason of the inflexibleness of his legs, a Forrester coming by, helped him up;
wherewith the Elephant by the very instinct of nature, was so affected, that he
followed this man, and would do any thing for him, and never left him till his
dying day. Ah Sirs, will not Divine Love make a man do more?
loves me. Divine Love is very Operative. Psalm. 116. 1. I love the Lord, says
David. Well, but how does this Love work? Why says he, I will walk in his ways:
I will pay my vows: I will take the cup of salvation: I will offer the of
thankssgiving; and I will call upon the Name of the Lord, as long as I live,
Verse. 2, 9, 13, 14, 17. Divine Love is not stinted nor limited to one sort of
duty, but is free to all: He that loves, flies; he that loves, runs; he
that loves, believes; he that loves, rejoices; he that loves, mourns; he
that loves, gives; he that loves, lends; he that loves, bears; he that
loves, waits; he that loves, hops, etc. Heb. 6. 10. For God is not
unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love. Love makes the soul
laborious; that Love that accompanies Salvation, is very Active and Operative,
it is like the virtuous Woman in the Proverbs, that sets all her Maidens on
work; it is never quiet, but in doing the Will of God; it will not suffer any
Grace to sit idle in the Soul; it will egg and put on all other Graces, to act
and operate. Love sets Faith upon drawing from Christ, and Patience upon
waiting on Christ, and Humility upon submitting to Christ, and Godly-sorrow
upon mourning over Christ, and Selfdenial upon forsaking of the nearest and
dearest comforts for Christ, etc. As the Sun makes the Earth fertile, so does
Divine love make the Soul fruitful in Works of Righteousness and Holiness. He
that loves, cannot be idle nor barren; Love makes the Soul constant and
abundant in well-doing, 2 Cor. 5. 14. The love of Christ constrains (...).
Loves property is to do eternally, it is an eternal, lasting principle, and
actions will last as long as principles; its action is as abiding as it self.
us; it does urge us, and put us forward; it carries us on, as men possessed
with a vehemence of spirit, or as a ship which is driven with strong winds
toward the desired Haven. Natural love makes the Child, the Servant, the Wife
obedient; so does Divine love make the soul, better at obeying, then at
disputing. A Soul that loves Christ, will never cease to obey, till he ceases
to be. That Love that accompanies Salvation, is like the Sun; the Sun you know
casts Beatus qui amat te, and amicos in te, and inimicos propter te. Aug.
Confess.
his beams upward and downward, to the East, and to the West, to the North, and
to the South; so the love of a Saint ascends to God above, and descends to Men
on Earth, to our Friends on the right hand, to our Enemies on the left hand; to
them that are in a state of Grace, and to them that are in a state of Nature.
Divine love will still be a working one way or another.

Thirdly, That Love that accompanies Salvation, is a sincere and incorrupt
love. Ephesians. 6. 24. Grace be with all (...) Word for word in incorruption, or
with incorruption. i. e. That love Christ in sincerity, and not feignedly and
hypocritically.
them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. Amen. The true bred
Christian ( Amat Christum, propter Christum) loves Christ for Christ; he loves
Christ for that internal and eternal worth that is in him; he loves him for his
incomparable excellency and beauty, for that transcendent sweetness,
loveliness, holiness, and goodness, that is in him; he is none of those that
loves Christ for loaves, neither will he with Judas, kiss Christ, and betray
him; nor yet will he with those in Matthew. 21. 9, 15.
the Gospel, cry out, Hosanna, Hosanna, one day; and Crucify him, crucify
him, the next. They love Christ with a Virgin love, Cant. 1. 3. The Virgins
love thee. They love thee in much sincerity, purity, and integrity; they love
thee for that fragrant savor, for that natural sweetness, for that incomparable
goodness that is in thee; so in the fourth Verse, The upright love thee, or as
it is in the Hebrew, Uprightnesses (...)
love thee; Uprightnesses being put for upright ones, the abstract for the
concrete; Judas was kin to the bag, he was not kin to Christ; and he in Clemens
was not his, but his riches Kinsman. Christ has many such Kinsmen. A Christian
cares not for any thing that has not aliquid Christi, something of Christ in
it. He says with him, Sine Deo omnis copia est eg^stas, Without Christ all
plenty is scarcity. Austin prays, Lord (says he) whatever thou have given
take all away, only give me thy self. God gave him himself, and cast in many
other mercies, as Paper and Packthred into the bargain.
or, they love thee in uprightnesses, that is, most uprightly, most entirely,
most sincerely; and not as Hypocrites, who love thee for base, carnal respects;
who love thee in complements, but not in realities; who love thee in word and
tongue, but despise thee in heart and life; who love the gift, more then the
giver. That Love that accompanies Salvation, is real and cordial Love, it is
sincere and upright love; it makes the Soul love (Christ) the giver, more then
the gift; it makes the Soul love the gift for the givers sake, it will make the
Soul to love the giver without his gifts.

And verily, they shall not be long without good gifts from Christ, that love
Christ more then his gifts. Vespasian commanded a liberal reward should be
given to a woman that came, and professed, That she was in love with him; and
when his Steward asked him, What item he should put to it in his Book of
Accounts; the Emperor answered, Vespasiano adamato, Item to her that loved
Vespasian. Ah Christians, shall Vespasian an Heathen Prince reward her
liberally that loved his person, and will not the Lord Jesus much more reward
them with his choicest gifts, that love him more then his gifts? Surely, Christ
will not be worse then a Heathen, he will not act below a Heathen. He shall
never be a loser that loves Christ for that Spiritual sweetness, and loveliness
that is in Christ, Christ will not live long in that man's debt.

Fourthly, That Love that accompanies Salvation, is a vehement Love, an ardent
Love; it is a spark of heavenly fire, and it puts all the affections into a
holy flame. Can. 1. 7. Tell me, O thou, whom my soul loves, where thou
feedest? etc. This amiable, amorous, Pathetical Compellation, O thou Anima est
ubi amat, non ubi animat, The soul is where it loves, not where it lives.
whom my soul loves, speaks the Spouses love to be hot and burning toward
Christ. So in Isa. 26. 8, 9. The desire of our souls is toward thee, and to
the remembrance of thy name. With my (...) In the midst of me; it is an
emphatical phrase
soul have I desired thee in the night, yea, with my spirit within me, will I
seek thee early. This affectionate, this passionate form of Speech, With my
soul have I desired thee, and that, with my spirit within me, will I seek thee,
does elegantly set forth the vehement, and ardent love of the Church to Christ;
so does that pathetical exclamation of the Church, Stay me with flagons,
comfort Cant. 2. 5.
me with apples, for I am sick of love. The betrothed Virgin cannot show more
strong and vehement love to her beloved, then by being sick, and surprised with
love-qualms, when she meets him, when she enjoyes him; it was so here with the
Spouse of Christ. The love of Christ to Believers, is a vehement love, an
ardent love (witness his leaving his Fathers bosom, his putting upon us his
Royal Robes, his bleeding, his dying, etc.) And it does naturally beget Amor
non nisi donum amantis. Gul. Par.
vehement and ardent Love in all the beloved of God. Where Christ loves, he
always begets somewhat like himself, Amor semper habet, quid sui simile. That
love that is flat, lukewarm, or cold, will leave a man to freeze a this side
Heaven, it will fit him for the warmest place in Hell. Dives love was very
cold, and he found the flames of Hell to be very hot. That love that
accompanies Salvation is full of heat and fire.

Fifthly, That Love that accompanies Salvation, is lasting Love, it is
permanent Love; the objects of it are lasting, the springs and causes of it are
lasting, the nature of it is lasting. The Primitive Christians loved not Revel.
12. 11.
their lives unto the death; Persecutors have taken away the Martyrs lives for
Christ, but could never destroy their love to Christ. Ephesians. 6. 24. Grace be 1
Cor. 13. 8. Love never fails, or as it is in the Greek (...), never falls
away, but shall last for ever in Heaven; in which respect the Apostle lifts it
up above Faith, Hope, and all the common gifts of the Spirit, in the same
Chapter.
with all that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, or, in incorruption, as the
Greek word signifies, whereby the Apostle gives us to understand, That true
love to Christ, is not liable to corruption, putrefaction, or decay, but is
constant and permanent, lasting, yea, everlasting.

That Love that accompanies Salvation, is like to the Oil in the Cruse, and the
Meal in the Barrel, that wasted not; it is like the Apple Tree of Persia, that
buddeth, blossometh, and bears fruit every month; it is like the Lamp in the
story, that never went out; it is like the Stone in Thracia, that neither
burns in the fire, nor sinketh in the water. Cant. 8. 6, 7. Love is stronger
then death, many waters (...) Contemning, it would be contemned. Omnia vincit
amor. Love rides in her chariot of triumph over all calamities, and miseries,
and cries, Victory, victory.
cannot quench it, nor the floods cannot drown it: If a man would give all the
substance of his house for love, it would be contemned. Love will outlive all
enemies, temptations, oppositions, afflictions, persecutions, dangers, and
deaths. Loves Motto is ( Nulli cedo) I yield to none. Love is like the Sun, the
Sun beginning to ascend in his circle, never goes back until he comes to the
highest degree thereof.

True love abhors Apostacy, it ascends to more perfection, and ceases not,
until like Eliahs Fiery-Chariot, it has carried the Soul to Heaven.

Many men's love to Christ, is like the Morning Dew, it is like Jonahs Goard,
that came up in a night, and vanished in a night: But that love that
accompanies Salvation, is like Ruthes love, a lasting, and an abiding Ruth 1.
love; it is Love that will bed and board with the Soul, that will lie down and
rise up with the Soul, that will to the fire, to the prison, to the grave, to
Heaven with the Soul.

Sixthly, That love that accompanies Salvation, is an abounding This is clear
throughout the whole Book of Canti^les, as all may ru^ and read.
love, an increasing love. Love in a Saint, is like the Waters in Noah's time,
that rose higher and higher. The very nature of true Love is to abound and rise
higher and higher, Phil. 1. 9. This I pray, that your love may abound yet more
and more.

The longer a Believer lives, the more eminent and excellent Causes of Love he
sees in Christ. Christ discovers himself gradually to the Soul. Now a Believers
love to Christ, rises answerable to the causes of love that he sees in Christ.
The more light, the more love, Knowledge and Love, like the Water and the Ice,
beget each other.

Man loves Christ by knowing, and knows Christ by loving: Man's love is always
answerable to his light; he cannot love much, that knows but little; he cannot
love little, that knows much. As a man rises higher and higher in his
apprehensions of Amat Deus? non aliunde hoc habet; sed ipse est unde amat. Aug.
Christ; so he cannot but rise higher and higher in his affections to Christ.
Again, the daily Mercies and Experiences that they have of the love of Christ,
of the care of Christ, of the bowels and compassions of Christ, working more
and more toward them, cannot but raise their affections more and more to him:
As fire is increased by adding of fuel unto it, so is our love to Christ, upon
fresh and new manifestations of his great love toward us. As the Husband
abounds in his love to his Wife, so the Wife rises in her love to her Husband;
the more love the Father manifests to the Child, the more the ingenuous Child
rises in his affections to him; so the more love the Lord Jesus shows to us,
the more he is beloved by us. Christ showed much love to Mary Luke 7. 47* 48
Magdalen, and this raises in her much love to Christ; She loved much, for much
was forgiven her. As the Israelites in the three and thirtieth of Numbers,
removed their Tents from Mithkah to Chasmonah, from sweetness to swiftness (as
the words import;) so the sweetness of Divine love manifested to the soul,
makes the soul more sweet, swift, and high in the exercise and actings of love
toward Christ. A Soul under special manifestations of Love, weeps that it can
love Christ no more. Mr. Welsh, a Suffolk Minister, weeping at Table, and being
asked the reason of it, answered, It was because he could love Christ no more.
The true lovers of Christ can never rise high enough in their love to Christ;
they count a little love to be no love; great love to be but little; strong
love to be but weak; and the highest love to be infinitely below the worth of
Christ, the beauty and glory of Christ, the fullness, sweetness, and goodness of
Christ: The top of their misery in this life, is, That they love so little,
though they are so much beloved.

Seventhly and lastly, That Love that accompanies Salvation, is open love, it
is manifest love, it is love that cannot be hid, that cannot be covered and
buried; it is like the Sun, it will shine forth, and show it self to all the
world. A man cannot love Christ, but he will show it in these, and suchlike
things as follow.

First, Divine Love makes the Soul even ready to break, in longing after a
further, clearer, and fuller enjoyment of Christ. The voice of Divine love is,
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Revel. 22. 20. Cant. 8. ult. (...) Be^ahh, dod,
Flee away speedily my beloved.
Make haste my beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, or to a young Heart upon the
Mountain of Spices. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which for
me is best of all. It is a mercy, says Paul, for Christ to be with me, but it
is a greater mercy for me to be with Christ. I desire to die, that I Austin
longed to see that head that was crowned with thorns.
may see my Savior, I refuse to live, that I may live with my Redeemer.

Love desires and endeavors for ever to be present, to converse with, to enjoy,
to be closely and eternally united to its object Christ. The longing of the
espoused Maid for the marriage day, of the Traveller for his Inn, of the
Mariner for his Haven, of the Captive for his Ransom, etc. Is not to be
compared to the longings of the Lovers of Christ, after a further and fuller
enjoyment of Christ.

The Lovers of Christ do well God has reserved the best Wine, the best things,
till last.
know, that till they are taken up into glory, their chains will not fall off,
till then their glorious Robes shall not be put on, till then all sorrow and
tears shall not be wiped from their eyes, till then their joy will not be full,
their Comforts pure, their Peace lasting, their Graces perfect; and this makes
them look and long after the enjoyment of the Person of Christ.

It was a notable saying of one, Let all the Devils in Hell (says he) beset me
round; let fasting macerat my body; let sorrows oppress my mind; let pains
consume my flesh; let watchings dry me, or heat scorch me, or cold freeze me:
Let all these, and what can come more, happen unto me, so I may enjoy my
Savior.

Secondly, Love to Christ shows it self by working the Soul, to abase it self,
that Christ may be exalted, to Revel. 4. 10, 11. Joh* 3 26 to 31. Phil. 3. 7, 8.
throw down it self, that Christ may be set up, to lessen it self, to greaten
Christ, to cloud it self, that Christ a^one may shine. Love cares not what it
is, nor what it does, so it may but advance the Lord Jesus; Love makes the Soul
willing to be a footstool for Christ, to be any thing, to be nothing, that
Christ may be all in all.

Thirdly, That love that accompanies Salvation, sometimes shows it self by
working the Soul to be cheerful and resolute, to be patient and confident in
sufferings for Christ, 1 Cor. Acts 5. 16.
13. Love endures all things: Love will not complain; Love will not say the
burden is too great, the Prison is too dark, the Furnace is too hot, the Chains
are too heavy, the Cup is too bitter, etc. A true lover of Christ can slight
Acts 21. 13.
his life, out of love to Christ; as that blessed Virgin in Basil, who being
condemned for Christianity to the fire, and having her estate, and life offered
her, if she would worship Idols, cried, Let money perish, and life vanish,
Christ is better then all. So Alice Driver said, I drove my Fathers Plough
often, yet I can die for Christ as soon as any of you all. That Love that
accompanies Salvation, makes a Christian free and forward in suffering any
thing that makes for the glory of Christ.

Fourthly, That Love that accompanies Salvation, shows it self by working the
Soul to be pleased or displeased, It is a saying in Natural Philosophy That it
is ( Naturalissimum opus viventis generare sibi simile) the most natural act or
work of every living thing, to produce another like unto it self. Psalm. 45. 7.
and 1^9. 104, 113, 128, 163.
as* Christ is pleased or displeased. A Soul that loves Christ, has his eye
upon Christ, and that which makes Christ frown, makes him frown, and what makes
Christ smile, makes him smile: Love is impatient of any thing that may
displease a beloved Christ. Look what Harpalus once said, ( Quod Regi placet,
mihi placet,) What pleases the King, pleases me, That says a true lover of
Christ, What pleases Christ, that pleases me: Holiness pleases Christ, and
holiness pleases me, says a lover of Christ. It pleases Christ to overcome
evil with good, to overcome Hatred with Love, Enmity with Amity, Pride with
Humility, Passion with Meekness, etc. And the same pleases me, says a lover
of Christ. 1 John 4. 17. As he is, so are we in this world. Our love answers to
Christ's love, and our hatred answers to Christ's hatred; he loves all
Righteousness, and hates all wickedness; so do we, say the Lovers of Christ,
Psalm. 119. 113, 128, 163.

It is said of Constantines Children, Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History.
That they resembled their Father to the life, that they put him wholly on. The
true Lovers of Christ resemble Christ to the life, and they put him wholly on.
Hence it is, That they are called Christ's, 1 Cor. 12. 12.

Fifthly, True love to Christ, shows it self sometimes by working the Lovers of
Christ, to expose themselves to suffering, to save Christ from suffering in his
glory, to adventure the loss of their own crowns, to keep Christ's Crown upon
his head, to adventure drowing to save Christ's honor from sinking.

Thus did the Three Children, Daniel, Moses, and other Worthies. I Heb. 11.
have read of a servant, who dearly loved his Master, and knowing that his
Master was looked for by his enemies, he put on his Masters Clothes, and was
taken for his Master, and suffered death for him. Divine love will make a man
do as much for Christ, it will make a man hang for Christ, and burn for Christ.
Revel. 12. 11. They loved not their lives unto the death. Christ and his Truth
was dearer to them, then their lives; They slighted, contemned, yea, despised
their very lives, when they stood in competition with Christ, and his glory,
and chose rather to suffer the greatest misery, then that Christ should lose
the least dram of his glory.

Sixthly, That Love that accompanies Salvation, shows it self sometimes by
working the lovers of Christ, to be affected and afflicted with the dishonors
that are done to Christ Psalm. 119. Mine eyes run down with Rivers Jere 9. 1, 2.
of tears, because men keep not thy Law. So Lots soul was vexed, racked, 2 Pet.
2. 7, 8. (...), signifies two things, 1. The search and examination of a thing,
2. The racking and vexing a man upon the trial.
and tortured with the filthy conversation of the wicked Sodomites: The turning
of his own flesh, his Wife, into a Pillar of Salt, did not vex him, but their
sins did rack his righteous soul. Psalm. 6^. ^. The reproaches of them that
reproached thee, fell upon me. A woman is most wounded in her Husband, so is a
Christian in his Christ. Though Though King Craesus his son were dumb all his
life time, yet when one would have struck at his Father, the affection that he
had to his Father broke the bars of his Speech, and he cried out, Take heed of
killing the King: You know how to apply it.
Moses was as a dumb child in his own cause, yet when the Israelites by making
and dancing about their Golden Calf, had wounded the honor and glory of God, he
shows himself to be much affected, and afflicted for the dishonor done to God.
The statue of Apollo is said to shed tears for the afflictions of the Grecians,
though he could not help them; so a true lover of Christ will shed tears for
those dishonors that are done to Christ, though he knows not how to prevent
them. It is between Christ and his Lovers, as it is between two Lute strings
that are tuned one to another, no sooner one is struck, but the other trembles;
so no sooner is Christ struck, but a Christian trembles, and no sooner is a
Christian struck, but Christ trembles. Saul, Saul, Acts 9.
why persecutest thou me?

Seventhly, That Love that accompanie^ Salvation, does show it self by working
the Soul, to observe with a curious critical eye, Christ's countenance Vbi amor,
ibi oculus. As love came in by the eye, so it delights by the same door, to run
out to Christ.
and carriage, and by causing the soul to be sad or cheerful, as Christ's
carriage and countenance is toward the soul; when Christ looks sad, and
carries it sadly, then to be sad as Peter was, Christ cast a sad look upon him,
and that made his heart sad; he went forth and wept bitterly. And when Christ
looks sweetly, and speaks kindly, and carries it lovingly, then to be cheerful
and joyful, as the Church was in Cant. 3. 4. It was but a little that I passed
from them, but I found him, whom my soul loves: I held him, and would not let
him go, until I had brought him into my Mothers house, and into the Chamber of
her that conceived me. So the Church in Isai. 61. 10. I will greatly rejoice in
(...) In rejoicing, I will rejoice: That is, I will exceedingly rejoice.
the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he has clothed me with the
garments of Salvation, he has covered me with a robe of Righteousness, as a
Bridegroom decketh himself with Ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth her self
with her Jewels. A true Lover of Christ has still his eye upon Christ, and as
his countenance stands, so is he glad or sad, cheerful or sorrowful. Tigranes
in Xenophon, coming to redeem his Father and Friends, with his Wife, that were
taken prisoners by King Cyrus, was asked among other Questions this, viz. What
ransom he would give for his Wife, he answered, He would redeem her liberty
with his own life: But having prevailed for all their liberties, as they
returned together, every one commended Cyrus for a goodly man; and Tigranes
would needs know of his Wife what she thought of him, Truly (said she) I cannot
tell; for I did not so much as look on him, or see him. Whom then (said he,
wondering) did you look upon? Whom should I look upon (said she) but him that
would have redeemed my liberty, with the loss of his own life? So a Christian,
a true lover of Christ esteems nothing worth a looking upon, but Christ who
has redeemed him with his own Blood.

Eighthly, That Love that accompanies Salvation, reaches forth a hand J^rom
professed how much he loved Christ in Augustine, and Augustine in Christ.
of kindness to those that bear the Image of Christ. 1 John 5. 1, 2. Every one
that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him. By this we
know, that we love the Children of God, when we love God, and keep his
Commandments. He that loves not his Brother, whom he has seen, how can he
love God, whom he has not seen.

Now because many mistake in their love to the Saints, and the consequences
that follow that mistake are very dangerous and pernicious to the souls of men,
I shall therefore briefly hint to you the properties of that love to the Saints
that accompanies Salvation. And

The first is this, True Love to the Saints is spiritual, it is a love for the
Image of God, that is stamped upon the Soul. Col. 1. 8. Epaphras has declared
to us your love in the Spirit. A Soul that truly loves, loves the Father for
his own sake, and the children for the Fathers sake. Many there are that love
Christians for their goods, not for their good; they love them for the money
that is in their purse, but not for the grace that is in their hearts. Many
like the Bohemian Cur, fawn upon a good suit: Love to the Saints, for the Image
of God stamped upon them, is a flower that grows not in Natures Garden. No man
can love Grace in another man's heart, but he that has grace in his own. Men
does not more Remember, wicked men, God himself is wro^ged by the injury that
is done to his Image. The contempt and despite is done to the King himself,
which is done to his Image or Coin.
naturally love their parents, and love their children, and love themselves,
then they do naturally hate the Image of God upon his people, and ways. True
love is for what of the Divine Nature, for what of Christ and Grace shines in a
man: It is one thing to love a godly man, and another thing to love him for
godliness. Many love godly men, as they are Politicians, or Potent, or Learned,
or of a sweet Nature, but all this is but natural love; but to love them,
because they are spiritually lovely, because they are all Psalm. 45. 13.
glorious within, and their raiment is of imbroidered gold, is to love them as
becomes Saints, it is to love them at so high and noble a rate, that no
Hypocrite in the world can reach to it. Tho Wasps fly about the Tradesmans
shop, not out of love to him, but the Honey and the Fruit that is there: This
age is full of such Wasps. Ephesians. 1. 15. Col* 1. 4. It was the glory of the
Ephesians and Colossians, that their Faith and Love reached to all the Saints.
It was not narrow, and confined to some particulars, but it was universal.


Secondly, True Love to the Saints, is universal to one Christian as well as
another, to all as well as any, to poor Lazarus as well as to rich Abraham, to
a despised Job as well as to an admired David, to an afflicted Joseph as well
as to a raised Jacob, to a despised Disciple as well as to an exalted Apostle.
Phil. 4. 21. Salute every Saint; the meanest as well as the richest, the
weakest as well as the strongest, the lowest as well as the highest: They have
all the same Spirit, the same Jesus, the same Faith; they are all Fellow
Members, Fellow Travelers, Fellow Soldiers, Fellow Citizens, Fellow Heirs,
and therefore must they all be loved with a sincere and cordial love. The
Apostle James does roundly condemn that partial love that was among Professors
in his days, Jam. 2. 1, 2. Not that the Apostle does absolutely prohibit a
civil differencing of men in place, from others; but when the rich Non gens sed
men's, non genus sed genius, Not race or place, but grace, truly sets forth a
man.
man's wealth is more regarded then the poor man's godliness, and when men carry
it so to the rich, as to cast scorn, contempt, disgrace, and discouragement
upon the godly poor, This is a sin for which God will visit the sons of Pride.
Pompey told his Cornelia, it is no praise to thee to have loved ( Pompeium
Magnum) Pompey the Great, but if thou love ( Pompeium Miserum) Pompey the
Miserable, thou shall be a pattern for imitation to all posterity. I will leave
you to apply it. Romanus the Martyr, who was born of Noble Parentage, entreated
his Persecutors that they would not favor him for his Nobility; For it is not
(said he) the blood of my Ancestors, but my Christian Faith that makes me noble.

Verily, he that loves one Saint for Yet there is a love of familiarity which
we may lawfully show more to one godly man, then to another. Thus Christ loved
John more then the other Disciples.
the Grace that is in him, for that Holiness, that Image of God that is upon
him, he cannot but fall in love with every Saint that bears the lovely Image of
the Father upon him; he cannot but love a Saint in rags, as well as a Saint in
robes, a Saint upon the dunghill, as well as a Saint upon the throne. Usually
the most ragged Christians, are the richest Christians, they usually have most
of Heaven, that have least of Earth, Jam. 2. 5. The true Diamond shines best in
the dark.

Thirdly, Our Love to the Saints is Yet this must be granted, That grace in a
rugged, unhewn nature, is like a Gold Ring on a leprous hand, or a Diamond set
in Iron; As a Gold Ring is most pleasing, and taking, when it is on a neat,
clean hand, and as a Diamond when it is set in a Ring of Gold; so grace is most
pleasing and taking to us in a sweet nature, and not so much when it is in a
rugged, unhewn nature; the beauty and glory of it, being clouded and darkened by
a rugged nature.
right, when we love them, and delight in them, answerable to the
Spiritualcauses of love that shine in them, as the more holy and gracious they
are, the more we love them. Psalm. 16. 2, 3. My goodness extends not to thee,
but to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all
my delight. This is most certain, If godliness be the reason, why we love any,
then the more any excel others in the Love, Spirit, Power, and practice of
Godliness, the more we should love them. There are those that seem to love such
godly men, as are weak in their judgments, low in their principles, and dull in
their practices; and yet look with a squint-eye upon those that are more sound
in their judgments, more high in their principles, and more holy in their
practices, which doubtless, speaks out more hypocrisy then sincerity. Verily,
he has either no grace, or but a little grace, that does not love most where
the Spiritual causes of love, do most shine and appear. Surely, those
Christians are under a very great distemper of spirit, that envy those gifts
and graces of God in others, that outshine their own. John's Disciples muttered
and murmured, because Christ had more followers and admirers, then John; And
John's Disciples are not all dead, yea, they seem to have a new Resurrection in
these days. Well, as the fairest day has its Clouds, the finest Linen its
spots, the richest Jewels their flaws, the sweetest Fruits their Worms: So when
precious Christians are under temptations, they may, and too often do envy and
repine at those excellent Graces, Abilities, and Excellencies, that cloud,
darken, and outshine their own: The best of men are too full of pride, and
self-love, that makes them sometimes cast dirt and disgrace upon that
excellency that themselves want; Eus^bius speaks of him in his Ecclesiastical
History.
As that great man that could not write his own name, and yet called the
Liberal Arts, a Public Poison and Pestilence. There is no greater Argument,
that our grace is true, and that we do love others for grace sake, then our
loving them best that have most grace; though they have least of worldly goods.
A Pearl is rich, if found on a dunghill, though it may glister more when set in
a Ring of Gold; so many a poor Believer is rich and glorious in the eye of
Christ, and should be so in ours; though like Job he sits upon a dunghill;
though to the world he may seem to glister most, when adorned with riches,
honor, and outward pomp, etc.

Fourthly, True Love to Saints is constant, 1 Cor. 13. 8. Love never fails,
it continues for ever in Heaven; that love was never true, that is not
constant. Heb. 13. 1. Let brotherly love continue. True love is constant in
prosperity Consalvus (a Spanish Bishop and I^quisitor) wondered how the
Christians had that Commandment, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, so
indelibly Printed in their hearts. that no torture could blot it out, and make
them confess, and betray one another, or cease from loving one another.
and adversity, in storms and calms, in health and sickness, in presence and in
absence. Thy own friend, and thy Fathers friend, forsake not. A friend (says
the Wiseman) loves at all times, and a brother is born for adversity.
Prosperity makes friends, and Adversity will try friends: A true friend is
neither known in prosperity, nor hid in adversity. True love is like to that of
Ruths to Naomi, and that of Jonathans to David, permanent and constant. Many
there be whose love to the Saint, is like Jobs Brooks, Job 6. 15, 16. which in
Winter when we have no need, over-flows with tenders of service, and shows of
love; but when the season is hot and dry, and the poor thirsty Travellor stands
in most need of water to refresh him, then the Brooks are quite dried up. They
are like the Swallow that will stay by you in the Summer, but fly from you in
the Winter.

It is observed by Josephus of the Samaritans, that when ever the Jews affairs
prospered, they would be their friends, and profess much love to them; Augustus
Caesar was a constant friends to those whom he loved he used to say, ( Amare
nec cito desisto, nec te^ere incipio) Late ere I love, as long ere I leave.
but if the Jews were in trouble, and wanted their assistance, then they would
not own them, nor have any thing to do with them. This age is full of such
Samaritans; yet such as truly love, will always love. In the Primitive times,
it was very much taken notice of by the very Heathen, That in the depth of
misery, when Fathers and Mothers forsook their Children, Christians (otherwise
strangers) stuck close one to another, their love of Religion, and one of
another, proved firmer, then that of nature. They seem to take away the Sun out
of the World, (said the Orator) who take away friendship from the life of men:
And we do not more need fire and water, then constant friendship.

Ninthly, That Love that accompanies Salvation, does manifest and show it self
by working the Soul to be quiet, and still under Christ's rebukes. John 21. 16,
17, 18
Peter sits down quiet under a threefold reproof; Lord thou know all things,
thou know that I love thee. So Eli, It is 1 Samuel 3. 18.
the Lord, let him do what seems good in his own eyes. And Aaron holds his
peace, Levit. 10. 3.
when he saw the flames about his sons ears: So David, I was dumb, I opened
Psalm. 39. 9.
not my mouth, because thou did it. The lovers of Christ are like the
Scythian, that went naked in the Snow; and when Alexander wondered how he could
endure it, he answered, I am all forehead. O the lovers of Christ are all
forehead, to bear the rebukes of the Lord Jesus.

The Lovers of Christ know, That all his rebukes are from love; whom he Revel
3. 19.
loves, he rebukes; they can see smiles through Christ's frowns: They know, that
to argue that Christ hates them, because he rebukes them, is the Devils Logic;
They know, that all the rebukes of Christ, are in order to their internal and
eternal good, and that quiets them; They know, that all the rebukes of Christ
are but forerunners of some glorious manifestations of greater love to their
souls. Psalm. 71. 20, 21. Thou which have showed me great and sore troubles,
shall quicken me again, and shall bring me up again from the depths of the
Earth. Thou shall increase my greatness, and comfort me on every side. They
know that it is the forest judgment in the world, to go on freely in a way of
sin without rebukes. Ebhraim is joined to Idols, let him alone. Hos. 4. 17.
And therefore they keep silence before the Lord, they lay one hand upon their
mouths, and the other upon their hearts, and so sit mute before the Holy One.

Tenthly, That Love that accompanies Salvation, shows it self by working the
heart to be affected and afflicted with the least dishonors that are done to
Christ. Love is curious of little things, it is as much afflicted with an idle
word, or with an impure dream, as lovers of Christ are with adultery or
blasphemy. David did but cut off the lap of Saul's Garment, and his heart ^mote
him, 1 Samuel 24. 5. Though he did it to convince Saul of his false jealousy,
and his own innocence. Love will not allow of the least infirmity, Romans 7. 15.
That which I do, I allow not. Love will make a man aim at Angelical purity, and
perfect innocence; love will be getting up to the top of Jacobs Ladder; love
can rest in nothing below perfection: Love makes a man look more at what he
should be, then at what he is; it makes a man strive as for life, to imitate
the highest examples, and to write after the choicest copies. Love fears The
sin, and the coat of the sin, is to be hated, says Ambrose.
every Image of offense, it trembles at the appearance of sin, it does not, it
cannot allow it self to do any thing that looks like sin, it hates the Garment
spotted with the flesh, it shuns the occasions of sin, as it shuns Hell it
self: This is the Divine curiosity and glory of a Christians love. Love says,
Melius mori fame, quam Idolothytis vesci. Aug. Marcus Arethusius in Julians
time.
It is better to die with hunger, then to eat that which is offered to Idols. I
have read of a holy man, who out of his love to Christ, and hatred of Idolatry,
would not give one halfpenny toward the building of an Idols Temple, though he
was provoked thereunto by intolerable torments. Love The Nieene Fathers would
not gratify Arrius, no not in one tittle.
knows that the least evils are contrary to the greatest good, they are
contrary to the Nature of Christ, the Commands of Christ, the Spirit of Christ
the Grace of Christ, the Glory of Christ, the Blood of Christ. Love knows that
little dishonors (if I may call any sin little) make way for greater; as little
Thieves unlock the door, and make way for greater. Love knows that little sins
multiplied, become great: As love knows that there is nothing lesser then a
grain of Sand; so love knows that there is nothing heavier then the Sand of the
Sea, when multiplied.

Eleventhly, That love that accompanies Salvation, will show it self by keeping
the doors of the heart shut against those treacherous lovers, that would draw
the heart from Christ. Love is a Golden Key to let in Christ, and a strong lock
to keep out others: Though many may knock at Loves door, yet Love will open to
none but Christ. Cant. 5. 6. I opened to my Beloved. and 8. 7. Many waters
cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it: If a man would give all
the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be contemned, (Bon
Jabuzu) contemning it would be contemned. When the world would buy So did
Luther Galeaciou^ that noble Italian.
his love, he cries out with Peter, Thy money perish with thee. Love makes a
man look with a holy scorn and disdain upon all persons and things, that
attempt either to force or flatter her out of her love and loyalty to her
Beloved. It is neither force, nor fraud; it is neither promises, nor
threatenings; it is neither the Cross, nor the Crown; the Palace, nor the
Prison; the Rod, nor the Robe; the Hempton Halter, nor the Golden Chain, that
will make love embrace a stranger in the room of Christ. Go, says Divine Love,
offer your Gold, and empty Glories, to others; your Pleasures, and your
Treasures to others; put on your Lions skin, and fright others: As for my part,
I scorn, and contemn your golden offers, and I disdain, and deride your rage
and threats. Love makes a man too noble, too high, too gallant, and too
faithful, to open, to any lover but Christ, to let any lie between the Breasts
but Christ, Cant. 1. 13. A bundle of myrrh is my welbeloved unto me; be shall
lie all night betwixt my Breasts. When Basil was Plato (says Pliny) took as
much delight and glory in those dignities and hono^^, he denied, as he did in
those he did enjoy. It ^s just so with the Saints.
tempted with money and preferment, he answers, ( Pecuniam da quae perma neat,
ac continuo duret, gloriam quae semper floreat,) Give money that may last for
ever, and glory that may eternally flourish. Love makes a man cry out, when
tempted, Let not any man think that he will embrace other men's goods to forsake
Christ, who has forsaken his own proper goods to follow Christ. Love makes a
man cry out when tempted, as that worthy Convert did, ( Ego non sum ego) I am
not the man that I was. When my heart was void of Divine Love, I was as easily
conquered, as I was tempted: O but now he has shed abroad his love in my soul,
I am not the man that I was, I had rather die then fly, or fall before a
temptation.

Twelfthly, That Love that accompanies Salvation, shows it self by secret
kindnesses, by secret visits, by secret expressions of love. A Soul that truly
loves Christ, loves to meet him in a corner, to meet him behind the door, to
meet him in the clefts of the Cant. 2. 14. Matthew. 6. 6.
Rock, where no eye sees, nor no ear hears, nor no heart observes. Feigned love
is much in commending and kissing Christ upon the stage; but unfeigned love is
much in embracing, and weeping over Christ in a Closet. The Pharisee loved to
stand praying in the Matthew. 6.
Marketplace, and in the Temple; but Nathaniel was with Christ under the John
1. 48.
Fig Tree; and Cornelius was at it in the Acts 10.
corner of his house; and Peter was at it on the Leads; and the Spouse Cant. 7.
11.
was at it in the Villages. Souls that truly love Christ, are much in secret
visits, in secret prayer, in secret sighing, in secret groaning, in secret
mourning, etc. True love is good at bolting of the door, and is always best
when it is most with Christ in a corner. The secret discoveries that Christ
makes to souls, do much oblige them to closet services.

Arcesilaus, in Plutarch, visiting his sick friend, and perceiving his
necessity that he wanted, and yet his modesty that he was ashamed to ask, that
he might satisfy the one, and yet salve the other, secretly conveyed money
under his Pillow; which his friend finding after he was gone, was wont to say,
Arcesilaus stole this: So Christ steals secret kindnesses upon his people, and
that draws them out to be much in secret, in closet services.

Thirteenthly, That Love that accompanies Salvation, shows it self by breathing
after more clear evidence, and full assurance of Christ's love. To the soul,
Divine love would fain have her drop turned into an Ocean, her spark into a
flame, her penny into a pound, her mite into a million. A soul that truly
loves, can never see enough, nor never taste enough, nor never feel enough, nor
never enjoy enough of the love of Christ; when once they have found his love to
be better then Wine, then nothing will satisfy them but the kisses of his
mouth. Cant. 1. 3. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth. Not with a
kiss, but with the kisses of his mouth. A soul once kissed by Christ, can never
have enough of the kisses of Christ; his lips drop myrrh, and mercy; no kisses
to the kisses of Christ. The The more a Virgins love is drawn out to another,
the more she desires to be confirmed and assured of his love to her.
more any soul loves Christ, the more serious, studious, and industrious will
that soul be, to have the love of Christ discovered, confirmed, witnessed, and
sealed to it. That is a sweet word of the Spouse, Cant. 8. 6. Set me as a seal
upon thy heart, as a seal upon thy arm; for love is strong as death. Set me as
a seal upon thy heart; that is, Let me be deeply engraven as a seal into thy
heart and affections: Let the love and remembrance of me, make a deep
impression in thee; and set me as a seal or signet on thy arm.

1. The seal you know is for ratifying, confirming, and making sure of things.
O says the Spouse, establish and confirm me in thy love, and in the outward
expressions and manifestations of it.

2. Seals among the Jews were used, not as Ornaments only, but as Monuments of
love that were continually in sight and remembrance. O says the Church, Let me
be still in thy sight and remembrance, as a monument of thy love. In the Old
Law, you know Exodus 28. 11, 12, 21, 29. compared.
the High Priest did bear the names of Israel engraven on stones, upon his
heart and shoulder, for a memorial. Ah says the Church, Let my name be deeply
engraven upon thy heart; let me be always in thy eye; let me be always a
memorial upon thy shoulder.

3. Great men have their signets upon their hands in precious esteem. Jere. 22.
24. As I live, says the Lord, though Coniah, the son of Jehojakim King of
Judah, were the signet upon my right hand, yet would I pluck thee thence. Ah
says the Spouse, O highly prize me, Lord Jesus highly esteem of me, O let me
be as dear and precious unto thee, as the signet that thou carriest about with
thee, or as signets are to great men that wear them.

Lastly, That Love that accompanies Salvation, shows it self by working a true
lover of Christ, to commit his richest Treasures, his choicest Jewels, to the
care and custody of Christ. Where we love, we will trust; and as we love, we
will trust: Little trust, speaks out little love; great trust, speaks out great
love. The lovers of Christ, commend to Christ's Psalm. 31. 15. So Job, so Paul. 2 Timothy 1. 12. and 4. 7, 8 Micah 7. 8, 9. Dan 6. 22.
care, their Pearls of greatest price, their Names, their Lives, their Souls,
their Crowns, their Innocence, their All. It was a notable saying of Luther,
Let him that died for my soul, see to the salvation of it. Caesar received not
his wounds from the swords of enemies, but from the hands of friends; that is,
from trusting in them. Oh! but the lovers of Christ shall never receive any
wounds, by trusting in Christ, by committing their choicest Jewels to his care;
for he has a powerful hand, and a wise and loving heart. Christ will hold fast
whatever the Father, or the Saints put into his hand. And thus I have showed
you what that Love is, that does accompany Salvation. I come now in the sixth
place to show you, what Prayer that is that does accompany Salvation. (But I
see that I must contract what remains into a narrow room, lest I should tire
out both the Reader and my self. Which that I may not, I shall endeavor by
Divine Assistance, to mind brevity in what remains.)

Now that Prayer does accompany Salvation, I have formerly showed. Now I am
briefly to show you what Prayer that is that does accompany Salvation, and that
I shall do in these following particulars.

First, Prayer is a Divine Worship, The matter of Prayer may be reduced to
these heads, 1. Petition. 2. Deprecation. 3. Intercession 4. Expostulation.
There are other distinctions in regard of the manner, As first, Mental Prayer,
which is the inward lifting up of the heart to God. Secondly, Vocal, which is
uttered by words, As the Publicans, God be merciful to me a sinner. Thirdly,
There is conceived prayer, and prescribed prayer. Fourthly, There is public or
private prayer. These hints may suffice as to this.
wherein we speak to God in Faith, Humility, Sincerity, and Fervency of Spirit,
through the Mediation of Christ, begging those good things that we and others
want, deprecating that we and others fear, and giving thanks for that we and
others have received. Prayer is a speaking to God face to face; it is Jacobs
Ladder, by which the soul climbs up to Heaven; it is Noah's Dove, that goes, and
returns not till it brings Assurance of Peace.

But not to please you with notions, you must remember that that Prayer that
accompanies Salvation, is such Prayer as has in it all the requisites of
Prayer. Now there are four requisites in Prayer.

First, The person must be righteous, Iam. 5. 16. The fervent prayer of a
righteous man avails much. John 9. 31. God hears not sinners. The Jews urge
it as a Proverb, An unclean person polluteth his own Prayers. Good motions from
a bad heart, make no music in Heaven; the sweet words that drop from a Lepers
lips, are but lies in the account of God. Hosea 11. 12.

I have read of a Jewel, that being put in a dead man's mouth, loses all its
virtue: Prayer in the mouth of a wicked man that is dead God-wards,
Christ-wards, Heaven-wards, and Holiness-wards, is a Jewel that loses all its
virtue. Psalm. 50. 16, 17. But unto the wicked, God says, What have thou to do
to declare my Statutes; or that thou Quid prodest voce invocare, quem operibus
negas? Jerome. What avails it to invocate him with thy voice, whom thou
deniest in thy works?
should take my Covenant into thy mouth? Seeing that thou hate
instruction, and castest my words behind thee. Bias, an Heathen, being at Sea
in a great storm, and perceiving many wicked wretches with him in the ship,
calling upon the gods, O, says he, forbear Prayer, hold your tongues, I would
not have the gods take notice that you are here, they will sure drown us all,
if they should. You are wise, and know how to apply it.

The second requisite in Prayer, is It was both a profane and blasphemous
Speech of that Atheistical wretch, that told God he was no common beggar, he
never troubled him before with prayer, and if he would hear him that time, he
would never trouble him again. Heil. Mic p. 376.
this, viz. The matter of your Prayer must be good, 1 John 5. 14. And this is
the confidence that we have in him, That if we ask any thing according to his
will, he hears us. The Favorits of Heaven have no further the ear of the King
of Kings in Prayer, then the matter of their Prayer is good, and agreeable to
his will, Romans 8. 27. The matter of your Prayer must fall under some
particular, or general precept, or promise, or else God will never own it, nor
honor it with acceptance. You must not pray as Augustine prayed before his
Conversion, he prayed for continency with a Proviso, Lord give me continency
(says he) but not yet. Such Hypocrisy is double Iniquity, and God will deal
with such sinners accordingly.

Thirdly, As the matter of your Prayer must be good, so the manner of your
Prayer must be right. God regards not so much the matter, as the manner of our
Prayer; God loves Adverbs, better then Nowns; not to Criton.
pray only, but to pray well; ( Non bonum, sed been agere) not to do good, but
to do it well.

Now for the better and further clearing of this truth, I shall show you, by
Divine Assistance, what it is to pray in a right manner; and that I shall do in
the following particulars.

First, To pray in a right manner, is to pray understandingly, to pray
knowingly, 1 Cor. 14. 15. I will pray with understanding. He that does not pray
understandingly, does not pray, but prate; as that Parrot in Rome, that could
distinctly say over the whole Ignorant sane improbus omnis, says Aristotle.
Ignorance is the source of all sin, the very wellspring from which all
wickedness does issue.
Creed. John 4. 22. Ye worship ye know not what (says Christ.) So many pray
they know not what. Without knowledge, the mind cannot be good, Prove. 19. And
can the Prayer be good, when the mind is bad? A blind mind, a blind
Sacrifice, and a blind Priest, are abominable to God. It was a good saying of
one, God hears not the words of one that prays, (says he) unless he that
prays, hears them first himself: And verily, God will never understand that
Prayer, that we do not understand our selves.

Secondly, To pray in a right manner, is to pray believingly, Heb. 11. 6. He
The Philosopher could say, Qui timi^e rogat, docet negare, He that craveth
fearfully, draws on a denial.
that comes unto God, must believe that he is; that is, that he is really, as
good, as gracious, as glorious, as excellent, as constant, etc. as his word
reports him to be. And that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him.
Mark 11. 24. Therefore I say unto you, what things soever ye desire when ye
pray, believe that ye One of the Ancients describes Prayer thus; It is (says
he) Ascensus mentis ad Deum, a climbing up of the heart to God, which cannot be
done, but by the power of Faith.
receive them, and ye shall have them. In the Greek it is (...) in the
Presenttense, Ye do receive them, to show the certainty of receiving them: You
shall as certainly receive the good things that believingly you ask in Prayer,
as if you had them already in your hand. God will never let the hand of Faith
go empty away in Prayer: Faith is Gods darling, and he never fails to give it a
worthy portion, a Benjamins portion, a Hannahs portion, a double portion, Iam.
1. 5, 6, 7. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all
men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him. But let him ask
in faith, nothing wavering; for he that wavereth, is like Unbelief is virtually
all ill, therefore fight especially against it.
a wave of the Sea, driven with the wind, and tossed. For let not that man
think, that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. He that prays doubtingly,
shuts the Gates of Heaven against his own Prayers.

It is reported in the life of Luther, that when he prayed, it was ( Tanta
reverentia ut si Deo, and tanta fiducia ut si amico) with so much reverence, as
if he were praying to God; and with so much boldness, as if he had been
speaking to his friend. Faith in Prayer, makes a man divinely familiar, and
bold with God in Prayer. That Prayer that has not the image and stamp of Faith
upon it, is no Prayer in Divine account. The sweetest flowers of Paradise, are
only acceptable to God, as they are tendered to him by a hand of Faith.

Augustus, when a poor man came to present a Petition to him, with his hand
shaking and trembling out of fear, the Emperor was much displeased, and said,
It is not fit that any should come with a Petition to a King, as if a man were
giving meat to an Elephant, that is, afraid to be destroyed by him.

Verily, Jehovah loves to see every one of his Petitioners to come to him with
a steadfast Faith, and not with a trembling Hand. Christ gets most glory, and
the Soul gets most good, by those Prayers that are accompanied with the actings
of Faith.

Thirdly, To pray in a right manner, is to pray intensly, servently, earnestly.
So Jam. 5. 16. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much;
(...), Faith is an omniporent grace, it works wonders in Heaven, in the Heart,
and in Earth, Such working-prayer as sets all the faculties of the soul, and
all the graces in the soul at work, always speeds; it fails not of winning the
day, of carrying the Crown.
or as the Greek has it, The working Prayer; that is, such Prayer as sets the
whole man a work; the word signifies, such a working as notes the liveliest
activity that can be. As Physic kills the body, if it work not; so does Prayer
the soul, if it be not a working-prayer. As a painted fire is no fire, a dead
man no man; so a cold prayer is no prayer: In a painted fire there is no heat,
in a dead man there is no life; so in a cold prayer there is no omnipotency, no
devotion, no blessing. It is not cold, but workingprayer, that can lock up
Heaven three years, and open Heavens gate at pleasure, and bring down the
sweetest blessings upon our heads, and the choicest favors into our hearts.
Cold Prayers are as Arrows without heads, as Swords without edges, as Birds
without wings, they pierce not, they cut not, they fly not up to Heaven: Cold
Prayers do always freeze before they reach to Heaven. So Jacob was earnest in
his wrestling with God. Let Genesis 32. 24, 25, 26, 27.
me alone, says God: I will not let thee go, except thou bless me, says
Jacob. Jacob, though lamed, and hard laid at, will not let the Lord go without
a blessing: Jacob holds with his hands, when his joints were out of joint; and
so as a Prince prevails with God. Jacob prays and weeps, and weeps The Jews
have a saying, That since the destruction of Jerusalem, the door of prayers
has been shut: But the door of tears was never shut, says One.
and prays, and so prevails with God. Hos. 12. 4. Yea, he had power over the
Angel, and prevailed; he wept and made supplication unto him, etc. It is not
the labor of the lips, but the travel of the heart; it is not the pouring forth
a flood of words, but the pouring out of the soul, that makes a man a Prince, a
prevailer with God. A man that would gain victory over God in Prayer, must
strain every string of his heart; he Rom 15. 30. (...), the word signifies, to
strive to the shedding of blood. Luke 18. 5. (...). Buffet me, or beat me down
with her blows, as wrestlers beat down their adve^saries with their fists, or
clubs.
must in beseeching God, besiedge him, and so get the better of him; he must
strive in Prayer, even to an agony; he must be like importunate beggars, that
will not be put off with frowns, or silence, or sad answers. Those that would
be masters of their requests, must with the importunate Widow, press God so
far, as to put him to the blush; they must with a holy impudence (as Basil
speaks) make God ashamed to look them in the face, if he should deny the
importunity of their souls. An importunate soul will never cease till he speed,
he will devour all discouragements, yea, he will turn discouragements into
encouragements, as the woman of Canaan did, till Christ says, Be it unto thee,
O Soul, as thou will. As a body without a soul, much wood without fire, a
bullet in a gun without powder; so are words in Prayer, Oration brevis penetrat
c^lum, says one.
without fervency of Spirit. The hotest Springs send forth their waters by
ebullitions.

I have read of one, who being sensible of his own dullness and coldness in
Prayer, chid himself thus; What? The Jews write upon the walls of their
Synagogues this sentence, That Prayer without the intention of the mind, is
but as a body without a soul. You know how to apply it.
do thou think that Jonah prayed thus, when he was in the belly of Hell? or
Daniel, when he was in the Lions den? or the Thief when he was upon the cross?
And I may add, or the three Children when they were in the fiery furnace? or
the Apostles when they were in bonds and prisons? O that Christians would chide
themselves out of their cold Prayers, and chide themselves into a better, and a
warmer frame of spirit, when they make their Supplications before the Jerome
speaks of certain holy women in his time, That they seemed in their fervent
affections to join with the holy company of Heaven.
Lord. An importunate Soul in Prayer, is like the poor beggar, that prays and
knocks, that prays and waits, that prays and works, that knocks and knits,
that begs and patches, and will not stir from the door, till he has an alms.
And verily, he that is good at this, will not be long a beggar in grace; God
will make his heart, and his cup to overflow.

Fourthly, To pray in a right manner, is, To pray a^^iduously, constantly, as
well as fervently, Luke 18. 1. And he spoke a parable unto them, to this end,
that men ought always to pray, and not so faint; or as it is in the Greek, not
to (...), id est, non de^atigati. Cornel a Lap. To pray always is (...), to
pray in every opportunity.
shri^k back, as sluggards in work, or cowards in war. Now men pray always,
first, when their hearts are always prepared to pray, or in a praying frame:
Secondly, When they do not omit the duty, when it is to be performed; or when
they take hold on every opportunity, to pour out their souls before the Lord. 1
These. 5. 17. Pray without ceasing A man must always pray habitually, though not
actually, he must have his heart in a praying disposition Semper orat qui been
s^mpe^ agit. To pray always, is to pray omni tempore.
in all estates and conditions, in prosperity and adversity, in health and
sickness, in strength and weakness, in wealth and wants, in life and death. So
in Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the
Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication for all
Saints. Our daily weaknesses, our daily wants, our daily Prayer, says one, is
Flagellum Diaboli.
fears, our daily dangers, our daily temptations, etc. be speak our daily
Prayers. Romans 12. 12. Rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation, continuing
instant in Prayer. It is a Metaphor (...).
taken from dogs that hunt, that will not give over the game, till they have
got it. A dog of all Creatures is best Augustines usual wish was, That when
Christ came, he might find him, ( Aut precantem, aut praedicantem) either
praying or preaching.
able to endure hunger, he will run from place to place, and never leave till
he has got his prey: So a child of God in his hunting after God, Christ,
Grace, Peace, Mercy, Glory, never gives over till he has found his heavenly
prey, Cant. 3. 4. At length I found him whom my soul loved; I held him, and
would not let him go. The Spouse never left hunting after her beloved, till she
had found him. Gracious souls reckon As a hungry man eats, as if he had never
eat before.
that they have nothing, till they speed in the things they sue for; they pray
as if they had never prayed, and think that they have done nothing, till they
have done the deed. It is observed by some, of Proteus, that he was wont to
give certain Oracles; but it was hard to make him speak, and deliver them, but
he would turn himself into several shapes and forms; yet if they would hold
out, and press him hard without fear, into whatsoever form or shape he
appeared, they were sure to have satisfactory Oracles: So if we will continue
Hypocrites are inconstant in their prayers, Job 27. 10. they are only at it by
sits and starts, they are only constant in inconstancy.
constant in our wrestling with God for blessings, though God should appear to
us in the form or shape of a Judge, an Enemy, a Stranger, etc. yet still to
press him hard for mercy, verily, mercy will come at the long run, and we shall
say, That it is not in vain for men to hold on praying, though God for a time
delays giving the particular favors they sue for. As that Emperor said, (
Oportet Imperatorem stantem mori) It behooves an Emperor to die standing: So may
I say, ( Oportet Christianum mori precantem,) It behooves a Christian to die
praying.

Fifthly, To pray in a right manner, is, To pray sincerely, Psalm. 17. 1. Give
ear unto my prayer, that goes not out of (...) The very Heathen gods wo^ld be
served in white, the very emblem of purity.
feigned lips; or, as it is in the Hebrew, without lips of deceit. Psalm. 145.
18. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him: To all that call upon
him in truth. Your heart and tongue must go together, word and work, lip and
life, prayer and practice, must echo one to another, or else all will be lost;
God lost, Christ lost, Heaven lost, and the Soul lost for ever. It is not the
greatness of the voice, nor the multitude of words, nor the sweetness of the
tone, nor studied notions, nor eloquent expressions that takes Jehovah, Psalm.
51. 6.
but truth in the inward parts. When the Athenians would know of the Oracle,
the cause of their often unprosperous successes in battle against the
Lacedaemonians, seeing they offered the choicest things they could get, in
sacrifice to the gods, which their enemies did not; The Oracle gave them this
answer, That the gods were better pleased with their inward supplication,
without ambition, then with all their outward pomp in costly sacrifices. Ah
Souls, the reason why you are so unsuccessful in your religious duties and
services, is, Because you are no more sincere and upright in them; were A
Gentlewoman being in her Parlor in Meditation and Prayer, cried out, O that I
might ever enjoy this sweet communion with God, and never change it. The first
part of her wish is precious, in the latter part of the wish (like Peter) she
said she knew not what.
there more singleness, and sincerity of heart in your duties, you would have
surer and sweeter returns from Heaven.

One reports of Joachim, the Father of the Virgin Mary, that he would often say
( Cibus and potus mihi erit oration,) Prayer is my meat and drink. Ah
Christians, the more sincere you are, the more will Prayer be your meat and
drink; and the more prayer is a delight and pleasure to you, the more will you
be the pleasure and delight of God, who delights in those that delight in his
service, and that count his work better then wages. It was more troublesome to
Severus (the Emperor) to be asked nothing, then to give much; when any of his
Courtiers had not made bold with him, he would call him, and say, ( Quid est
cur nihil petis? etc.) What meanest thou to ask me nothing? So says Christ, to
upright souls; Hitherto have ye asked nothing: Ask and ye shall receive, that
your joy may be full, John 16. 24. Christ has a full purse, a noble heart, and
a liberal hand.

The fourth requisite in Prayer, is this, viz. Your Prayer must be ad bonum,
Max^milians Motto was, ( Tene mensuram, and respice finem) Keep thy self within
compass, and have always an eye to the end of thy life and actions.
to a good end, it must be to the glory of God, and to the internal and eternal
advantage of your own, and others souls. The chiefest end, the white, the mark,
at which the soul must aim in Prayer, is Gods glory. Whatsoever ye do, do all
to the glory of God. When God crowns us, he does but crown his own gifts in us;
and when we give God the glory of all we do, we do but give him the glory that
is due unto his Name: For he works all our works in us, and for us. God
measures all men's actions by their ends; if the end be good, all is good; if
the end be naught, all is naught: The end determines the action. All actions
of worship, are good or bad, as the mark is at which the soul aims. He that
makes God the object of Prayer, but not the end of Prayer, does but lose his
Prayer, and take pains to undo himself. God will Lord, says Austin, whatever
thou have given, take all away, only give me thy self. Isai. 1. 11. Zach. 7. 5
Amos 5 22. Hos. 7. 14. Many Heathens as Aristides, Cato, Themistecles, with
diverse others, did unfeignedly many great services for the common good, and not
for their own gain, but yet they could not hit the mark, the white, Divine
glory; and so their most glorious actions were but glorious sins, and would
never turn to their souls accounts.
be all in all, or he will be nothing at all; he will be Alexander or Nemo, he
will be both the object and the end of Prayer, or else he will abhor your
Prayer. Those Prayers never reach his ear, they are never lodged in his bosom,
that are not directed to his glory: The end must always be as noble as the
means, or else a Christian acts below himself, yea, below his very Reason.

Ah Christians, it is not a flood of words, nor high strains of wit, nor
vehemence of affections in Prayer, but holy and gracious ends that will render
Prayer acceptable and honorable to God, comfortable and profitable to your
selves, and others; yea, the directing of one Prayer to divine glory, does more
torture and torment Satan, then all the Prayers in the world that are directed
to ends below divine glory. It is not simply Prayer, but the souls aiming at
divine glory in Prayer, that adds to Christ's Crown, and Satan's Hell.

And thus I have showed you all the Requisits of Prayer, even of such Prayer as
accompanies Salvation. I shall now proceed to some other particulars, for the
further and fuller opening of this truth.

Secondly, That Prayer that accompanies It was a sweet saying of one, O Lord, I
never come to thee, but by thee; I never go from thee, without thee.
Salvation, betters the whole Man; by it Faith is increased, Hope strengthened,
the Spirit exhilarated, the Heart pacified, the Conscience purified,
Temptations vanquished, Corruptions weakened, the Affections inflamed, the Will
more renewed, and the whole Man more advantaged. Prayer is a Spiritual Chair,
wherein the soul siteth down at the feet of the Lord, to receive the influences
of his Grace: Prayer is the Regal Gate, by which the Lord enters into the
heart, comforting, quieting, strengthening, quickening, and raising of it. The
Scripture affords us a cloud of witnesses to prove this truth, but I appeal to
praying Saints, Ah tell me, tell me, praying Souls, have not you, do not you
find it so? I know you have and do, and that is it that makes Prayer a
pleasure, a paradise unto you.

Thirdly, You may judge what Prayer that is that accompanies Salvation, by
considering the difference that is betwixt the Prayers of the godly and the
wicked. Now the difference between the Prayers of the one, and the other, I
shall show you in the following particulars.

First, Gracious Souls do trade and deal with God in Prayer only upon the
account and credit of Christ. They It is a notable saving Luther has upon the
130 Psalm. Often and willingly, says he, do I inculcate this, that you should
shut your eyes and your ears, and say, You know no God out of Christ, none, but
he that was in the lap of Mary, and sucked her Breasts. He means none out of him.
beg mercy to pardon them, and grace ^o purge them, and balm to heal them, and
divine favor to comfort them, and power to support them, and wisdom to counsel
them, and goodness to satisfy them; but all upon the account of Christ's Blood,
of Christ's Righteousness, of Christ's Satisfaction, and of Christ's Intercession
at the right hand of the Father, Revel. 4. 10, 11. They seek the Father in the
Son, they present their suits always in Christ's Name; for so is the will of
Christ, John 14. 13, 14. And whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that will I
do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask any thing in
my Name, I will do it. John 15. 16. Whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my
Name, he will give it you. Chap. 16. 23. Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye
shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you. (...). The Greek is
pregnant, and may be read, not only whatsoever, but also how many things
soever ye shall ask or beg of the Father in my Name, he will give them to you.
There is no admission into Heaven, except we bring Christ in our arms, Ephesians.
2. 18. For through him we both have access by one Spirit, unto (...). As no
access, so no acceptance without Christ. Ephesians. 1. 6. Wherein he has made us
accepted in the beloved.
the Father. The Greek word signifies A leading by the hand, it is an allusion
to the custom of Princes, to whom there is no passage, unless we be brought in
by one of their Favorites. Plutarch reports, That it was wont to be the way of
some of the Heathens, the Molossians, when they would seek the favor of their
Prince, they took up the Kings Son in their Arms, and so went and kneeled
before the King. Ah Christians, Christ is near and dear unto the Father, the
Father has determined to give out all his loves and favors through his Son; if
you bring As Jacob said, See not my face, except you bring Benjamin with you:
So says God, See not my face, except you bring Jesus with you. Genesis 42. 20, to
34. And as David said to Abner. 2 Samuel 3. 13.
Christ in the arms of your Faith, you gain the Fathers heart, and in gaining
his heart, you gain all. The Fathers Mercies melt, his Bowels roll, his Heart
turns, his Compassions are kindled, upon the sight of his Sons Merits and
Mediation. As Joseph said to his Brethren, Ye shall not see my face, unless you
bring your Brother Benjamin: So says God, you shall not see my face unless you
bring the Lord Jesus with you.

Now gracious Souls, in all their Prayers, they present Jesus Christ before the
Father, and upon his account they desire those things that make for their
external, internal, and eternal good. Ah but vain men treat and trade with God
in Prayer, upon the account of their own worth, righteousness, worthiness, and
services, Isa. 58. 2, 3. Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways,
as a Nation that did Righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinance of their God.
They ask of me the Ordinances of Justice, they take delight in approaching to
me: Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou see not? Wherefore have we
afflicted our souls, and thou take no knowledge? Here you see they stand upon
their own practices, and services, and expostulate the case with God in an
angry manner, because God did not answer their hypocritical performances. So
the proud Pharisee stands in Prayer upon his own worthiness, and righteousness,
Luke 18. 11, 12. The Pharisee stood and prayed This Pharisee was like the
Egyptian Temple, painted without, and spotted within, varnish without, and
vermin within.
thus with himself, God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican. I fast twice in the
week, I give tithes of all that I possess. So did those Hypocrites in the sixth
Chapter, and in the three and twentieth Chapter of Matthew, stand very much
upon their outward services and performances, though they were but shining
sins, but filthy rags.

Secondly, Souls truly gracious, pray more to get off their sins, then they do
to get off their chains. Though Bonds did attend Paul in every place, as Acts
20. 23.
himself speaks, yet he never cries out, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from my Bonds, but O Romans 7. 23.
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me, from my sins, from this body of
death? David cries not, Perii, but Peccavi, Psalm. 51.
Not I am undone, but I have done foolishly: But wicked men strive in Prayer,
more to get off their chains, then to get off their sins, more to be delivered
from enemies without, then lusts within, more to get out of the Furnace, then
to be delivered from their Spiritual Bondage; as the Scriptures Psalm. 78. 34.
Zach. 7. 5, 6, 7. Isai. 26. 16, 17.
in the Margent do evidence.

Thirdly, The Stream and Cream of a gracious Man's spirit, runs most out in
Prayer, after Spiritual and Heavenly Psalm. 4. 6, 7. and 27 4.
things, as is abundantly evident by those Prayers of the Saints that are upon
record throughout the Scripture: But the Stream and Cream of vain men's spirits
in Prayer runs most out after poor, low, carnal things, as you may see in
comparing the following Scriptures together, Hos. 7. 14. Zach. 7. 5, 6, 7. Jam.
4. 3, etc.

Fourthly, A gracious Soul looks and lives more upon God in Prayer, then upon
his Prayer: He knows, though Prayer be his Chariot, yet Christ is his food:
Prayer may be a staff to support him, but Christ is that Manna that must
nourish him; and upon him he looks, and lives. Psalm. 5. 3. In the morning will
I direct my prayer unto thee, (or Martial, and set in order my Prayer, as it is
in the Hebrew) and will look up (or look out, as it is in the Hebrew) (...) in
Pihil.
as a watchman looks out to discover the approaches of an enemy: But vain men,
they live and look more upon their Prayers, then they do upon God; Nay, usually
they never look after their Prayers, they never observe what returns they have
from Heaven; they are like those that shoot Arrows, but do not mind where they
fall. Wicked men think it is Religion enough for them to pray, and to look
after their prayers, to see how their prayers speed is no Article of their
Faith: But a gracious Soul is of a more noble spirit, when he has prayed he
will stand upon his watchtower, and observe what God will speak. Psalm. 85. 8.
I will hear that God the Lord will speak; for he will speak peace unto his
people, and to his Saints: But let them not return to folly; or as the Hebrew
may be read, And they shall (...) I will lissen and lay my obedient ear to what
the Lord shall speak.
not return to folly, Veal iashubu le Chislah. Wicked men would have God to be
all ear, to hear what they desire, when themselves have never an ear to hear
what he speaks. But deaf ears shall always be attended with dumb answers.
Justice always makes mercy dumb, when sin has made the sinner deaf.

Fifthly, No discouragements can take gracious Souls off from Prayer, but the
least discouragements will Aristotle, though a Heathen, could say, That in some
cases a man had better lose his life, then be cowardly. Ethic. 3. c. 1.
take off carnal hearts from Prayer, as you may see in the following
Scriptures, compared together, Psalm. 40. 1, 2. and 44. 10-23. Matthew. 15. 21-29.
Mal. 3. 14. Isai. 58. 1, 2, 3. Amos 8. 3, 4, 5, etc. When one of the Ancient
Martyrs was terrified with the threatenings of his persecutors, he replied,
There is nothing (says he) of things visible, nothing of things invisible,
that I fear, I will stand to my profession of the name of Christ, and contend
earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, come on it what will. It
is neither the hope of life, nor the fear of death, that can take a real
Christian off from Prayer: He is rather raised then dejected; he is rather
quickened then discouraged by delays or denials; he will hold up and hold on in
a way and course of Prayer, though men should rage, and Lions roar, and the
Furnace be heat seven times hotter, etc. But it is not so with carnal hearts,
Job 27 9, 10.

Sixthly, When a gracious man In his course his heart is in his Prayer, he
finds by experience that the heart is the Primum mobile, the great wheel that
moves all other wheels. It is the chief Monarch in the Isle of Man.
prays; he has his heart in his Prayer, when he falls upon the work he makes
heart-work on it. So David in Psalm. 42. 4. When I remember these things, I pour
out my heart. So Hannah in 1 Samuel 1. 15. I am a woman of a sorrowful spirit
(says she) and have poured out my soul before the Lord. So the Israelites in 1 Samuel 7. 6. Poured out their souls like water before the Lord. So the Church in
Isa. 26. 8, 9. The desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of
thee. With my soul have I desired thee in the night; yea, with my spirit within
me will I seek thee early. Gracious Souls know, The voice of God is Da Mihi cor.
that no Prayer is acknowledged, accepted, and rewarded by God, but that
wherein the heart is sincerely and wholly. It is not a piece, it is not a
corner of the heart, that will satisfy the Maker of the heart. The true Mother
would not have the child divided: As God loves a broken and a contrite heart,
so he loathes a divided heart. God neither loves halting, nor halving, he will
be served truly and totally. The Royal Law is, Thou shall The heart as a Prince
gives Laws to all other Members. The Heart is Christ's Bed of Spices, it is his
Presence Chamber, it is his Royal Throne; it is one of those four Keys that God
keeps under his own girdle.
love and serve the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul.
Among the Heathens, when the Beasts were cut up for Sacrifice, the first thing
the Priest looked upon, was the heart; and if the heart was naught, the
Sacrifice was rejected. Verily, God rejects all those Sacrifices wherein the
Heart is not.

Now wicked men are heartless in all their Services* in all their Prayers, as
you may see in comparing the following Scriptures together, (I shall not
transcribe the words, because I must cut short the work,) Isai. 29. 13. Matthew.
15. 7, 8, 9. Ezekiel. 33. 30, 31, 32. Zach. 7. 4, 5, 6. 2 Chro. 25. 1, 2. As the
body without the soul is dead, so Prayer, Prayer without the heart, is but an
empty ring, a tinckling symbal.
without the heart be in it, is but dead Prayer in the eye and account of God.
Prayer is only lovely and weighty, as the heatt is in it, and no otherwise. It
is not the lifting up of the voice, nor the wringing of the hands, nor the
beating of the breasts, but the stirrings of the heart, that God looks at in
Prayer. God hears no more then the heart speaks; if the heart be dumb, God will
certainly be deaf. No Prayer takes with God, but that which is the travel of
the heart.

Seventhly, Gracious Souls usually Dan 9. 9. Nehe. 10. compared. Romans 8. 26.
(...), Helps together, or helps us as the nurse does the little child.
Prayer is the breath of the Spirit, etc.
come off from Prayer, with hearts more disengaged from sin, and more
vehemently set against it: The precious communion that they have with God in
Prayer, the sweet breathings of God into their hearts, whilst they are a
breathing out their requests in his ears, and the secret assistance, stirrings,
and movings of the Spirit upon their souls in Prayer, arm them more against
sin, and makes them stand upon the highest terms of defiance with sin. How
shall I do this or that wickedness against God? Says the praying Soul, O I
cannot, I will not do any thing unworthy of him, that has caused his glory to
pass before me in Prayer.

Ah but wicked men come off from Prayer with hearts more encouraged to sin, and
more resolved to walk in ways of sin. Prove. 7. 14, 15-24. I have
Peace Offerings with me; (says the Harlot) This day have I paid my vows.
Therefore came I forth to meet thee, diligently to seek thy face, and I have
found thee. Come, let us take our fill of love, until (...) Be drunken with
loves, which shows her unsatiable lusts.
the morning; let us solace our selves with loves. So in Jere. 7. 9, 10. Will
ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense unto
Baal, and walk after other gods whom ye know not, And come and stand before me
in this house, which is called by my Name, and say, We are delivered to do all
these abominations? Wicked men are like Lewis, King of France, that would
swear, and then kiss the cross, and then swear more bitterly, and then kiss the
cross: So they sin and pray, and pray Mr. Shepherd in his Sincere Convert
speaks of such a monster, yea, this age is full of such Monsters, that have no
pity upon themselves.
and sin; and the more they pray, the more easily, resolutely, and impudently
do they sin. They make use of Prayer to charm their Consciences, that so they
may sin with more pleasure, and less regreet. Ah, what pains do such sinners
take to go to Hell, and to arm their Consciences against themselves in that
day, wherein they shall say, There is no help, there is no hope!

Eighthly and lastly, Gracious Souls do more eye and observe, how their own
hearts are wrought upon in Prayer, Psalm. 35. 13. My Prayer returned into my own
bosom. Isa^. 26. 8, 9.
then how others hearts are wrought upon. When they pray, they look with a
curious eye upon their own spirits, they look with a narrow eye upon their own
hearts, and observe how they are affected, melted, humbled, quickened, raised,
spiritualized, and bettered by Prayer: But vain men as they pray to be seen of
men; so they eye most how others like their prayers, and Matthew. 6. and 23. The
virtue of some lies in the spectators eyes.
are affected and taken with their prayers; they are most critical in observing
what operations their prayers have upon others hearts, but never mind (to any
purpose) how they operate upon their own hearts; a worse plague cannot befall
them.

And thus I have endeavored to show you what a wide difference there is betwixt
the Prayers of the godly, and the ungodly; and by this, as by the former
particulars laid down, you may see what Prayer that is that accompanies
Salvation.

Now, in the seventh place, I shall The seventh thing that accompanies
Salvation, is Perseverance.
show you what Perseverance that is that accompanies Salvation, and that I
shall do in these following particulars.

First, That Perseverance that accompanies Salvation, is, Perseverance in a
holy Profession. Heb. 4. 14. Seeing then that we have a great High Priest, that
is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God: Let us hold fast our
profession by a strong hand, or by a hand of holy (...).
violence. So in Chap. 10. 23. Let us hold fast the profession of our Faith
without (...), signifies, A forcible holding, a holding with both hands. (...).
wavering (or as it is in the Greek, without tilting, or tossing to one side or
other) for he is faithful that promised. Therefore let no temptation,
affliction, opposition, or persecution, take us off from our holy Profession,
but let us hold our Profession with a forcible hand, yea, with both hands, in
the face of all difficulties, dangers, and deaths. As Cynaegirus, the Athenian
Captain, did the ship that was laden with the rich spoil of his Country.

Secondly, That Perseverance that accompanies Salvation, is, a Perseverance in
holy and spiritual Principles: It is an abiding in love, John 15. 9, 10. So in
Col. 1. 23. 1 Timothy 2. 15. Heb. 13. 1. and 11. 13. These all died in Faith; or
as it is in the Greek, They all died according to Faith; that is, Persevering
in Faith.
And an abiding in faith and hope, 1 Cor. 13. 13, etc. Perseverence is not a
particular distinct Grace of it self; but such a Virtue as crowns all virtue;
it is such a Grace as casts a general glory and beauty upon every grace: It is
a Grace that leads every grace on to perfection.

To persevere in holy and heavenly Principles, is, To persevere in Believing,
in Repenting, in Mourning, in Hoping; It is to persevere in Love, in Fear, in
Humility, in Patience, in Self-denial, etc. Now it is this perseverance It is a
Rule in the Civil Law ( Nec videtur actum si quid superfit quod agatur) that
nothing seems to be done, if there remain ought to be done. Let a man do never
so much, if he do not persevere, he will be found to have done nothing.
in holy and gracious Principles that accompaines Salvation, that leads to
Salvation. No grace, no, not the most sparkling and shining grace, can bring a
man to Heaven of it self, without Perseverance; not Faith, which is the
Champion of Grace, if it faint and fail; not Love, which is the Nurse of Grace,
if it decline and wax cold; not Humility, which is the adorner and beautifier
of Grace, if it continue not to the end; not Obedience, not Repentance, not
Patience, nor no other Grace, except they have their perfect work. It is
Perseverance in Grace that crowns every Grace, and every gracious Soul with a
crown of glory at last. Revel. 2. 10. Be thou faithful to the death, and I will
give thee a crown of life. Such as As all Hypocrites only do. John 6, etc.
only believe for a time, and repent for a time, and love for a time, and
repent for a time, and love for a time, and rejoice for a time, and hope for a
time, etc. But do not persevere and hold out, will be doubly miserable in the
day of vengeance. Perseverance is the accomplishment of every Grace, without
it, he that fights cannot hope to overcome; and he that for the present does
overcome, cannot look for the Crown, unless he still perseveres and goes on
conquering, and to conquer, till he finds all his enemies slain before him.

Thirdly, That Perseverance that accompanies Salvation, is, An abiding You must
persevere and hold fast the faith of the Gospel, without wavering in it, or
startling from it. You must be as the Center, or as Mount Sion, steadfast and
unmovable.
or continuing in the Word or Doctrine of Christ. John 15. 7. If ye abide in
me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what you will, and it shall be done
unto you. 1 John 2. 14. I have written unto you young men, because ye are
strong, and the Word of God abides in you. Verse. 24. Let that therefore abide
in you, which you have heard from the beginning; if that which ye have heard
from the beginning, shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son, and
in the Father. 2 John verse. 9. Whosoever tranfgresseth and abides not in the
Doctrine of Christ, has not God. He that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, he
has both the Father, and the Son. None shall receive the end of The Tabernacle
was covered over with red (and the purple feathers tell us, that they take that
habit for the same intent) to note, That we must defend the truth, and abide by
the truth, even to essusion of blood.
their Faith, the Salvation of their Souls, but those that hold fast the
Doctrine of Faith, foundly, sincerely, and entirely, to the end. John 8. 31. If
ye continue in my Word, then are ye my Disciples indeed. It is the End that
crowns the action, as the Evening crowns the day, as the last act commends the
whole Scene. It is not enough to begin well, except we end well; the beginning
of Christians is not so considerable as the end. Manasseh and Paul began ill,
but ended well; Neroes first five years were famous, but afterward who more
cruel?
Judas and Demas began well, but ended ill. It is not the knowledge of the
Doctrine of Christ, nor the commending of the Word of Christ, but the abiding
in Christ's Word, the continuing in Christ's Doctrine, that accompanies Life and
Glory, and that will render a man happy at last. Such that with Hymeneus and
Alexander, put away, 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 5. 5.
or make shipwreck of the Doctrine of Faith, of the Word of Faith, shall by the
Lord, or his people, or by both, be delivered unto Satan, that they may learn
not to blaspheme: Usually the end of such, is worse then the beginning. Double
2 Pet. 2. 20, 21, 22. 2 Timothy 3. 13.
damnation attends those that begin in the Spirit, and end in the Flesh.

Fourthly and lastly, That Perseverance that accompanies Salvation, is, A
Perseverance in holy and gracius Phil. 3. 10-14 Isa. 40. ult.
Actions and Motions, it is a continuing in Pious Duties, and Religious
Services. The life of Christian consists in Motion, Non progrediest regredi,
Not to go forwards, is to go backwards.
not in Session: A Christians Emblem should be an House moving toward Heaven,
he must never stand still, he must always be a going on from Faith to Faith,
and from strength to strength. When Saints have done their work in this life,
they shall sit upon Thrones in a better life. Perseverance Acts 13. 43. and 14.
22. (...), of (...), signifying a continuance in Prayer and Supplication, with
an invincible and strong constancy. There was a Temple of Concord among the
Heathens, and shall it not be found among Christians that are the Temple of the
Holy Ghost?
is a going on, a holding out, in ways of piety and sanctity. Acts 1. 14. These
all continued with one accord in Prayer and Supplication. Chap. 2. 42. And they
continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking
of Bread, and in Prayers. Verse. 46. And they continued daily with one accord in
the Temple, and breaking Bread from house to house, did eat their meat with
gladness, and singleness of heart. 1 Timothy 5. 5. Now she that is a widow indeed,
and desolate, trusts in God, and continues in Supplications and Prayers,
night and day. Romans 12. 12. Continuing instant in Prayer. Christians must work
hard in a Wilderness, before they sit down in paradise: They must make a
constant progress in holiness, before they enter into happiness.

It is the excellency of Perseverance, that it keeps a Christian still in
motion God-wards, Heaven-wards, Holinesswards. It is a Grace that quickens a
man to motion, to action; it keeps a man still going, still doing. And Motion
is the excellency of the Creature, and the more excellent any Creature is, the
more excellent is that Creature in its motions; as you may see in the motions
of the Celestial Bodies, the Sun, Moon, and Stars. Perseverance is a perpetual
motion in ways of Grace and Holiness. Perseverance will Psalm. 44. 16, 17, 18,
19, 20.
make a man hold up, and hold on, in the work and ways of the Lord, in the face
of all impediments, discouragements, temptations, tribulations, and
persecutions. As the Moon holds on her motion, though the dogs bark; so
Perseverance will make a Christian hold on in his holy and heavenly Motions,
though vain men bark, and bite, etc.

And thus I have showed you what Perseverance that is that accompanies
Salvation.

Now in the Eighth place, I shall The eighth and last thing that accompanies
Salvation is Hope. I shall gather up what I have to say concern^ng Hope, into
as narrow a compass as I can, being unwilling to tire the Readers patience, and
my own spirits. The Philosophers excluded Hope out of their Catalogues of
virtues, numbering it among the perturbations; but God by his Werd has taught
us better.
show you, (very briefly) First, That Hope does accompany Salvation; Secondly,
What that Hope is that does accompany Salvation.

First, That Hope does accompany Salvation, these Scriptures speak it out. Romans
8. 24. For we are saved by hope. Gal. 5. 5. For we through the Spirit, wait for
the hope of righteousness by faith. Ephesians. 1. 18. The eyes of your
understanding being enlightened; that ye may know what is the hope of his
calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints. 1
These. 5. 8. But let us who are of the day, be sober, putting on the breast plate
of Faith, and Love, and for an helmet, the Hope of Salvation. Tit. 3. 7. That
being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of
eternal life. Chap. 1. 2. In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie,
promised before the world began. By all these Scriptures it does fully appear,
that Hope does accompany Salvation, it does boarder upon eternal life.

The second thing that I am to show you is, What Hope that is that does
accompany Salvation, that comprehends Salvation; and that I shall do with as
much brevity and perspicuity as I can, in the following particulars.

First, That Hope that accompanies Salvation, is, A grace of God, whereby Spes
est expectatio eorum quae vere a Deo promissa fides credidit. Calvin. 1 Timothy 6.
17. This very title The God of Hope, may serve as a sovereign antidote against
the blackest and horridest temptations; for why should any despair of his mercy
who has proclaimed himself to be the God of Hope? Spes est virtus qua
inclinam^r ad expectationem eorum quae Deus nobis promisit. Perkins.
we expect good to come, patiently waiting till it come. First, I call it a
Grace of God, because he is the donor of it; and therefore he is called the God
of Hope, Romans 15. 13. Now the God of Hope fill you with all joy and peace in
believing. Now God is called the God of Hope, because he is objective, the
only object of our Hope, and he is effective, the only Author and Worker of
Hope in the Soul. Hope is no natural affection in men, men are not born with
hope in their hearts, as they are born with tongues in their mouths: Hope is
nobly descended, it is from above, it is a heavenly Babe, that is formed in the
soul of man by the power of the Holy Ghost. And as Hope is no natural
affection, so Hope is no Moral virtue, which men may attain by their frequent
actions; but Hope is a Theological virtue that none can give but God. Secondly,
I say it is a Grace of God, whereby we expect good to come; I say good, not
evil; for evil is rather feared, then hoped for by any. The object of this Hope
has four conditions. 1. It must be Bonum, good. 2. Futurum, future. 3.
Possibile, possible. 4. Arduum, hard or difficult to obtain. Thirdly, I say
Hope is a Grace of God, whereby we expect good to come, patiently waiting till
it come: Hope makes the Soul quiet and patient till it comes to possess the
good desired and hoped for, Romans 8. 25. But if we hope for that we see not,
then do we with patience wait for it. The Hebrew word ( Kavah) that is often
translated Hope, signifies a very vehement intention, both of body and mind, a
stretching forth of the Spirit or Mind, in waiting for a desired good. 2 Cor.
4. ult. Hope fates well, it keeps a Princes Table, it lives upon Honey and
Milk, Oil and Wine, it sives upon the sweet meats, the delicates of Heaven, as
God, Christ, and Glory. Psalm. 31. 24. and 33. 22. and 38. 15. and 42. 5. and
43. 5. and 39. 7. and 71. 5. and 65. 5.


Secondly, That Hope that accompanies Salvation, is always conversant about
holy and heavenly objects, as about God and Christ. 1 Timothy 1. 1. Paul an
Apostle of Jesus Christ by the commandment of God our Savior, and Lord Jesus
Christ, which is our Hope. In these words, Christ is set forth as the chief
object of our Hope, because by his merits and mercy, we hope to obtain the
remission of our sins, and the eternal Salvation of our souls. Sometimes Hope
is exercised about the Righteousness of Christ. Gal. 5. 5. For we through the
Spirit, wait for the Hope of Righteousness by Faith. Sometimes Hope is
exercised about God the Father, 1 Pet. 1. 21. Who by him do believe in God,
that raised him up from the dead, and gave him glory, that your faith and hope
might be in God. Jere. 14. 8. O the Hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in time
of trouble. Chap. 17. 13. O Lord, the hope of Israel, all that forsake thee
shall be ashamed. Verse. 17. Thou art my hope in the day of evil. Sometimes Hope
The Jewish Rabbis were wont to say, That upon every Letter of the Law, there
hangs Mountains of profitable matter. Ah then what abundance of comfort and
sweetness may hope find, yea, does hope find in the Promises?
is exercised, and busied about the Word and Promises, Psalm. 119. 49. Remember
the word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to Hope. Verse. 81. My
soul faints for thy Salvation, but I hope in thy Word. Verse 114. Thou art my
hiding place, and my shield. I hope in thy Word. Psalm. 130. 5. I wait for the
Lord, my soul does wait: And in his Word, do I hope. Psalm. 119. 74. They that
fear thee will be glad, when they see me: Because I have hoped in thy Word.
Verse 147. I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried: I hoped in thy
Word. Hope in the Promise, will keep the head from aching, and the heart from
breaking, it will keep both head and heart from sinking and drowning. Hope
exercised upon the promise, brings Heaven down to the heart: The Promises are
the Ladder by which Hope gets up to Heaven. Hope in the Promise will not only
keep life and soul together, but it will also keep the soul and glory together.
Hope in Psalm. 4^. 5. and 119. 49, 50. compared. Hol. 6. 1, 2.
the Promise will support distressed souls; Hope in the Promise will settle
perplexed souls; Hope in the Promise will comfort dejected souls; Hope in the
Promise will reduce wandering souls; Hope in the Promise will confirm
staggering souls; Hope in the Promise will save undone souls. The Promise is
the same to Hope, that Romans 8. 24. The Promises are Hopes rich Magazin.
Hope is to the Soul; the Promise is the Anchor of Hope, as Hope is the Anchor
of the Soul. Look what the Breasts are to the Child, and Oil is to the Lamp,
that, are the Promises to Hope. Hope lives and thrives, as it feeds upon the
Promises, as it embraces the Promises: The Promises are the sweetmeats of
Heaven, upon Heb. 11. 13.
which Hope lives. And every degree of Hope brings a degree of joy into the
Soul, which makes it cry out Heaven, Heaven.

Again, Hope is exercised about the glory and felicity, the happiness Psalm. 16.
ult. Tit. 3. 7. (...). Looking for Christ's coming as earnestly as men look and
long for the coming of some special friends, or as Innkeepers do for special
guests.
and blessedness that is at Gods right hand. Tit. 2. 13. Looking for that
blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ. Hope makes a man stretch out his neck, and put forth his hand,
and look as earnestly for the glorious appearing of Christ, as Sisera's Mother
did for the happy return of her Son. The hoping Soul is often a sighing it out,
Why are his Chariot Wheels so long a coming. Col 1. 5. For the hope which is
laid up for you in Heaven. Hope in this place So in Romans 8. 24, 25. Col. 1. 27.
Romans 5. 2, etc.
is taken by a Metonimy, for the things hoped for, viz. All that glory and
felicity, that blessedness and happiness, that is laid up for us in Heaven. So
in Heb. 6. 18. Who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before
us. Hope here is put for the object of Hope, viz. Heaven and Happiness. Hope
lays such fast hold (as the Greek word here (...).
signifies) upon Heaven and Happiness, that none shall ever be able to take
those precious things out of Hopes hand. So Hope is put for the glorious things
hoped for, Ephesians. 1. 18. And thus you see those precious and glorious objects,
about which that Hope that accompanies Salvation is exercised.

Thirdly, That Hope that accompanies Salvation, that comprehends Salvation,
that borders upon Salvation, is grounded upon the firmest foundations, to wit,
the Promises of God, as has Psalm. 40. 4. Prove. 10. 28.
been fully showed before; and it is built upon the Free Grace of God, 1 Pet.
1. 13. It is built upon the infinite and glorious power of God, Romans 4. 21. It
is built upon the truth and faithfulness of God, 2 Timothy 2. 13. These precious
and glorious Foundations do bear up the hopes of the Saints, as the three
Pillars bore up the hangings in the Tabernacle. A Believers hope is founded
upon the Love of Christ, the Blood of Christ, the Righteousness of Christ, the
Satisfaction of Christ, and the Intercession of Christ, etc. But the hopes of
Hypocrites, and wicked men, are always built upon weak, slender, and sandy
foundations; sometimes they build their hopes upon their outward profession,
upon their Lamps, though Matthew. 25. 3.
they are empty Lamps; and sometimes upon their duties and services, as Isai 58
1, 2, 3. Matthew. 6. Every false principle in Religion is a Reed of Egypt that
will certainly deceive souls at last; therefore take heed of leaning upon any
of those Reeds.
the Jews, Scribes, and Pharisees did; and sometimes upon their outward
privileges, crying out, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; and
sometimes they build their hopes upon others good opinion of them; and
sometimes upon flashes of joy; and sometimes upon enlargements in duties; and
sometimes upon the heat and vigor of their spirits in Religious services, etc.
And all these are but sandy foundations, and they that build their hope upon
them will certainly fall, and great will be their fall. The hopes of the Saints
are built upon the surest and the strongest foundations. It was a good saying
of one of the Ancients, I Bernard, S^rm. 3. de fragm. Sept. Miser.
consider (says he) three things, in which all my hope consists, to wit, 1.
Gods love in my Adoption. 2. The truth of his Promise. And 3. his power of
performance. Therefore let my foolish cogitation murmur as long as it list,
saying, Who art thou? or, what is that glory? or, by what merits do thou hope
to attain it? For I can answer with sure confidence, I know 2 Timothy 1. 12.
on whom I have believed; And I am certain, First, That in his love he adopted
me. Secondly, That he is true in his promise. And thirdly, That he is able to
perform it: This is the threefold cord which is not easily broken.

Fourthly, That Hope that accompanies Salvation, that borders upon Salvation,
that comprehends Salvation, that brings Salvation, may be known from all false
hopes, by the excellent properties of it, and they are these that follow.

The first property of that Hope that accompanies Salvation, is this, It Matthew
6. 20, 21. Phil 3. 20, Col 3. 1. Mark, wicked men's hopes never raise them as
high as Heaven, under all their hopes they are as very enemies, and as great
strangers to God, Christ, and Heaven, as ever.
elevates and raises the heart to live above, where its treasure is: This Hope
is from above, and it makes the heart to live above; it is a spark of glory,
and it leads the heart to live in glory. Divine hope carries a man to Heaven;
for life to quicken him, and for wisdom to direct him, and for power to uphold
him, and for righteousness to justify him, and for holiness to sanctify him,
and for mercy to forgive him and for assurance to rejoice him, and for
happiness to crown him. Divine hope takes in the pleasures of Heaven before
hand, it lives in the joyful expectation of them, it fancies to it self (as I
may say) the pleasures and joys of eternity, and lives in a sweet anticipation
of what it possesses by Faith. Hopes richest treasures, and choicest friends,
and chiefest delights, and sweetest contents, are in the Country above, and
therefore Hope loves best to live there most.

A second property of that Hope that accompanies Salvation, is this, It will
strengthen the Soul against all afflictions, oppositions, and temptations, Dan.
3. 57. Psalm. 4. 6, 7. Heb. 10 34. and 11. 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18.
1 These. 5. 8. But let us who are of the day, be sober, putting on the
breast plate of faith, and love, and for an helmet, the hope of salvation. Look
as the Helmet defends and secures the head, so does Hope defend and secure the
heart: Hope is a Helmet that keeps off all darts that Satan or the world casts
at the Soul. The hopes of heavenly riches made It was a wicked and hopeless
Cardinal that said, He would not leave his part in Paris, for a part in
Paradise.
those worthies, in that eleventh of the Hebrews, to despise the riches of this
world; The hopes they had of a heavenly Country, made them willing to leave
their own Country, and to live in the very Land of Promise, as in a strange
Country. The hopes they had of possessing (at last) a house not made with
hands, but eternal in the Heavens, made them willingly and cheerfully to live
in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens, and caves of the Earth. The hopes
they had of a glorious Resurrection, made them courageously to withstand the
strongest temptations, etc. A Saints hope will outlive Romans 5. 2, 3, 4, 5. Some
are verily persuaded that the want of this Divine hope has been the reason
that many among the Heathen have laid violent hands upon themselves. See
Plutarch in Caesar and Catoes lives. Heb. 11. 10, 14, 16, 25, 32, compared.
all fears and cares, all trials and troubles, all afflictions, and
temptations. Saints have much in hope, though little in hand, they have much in
reversion, though but little in possession, they have much in the promise,
though but little in the purse. A Saint can truly say, ( Spero meliora) my
hopes are better then my possessions. Hope can see Heaven through the thickest
clouds; Hope can see light through darkness, life through death, smiles through
frowns, and glory through misery: Hope holds life and soul together, it holds
Christ and the Soul together, it holds the Soul and the Promises together, it
holds the Soul and Heaven together, and so it makes a Christian to stand and
triumph over all afflictions, oppositions, and temptations.

A third property of that Hope that accompanies Salvation, is this, It makes
the Soul lively and active, Psalm. 119. 166. Lord, I have hoped for thy
salvation, and done thy commandments. Hope puts the Soul upon doing, upon
obeying. 1 Pet. 1. 3. Blessed be the God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which according to his abundant (or, much) mercy, (...). Much.
has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the dead. It is called a lively hope, A man's duties* and services, usually
are as his hopes are, if his hopes are weak and low, so will his services be;
but if his hopes are spiritual, noble, and high, so will his motions and
actions be. Divine hope makes Saints as far excel all other men in their
actings, as the Angels do excel them. Some say hope and fasting are the two
wings of Prayer; fasting is but as the wing of a bird, but hope is as the wing
of an Angel, bearing our prayers to the throne of Grace.
because it brings life and comfort into the Soul; and it is called a lively
hope, in opposition to the withering and dying hopes of Hypocrites, and wicked
men; and it is called a lively hope, because it flows from lively causes, viz.
The Spirit of Christ, and the Souls union and communion with Christ; but mainly
it is called a lively hope, because it puts the Soul upon lively endeavors.
Hope will make a man pray as for life, hear as for life, and mourn as for life,
and obey as for life, and work and walk as for life: Hope will not say, this
work is too hard, and that work is too hot; this work is too high, and the
other work is too low: Hope will make a man put his hand to every work; Hope
makes a man more motion then notion, it makes a man better at doing then at
saying, etc. Hope gives life and strength to all religious duties and services.
1 Cor. 9. 10. He that plougheth should plough in hope; and he that thresheth in
hope, shall be partaker of his hope. Hope will put a Christian upon ploughing
and threshing, that is, upon the hardest and difficultest services for God and
his glory. If fleshly Fleshly hopes put the Romans upon doing very strange and
wonderful exploits, as you may see in Plutarch, and other Historians.
hopes of gaining the honors, riches, and favors of this world, made Absalom,
Ahitophel, Jehu, Haman, and many Heathens, full of life and activity, full of
motion and action: Verily, holy and heavenly hopes will make men much more
lively and active, by how much heavenly hopes are more excellent then earthly.
A man full of hope will be full of action; a lively hope, and a diligently
hand, are inseparable companions. Hope will make a man do, though he dies for
doing.

A fourth property of that Hope that accompanies Salvation, is this, It will
make a man sit, Noah like, quiet and still in the midst of all storms and
tempests, in the midst of all combustions, concussions, and mutations; when
others are at their wits end, then hope will house the Soul, and lodge it safe
and quiet in the bosom of God, Job 11. 18. And thou shall be secure, because
there is hope; yea, thou shall dig about thee, and thou shall take thy rest in
safety. The Hebrew word that is here rendered rest, (...) from (...) To rest as
men rest in their beds, or as the body rests in the grave.
is from a root that signifies to rest and sleep quietly, as in ones bed: Hope
will bring the Soul to bed safely and sweetly, in the darkest night, in the
longest storm, and in the greatest tempest. Heb. 6. 19. Which hope we have as
an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, and which enters into that
within the veil. Hope is that Anchor of the Soul, that keeps it quiet and still
in all storms and tempests; it keeps the soul from dashing Chrysostom says,
that hope is not only the Anchor, but the Ship to that good Anchor.
upon the Rocks, and from being swallowed up in the Sands: Hope is an Anchor
that is fastened above, not below, in Heaven, not in Earth, within the veil, not
without; therefore the ship, the Soul of a Believer, must needs be safe and
secure. That ship will never be split upon the Rocks, Hypoerites in stormy
times are like ships without Anchors, ^ost up and down with every wave, and in
danger of being split upon every Rock. Job 27. 9, 10.
whose Anchor is in Heaven. Hope enters within the veil, and takes fast
Anchor-hold on God himself; and therefore blow high, blow low, rain, or shine,
the soul of a Saint is safe. Divine hope settles the heart; he that cannot look
for more then he has, can never be settled nor satisfied; our best and
greatest estate lies in invisibles; our perfect and complete estate here, lies
not in re, but in spe; it lies not in what we have in possession, but in what
we have in expectation, in reversion.

A fifth property of that Hope that accompanies Salvation, is this, It will work
the Soul to a quiet and patient Patience is nothing else but Hope spun out. If
you would lengthen Patience, be sure to strenthen Hope.
waiting upon God for mercy, though God should delay the giving in of mercy.
Romans 8. 25. But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait
for it. Psalm. 130. 5, 6. I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, and in his
word do I hope. My soul waits for the Lord, more then they that watch for the
morning: I say, more then they that watch for the morning: Hope will make a man
wait, yea, wait long for a mercy, as it did Abraham, Romans 4. 18, 19, 20, 21.
Though the vision stay, yet hope will Hab. 2. 1, 2, 3. Heb. 10. 36, 37. Hopes
Motto is ( Quod defertur non aufertur,) For bear^nce is no acquittance.
wait for it; yet a little, little while, says hope, and he that shall come,
will come, and will not tarry. The longer I wait for a mercy, the greater,
better, and sweeter, at last, the mercy will prove, says Hope. It is not
mercy, if it be not worth a waiting for, says Hope; and if it be mercy, thou
can not wait too long for it, says Hope. The men of Bethulia resolved to
wait upon God but five days longer, but Deliverance stayed seven days, and
yet came at last: So says Hope, Pittacus, one of the seven Sages, used to say,
A wise man must recover that by patience, which force cannot command.
though Deliverance stay, though this and that mercy stays (as it were in the
birth) yet it will come at last, therefore wait. Hope is not hasty in prefixing
the time when God shall show mercy, neither will it limit God to the way or
manner of showing mercy, but leave both the time and the manner to him that is
wise and faithful. Says Hope, Christ knows his The Lord shows much mercy in
timing our mercies for us.
own time, and his own time is best; though he stays long, yet he will
certainly come, and he will not stay a moment beyond the time he has prefixed;
and therefore, says Hope, be not weary, O Soul, but still wait patiently upon
the Lord. 1 These. 1. 3. Remembering without ceasing, your work of faith, and
labor of love, and patience of hope. Hope is the Mother of Patience, and the
Nurse of Patience; Hope breeds Patience, and Hope feeds Patience: If it were
not for hope, the Spes est mestorum. Drusius.
heart would die, and if it were not for hope, patience would die. Look as
Faith gives life and strength to Hope, so does Hope give life and strength to
Patience: Therefore Patience is called Patience of Hope. Hope maintains
Patience, as the Fuel maintains the Fire.

A sixth property of that Hope that accompanies Salvation, is this, It is
Soul-purifying Hope, it puts a Christian upon purifying himself, as Christ is
pure, 1 John 3. 3. And every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself,
even as Christ is pure. Divine hope runs In quality, though not in equality. (
As) is not a note of parility or equality, but of resemblance, and similitude.
As there is a similitude betwixt the face it self, and the image of the face in
the glass, but no equality.
out into holiness; he that has the purest and strongest hopes of being saved,
is most studious and laborious to be sanctified. The Greek word ((...)) that is
rendered purifieth, is a Metaphor taken, either from the Ceremonial
purifications in time of the Law, or else from Goldsmiths purifying Metals from
their Dross; and it notes thus much to us, That those that have hopes to reign
with Christ in glory, that have set their hearts upon that pure and blissful
State, that Paradise, that holy and spiritual State of Bliss that is made up of
singleness and purity, they will purify both their insides, and their
outsides, both body and soul, that they may answer to that excellent Copy that
Christ has set before them; knowing, that none shall enjoy Everlasting Glory,
but those that labor after perfect purity.

Now Hope purifies the heart and life thus, by keeping the purest objects, as
God, Christ, the Word, and the Soul together; and by making How lively Hope
makes the Soul in Religious services, I have showed in the third property.
the Soul serious and conscientious in the use of all Soul-purifying
Ordinances; and by being a fire in the Soul, to burn up all those corruptions,
and principles of darkness, that are contrary to that purity and glory that
Hope has in her eye; and by working the Soul to lean upon Christ, to live in
Christ, and to draw purifying virtue from Christ, who is the Spring and
Fountain of all Purity and Sanctity. And thus Hope purifies those that expect
to be like to Christ in Glory.

The seventh and last property of that Hope that accompanies Salvation, that
comprehends Salvation, is this, It is permanent and lasting, it Prove. 10. 28.
Austins hope made him long to die, that he might see that head that was once
crowned with thorns.
will never leave the Soul, till it has lodged it in the bosom of Christ.
Prove. 14. 32. The righteous has hope in his death. The righteous man's hope
will bed and board with him; it will lie down with him, and rise up with him,
it will to the Grave, to Heaven with him; his Motto is, Cum expiro, spero, My
hope lasts beyond life. The Hope made the Ancients to call the days of their
death ( Natalia) not dying, but birth days.
Jews ancient custom was, by the way as they went with their Corpse, to pluck up
every one the Grass, as who should say, They were not sorry, as men without
hope, for their Brother was but so cropped off, and should spring up again in the
morning of the Resurrection. And the Jews, to this very day, stick not to call
their Golgotha's ( Batte Catim) the houses or places of the living.

That Hope that accompanies Salvation, is a long-lived hope, it is a living
hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3. Blessed be the God, and Heb. 3. 6. and 6. 11. 1 Pet. 1. 13.
Psalm. 131. 3. (...). Living.
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy has
begotten us again unto a lively hope, or a living hope: A hope that will not
die, a hope that will not leave a man in life nor death, Psalm. 71. 14. But I
will hope (...)
continually, and will yet praise thee more In prosperity and adversity, in
wealth and sickness, in life and death, I will hope; it is neither the smiles,
nor the frowns of the world, that shall bury a Christians hope. A Christians
hope will live in all weathers, and it will make a Christian bear up bravely in
all storms, and under all changes.
and more. No trials, no troubles, no afflictions, no oppositions, shall keep
down my hope, says David. I am peremptorily resolved, in the face of all
dangers, difficulties, and deaths, to keep up my hopes; come what will come on
it, I will rather let my life go, then my hope go, I will hope continually. A
hopeless condition, is a very sad condition; it is the worst condition in the
world, it makes a man's life, a very Hell. If hope deferred makes the heart
sick, (as the Wiseman speaks, Prove. 13. 12.) then the loss of hope will make
the soul languish; it will make it choose strangling, rather then life; it will
make a man's life, a continual death. A Soul without hope, is like a ship
without anchors: Lord where will that soul stay, that stays not upon thee by
hope? A man were better part with any thing, then his hope.

When Alexander went upon a hopeful expedition, he gave away his Gold; and when
he was asked, what he kept for himself, he answered, ( Spem majorum and
meliorum,) The hope of greater and better things. A Believers hope I have read
of a Rhodian, who being cast into a dungeon full of Adders and Snakes (for some
horrid crimes by him committed) Some persuaded him to rid himself out of that
misery by a violent way; but he answered, No; For (says he) as long as I have
breath in my nostrils, I will ever hope for my deliverance.
is not like that of Pandora, which may fly out of the Box, and bid the Soul
an everlasting farewell: No, it is like the morning light* the least beam of it
shall commence into a complete Sunshine. It is Aurora Gaudii, and it shall
shine forth brighter and brighter, till it has fully possessed the Believer of
his Christ, and Crown. This will be the Hypocrites hell and horror, when he
comes to die, that his hope will be like the morning dew, like the Spiders web,
like the crackling of thorns under a pot, and like the giving up of the ghost,
Job 8. 13, 14. and 11. 20. and 27. 8. Prove. 14. 32. and 11. 7. And this is now
the upright man's joy, that who ever leaves him, yet his hope will not leave
him, till he has put on his Crown, and is set down in Paradise. And thus you
see what Hope that is that does accompany Salvation; before I close up this
Chapter, take these two Cautions with you, they make for your comfort and
settlement.

The first Caution, is this, That all Caution. 1. The Scripture tells you of
Saints of several sizes, some are babes, some are children, some are yongmen,
some are old men; now all these do no^ attain to the same degree, but h^ppy is
he that has the least degree.
Saints have not these things that accompany Salvation, in the same degree; if
thou have but the least measure or degree of that Knowledge that accompanies
Salvation, or of that Faith that accompanies Salvation, or of that Repentance,
or of that Obedience, or of that Love, etc. that accompanies Salvation, thou
may be as assuredly confident of thy Salvation, as if thou wast already in
Heaven. The least degree, O Christian, of those things that accompany
Salvation, will certainly yield thee a Heaven hereafter, and why then should it
not yield thee a Heaven here? It will undoubtedly yield thee a Crown at last,
and why should it not yield thee Comfort and Assurance now? I judge it may, if
thou art not an enemy to thine own Soul, and to thy own Peace and Comfort.

The second Caution is this, Though Caution 2. No Saints are at all times
ens^ble, that all those precious things that accompany Salvat^^n a^e i^ them.
It is not always day with the Saints.
thou do not find every one of those things in thee that do accompany
Salvation, yet if thou do find some of those things, I, though but a few of
those things, yea, though but one of those things that accompanies Salvation,
that comprehends Salvation, that borders upon Salvation, thy estate is safe,
and happiness will be thy portion at last. Thy sense and feeling of one of
those precious things that accompanies Salvation, should be of more power to
work thee to conclude, that thy estate is good, then any other thing should
work thee to conclude, that all is naught, and that thou shall miscarry at
last. Do not always side with sin and Satan, against thine own precious Soul.

Having thus discovered to you the Way and Means of attaining to a welgrounded
Assurance, I shall now hasten to a close*

CHAP. VI. Showing the difference between a true and a counterfeit Assurance,
between sound Assurance and Presumption.
FIrst, A sound and welgrounded Assurance is attended with a deep admiration of
Gods transcendent love and favor to the Soul in the Lord Jesus: The assured
Soul is often a breathing it out thus, Ah Lord, who am I? what am I that thou
should give into my bosom the white stone of Absolution, Revel. 2. 17. The
white stone given among the Romans, was a sign of Absolution, and the black
stone was a sign of condemnation.
when the world has given into their bosoms only the black stone of
Condemnation? Lord, what mercy is this, that thou should give me Assurance,
give me water out of the Rock, and feed me with Manna from Heaven, when many of
thy dearest ones spend their days in sighing, mourning and complaining for want
of Assurance? Lord, what manner of love is this, that thou should set me upon
thy knee? embrace me in thy arms? lodge me in thy bosom? and kiss me with the
sweet kisses of thy blessed mouth, with those kisses that are better then Cant.
1. 2. Psalm. 63. 3.
wine, yea, better then life, when many are even weary of their lives, because
they want what I enjoy? Ah Lord, by what name shall I call this Mercy,
Assurance is a wonderful Alchimy it changes Iron to Gold, Ignominies to
Crowns, and all sufferings to delights.
this Assurance, that thou have given me? It being a mercy that fits me to do
duties, to bear crosses, and to improve mercies; that fits me to speak sweetly,
to judge righteously, to give liberally, to act seriously, to suffer
cheerfully, and to walk humbly. I cannot, says the assured Soul, but sing it
out with Moses, Who is like unto thee, O Exodus 15. 11.
Lord, amongst the gods? Who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in
praises, doing wonders? And with the Apostle, O the height, the depth, the
length and Ephesians. 3. 18, 19. Assurance of Christ's love made Jerome admiringly to
say, O my Savior, did thou die for love of me alone, more dolorous then
death, but to me a death more lovely, then love it self? I cannot live, love
thee, and be longer from thee.
breadth of the love of Christ which passes knowledge. If the Queen of She^a
(says the assured Soul) was so swallowed up in a deep adm^ration of Solomon's
wisdom, greatness, goodness, excellency, and glory, that she could not but
admiringly breathe it thus out, Happy are thy men, happy are these thy
servants, which stand continually before thee, and that hear thy wisdom; O
then, how should that blessed Assurance that I have of the love of God, of my
interest in God, of my union and communion with God, of my blessedness here,
and my happiness hereafter, work me to a deep and serious, to a real and
perpetual admiration of God!

Secondly, A wel-grounded Assurance does always beget in the Soul an earnest
and an impatient longing after, a further, a clearer, and fuller enjoyment of
God and Christ. Psalm. 63. 1. O God, thou art my God, (here is David, though in
a wilderness, seeks not for bread or water, or protection, but for more of God.
Phil. 1. 23.
Assurance) well, what follows? Early will I seek thee. My soul thirsts for
thee, my flesh longs for thee in a dry and thirsty Land, where no water is.
The assured Soul cries out, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ;
And, Make haste Cant. 8. 14.
my beloved; And, Come Lord Jesus, come Revel. 22. 17.
quickly. O Lord Jesus, says the assured The assured Souls Motto is, O my God,
when shall I be with thee, when shall I be with thee?
Soul, thou art my light, thou art my life, thou art my love, thou art my joy,
thou art my crown, thou art my heaven, thou art my all: I cannot but long to
see that beautiful face that was spit upon for my sins, and that glorious head
that was crowned with thorns for my transgressions. I long to take some turns
with thee in Paradise, to see the glory of thy Jerusalem above, to drink of
those Rivers of pleasures that be at thy right hand, to taste of all the
delicates of thy Kingdom, and to be acquainted with those secrets and Ephesians. 3.
5. Col. 1. 26.
mysteries that have been hid from all ages, and to be swallowed up in the full
enjoyment of thy Blessed Self.

Thirdly, A wel-grounded Assurance is (usually) strongly assaulted by Satan The
Devil marches well armed, and in good array, says Luther.
on all sides; Satan is such a grand enemy to the Joy and Peace, to the
Salvation and Consolation of the Saints, that he cannot but make use of all his
devices and stratagems, to amaze and amuse, to disturb and disquiet the peace
and rest of their Souls. No sooner had Jesus Christ heard that lovely voice
from Heaven, This is my Matthew. 3. ult. and 4. 1, 2, etc.
beloved Son, in whom I am wel-pleased, but he is desperately assaulted by
Satan in the Wilderness. No sooner was Paul 2 Cor. 12.
dropped out of Heaven, after he had seen such visions of glory, that was
unutterable, but he was presently assaulted, and buffetted by Satan. Stand up,
stand up assured Christians, and tell me whether you have not found the Isa.
25. 4.
blast of the terrible one, to be as a storm against the wall; Since the Lord I
verily think that they have very much cause to question the truth of their
assurance, who know not what it is to have their assurance assaulted strongly
by S^tan.
said unto you, be of good cheer, your sins are forgiven you. Have not you
found Satan to play the part, both of the Lion and the Woolf, of the Serpent
and the Fox, and all to weaken your Assurance; and to work you to question the
truth of your Assurance, and to cast water upon your Assurance, and to take off
the freshness and sweetness, the beauty and glory of your Assurance? I know you
have. His malice, envy, and enmity, is such against Satan is that old Serpent,
as John speaks, Revel. 12. 9. He is as old as the World, and is grown very
cunning by experience, he being a spirit of above five thousand years standing.
Gods honor and glory, and your comfort and felicity, that he cannot but be
very studious and industrious to make use of all traps, snares, methods, and
ways, whereby he may shake the pillars of your Faith, and weaken and overthrow
your Assurance* Pirates you know do most fiercely assault those ships and
vessels that are most richly laden; so does Satan those precious souls that
have attained to the riches of full Assurance. Assurance makes a Paradise in
Believers Souls, and this makes Satan to roar and rage. Assurance fits a man to
do God the greatest service, and Satan the greatest dis-service, and this makes
him mad against the Soul. Assurance makes a Saint to be too hard for Satan at
all weapons, yea, to Romans 8. 32. ult.
lead that Sun of the Morning captive, to spoil him of all his hurting power,
to bind him in chains, and to triumph over him, and this makes his Hell a great
deal hotter; and therefore never Luther cries out, I am set upon by all the
world without and within, by the devil and all his Angels.
wonder at Satan's assaulting your Assurance, but expect it, and look for it.
The Jailer is quiet, when his prisoner is in Bolts, but if he be escaped, then
he pursues him with hugh and cry; so long as the Soul is in bolts and bondage
under Satan, Satan is quiet, and is not so apt to molest and vex it; but when
once a Soul is made free, and John 8. 36.
assured of his freedom by Christ, then says Satan, (as once Pharaoh did) I
Exodus 15. 9.
will arise, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil, my lust
shall be satisfied upon them: I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.
The experience of all assured Saints does abundantly confirm this. Israel going
into Egypt had no enemies, no opposition, but traveling into Canaan, they were
never free.

Fourthly, A wel-grounded Assurance makes a man as bold as a Lion, it makes him
valiant and gallant for Prove. 28. 1. Tanto pl^^ gloriae referemus quoniam eo
plures superabimus. The number of opposers makes the Christians conquest the
more illustrious, say Saints, under the power of Assurance, etc.
Christ and his cause, in the face of all dangers and deaths. After the Holy
Ghost was fallen upon the Apostles, and had assured them of their internal and
eternal Happiness, O how bold, how undanted, how resolute were they in the face
of all oppositions, afflictions, and persecutions! as you may see from the
second of the Acts (of the Apostles) to the end of the Acts. So Assurance had
this operation upon David's heart, Psalm. 23. 4, 6. compared, Surely, goodness
and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life: Well David, but how does
this Assurance of yours operate? Why says he, Though I walk through the valley
of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: So Moses having an Assurance of
the recompense of reward, he fears not the wrath of the King; for (...). Was
constant.
he endured, as seeing him who is invisible. Heb. 11. 26, 27. So in Heb. 10.
34. And (...), Knowing that you have in your selves, (...), a better being in
Heaven, and an abiding one.
ye took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves, that ye
have in Heaven a better and an enduring substance. O that Knowledge, that
Assurance, that they had in their own hearts of enjoying in Heaven a better and
a more enduring substance, made them bear cheerfully and gallantly, the
spoiling of their worldly goods. Though the Archers, the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil, do shoot sore at a Soul under Assurance, yet his Bow will still
abide in strength. Assurance will make a man to break a Bow of Steel, to
trample down strength, and to triumph over all oppositions and afflictions.
Colonus the Dutch Martyr, called to the Judge that had sentenced him to death,
and desired him to lay his hand upon his heart, and asked him whose heart did
most beat, his or the Judges. Assurance will make a man do this, and much more
for Christ, and his Cause.

Fifthly, A wel-grounded Assurance of a man's own eternal Happiness and
Blessedness, will make him very studious and laborious to make others happy.
Psalm. 66. 16. Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will tell you what he
has done for my soul. I will acquaint you with the soul-blessings, with the
soul-favors, that God has crowned me with. I was darkness, but he has Ephesians. 5.
8. 1 Cor. 1. 30.
made me light; I was unrighteousness, but he has made me righteous; I was
Col. 2. 10. Isa. 1. 6. Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. Cant. 4. 7.
deformed, but he has made me complete; I was full of sores, and spots, and
blemishes, but he has washed me, and made me all fair without spot or wrinkle.
I have found the want of Assurance, I now see the worth of Assurance; I have
long sought Assurance, and now I find the sweetness of Assurance: Ah it is
such a Pearl of price, it is such a Beam of God, it is such a spark of glory,
that makes my Soul a rich amends for all its waiting, weeping, and wrestling.
So when it pleased Gal. 1. 15, 16. (...), In me.
God to call Paul by his grace, and to reveal Christ in him, and to him, Ah how
does he labor, as for life, to bring others to an acquaintance with Christ, and
to an acceptance of Christ, and to an Assurance of Everlasting Happiness, and
Blessedness by Christ! After Paul had been in Paradise, he makes it his 2 Cor.
12.
all to bring others to Paradise. So the Spouse in the Canticles having
assurance Cant. 5. 10 -- ult. and 6. 1, etc.
of her interest in Christ, how does she labor by all holy and heavenly
Rhetoric and Logic, by all the strains of love and sweetness, to draw the
daughters of Jerusalem to a sight of Christ, and to an assurance of the love of
Christ! When a Beam of Divine light and love had shined upon Andrew, John 1.
40, 41, 42.
he labors to draw his Brother Simon to the Fountain of all light and love; and
when Philip had but a cast of Verse. 43, 44, 45, 46, 47.
Christ's countenance, his pulse beats, and his heart calls upon Nathaniel, to
come and share with him in that loving kindness that was better then life.

The constant cry of Souls under the power of Assurance, is, Come taste and
Psalm. 34. 8.
see how good the Lord is. Ah sinners, sinners, his ways are ways of
pleasantness, Prove. 3. 17. 1 John 5. 3.
and all his paths are peace; his commands are not grievous, but joyous; his
yoke Matthew. 11. 30.
is easy, and his burden is light; not only for keeping, but also in keeping
of Psalm. 19. 11.
his commands, there is great reward. Assurance will strongly put men upon
winning of others by counsel, by example, by prayer, and by communicating their
Spiritual Experiences to them. Assurance will furnish a man with will, skill,
and experience, to confute all those false reports that vain men frequently
cast upon the Lord, and his ways. It will make a man proclaim to the world,
That one Psalm. 84. 10.
day in the Lords courts is better then a thousand years elsewhere; That there
are more glorious joys, more pure comforts, more abiding peace, more royal
contents, more celestial delights, in one days walking with God, in one hours
communion with God, etc. then is to be found in all things below God. And by
these, and such like ways, Souls under the power of a welgrounded Assurance,
do endeavor to make others happy with themselves. A Soul under Assurance is
unwilling to go to Heaven without company; he is often a crying out, Father
bless this Soul too, and crown that Soul too: Let us to Heaven together, let us
be made happy together.

Sixthly, A wel-grounded Assurance of Gods love, and of a man's Everlasting
Happiness and Blessedness, will exceedingly arm and strengthen him against all
wickedness and baseness. No man loathes sin, and himself for sin, Ezekiel. 16 60,
61, 62, 63.
as such a man; no man wars and watches against sin, more then such a man; no
man sighs and mourns, Romans 7. 22, ult.
bleeds and complains under the sense of sinful motions, and sinful operations,
Luke 7. 44. ult.
more then such a man. Every stirring of sin makes a man that is under the
power of Assurance, to cry out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from this body of death! Psalm. 85. 8. I will hear what God the Lord will speak;
for he will speak peace unto his people, and to his Saints: And let them not
turn again to folly, or as the Hebrew will bear, And they shall not return to
folly. Gods speaking peace to his people, fences and fortifies them against
folly and vanity.

The Assurance that Joseph had of his Masters love, armed him against the
lascivious assaults of his lustful Mistress; and will not Divine love that is
stronger then death, do this Cant 8. 6, 7.
and more? Assurance makes a man say to his sins, as he to his Idols, get you
hence, for, What have I any Hosea 14. 8. compared with the 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
vers^^.
more to do with Idols? So says the assured Soul, away pride, away passion,
away worldly mindedness, away uncleanness, away uncharitableness, etc. For what
have I any more to do with you? Assurance makes the Soul speak to sin, as David
speaks to sinners, Psalm. 119. 115. Depart from me ye workers of iniquity; for I
will keep the Commandments of my God: So says the assured Soul, depart from
me, O my lusts, for I have tasted of the love of God, and I have given up my
self wholly and one^y to God, and I cannot but keep the Commandments of my God.
The Jewish Rabbis report, that the same night that Israel departed out of
Egypt, toward Canaan, all the Idols and idolatrous Temples in Egypt, by
Lightning and Earthquakes, were broken down: So when Christ and Assurance comes
to be set up in the Soul, all the Idols of Satan, and a man's own heart; are
cast down, and cast out as an abomination. Sound Assurance puts a man upon
purifying himself, even as Christ is 1 John 3. 2, 3.
pure. The assured Christian knows, That it is dangerous to sin against light,
that it is more dangerous to sin against love, that it is most dangerons to sin
against love revealed and manifested. God may well say to such a Christian, Is
this thy kindness to thy friend? To sin under Assurance, is to sin against the
Bowels of Mercy, it is to sin against the choicest Remedy, it is to sin against
the highest Hopes of Glory; and this will certainly provoke God to be angry. 1
Kings 11. 9. And (...)
the Lord was angry with Solomon, because Vaiithannaph in Pihil, to show that
the Lord was greatly angry with Solomon, the Root, (...) signifies properly to
snuff with anger. It notes such anger, as appears in the paleness of the
face, and snuffing of the nose.
his heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel, that had appeared to him
twice. To sin under Assurance, is to sin in Paradise, it is to sin under the
flaming sword, it is to sin in the Suburbs of Heaven; it is to run the hazard
of losing that favor that is better then life, of that joy that is unspeakable,
and full of glory, and of that peace that passes understanding. To sin under
Assurance, is to cast reproach upon Christ, to grieve the Spirit, to wound
Conscience, to weaken your Graces, to blur your Evidences, to usher in
Calamities, to imbitter your Mercies, and to provoke the Tempter to triumph
over your Savior. Verily, that Assurance is but presumption that works men to
play with sin, to be bold with sin, to make light of sin, to walk on in ways
of sin: Such Assurance will never bring a man to Heaven, it will never keep him
from dropping into Hell, yea, it will double his damnation, and make him the
most miserable among all damned, miserable, forlorn spirits. Ah Lord! from This
made Auselm say, That he had rather be thrust into Hell without sin, then go
into Heaven with sin.
such an assurance deliver my Soul, and give me more and more of that Divine
Assurance that makes sin to be more hateful then Hell, and that makes the Soul
to be more careful to avoid the one, then it is fearful of falling into the
other.

Seventhly, A wel-grounded Assurance is always attended with three fair
Handmaids, or with three sweet Companions:

The first is Love. O! the Assurance 1. Handmaid.
of Divine Favor does mightily inflame a man's love to Christ. Mary Magdalen
Luke 7.
loved much, Christ's love to her drew out her love very much to Christ.
Assurance makes the Soul sing it out with that sweet Singer of Israel, I will
dearly love thee, O Lord, my Psalm. 18. 1.
strength. Lovers know not how to (...) from (...) To love intimately and
dearly, as a tender mother loves the fruit of her womb.
keep silence; lovers of Christ are full of gracious expressions. Magnes amor
is est amor; Love is the attractive Loadstone of love. It is impossible for a
Soul not to love Christ, that knows he is beloved of Christ. Christ's love
constrains the Soul to love, not by forcible, but loving necessity. Praxiteles
exquisitly drew Love, taking the pattern from that Passion which he felt in his
own heart. A Believer cannot find the heart of Christ to be beating toward
him, but his heart will strongly beat toward Christ. Divine love is like a rod
of myrtle, which as Pliny reports, makes the Traveller that carries it in his
hand, that he shall never be faint or weary of walking or loving. Love alone
over-powereth all power. Love is the Diadem, none but the Queen must wear it.
Love is the Wedding Garment, none but the Spouse can fit it. Love is a
Loadstone to draw, as well as a fire to warm; he that does not love Christ, was
never assured of the love of Christ.

The second Handmaid or Companion 2. Handmaid.
that attends a wel-grounded Assurance, is Humility. David under Assurance
Psalm. 22. 6. (...) the Hebrew word Tolagnah, that is here rendered Worm,
signifies a very little worm which a man can hardly see or perceive.
cries out, I am a worm and no man; Abraham under Assurance cries out, that he
is but dust and ashes; Jacob under Assurance crves out, that he was less then
the least of all mercies; Job under Assurance abhors himself in dust and ashes;
Moses had the honor and the happiness to speak with God face to face, he was
very much in Gods books, in Gods favor, and yet a more humble Soul the earth
did never bear. The great Apostle Paul, under all the revelations and glorious
manifestations of God to him, counts himself less then the least of all Saints,
Ephe. 3. 8. That is Presumption, that is a delusion of the Devil, and no sound
Assurance, that puffs and swells the Souls of men, that makes men prize
themselves above the market, above the value that God has put upon them.

The third Handmaid or Companion 3. Handmaid.
that attends Assurance, is, holy Joy; Ah this Assurance causes the strong
waters of Consolation to overflow the Soul; Assurance raises the strongest
joys in the Soul, Luke 1. 46, 47. And Mary said, My soul does magnify the
Lord, and my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. When a man comes to be
assured that God is his Savior, presently his Spirit rejoices in God; this
truth is held forth by three Parables in that of Luke 15. So in that of 1 Pet.
1. 8, 9. Whom having not seen, ye love, in (...) to dance and leap for joy,
(...), glorified already, they have heavens happiness before hand.
whom though now ye see him not, yet bebeleeving, ye rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of glory: Receiving the end of your faith, even the
salvation of your souls. O the Joy, the Joy, the inexpressible Joy that attends
a wel-grounded Assurance! Assurance raises a Paradise of delight in the soul,
In quibus operamur, in ill is and gaudemus, says Tertull. In what things or
persons we act, in those things we rejoice; a Christian (under the power of
Assurance) works all his works in Christ, in him therefore, and in him alone,
he rejoices.

Eighthly, and lastly, A welgrounded Assurance sometimes springs from the
Testimony and Witness of the Spirit of God. The Spirit sometimes witnesses to
a Believers spirit that he is born of God, that he is beloved of God, that he
has union and communion with God, and that he shall reign for ever with God,
Romans 8. 16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our (...) That same spirit.
The Spirits work is not (...), but (...) to witness together with our Spirit,
that is to confirm and ratify what ou^ spirits have asserted concerning our
Adoption. etc.
spirit, that we are the children of God. The Spirit it self witnesses, not
only the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit, but the Spirit it self witnesses
together with our own spirit that we are the children of God. Sometimes the
Saints have two Witnesses joining their testimonies together to confirm and
establish them in these blessed and glorious Truths, that they are the Sons of
God, and Heirs of Glory: And this is their honor, as well as their comfort,
that the blessed Spirit should bear witness at the bar of their Consciences,
that they are the Sons of God, 1 Cor. God sometimes assures his people of
heaven aforehand.
2. 12. Now we have received not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which
is of God, that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God;
That is, that we may know our Election, Vocation, Justification,
Sanctification, and Glorification. A man may receive many things that are
freely given of God, and yet not know them till the Spirit comes and makes them
known to the soul.

Quest. But you may say to me, how shall we know the whispering of the holy
Spirit from the hissing of the old Serpent? how shall we know the report, the
witness, and testimony of the Spirit of Christ, from that report, witnesle,
and testimony that the old Serpent deludes and deceives many by, in these days
wherein he mostly appears in his Angelical Robes?

I Answer, you may know the whispering

First, The Spirit of Christ does not witness by any outward voice, as God
Matthew 3. ult. Luke 1. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34.
did from Heaven of Christ; nor by an Angel, as to the Virgin Mary; but by an
inward, secret, glorious and unspeakable way, he bids Believers be of good
cheer, their sins are forgiven Matthew. 9. 2.
them, as Christ said to the palsy man in the Gospel. And this truth is to be
solemnly minded against those poor deceived and deluded souls in Quakers and
Ra^ters.
these days, that would make the world believe, that they have had such and
such glorious things made known by an outward audible voice from Heaven; It is
much to be feared that they never found the inward, the sweet, the secret, the
powerful testimony and report of the Spirit of Christ, that boast, and brag,
and rest so much upon an outward testimony. In 1 King. 19. you read of a great
strong wind that rent the Verse. 11.
Mountains, and brake in pieces the Rocks: but the Lord was not in the wind:
and after the wind there was an earthquake, but the Lord was not in the
earthquake. And after the earthquake a fire, but the Verse. 12.
Lord was not in the fire; And after the fire Verse. 13.
there was a still small voice, and the Lord spoke to Elijah in that still
small voice. Ah Christians! the Spirit of the Lord makes not a noise, but he
comes in a still small voice, as I may say, and makes a soft and secret report
to the soul, that it is beloved, that it is pardoned, and that it shall be for
ever glorified.

Secondly, The testimony and witness of the Spirit of Christ is only gained
and enjoyed in holy and heavenly ways, as you may clearly see by comparing
Acts 10. 4. Dan. 9. 20. 21, 22. Isa 64. 5. Act. 10. 44, etc.
the Scriptures in the margent together. The Spirit of the Lord is a holy
spirit, and he cannot, he will not make any report of the love of the Father to
the soul out of a way of holiness. Verily all those glorious reports that
many boast they have met with, in sinful ways, in wretched and ungodly ways,
are from the hissing of the old Serpent, and not from the whisperings of the
Yet this age has many such Monsters.
Spirit of Grace. I think it is little less then blasphemy, for any to affirm,
that the blessed Spirit of Christ does make reports of the love and favor of
God, to persons walking in ways of wickedness and baseness.

Thirdly, The testimony and witness of the Spirit of Christ, is a clear, a ^ul,
a satisfying testimony and witness, the soul sits down under the home reports
John 14 17. 1 John 3. 24.
of the Spirit, and says, Lord it is enough, the soul being full sits down and
sweetly sings it out, My beloved is mine, and Cant. 2. 16. and 7. 10.
I am his, I am my wel-beloveds and his desire is toward me. The Lord is my
portion Psalm. 16. 5. Psalm. 73. 25.
and the lot of mine inheritance. I have none in Heaven but thee, neither is
there any on earth that I desire in comparison of 2 Timothy 4 8.
thee. Henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness. Make haste my
beloved, Cant. 8. ult.
etc. Such power, majesty, and glory attends the glorious testimony of the
Spirit of Christ, as scatters all clouds, as resolves all doubts, as answers
all objections, as silences the wrangling soul, etc. If the testimony of the
Spirit of Christ were not a full satisfying testimony, it could never fill the
soul with such joy as is unspeakable and full of glory, and with such peace as
passes understanding; if the testimony were not satisfactory the soul would
still be under fears and doubts, the heart would still be a wrangling and
quarrelling, I may perish, and I may be undone, I may have the door of Mercy
shut against me, etc. If you bring news to a condemned person that the King
has pardoned him, and that he will receive him to favor, and confer such and
such dignity upon him, yet this does not quiet him, nor satisfy him, till he
knows it is the Kings act, till he is satisfied in that, he cannot say it is
enough, he cannot be cheerful, he cannot be delightful. etc. But when he is
satisfied that it is the Kings act, that the King has certainly done this, and
that for him, then he is satisfied, and then sighing and mourning flies away,
and then he rejoices with joy unspeakable. So it is with a believing Soul under
the testimony and witness of the Spirit of Christ.

Fourthly, Though the Spirit be a witnessing Spirit, yet he does not always
witness to believers their adoption, their interest in Christ, etc. There is a
mighty difference between the working of the Spirit, and the witness of the
Spirit; There are often times many glorious and efficacious works of the
Spirit, as Faith, Love, Repontance, Isa. 50. 10.
Holiness, etc. where there is not the witness of the Spirit. David at that
very time had the Spirit. and Psa. 50. 10, 11, 12
many sweet workings of the Spirit in him, and upon him, when he had by sin
lost the witness and testimony of the Spirit. Though the Spirit of the Lord be
a witnessing and a sealing Spirit, yet he does not always witness Job 23. 8,
9. 1 John 5. 13. Psa 88. Psa. 77. Mich. 7. 8, 9. Isa. 8. 17.
and seal up the love and favor of the Father to believers souls, as you may
see by the Scriptures in the Margent, and as the experience of many precious
Christians can abundantly evidence. All believers do not see alike need of this
testimony, they do not all alike prize this testimony, they do not all alike
observe it and improve it, and therefore it is no wonder if the Spirit be a
witnessing Spirit to some, and not to others: You do but gratify Satan, and
wrong your own souls, when you argue that certainly you have not the Spirit
because he is not a witnessing and a sealing Spirit to your souls. Though it
be the office of the Spirit to witness, yet it is not his office always to
witness to believers their happiness and blessedness: The Spirit may act one
way and in one room of the A man may be a doing in one Room, when he is not in
another: So is the Spirit in the heart of a Saint.
soul, when he does not act in another; sometimes the Spirit works upon the
Understanding, sometimes upon the Will, sometimes upon the Affections,
sometimes upon Faith, sometimes upon Fear, sometimes upon Love, sometimes upon
Humility, etc. Our hearts are the Spirits Harps; If a man should always touch
one string in an Instrument, he should never play various tunes, he should
never make pleasant music; no more would the Spirit, it he should be always a
doing one thing in the soul; therefore he acts variously, sometimes he will
show himself a quickening Spirit, sometimes an enlightening Spirit, sometimes an
humbling Spirit, sometimes a rejoicing Spirit, sometimes a sealing Spirit, and
always a surporting Spirit, etc.

Fifthly, The testimony and witness of the Spirit, is a sure testimony, a Titus
1. 2. John 14. 17. 1 Cor. 2. 10* 1 John 4. 1, 2, 3, 4
sure witness, the Spirit is truth it self, he is the great searcher of the
deep things of God, the Spirit of the Lord is the Discoverer, the Confuter, and
Destroyer of all false spirits. The Spirit is above all possibility of being
deceived; he is omnipotent, he is omniscient, he is omnipresent, he is one of
the Cabinet-Councel of Heaven, he lies, and lives in the bosom of the Father,
and can call them all by name upon whom the Father has set his heart, and
therefore his testimony must needs be true. It is a surer testimony then if a
man should hear a voice from Heaven pronouncing him to be happy and blessed.
You may safely and securely lay the weight of your souls upon this testimony,
it never has, it never will deceive any that has leaned upon it. This
testimony will be a rock that will bear up a soul, When other false testimonies
will be but a reed of Egypt, that will deceive the soul, that will undo the
soul; As I am afraid many in this deluding age have found by sad experience.

Sixthly, The testimony of Gods I do not say that the testimony of our spirits
is always accompanied with the testimony of the Spirit; No, for a Believer has
often the single testimony of his own spirit, when he wants the testimony of
the Spirit of Christ, and the single testimony of his own conscience, will
afford him much courage and comfort, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Yea, it will make a paradise
of delight in his soul, etc.
Spirit is always accompanied with the testimony of our own, these may be
distinguished, but they can never be separated; when the Spirit of God gives in
witness for a man, his own spirit does not give in witness against him. Look
as face answers to face, so does the witness of a Believers spirit answer to
the witness of the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8. 16. The Spirit witnesses together
with our spirits that we be the Sons of God. Now if our own Consciences do not
testify first, that we are Sons and Heirs, the Spirit does not testify, for
the Spirit bears witness together with our spirits; St. John is very express
in 1 John 3. 21. But if our hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward God. But if our hearts condemn us, God is greater then our hearts, and
knows all things, 1 John 5. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. And there are three that bear
witness in Earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood, and these three
agree in one. The Spirit does witness eminently and efficiently, but Water and
Blood materially, and our spirits and Reason, instrumentally. By the Spirit we
may understand the Holy Ghost, by whose strength we lay hold on Christ; and
all his benefits; by Water we may understand our Regeneration, our
Sanctification; and by Blood we may understand the blood and righteousness of
Christ, that is imputed and applied by faith to us; and these three agree in
one, that is, they do all three of one accord testify the same thing.

Seventhly, The witness of the Spirit is ever according to the Word; there is a
sweet harmony between the inward and outward testimony, between the Spirit of
God and the Word of God. The Scriptures were 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21.
all indicted by the Spirit, and therefore the Spirit cannot contradict
himself, which he should do, if he should give in any testimony contrary to
the testimony of the word. It is blasphemy to make the testimony of the spirit
to contradict the testimony of the Word. The Spirit has revealed his whole
mind in the Word, and he will not give a contrary testimony to what he has
given in the Word. The Word says, they that are born again, that are new
Creatures, that believe and repent, shall be saved: But thou art born again,
thou art a new Creature, thou beleevest and repentest; therefore thou shall be
saved says the Spirit: The Spirit never loses, where the Word binds; the
Spirit never justifies, where the Word condemns; the Spirit never approves,
where the Word disapproves* the Spirit never blesses, where the Word curses.
In Deu. l 3. 1, 2, 3, 4
the Old Testament, all Revelations were to be examined by the Word, Isa. 8.
20. To the Law and to the Testimony, (...)
if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no light (or
no morning) in them. So in that of John 16. We are not only blind but lame too,
therefore the Spirit shall lead us to the knowledge and practice of all
necessary saving truths.
13. The Spirit shall lead you into all truth, for he shall not speak of
himself, but what he shall hear* that shall he speak. Here the Holy Ghost is
brought in as some Messenger or Ambassador who only relates things faithfully,
according to that he has in charge. Such as look and lean upon the hissing of
the old Serpent, may have a testimony that they are happy, against the
testimony of the Word; But where ever the Spirit of Christ gives in his
^estimony, it is still according to the Word. Look, as Indenture answers to
Indenture, or as the Counterpaine exactly answers to the principal Conveyance,
there is Article for Article, Clause for Clause, Covenant for Covenant, word
for word: So does the testimony of the Spirit exactly answer to the testimony
of the Word.

Eighthly, It is a Holy witness, a holy Nil nisi sanctu^ a sancto spiritu
prodire potest, Nothing can come from the Holy Spirit but that which is holy.
testimony, it is formally holy, it is originally holy, it is effectually holy.
Nothing makes the heart more in the love, study, practice and growth of
holiness, then the glorious testimony of the Holy Spirit; and the more clear and
full the testimony is, the more holy and gracious it will make the Soul.
Nothing puts such golden Engagements upon the soul to holiness, as the Spirit
sealing a man up to the day of Redemption, as the Spirits speaking and sealing
Peace. Love, and pardon to the Soul, Psalm. 85. 8. 1 Cor. 15. 31. 2 Cor. 5. 14.
Nothing makes a man more careful to please Christ, more fearful to offend
Christ, more studious to exalt Christ, and more circumspect to walk with
Christ, then this testimony of the Spirit of Christ. Verily, that is not the
blessed whispering of Christ's Spirit, but the hissing of the old Serpent, that
makes men bold with sin, that makes men dally with sin, that makes man a
servant to sin, that breeds a contempt of Ordinances, a neglect of holy Duties,
a carelessness in walking with God; And from those hissings of the old Serpent,
O Lord, deliver my Soul, and the Souls of all thy servants that put their trust
in thee.

Ninethly and lastly, Assurance is a Jewel, a Pearl of that price, that God
only bestows it upon renewed hearts. The Spirit never sets his Seal upon any,
but upon those that Christ has first Revel 2. 17. Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27.
compared.
printed his Image upon: God gives to none the white stone, but to those from
whom he has taken the heart of stone. Christ never tells a man that his Name
is written in the Book of Luke 10. 20.
Life, till he has breathed into him Spiritual Life. Christ never says, Son
be of good cheer, thy sin is pardoned, Luke 5. 18, 19, 20.
till he has first said, Be thou healed, be thou cleansed. Christ never gives
a man a new name, that is Isa. 56. 5. 2 Cor. 5. 17.
better then the names of Sons and Daughters, till he has made them new
Creatures. Of Slaves Christ first makes us Sons, before we cry Abba Rom 8. 15.
Ephesians. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
Father. Of Enemies, he first makes us Friends, before he will make us of his
Court or Counsel. Christ will never hang a Pearl in a Swines snout, nor put new
Wine into old Bottles, nor his Royal Robes upon a leprous back, nor his Golden
Chain about a dead man's neck, nor his glistering Crown upon a Ephesians. 1. 13.
Traitors head. The Spirit never sets his Seal upon any, but upon those that
Christ has first se^ as a Seal upon his Cant. 8. 6.
heart. The Spirit only bears witness to such as hate sin as Christ hates it,
and that love Righteousness as Christ Psalm. 45 7.
loves it, that hate sin more then Hell, and that love truth more then life. A
Soul sealed by the Spirit will pull out right eyes, and cut off right hands,
for Christ; such a Soul will part with a Benjamin, and offer up an Isaac, for
Christ. And this is to be seriously minded against those deceived and deluded
Souls, that remain yet in their blood, and that wallow in their sins, and yet
boast and brag of the Seal, and of the witness and testimony of the Spirit.

And thus I have showed you the difference between the whisperings of the
Spirit, and the hissing of the old Serpent, between a true testimony and a
false.

CHAP. VII. Containing Answers to several special Questions about Assurance.
BUt me thinks I hear some precious Souls, saying, Sir, we have, after much
praying, weeping and waiting, gained this Pearl of price, Assurance: But, O how
shall we do to strengthen it? How shall we do to keep it? Satan will labor to
weaken our Assurance, and to rob us of this Jewel, that is more worth than a
world; what means must we use to strengthen our Assurance, and to secure it?
etc.

Now to this Question, I shall give these following Answers.

First, If you would have your Assurance strengthened and maintained, then keep
close to Soul-strengthning The old Rule was Hoc age.
ways, be serious and sincere, be diligent and constant in the use of those
means and ways wherein you first gained Assurance, as Prayer, the Word,
breaking of Bread, Communion of Saints, etc. A conscionable and cordial A cool
spirit is always a losing spirit, the doing heart, the diligent heart, turns
the spark into a flame, the mite into a million, etc.
use of holy and heavenly means is blessed, not only with a preservation of
Assurance, but likewise with an addition and increase of it. The ways of God,
and his goings in the Sanctuary, have wrought wonders upon thee, when thou wast
dead, how much more will they work upon thee, and for thee, now thou art (by
Grace made) alive? He that will not apply himself to Gods strengthening methods,
will quickly find his Assurance weakened, if not wholly wasted. He that thinks
himself too good for Ordinances, will quickly grow weak in his Assurance. The
choicest Prophets, and highest Apostles (if I may so speak) that had attained
to the fullest Assurance, kept close to the ways and precious institutions of
Christ. Verily, those that pretend to live above Ordinances, and yet live below
them, never knew by experience, what a mercy it was to have a wel-grounded
Assurance, or else they have lost that blessed Assurance that once they had,
etc.

Secondly, If you would strengthen and maintain your Assurance, then dwell much
upon your Spiritual and Eternal Privileges, viz. Your Adoption, Holy and
heavenly privileges, are the food by which Assurance is cherished and
maintained.
Justification, Reconciliation, etc. 1 Pet. 2. 9. This you will find by
experience will mightily tend to the strengthening and maintaining of your
Assurance. He that neglects this Rule, will quickly find his Sun to set in a
cloud, his Harp to be turned into mourning, and his Organ into the voice Job
30. ult.
of them that weep.

Thirdly, If you would strengthen and maintain your Assurance, then look that
your hearts and thoughts run more out to Christ^ then to Assurance, to the Sun
then to the Beams, to the Fountain then to the Stream, to the Root then to the
Branch, to the Cause then to the Effect. Assurance is sweet, Cant. 1. 13.
but Christ is more sweet. Assurance is lovely, but Christ is altogether
lovely. Cant. 5. 16. Prove 3. 15.
Assurance is precious, but Christ is most precious. Though Assurance be a
flower that yields much comfort and delight, yet it is but a flower. Though
Assurance be a precious Box, yet it is but a Box. Though Assurance be a Ring of
Gold, yet it is but a Ring of Gold. And what is the flower to the Root, what is
the Box to the Ointment, what is the Ring to the Pearl? No more is Assurance to
Christ; therefore let thy eye, and heart, first, most, and last, be fixed upon
Christ, then will Assurance bed and board with thee, otherwise thou will
quickly find thy Summer to be turned into Winter.

Fourthly, If you would strengthen and maintain your Assurance, then look that
your hearts are more taken up with Christ, then with your Graces. Though Grace
be a glorious Creature, Christ is the pot of Manna, the Cruse of Oil, the
bortomless Ocean, the most sparkling Diamond in the Ring of glory, etc.
yet it is but a Creature; therefore let Grace have your eye, but be sure that
Christ have your heart. Christ will not allow your very Graces to be corrivals
with him. He that minds his Graces more then Christ, or that sets his Graces
upon the Throne with Christ, will quickly find what it is to lose the face and
favor of Christ. Your Grace are but Christ's Servants and Handmaids, you may
look upon them, but you must not match with them. When Darius sent to
Alexander, that he would be willing to divide the Kingdom, no says Alexander,
there is but one Sun in the Firmament, and there can be but one King in a
Kingdom: So says Christ, etc.
It is a reproach to Christ, that those that have married the Master, should at
the same time match with the Servant. The Queen may look upon her glistering
Courtiers, but she must live upon the King; the Wife may take pleasure in her
lovely Babes, but she must live upon her Husband, and be most observant of her
Husband: So gracious souls may look upon their Graces, but they must live upon
King Jesus; they may take pleasure in their Graces, but they must live upon
Christ, and be most observant of Christ. This is the way to keep Christ and
Assurance, and he that walks contrary to this rule, will soon find the loss of
both. Christ will be Alexander or Nemo, he will be all in all, or he will be
nothing at all. Though his Coat ^oh. 19. 23.
was once divided, yet he will never suffer his Crown to be divided. His Isa.
42. 8.
glory he will give to none.

Fifthly, If you would have your We have, says Cyprian, no such notions as
many Philosophers have, but we are Philosophers in our deeds, we do not speak
great things, but we do great things in our lives.
Assurance strengthened and maintained, then labor to improve your Assurance,
improve it to the strengthening of you against temptations, to the fencing of
you against corruptions, to the raising of your resolutions, to the inflaming
of your affections, to the bettering of your conversations. Assurance is a
pearl of price, he that will keep it, must improve it. The ready way to
maintain our natural strength, and to increase it, is to improve it: So the
ready way to maintain our Assurance, and to increase it, is to improve it.
Assurance is one of the choicest and chiefest talents that ever God entrusted
man with, and he that does not improve it and employ it, will quickly lose it,
etc. God will not suffer so Matthew. 25. 28.
golden a talent to gather rust. Win gold and wear gold, improve gold and keep
gold; win Assurance and wear Assurance, improve Assurance and keep Assurance.
Dionysius the elder, being advised of one that had hidden great store of money,
commands him upon pain of death to bring it to him; which he did, but not all;
But with the remainder he went and dwelt in another Country, where he bought
an Inheri^ance, and fell upon some employment; which when Dionysius heard, he
sent him his money again, which he had taken from him, saying, Now thou
know how to use riches, take that I had from thee. I shall leave you to make
the application.

Sixthly, If you would have your Assurance strengthened and maintained, then
walk humbly with your God. Mich. 6. 8.
God makes the humble man's heart his house to dwell in, Isa. 57. 15. Thus says
the high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy, I dwell in
(...) low of spirit (...) to quicken or make to live the spirit of humble ones.
Isa. 41. 10.
the high and holy place; with him also that is of a contrite and humble
spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the
contrite ones. The highest heavens, and the lowest hearts, are the habitations
wherein the holy one delights to dwell. Now this phrase, I will dwell with the
humble, takes in several things. 1. It includes Gods overlooking the humble. 2.
It takes in Gods assisting and strengthening of the humble. 3. It takes in Gods
protection, I will dwell with the humble, that is, I Job 22. 29.
will protect him and secure him. 4: It takes in Gods sympathizing with the
humble. 5. It takes in Gods applying Isa. 63. 9. Isa. 57. 18.
all suitable good to the humble. 6. It takes in Gods ruling and overruling
the heart and the affections of the humble. 7. It takes in Gods teaching and
Psa. 10. 17. Psalm. 25. 9.
learning of the humble. But 8. and lastly, it includes and takes in a clearer,
a fuller, and a larger manifestation and communication of God to humble souls;
ah says God, I will dwell with the humble, that is, I will more richly, more
abundantly, and more gloriously manifest and make known my grace and glory, my
goodness and sweetness, my loving kindness and tenderness to humble souls.
Now tell me humble souls, will not Gods dwelling thus with you contribute very
much to the strengthening and maintaining of your Assurance? Jam. 4. 6. But he
gives more grace, wherefore he says, God resists the proud (or as the Greek
(...).
word emphatically signifies, he sets himself in battle array against the
proud) but gives grace to the humble. Humility is both a grace, and a vessel
to receive grace. God poures in grace into the humble souls, as men pour
liquor into an empty vessel. And verily, the more grace you have, the more will
your Assurance be strengthened and maintained. Well, remember this, the humble
man's mercies are the sweetest mercies, the greatest mercies, the most growing
and thriving mercies, the most blessed and sanctified mercies, and the most
lasting and abiding mercies. Therefore as you would have your Assurance
strengthened and maintained, walk humbly with your God; I say again, walk
humbly, walk humbly with your God, and you shall wear the crown of Assurance to
your grave.

Seventhly, If you would keep and maintain your Assurance, then take heed and
watch against those very particular sins by which other Saints have lost their
Assurance. Take heed of carnal confidence and security. David Psalm. 30. 6, 7.
lost his Assurance by not guarding his heart against those evils. Again, take
heed of a light, slight, careless, and negligent spirit in holy and spiritual
things. The Spouse in the Canticles lost her Assurance, and her sweet communion
with Christ, by her slightness of spirit. Again, take heed of a stout Cant. 5
2, 3, 6. compared.
and unyeelding spirit under the afflicting hand of God, this made God hide his
face from them, Isa. 57. 17. In a word, take heed of tasting of forbidden
fruit, remembering what Adam lost by a taste.

Eighthly, If you would maintain and keep your Assurance, then freequently A
man may easier make a seeing eye blind, then a blind eye to see; a man may soon
put an instrument out of tune, but not so soon put it in again; A man is easily
born down the stream, but cannot swim so easily up the stream. etc.
and seriously consider of the wonderful difficulty of recovering Assurance
when it is lost; Oh the sighs, the groans, the complaints, the prayers, the
tears, the heart-renting, the soul-bleeding that the recovery of thy lost
Assurance will cost. The gaming of Assurance at first cost thee dear, but the
regaining of it (if thou should be so unhappy as to lose it) will put thee
to more pains and charge. Of the two it is easier to keep Assurance now thou
have it, then to recover it when thou have lost it. It is easier to keep the
house in reparations, then when it is fallen to build it up.

Ninethly and lastly, consider solemnly the sad and woeful evils and
inconveniences that will certainly follow How can the bird fly without wings,
and the wheels go without oil, and the workman work without hands, and the
painter paint without eyes? etc.
upon the loss of your Assurance, I will only touch upon a few.

1 None of the precious things of Christ will be so sweet to thee as formerly
they have been.

2 You will neither be so fervent in duty, nor so frequent in duty, nor so
abundant in duty, nor so spiritual in duty, nor so lively in duty, nor so
cheerful in duty, as formerly you have been.

3. Afflictions will sooner sink you, temptations will sooner overcome you,
oppositions will sooner discourage you.

4. Your mercies will be bitter, your life a burden, and death a terror to you;
you will be weary of living, and yet afraid of dying, etc.

Now the second Question is this, Suppose Souls have not been so careful to
keep and maintain their Assurance, as they should have been, but upon one
account or another have lost that blessed Assurance that once they had; how may
such sad Souls be supported and kept from fainting, sinking, and languishing
under the loss of Assurance?

To this Question I shall give these following Answers.

First, Souls that have lost that sweet Romans 8. 15, 16, 17.
for once sons and always sons: You are sons, though dejected sons; you are
sons, though comfortless sons; you are sons, though mourning sons, Psalm. 89.
30, 31, 32, 33, 34. John 13. 3. Jere. 31. 3.
Once children, and always children; once heirs, and always heirs; once
beloved, and always beloved; once happy, and always happy. 2 Samuel 23. 5.
Although my house be not so with God; yet he has made with me an Everlasting
Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: For this is all my Salvation, and
all my desire, although he make it not to grow. Well, says David, though
neither my self, nor my house, have been so exact and perfect in our walkings
before God as we should, but we have broken our Covenants with him, and dealt
unworthily by him, and turned our backs upon him, yet he has made with me an
Everlasting Covenant, he has engaged himself in an Everlasting Covenant, that
he will be my Father, and that I shall be his Son. And this is my Salvation,
and an Everlasting Ground of Consolation, and Supportation to my Soul.

The second Support is this, Consider, your Assurance, yet your Eternal
Happiness and Blessedness does not depend upon your Assurance; if it did, you
might be happy and miserable in a day, I, in an hour: Your Happiness lies in
your Union with God, in your Communion with God, in your Interest in God, and
not in your seeing and knowing: Your Interest, your Joy, and Comfort, lies in
your seeing and knowing your Interest in God, but your Everlasting Happiness
lies in your being interested in God. The welfare and happiness of the child
lies in the interest that he has in his Father, but the joy and comfort of the
child lies in his seeing, in his knowing of his interest in his Father: It is
so between the Lord and Believers. Psalm. 144. 15. Happy be the people that be
in such a case, yea, happy is that people whose God is the Nemo aliorum sensu
miser est, sed suo. Sal. de Gub. Dei, ^. 1. A godly man's happiness or misery is
not to be judged by the worlds sense or feeling, but his own.
Lord. Among the Philosophers there were Two hundred and eighty Opinions
concerning Happiness, some affirming Happiness to lie in one thing, some in
another. Ah, but by the Spirit and Word we are taught, that Happiness lies in
our oneness with God, in our nearness and dearness to God, and in our
conformity to God, etc. Mark, the To make up happiness, these things must
concur: First, it must be a convenient good, a suitable good to our natures;
Secondly, it must be an excellent good, a good that has worth and excellency
in it; Thirdly, it must be a sufficient good, a few scrapings of gold will not
make a man rich, etc. Fourthly, it must be a permanent good, it is permanency
that s^ts the greatest price, and has the greatest influence into our
happiness and felicity.
Scripture pronounces him happy, whose hope is in God, though he want
Assurance, Psalm. 146. 5. Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help,
whose hope is in the Lord his God. Again, he is happy that trusts in the
Lord, though for the present he want Assurance, Prove. 16. 20. And who so
trusts in the Lord, happy is he. Again, he is happy that fears the Lord,
that has set up God as the object of his fear, though he want Assurance of the
love of God, Prove. 28. 14. Happy is the man that fears always; That fears to
offend, that fears to disobey, that fears to rebel, etc. Again, he is happy
that believes in Christ, that rests and stays upon Christ, as the Scriptures
every where testify, though he may want Assurance.

Happiness lies not in any transient act of the Spirit, as Assurance is, but in
the more permanent and lasting acts of the Spirit. The Philosopher could say,
That he was never a happy man, that might afterward become miserable. If a
man's Eternal Happiness did lie in the Assurance of his Happiness, then might a
man be crowned with Xerxes's Steersman in the Morning, and be beheaded with him
in the Evening of the same day.

But this is the Believers Blessedness, That his condition is always good,
though he does not always see it to be good; that his state is always safe,
though it be not always comfortable.

The third Support to keep those Psalm. 71 20, 21. and 42. 5, 7, 8, Isa. 54 7,
8. Micah 7. 18, 19 Cant. 3. 4. Psalm. 84. 11, etc. Glover and many others, yea,
a cloud of witnesses might be found to testify this truth.
evidence. And does not this age, as well as former, furnish us with many
instances of this kind? Doubtless, many there are among the precious Sons and
Daughters of Zion, that have lost this Pearl of price, and after waiting,
weeping, and wrestling, have found it again; therefore be not discouraged, O
sighing, losing Souls. In the loss of emporals, it is a great support to men's
spirits, that their loss may be made up, and why should it not be so in
spirituals also?

The fourth Support to keep their Psalm. 30. 6, 7. and 51. 12. Job 23. 8, 9.
Isa. 8. 17.
in the Margent together. Those that were once the Worthies of this world, and
are now triumphing in that other World among the Princes of glory, have lost
that sweet Assurance and sense of Divine love and favor, that once they
enjoyed; therefore let not your spirits faint and fail. In temporal Acts 16.
trials, it is a comfort and a support to have companions with us, and why
should it not much more be so in spirituals?

The fifth Support to bear up their and sweet influences of the Spirit Cant. 3.
and 5. Micah 7. 7, 8, 9. compared. Isa. 8. 17. Isa. 50. 10.
upon them; witness their love to Christ, their longing after Christ, their
fear of offending Christ, their care to please Christ, their high esteem of
Christ, and their mourning for the dishonors, that by themselves or others are
done to Christ, etc. A man may enjoy the warmth, heat, and influence of the
Sun, when he has lost the sight of the Sun: David had lost his Assurance, he
had lost the sight of the Sun, and yet he enjoyed the warmth and influences of
it upon his heart, as is evident in the One and fiftieth Psalm.

Though thy Sun, O Christian, be set in a cloud, yet it will rise again, and in
the interim, thou have and do enjoy the warmth and influences of the Sun;
therefore sorrow not, mourn not, as one without hope. Those warm influences
that the Sun of Righteousness has now upon thy heart, are infallible
evidences, that he will shine Psalm. 42. 5, 7, 8, 11.
forth, and smile upon thee, as in the days of old; therefore let thy Bow
still abide in strength.

The sixth Support to keep their hearts from fainting and sinking, that have
lost that sweet Assurance that once they had, is, seriously to consider, that
it will be but as a day, but as a short day, before the loss of thy Assurance
shall be made up, with a more clear, full, perfect, and complete enjoyment of
God; ere long, O mourning Soul, thy Sun shall rise and never set, thy joy and
comfort shall be always Isa. 57. 18, 19, 20.
fresh and green, God shall comfort thee on every side, it shall be night with
thee no more, thou shall be always in the bosom of God. Psalm. 71. 20, 21. Thou
which have showed me great and sore troubles, shall quicken me again; and shall
bring me up again from the depths of the Earth. Thou shall increase my
greatness, and comfort me on every side. The day is at hand, O perplexed Soul*
when thou shall have smiles without frowns, light without darkness, day without
night, wine without water, sweet without bitter, and joy without sorrow.

The year of Jubilee is at hand, thou Levit 25. Psalm. 126. 5. Isa. 35. 2.
now sowest in tears, thou shall shortly reap in joy, yea, Everlasting joy
shall be upon thy head, and sorrow, and sighing shall flee away, therefore
faint not.

The third Question is this, viz. What means must Souls use to recover
Assurance, when it is lost?

I shall give a few short Answers to this Question, and so draw to a cloze.

First, If thou would recover Assurance, Austin says, Humanum est peccare,
diabolicum perseverare, and Angelicum resurgere, It is a humane thing to fall
into sin, a devilish to persevere therein, and an Angelical or supernatural to
rise from it.
then thou must labor diligently to find out that sin, that Achan, that has
robbed thee of thy Wedg of Gold, of thy Assurance; surely it is not for
infirmities, but enormities, that God has put out thy candle, and caused thy
Sun to set at Noon; surely, thou have been feeding (I say not tasting) of
forbidden fruit, that God has stripped thee of thy robes, and taken the crown
from off thy head, and turned thee out of Paradise. But this is not all.

Therefore in the second place, weep Reve. 2. 4, 5. When ancient Rome was
Heathenish, if the Malefactor brought to be whipped sell upon his knees at his
feet whom he had offended, it was held as a sin if he suffered him to be whipped.
much, mourn much, over the Achan, over those wickednesses that have turned thy
day into night, thy rejoicing into sighing, etc. David does thus in that One
and fiftieth Psalm, and God takes him up from his knees, and restores to him
the joy of his Salvation. Though God be displeased with your sins, yet he is
wel-pleased with your tears. The promise is, that he will revive the spirit of
the contrite, Isa. 51. 15. It is said of Adam, that he turned his face toward
the Garden of Eden, and from his heart lamented his fall: Ah losing Souls, turn
your faces toward Heaven, and from your hearts lament your fall, lament your
loss; nothing puts God to it, like penitent tears. No sooner does Ephraim weep
over his sins, Jere 31. 18, 19, 20. It is an excellent expression of Basil, It
grieves, it irks, it is tedi^ is to our most munificient, great, glorious King,
If we ask any thing little of him, he would have us ask great things of him.
but the bowels of God are stirring toward him, and God cannot hold but he
must proclaim to the world, that mourning Ephraim, bemoaning Ephraim, is his
dear son, his pleasant child, and that he will surely have mercy on him, or,
as the Hebrew has it (Rahhem arahhamenu) I will having mercy, have mercy on
him, or, I will abundantly have mercy on him. When our hearts are set to weep
over our sins, God will so act in ways of love toward us, that it shall not be
long night with our Souls. God will never suffer them to be drowned in sorrow,
that are set upon drowning their sins in penitential tears. The Jews have a
saying, That since the destruction of Jerusalem, the door of Prayers has been
shut; but the door of tears was Psalm. 39. 12. Job 16. 20. Mark 9. 24, 25, etc.
never shut, says one. God has by promise engaged himself, That those that
sow in tears, shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126. 5. The tears of the Saints have
such a kind of omnipotency in them, that God himself cannot withstand them. 2
Kings 20. 5. I have seen thy tears, behold, I will heal thee; on the third day
thou shall go up unto the House of the Lord.

Thirdly, If you would recover Assurance, then sit not down discouraged, but be
up and doing. Remember what a Pearl of price thou have Revel. 2. 4, 5. As a man
that has been recovered formerly out of such or such a disease, if he be
relapsed, he will to the same means again, he will apply the same remedies
again; This did once do me good, I will try it again.
lost, and repent and do thy first works; fall close to the good old work of
Believing, Meditating, Examining, Praying, Hearing, Mourning, etc. Begin the
world again, and set afresh upon those very ways, by which at first thou did
get Assurance; fall upon family Duties, apply thy self to public Ordinances,
be much in close^ Services, stir up every gift that is in thee, stir up every
grace that is in thee, stir up all the life that is in thee, and never leave
blowing till thou have blowed thy little spark into a flame; never leave
turning thy penny, till thou have turned thy penny into a pound; never leave
improving thy mite, till thy mite be turned into a million. God will be found
in the use of means, and he will restore our lost mercies in the use of means,
Psalm. 22. 26. But this is not all.

Therefore in the fourth place, wait patiently upon the Lord; David did so, and
at length the Lord brought him Psalm. 40. 1, 2, 3.
out of a horrible pit, or out of a pit of noise and confusion, and set his
feet upon a rock, and established his goings, and put a new Song of praise into
his mouth. God never has, nor never will fail the waiting Soul; though God
loves to try the patience of his Children, yet he does not love to tire out the
patience of his Children, Isa. 57. 16, 18, 19
therefore he will not contend for ever, neither will he be always wroth, lest
the spirits of his people should fail. Assurance is a Jewel worth waiting for,
it is a Pearl that God gives to none but such as have waited long at mercies
door; It is a Crown that every one must win (by patient waiting) before he can
wear. God does not think the greatest Mercies too good for waiting Souls,
though he knows the least Mercy is too good for impatient Souls. The Breasts
of the Promises lie fair and open to waiting Souls, Isa. 30. 18. and 64. 4.
and 49. 23. The waiting soul shall have any thing of God, but the froward and
impatient soul gets nothing of God but frowns, and blows, and wounds, and
broken bones. Sad souls should do well to make that text their bosom
companion, Joh. 14. 18. I will not leave (...).
you comfortless (or Orphans) I will come to you. And that Text, Heb. 10. 36,
37. For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye
might receive the Promise: for yet a little, little while (as it is in the
Greek) and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry.

Fifthly and lastly, If you would recover Assurance, then take heed of refusing
Comforts when God brings them to your door, take heed of throwing
Gospel-Cordialls against the wall. This was Asaphs sin, My Psalm. 77. 2. Ambrose
says, If I would offer thee gold to day, thou would not say I will come
tomorrow: And will thou lightly and slightly put God off when he offers peace
and comfort to thy soul? etc.
soul refused to be comforted. God comes and offers love to the soul, and the
soul refuses it; God comes and spreads the Promises of Consolation before the
Soul, and the Soul refuses to look upon them; God comes and makes tenders of
the riches of grace, and the soul refuses to accept of them. Sometimes the
hand, the man that brings the Cordial is not liked, and therefore men refuse
it. Well, remember this, when gold is offered men care not how great or how
base he is that offers it; neither should we care by whom the Cordials and
consolations of the Gospel are offered to us, whether they are offered by the
hand of Isaiah a Prophet of the blood royal, as some think, or by Amos from
amongst the Heardsmen of Tekoa. If the Sweetmeats of Heaven are set before
thee, it is thy wisdom and thy duty to taste of them, and to feed upon them,
without stumbling at the hand that presents them.

Now for a cloze I shall make a few short uses of what has been said, and so
conclude.

First, You that have Assurance, be Jam. 1. 17. Plato was very thankful, that
God made him a man, and not a woman, a Grecian, and not a Barbarian, a Scholar
to Socrates, and not to any other Philosopher. O what cause then have you to be
thankful for Assurance?
not born with it in his heart, as he is with a tongue in his mouth. Assurance
is a peculiar mercy, it is a flower of Paradise that God sticks only in his
childrens bosoms. Assurance is a mercy, sweetning mercy, it is a mercy that
puts the Garland upon all our mercies. Assurance makes every bitter sweet, and
every sweet more sweet; he enjoyes little, that wants it, he wants nothing that
enjoyes it; therefore be you thankful that have, and do find the sweetness of
it. If Philip rejoiced that Alexander was born in the days of Aristotle, How
much more cause have you to rejoice, upon whose heads the Lord has put the
Crown of Assurance, a crown of more worth and weight, then all Princes crowns
in the world?

Secondly, If God has given you Psalm. 37. 1, 7, 8. Prove. 23. 17.
Assurance, then do not envy the outward felicity and happiness of the men of
the world. Ah lass, what are Mountains of Dust, to Mountains of Gold? what are
the Stones of the Street, to Rocks of Pearl? what are Crowns of Thorns, to
Crowns of Gold? etc. No more are all the treasures, honors, pleasures, and
favors of this world, to Assurance. The envious man has so many tortures, as
the envied Socrates wished that envious men had more eyes, and more ears then
others, that they might be more tormented then others, by beholding others
happiness.
has praisers; it is the Justice of Envy, to kill and torment the envious. The
men of the world, are real objects of pity, but not of envy; who envies the
Prisoner at the Bar? who envies the Malefactor that is going to Execution? who
envies the dead man that is going to his grave? God has done more for thee by
giving thee Assurance, then if he had given thee all the world, yea, Ten
thousand worlds. When the Spanish Ambassador boasted that his Master was King
of such a place, and of such a place, and of such a place, etc. The French
Ambassador answered, My Master is King of France, K. or France, K. of France,
signifying thereby, that France was as much, or more worth, then all the
Kingdoms under the power of the King of Spain. Ah Christians, when the men of
the world shall cry out, O their riches, O their honors, O their preferments,
etc. You may well cry out, O Assurance, Assurance, Assurance, there being more
real worth and glory in that, then is to be found in all the wealth and glory
of the world; therefore do not envy the outward prosperity and felicity of
worldly men, etc.

Thirdly, If God has given you Saul had but five pence to give the Seer, the
Seer after much good cheer gives him freely the Kingdom, 1 Samuel 9. 8. and 10.
1. So God deals with his.
not deny him a crust, to whom he has given a Christ; he will not deny him a
crumb, upon whom he has bestowed a Crown; he will not deny him a less mercy,
upon whom he has bestowed Assurance, which is the Prince of mercies. Fear not
death, for why should thou fear death, that have Assurance of a better life?
etc.

Fourthly, If God has given you a expect, that as no sin of ours does Psalm.
89. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. Jere. 31. 3.
make any substantial alteration in his affections to us; so none, no not his
sharpest dispensations, should make any alteration in our thoughts and
affections toward him.

Fifthly and lastly, If God has given Eccles. 9. 8. Revel. 3. 4. Matthew. 5. 16.
Vive ut vivas* Live that thou may live. Live in such sort, says Periander
King of Corinth, that thou may have honor by thy life, and that after thy
death, men may account thee happy.
you Assurance, then live holily, live angelically, keep your garments pure and
white, walk with an even foot, be shining lights. Your Happiness here is your
Holiness, and in Heaven your highest Happiness will be your perfect Holiness;
Holiness differs nothing from Happiness, but in name; Holiness is Happiness in
the bud, and Happiness is Holiness at the full; Happiness is nothing but the
quintessence of Holiness; The more holy any man is, the more the Lord loves
him, John 14. 21, 23. Augustine does excellently observe in his Tract on John
the first and the 14. That God loved the humanity of Christ, more then any man,
because he was Grace and Truth, then any man. The Philosopher could say, That
God was but an empty name, without virtue; so are all our professions, without
Holiness: Holiness is the very marrow and quintessence of Ille non est bonus
qui non vnlt esse melior. The loose walking of many Christians was (as Salvian
complains) made by the Pagans the reproach of Christ himself, saying, If Christ
had taught holy doctrine, surely his followers had led better lives.
all Religion: Holiness is God stamped and printed upon the Soul; it is Christ
formed in the Heart; it is our Light, our Life, our Beauty, our Glory, our Joy,
our Crown, our Heaven, our All. The holy Soul is happy in Life, and blessed in
Death, and shall be transcendently glorious in the Morning of the Resurrection,
when Christ shall say, Lo, here am I, and my holy Ones, who are my Joy; Lo,
here am I, and my holy Ones, who are my Crown; and therefore upon the Heads of
these holy Ones, will I set an Immortal Crown. Even so Amen Lord Jesus.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

Joseph Caryl.

ERRATA.
PAge 7. Margent add can be, p. 37. Marg. r. (...). ib. r. (...) p. 41. Marg.
r. opera, p. 56. l. 4. add a, p. 60. l. 13. r. done, p. 67. l. 5. add a, l.
11. r. preparations, page 80. l. 28. r. let, p. 103. Marg. r. crux, p. 110. l.
12. r. cheared, p. 113. l. 25. dele of, p. 115. l. 3. add the, p. 117. l. 21.
r. renewing, p. 135. r. (...), ib. r. (...), p. 138. Marg. r. (...) p. 144. l
5. r. liveless, p. 152. l. 22. r. foiling, p. 159. r. infinite, p. 162. l. 2.
dele the, p. 164. l. 2. add that, p. 184. l. 20. r. doubled, p. 186. l. 18.
dele a, p. 230. l 4. r. spittle, p. 258. l. 22. r. daring, p. 275. Marg. r.
affectibus, p. 276. Marg. r. (...), page 279. l. 28. r. means, p. 304. l. 15.
r. him, p. 318. Marg r. (...) p 334 l. 11. r. coveting, p. 344. Marg. r. (...),
p. 363. Marg. r. mediatum, p. 404. l. 21. add as, p. 436. l. 5. r. if.

There is another Book lately published by Mr. Thomas Brooks, entitled,
Precious Remedies against Satan's Devices, or Salve for Believers and
Unbelievers sores, being a Companion for those that are in Christ, or out of
Christ; that slight or neglect Ordinances, under a pretense of living above
them; that are growing in Spirituals, or decaying; that are tempted, or
deserted, etc. Sold by John Hancock, at the entering into Pope's Head Alley.


