A BRIEF SURVEY OF THE PROPHETICAL and EVANGELICAL EVENTS OF THE LAST TIMES:
Wherein that which principally is insisted on, is the Prophetical Little Horn,
or Man of Sin, and Evangelical Beast, and his seven Heads and ten Horns.

Showing by the Scriptures what they be, when their Rise, what their Work, how
long their Continuance, and their End and Ruin.

Much differing from former and common Interpretations hereupon.

Wherein also those Prophecies are briefly touched which concern the
persecution of the Saints, the falling away of the Churches, the night of
darkness, the Virgins going forth to meet the Bridegroom, the Mystical Whore,
the preaching of the Gospel of the Kingdom to all the World, and the gathering
of the Jews into their own Land.

Being a Portion of the pains in searching of the holy Scriptures by several
of the Members of the Congregation of Orpington in Kent. And now published for
the comfort of all those that have an interest in the Lord Jesus Christ, and
walt, look for, and long after his coming, Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13.

By Capt. JOHN BROWN a Member of that CONGREGATION.

LONDON, Printed by Gartrude Dawson, Anno Dom. 1655

TO HIS HIGHNESS OLIVER LORD PROTECTOR Of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND,
SCOTLAND and IRELAND.
My LORD,
THE Actings of the Almighty, in this last Age of the World, are visible to the
eyes of all Persons in general in these Nations, (especially to those that
Love and Obey him) over whom Providence has placed you as the chief
Magistrate, in whose hands you have been an eminent Instrument, to bring to
pass those things which he had determined so to be, and foretold by his
Prophets, the Lord Jesus and his Apostles; which having in some measure been
discovered to some of His (despised in this world) they durst not hide their
Talent in a Napkin, but what was freely given in to them, of knowledge and
understanding in things yet to be brought to pass, they do as freely
communicate to all, there being duties to be performed by all, and especially
by those who have power in their hands to make good use of it, and their time,
in employing of it so, as that This Gospel of the Kingdom may be Preached in
all the World, and the Jews brought to their own Land, that so the Coming and
Kingdom of the Lord Jesus to reign on the Earth with his Saints may be
hastened; who knows but that the time of deliverance to his People is nigh;
the Lord grant that there may be no curfed Murmurers, or wicked Transgressors
among us, whereby that deliverance should yet be retarded a longer time, as it
was with Israel for such Transgressions, who were deprived of the possession of
the Land of Promise a long time, and wandered in the Wildernesses forty years.

My Lord, the work is great that is to be done, and it will be done in a short
time, if we put forth our Selves, Conquest and Liberty to preach the Gospel of
the Kingdom go together; our ears have heard you have some design on the
Western parts of the World, where these glad Tidings were never as yet made
known; if Your Highness have any desire that the same should be there, or in
any other part of the World published, you need not fear the Attempt.

At your spare time cast your Eye upon what this ushers to your view, and if
the Lord have appointed you for the great work that is yet to be done, He will
stir up your heart to a speedy acting therein; to whom our Prayers for your
direction, and blessing therein, and protection over you (that under your
Government we may live a quiet and peaceable life, in all Godliness and
Honesty) shall not be wanting, in whom we desire to be found.

My Lord, Your Highnesses in all faithful Obedience to your Commands, not
disagreeing to the Command of our God and our Lord Jesus. Signed in the Name of
several Believers in Christ, and especially of many of the Congregation at
Orpington, JOHN BROWN.

To all Christian Readers by Profession in general, but especially to such who
have made manifest their Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, by yiedling Obedience
to all his Commandments.
THis little Trratise comes forth to the public view of all naked (yet
innotent) and that to an encounter with Eminent Expositers (both Ancient and
Modern) on this Subject of the Beast, like a stripling David with the great 1 Samuel 17. 4.
Goliath of Gath, one of the Sons of 1 Chro. 20. 8.
Harephah, well and completely armed, when little David brings with him only a
1 Samuel 17. 4.
Staff or Sling, with a Scrip, wherein he puts a few smooth stones which he
had taken out of the Brook, contemptible weapons in themselves for to encounter
such a Giant; such may this seem to be, which shall dare to oppose the volumes
of the many famous Authors, for so many Ages past, who have so largely
expressed themselves in their Writings on this Subject, all of them in general
concluding, that this Beast is risen long since, yea many hundreds of years
past (but with much difference of Opinion as to the time, as Mr. Tillinghast in
his late Treatise of the Knowledge of the Times has observed) when as this
does clearly prove, that he is not yet risen (if they mean the little Horn or
vile Person in Daniels Prophecy, or the Beast with seven Heads and ten Horns
in John's Visions) nor shall not arise till the seventh Head, King or Government
be risen and fallen, which is but yet arising; the truth of this, with the
event of the Combat, will evidently appear to such as desire after true
Knowledge (who are not prepossest with the Opinion of other Expositers, like a
Vessel that is first seasoned with unsavory Liquor, which will hardly be
c^eansed, and that not without some tang or relish of its first seasoning)
there being nothing but plain Scripture proofs (weapons like a Staff or
Sling) and a few Observations out of History (like a few smooth stones out of
the Brook) for what we do allege; as for our Opponents, who are many, how
they build one upon another, and add strength to strength till they become a
Giant (invincible and unanswerable in their own and others Opinions) and armed
with a staff (many Scriptures, but how rightly applied weigh and consider) but
beyond that of a Sling, a Spear, whose shaft was like a weavers beam, armed
with an Iron head weighing six hundred shekels; that is, pretending many
hundreds of years past for the original of that which they affirm; so that
for poor contemptible ones to come with a new doctrine, a new interpretation of
these Prophesies and Visions, may seem very adventurous (possibly to some a
rash and a distempered brain) yea and be cried down as dangerous and not to be
tolerated; but we beg this favor of the Readers, as to be spectators a while,
and if any will be Judges let them have patience also, and suspend their
Judgments for a time (which will try the truth of all things) and they may
possibly receive some better satisfaction, after a more serious consideration
of the Scripture Arguments on both sides.

This had come forth in public sooner, if the Clarke to the Company of
Stationers had not refused the Entrance of the Copy in their Hall Book, for
the poor (a Widow) Printer, because it was not licensed by some of the old
Licensers (there being no Law in force for it, and if there were, what a sad
condition would it be, for poor inquiring Souls to be deprived of true light
and knowledge, because the Licensers are of a contrary Judgment) or subscribed
by one of the Wardens of that Company, the one refusing to put to his hand, the
other her Adversary, from whom she could expect little good; so that Might and
Partiallity are as opposite to Good, and as active to the hinderance of the
poor Widow and Fatherless as ever.

The Lord teach us all to see the evil of our ways, and the vanity of our
doings, and repent thereof whilst we have time, least our Master call us to an
account before we are ready for it. Readers, if ye shall reap any profit by
this little Treatise, render unto the Great God and our Lord Jesus Christ a
Tribute of praise for the same, for from him have we received all the Light and
Truth thereof; if any thing therein shall upon the Touchstone of the Word be
found not to be the true Metal we bring it for, let that be imputed to us,
who have our failings as well as others; be as wise as the Noble Bereans, to
search the Scriptures that we have brought for what we affirm, and the Lord
give you understanding therein, so prays he for you

That have an interest in the Lord Jesus, J. B.

ERRATA.

PAge 2: line 1: record, read recorded: l, 30: stability, r: abillety: p: 4: l:
2: not, to be left out: l: 4: gratified, r: practiced: l: 32: fall, r: fell: p:
5: l: 19: to others, r: to others not: p: 7: l: 22. Women, r: Woman: p: 9: l:
26: r: Monarchy: p: 17: l: 5: this, r: his: l: 6: Tysris, r: Tygris: p: 18:
Berod^sh and Merodash, r: Berodach and Merodach: l: ult: r: Tir^aka: p: 29: l,
5, r: of Agustus Caesar.

The PASSAGES of PROVIDENCE In Relation to the Actings of Men, and fufferings
of the Saints (both Jews and Gentiles) from and after the death of our Lord
Jesus Christ are many and full of variety, both as to the time past and to
come, which we shall endeavor to lay down and clear, as they lie in Order (as
near as we can) to succeed.
THe first thing that was to befall the Saints after the death, resurrection
and ascension of Persecuton.
the Lord Jesus (and after the gifts of the holy Spirit were given forth
(according to his Promise, and command to his Disciples to wait for in
Jerusalem, 24. Luke 49, compared with the 2. Chapter of the Acts and 4. verse)
is, Persecution; which is agreeable to what our Savior had foretold, and
recorded by the Apostle John 15. Chapter 20. verse; If they have persecuted me,
they will also persecute you: And the Evangelist L^ke declares as much 21.
Chapter 12. They shall lay their hands on you (says he, speaking the words of
the Lord Jesus) and persecute you, delivering you up to the Synagogues, and
into Prisons, being brought before Kings and Rulers for my Names sake. Yea the
Lord Jesus tells us, before we become his Disciples that if we will be his
Disciples, we must hate all our dear and near relations, in comparison of him,
of loving them, and take up our cross and follow him, 14. Luke 26, 27. And
this not to be the portion of ordinary Disciples, but also of the most eminent
among them, read the words of the Lord Jesus, record by the Evangelist Luke, in
his 11. Chapter 49. ver. Therefore also, said the wisdom of God, I will send
them Prophets and Apostles, and some of them they shall slay and persecute. And
this persecution is not to extend only to the Saints who are believers in
Christ, but also to the woman (the Church of the Jews) which is to bring forth
the man child (which are believers in the Lord Jesus both Jews and Gentiles, of
which we shall write more fully hereafter) 12. Revelations 13. and to the
remnant of her seed, by the dragons making war with them, 12. Rev. 17. which as
it had its beginning on Abel (the second person begotten after the Creation) so
it will continue to be the portion of Gods people, till their last enemy is
destroyed, Gog and Magog, 20* Rev. 8, 9 but with some breathing time, as was in
the days of the Judges; (viz.) 3. Judges 11
Othniel, 3 Judges 30
Ehud, 5 Judges 30
Deborah, 8 Judges 28
Gideon, and others) as also of Solomon, and a short time in the Apostles
days, 9 Acts 31. and will be during the whole reign of Christ, for one
thousand year upon the earth; for then that enemy of the Saints, who was (and
will be) the chief cause of all the persecution (that they did, or shall go
under) in any age of the world) will then be chained up, 20. Revel 1, 2, 3. But
will be loosed afterward for a little season, as in the latter part of that
third verse before quoted, compared with the 7, 8, 9, verses of that Chapter.
Therefore the people of God are to take notice of his wisdom and goodness to
them, in that he knows how much better persecutions and afflictions are for
them than rest and prosperity, and accordingly administers the same to them, in
a proportion to the stability he has given to every one of them.

Now as we have proved that persecution is the portion of the Saints in this
life, because they are not of the world 15. John 19. So the next thing that was
to befall the 2. Falingaway of the Churches.
Churches, was their falling away from the Truth of that Doctrine that was
taught them by the Lord Jesus and his Apostles; and this the Apostle Paul
foretells the Church at Thesalonica, that there should be a falling away before
the man of sin would be revealed, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. The occasion whereof is not so
much the times of persecution as the Churches neglect of the Light (the Word)
that is left them, by which they ought to walk in the times of darkness. The
beginning of the falling away of the Churches; was before John's writing of the
book of the Revelations, in which the Church of Ephesus is exhorted to Remember
from whence she is fallen, and repent and do the first works, ar else (says
Christ) I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of
his place, except thou repent, 25. Chapter at the 5. verse.

The said falling away ushers in the 3d subsequent thing that we are to treat
on, that is the night of darkness, which was foretold* by our Lord Jesus, The
night comes, says he, when no man can work. 9. John 4. Also the same
Evangelist in his 12. Chapter 35, and 46. verses relates 3. The night of
darkdnesse.
more expressions of our said Lord, to the same effect; take the words as they
are recorded by him, Then Jesus said unto them, Yet a little while is the Light
with you, walk while you have the Light, lest darkness come upon you: For he
that walks in darkness knows not whether he goes: I am come a Light into
the world, that whosoever believes in me should not abide in darkness. We do
not say that this night of darkness was immediately to follow the death
resurrection, or ascension of Christ; for although he be the Day, or great
Light of the world (for by him all things were made that were made, 1 John 3.)
according to John the Baptists expression, 1. John 8, 9. And the Sun of
righteousness, according to the Prophet Malachies Prophecy, in his 4. Chapter
2. verse, compared with Zacharies Prophecy 1. Luke 7. 8. Yet he himself says,
that his Disciples are also the Light of the world, 5. Matthew 14. which they
are to hold forth to others, verse 16. Neither does the said night of darkness
presently follow the decease of the Apostles; for the Apostle Paul tells the
Church of Philippi, that although they were in the midst of a crooked and
perverse nation, yet among them they shine as lights in the world, 2
Philippians 15. As also the same Apostle writting to the Church at Thesalonica
declares to them, ye are not, (says he) the children of light; and the
children of the day; we are not of the night, nor of darkness, 1 Th^s. 5. 5.
But when once the Churches (who believed and gratified the foundation
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ) ceased to be, then came the night of
darkness on.

Now this darkness was to fall upon the Jews first, for their rejecting of
the Light; the Lord Jesus bemoanes their sad condition for the same, saying, If
thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong
unto thy peace! But now they are hid from thine eyes, 19. Luke 42. And the
Apostle John relates the exhortation of the Lord Jesus to them (the words we
have already repeated at large upon another occasion, 12. John 35. which
compared with the expressions of the Appostle Paul to the Jews, for their
contradicting and blaspheming: Then Paul and Barnabas waxed h^ld and said, it
was necessary that the Word of God should first have been spoken to you: but
seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life;
Lo, we turn to the Gentiles, 13 Acts 46. will clear our affirmation.

As this Night of darkness came upon the Jews for their rejecting of the
Light, so in the second place it came upon the Gentiles for their neglecting of
it. The Apostle Paul writing to the Church at Rome, bids them have a care of
boasting; take his expressions a little at large; Thou will say then, the
Branches were broken off, that I Romans 11. 19, 20, 21, 22.
might be grafted in. Well, because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou
stand by Faith. Be not high minded* but fear: For if God spare not the
natural Branches, tak^ heed least he also spare not thee Behold there fore the
Goodness and Severity of God; on them which fall, Severity; but toward thee
Goodness, if thou continue in his Goodness; otherwise thou also shall be cut
off. Compare this with the advice of the Lord Jesus to the Church at Ephesus,
Remember from whence thou art fallen, Revel. 2. 5. And withal consider well of
the words of the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, (who were believers in
Christ, and had believed and practiced the beginnings of the doctrine of
Christ, Hebr. 6. 1, 2.) For (says he) if the word spok^n by Angels was
steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense
of reward: How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation, which at the
first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that
heard him, Hebr. 2. 2, 3.

This darkness, after the Ascension of the Lord Jesus, decease of the
Apostles, and falling away of the Churches, was a general darkness, and so
brought on the night, in which the Virgins were to go forth, to meet the
Bridegroom, The Virgins go forth.
the Lord Jesus, Math. 25. 1. But while he tarrieth they fall asleep, verse 5.
and at midnight the cry was made, behold the Bridegroom com^th, verse. 6. which
though a Parable (or dark saying) yet ^t holds forth something, which then, as
to Persons and Time, should be. And to them which have believed and practiced
the principles of the doctrine of Christ, it is given to know the Mysteries of
the Kingdom to others, Math. 13. 11.

Now for the Persons that do go forth to meet the Bridegroom, the Scripture
(as we have already declared) styles them Virgins, that is, pure persons, and
such as those who have laid the two first foundation Principles, viz.
Repentance and Faith: that is, have repented that they have sinned, and do
believe that God has pardoned their sins by the blood of the Lord Jesus, and
therefore such must needs be pure persons.

But the Scripture makes a clear distinction between the Spouse of Christ and
Virgins: Solomon (the wifest of Men) in his Song, speaking in the person of the
Spouse to her Beloved, says, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth,
for thy love is better than Wine. Because of the Savor of thy good Ointments,
thy Name is as Ointment poured sorth, therefore do the Virgins love th^e,
Cant. 1. 2, 3. In which two verses there is a clear distinction I say, between
the Spouse (Let him kiss me) and Virgins (the Virgins love thee.) Take one
other expression of his in his said Song, chapter 6. 8, 9. There are threescore
Queens, and fourscore Concubines, and Virgins without number. My Dove, my
undifiled is but one: she is the only one of her Mother she is the choice one
of her that bare her; the Daughters saw her and blessed her; yea the Queens
and the Concubines, and they praised her. For a farther proof of our assertion,
that there is such a clear distinction betwixt the Spouse and Virgins, take the
words of a man after Gods own heart, the Psalmist David in his 45. Psalm 13,
and 14. verses; The Kings Daughter (says he) is all glorious within; her
clothing is of wrought Gold: She shall be brought unto the King in raiment of
needle work: The Virgins, her Companions, that follow her, shall be brought
unto thee.

Octject. Does not the Apostle Paul, in his Epistle to the Church of Christ at
Corinth, call her there a Virgin? 2 Cor. 11. 2.
For I have Espoused you (says he) to one Husband, that I may present you as a
chaste Virgin to Christ.

Answ. She is a chaste Virgin indeed, but is no where in Scripture called by the
Name of Virgins, in the Plural Number; for Solomon in his Cant. 6. 9. before
quoted, says, My Dove, my undefiled is but one, she is the only one of her
Mother; and that expression of the Psalmist David, Psalm 45. 14. will farther
clear this Objection.

Object. If there be such a distinction between the Church of Christ and
Virgins, then may not we fafely conclude, that the one hundred forty and four
thousand, mentioned in the 14. Revelations 4. (who are there called Virgins) to
be the Virgins that attend the Spouse in the 45. Psalm 14.

Answ. No, sor when the Spouse, or the Kings Daughter, is presented unto the
Lamb, she has both Virgins and Companions attending on her; whereas the one
hundred forty and four thousand are not sealed till after the Spouse of Christ
(that is the believing Saints) are taken up; consider well of that part of the
vision that the Apostle John saw in the 7 chapter of his Revelations 2, 3, and
4. verses, where after he has given some account of the opening of the sixth
Seal in the precedent chapter from the 12 verse to the end, in the first verse
of his seventh chapter, says, and after these things (which went before in the
sixth chapter (not that all things mentioned in this book of the Revelations
are to succeed in order) as they are laid down; but to question the things
related in the opening of the seven Seals, whether or, no they shall succeed
in order as we find them writtenwere to question, whether it were day when the
Sun shines) I saw four Angels, etc. And in the 2 verse, I saw another Angel
ascending from the East, having the Seal of the living God, and he cried with a
loud voy^e to the four Angels, to whom it was given to hurt the Earth and the
Sea, saying, hurt not the Earth, neither the Sea, nor the Trees, till we have
sealed the Servants of God in their foreheads. And I heard the number of them
which were s^aled, and there were sealed an hundred forty and four thousand,
of all the Tribes of the Children of Israel. Now this does clearly prove, that
the hundred forty and four thousand, who are called Virgins, cannot be said to
be the Virgins that attend the Spouse, the Lambs Wife, seeing they are upon the
Earth after the said Spouse is taken up. And hereafter we shall (with the Lords
assistance) prove, that this a hundred forty and four thousand is the Women
that flies into the wilderness, mentioned in the 12. Rev. 6.

Now as we have declared something what the Scripture does hold forth to be the
night of darkness, in which 2.
the Virgins do go forth to me^t the Bridegroom; so in the next place we are to
consider their actions, what they do.

First, they take their Lamps and go forth to meet the Bridegroom* Their Lamps
is the Word of God, its the Expression of the holy Spirit, in the mouth of a
man after Gods own heart, the Kingly Prophet David in the 119 Psalm 105. Thy
W^rd (says he) is a Lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.

Secondly, The wise took Oil n their vessels with their Lamps; So that there
we have a distinguishing of them, for although all of them take their Lamps,
yet five of them are said to be wise* and five of them to be foolish; that
which gives them this tittle is, their taking, or not taking Oil with them; For
the foolish took their Lamps, yet took no Oil with them, but the wise took Oil
in their vessels with their Lamps. Their vessels, which all of them had, ^s
their bodies, For proof thereof, take an expression of the Apostle Paul to the
Church of Corinth, speaking of the glorious Light of the Gospel of Christ; But
we (says he) have this treasure in earthen vessels that the excellency of the
power might be of God, and not of us; 2 Cor. 4. 7. Look also on that portion of
Scripture written for our learning in 2 Timothy 2. 21. As also 9. Acts 15. By the
Oil is meant joy and gladness, as for Joy take notice of the Prophet Esaies
expression from the Lord to his people; To appoint unto them that mourn in
Sion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, and the Oil of j^y for mourning, 61
Esai 3. And for Gladness see what the Spirit of God by the Prophet David,
speaking concerning Christ, Thou love Righteousness, (says he) and hate
wickedn^sse, therefore God, thy God has anointed thee with the Oil of
gladness above thy fellows.

Thirdly, They slumbered and slept; not a natural but a spiritual slumbring
and sleeping, which they fall into by reason of the Bridegroomes long tarrying,
for had they not so done, they would have yielded obedience to all the Commands
of Christ, and laid the foundation Principles complete, whereby they might have
been admitted as the Spouse of Christ, which now by reason of their sleeping
condition, they proceed no further than to repentance and Faith, and thereby
are deprived of that happiness, yet holding fast what they had, they have this
honor to be Virgins, to attend the Bride the Lambs Wife: And this sleeping
condition seized not only upon the Saints who had laid these beginning
doctrines of Christ, (Repentance and Faith) presently after the falling away of
the Churches: but also upon the Saints for many ages since; and it would be
much rejoicing to us if we could see the Saints by profession, in this age
freed from it; that is, that would rouse up their Spirits, and no longer
neglect the means afforded them, whereby they may attain unto the hight of
happiness, that is to be members of the Spouse, the Bride, the Lambs wife. Oh
the abundance of corruption that is in all our hearts by nature, and which we
are too much in love withal; which appears evidently in that we are so
unwilling to hazard the loss of honor, friends, means, and reputation, for
the gaining of so great an happiness and Honor as to be the Spouse of Christ;
Truly they that will not forsake all for Christ, are not worthy of him, 10.
Mat. 37. 38. But the Saints in this age ought to consider what they do; for
they cannot deny but that they are awakened by the cry that is begun to be
made, Behold the Bridegroom comes, which is the preaching of the Gospel of the
Kingdom: And if they do not proceed so far, as to attain the happiness of
being the Lambs Wife, through their own neglect and corruption; yet they ought
to be very careful, that they take and Trim their Lamps, and Oil in their
Vessels (Joy and Gladness in what they h^ve b^gun) least they act the part of
the foolish Virgins, and so be shut out, with a verily I say to you I know you
not.

Again, let us consider of some other things that were to fall out in this Time
of darkness, beside the Virgins sleeping; A the coming forth of the Mystical
Whore of Babylon; The Mystical Whore of Babylon.
which will be in the sixth Head or Monarch, 17. Rev. 9, 10. and will continue
till the coming forth of the ten horns* which will not be till after the rise
and fall of the seventh head, verse 11, 12. Concerning this Mystical whore, we
are to consider these particulars.

First, who she is, the description of her you will find in 17. Rev. 3, 4, 5.
verses.

2. The place of her abode, see the 18. verse of that 17. Chapter, where the
holy Spirit unfolding unto John the mystery of those things mentioned in that
Chapter, tells him, And the Woman which thou saw (says the Angel) is that
great City, which reigns over the Kings of the Earth. Which City, comparing
Scripture and History together, we shall find to be (and it could be none other
but) Rome, the chief Seat of the sixth Head, or Roman Monarchy, as we shall
more fully clear hereafter, the Lord assisting us.

3. What she would do; consider what the Apostle Paul did by the Spirit
foretell what should fall out in the latter times, in his second Epistle to
Timothy Chap. 4. 1, 2, 3. whose words are these. Now the Spirit speak^th
expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the Faith, giving
heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils: speaking lies in hypocrisy,
having their Consciences seared with a hot Iron. Forbidding to marry, and
commanding to abstain from meats, which God has created to be received with
thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth. Which words spoken of
some in the Plural Number, cannot more properly be applied to any then to the
Popes of Rome, typified by the Woman setting upon a scarlet colored Beast,
R^vel. 17. 3. And we may appeal to the hearts and consciences of all true
Christian Readeis hereof, whether that which the Apostle wrote in those three
verses to Timothy has not been fulfilled by the Papal Power of Rome. Again,
let us see and consider one other Prophecy concerning her acting, which the
Angel showed unto the Apostle John, and which he saw, Revel. 17. 6. And I saw
the Woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus; and when I saw her I wondered with great admiration Now if we
may give any credit to Mr. Fox his History of the Martyrs of Jesus (which we
shall not question) that Prophecy has been fulfilled to the purpose, of which
many of the poor Saints in this Island in the days of Henry the eighth, and
Queen Mary's time, were witnesses thereof

4. Her Judgment, with the Persons o^ Powers that shall execute it; take one
clear Scripture for it in the 17. Revel. 16. And the ten Horns (says the
Angel unto John) which thou saw upon the Beast, these shall hate the Whore,
and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn ^er
with fire.

Object. But some may say, how can this Scripture clear or prove that which you
bring it for; it speaking concerning the hating of the Whore, not of the Woman;
therefore this verse may rather seem to have relation to the first verse of
that 17. Chapter, where the Angel tells John, He will show him the Judgment of
the great Whore, that sits upon many Waters: and in the 15. verse of that
chapter, the Angel tells him, that the Waters which thou saw, where the
Whore sits, are Peoples, and Multitud^s, and Nations, and Tongues.

Answ. The Book of the Revelations is full of Mysteries and Prophecies, and not
easily to be understood, not only upon the first, but also not upon many
readings thereof; for if it had, how comes it to pass, that those Interpreters
thereof (whose writings are extant) are so dark in those things that they
undertook to open and clear; as in this Age we find some that have contradicted
others that went before them, in the unfolding of these Mysteries; and we
question not, but the Lord will give a clearer light to others, to make more
clear those things, which in this short Treatise we have in some measure
(though darkly) unfolded. But as to the Objection we say, that by comparing one
place in this chapter with another, and by clearing some improbabilities (if
not impossibilities) in it, that which we have affirmed concerning the
Judgment of the Woman or Whore, will evidently appear to be truth.

First, consider whether the Title Whore be not proper to this Woman, in the 4.
verse of that 17. chapter she is said to have a golden Cup in her hand, full of
the abominations and filthiness of her fornication. Now judge, whether she
that has committed Fornication, does not justly deserve the Title of Whore to
be given her.

Secondly, for the improbability of it; consider whether its likely that the
beast, unto whom these ten Horns give their Kingdom, would be acceptable unto
him, when as they had destroyed the Seat of his Empire, Babylon; if so be that
the word Whore in the sixteenth verse had relation to the word great Whore in
the first verse, or Whore in the fifteenth verse.

5. The fifth thing to be considered of, and that will fall out before the
taking up of the Saints, is, the preaching of the Gospel of the Kingdom, Math.
24* 14. The Lord Jesus speaking to his Disciples, in answer to the three
questions The preaching of the Gospel of the Kingdom.
propounded by them to him in the third verse, begins with the first, telling
them what should fall out in after times, and amongst other things tells them,
That this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a
witn^sse unto all Nations, and then shall the end come.

This Gospel of the Kingdom was begun to be preached by the Lord Jesus
himself, as the said Evangelist Matthew ^ath recorded in the 4. chapter 23. And
Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their Synag^gues, and preaching the
Gospel of the Kingdom: also in Matthew 9. 35. you have it there recorded again
of his so doing. And this he does not only make a part of his own work, but
also when he sends forth his twelve Apostles, he commands them, saying, As ye
g^e preach saying, the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Matthew 10. 7. Which also
Phillip one of the seven Deacons preaches up, as appears in Acts 8. 12. And
that chosen vessel of the Lord, the Apostle Paul, he declares and preaches
the same, And now behold, I know that ye all, among wh^m I have gone preaching
the Kingdom of God, shall see my face no more. Act. 20. 25. Yea the last words
and actions that are recorded of him, in the 28. Acts 30, and 31, verses, does
declare as much; the words are these, And Paul dwelt two wh^le years in his own
hired house, and received all that came in unto him, preaching the Kingdom of
God, and teaching those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all
confidence, no man forbidding him.

Now this Gospel of the Kingdom ceased to be preached after the falling away
of the Churches, and has continued so for many Ages; but the time drawing nigh
of the coming of that Kingdom, it is begun to be held forth again, and must be
preached in all Nations before that time come (which was not done in the
primative times, by reason a great part of the now known world was not then
discovered) according to what we have already declared from the mouth of the
Lord Jesus, Math. 24* 14.

Sixthly, When the Gospel (or glad tidings) of the Kingdom is begun to be
preached in the last Age of the world, The gathering of the two Tribes to
Jerusalem.
(which is a sign of the near approach of that Kingdom) then will follow the
calling of the two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin to Jerusalem; See what the Lord
declares by the Prophet Jeremy concerning this; Thus says the Lord, behold I
will bring again the Captivity of Jacobs Tents, and have mercy Jer. 30. 18
on his dwelling Places: And the City shall be builded upon her own heaps, and
the Palace shall remain after the manner (...) So that comparing the latter
part of the verse with the former part, it will plainly appear, that by Jacobs
Tents cannot be meant the whole twelve Tribes, or the ten Tribes, but the two
Tribes only (not but that there may be some of every Tribe amongst the two
Tribes, as there was some did cleave to the house of David, when its said the
ten Tribes fell away) for these here that shall be brought back, are said to be
first brought back, and then the City is built, which bringing back of the ten
Tr^bes w^^l not be completed till after the Saints are taken up, when as
before that time both Jerusalem and the Temple will be built, and Sacrifices
offered; of which we shall have ^ccasion to enlarge upon hereafter. Consider of
another Prophecy concerning this in the 12 Zach^r^ 6 7* In that day I will
make the Governors of Jud^h lik^ a ha^th o^ fi^e among the w^od, and like a
torch of (...) shall devour all the people round about* on the (...) and on the
left: And Jerusalem shall be inhabited (...) own place, even in Jerusalem. The
Lord also shall save the T^n^s of Judah first.

Seventhly, After the calling of the two Tribes for to build and inhabit
Jerusalem, the next remarkable thing that will in those days fall out to be,
is the rising or manifesting of the Beast, and ten Horns, or Kings, mentioned
by the Apostle John in his 17. Chapter of the Revelations. In which these The
rise of the Beast with the ten Kings.
following particulers will be worthy of our consideration, in the opening of
them.

1. Who the Beast is, and secondly, Who the ten Kings are. 2. The place from
whence they and he will arise. 3. What they and he are to do when risen, viz.
First, before the Saints are taken up, and secondly after they are taken up. 4.
His reign, viz. how long time. 5. His ruin, and how far they suffer in it.
For the first, the Beast, who he is. He is that Beast that was shown to the
Apostle John, which he describes in his 17. The Beast who he is.
Chapter of the Revelations and 3. verse, having seven heads and ten horns,
which compared with other Scriptures, we shall find him to have several titles
or denominations, (...) which he is discovered, viz. he is called the little
Horn, Dan. 7, 8. The vile Person, Dan. 11. 21. The Man of Sin, 2 These. 2. 3.

In John's description before quoted, he has seven Heads as well as ten Horns.
Now that ^e may know, who or that these seven heads are; if we consider well of
the Angels interpretation to John, Chap. 17 10. and upon search of other
Scriptures, we shall find, that they are seven Governments, that should be
Supreme in the several Ages of the world, from the days of Noah after the
Flood* till the rise of the ten Horns* Five of which Heads or Governments had
been before John saw this Vision, the sixth was then in being (and is now
toward its period) and the seventh was not then come, but is now arising.

The first Head (or Government) was the Assyrian and Babylonian Monarchy joined
under one head, viz. Nimrod, First Head.
compare the Wricings of Moses concerning this Person, Government and Country,
with that of the Prophet Esaias, and consider how they prove our assertion Moses
giving us some account of Noah's Posterity, and speaking of that of his Son Ham,
says, Ham begat Cush, and Cush begat Nimrod: He began to be a mighty one in
the Earth. He was a Genesis 10. 8, and, 10, 11.
mighty Hunter before the Lord. Wherefore it is said, even as Nimrod the mighty
Hunter before the Lord. And the beginning of his Kingdom was Babell, and
Eresh, and Achad, and Ca^neh, in the Land of Shinar. Out of that Land went
forth Ashur, and builded Niniveh, and the City Reho both and Calah. Also the
same Moses speaks farther concerning Noah's Posterity, And the whole earth was
of one language and of one speech. Genesis 11. 1, 2.
And it came to pass as they journeyed from the East, that they found a Plain
in the Land of Shinar, and they dwelt there. Now take what Esaias writes
concerning this; B^hold the Land of the Caldeans, this People was not, till the
Assyrian founded it, Esaias 23. 13
for them that dwell in the Wilderness: They set up the Towers thereof, they
raised up the Palaces thereof, and he brought it to ruin. So that Moses gives
us to understand thus much, that Nimrod was the first mighty One upon the
earth, whose ^^^gdome was Babell: and Ashur went out from thence and built
Niniveh; which Ashur could be no other then this Nimrod; for when he came or
journeyed out of the East, he came into the Land of Shinar, and dwelt there,
which Land of Shinar must needs be Caldea, Babell being built in it, as we have
now related out of Moses, which the Prophet Esaias calls C^ldea, as you have his
words also. In brief thus much, Nimrod an Assyrian by birth or habitation (or
both) comes into Shinar or Caldea, sets up his Kingdom, builds Babell his
chief Seat, and other Cities; afterward goes out thence into Assyria again,
and builds Niniveh and other Cities; which is the ground of our stiling him by
the title of the Assy^ian and Babylonian Monarch: And he is the first (after
the Flood) that the Scripture mentions; but of his continuance, or length of
his reign, it is silent. Some Historians do give some account thereof, but
with diversity of Opinions concerning it, therefore leave the curious therein
to search them.

The second Head, is the Assyrian alone, under another Family, the Line of
Nimrod being extinct in Sardanapulus, 2d. Head.
(as Sir Walter Rawleigh in his History of the World (the first Impression) the
first part, folio 482. does at large relate) whose first King, that the
Scripture mentions, was Pull (or Phull) by whom, and Tiglath Pilessar (his
Successor, if not Son) the two Tribes and half were first carried away captive:
See a proof for this out of the Scripture in the 1 Chronicles. 5. 26. And the God of
Israel stirred up the Spirit of Pull King of Assyria, and the Spirit of
Tiglath-Pilnesar King of Assyria, and he carried them away (even the
Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half Tribe of Manassah) and brought them
unto Halath, and Habor, and Hara, and to the River Gos^n unto this day. By whom
also the Syrians (the great oppressors of Israel in several Ages) were subdued,
2 Kings 16 9 Also by Shalmaness^r, (his Successor, if not Son, the rest of the
ten ^ribes, in the days of Hoshea King of Israel, are carried captive 2 Kings
17. 3, and 6. These are carried captive into the ^and of Assyria (it is not
said Cal^ea) not but that Caldea and Babylon were under the Assyrian Mona^chy*)
2 Kings 8* 11. Then (...) the ^uccessor (if not Son) of Shalm^ness^r in the
fourteenth year of King H^zekiah, comes up with a great Army against 2 Ki^gs.
18 13, 15, 16.
the fenced Cities of Judah, and takes them, to whom Hezekiah is willing to
submit, and therefore sends him great presents, and for want of his own
borrowes from the Temple: But the King of Assyria is not content therewith, and
therefore sends an Army under the Command of his Captains, Tartan, Rabsaris,
Rabshakeh, to Jerusalem to take it, either by words or deeds, 2 Kings 18. 17.
to the end. But these not being able to prevail, return to their Master, the
King of Assyria, who was warring against Libnah, from whence he sends
Messengers with a blasphemous Letter to King Hezekiah, with 2 Kings 19 8, v. 9.
and 14. v. 15. v. 36.
which he goes up to the House of the Lord and prays; the efficacy whereof
was such, that that night the Angel of the Lord destroys 185000. men in the
Assyrian Host; who returning with the remaining number to his own Land, and
City Nineveh, is there slain ^y two of his own Sons, as he is worshipping in
the Temple of Nisroch his God; and Ezrahaddon his Son reigns in his stead,
verse 36, 37.

Now that the Assyrian alone was the next great Monarch (or chief Government of
Note in the world) to the Assyrian and Babylonian together; we do prove, not
only by what has been related, as to what four of those Kings did, but also
for these ensuing reasons, grounded upon History and Scripture.

First from History; Pull (whom the Scripture mentions, 1 Chronicles. 5. 26.) who
was but Sardanapulus Lieutenant in Babylon, and conspiring with Arbaces,
another of his Lieutenants in Media, (who was incited thereunto, partly by the
Prediction of this Pull, and partly by his own (in that having had a sight of
the Person of his King, found him disguised in woman's apparel, striving to
counterfeit an Harlot) these two after several battles overthrew him, and Sir
W. Rawle^gh first part, f. 476.
beseiging him in this great City Niniveh; by the overflowing of the River
Tysris, whereby twenty furlongs of that great wall was overthrown, they take
the City, but not their Master; for he finding himself in a lost condition,
shuts up him^^lf in his Palace, with his Wives, Eunuchs, and all his
Treasures, and sets fire thereunto, whereby both he and they were all consumed.
After which, the Median is content with his own Government of Media, but Pull
and his Posterity are not with theirs, till they get possession of that great
City Nineveh, which they make the Seat of their Monarchy, and Sir W. R. f. 482,
483.
therefore is called the Assyrian alone, to distinguish it from the First,
whose chief City in Nimrods time was Babylon.

Second Reason: Because the Scripture mentions a larger extent of dominion to
this second Monarchy, then unto the first. For we do not find, that Nimrods
dominion did extend Westward from the River Euphrates, that is into Syria; (if
it did it was but of short continuance) but this of Pulls does, and that very
far, even to the Land of Israel and Judah, whose Lot was bounded by the
Mediteranean Sea, Joshua 15. 12. called the great Sea. And we find, that Media
that was under Nimrods posterity (and after usurped by Arbac^s) is a great part
(if not all) brought under by the Assyrian: For Shalmanessar, who carries the
remaining part of the ten Tribes captive, places some of them in the Cities of
the Medes, 2 Kings 17. 6, And the Prophet Ezekiel, speaking unto Pharaoh in the
Name of the Lord, makes mention of the greatness of the Assyrian, Ezekiel. 31.
2. to the 10, verse, as also of his fall and ruin by the Caldean, chap. 32.
11, 12. which makes way for the third Head or Monarchy.

The third Head of the Beast, is the Caldean Monarchy, whose foundation was
laid in the days of Berodach Baladan 3d (...)
the Son of Balladan, who sent unto Hezekiah King of Judah, both Letters and a
Present, 2 King. 20. 12. which was in or about the fifteenth year of Hezekiah's
reign; for in his fourteen year Sennacherib (the King of Assyria) invades
Judea, 2 Kings 18. 13. And after the great loss of 185000. he returns into
his own Land. In those days Hezekiah falls sick, 2 Kings 20* 1. upon whose
earnest prayer (and the Promise of God to David; for Hezekiah had no Son as
yet, that the Scripture mentions, and Manasseh his Successor was not born in
three years after, for he was but twelve years old when he began to reign, 2
Kings 21. 1.) the Lord ^nds him a Message by the Prophet Esaias, that he would
add fifteen years to his days: and a sign for his recovery is, that the Sun
should go ten degrees backward, by which it had gone down in the Dyall of
Ahaz, 2 Kings 20. 6, 11. and the whole reign of Hezekiah was but twenty nine
years, 2 Kings 18. 2.

Now though the Scripture be silent, as to inform us, how Berodash Baladan came
to be King of Babylon; yet we find, that both he and the Caldeans take notice
of Hezekiahs sickness and recovery, with that great sign in the Heaven of the
Suns going backward, (the Caldeans being famous in Astronimie, and natural
Astrology, as well as infamous for their divellish Astrology) which was in or
about the fifteenth year of his reign: which as it was the last of
Sennacheribs, so it was the first of Berodash: for we read in the Scripture of
no King of Babylon, since Nimrod, to this time; not but that Babylon was a
famous City all along. And if we may give credit to Sir Walter Rawleigh (of
whose extraordinary travel in searching of Histories, of all Ages past, to the
finishing of that excellent piece of his, called, the Hystory of the World)
that this Berodash (or as he cass him (as also the Geneva Translation)
Merodash) took time by the foretop, and laid hold on the present opportunity
that offered it self, which was this: Merodash was Lieutenant in Babylon under
Sennacherib (whose head City was Niniveh) Sir W. R. first part, f. ^07.
who having wars in Syria and Egypt, had levied a very great Army, and
having been forced to raise his Seige from before Pelusium in Egypt, and that
not without some loss, and more disgrace, through the coming of Tirhaba King
of Ethiopia (or Arabia) to the aid of the Egyptian; he was the more desirous
to have had possession of Jerusalem, to have retreated unto with his Army; but
failing of his purpose, sends a great part thereof to beseige it, with the rest
he beseigeth Lachish, and afterward Lib^ah* 2 Kings 19. 8. of which Army,
presently after, the Angel of the Lord destroys in one night 185000. verse 35
upon which he returns with the remaining part thereof to Niniveh (and not to
Babylon, though much the nearer, not daring to trust to M^rodash, as having had
some inckling of his Ambition, if not of his Treason, then a hatching, as is
supposed) and within a short time after (Tobit says, five and fifty days
chap. 1. 21.) is slain by two of his Sons, (the reason supposed is, that they
being the Eldest, were disinherited by their Father, and the younger Brother
appointed to be his Successor, which they could not prevent with their
Paracide) and As^rhaddon being but weak in himself (though strong in Friends
and Soldiers, for he held Merod^sh hard to it all his days, which was eleven
years) he supposes it no difficulter a piece of work, to gain the Kingdom of
Babylon unto himself, then Pull found (who joined) with Arbac^s the Median, to
unthrone Sardanapulus, (the last of Nimrods Race) whose Posterity became
eminent afterward, especially Sennacherib, who is called, the great King of
Assyria, 2 Kings 18. 19. And therefore upon Sennacheribs death, breaks out into
open Rebellion, and styles himself King of Babylon, and is so called in
Scripture, 2 Kings 20. 12. Whose Posterity is not spoken of in Sacred Writ,
till Nebuchadnessar. But our before quoted Author faith, his Son Ben* Merodach
reigned after him, and then Nebulassar his Son, the last Sir W. R. First part,
f 541. and 551.
year of whose reign was the third year of Iehoiakim King of Judah, Dan. 1. 1.
For the Prophet Jeremy in his 25. chap. 1. says, that the first year of
Nebuchadnessar's reign was the fourth year of Iehoiakim's reign; which may seem
to be some contradiction in the Prophets, but both Scripture and History will
help us to clear this; for it was the usual custom of those Eastern Kings, to
appoint their Successors in their life time, and to admit them to have a share
in the managing of the Affairs of the Kingdom, as David does Solomon, Vz^iah
(or Azariah) does Iotham, and Iehoiakim does his Son; which latter seems
something difficult to be apprehended at the first view, and therefore shall
clear it before we pass any farther; Iehoiakim the Son of Josiah being made
King in the room of Iehoahaz (by Phara^h Necho) reigns eleven years (and is
bound to be carried captive to Babylon, but is slain, and had the burial of an
Ass, according to Ieremies Prophecy, chap. 22* 18, 19.) and his Son Iehoiakim
reigns in his stead, who was eight years old when he began to reign, and
reigned three months in Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles 36. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. And in the 2
Kings 24. 8. it is said, that Iehoiakim was eighteen years old when he began
to reign, and reigned three months in Jerusalem; so that to reconcile these two
places, it does appear, that I^hoiakim the Son was but eight years old when he
began to reign with his Father, and reigned with him ten years, and he was
eighteen years old when he began to reign alone, and reigned three months. So
that although the Scripture does not so fully clear it to us, that
Nebuchadnessar was the great Grandchild of Merodash Baladan King of Babylon,
yet the two Prophets, Daniel and Jeremy cannot be reconciled, without admitting
Nebuchadnessar to reign some time with his Predecessor, one year at the least;
besides the Scriptures do mention some distance of time between the first year
of Merodash, and the first year of Nebuchadnessar; for Hezekiah reigned about
fifteen years after the death of Sennacherib, Manasseh reigned fifty five
years, Ammon two years, Josiah thirty one years, and in the fourth year of
Iehoiakim does Nebuchadnessar begin to reign, Jeremy 25 1. So that there i^
about 107. years, which must ^^eds admit of some Successors to Merodash before
Nebuchadnessar.

Object. But how comes it to pass, that we have no more concerning the Kings
of Babylon from Merodash's time till Nebuchadnessar, or the last year of his
Predecessor.

Answ. Merodash had but laid the foundation of his Kingdom in the fifteenth
year of Hezekiah; and Sir Walter Rawleigh says, that he had eleven years
contention with Asarhaddon, even till his death, which gave Merodash a little
better assurance of what he then had, and some hopes to enlarge his Dominion,
especially toward Assyria: As for Syria he had no fear from thence, having (as
may be apprehended) made a League with Hezekiah, and therefore did choose rather
to enlarge his Dominion Eastward and Northward, agreeable to what the Prophet
Ezekiel had prophesied (though not upon that account) where the Prophet speaks
concerning the destruction of Ashur and other Nations, by the Babylonians,
Ezekiel. 32. 22. to the 31, verse. And for what the other two Successors of
Merodash did, seeing the Scripture is silent, and Historians speak but little;
(only their taking the great City Niniveh, and bringing the whole Dominion of
Assyria under the Called an or Babylonian yoke, which was not accomplished in or
near 100. years time) we shall treat concerning him, whom the Scripture does
mention, that is Nebuchadnessar (or as he is called in some places of the
Scriptures, Nebuchadressar.) The first year of whose reign was the fourth year
of Iehoiakim King of Judah, as we have formerly mentioned, in which year he
smites the Army of Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, by the River Perah (or
Euphrates) in Carchemish, Ierem. 46 2. In the second year of his reign he has
a dream, which he forgets, and Daniel declares to him, with the interpretation
thereof, Daniel 2. the whole chapter. About his seventh year he takes
Iehoiakim, and binds him to carry him to Babell, (at which time, or a little
before, he began the famous seige of Tyrus, which lasted thirteen years) but
causes him to be slain, and gives him the burial of an Ass, according to the
Prophet Ieremies prophecy, for his burning of the Roll, Ierem. 22 18, 19.
compared with the 36. chapter 29, 30. And for his Son Iehoiakim he reigned but
three months alone, and was carried captive to Babylon with his Mother, as the
same Prophet prophesied, chap. 22, 24, 25, 26. compared with 2 Kings 24. 15,
which was done in the eighth year of Nebuchadnessar's reign, verse 12. Who set
up Zedekias* (his Uncle) King in his room; who about the nineteenth year of his
reign (which was the eleventh year of Zedekias* reign) takes Jerusalem and the
King, and destroys the City, and the Temple, and carries the remnant of them
that escaped the sword captive to Babylon, 2 Kings 25.

About which time the famous City o^ Tyrus was taken also by him; after which
he destroyed Edem and the Zydonians, and several other Nations, according to
Ez^kiels prophecy, chap. 32. 17. to the end.

In the three and twentieth year of his reign, Nebusaradon, the Captain of his
Guard, comes up to Jerusalem again, and carries away 745. Jews captive, Ierem.
52. 30. After which, when be has subdued all the Nations about him, he sets up
his golden Image, for all People, Nations and Languages to fall down and
worship it, Daniel 3. 7. Which when Shadrech, Meshach and Abednego refuse so to
do, they are cast into the hot fiery Furnace, verse 21. and delivered from the
danger thereof, verse 25. 27. After which he destroys Egypt, as Sir Walter
Rawleigh says; but the Scripture is silent as to the time of the destruction
of that rich Country, only Ezekiel in his 29 chapter 17. says, in the twenty
seven year the Word of the Lord came to him; but whether it were the twenty
seven year of his Captivity, or of Iehoiakim's, Captivity, or of
Nebuchadn^ssars reign, is questionable, however so it was, that Egypt was
destroyed, according to the prophesies of Ezekiel and Jeremy, chap. 44 30. and
chap. 43. 8. to the end.

Afterward Daniel tells him the interpretation of his dream concerning the
Tree, Dan. 4 19, to the 28. and about a year after the same is fulfilled, for
his not bearkening to the Counsel of the Prophet, and is cast out for seven
years, which is toward the end of his reign; for neither Scripture nor
History makes any mention of any Acts of his after his Restoration. The
length of whose reign was about 43. or 44. years: for the fourth year of
Iehoiakin was the first year of his reign, and the thirty seventh year of
Iehoiakim's Captivity, is the first year of Evilmerodach King of Babylon,
Successor (if not Son) to Nebuchadnessar, 2 Kings 25. 17. Evilmerodach in the
first year of his reign, lifts up the head of Iehoiachin King of Judah, and
brought him out of Prison, the 52. Jeremy 31. to the end. What other thing of
note he did, or how long he reigned, the Scripture is altogether silent.
History says, he lost some part of his Dominions, and lost his Successor
imbroyld in a dangerous War against the Meades; but whether Balthazar was his
immediate Sir W. R.
Successor, or no, we cannot positively conclude from the Scriptures, only we
find him the next to Evilmerodach that the Scriptures do mention; and cannot
but conclude him to be of Nebuchadnessars Race, because of Ieremies Prophecy,
chap* 27. 7. where it is said, All Nations shall serve him, and his Son, and
his Sons Son, until the very time of his Land come, and then many Nations and
great King's shall serve themselves of him. In the first year of this Balthazar
Daniel sees the Vision of four Beasts, chap. 7. 1. In his third year Daniel
sees the Vision of the Ram, and of the Hee-Goat, chap. 8. 1. And in his last
year, the last day thereof, Daniel read the hand writing on the wall, and tells
him the interpretation thereof, chap. 5. 25, 26, 27, 28. and verse 30. in that
night was Balthazar the King of the Caldeans slain, and Darius the Median took
the Kingdom, verse 31.

Now how long these two last Successors of Nebuchadnessar reigned, the
Scripture does not mention in particular; only between them two is spent,
either thirty and three years, or forty and four years. The ground of our
apprehension, as to this is, the seventy years of the Jews Captivity, which
began either in the first year of Iehoiachin's Captivity, or the last year of
Zedekiah, when the City was taken, and the Temple was bu^nt; if it began at the
first, then the Scripture tells us, that Evilmerodach King of Babylon lifted up
the head of Iehoiachin, and brought him out of Prison in the seven and
thirtieth year of his Captivity, and first year of his Reign, Ierem. 52. 31. so
that adding thirty and three years to thirty and seven, and then the seventy
years is fulfilled: but if the Captivity began not till Zedekiah's death, then
there must be added eleven years more (for he reigned eleven years after
Iehoiachin was carried Captive) to thirty and three years, which is forty and
four, and then Iehoiachin was carried Captive to Babylon, eleven years before
the seventy years began, which were to be fulfilled before they were to return
out of Captivity. And that the seventy years were fulfilled at the death of
Belshazar, Daniel tells us, that in the first year of Darius the Mede, which
was made King over the Realm of the Caldeans. Dan. 9. 1, 2, 3. that after he
had fasted and prayed, that the Man Gabriel (or Angel of the Lord) revealed the
same to him; take his words at large. And whiles I was speaking, and praying,
and conf^ssing my sin, and the sin of my People Israel, and presenting my
supplication before the Lord my God for the holy Mountain of my God; yea,
whiles I was speaking in Prayer, even the Man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the
Vision at the beginning, being caused to fly swiftly, touched me about the time
of the evening Oblation. And he informed me, and talked with me, and said, O
Daniel, I am now come forth to give thee skill and understanding. At the
beginning of thy supplication, the Commandment came forth, and I am come to
show thee: for thou art greatly beloved; therefore understand the matter, and
consider the Vision. Seventy weeks are determined upon thy People, and upon thy
holy City, to finish the transgression, and make an end of sins, and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to
seal up the Vision and Prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy; verse 20, 21,
22, 23, 24.

Whichleads us to the fourth Head, the Meades and Persians. The Caldean ending
in Belshazar, as we said before, Darius 4th Head.
the Mede being made King over the Realm of Caldea, Dan. 9. 1. In the first
year of whose Reign (who reigned about two years, says Sir Walter Rawleigh)
Daniel by the Tbird Book chap. 2.
searching of Books, and by the Man Gabriel, attaines to the knowledge of
knowing the seventy weeks are expired, that the Jews were to be in Captivity.

In the first year of Cyrus the Persian the Jews are permitted to return to
their own Land, and that openly, by way of Proclamation, 2 Chronicles. 36. 22, 23.
and Ezra 1. 1, 2, 3, 4. Who also delivers the Vessels of the House of the Lord
to Sheshbazzer the Prince of Judah, verse 7, 8.

And this was according to what was foretold by the Prophets, concerning their
seventy years Captivity, Ier. 25. 12. and chap. 29. 10. And Cyrus to be the
Man to deliver Gods People, Esaias 44. last, and chap. 45. 1, 2, 3, 4, 13.

In the third year of Cyrus, Daniel sees a Vision, chap. 10. 1. and talks
with one, like the similitude of the Son of Man, whom he calls my Lord, verse
16* 17. And is made acquainted by revelation, what Governments should succeed
in the world, till the coming of the Lord Jesus to Reign on the earth, chap.
11. 2. to the beginning of the 12. chapter.

Concerning the remainder of the years of Cyrus Reign, how long, or what he
did, the Scriptures are silent. Only the Apocripha mentions some obstruction
in the building of the Temple, during the Reign of Cyrus, by his Son Cambyse^,
whom he made his Lieutenant in all his Dominions, while himself follows the
Wars; and this was not only done by him, during his Fathers Reign, but also
during his own, and that out of Natural and politic ends.

The first, in that he was a cruel Tyrant, whose will was a law, and his
Flatterers told him, that all things were lawful Sir W. R. 3. book 3. chap. 7.
P^ragraph.
for the Kings of Persia, upon which he married two of his Sisters, against the
Laws of his Kingdom.

And for the second, he had an intention to invade Egypt, and feared least the
Jews should prove such as his Provintiall Governors had written to him (under
the name of Artaxerxes) of, Ezra 4. 7. to the 23. that the Jews. and
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, were a rebellious people; and tha^ it was a common
Opinion, that the Jews descended of those Nations, because they issued thence
under Moses, when they conquered Judea; and that if their City were repaired
and fortified, they might give some disturbance to his intended Conquest of
that Country, as they had done in H^zekiah's days to Sennacherib, when he went
to invade Egypt. Wherefore he commanded them to be hindered in that work of the
building of the Temple and City. Which hindrance continued till the second year
of Darius King of Persia, Ezra 4. 24. (the Successor of Cambyses, or as the
Scripture calls him Artaxerxes) how he came to the Kingdom, read Sir Walt.
Rawleigh 3. book 4 chapter 4. paragraph; who in that year gave order for the
building of the Temple of Jerusalem at his own charge, Ezra 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11*
The Jews being encouraged unto this by the Prophets, Haggai, and Zacheriah,
Ezra 5. 1. which work was finished in the sixth year of the Reign of Darius,
Ezra 6. 15. though not ful^y, because in the fourteenth verse he says, they
builded and finished it, according to the Commandment of Cyrus, Darius and
Artaxerxes, Kings of Persia.

In the days of Artaxerxes, the Successor (if not Son) of Darius, in the
seventh year of his Reign, Ezra and his Company go from Babylon to Jerusalem,
Ezra 7. 7, 8, 9. In the twentieth year Nehemiah obtaines leave, to go and
build the walls of Jerusalem, Nehem. 2. 1. who sets the King a time for his
return, verse 6. And in the two and thirtieth year he obtaines leave the second
time, to go to Jerusalem again, chap. 13. 6,

Concerning what is spoken about Esther, in the days of Ahashueresh, who he
was whether this King Artaxerxes, or any other, the Scripture is silent: much
might be said, that he was, or was not the same Person; but it would be found a
very difficult thing to make an agreement in several Scriptures concerning the
same*

Who were the succeeding Kings of Persia, till the coming of Alexander the
Macedonian, the Scripture mentions not, only Daniel is showed in a vision, in
the third year of Cyrus, chap. 10. 1. what Kings there should be after him in
Persia, whose words are these; And now I will show thee the Truth; Behold there
shall stand up yet three Kings in Persia, and the fourth shall be far richer
than they all: and by his strength, through his riches, he shall stir up all
against the Realm of Grecia, Dan. 11. 2. Now if we may give credit to
Historians, concerning whom this last rich King was, they say, he was Darius,
the Son of Arsames, who was subdued by Alexander the Grecian (or Macedonian)
which brings us to the fifth Head or Monarchy.

The fifth Head was the Grecian, revealed to Daniel in a Vision 5th Head.
of a He Goat, or Rough Goat, chap. 8. 5* 21. (as the Meades and Persians was a
Ram with two horns, Dan. 8, 3. 20.) What this Grecian did, we must be
beholding to Historians* for our knowledge; the Scriptures Canonical not
mentioning Vide, Sit W. R. 4. book. chap. 2. from the beginnlng of Alexanders
Reign to his end.
any; the Apocripha but a little, that which is may be found in the first book
of the Maccabees chap. 1. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, verses: which as he did much in
regard he came to be a third of Daniels Beasts or Monarchies, therefore it is
said, he carried his Victories with wings, who from a small Kingdom, extended
it to a very great distance, Eastward, and Southward, and Northward, but
withal, it was but of short continuance (as all violent things and motions
are) but twelve years, being poisoned by the conspiracy of his Servants, who
stood in fear of his cruelty.

Upon whose death his large Dominions was divided (though not presently) among
four of his great Captains, according to Daniels Vision, chap. 8. 8: and
interpretation, verse 22. Josephus names five, viz. Antigonus was Lord of
Josephus 12. book first chapter. Sir W. R. 5 book f: 338.
Asia (whose Dominion being lost there, his Posterity enjoyed Macedon:)
Seleucus Nicator of Babylon and the bordering Nations; Lysymachus had
Hellespont; Cassander had Macedon (whose Dominion ended with him, his Sons
being slain, not long after his death;) And Ptolemy the Son of Lagus had
Egypt: All which took the Titles of Kings on them in a short time, only
Cassander, whose Successor did take the same also, though with ill success.
Sir W. R. 4. book f. 232.


Seleucus Nicator was the first that took the Title of King of Babylon and the
bordering Nations; his Son Antiochus Soter succeeds him, and reigns nineteen
years; after him his Son Antiochus Theos reigns fifteen years; his Son
Seleuchus Callinicus twenty years, and left two Sons, viz. Seleucus Ceraunus
who reigned three years, and Antiochus the Great thirty six years; who left
Seleucus Philopater who reigned twelve years says Eusebius, seven years
says Josephus; and Antiochus Epiphanes, which was he that commanded Swines
flesh to be offered on several Alters in the Temple at Jerusalem, which caused
much affliction and misery to the Jews, being a Type of that which Daniel
Prophesied in his eighth chapter, but cannot be the same, as is apprehended by
some; because the Lord Jesus would not have told his Disciples by way of
Prophecy what had been past, but rather, he told them what should be
hereafter, Matthew 24. 15.

What the Successors of Alexanders Captains did (who had divided his large
Dominions among themselves) History does declare. This may be noted concerning
them (which is Sir Walter Rawleigs observation of them f. 555.) that the
Successors of Ptolemey were the first that made a League with the Romans, and
the last that were subdued by them.

Which brings us to the sixth Head, Government or Monarchy, viz. the Romans,
whose chief City was Rome, which 6th Head, The Romans.
was built in or about the year of the world 3280. and after the building of
the Temple of Solomon 287. and before the birth of our Lord Christ 684. whose
greatness began to appear out of its infancy, in the time of Pyrrus King of
Epirus, Successor to Cassander in half the Kingdom of Macedon, taken from
Cassanders Children, by him and Lysimachus King of Tbracia: (he being a
powerful Prince, viz. Pyrrhus) and they (viz. the Romans) but few years
before freed themselves from the Gauls, who had taken all from them, yea, Rome
it self, the Capitol excepted, and drove him out of Italy, in or about 487.
years after Rome was built; and about 107. years after they take the whole
Kingdom of Macedon, with Perseus the last King thereof, and make a Province of
it.

In the days of Antiochus Epiphanes, who began to reign about the year 579*
after Rome was built (who was he that commanded Swines flesh to be offered on
several Altars in the Temple at Jerusalem) the Romans have increased their
Dominions so largely, as that they take upon them, as to command him to depart
out of Egypt (who had almost subdued Sir W. R. f. 665.
that Country) and he obeyes.

In the days of Demetrius the Son of Seleucus Philopater (elder Brother to
Antiochus Epiphanes) Judas Macabeus sends Ambassadors to Rome, who make a
League with the Jews, Macabeus 8. who at that time, says Josephus f. 315. had
conquered Gaul (or France) Spain, Carthage and Greece; whose power and
dominion from that time grows up mightily; for in the days of Pompey all
Syria was subdued, and he himself gone up into Armenia, in pursuit of the war
betwixt the Romans and Tygranes, Josephus lib. 14. ch* 4. And in the days of
Augustus Caesar there came forth a decree, that all the world should be taxed,
Luke 2. 1. which the Author of the Notes in the Bible of the Geneva Translation
says, that it was so far as the Empire of the Romans did extend, which was of
a far greater extent than all the precedent Monarchies did contain, especially
toward the South, and the North West from Babylon and Jerusalem.

And this was agreeable to Daniels Prophecy, chap. 2. 4. who says, that the
fourth Kingdom from Nebuchadnesser should be strong as Iron, for as Iron
breaks in pieces and subdueth all things, and as Iron bruisetb all those
things, so shall it break in pieces and bruise it.

And in his Vision in the first year of Belshazar, he sees these four
Kingdoms under several Types of Beasts, but Daniel 7.
the fourth was different from, or unlike to, all the rest, verse 7. And in the
interpretation it is said, it shall be unlike to all the Kingdoms, and shall
devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces, verse
23. And out of this must arise ten horns, which are ten Kings; and another
shall arise after them, and he shall be unlike to the first, and subdue three
Kings, and shall speak words against the most High, verse 24, 25. So that we
find Daniels Prophecy, concerning this fourth Kingdom (or sixth King in the
Apostle John's Revelations, chap. 17. 10.) to have been fulfilled in the time of
Christ and his Apostles, it then being in its height. For Master Edward
Grimstone, in his Imperial Hystory in the life of Augustus, folio 37. says,
that the Subjects of the Empire were very obedient unto him; and all others
sent him Ambassadors, seeking his favor and friendship, offering him their
service: yea the Indians (a people of the remotest parts of the East) and also
the Scythians which inhabit in the North, and the Parthians (a people most
feirce and untamed) sent their Embassodors to him, giving security to keep the
peace, and delivered the Standerds and Eagles taken ^n battle when Marcus
Crassus was slain. There came also Kings, Friends and Subjects to the Empire,
to Rome, to do him honor as his familiar Friends* leying aside their Ensigns
and Rovall Robes* and many of them built Cities to his Name ^or h^s honor,
calling them Cesareas in remembrance of* him* (...) whose time the Temple of
Ianus ^^^mstone ^. 35.
was thrice shut up; which never wa^ but twice before from Romes foundation. So
that his Dominion must needs be of a large extent; Rome still being the apitall
City (or Imperial Seat*) and continued so* till Constantine removed it, who
made Byzantium in Thracia (situated between the two Seas* viz. the Euxine and
the Mediteranean) his Imperial City; which was afterward by him, and to his
Honor, called, Constantine the Noble (and by contraction, Constantinople;)
this being done about the year o our Lord Christ 332. Now though Constantine,
by reason of his removing of his Imperial Seat, from Rome out of the West, to
Constantinople in the East, did much weaken the Imperial Power; yet the Empire
was not fully divided in many years after; but some partings there were
before, as in the Reign of the Emperor Iovinianus, (the Successor of Julian
the Apostate) about the year of Christ 366. (who reigned but seven months) he
was compelled to make peace with Sapores the King of Persia for thirty years,
leaving unto the said Persian King, all the Provinces belonging unto the Roman
Empire, lying beyond the River Tygris, as also some Cities in Armenia; and he
was not to aid or assist Arsaces King of Armenia. And about the year of our
Lord, 420. the Gauls, or French, in the West (in the days of the Emperors
Honorius and Arcadius, Sons of Theodosius the Great) fell off from the Empire,
and set up Pharamond, the Son of Marcomir, for their King. About which time did
the Goths, who possessed a great part of Spain (and some part General History
of Spain. f. 132.
of that Country which is now under the Dominion of the Fr^nch) set up Vallia,
their first King, whose Royal Seats were Narbon^ and Toulouse. Also in the
year 440. Hermerick, King of the Sueves, a little before his death, had so
Grimstone ^* 280.
pacified the people of Galicia, as he reigned over them. And about the year
447. in the Reign of Theodosius the second, and Valentinianus, Emperors, the
Britains in this Howes Chronicle f. 50.
Island (being sorsaken of the Roman aid which they expected against the Picts)
chose Vor^iger for their King. About which time Alaricus, King of the Gothe^,
came into Italy, and took and destroyed the City of Rome, 1160 Grimstone f. 266.
years after it was built; Honorius the Emperor (with his Brother Arcadius)
living at Ravenna, which in those days was a great and principal City. But
the great division of the Empire was in the days of Constanstine the sixth,
and his Mother Irene; L^o the third being Pope of Rome, who at a solemn M^sse
(being assisted by his Cardinals) Crowned Grimstone f. 381.
Charles the Great King of France (born in Germany) Emperor of Rome, on the
25. of December, in the year of our Lord 800, about 468. years after
Constantine the Great removed his Imperial Seat out of the West into the East.
Which division some do apprehend to be the time that Daniel's Vision of the
Image, which Nebuchadnezar saw, did hold forth, as consisting of two legs that
were of Iron, which implies strength. But how could that be? for this division
of the Empire, instead of strengthening of it, made it weaker daily, as the that
will take a little pains to search in Grimstones Imperial Hystory, from and
after this time, shall find; for the Western Empire is afterward divided into
several Kingdoms and Governments, and the Eastern is quite devoured by the
Turks in the year of our Lord 1453. Constantine Paleologus being the last
Emperor, and slain in the City of Constantinople, when it was taken by that
famous Turk, Mahomet the Great, the first of that name; and with it the whole
Grecian or Eastern Empi^e about 1121* years after it had been the head City of
that Empire.

So that the decay of one of these Iron legs of the Image, (viz. the Roman
Empire) makes way for the other Iron leg, 7th Head.
upon which the whole Body is supported, which is the seventh Head, or King, in
John's Revelation, chap 17. 10. And there are seven Kings, (and they are seven
Kings, says the Geneva Translation) five are fallen, one is, and the other is
not yet come, and when he comes, he must continue a short space; which
compared with the 11. Daniel 20. and you shall find him there styled, a Raiser
of Taxes; Then shall stand up in his Estate a Raiser of Taxes, in the Glory of
the Kingdom, but within few days he shall be destroyed, neither in anger, nor
in battle.

Object. In the 2. Daniel 33. verse, the two Iron legs in the Vision are called
but one Kingdom in the interpretation, verse 40.

Answ. That many times the Lord is pleased in the Visions of the Prophets, to
wrap up many things in one. As for instance, in the 8. Daniel, in the Vision of
the Rough Goat, upon whose fall four Horns or Kingdoms arise, and out of them
came forth a little Horn, which waxed exceeding great, etc. verse 8, 9, 10, 11,
12. which compared with the interpretation thereof, verse 22, 23, 24, 25. it
will evidently appear, that this little Horn must be the same with the vile
Person, Man of Sin, and Beast, that John speaks of in the 17. Revelations,
because his power is mighty, but not by his own power, he getting the Dominion
by flattery, Dan. 11. 21 And he shall stand up against the Prince of Princes
(which Antiochus never did, as some say, who imagine him to be this little
Horn) and be broken without hands, which cannot have relation to his Person
only, but to his Power also, which Antiochus power was not, though he himself
were consumed by Worms.

But this vile Person, little Horn, Man of Sin, or Beast, his Army is
destroyed, and himself taken alive, and cast into a Lake of fire, Revel. 19,
19, 20, 21. Which if so, then is not only the fourth Kingdom left out, in the
2. Dan. 40. but also that Raiser of Taxes, Daniel 11. 20. Another instance in
the 11. Daniel, in that Vision, he having spoken of the Persian and Grecian
Dominion, and the ruin of the last, and rise of the four Kingdoms out of it;
there is declared, what shall fall out between the two Dominions of the North
and the South (viz. the Seleucides and Ptolomeys) but nothing at all of the
fourth Beast or Kingdom, and sixth Head or Kingdom in John's Revelation.

And then comes to mention the Successor of the King of the North, whom he
calls a Raiser of Taxes, verse 20. where it is said, Then shall stand up in his
Estate a Raiser of Taxes, in the glory of the Kingdom, but within few days he
shall be destroyed, neither in anger or in Battle, and verse the 21. And in
his Estate shall stand up a vile Person, etc.

One instance more, in the 7. Daniel, where the Prophet sees the Vision of four
Monarchies typified by four Beasts, and the fourth Beast to have ten Horns,
verse 7. where is left out the Raiser of Taxes, that is to arise before the ten
Horns, as will plainly appear in the 17: chapter of John's Revelations.

The seventh Head must arise before the Beast, and the ten Horns are to have
power one hour with the Beast, verse 12. So that these three instances do make
it evidently appear, that the Lord in His Visions to his Prophet does not at
one time show all things that should be, or fall out, but in some more, in some
less, as we see here in these instances; in the first is left out the fourth
Kingdom or sixth Head, and the Raiser of Taxes or seventh Head. In the second
is left out the fourth Kingdom or sixth Head only: And in the last is left out
the Raiser of Taxes or seventh Head only.

Now concerning this seventh Head in John's Revelations chapter 17. according to
the Geneva Translation it is rendered thus; Here is the mind that has Wisdom,
the seven Heads are seven Mountains, whereon the Woman sits, they are also
seven Kings, verse 10. Five are fallen, and one is, and another is not yet
come, and when he comes he must continue a short space, and verse 11. And the
Beast that was, and is not, is even the eighth, and is one of the seven, and
shall go into destruction; which compared with the 11. Daniel 20, 21. we shall
find, that the Raiser of Taxes (which, by what we have already proved, ^ust
needs be this seventh Head) does arise the next, before the vile Person, Then
shall stand up in his place, in the Glory of the Kingdom, etc. yet he (viz.
the vile Person) shall come to his end, and none shall help him, verse 45.

Object. But may we not question the Geneva Translation as to this particular
seeing all our common Translations render it in another sense; as thus, And
there are seven Kings; not, They are seven Kings.

Answ. We do not only find it in our English Bibles, of the Geneva
Translation, and that of Tindals Translation, but also the Italian, and ancient
French Bibles, printed near one hundred years since at Ly^ns; however the
current of the Scriptures will clear it to be so; as that Mountains do imply
Persons and Powers, or Persons in power; look upon and consider well of that
expression of the Prophet Jeremy, in his 51. chapter 25. Behold I am against
thee, O destroying Mountain, says the Lord (speaking of Babylon in the
foregoing verse) which destroys all the Earth, and I will stretch out mine
hand upon thee, and roll the down from the Rocks, and will make thee a burnt
Mountain. Also that of the Prophet Zachery in his 4. chapter 7. Who art thou O
great Mountain? (speaking of the Persian Monarch) before Zerubbabell thou shall
become a Plain.

And if that we should say, that this seventh Head is now arising (for we have
already showed, that the sixth Head is so far decayed, that there is little
of it now appears, in comparison of what it was) I hope we should not be found
to be in an error. And we shall lay down some grounds for what we hope, or in
this thing should seem to maintain.

1. First we are to observe, that the rise of one Head was the ruin of that
which was before it; or the decay of the one made way for the rise of the
other, as we have already proved.

2. That this seventh Head or Government, according to Daniels Prophecy chap.
11. 20. is styled a Raiser of Taxes, that is a Government which is upheld by
Taxes; not a Government that has a vast Treasure hoorded up, as was in the
Capital at Rome; nor that has a great Revenue of Lands or Tribute, as Kingly
and Monarchical Governments in these Ages have; and in particular, this Nation
had, when under such a Government; but it is a Government that is wholly
supported and upheld by Taxes, as this Nation wherein we live is; and this
Nation (in respect of Government) would not be able to subsist, were it not for
this supportation; for now here is no Treasure to be found, nor Revenue left to
defray the ordinary Charges incident thereunto, much less for the maintenance
of an Army in the three (quondam) Kingdoms, and a Navy near ten times as great
as was ordinarily maintained under the Royal Government.

Object. But was not Augustus Caesar this Person or Government, which did
subsist in this way; for the Evangelist Luke in his 2. chapter 1. says, And it
came to pass in those days, that there came a Decree from Augustus Caesar,
that all the world should be taxed.

Answ. It could not be, for these Reasons: First, that Government by Taxes must
immediately precede the vile Person; and that Government of Augustus was that
which John calls the sixth Head, five are fallen, one is, which is this under
which John lived, and was banished by into the Isle of Patmos, and the other is
not yet come, which then was not, and is that we now write of, that of Taxes.

Secondly, that Government of Augustus continued some hundred of years in its
height, and was many ages in declining, this Government by Taxes shall continue
a short space, comparatively with the other.

So that we may safely conclude, that this Government, which is to be supported
by Taxes, cannot properly be said to have been in any Nation, that was under
any of the other six Heads or Governments, if not in this Commonwealth of
England, Scotland and Ireland.

3. Ground of our apprehending that the seventh Head is arising (and that among
us) which is to be maintained by Taxes, is the Liberty of Conscience (or
Freedom to exercise that knowledge, which is communicated to any, in
spiritual things, agreeable to the Word of God, or not repugnant to it) that
is granted here, whereby the Gospel of the Kingdom (or Personal Reign of
Christ on Earth) may be freely preached among us (and so shall pass into all
the world afterward, the Sword making way for this Liberty) which Freedom or
Liberty is granted in no Nation, especially upon that account as here; In
France there is some tolleration, but of necessity (those that they call
Protestants there being a considerable powerful party, and so not easily to be
suppressed:) In the United Provinces the Liberty granted, proves very
advantaglous to them, by drawing others (that cannot have that liberty in their
own Country) thither, who bring with them Estates; but whether poor or rich,
they do contribute little or much toward the charge of maintaining them in
their civil Liberties.

But in England it is otherwise, the Liberty that is granted and enjoyed is
merely upon the account, that light is broke forth; and since this Liberty has
been granted (and upon this account) all eyes (that are not wilfully shut from
beholding the same) have seen, that no Nation has prospered, or has had the
like success that we have had against all our Enemies; in so much that the
neighbor Nations stand in admiration at it, if not tremble, (to God only be
all the Glory) as they have good cause, if at any time they shall combine
against us; for the seventh Head must have as large Dominions as any (if not as
all) the precedent had.

Now concerning the Lords work, which he will do under this seventh Head, we
shall find it to be twofold, and that in a way of Mercy, as he permitted a
twofold work to be done under the sixth Head, in a way of affliction or
persecution.

The first of which (under the sixth Head) was the ten persecutions of the
Saints (which could not be the ten Horns, as some have imagined, and the Whore
of Rome to be the Beast) in the first three hundred years after Christ, who
then suffered under the litterall Babylonish Whore, in respect of Worship,
because they would not sacrifice to Idols; whose judgment (viz. the litterall
Babylonish Whore) in respect of Worship, was shown to John in his 17.
Revelations 1, 2. And that by the rise of another Whore (or whorish or false
Worship) in the 3. verse, John being carried by the Spirit into the
wilderness, where he saw a Woman that sat upon a skarlet colored Beast, full
of names of blasphemy, having seven Heads and ten Horns. Whose rise of Worship
(viz. the spiritual Babylonish or Romish) is and has been the ruin of the
first; and her practice is, by her Emissaries, in respect of doctrine, to cry
down all litterall Sacrifices (as killing of Beasts and Fowls, etc.) only a
spiritual Sacrifice that they bring instead there of, by offering up their
Wafer God (so called) in the hands of their Priests; by whom also that absurd
doctrine (and bloody to those poor Saints in the Marian days, that would not
believe a lie.) of Transubstantiation was brought in: In opposing of her
spiritual whorish Worship, how many Saints (since her rise) has she made the
Martyrs of Jesus, being drunken with their blood; at which the Apostle John
wondered with great admiration, verse 6. And this was the second work that
should be brought to pass under the sixth Head, in respect of affliction or
persecution; which power of hers, in respect of Worship, will continue in the
time of the seventh Head; for she is to sit upon the Beast with seven Heads and
ten Horns; so that she is to have a being after the rise of the ten Horns,
who arise not till the seventh Head has reigned; and she shall afterward be
destroyed by them in respect of place, or Seat, (viz. Rome it self) if not of
worship also, verse 16, 17, 18.

Now the Lords work that is to be done under this seventh Head is, as we said,
twofold:

First, the preaching of the Gospel of the Kingdom, Math. 24. 14.

Secondly, the calling home of the Jews into their own Land (viz. the two
Tribes, Judah and Benjami^) to build the City of Jerusalem and the Temple.

Object. Concerning the preaching of the Gospel of the Kingdom, some it may be
will say, it has been preached already, in the days of the Apostles, who went
about into all parts of the world, according to their Masters Commission in
Math. 28. Go ye into all the world, preach the Gospel to every Creature, etc.
and the Apostle Paul in the 10. Romans 18. says, Their sound went into all the
Earth; which say some, is the Gospel spoken of in the 16. verse of that
chapter, but they have not all obeyed the Gospel,

Answ. To which we answer, That the Gospel of the Kingdom could not possibly
have been preached in all the earth in the Apostles time; for if it had so
been, the end of it had been presently, that is, it would not have been any
more preached.

2. It could not have been so preached then, because a large part of the now
known world was not then known or discovered, nor in many hundred years after
them; and it may well be questioned, whether it has at all been preached (yea
hardly known or believed by any there) in the English Plantations in America,
much less in the Plantations of other Nations (in that now known part of the
world) who cannot endure to have the least light of spiritual things to break
forth in their Dominions; witness that damnable doctrine of theirs, so highly
cried up by the Popish Party, that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, joined
with another of the same stamp, that Images are Laymens books: but chiefly
their cruel tyrannizing over the Consciences of their people, by setting up
their Hell upon Earth, their cruel Inquisition, which so long as that is
maintained in a Nation, there is little hopes of this Gospel to be preached
there. And as concerning that Scripture of the Apostle Paul in his 10. chapter
of his Epistle to the Church at Rome, verse 18. if the coherence of the words
be well weighed, the Gospel there spoken of, cannot be the Gospel of Christ,
which the Apostles had in Commission from him to preach: But it was the Gospel
or glad Tidings, spoken of in the Writings of the Prophets (viz. in Isaiah and
Nahum) for the Apostle in the 15. verse of that 10. chapter says, as it is
written, how beautiful are the feet, etc. Therefore we suppose we may conclude
safely, that this Gospel of the Kingdom or Reign of Christ upon Earth) has
not been published or made known in all the world.

Object. But why must it now be preached in these days, in the time of the
seventh Head or Government, or what necessity is there for it.

Answ. First, because it has in some measure been proved (if not fully) that
it has not been preached in all the world as yet, therefore it must be
continued to be preached till it has so been.

Secondly, because the time of the seventh Heads power or Reign is but short,
therefore to be hastened in that time, for there is little hopes of Peace or
Liberty for the Saints in the time of the ten Horns or Kings and the Beast.

Thirdly, it cannot be published in any place, but where there is Liberty and
Peace, as there is among us, and it is hoped, the Sword that is in the now
Magistrates hand of this Nation, will procure the same in other Nations, that
there it may be preached also.

Fourthly, because the Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ draws nigh,
(especially in relation to the taking up of the Saints) for if it be so, that
the seventh Head be arising and shall continue but a short space, then
immediately (upon his decay or setting) the ten Horns and the Beast will
arise, before whose power is at the height (viz* the Beasts) the Saints will be
taken up (as we shall clear it more fully hereafter, especially when we open
the 12. chapter of the book of the Revelation^) therefore the more reason to
set upon this most necessary work of the preaching of the Gospel of the
Kingdom, least we be found retarders of our own happiness.

And as concerning the calling of the I^ws in thi^ time o^ Government, we say,
that is that other work the Lord will Calling of the Jews*
now have brought to pass; for as yet they are not so called, nor permitted by
the Turks (who have the possession of their Country) to make any habitation
there, nor to come thither but as Pilgrims, or to bury the bones of their
deceased Friends, which they bring thither from all parts where they inhabit.

Secondly, the Scriptures of the Prophets do declare, that Jerusalem must be
built in its own place (which now it is not, if we may give any belief to
Historians and Travelers) so what the Prophet Jeremy foretells concerning this
particular in his 30. chapter 18. whose words are these; Thus says the Lord,
behold I will bring again the Captivity of Jacobs Tents, and have mercy on his
dwelling places: and the City shall be builded upon her own heap, and the
Palace shall remain after the manner thereof. Also consider of the Prophet
Zachery's Prophecy as to this particular, in his 12. chapter 6. In that day
will I make the Governors of Judah like a hearth of fire among the wood, and
like a Torch of fire in a sheaf, and they shall devour all the People round
about, on the right hand and on the left, and Jerusalem shall be inhabited
again in her own place, even in Jerusalem, And the other Prophets do declare,
that the City must be beseiged, and the daily Sacrisice taken away, and great
tribulation upon that people, and all this before the Beast is at his height,
in regard of his power, who does immediately arise upon the fall of the seventh
Head.

So that now having fully made manifest the Beast, in respect of his seven
Heads; the next thing to be declared and opened is the ten Horns or Kings;
viz. who they are, concerning which the Scripture is silent, only that they
are the The ten Horns.
ten toes of Nebuchadnessar's Image, Daniel 2. as to their Persons and
Dominion, in respect of Countries, where they shall particularly reign, we find
not, and that as yet, they are not risen; for the Apostle John in his 17.
Revelations 12. says, They are ten Kings, who have received no Kingdom as
yet, but receive power one hour with the Beast. But thus much we may take
notice of by the way, that the ten Horns and the Beast, when they arise, will
make Nebuchadnezars Image complete, Daniel 2. 33. whose feet were part of Iron,
and part of Clay; of whose Iron legs we have already given some account) which
in the interpretation he says, Whereas thou saw the feet and toes, part of
Potters Clay, and part of Iron; the Kingdom shall be divided, but there shall
be in it of the strength of Iron, for as much as thou saw the Iron mixed
Feet and Toes.*
with the mirie Clay: and as the toes of the feet were part of Iron and part of
Clay; so the Kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken. And whereas
thou saw the Iron mixed with the mirie Clay, they shall mingle themselves
with the seed of men, but they shall not cleave one to another, even as Iron is
not mixed with Clay. And in the daye^ of those Kings shall the God of Heaven
set up a Kingdom, which shall never be destroyed, and the Kingdom shall not
be left to other People, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these
Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever, verse 41, 42, 43, 44. So that as they
are partly strong and partly weak (they being but a mixed power, that are united
for the perfecting of some great design, but will not long hold together, for
before the little Horn will three of the ten Horns be plucked away, Daniel 7.
^. which in the interpretation verse 24. its said, he shall subdue three Kings)
it intimates, that they will be divided, and he shall have those that will
oppose him, yea, and destroy his royal Seats, of which more hereafter.

Secondly, concerning the place from whence the Beast and ten Kings are to
arise, it will evidently appear to be, out of The place where.
the Dominion that the seventh Head is to have, though Daniel seems to say,
that they shall arise out of the sixth Head or fourth Beast in his 7. chapter
23, 24 yet compared with other Scriptures, it will plainly appear, that they
will arise out of the seventh Head; see the 17. Revelations 11, 12. and Daniel
11. 21. but they must arise out of that part of the Dominion that was under the
sixth Head, or Roman Monarchy, in John's time, for the Dominion of the seventh
Head will be of a far larger extent than ever the sixth was in John's days,
in regard of that large part of the world, that was unknown, and undiscovered
in those days, but now is, and shall be brought under the power and government
of the seventh Head.

And in particular, the Beast that was and is not (which is the Beast complete
with seven Heads and ten Horns) and which yet shall be, he is the eight, and
is of the seven; his rise will be in that part of the world that it was at the
first, viz. in Assyria, and in that part thereof which was called Caldea; whose
chief City shall be Babylon, as it was at the first; for John says, The Beast
that thou saw, was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomless Pit,
chap. 17. 8. Not that it was then so made manifest or known; for John saw not
things as they then were apparent to the world, but what should be in its time;
nor that it should be made manifest when the Beast did arise, but what it
should be afterward: So that his rise is out of that part of the world, that
should in its time be made manifest to be the bottomless Pit; out of which Pit
the Locusts shall arise, that shall plague or sting the Inhabitants of the
Earth, which have not the Seal of God in their foreheads, Revel. 9. 3, 4. and
in which place the Devil shall be chained up for a thousand years, Revel. 20.
1, 2, 3. Now that the bottomless Pit shall be in Caldea; see what the same
Apostle John heard, as concerning Babylon, what it should be; viz The
habitation of Devils, and the hold of every foul Spirit, and a cage of every
unclean and hateful Bird, Revel. 18. 2. which compared with the 13. Isaiah 19,
20. 21, 22. and chap. 14. 22, 23. you will find how they agree in their
Prophesies and Visions concerning the desolation and destruction of that place*
I shall (to conclude as concerning the bottomless Pit, which shall be in
Caldea, and chiefly in Babylon) relate a little at large what the Prophet
Jeremy has foretold concerning it, whose words are these, Therefore Jer. 50.
39, 40.
the wild Beasts of the Desert, with the wild Beasts of the Islands shall dwell
there, and the Owls shall dwell therein; and it shall be no more inhabited for
ever; neither shall it be dwelt in from Generation to Gener ation. As God
overthrew Sodom and Gomorha, and the neighbor Cities thereof, says the Lord;
so shall no man abide there, neither shall any son of man dwell therein. What
they will do.


The third thing to be considered of, is what the ten Horns and Beast will do
before and after the taking up of the Saints.

First, before the taking up of the Saints, the ten Horns will arise, and hate
the Whore, and make her desolate, etc. Revel. 17. 16. and this Whore or Woman,
is that great City, which reigns over the Kings of the Earth, verse 18. (viz.
in that time that John saw the Vision and wrote this Book) and God has put
into their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree with one consent to give
their Kingdom unto the Beast, until the words of God be fulfilled, verse 17.
So that they must first hate the Whore, and destroy her, before they give up
their power unto the Beast.

Secondly, As to the Beast, what he will do.

First, Before the Saints are taken up, we find much in the 21. chapter of
Daniels Prophecy after his rise. As that Arms shall be overthrown with a
flood before him, and shall be broken, and also the Prince of the Covenant (or
chief of those who had joined in a League to oppose him;) and after the League
made with him (he having obtained his power and dominion at the first by
flatteries) he shall work deceitfully, for he shall come up and overcome with a
small people (in regard the Nations had no thoughts of a War, a League being
lately made before between them) and he shall enter into the quiet and
plentiful Province (that is, into the Land of Canaan, whose barrenness shall
then be healed, as several of the Prophets have foretold; Esaias 32. 15. and in
his 51. chapter 3. he faith, For the Lord shall comfort Sion; he will comfort
all her wast places, and he will make her Wilderness like Eden, and her Desert
like the Garden of the Lord: Joy and gladness shall be found therein,
thanksgiving and the voice of melody: Also the 30. Jeremiah 17. and chap. 33.
6. to the 14. verse. Ezekiel 38. 12. and Ioell 2. 19, 22, 23, 24.) and he shall
do that which his Fathers have not done, nor his Fathers Fathers; he shall
divide among them the prey, and the spoil, and the substance (a thing which his
Fathers, nor none of his Predecessors ever did, for they took all from the
people of the Jews, never divided any among them, which he shall do) yea; he
shall forecast his devises against the strong holds, even for a time, verse 24.
although at that time he does do much for them, only to put them into a
secure condition. In the 25. and 26. verses it is said, he shall make war
with the King of the South (the Aegyptdan Prince) and he shall be betrayed to
the vile Person, by those that feed of the Portion of his meat, but afterward
they shall be reconciled seemingly, for they shall talk of deceit (or speak
lies) at one Table, verse 27. and both set their hearts to do mischief, but it
shall not avail, for yet the end shall be at the time appointed: and verse 28.
He shall return into his own Land, with great substance (or Riches) and his
heart shall be against the holy Covenant (or people of the Iowes, with whom he
had before made a League, and divided his spoll among them) so shall he do,
and return to his own Land; that is, his evil thoughts will then begin to work
against them, according to Ez^kiels Prophecy in his 38. chapter 10, 11, 13.
for this Gog or Prince of Meshech and Tuball will evidently appear to be be
this vile Person or John's Beast, if we compare Ezok. 38. 18. to the 23. and 39.
chapter 17, 18, 19, 20 with the 19. Revel. 17, 18.) And at the time appointed
he shall return and come toward the South; (at which return of his, his evil
thoughts do then begin to show themselves in actions, by his causing them
(viz. the Jews) to be beseiged, as he passes through their Country toward
the King of the South. For then it is, that Sheba, and Dedan, and the Merchants
of Tarshish shall say, (to Gog or this vile Person) art thou come to take the
Prey and the Spoil, Ezekiel. 38. 13. So that now will begin to be fulfilled
another part of Daniels Prophecy, who says in his 8. chapter 13, 14. that the
time that the daily Sacrifice shall be taken away, and the transgression of
desolation, to give both the Sanctuary and the Host, to be trodden under feet,
shall be two thousand three hundred days, and then the Sanctuary shall be
cleansed. So that the taking away of the daily Sacrifice (by reason of his
beseiging Jerusalem) shall be near three years, or about a thousand days,
before the abomination that makes de solate be set up (which cannot be till
after the City is taken by the vile Person: And from that time, that the
abomination is set up, it shall be one thousand two hundred and ninety days
before the end of the vile Persons Reign be; and blessed is he that wait^th and
comes to the one thousand three hundred and five and thirty days, Daniel 12.
11, 12.) But the last (expedition) shall not be as the first; For the Ships of
Chittim shall come against him, etc. verse 30. Who they are the Scripture is
silent; only we find another prophecy of Balaam to this effect in the 24.
Numbers 24. where it is said, And Skips shall come from the Coast of Chittim,
and shall afflict Ashur, and shall afflict Eber, and he (Ashur) also shall
perish for ever.

Now we shall give in something of our own thoughts concerning this verse (and
yet not our own, but what is given in unto us; which its likely will be
slighted by those that are prepossessed with former and ancient Expositions on
this Subject, but we shall leave it to after time, which will manifest whether
we are in the truth or no;) the Ships of Chittim we do apprehend to be the
power or forces of the ten Horns or Kings, who had lately destroyed Rome, and
now are invited by the King of the South (or Egypt). (whom we do apprehend to
be one or those ten Kings, a part of whose Forces has been with the rest in
destroying the Whore or Woman viz Rome) to help him against the vile Person,
who he hears is preparing for a second invasion on him, which they hearken
unto (in regard they have done their great work in destroying the Whore, Rome;)
and the vile person finding it (by his Intelligences) to be true: He considers
with himself, that this must needs be a very great power that is coming against
him, (that had destroyed so great and famous a City as Rome) which makes him
sorry that he must leave his Southern design, and therefore now frets himself
against the holy Covenant, and returns against the people of the Jews, whom he
will then beseige with his whole force; and in the height of his power
thinking to take it, is he and his Army so terrified with that dreadful sight
of the Graves opening, and the believing Saints being taken up to meet the Lord
Jesus in the air (at which time the Devil shall be cast into the earth, and
shall give his power unto the Beast) that they shall fly and call to the Rocks
to fall upon them, etc. Rev. 6. And during the time of that terror will the
Church of the Jews (viz. the one hundred forty and four thousand) fly out of
Jerusalem into the wilderness.

And now we come to declare what he (id ^st, the v^le Person or Beast) will do
after the Saints are taken up; that is, he and his Army, after a short space,
will recover their Spirits again, and being empowered by the devil (according
to what John saw in a vision that would be in his 13. Rev. 7.) he takes
Jerusalem, and half the City is carried into captivity, the other half
remaining therein, Za^h. 14. 2. And then will he set himself in the Temple of
God, and exalt himself above all that is called God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. and Dan.
11. 36. Presently after this will another part of Daniels prophesies be
fulfilled, verse 31. And arms shall stand on his part, etc. for the forces of
the ten Horns or Kings, who came to assist the King of the South (by reason of
Satan's malioe, increasing against the Woman, or Church of the Jews, fled into
the wilderness) are now persuaded, by the Dragon and the vile Person, to join
with him, in utterly rooting out this people of the Jews out of that
plentiful Country; and to cause them the sooner to comply with him, he will
tell them how great his power is, as that that great terror that fell upon all
the Inhabitants of the world, was not in any favor or assistance to the Jews
(whom he then beseiged) but to him; the God of this world (the Devil) having
now communicated his power to him, as the Apostle John declares the Dragon will
do, Rev. 13. 2. and his lies prevail with them, according to the prophecy of
the Apostle Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. which he having effected, he then is that
Beast complete with seven Heads and ten Horns, having them all under his power
and command.

And now we apprehend will be the time, when all the world will wonder after
the Beast, whose deadly wound by a Sword was healed and did live, Rev. 13. 3,
14. which deadly wound had relation to the time that Phull and Arbaces did
divide the Assyrian and Babylonian Monarchy between them, in the days of
Sardanapulus the last of Nimrods posterity; which Beast the Apostle John says
in the 17. Rev. 8. Was and is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomless Pit,
and shall go into perdition, and they that dwell on the Earth shall wonder
(whose names are not written in the Book of Life from the foundation of the
world) when they behold the Beast that was, and is not, and yet is. As if it
had been a thing impossible, that ever any Monarch should arise out of that
place again.) And so they come and join with him, who immediately (after this
conjunction) persueth the Woman (the Church of the Jews) that is fled into the
wilderness; and they staying behind to keep possession of Jerusalem, by the
persuasion of the false Prophet (who arose among them) set up the abomination
that makes desolate, as is prophesied of by Daniel in his 11. chapter 31.
verse: Which Prophecy could not be fulfilled in the days of Antiochus
Epiphanes (though that might be a type of this) as the marginall Notes in the
Geneva Translation seem to hold forth, for they say, the said Antiochus did
then set up the Image of Jupiter Olimpius in the Temple of Jerusalem: Now if
that prophecy had then been fulfilled, the Lord Jesus (by two of his
Evangelists, Matthew and Mark) would not have left it upon Record, (Math. 24.
15. Mark 13. 14.) for the Iowes to take notice of, that then would be the time
that they had most need to fly, in regard of the great tribulation that would
immediately follow, such as was not from the beginning of the world to that
time, nor shall be, Math. 24. 21. therefore this could not be fulfilled before.
Besides this Abomination that is then to be set up, is the Image of the vile
Person or Beast (who is not yet risen as to be made manifest) according to the
Apostle John's R^velation, chap. 13. 14, 15. and not any other Image, or
offering of Swines flesh, as some other Expositors on that place do hold forth.

Now having declared something of the actings of this Beast, both before and
after the Saints are taken up, we shall in the next place mention something of
the time of hi^ Reign, how The time of his Reign, how long after the Saints are
taken up.
long it will be, with some passages of things during that time, which we have
not already declared.

As to the time, the Apostle John in his 11. chapter of his Revelations 2.
says But the Court that is without the Temple, cast out and meet it not, for
it is given unto the Gentiles, and the holy City shall they trea^ under foot
two and forty months. Which compared with the 9. Daniel 27. And he shall
confirm the Covenant with many for one week, and in the midst of the week he
shall cause the Sacrifice and the Oblation to cease, etc. And he shall speak
great words against the most High, and shall wear out the Saints of the most
High, and think to change Times and Laws: and they shall be given into his
hands until a time, and times, and the dividing of time, Daniel 7. 25. also
other Scriptures for the farther clearing of this may be found in the 12 Daniel
7, 11, 12. verses. So that from the time of the Saints being taken up, and the
Dragon or Devil being cast down (who gives his power to the Beast) to the time
that the Beast and false Prophet will be taken alive and cast into the lake ^f
fire, and the said Devil or Dragon bound up with a chain, will be but a short
time; for the v^yce in heaven, Revelation 12. 10. and the beginning, and the
12. verse, the latter end, declares a Wo^ to the Inhabitants of the Earth, and
of the Sea, for the D^vill is come down unto you, which has great wrath,
knowing that he has but a sh^rt time, So that taking the longest time of the
Prophecies concerning him, from the said time of the Saints being taken up, to
his end, will not be four years. A short time in respect of eternity, but a
long time in respect of the miseries and plagues that will fall upon the
Inhabitants of the Earth. In that time this little Horn (as Daniel calls him in
his 7. chapter 24.) shall subdue three Kings, which in the 8. verse of that
chapter the calls Horns; who these three are, probably they may be found, to
be Egypt, Lybia, and Aeth^opia, Daniel 11. 43. but if these be not those, then
as yet we cannot discern from the Scriptures who they are. Also in that time
the Witnesses prophecy, who have power to smite the Earth with all manner of
plagues as often as they will; and then will the seven Trumpets sound, and the
seven Vi^ls be poured forth; of which we shall hereafter, as time and
opportunity shall serve, and the Lord assisting of us, declare further what is
given In unto us concerning them.

Fifthly, For his Ruin, it will be after he has raised a very great Army, and
that by the Spirits of Devils working Miracles, that go out of his mouth, and
the Dragons, and the false Prophets, who go unto the Kings of His Ruin.
the Earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of the great
day of God Almighty, Revelations 16. 13, 14. For in the 19. Revelations 19, 20.
John says, And I saw the Beast, and the Kings of the Earth, and their Hosts
gathered together to make battle against him that sat on the Horse, and
against his Army; but the Beast was taken, and with him that false Prophet that
wrought miracles before him, whereby he dcceived them that received: he Beasts
mark, and them that worshipped his Image; these both were alive cast into a
lake of fire, burning with brimstone. Now if we compar^ this Scripture of his
Ruin with o her Scriptures, we shall find, that the Beast, the Man of sin, the
vile Person, the little Horn, and Gog the Prince of Meshech and Tuball, to be
all one Person, under several Names and Titles, i^ we consider their Actings
and Ends.

1. First for the Man of fin, the Apostle Paul gives the Church at Thessalonica
a description of him, by his Actings and End, 2 Thessalonians. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8* 9.

2. For the vile Person, though we have not so clear a Scripture how he shall
come to his and, yet his Actings will demonstrate him to be the same, Daniel
11. 3^. and so forward but in the 36. verse you have the substance of all; And
the King shall do what him list, he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself
ahove every God, and shall speak mavelous things against the God of Gods* and
shall prosper till the indignation be accomplished, for that that is determined
shall be done. And in the last vers^, He shall come to his end.

3. For the little Horn, Daniel in his 7. chap^^^ 11. tells us, that then he
beh^ld, because of (...) voice of the presumptuous words which the little H^rn
spoke, I beh^ld even till the Beast was (...), and his body destroyed and given
to the burning flame.

4. For Gog the Prince of Meshech and Tuball, the Prophet Ezekiel who saw his
Rise and Ruin, gives an account of him in his 38. and 39 chapters, whose end
is suitable to the other description of the Prophets (both before and after
Ezekiels prophecy) and Apostles of that Person, whose power shall be so great
in the latter days; consider well of the 17. verse of Ezekiels 38. chapter,
and in the 22: verse of that chapter is the ruin of his Army declared; and the
Fowls of the Heaven are invited to this great Slaughter or Sacrifice of the
Lord, chap: 39: 17, 18: compared with the 19: Rev. 17, 18.

Now though the Ruin of the Beast or vile Person, etc. be on this manner, yet
it may very well be questioned, whether the ten Horns or Kings (or rather
seven of the ten, the Beast having already rcoted up three of them) are
destroyed with him; for if we consider well of that portion of Daniels
Prophecy, chap: 7: 12: where it is said, as concerning the other Beasts, they
had their Dominion taken away yet their lives were prolonged for a certain time
and season: we may rather conclude, that they were not destroyed with the Beast.

The next particular that we shall (with the Lords Assistance) treat upon, will
be the opening of the 12: chapter of the Apostle John's Visions and Revelations,
which as we shall not declare rash and sudden thoughts thereon, so we desire it
may not be suddenly expected from us, but rather to wait a while, for light is
breaking forth daily, and that which may be apprehended for a truth to day; to
morrow may easily be discerned to be a mistake; It is with us as with Military
Persons upon duty in the Field, especially those that are upon the Guard, who
looking about them continually (but chiefly upon break of the day) discover
variety of Objects as they apprehend, and as there are, quot homines tot
Sententioe, so many men so many minds or opinions, for one says, that such a
black thing that is at a pretty distance, is a Man, another says a Tree,
another a Horse, another this or that, when as possibly within a short time
after (the day dawning more and more) they plainly perceive that they were all
in an error, though then when they gave their opinions, they all might be
confident, that what they said it was, it was, and then (as we apprehend) no
evil in them, because they knew not the contrary, though not possible, that
one Object upon the near approach, or by day light, could be the same thing
that men of several judgments said it was: So it is with us, in respect of
what we have already written, or shall; for many before us, in times of
darkness, have given their interpretation, on these Subjects, In a contrary
sense; and saying, that these Prophesies have all (or the most part) been
fulfilled long since; but we who are come near to the dawning of the day of the
Lord Jesus, do clearly discern, that th^se that went before us, and writ on
these Subjects, were much mistaken; and those that come after us will have a
clearer and fuller discovery of these things then as yet we have; which then we
hope will appear evidently to the eyes of all those, whose eyes of their
understandings are enlightened by the Word and Spirit of God, to be such. Now to
God only wise, and our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior, who has
not left us comfortless, but has sent us His holy Spirit into our hearts, to
guide and direct us in the way of Truth, be Glory, Praise and Dominion for
ever: Amen.

FINIS.

