THE Baker and Brewers Warning-Piece.

Or, Excellent ORDERS

To be observed, by such as shall be appointed to serve the Markets with Corn,
Meal, and other Grain, for relief of the poor people.

The Officers appointed to be present in the Market, to see poor Citizens,
Tradesmen, and others, releived upon reasonable prices: The admirable Edict
made against Ingrossers; and a most Christian Order touching Bakers and
Brewers, for the performing of their due Weight and Measure; with penalties to
be inflicted upon unlawful exactions.

As also, A Rule and Precept for the Ministers and Magistrates, to be observed
in their several Parishes, concerning Taverns, Inns, and Alehouses.

LONDON, Printed for G. Freeman, and are to be sold near the Blew Anchor in
Little Britain, 1662.

THE BAKERS Warning-piece, etc.
AMongst the rest of the good Orders for relief of the Poor, and the abating of
the Price of Corn, and all other sorts of Grain, these following are very
observable, deriving from former presidents in the glorious Reign of Queen
Elizabeh, of ever blessed memory; occasioned by a great Dearth and scarcity of
Corn, to wit.

Malt-makers, Bakers, and Brewers.
Item, What number of Malt-makers, Bakers, common Brewers, or Tiplers, dwell
within the said Parish, and who they are by Name, and how long they have used
that Trade, and how much they bake or brew in the Week, and what Trade they
have whereby otherwise to live.

Indeed there has been too much deceit of late years used by many through
their false Weights and Measures, and some there are to this day that
persevere therein; the Baker making his Bread too light, others pintching of
their Measure; so that the poor are almost starved, having not moneys to buy
such small Morsels at sodear a rate: But let such Oppressors know, That the
Lord will punish them for their oppression, and avenge himself on his that by
fraud does inj^re any one; for the holy Scripture makes it evident, [ That the
LORD did so abdor oppression and cruelty, as that he re^^ired the Blood of that
Man, that did eat the Flesh of Beasts with the blood thereo, Deuteronomy. 2.23.] Nay,
that man that oppresses the Poor to enrich himself, shall himself come to
poverty, J^r. 23.13. And he that oppresses another, by reinsing to hear his
cry, the Lord will not hear him; and he that does evil to any one it shall be
his destrushion; for great have been the inconveniences and mischiefs that
have flowed from cruelties and oppressions; as in the cafe of Rehoboam King of
Israel, Dionisius, and Henry King of Specia, who lost himself upon his
intolerable exactions on the people, and those that advised him to his
unmerciful cruelties, lost their li^es in their labors, and were stoned to
Death by the multitude.

Let this therefore serve as a Warning-piece to all Oppressers; and for such as
have Riches set not your heart upon them; but relieve the Poor, cloth the
Naked, and oppress not the Widow or Fatherless, but follow the counsel of holy
Daniel, Dan. 2.27. Break off that sin by repentance unto God, by mercy to the
^oor and with Zachets, by restitation to wronged, oppressed, and injured men,
L^ke 19. For w^ ^o such, who by false Weights and Measures get Riches unto
themselves, Amos 8.8. It being expressly held forth in Scripture, That such
things are an abomination to the LORD, Prove. 11.1 and 20.10. But to descend to
some particular Orders, offered from former precedents, these may serve as a
direct line to guide us by in sad times, viz.

^ers to be observed by such as shall be appointed to serve the Markets with
Corn, for the relief of the poor people first.
You shall brin^, or cause to the brnught, weekly so many Q^arters or Bushels
of Corn, as Wheat, Rye, Barley, Malt, Pease, Beans, or other Grain, or so muc
thereof as shall not be directly sold to the poor Artificers or Day-labourers
of the Parish within which you dwell, or two of them there to be by you, or at
your assignment sold in open Market by half Quarters, two Bushels, one Bushel,
or less, as the buyer shall require of you, and not in greater quantity except
it be to a Badger, or carrier of Corn, admitted according to the Statute, or to
a common known Brewer on Baker, having testimony under the Hand and Seal of two
such Justices of the Peace at the least of the Division, or of a Mayor, or
other head Officer of the City, Town, or Borough Corporate where he dwells,
that he is a common Brewer or Baker within the same; or to such other person as
shall make provision for any Lord Spiritual or Temporal, Knight. or any other
Gentleman that has no provision of Corn; so as the same person have, and show
unto such persons as shall have the oversight of the Market in that behalf,
testimony under the Hand and Seal of the party for whom he comes to the Market
to make that provision; declaring, That it is for the provision of his House,
and containing the quantities and kind of Grain to be provided; and you shall
not willingly leave any part of your Coru so brought to that Market unfold, if
Money be offered to you for the same, by any that are permitted to b^y the
same, after the issual price of the Market there that day, as long as the
Market shall last.

No Corn-brought to the Market unsold, to be cauried out of the Town.
Neither shall you from the beginning of the Market to the full end thereof
k^ep, or cause to be kept, any of your said Corn out of the sight o^ the op^n
Market; neither shall you carry away from the Market Town any kind of Grain
that was brought thither which you have not there sold, but you shall leave the
same there in the Market, in a known place, so that it may be exposed to
public fale the next day after: Novertheless you shall bring to the Market
such other quantity of Grain as shall be limited, and so continue at every
Market day the bringing into the open Market the quantity of Corn that shall be
limited.

No Corn to be bought for to sell again.
Ye shall buy no Corn to sell it again, neither shall you buy any color
directly or indirectly, appoint any your Servants, or any other person to be a
Badger of your Corn, otherwise then to carry it to the Market, there to be sold
as your own, without changing of any property.

No Corn to be bought but in open Market.
Ye shall neither buy or sell any manner of Corn, but in the open Market,
unless the same be to some Handi-craftsmen, or Day-labourers within the Parish
wherein you do dwell, that cannot conveniently come to the Market Towns, by
reason of distance of place, accoring to such direction as shall be given unto
you in that behalf by us the Justices of the Peace of that Division within
which you do dwell, or two of us, and to none of these above one Bushel at a
time, and thereof you shall keep, or cause to be kept a particular Note in
Writing, to whom you shall so sell Weekly, and at what prices, so as the same
may appear to the Justices to be done without fraud or abuse.

Inquiry to be made against Engrosser.
That the Justices of the Peace within their seveal divisions have regard that
Engrossers of Corn be carefully looked unto, and inquifitions to be made for
knowledge of them, so as they may be severely punished accordig to the Law; and
where such are found, to make Certificates, their Names and Dwellings, and of
the proofs to the Kings Majesty's Atturnal General for the time being, who is
directed speedily to inform against them for the same, and to see that none be
permitted to buy any Corn to sell again, but by special License, and that of
all manner of Licenses by Justices of the Peace, or by any other Authority, the
parties that shall have such Licenses, shall cause an entry to be made in the
Books of the Peace, remaining with the Custos Rot lorvm, or the Clerk of the
Peace; for entry whereof the party shall not pay above Two pence, and thereof
the Costos Rotulorum, or the Clerk, shall keep a good Register to be showed to
the Justices, whenever they shall require the fight thereof.

Regard to the Bakers, for keeping the size of Bread.
That they take order with the common Bakers, for the baking of Rye, barley,
Pease, and Beans, for the use of the poor, and that they appoint special and
fit personsdiligently to see the people well dealt withal by the common Bakers
and Brewers in all Towns and places, in their Weights and Assizes, having also
regard that the Deputies of the Clerk of the Market do not abuse themselves in
unlawful exactions for Weight and Measure, and effectually to enquire for and
search out the default therein, and thereupon to give order for punishment of
the Offender severely, according to the Law, and where any notable excessive
offense shall be in the Bakers, to cause the Bread to be sold to the poorer
sort under the ordinary price, as in part of punishment of the Baker.

Some Justices to be present in the Marekt, to see the poor relieved upon
reasonable prices.
That the said Justices, or two, or one of them, at the least in every
Division, shall be personally present at every Market within their several
Divisions, during the whole time of the Market, to see the orders to be taken
by the Authority here of to be well observed, and the poor people provided of
necessary Corn, and that with as much favor in the price, as by the earnest
persuasions of the Justices can be obtained. By this it is not meant to charge
any Lord of Parliament being a Justice of Peace, to attend upon any such
service in any Market, otherwise then it shall be with his own good will; but
in all other causes tending to the execution of these orders, it is hoped that
every person of any estate, will readily give advice and assistance.

That Ministers and Preachers exhort the Rich sort to be liberal to help the
Poor with Money or Victual, if needful.
That all good means and persuasions be used by the Justices in their several
Di^isions, and by admonitions and exhortations at Sermons in the Churches, by
the Preachers and Ministers of the Word, that the pour may be served of Corn at
conxeuient and charitable prices: And to the furtherance thereof, that the
Richer sort be earnestly moved by Christian charity, to cause their Grain to be
sold under the common prices of the Market to the poorer sort. A deed of mercy,
that will be doubtless rewarded of Almighty God. That there be no buying or
bargaining of any kind of Corn, but in open Markets, and that the Justices in
their several Divisions, restrain common Maltsters from making Barley Malt, in
those Countries and places where there be Oats sufficient to make Malt of for
the use of the people, and to restrain as well the brewing of Barley Malt, by
or for Ale houses, or common Tiplers in those places and Countries, as also the
excess use of any kind of Malt, by all common Brwers, Malsters, or common
Tiplers, according to the true meaning of this Article; and that the unnessary
number of Alelseases and common Tiplers, be forth with suppressed in all places,
and that direction be given to all Taverns, Alehouses, and Tippling houses, not
to suffer any persons to repair theither, to eat and drink at unseasonable
times, or to continue in such houses longer then to satisfy their necessity of
eating and drinking.

That no Millers are suffered to become buyers of Corn, nor to fell Meal; but
to attend to the true grinding of the Corn brought, and use measurable Tall
these dear seasons.
Where in some parts of the Realm, diverse Millers, who ought only to serve for
grinding of Corn that shall be brought to their Mills, have began lately a very
corrupt Trade, to be common buyers of Corn, both in Markets and out of Markets,
and the same do grind into Meal, and do use as Badgers, or otherwise, to sell
the same at Markets, and in other places, seeking thereby an inordinate gain,
besides the misufing of other men's Corn brought thither to be ground, by delay
of grinding, or what worse is, by changing and altering their good Corn to bad;
it is therefore though necessary, that the Justices of the Peace who are not
owners by any Title of any Mills, nor Masters or LandLords to any Millers,
shall in hibit them upon pain of imprisonment, to use any sucly Trade of buying
any Grain, to be sold either in Corn or Meal.

FINIS.

