THE PROPOSITIONS Of Captain JOHN BVLMER, in the Office of Assurance, London;
For the blowing up of a Boat and a Man over London Bridge.
IN the Name of God, Amen. John Bulmer of London, Esquire: Master and Surveiour
General of the Kings Majesty's Mines Royal, and Engines for Water-workes,
propounds (by Gods assistance) That he the said John Bulmer, shall, and will,
at and in a flowing water, set out a Boat or Vessel with an Engine, floating
with a Man or Boy, in and aboard the said Boat, in the River of Thames, over
against the Tower-wharfe, or lower. Which said Boat, with the said Man or Boy
in or aboard her, shall the same Tide before Low Water again, by Art of the
said John Bulmer, and help of the said Engine be advanced and elevated so
high, as that the same shall pass and be delivered over London Bridge,
together with the said Man or Boy in and aboard her, and floate again in the
said River of Thames, on the other side of the said Bridge in safety. And the
said John Bulmer for Him, his Heirs, executors, and Administrators, does
hereby covenant and promise, that he the said John Bulmer shall and will
perform and accomplish the premises, within the space of one month next after
he shall cause intimation to be given into the Office of Assurance, London,
that he is about or intends to put the same in practice: which Intimation shall
so by him be given at such time, and so soon as the undertakers against him
wagering six for one, shall have deposited and left in the said Office such a
considerable sum of money, as the said John Bulmer may compute will
countervaile the charges of contriving the said Boat and Engine, and such other
disbursements as shall arise and grow in prosecution of the said business. And
he the said John Bulmer shall and will deposite his proportion of moneys in the
said Office accordingly. And the said moneys so deposided by the said
undertakers, and the said Bulmer, shall remain in the said Office, until the
said Bulmer shall either have accomplished the same, or the time expired for
accomplishment thereof. And the said undertakers and every of them, shall
subscribe and underwrite, such sum of money as they or any of them shall
deposite, adventure, and wager, against the said Bulmer: which said moneys so
deposited by the said undertakers, and the said John Bulmer, shall be delivered
to the said Bulmer (in case of performance of the premises) otherwise to the
said undertakers. Dated the 6. of November, 1643.

And all those that will bring in their moneys into the Office, shall be there
assured of their loss or gain, according to the conditions above mentioned.


