A note of such Arts and Mysteries as an English Gentleman, a Soldier and a
Traveller is able by Gods assistance to perform (he having means to perfect the
same.)
I. IN primis to find out all sorts of Mines, and Mineralls of what nature and
quality soever they be that lie within the body of the Earth and to direct the
working of them, according to their several natures, and qualities.

II. Item to direct the making of all sorts of Engines either offensive or
defensive for the War.

III. To find out the Level of any Country for the draining of Fennes or low
grounds; or to direct the making of Engines for the raising of water for the
service of Cities and Towns where nature fails.

IV. Item a new way of finding out any Ship, Bark, or Boat, which does lie
above the Sand or Rocks, although they lie twenty or thirty Fatham deep in the
bottom of the Sea, and to take up the Decks, and the goods that are under the
Decks, be they Ordinance or other commodities without diving an inch under
water, and to perform as much labor with one man upon that service, as is now
commonly used in Seafairing business with ten men, and in the same time.

V. Item to show many conclusions, as well for pleasure as for profit which may
seem by relation to be things impossible, yet to be as really performed as
propounded, and with little charge.

All which secrets the propounder has gained with much study travel and
expenses of many thousands of pounds as was well known to his Majesty and most
of the Ancient Nobility in this Kingdom: And now being old, and out of
employment, is willing to show his Art in these things to any which are
desirous to learn upon assurance of such reward as they shall agree upon, he
performing what he promises before he do exspect his reward.

A true copy of a Certificate from Emmanuel College in Cambridge 1646.
WHereas Captain Bulmer made several propositions, which he undertook by his
art to demonstrate; he has given sufficient satisfaction that he is able.

I. To raise any weight from the bottom of the water to the surface without
diving at all, or making use of any principle or motion saving the form of an
element only.

II To keep any thing dry and conveigh it under the water; nothing thereof
appearing to the eye.

III. To lift up a Boat or any other weight so high, as safely to deliver it on
the other side of London Bridge if need were.

IV. To weigh any uncertain weight without Center, and poize it so, that by
adding the strength of an horse hair it may be raised up higher from its rest,
in the air or water.

This we could not but testify at his request being convinced thereof by what
we have seen.

Lawrence Sarson Ralph Cudworth William Dillingham


To the States of England.
DEtraction with fair feathers on his back
Is like a prating Parrat whose tongue's black
And talks without discretion, thus he brawls,
Now for an Almond, then a Rope he calls,
Such Parrats has abused me and my Art
Apt scholars that has learned their tale by heart
That one, an Infant, can there sentence give
Ere it be born, and swears it cannot live.
To Detractours.
Presumptuous fools, when you my Art shall see,
Presented in a small Epitomie.
You Will not believe that if a little boat
Can with two oars upon the River float
With the like confidence a tall Ship can
Dance on the knees of the vast Ocean.
But take your swing, when parliament and state have been
And but one hand full of my skill have seen.
They by their candid judgments will with case,
Judge by the foot, the Height of Hercules,
And entertain my service, with my love,
It Is harder pleasing Gannamede then Jove.
For ease it is, in Royal court to find,
A Vasail currish, but a Master kind.
What? it is no sin to be an Enginere,
I wish Projecters half so honest were.
I wrack no lands, Raise no monopolies
Nor Pattents for my Countries hurt devise.
I with the water traffic, as well as land,
And would do good, if they would understand
But when I proffer them this pearl of mine,
They run to Cerses, she makes them swine:
And do so still for me, husks are as good
For such unsoul'd Brutes, as choicest food.
But when I shall from under water raise
A new invention up in my old days,
And bring in to effect a work that will
Do as much good as projects have done ill,
I hope when fame shall this my Art report,
My God and Country will both reward me for it.
Necessity compells (the more's his grief) That beggs employment for relief.

By Captain John Bulmer Engineer.

