LONDONS TRJUMPH: OR, The Solemn and Magnificent reception of of that
Honorable Gentleman, ROBERT TICHBORN, Lord Major: After his return from taking
his Oath at Westminster, the morrow after Simon and Jude day, being October 29.
1656.

With the Speeches spoken at Fosterlane-end and Soperlane-end.

blazon or coat of arms

London, Printed for N. Brook at the Angel in Cornhill. 1656.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAYOR OF THE City of LONDON: And the Right
Worshipful, the MASTER, WARDENS, and ASSISTANTS of the Company of SKINNERS.
Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful,
I Present you with these labors of my Pen as the first and newest Offering
tendered into your hands to welcome You to your new Office of Majoralty: and to
congratulate the Right Worshipful Company, which has produced a person so
well worthy to receive a dignity so well worth the Cities bestowing. May both
you and they find as much joy at the last day of your wearing it as at the
first day of your putting it on. J confess I cannot deserve to have these lines
accepted, yet I hope you will give them a courteous entertainment through the
nobleness of your good Natures: for to your lasting Memory I set this down,
and dedicate it to your generous dispositions, desiring nothing more then the
prosperity and glory of this renewned City.

Londons Triumph.
WEre it now the intention of our discourse to dwell upon so Noble a Theme, I
might quickly run beyond the limits of those few sheets to which I am tied, in
relating the glory and antiquity of this famous City. For as the Romans, to
dignifie their great and potent City of Rome, deduced the original thereof
from the Gods themselves; so do also our own Historians draw the foundation of
this mighty City from as high a beginning. It being by them affirmed that Brute
descended from the loins of Aeneas, the son of Venus, the daughter of Jupiter,
above a thousand years before the Nativity of Christ, built this City upon the
banks of the River Thames. It was afterward repaired and beautified by King
Lud, and called after his name Lud's Town, and in process of time, with a
small depravation of the pronunciation, London. But letting pass the first
foundation of it, the uncontrolled and fortunate estate thereof even to this
day, has given evident proof that it was built in a lucky hour, and marked out
for life and a long continuance. There being no City that has more flourished,
nor any City that has been less afflicted with calamities. And indeed whether
we consider the Politic government thereof, or the wealth of the Inhabitants,
or the privileges which it enjoyes, there are few Cities in the world may
compare with it. Mark the public government thereof, and say, where is less
disturbance among such a multitude of men thronged together. Consider the order
and decorum of the military force, being furnished with a body of well trained
and expert Soldiers for the defense thereof, as no where is to be found the
like. Consider the fair provisions made for poor and sick, and say where are to
be found Almshouses and Hospitals of larger extent and greater maintenance.

And though the learning of the Nation have its proper seat and abode, yet has
it for the admiration and recreation of strangers, Schools, Libraries and
Colleges of no small note and fame. And whereas Commonwealths and Cities
cannot have next under God any surer foundation then the love and good will of
one man toward another, as also of the people obeying to the Magistrate
Ruling, that also is closely kept and maintained in this City. And now I have
made mention of the Magistrates of this City, I shall likewise speak something
of the Antiquity of the government now in being. It is true, that in old time
the government of this City with the Law and customs used therein, were
registered in a book called Domus Dei or Doomsday book, which was written in
the Saxon language; but of latter times when those Laws and customs were
changed, that book was defaced, and the things therein imbazl'd and lost.
Notwithstanding we do find in other Records, that in the time of Edward the
Confessor, this City had two Governors, which were then called Portgraves,
which were no other then those who at this time are called Sheriffs. For these
Portgraves are in diverse Records called Viscounts or Sheriffs, because that
they then used the same authority as now the Sheriffs do. Others there be that
call them Aldermen or Judges of the Kings Court. In the time of Edward the
Confessor, there were two officers of this nature that governd this City, by
name William Bishop, and one other called Leofstane. In the time of Will. the
Conqueror, the aforesaid Will. Bishop and one Godfrey were Portgraves or
Sheriffs. In the reign of Will. Rufus, one Godfrey de Magnavile was Portgrave
or Sheriff; and Richard de Par, Provost or Major. In the reign of Richard the
first, Hugh Buche was Portgrave and Leofstane Provost. After them Aubery de
vere was Portgrave, and Robert Querel Provost. In this posture of government
stood the City till the beginning of the reign of Richard the first. Which gave
occasion to some Authors to liken and compare this City even to Rome it self,
It being in the first place divided into Wards: and secondly, having Sheriffs
instead of Consuls, and an assembly of Senators or Aldermen, together with
several Courts, or general meetings upon certain days. Now that we may come to
the Office of Major in particular, we must take notice that in the time of King
Richard the first, the Citizens of London obtained to have a Major for their
principal Governor, who was to enter into his Office at the feast of St.
Michael the Archangel. Of the grandeur of this dignity I shall speak more at
large by and by; It shall suffice at present to say thus much in reference to
the present occasion, that above fifteen of those who have sat in this seat of
honor and dignity, have been members of the worshipful company of Skinners; so
fruitful has that society been of worthy Patriots and Magistrates to uphold
the government of this City. The wealth of this City is apparent by the
sumptuousness of the buildings both private and public, and indeed I may
affirm that there have not been greater actions either of charity or
munificence done by any persons more then by the Citizens of this place. Great
Almshouses and Churches having been built by particular men. What good lier
sight can there be, then to behold such numbers of tall Ships riding as it were
under the walls of the City, so well fraught with the merchandise of the whole
earth; bringing in yearly such a mass of wealth as if all the world paid
tribute to this one City. So that the rich live splendidly, and the poorest are
free from want. To speak of the strength hereof, it is a City glorious for
manhood, potent in Arms, and furnished with such store of munition and
inhabitants, insomuch that it has showed in a muster-roll above 20000
Horsemen, and threescore 1000 footmen fit for war. For its privileges it has
many; but among the rest there is none more notable then the many marks of
favor bestowed upon those who have been Lord Majors, by several the Kings of
England, who seldom leave their Office without the honor of Knighthood
conferred upon them. Neither do they make this dignity less pleasing and
splendid to the people, by the pomp and gayety which is solemnly used when they
are sworn at Westminster. Which are performed upon this score, knowing that
Triumphs are that most choice and pleasant fruit that only springs from peace
and plenty. They are begot by love, all people being willing to contribute
toward the outward dignity of their Magistrates.

They are but the glorious beams and ornaments of State and Magnificence, which
add a light and luster to the Mansions and the titles of Governors. And when
they are but seldom done, they carry so alluring a shape, that Princes
themselves delight to behold them, there being this distinction between them
and the vulgar, that they behold them with delight; those, with admiration.
They are many times a debt due to Custom; which being done with a sumptuous
thriftinesse is laudable in a City so rarely governed as this. For the Chairs
of Magistrates ought to be adorned, and to shine like the Chariot of the Sun,
to dazzle and amaze the common Eye, and to make them know, there is something
more excellent in Magistracy then they understand, whereby they may be drawn to
a stricter and greater obedience. In a happy hour did his Lordship that now
governs this renowned City, being born a Citizen thereof, take upon him that
noble and ancient honor, who being a Person of such a generous mind, had the
happiness to meet with a Company equal to himself in spirit. Neither have they
shed the seed of their bounty upon an unfruitful and barren ground, which with
a soon ripe and liberal gratitude answers their expectation so fully. It was a
comely sight to see all the Companies striving to set forth and brighten the
glory of the day. For what Infamy could there have been greater, then now to be
morose, sullen, and niggardly, when all ears are listening for no news but
those of Feasts and Triumphs, and when all eyes are open to behold them? when
all the Nation seems to be drawn together, and to be Epitomized within the
Walls of her Metropolis. If you think what we have here said has been any
thing of flattery, let us but lead you to the River, and the Thames shall show
you all the Honors of this Day's Triumph; That being done, step again upon the
Land; and there again, the Land it self, thronged with multitudes of Witnesses,
will be an easy confirmation of what we shall declare.

In the first place, the loving members of the honorable Society exercising
Arms in Cripplegate Ground being drawn up together, marched in a military order
to the house of my Lord Mayor, where they attended on him, and from thence
marched before him to the three Crane Wharfe, where part of them under the Red
Colors embarked themselves in three several Barges; and another part took
water at Stone Stairs being under green colors as enemies to the other: and
thence wafting to the other side of the water, there began an encounter between
each party, which continued all the way to Westminster; a third body consisting
of Pikes and Muskets marched to Bainards Castle, and there from the
Battlements of the Castle gave Thundering Echoes to the vollies of those that
passed along the stream. Part before and part behind, went the several
Companies waiting on the Lord Mayor in several Barges, with Drums beating, and
Trumpets sounding, and variety of other Music to take the ear, while the
Flaggs and Silver Pendents made a pleasant sight delectable to the beholders.

When the Barges wherein the Soldiers were, came right against White Hall,
they saluted the Lord Protector and his Council, with several peales of
shot, which the Lord Protecter answered with signal testimonies of grace and
courtesy: and thence proceeding forward to Westminster-Staires, they gave
another volley at the landing of the Lord Mayor. While the Lord Mayor was
taking his Oath before the Barons of the Exchequer, both parties began a sharp
encounter one against the other, which continuing for a short space, the green
colors sounded a parley; which being accepted, both parties suddenly became
friends. Thus, being united, they attended the Lord Majors taking Barge again,
and as soon as he was on the Water, they all together gave him another volly,
as acknowledging him their present Governor, and the great Guns also gave him
a Thundering farewell as he passed by. Thence, returning to White Hall again,
the Soldiers saluted the Lord Protector with another volly, which being done,
they wafted down to Bainards Castle, the small short Thundering all the way, and
being still answered by those upon the Battlements of the Castle, who stood
ready to receive them at their landing, in Triumph. Thus the Lord Mayor and
Companies, together with the military Soldiers being landed, put an end to the
Water solemnity; than which there has not been a more graceful sight upon
the Thames ever since the City stood. The Lord Mayor being landed, the several
Companies went to their several stations appointed for them in the streets,
and the Lord Mayor being now ready to proceed on his way, the Military Band
marched before with Drums beating and Colors flying, all in a noble and
Warlike equipage: after them the aged Pensioners of the City, doing a kind of
small homage for their maintenance, went bearing the Escucheons of the City,
and several of the Members of that company out of which the Lord Mayor was
chosen.

After these came several Gentlemen-Ushers adorned with Gold Chains; behind
them certain rich Batchelours, wearing gowns furred with Foynes and upon them
Satin Hoods; And lastly after them, followed the Worshipful Company of
SKINNERS it self, whereof the Lord Mayor is a member. Next these, the City
Officers passing on before, rode the Lord Mayor with the Sword, Mace, and Cap
of Mainenance before him, being attended by the Recorder, and all the Aldermen
in Scarlet Gowns on Horseback. Thus attended, he rode from Bainards Castle into
Cheapside, the Companies standing on both sides of the way as far as the upper
end of the Old Jury, ready to receive him. When he was come right against the
Old Change, a Pageant seemed to meet him. On the Pageant stood two Leopards
bestrid by two Moors, attird in the habit of their Country; at the four
Corners sat four Virgins arraid in Cloth of Silver, with their hair
disheveld, and Coronets on their Heads. This seemed to be the emblem of a City
pensive and forlorn, for want of a Zealous governor: the Moors and Leopards,
like evil customs tyrannizing over the weak Virginity of undefended Virtue;
which made an aged man, who sat at the fore part of the Pageant, mantled in a
black garment, with a dejected countenance seem to bewail the condition of his
Native City; but thus he remaind not long: for at the approach of the Lord
Mayor, as if now he had espied the safety of his Country, he threw off his
mourning weeds, and with the following Speech made known the joy he had for the
Election of so happy and just a Magistrate.

The Speech spoken over against the Old Change:
AMazement vanish! Joy, instruct my Tongue,
To Express our wishes, such as the Romans sung
To their Patroni, when that Glorious State
By free Elections, became fortunate.
Though Honors, Marks of Envy are, we see
That your Election (Sir) was Envy free:
The Peoples Love; not sinister regard,
Gave to your Virtue, Sir, its just reward:
They knew your Worth, found you a Man most fit
For such a Trust, so seated you in it:
Son of a Freeman of this Company
Whose Virtues you inherit; Oh may we
Never want like Branches from so good a Tree.
Your Prudence, Sir, we Praise, your Active care
Both of the City's, and of our welfare.
Our hearts go with our wishes, none can be
Filled with more Joy then is your Company,
To see this Day; vouchsafe then to approve
The early tender of their Zealous Love.
THe Speech being spoken, the first Pageant past on before the Lord Mayor as
far as Mercers Chapel; a Giant being twelve foot in height going before the
Pageant for the delight of the people. Over against Soper-Lane End, stood
another Pageant also; upon this were placed several sorts of Beasts, as Lions,
Tigers, Bears, Leopards, Foxes, Apes, Monkeys, in a great Wilderness; at the
forepart whereof sat Pan with a Pipe in his hand; in the middle was a Canopie,
at the Portal whereof sat Orpheus in an antique Attire, playing on his Harp,
while all the Beasts seemed to dance at the sound of his melody. Under the
Canopie sat four Satyrs playing on Pipes. The Emblem of this Pageant seemed
proper to the Company out of which the Lord Mayor was elected; putting the
Spectators in mind how much they ought to esteem of such a Calling, as clad the
Judges in their Garments of honor, and Princes in their Robes of Majesty, and
makes the wealthy Ladies covet Winter, to appear clad in their sable Furrs. A
second signification of this Emblem may be this; That as Orpheus tamed the wild
Beasts by the alluring sound of his melody; so does a just and an upright
Governor tame and govern the wild affections of men, by good and wholesome
Laws, causing a general Joy and Peace in the place where he commands. Which
made Orpheus being well experienced in this truth, to address himself to the
Lord Mayor in these following Lines:

The Speech from off the Wilderness at Soper-Lane-End.
ORder, says Plato, is the Soul of things,
And from that Fountain every good Art springs:
Beasts become tame and useful, Man would be,
More fierce then they, did not Authority
Awe his unruly Actions, and loose will,
Making distinctions 'twixt the Good and Ill.
Good Governors like skillful Surgeons give,
Where useful, Corrosives, and also Lenitive
In its due place applies: without which,
Man would grow up into a lep'rous Itch.
And surround the whole Body: such a cure
Is properest for you, my Lord, whose Pure
Untainted Life and Reputation will
Make Virtue more Esteemed and cherisht still,
The Vicious see their want of Good, and be
Reclaimed to Virtue and to Piety.
So, Honored Sir, may Plenitude of days,
Crown all your Actions with deserved Praise;
And so rewarded in our City be
Found to Your Fame and honored Memory.
THe Speech being ended, the Lord Mayor rode forward to his House in
Silver-Street, the Military Bands still going before him. When he was in his
House, they saluted him with two Volleys of shot, and so marching again to
their Ground in Cripple-ga^e Churchyard, they lodged their Colors; and as
they began, so concluded this days Triumph.

How noble the Love of these Gentlemen was to his Lordship, was testified in
this their public expression of their Duty toward him. As for my self, I
should do ill to take upon me, the going about to give any luster either to the
exactness of their marshalling themselves, or to set down the bravery of their
Souldier-like Habits; that being a business not within the compass of my
performance. And besides this, there were so many more judicious Eyewitnesses
of their Gallantry, that it would be in me altogether superfluous.

Now for a conclusion to the Triumphs of this Day let me not deprive that
worthy Architect Mr. Jerman, of a debt so justly due to his ingenuitie, as is
the praise which he has merited by the handsome contrivance, neat curiosities,
and rare inventions wherewith he did adorn this Day's Triumph. Though I
confess, that the Courtesy done him is very small, where his own Works would
have spoken his praise, should I have been silent in my applause. I may add
this also as a farther Congratulation to that Honorable Person so lately
invested in the Di^nity of Maioralty, That he must needs be the most welcome
Governor that has for many years ruled this City; who comes bringing in his
hand the Olive Branch of Peace, restoring to the City those Ancient Customs of
Joy and Triumph, which formerly gave it the Title of the most Fortunate,
Plentiful, and Flourishing City in the World.

FINIS.

