A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF THAT Truly Pious and Faithful Minister of
Jesus Christ,

Mr. Nich. Thorowgood:

At Godelman in Surrey.

By JOHN BVCK, Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultrey,
over against the Stocks-Market. 1692.

To the REVEREND Mr. Edward Veal, Minister of the Gospel in Wapping.
SIR,
COULD I be ungrateful, your Name had never been prefixed to this Sermon: For
as you were pleased to command me this last Office of respect to the Deceased,
of which you gave me an Example but a few Months before on the like sad and
sorrowful Occasion that called us together as Mourners: So it is but Justice you
should allow me the liberty, when my dearest Friends go off the Stage so fast,
to express my Thankfulness for one living, whose Friendship is so greatly
valuable.

Any who know me, know I truly rejoice in the happy Relation that favors me
with the honor of calling you Tutor, or Brother. Reading, and Books, have been
but part of my small Improvement; Your Friendly and Affable Converse in your
Family, and since, has been such as I must blame my own Dullness for, if I have
not been advantaged thereby. We were ever mutually dear one to the other;
distance and absence have but heightened our Reciprocal Affections; that on
your part must be owned the result only of a kind generous Disposition; but on
mine, as a just Tribute paid to your real Worth.

And may it be yet our Emulation, which of us shall continue the most
Affectionately Cordial: May the God of Heaven long lengthen out your days of
Service to his Church; and Crown therein your Ministerial Labors with the most
blessed Success:

There are none more desirous of it, than is,

SIR, Your most Affectionate Brother, and Hearty Servant, JOHN BUCK.

PHILIPP. I. 23. For I am in a strait between two, having a desire to depart,
and to be with Christ, which is far better.
IT IS pity any private Christian of Exemplary Zeal for God and Religion, should
at any time go unlamented to his Grave; much more any serious, painful, and
laborious Preacher, that like the kind Silkworm, has spinned out his own
Bowels for the Public good, and been others loud Call from Sin and Vanity, to
the sincere Profession of the Gospel, as their highest Advantage and Gain.

We are greatly stupid, if we eye not their death (the most gainful to
themselves) as our own misery and loss, the loudest Alarm to a serious
preparation for our own Dissolution and Change, (that must as certainly
overtake us, as it has them) and the saddest indication of Heaven's severest
Displeasure against us, in the inundation of the heaviest Calamities, that by
their powerful Intercessions they might have kept off, and prevented, if there
be any thing of weight in the most sacred complaint; The righteous perishes,
Isa. 57.1.
and no man lays it to heart; and merciful men are taken away, none
considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come. And who can
forbear dropping a sigh, or weeping a tear, if not a flood, for the death of
him we have lately followed to the Earth, and seen covered up therewith, as a
much-to-be-lamented loss, as a Christian, and a Minister; and of justice
challenging a greater tribute of Respect to his Memory and Ashes than what yet
we have paid?

But leaving at present so Melancholy a Theme, the sad Occasion of our
Assembling; Let us come nearer the Text, that plainly tells us, Life or Death,
as they most effectually advance the Honor of Christ, should be the chief
matter of our Rejoicing and Triumph: But as it is hard to determine, whether
one or the other; the one in a painful service in his Church, the other in a
holy dying Profession of his Truth, has the greatest tendency thereunto; so a
difficulty oftentimes almost invincible attends the Choice.

As for the division of the Text, it naturally brancheth it self out into these
parts.

1st, (...).
St. Paul's sharp Conflict with each; For I am in a strait betwixt two; q. d.
Hemmed in with Difficulties, not knowing which to take, nor which to leave;
under a perplexity of mind, not capable of answering Arguments for one or the
other; A pressure of Spirit not to be expressed, as is elsewhere the import of
the Phrase, Luke 12.50. Acts 18.5.

2. One chief Reason thereof; His desire of being with Christ in a departure,
(Having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ.) This was what stirred up in
him as earnest longings for Death, as hopes of further service to his dear
Philippians, did of Life; or caused him to breathe out the most passionate
desires of quitting his abode on Earth, for that of Heaven; the Greek (...),
Having a desire; as it denotes the greatest permanency and constancy thereof,
not a sick or faint velleity, or sudden Passion, that soon vanishes and is
gone; so (...) to depart; it imports a dissolution of parts, of which we were
before composed, or the quitting of our Clayie Cottages, as persons do their
Houses in a Journey; or a Ship, the Shore in a Voyage.

3. His true judgment of that estate: Far, far, (...).
or much, much, the better; i. e. To himself as his own greatest personal Gain,
tho not to others; the other Reason of his strait, in what he next utters; V.
24.
Nevertheless to abide in the flesh, is more needful for you.

From whence arises this Threefold Doctrine.

Truly holy souls, when Life and Death are set before them, may be in a very
great strait as to their choice of either. Truly holy souls are immediately
with Christ at their departure from the body. To be with Christ at our death,
is far better than any bodily continuance on earth. Truly holy souls, when life
and death are set before them, may be in a very great strait, as to their
choice of either.
St. Paul was so, not willing of a cessation from works, nor the delay of his
Reward; desirous of converting more fouls to Christ, and yet longing to be
himself with him; in a strait whether he should be yet longer surrounded with
the most afflictive troubles, (as are those of this present life, of one kind
or another) or received to a Heavenly Enlargement and Rest. And what was his
Conflict, may be that of others, under different Apprehensions or Temptations.
At one time they are reasoning, (there is a Serpent every where with his
alluring Apple, except in the Heavenly Paradise); How can I leave this
plentiful Estate to the spoils of luxurious Spend-thrifts, riepend enough
without them for destruction? How this dear companion of all my earthly
comforts and sorrows? How these Children of my delights, standing as
Olive-plants about my table, Psalm. 128.3.
e're I can leave them Holy and Gracious? Might I not, if longer spared in the
world, be of farther use and service in it, than hitherto, through remissness
or sloth I have been? Are not threatened Judgments calling for Intercessors? I
might be one in the gap to prevent. Are not hungry bellies, and naked backs
calling for Relief? It will be, at the last day, my greatest Honor and
Happiness, Mat. 25.34. to the 40.
to have fed and clothed them? Are not dark, secure, and comfortless Souls
needing Counsels, Awakenings, and Supports? I Would spare no pains to Awaken,
Direct, and Cheer: And shall I be of farther use and service to neither? Have I
finished my whole work? Might no Talent be better improved; nor in any thing
the Honor of my dear Redeemer more advanced? Is his Church in her fullest
Glory, I would rejoice to see her in? Am I dying, ere Religion is living? And
soon again, as conquered by quite different motives, they are breathing out
quite contrary desires; pleading, When, Lord, shall I be released from this
present bondage and misery? When from this heavy load of Corruption? When from
the cruel buffetings of Satan? When from the grief I am in for the Afflictions
of thy Zion; for which I weep, Lam. 1.16.
mine eye, mine eye runs down with water? When from the tempting Flatteries,
and unkind Persecutions of this vain and foolish world, that would allure or
affright me from my Reward and Crown? When shall I exchange these dead, cold,
and heartless duties, for Triumphant Praises and Hallelujahs? When for
transient visits on earth, shall I have a permanent enjoyment of Thee in
Heaven? Ah! I see a beauty, a desirableness in nothing that can be matched with
thy All-Glorious Perfections: Husband, Wife, and Children are dear; but thou
art dearer to me than all; how it repents me, that I should place so much of
affection on them, as I have done. Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. Rev. 22.20.
Judge. 5.28. Cant. 8.14.
Why so slack in thy approaches? Why is thy chariot so long in coming? Why
tarry the wheels thereof? Make haste, my beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, or
young Heart upon the mountains of spices. But a little while, and I shall be
triumphing in thy blessed Arms and Bosom, where I shall sin no more, and sorrow
no more. A Pain, a Sigh, a Groan more, as the happiest I ever felt, finisheth
my days, and compleats my joys: And who longs not with me for the approach of
this hour? Shall I carry none with me to Heaven, as unwilling to be happy
alone! Holy David was in a strait, as to the choice of three the greatest
evils, Famine, Pestilence, and Sword. 2 Samuel 24.14.
The Saint is oftentimes so, as to two the greatest goods, the Work and Service
of Life, and the Reward and Gain of Death.

Censure not any for it.

2. Think Heaven desirable: Needs must it be so, as what frees us from every
pinching strait; particularly that of Living or Dying: For the Soul there, how
unwilling soever it was to quit this life, is wholly freed from any the least
inclination of returning back to it; under no more sharp conflicts of leaving
creature comforts; but triumphs in God, as better than all.

Truly holy souls are immediately with Christ at their departure. With him, as
in a state of Separation from their earthly bodies, so without the assuming of
any Aereal; there is not any more need of this, for a heavenly converse with
their fellow-Spirits, than of Angels one with another.

With him, as not sleeping in the Grave till the Resurrection, nor tormented
with Purgatory-Flames: As the former is an inlet to the greatest Infidelity and
Atheism, so the latter is greatly derogatory from the Riches of Free Grace in
their forgiveness and pardon, as implying a Punishment of a fault remitted; a
Forgiving the Treason, but Executing the Traitor: For which, may they continue
to plead, who experience the secular gain thereof, as of any the most
profitable fire in their Kitchen; others, as great Masters of Reason as
themselves, dare not: but, as fully redeemed by the Blood of Christ, from all
future pains and misery, can heartily laugh at those of an imaginary Purgatory:
For we are told, we have Redemption through his blood, Ephesians. 1.7.
the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace. And how far a
less noble Redemption and Forgiveness would it be, than he has obtained for
us, were we after this life to be refined for Heaven in Flames (according to
the Popish notion), not differing from those of Hell, Luke 23.43.
except in duration? The Converted Thief enters, the very day he suffered, into
Paradise: It is not to be thought, that no greater happiness was designed him
in the promise of it, than the assurance of it after some longer continuance of
time, Acts 7.59.
than the very present day in which it was made. Stephen cemmends his Spirit to
Christ at his Death. Our good works, Rev. 14.13. Eccl. 12.7.
as meant of their reward, are said to follow us. The dust to return to the
earth, as it was, and the spirit unto God that gave it. And (which seems to be
the most convincing Argument of it), Are or can they be rightly desirous of a
Dissolution, upon no other account? It is not to be supposed, Thinking,
Rational Creatures should be willing to part with Life, the greatest of
Temporal Blessings, for the Redemption of which, a man will give skin for skin,
Job 2.8.
and all that he has, for a silent state in the grave, or the most
insupportable of pains? No, rather strip them of their hopes of a present
happiness at death; and very unaccountable are their desires of it: They, as
knowing when the earthly house of this tabernacle is dissolved, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2.
they shall have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens; are groaning enrnestly, desiring to be clothed upon with their
house which is from heaven.

Don't be prejudiced against Religion, or a holy life, Exit is Peace; their
Reward, Life Everlasting; Psalm. 37.37. Gal. 6.8.
and their present sorrow and affliction, the blessed school in which they have
been disciplined and trained up for it. And will you continue to be so
prejudiced? Psalm. 119.67.
Live rather their lives, as you would dye their deaths. It is most foolish
without this to wish, Numb. 23.10.
Let me dye the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his.
Embrace Piety as your richest gain; avoid sin as your highest folly; and
remember, That as aged and stricken in years, the hoary head is a crown of
glory, Prove. 16.31.
when found in the way of righteousness; so as young, you are called upon to
Remember your Creator in the days of your youth: Eccl. 12.1.
The dedication of your youthful parts, strength, and vigor, to him and his
service, seems greatly intended, in that under the Law, Deuteronomy. 18.4. Chap. 26.2.
Mat. 21.15. John 21.7.
of the first fruits for Sacrifice. The Hosannahs of Children were pleasing to
Christ in the Temple: St. John, of any, his youngest Disciple, was evidently
his most beloved Disciple. On you, of any, are founded the fairest hopes of
being the most faithful Instruments of service in Church and State, in the room
of those deceased. You are, of any, both the joys and fears of indulgent
Parents, and painful Preachers; almost weary of this world, they can do no more
good in it; and you only are those that can turn the old Hellish Proverb, A
Young Saint, and an Old Devil; into what looks more like Truth, and appears
divine (be the Doctrine of our final Perseverance in Grace begun, acknowledged
such), a Saint in Youth, and a bright Angel for Holiness in Old Age; an Angel
in Youth, and a Seraphim in Glory.

To be with Christ at our death, is far better than any bodily continuance on
the earth.

In the prosecution of which, I shall only show,

1. How, or in what respects it is so.

2. The Use.

1. How, or in what respects it is so. And here, where shall I begin, or where
shall I end? What a work have I undertaken? How unfit am I to discourse of the
blissful state of departed souls in Heaven, who know so little of Souls or
Spirits on Earth? Shall I describe a City or Plantation I never saw or viewed,
but in the History or Map? Much less a future Glory, which I am sure much more
to fail in the description of? Methinks I hear it more than whispered, Who is
this that darkneth counsel, Job 38.2.
by words without knowledge? Stop thou stammering Tongue, and frail Mortal, thy
blackest Pen, with which thou art sure but to shade and darken what thou fondly
hopest in lively colors to paint out and enliven. 2 Cor. 12.4.
They were (...), words unutterable, or unspeakable, the blessed Apostle, the
great St. 1 Cor. 2.9.
Paul, heard in his highest Rapture; Eye has not seen, ear has not heard, nor
heart conceived, the things which God has prepared for them that love him. And
will thou attempt to tell us more? it is impossible, alas, impossible. But a
dark and blurred discovery being better than none, be pleased to take it in
this twofold particular only: viz.

1st, A total removal of all Evil.

2dly, The actual possession and enjoyment of all Good.

1. A total removal of all Evil; as of Sin, and Sorrow.

1. Of Sin. Sin our greatest burden here, Romans 7.24.
the which made us often to utter the Apostolic Complaint, Oh wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death! shall be none
then, but be destroyed rather; as in its Actings and Woundings, so in its very
Esse, or Being. Not a vain Thought, the sinfulness of which once enkindled in
the Almighty A repentance of his ever making man; Genesis 6.5, 6. Jer. 4.14.
and we are bid to dislodge. Not a vain Word; Our words are so far so, that we
may call most of them, what the Satyrist calls some, Pers. Sat. 5. Bullaras
nugas, utpote simile, Bullis vento plenis. Rev. 3.4.
Bubbly toys; they are so like a Bubble full of wind: not a sinning Principle,
a sinning Disposition, a sinning Inclination is then remaining. We are clothed
in White, the most lively Emblem of Holiness, and have Spirits made perfect.
Our Sanctification is complete; Heb. 12.23. 1 John 3.12. Ephesians. 4.13.
the Divine Image, in which we were at first formed, most blessedly restored.
And oh happy blissful State! that at once strips us of all our former rotten
Rags of Sin, and Lust, and most richly adorns us with those of a primitive
Perfection and Purity. How should this be the Mark and Prize we aim at! It was
that St. Paul did so, in, and under his greatest Spiritual Seize, Philip.
3.13, 14.

2. Of Sorrow. Sorrows of one kind or another attend every worldly Condition:
We come into the World with a Cry, and take our farewell of it with a Groan. One
(of any the severest of Sorrows) is bemoaning himself under spiritual
Desertions, the prevalency of Corruption, and Buffetings of Satan: Another
passionately weeping for the death of Relations; this day like Jonah's Gourd,
flourishing; the next, dead and withered. Now the delight of our Eyes, and the
chief of our Affections; Genesis 24.3.
but anon a dead Sarah that must be buried out of our sight. Another,
expressing his Poverty and Losses, through Plunderings and Persecutions:
Another, his restless days and nights through Pains and Sickness. But farewell
Sorrow, farewell Grief in Heaven, as no place for either. Then no more Devil to
assault and tempt us, nor malicious World to afflict and persecute us; no more
aching Head, sick Heart, burning Fever, grinding Stone, painful Cholick,
trembling Palsy, wasted Strength, mouldring Carcass; no more scoffing Ishmael,
profane Esau, spiteful Canaanite, scratching Thorn, pricking Brier; but an end
of sinning, and an end of sorrowing and weeping; an end of sinning, and an end
of dying; Rev. 20.4. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
a dying once, and a living with the Lord for ever.

And not only is it better to be with Christ at our death, than to enjoy the
longest bodily continuance here as to this twofold Evil of Sin and Sorrow, we
are fully delivered from. But,

2. As to the actual possession and enjoyment of all good.

1. A perfection of Knowledge. Here it is blemished with much imperfection and
ignorance. One who had made the sacred Scriptures his chief study, confessed,
Multo plura nescio quam scio, He was ignorant of more than he knew. And some of
the Jewish Rabbis the like, in their known Saying, Elias cum venerit solvet
omnia, Elias, when he comes, shall give a solution to all things, though we
cannot. But then shall all our present ignorance and imperfection be done away,
and our knowledge be no longer in part, but complete and perfect; not mediate,
or at the second hand only, by discourse, study and meditation; but immediate,
and intuitive. And that, as of God, his Divine Being and Perfections; 1 Cor.
13.12.
so of Christ his Mysterious Incarnation, Union of Natures without change of
Properties; and of the Holy Spirit of Grace, how the same in Essence, and yet
distinct as to Person. How Creation, Redemption and Sanctification, are the
proper work of one, or the other; and yet as works ad extra, alike applicable
to either. And of the most Mysterious Actings of Providence in the World, Job
10.3. Psalm. 73.16.
we could before give no account of, nor durst demand any. How we were
afflicted, and yet beloved; What Souls are, as to their Royal Original, and
what as to their most vivacious Actings; without the assistance of any
corporeal Organ; with innumerable difficulties, no Hypothesis in Philosophy can
give an exact solution of. Oh the knowledge that a Soul one minute in glory,
has of delightful Mysteries, beyond what on Earth we are capable of, by the
most painful Converse with Men or Books! He knows more than us all, and is
perfectly happy in the knowledge of what he knows; whilst in the knowledge of
many things we are miserable, and as to our knowledge of what we ought chiefly
to know, have reason to sigh out the complaint of our ignorance.

2. Exactness of conformity in every thing to the divine Image. For what Grace
in our blessed Conformity thereunto, is not then in its liveliest and highest
Exercise! Our Love, our Delight, our Joy and Rejoicing is so, if not Desire,
Faith and Fear wholly ceasing; As we actually enjoy the good or happiness we
wished for, believed, or dreaded the loss of. And as for our obedience in every
thing to the Divine Will, it is the most cheerful, constant and perfect; or to
what end do we pray, Thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven?

3. Constancy of abode. They are no longer complaining, Heb. 13.14.
We have here no continuing City. No more restless in their motions from place
to place, like Noah's Dove, that found no rest for the sole of her Foot, the
Waters had so covered the Earth; but plucked in rather by a tender hand into
the heavenly Ark, where they have rest perpetual, are fixed the Citizens of the
New Jerusalem, that City above, where they are for ever at home. And oh the
happiness of this, beyond what possibly at present we entertain the thoughts
of! It is so undoubtedly as to that Venerable, Gray Headed Disciple and Soldier
of our dear Redeemer deceased, of any man I have known, since he first left his
Public Living for the sake of conscientious innocent Nonconformity; His Life
appeared but one continued Journey and Travel from place to place; and no
removal thereof was apparently more his death's stroke, than his last, from his
Native County, and dear People of his Affections, as he often styled them, to
sing out his dying, sweet and Swan-like Notes with you.

4. Sweetest Harmony and Concord one with another. It seems the least of
doubts, that Souls departed know each other in Glory; Why not, as well as Adam
in the state of Innocence? Of whom it is said, that as soon as he awaked out of
his deep Sleep, He knew Eve to be bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh. And
no small part truly of their Happiness is it, that they have the highest
satisfaction and contentment one in another, as partakers of the same Rest, and
alike employed in the same most noble and delightful work of Praise.

Heaven admits of no Mistakes, nor misunderstandings one of another; and it is
pity this lower World should do it. There are no Treacherous Judas's to betray
us with a Kiss; nor faithless Friends, whose friendship is as vanishing as the
smoke and vapor; but rather a Hooper and a Ridley more fairly-shaking hands,
than ever they agreed in their Prisons. A Luther and a Calvin sworn Friends, or
rather a perpetual and everlasting Friendship, that shall never once be
violated; begun not only with known Friends deceased, but all the Holy
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs, we never before saw or knew. And
may there, as the liveliest Emblem of Heaven, be more of Brotherly Peace, Love
and Amity on Earth; May no trifling difference in Judgment separate Affections,
but each one for the future make it their only contention, who shall most
advance the Interest of the Lord Jesus in the World; and resolve to leave those
of lesser moment, to such as think they have greater Concerns to mind, than an
endless blessed Eternity we are professedly waiting, hoping, longing for, and
hastening to. And which follows on this,

5. Fullness, unspeakableness, and Eternity of Delight and joy.

1. Fullness, and unspeakableness. It is a Joy redundant and overflowing, yet
what admits of degrees, or it had never been said, They that be wise, Dan. 12.3.
shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to
righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. But every holy glorified Soul,
more or less capacious, is as truly full of it, as the lesser Vessel thrown
into the Sea, less capacious, yet is as full as the greater. Matt. 25.21. Psalm.
16.11.
A Joy too great to enter into us, for which we are bid to enter into it. A
Fullness inexhaustible, and that lasts for ever. A Joy that at present supports
under the most painful Tribulations, and Afflictive Losses. Romans 5.3. Heb.
10.34.
Primitive Worthies gloried therein; And took joyfully the spoiling of their
goods, as knowing they had in heaven a more enduring substance. A Joy, of which
God himself is the Author, which was of everlasting preparation, Matt. 25.34.
and the most affecting Subject of his dearest Son's Intercession. He had never
Grace more apparently poured into his Lips, Psalm. 45.2.
than when he uttered, These things I speak in the world, that they might have
my joy fulfilled in themselves. John 17.13, v. 24.
Or as the everlasting subject thereof he pleaded, Father, I will that those
whom thou have given me, be with we where I am, that they may behold the glory
which thou have given me; for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the
world. A Joy completely satisfactory; and that as to the place of it, Heaven;
excelling in glory all that is earthly. Luke 23.43. Rev. 21.10. Rev. 21.2. Luke
22.29. Luke 12.32. Matt. 25.32. Rev. 4.8. Rev. 2.10.
It is styled upon this Account, Paradise, the great City, the new Jerusalem,
the Kingdom prepared from the foundation of the world; the work of it, Praises
and Thanksgiving, of any the most noble and delightful: Its advancement,
Thrones, Scepters and Crowns; our Company, God, Christ, and glorified Beings.
And our heavenly Converse as with the former, so the latter, communicating
their thoughts to us, and we ours to them, in a way much more noble and
excellent, than that at present of our quaintest and exactest Oratory. Oh the
various Delights and Joys, resulting from each part of such our fullness and
variety of Happiness, yet no way diverting us from God the Chief; but leading
of us rather to the greater admiration of his rich Sovereign Love and Goodness,
in preparing each part of it for Creatures the most vile and unworthy; and the
highest thankfulness to him, for the Death and Satisfaction of his Son, by
which only it has been obtained and purchased. And,

2. Eternity. It is what shall never have an end. We are never more dreading
the clouding or Eclipses of it; but is a Life of joy that lasts for ever. A Joy
that is essentially complete at death, but will be every way so at the
Resurrection, in the reunion of our Souls to our Bodies; Phil. 3.21.
Fashioned like unto Christ's most glorious body. It being then this despicable
Clay shall arise incorruptible and immortal, 1 Cor. 15.53.
and be alike Partners in glory with our Souls, as they have both been so in
work and service. Eternally in glory, for ever with the Lord: And oh madness
unspeakable, to prefer the greatest Comforts and Enjoyments of Life, before
such the greatest Happiness and Joy at Death! Oh what are Riches, Honors, and
worldly Greatness, that you should put them into the same Scale! Alas, but vain
and empty dead Comforts, dead Enjoyments, that speak you as foolish in the
hugging of them, as was the Egyptian in that of the Carved Image or Statue of
his dead Son; he hoped with Crowned Garlands, and a profound respect paid to
it, would have been the total cure of his Sorrow; but as the Historian tells
us, proved rather the life and resurrection thereof. They are but sweet Dishes,
Death with his Voider will soon sweep away, leaving you only a cutting
Reckoning to pay, for the full feast and meal of them you have made. They are
but Comforts and Enjoyments that are every day on their wing from you, were not
you so from them. Prove. 23.5.
And will you then continue to do this? haste rather from their tempting
Destruction; make sure of more satisfactory Delights, I mean those of a
heavenly State, which righteous Souls, as the former Doctrine tells you,
presently partake of at their Death. And this last they are most unspeakably
happy in, beyond any the longest bodily continuance on Earth.

But to hasten to a more practical improvement of what has been said. As,

The USE let it be inferred,
1st, Oh the dreadful Misery of the Damned! For if to be with Christ at our
death, is so desirable; to be banished from him then, must needs be dreadful.
Oh the sad exchange they have made of this Life, for what is future. Tongue
cannot express the least part of their Torment and Sorrow, and that from the
dismal place they are in, set forth to us in all the doleful Expressions of
Horror; Isa. 30 ult. 1 Pet. 3.19. Rev. 20.3. Matt. 13.42. Rev. 19.20. Luke
16.28. Matt. 22.13. 2 Pet. 2.4. Jud. 13.
as of Tophet, a Prison, Bottomless Pit, Furnace of Fire, Lake of Fire, Place
of Torment, Outer-Darkness, Chains, and Blackness of Darkness. Their Eternity,
Ever, Ever, being as a thousand Daggers wounding, or Scorpions stinging; and
the Accusations of Conscience still gnawing them, like Prometheus his Vulture,
for their inexcusable folly, as in running themselves upon the Misery they
might so fairly have avoided; so in losing the God, the Savior, the Kingdom
and Glory they might have gained. And shall then the Offers of each be slighted
any longer by you? Why so foolishly contented to be miserable, when wooed to be
happy? Trifle not away one offer of Grace more, lest it be your last.

2. Be less dismayed, if holy and righteous, at the approach of death, as to
your selves; and learn more to moderate your sorrow for that of others, you had
reason to believe such.

1. Be less dismayed, if holy and righteous, at the approach of death, as to
your selves. It is alas! as to you, but an enemy unstung and disarmed, if in
its self the King of Terrors; Job 18.14
what but lodges your Bodies in a Grave, the most sweetly perfumed by the
Burial of the Son of God, and your Souls with him in endless Happiness; and so
as Conquerors, already over each, bids you to Triumph, Oh death, where is thy
sting? Oh grave, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57.
where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is
the law; but thanks be to God, who gives us the victory, through our Lord
Jesus Christ.

2. Learn more to moderate your sorrow for that of others, you have reason to
believe such.

For how should the sense of their Gain, swallow up all repinings at your Loss,
and excite you to as great a willingness of parting with them, as any have to
the parting with their Children to the remotest ends of the earth, for the sake
of Temporal Advancements. Methinks upon this account sorrow too often usurps
the Throne of Joy. We should even be weeping at the Birth of an Infant, and
rejoicing at the Death of a Saint: Or if (which Nature allows us) the eye must
drop a tear, and the poor pained heart ease it self in sighs and groans, it
should be for this chiefly, That they have gotten so much the start of us, as
to be at their Kingdom and Rest before us: Which as we are called to in the
deaths of others, so particularly in that of this Worthy Person deceased:
Concerning whom I may modestly speak, That if his Soul be not now with his
Redeemer in Heaven, there are but few of us who have not reason to despair of
getting thither. So heavenly truly, and spiritual at all times were his words
and discourse, that we might have thought him unfit for earth, long before he
left it. His Observation of the Lords Day, was most exemplary, as never (tho
most mornings the earliest riser) sooner from his bed, nor later in it; even
impatient through the whole of it, of having his Mind and Ears filled with
worldly Concerns, or to see any part of it unredeemed. And as for his Industry
and Painfulness in his Ministerial Work, where he last was, both in Lectures
and Fasts, it must be confessed, He labored more abundantly than us all. 1
Cor. 15.10.


His Affections to you, in his coming to you, drowned greater Offers; as
thinking himself more happy in the Affections, than the Fleece of his Flock:
And how painful and acceptable his short-lived Labors were among you, needs no
fuller a proof, than his Last Sermon he Preached, with Death's cold Dart
stricken to his heart; and the general Lamentations you express for him. Upon
the Death of his dearest Relation, in very affecting expressions he uttered the
deepest sense of his own; he was heard thus to express himself, The Lord fit
those whose turn is next: Ah! What would I not do, what would I not forgo for
Christ and Heaven? And where is he now, but with him, reaping the full Reward
of all his Painful Labors? Not complaining any longer with his dearest Lord,
John 1.11.
He came to his own, but his own received him not: Nor bleeding under the
unkindnesses of Friends or Enemies: But as to his own fullness of Joy, and the
miseries that seem to threaten you, speaking, tho dead, the same Language the
other did, Luke 23.28.
Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for
your children. And surely, as his gain, you should acquiesce in your loss; for
can you bring him back again? It is impossible: The Grave, his Prison till a
Glorious Resurrection, has shut its mouth upon him. You must go to him, 2 Samuel
12, 22, 23.
he shall not return to you. Or if you could, would you? The greatest good you
could thereby wish or hope for your selves, is not what would compensate for
his harm: He is arrived at too happy a Port, ever once more willingly to
encounter the Rocks and Quicksands, the rough Waves and Billows of a
Tempestuous Sea; the dangers of which are passed; the consideration of which,
should teach you to be quiet; be dumb, not opening of your mouths, Psalm. 39.9.
it is God who has done it. Receive cheerfully a present evil from those
hands, Job 2.10. Job 1.20, 21.
from whence you have received so much good: Bless him taking, as well as
giving. But that it may not be thought I plead for a Stoical insensibleness
under so severe a stroke, let not tears or sorrow take up with a present vent.
It is a Death-stroke Heaven has given; a Loss that will not easily be
repaired: But let him continue to live in your Thoughts, and to Preach in your
Affections. It should be as hard for you now he is deceased, to refrain from
telling the world in plenty of tears over his Grave, how well you loved him, as
it was with many of you, John 11.36.
when you stood by him in his Ascent to Glory, to refrain from uttering, My
father, 2 Kin. 12.12.
my father, the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. And

3. Long more to be with him therein. Gain is alluring, and should not that of
your being with Christ in your death be so? If far better evidence is such by
your desires of it, as well as in the vanquishing the slavish fears of so grim
a Messenger that must bring you to it; make haste, prepare for it; yet not such
haste as he made to know the truth of the Souls Immortality, who leaped into
the Sea, and drowned himself, for a farther confirmation thereof, he was so
affected with the Platonic Lecture of it he had read; but by Holy Preparations
and Desires, our only way through the Merits of a Redeemer, the Scritpure has
chalked out thither: O for a greater weanedness of affection from the perishing
delights and joys of the world, and greater outgoings of them to the unseen
and Immortal. Let the one be more in your eye, the other more under your feet.
Look well to every account, improve faithfully every Talent; live every day,
perform every duty as your last, that when you cease to live, you may not be
afraid to dye; but be filled rather with St. Paul's Triumph, with which I
close, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I
have kept the faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day,
and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Tho. Cockerill.
RVSHWORTH's Historical Collections, 2d Part, never before Printed; containing
the Principal Matters which happened from the meeting of the Parliament 1640.
to the end of the year 1644. in 2 Vol. Fol. A Funeral Sermon on the Death of
the Reverend Mr. West. A Discourse concerning Regeneration, Faith, and
Repentance. A Discourse of the Christian Religion, in sundry Points. The
Incomprehensibleness of Imputed Righteousness for Justification, by Human
Reason, till enlightened by the Spirit of God. These Four by the Reverend Mr.
Cole. A Succinct and Seasonable Discourse of the Occasions, Causes, Natures,
Rise, Growth and Remedies of Mental Errors; with a Discourse of Infant Baptism,
and against the Antinomians. A Discourse of the Reasonableness of Personal
Reformation, and Necessity of Conversion. Mr. John Flavell's Remains; being two
Sermons: The one Preached at Dartmouth, the other intended to be preached at a
Meeting of Ministers. These Three by John Flavell, late Minister of Devon. A
Companion for Prayer: By R. Alleine, Author of Vinditiae Pietatis.

