A JUSTIFICATION Of two Points now in Controversy with the ANABAPTISTS
Concerning Baptism: The first is, That Infants of Christians ought to be
Baptized, with grounds to prove it, and their Objections answered.

With a brief Answer to Master TOMBS twelve doubtful Arguments against it in
his Exercitation about Infants Baptism.

Also a brief Answer to Captain HOBSONS five Arguments in his falacy of
Infants Baptism, being (as he says) that which should have been disputed by
him, and Mr. Knowles, and some others; against Mr. Calamy and Mr. Cranford.

The second Point is, That the Sprinckling the Baptized more agrees with the
mind of Christ then Dipping or Plunging in or under the Water: With grounds to
prove it, and a brief Answer to what they have to say against it.

By T. B.

Joh. 3.1. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whither they
are of God, because many false prophets are gone out into the world.

Imprimatur John Downham.

London printed for Henry Sheperd at the Bible in Tower-street, and for William
Ley at his shop in Paul's Churchyard near Doctors Commons. 1646.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, considering it ever was, and still is the custom of all
Christian Churches in the world to baptize their Infants, and to sprinkle the
Baptized; although it has been long opposed by the Anabaptists, yet they never
left it in any age; then although those men have published many Books of late
against it, and no Answer to them is yet come forth, which makes them ready to
say with the King of Assyria, I have gathered all the earth, and there was none
that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or peeped forth against it, Isaiah
10.14. Yet let not this little book be despised for the unworthiness of the
Author, but read it till some more able hand shall move for thy better
satisfaction; thou know not but God may sometimes hide things from the wise
and prudent, and reveal them to babes, because it so pleases him, Luke 10.21.
Aquilla and his Wife took Apollo that was mighty in Scriptures, and showed him
the way of God more perfectly, Acts 18. Naaman hearkened to his Maidservant,
when she told him of a Propher in Israel that would cure him of his Leprosy;
and to the advice of another servant, to observe the Prophets directions, 2
King. 5. Then look not on the Author, but weigh the matter and arguments in the
balance of the Sanctuary, and if they hold weight give God the praise, and me
thy prayers; and I shall remain thine in all Christian duties to be commanded

Thomas Bakewell.

The first Point in Controversy with the Anabaptists is, That Infants of
Christians ought to be Baptized: the grounds to prove it are these following.
FIrst, if Christ commanded, and his Apostles practiced the Baptism of
Infants, then it ought to be done; but Christ commanded to Baptize all Nations,
whereof Infants are a part, Mat. 28.19. and the Apostles Baptized whole
Households, whereof Infants are a part, Acts 16.15.33. 1 Cor. 1.16. therefore
Infants of Christians ought to be baptized.

Secondly, if Christian Infants have the promise to be baptized with the Holy
Ghost, then they ought to have the outward form of Baptism; but the Holy
Ghost is promised to Christians and their children, Acts 2.38, 39. therefore
their children ought to be baptized.

Thirdly, If Infants of Christians be separated from Turks and Infidels by
virtue of their Parents Baptism, then they ought to be Baptized; but Infants
of Christians have this mark of distinction, For now says Paul, Your children
are holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. that is, they have an outward sanctification, being
distinguished from Infidels, for the visible Church therefore they ought to be
Baptized.

Fourthly, If Christ did admit Infants to come unto him, and blamed them that
would keep them back, and giving this testimony of them, that those little
children which he had in his Arms did believe on him, and that they had a
right to the Kingdom of Heaven, then they ought to be Baptized; But the first
is true, Mat. 18.3.6.19.13.14. Mark 9.36.10.14.10. Luke 18.15.16. therefore
Infants of Christians ought to be Baptized.

Fifthly, If infants of Jews were circumcised, and Christ came not to take
away that benefit from them, but to change it to a better and larger benefit,
from Males alone to Males and Females, and from one Nation to all Nations, and
from a painful duty to an easy duty, then I say that Christian infants ought
to be Baptized as well as the Jewish infants were circumcised; but Christ never
repealed that Command, but did enlarge it to all Nations, Mat. 28.19. and to
both men and women, Acts 8.12.16.15. therefore Christian infants ought to be
baptized.

Sixthly, if the Apostles business was only to convert men of years from
false religion to the Christian Religion, before they did admit them to
Baptism, and did not wait till they were converted, from the state of
corrupted nature to the state of Grace, because they knew no man's heart, having
the first conversion they baptized many without the second; then Christian
infants who have no falls religion to be converted from, ought to be baptized,
although they be not converted from the state of corruption to the state of
Grace; but the Apostles only required men to believe that Christ was the Son
of God, the Eunuch believed this and was baptized, and Simon Magus believed
this and was baptized, although still in the gall of bitterness, and in the
bonds of iniquity, Acts 8.12.23.37. and many believed the Scripture, and the
words of Jesus, many believed in his name, yet Christ would not trust them
although they were his Disciples, for he knew their hearts, and needed not that
any should testify of them, yet those went away from Christ and never returned
to him, Joh. 2.23, 24.6.66. this shows they had only the first conversion,
and not the second; and Jewish infants were circumcised, if the Parents was but
of their Religion, never waiting for the childs conversion from corrupted
nature to the state of Grace, and Christians have as much power to bring up
their children in the Christian Religion, as they had to bring them up in the
Jewish Religion; then it is a clear truth that Christian infants ought to be
baptized.

Their Objections are next to be answered.
FIrst they Object; If they must first be taught before they be Baptized, then
infants may not be baptized; but the first is true, Mat. 28.19. ergo, so is the
second. I ans. The teaching them to observe, and to do all that is commanded
in that place, follows both Preaching and Baptism that both may be observed;
else it were to affirm that Christ would have one Ordinance to be observed and
not the other, when as he says, Observe and do whatsoever I have commanded
you; ver. 19.20. And to say Teaching is first set down is not much to the
purpose; if it be, then John did Baptize in the Wilderness, and then it is
said, he Preached the Baptism of Repentance, Mark 1.4. and Christ says, A man
must be borne of water, and then of the Spirit, John 3.5. and John the Baptist
said, I baptize you with water, but he comes after that baptizeth with the holy
Ghost, Mat. 3.11. but Master Tombs says, To baptize infants is to baptize
those whom the Lord has not appointed to be baptized; and yet he grants, that
infants may be baptized with the holy Ghost, and might be baptized if they were
known to us from that Text, Acts 10.47. But says he, To baptize infants
because Christ commands to Baptize all Nations is very faulty; First in casting
away that restriction which Christ has put. Secondly, in determining that all
men whatsoever are to be baptized, and so it is no privilege to believers and
their children, But as common to Infidels as to their children. I answer. Here
he denies the command of Christ to be a Rule, and would make a restriction
where Christ makes none, and then he makes a false conclusion, as if he ever
said, or did intend to baptize the children of Infidels before their Parents be
taught the Covenant, and so by baptism were admitted into the Christian
Church, but yet in other places he says himself, that believers children have
no privilege above the children of Infidels, but because he slights this
general command to all Nations, which includes all sorts of Mankind, because
he has not a special command for Infants only, I may say to him as Christ
said to the Pharisees, when they said, to swear by the Temple was nothing, but
he that swore by the gold of it was a debtor; so the command to Baptize all
Nations is nothing, unless it were for infants only, when as the Temple
sanctifies the gold, Mat. 23.16.17. and the whole Nation includes infants, but
he must have them Disciples first, because it was reported that Christ made and
baptized Disciples, John 4.2. when as he grants it to be a false report,
therefore nothing can safely be drawn from it, but I shall give a further
answer to this, and Captain Hobsons third agreement together. Again, suppose
we grant that men of years, who are converted from false religions to the true
Christian Religion, that such must be taught the Covenant, being capable of
Teaching before they have the token of it given to them; thus it was with
Abraham, and with many Heathens when they were converted to the Jews religion;
but when they were admitted their infants had a right to it without any
teaching going before; and when they were capable they taught them the Covenant
as they were commanded, Deuteronomy. 4.10.13. and so they taught them the meaning of
the Passover, Exodus 12.26.27. then why may not Christian infants be taught the
Covenant after they have received the token of it as well as Jewish infants.
Again, as they were mere passives when they received the token of the
Covenant, so are our infants, the work is done upon them therefore they may be
baptized.

Secondly, they Object, That if they must repent before they be baptized, then
infants may not be baptized; but the first is true, Acts 2.38. ergo, so is the
second. I answ. It is true in men of years that are converted from Heathens to
the Christian Religion, but it is neither required of Jewish infants before
Circumcision, nor of Christian infants before Baptism; for as they Circumcised
their infants, so John baptized them before or unto repentance, Mat. 3.11.
therefore Christian infanta ought to be baptized; but what if the Saduces and
Pharisees, and the bloody Murderers of Christ be called upon to repent before
either John, or Peter will admit them to baptism, will it follow that infants
of Christians must do so actually before they be admitted to Baptism? the one
of these was a generation of Vipers, having the leaven of false doctrine that
must be purged out, Mat. 16.13. else like Vipers it would eat out the heart
and life of Christian Religion, Mat. 3.7. and the other was the leaven of
prophannesse, which like savage Beasts would trample Religion under their feet,
then this also must be purged out, 1 Cor. 5.7.13. then as both must be purged
out, so they must be both kept out. But will it follow, that infants must
repent of Murders and Heresies before they be admitted to Baptism, let them
that would have them to repent of those foul sins prove them guilty of them,
or else they are very unjust to debar them of the Privileges of the Church,
and actually Excommunicate them without any trial or just proof against them,
and till then we must hold that they ought to be baptized.

Thirdly they Object, If none must be Baptized but such as are called, then
Infants of Christians may not be Baptized. But the first is true, Act 1.39.
ergo, so is the second. I Answ. It is true, to those afar off, they must be
called to the Christian Religion, but it is not true to Christians already
called, nor required of their Infants any more then it was of Jewish Infants,
for by virtue of their call their Children are holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. and ought to
be baptized.

Fourthly, they Object, That if none must be baptized but those that confess
their sins, then Infants must not be baptized. But the first is true, Mat.
3.6. ergo so is the second. I answ. This also is true in men of years, who are
converted from Heathenisme to the Christian Religion; so it was when any were
converted to the Jewish Religion, but what is this to Infants, either Jews, or
Christians. Again, when multitudes came to John to be baptized of him, some
few of them might confess the sins of all, as being the mouth of the people
to God, as any Minister is in his Congregation, then this hinders not; but
theirs and our Infants may be baptized.

Fifthly, they Object, if none must be baptized but such as believe, then
Infants may not be baptized. But the first is true, Mark 16.16. Acts 8.36, 37.
ergo, so is the second. I Answ. If none but such as we know do truly believe
must be baptized, then we must baptize none at all, because we know no man's
heart, and Faith is that new name written which none knows but he that
receives it, Revel. 2.7. Again, if none must be baptized but true believers,
and we cannot know them, we may soon mistake, and set the token of the
Covenant upon Reprobates, and refuse to give it to the Elect. Again, Christ
said, Those little ones that he took in his Arms did believe in him, see Mat.
16.6. compared with Luke 9.26, and their hearts may as well be known to us as
the hearts of men of years, for we know the hearts of none. Again, that faith
that was required was but to believe that Christ was the Son of God, and that
the Christian Religion was the true Religion; but Infants of Christians have
taken up no false Religion, then it need not be required that they should
believe the true, being brought up in none other. Again, to baptize none but
those that do truly believe were the direct way to cast out the token of the
Covenant altogether, because we cannot truly know them, then we ought not to
neglect this duty to baptize Infants.

Sixthly, They say, if none ought to be baptized but such as make profession of
justifying faith, then Infants ought not to be baptized; but Infants cannot
make such profession. And says Master Tombs, Neither John the Baptist, nor
the Apostles would baptize any without some shows of faith and repentance. And
although he grants, that Infants may have a right to Heaven, yet they must not
be baptized till that appear. But I say, their hearts will never be known to
us, then they had as good say they shall never be baptized, as to say, they
shall not be baptized till they know their hearts. Again, would not the
Apostles baptize any unless they profess a lie, and that in the presence of
Christ who knew their hearts, and then might they lawfully be baptized when
they had professed a lie in the presence of Christ, for they baptized always
in his presence before his death, John. 3.22.26.42. that they might be his
Disciples and not theirs. And would Christ have all those to profess that they
had true justifying faith? when as he knew their hearts and would not trust
them, John. 2. v. 23, 24. What horrible blasphemy is this? No, they were
required but to believe that Christ was the Son of God, and his Religion was
the true Religion, and then they had right to Baptism in the approbation of
Christ and his Apostles; and their parents profession might be imputed to the
child, because they have power to bring them up in that Religion they profess,
as well as the Jews had power to bring up their Infants in their Religion;
neither had their Infants any other profession but that of their parents; then
christian Infants may as well be baptized as Jewish Infants were circumcised.

Seventhly, They object against my second ground, saying, The gift of the Holy
Ghost there promised, Act. 2.39. is not the sanctifying Gift, but the gift of
Tongues, and miracles to cast out Devils, and to cure all manner of diseases,
Mark. 16.17. I answ. John the Baptist was filled with the Holy Ghost from his
mothers womb, Luke 1.15. to show that as he was fit for Baptism from the
womb, so he should judge of others: Neither could that be the gift of tongues,
nor the gift of miracles as soon as he was born, but the gift of sanctification
which Jeremiah had before he was borne, Jer. 1.5. Then if Infants may be so
baptized with the Holy Ghost, we may not deny them the outward form of
Baptism. But says Master Tombs, That promise is to Jews that were called of
the sending of Christ, from these Texts, Act. 3.25.26.13.32.33. This we grant.
But then he says, Mention is made of a Promise, not as of it self, yielding
right to Baptism without repentance, but as a motive to those that repent and
are baptized. But to this we grant, that Baptism without repentance is of no
value; But when we hear the Baptism of the Holy Ghost is promised to
christian Infants, and they have power to bring them up in the christian
Religion, then I would know why such may not be baptized, having no false
Religion to repent of, and the promise of the inward Baptism; thus sure their
parents that have power to bring them up in the true Religion, have also power
to set the mark of a christian upon them, to be known from Turks and
Infidels. But then he says, That Promise was made to Jewish Infants, and
therefore not to christian Infants, but this is a mere cavil against the
Text, and not worth answering.

Eighthly, They object against my third ground, saying, That the holiness
which children have from their parents, is nothing else but this, those parents
have a sanctified use of them, for unto the pure all things are pure, Tit.
1.15. I answer, If all things be pure unto them, then other men's children, yea
Infidels children are pure unto them, yea the stones and Beasts of the Field
are at peace with them, Job. 5.23. yea they have a sanctified use both of the
evil of sin and the evil of punishment, for all things shall work together
for their good that love God, Romans 3.28. but this benefit comes not by marrying
of believers, but by our marriage with Christ; but this had been to small
purpose for Paul to say, That believers have a sanctified use of their
children, when as he had not only said before, they have a sanctified use of
them, but of all things else; then the meaning is this, they have such a
holiness as the Jews had, to distinguish them from other Nations, to be of
the church of God, a holy Nation; so Infants of christians are distinguished
from Turks and Infidels, to be of the visible church, as well as the Jewish
Infants by this mark of distinction: now they are holy, therefore they ought
to be baptized. But Master Tombs says, That holiness spoken by Paul, 1 Cor.
7.14. is nothing else but this, they are legitimate, that is, they are not
bastards. To this I answer, That the Corinthians were Gentiles or Heathens
before Paul preached amongst them, and by his preaching some times he converted
a wife to the christian Religion, and could not convert the husband, and
sometimes the husband and not the wife, but if either of them was converted
from their dumb Idols wherein they were led, 1 Cor. 12.2. to the christian
faith, now, says Paul, your children are holy: It seems when either of them
was converted the great question to the Apostle was this, Whether their
children had a right to the Ordinance of Baptism, and so to all other
privileges of the christian church? To this a secret answer is employed, That
they had a right to all the Ordinances and privileges of the christian church,
for now, says Paul, your children are holy, that is, they are distinguished
now from Heathens and Infidels children, so that now one of the parents is
become a christian, it cannot be said now that they are Infidels children; but
when both the parents were converted to the christian Religion, then the matter
was out of question, so that then they need not ask whether their children
should enjoy the privileges of the christian church; this being the true
genuine meaning of the Text: Now let us see what truth is in Master Tombs
interpretation of it, saying, Now they are legittimate, now they are not
bastards; but can any rational man think this, that if a man's wife was
converted to the christian Religion, that then she would come to the Apostles
to ask them whether or not their children were bastards; could any man living
tell that better then she her self; if she were a whore then they were
bastards, but not else. Again, them that were lawfully married before Paul
came amongst them, and had children, they were not bastards by Master Tombs
own confession; but says Paul of those children, that they were unclean
then, but now says he, they are holy, because one of the Parents is become a
christian, now those children are not heathens but christians; so then, if the
same children which before were unclean, and now are holy by the conversion of
one of the Parents, it must needs be such a holiness to distinguish them from
Infidels, to be of the true christian Church; then he that denies this truth,
must needs draw this conclusion, that the same children which before Paul came
there were bastards, but now one of the Parents is converted to the christian
Religion, those children that were bastards and unclean, are now holy and no
bastards. Again, shall we be such fools, as to think, because the husband is a
Christian, that his christianity will so sanctify his wife, that she cannot
have a bastard, or will her being a christian so sanctify her husband that he
cannot have a bastard; if this were true, then how comes it to pass that we
have so many bastards in Engl. when both the husband and the wife profess
themselves to be christians, and yet sometimes both of them are so profane as
to have bastards? then I say, that holiness spoken of by Paul is that mark of
distinction to be known from Turks and Infidels to be of the visible Church of
Christ, and therefore have a true right to baptism, and so to all other
Ordinances and privileges of the christian Church, although infancy or
sickness may hinder them from some of them, yet it cannot from baptism, being
only passive, the work is done upon them, and no action required of them,
therefore they may and ought to be baptized.

Ninthly, they object against my fifth ground, saying, that command of God
ceased, which did command to set the token of the Covenant upon Jewish Infants,
when Christ came and changed that token of circumcision into baptism: But I
say, the command remains, although the token be changed; as for instance: God
commanded the children of Israel to keep holy the seventh day, for it was the
Sabbath of the Lord their God; but this command remains, although by Christ
the day was changed; and so for other commands to Israel, thou shall have no
other gods but me; thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor bow
down unto it, nor take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; but although the
Church of the Jews be cut off, and the christian Church grafted in, we may not
say these commands were repeald when the Church was changed, and so conclude
that Christians may have other gods, and bow down to them, and worship them,
and take the name of Isreal's God in vain, because the command was not made to
us, but to them; nor keep no Sabbath, because the command was made to them and
not to us; nor set the token of the Covenant on our children, because it was to
them and not to us, because our Church and Sabbath, and token of the Covenant
was all changed; then unless you be minded to cast off God, the Sabbath, the
Sacraments, the true Religion, let your children be baptized.

Tenthly, they object, saying, those that have a right to one of the
Sacraments, have a right to both, but Infants have no right to the Lords
Supper, because they cannot examine themselves, nor remember the death of
Christ, nor discern his body in the Sacrament, then Infants may not be
baptized. I answ. Those impediments that hinder them from receiving the Lords
Supper, are no impediments to hinder them from Baptism, because nothing is
required in the baptized Infants; they are merely passive, the work is done
upon them, when as the Lords supper requires many actions, as to take, eat, do
this, in men of age and understanding. Again, I doubt not but Infants have a
right to both Sacraments, and all other Ordinances, although by natural
infirmities they are for the present disabled from some of them, as by
sickness or infancy; yet this hinders not, nor disables any from Baptism,
therefore Infants ought to be baptized, although baptism is not of absolute
necessity where it cannot be had, yet this contempt of it is damnable, but in
times of persecution, or in a journey, it may be deferred, as Israel did in the
Wilderness forty years, Josh. 5.5. but they might not do so in Canaan, for if
they do, it may be their children when they come to age would despise that
Ordinance, and then they are to be cut off from Israel, because they have
broken the Covenant, Genesis 17.14. and how do these men know but their children
will despise the covenant when they come to age? Nay, I dare say, it is the
only way to make them despise it when they come to age; for it is said, all
the people that heard Christ, and the Publicans, justified God, being baptized
with the baptism of John (that is) with water, Mat. 3.11. but the Pharisees and
Lawyers rejected the Council of God, being not baptized of John, Luke 7.29.30.
And it were a just judgment of God upon such Parents, that will not set that
mark of distinction, to sever their children from Turks by baptism, that they
should never be severed from corrupted nature to the state of grace; then to
avoid this, let them be baptized.

Eleventhly, they object, that if Christ, who says, learn of me, was not
baptized till he was 30 years old, then Infants must not be baptized, Luke
3.23. But the first is true, ergo, so is the second. I answ. It is true that
Christ bad us learn of him to be humble and meek, Mat. 11.28. but he did not
bid us learn of him to be 30 years old before that we be baptized, and if we
learn that, we must neither be more nor less but just of his age. Again, he
was both circumcized and baptized, but he did not bid us learn both. Again,
at thirty years old he put an end to the Jewish Religion, and could not be
baptized before; neither could he set up Christian Religion, till he had put
down the Jewish Religion: But I would not have the Anabaptists to tarry till
they be thirty years old before they become Christians, and say they learned to
do so of Christ. Again, at the same time, others were baptized at several
ages, some more, some less then the age of Christ; then the matter lay in
this, whether they were converted from false Religions to the true Religion,
although they were not converted from the state of corrupted nature to the
state of grace, they baptized them; we read of none that ever were denied to be
baptized but the Pharisees and Sadduces who came to John to be baptized; but he
refused to baptize them, because they would not leave their sects and scismes,
they would be Pharisees and Sadduces still, therefore he calls them A generation
of Vipers, Mat. 3.7. because such would eat out the bowels of the christian
Church; this might be an item to all the sects and scismes amongst us, who are
no better then Vipers both to Church and State; but when any was admitted to
Baptism, if they did but believe that Christ was the Son of God, and his was
the true Religion; I say, although they should become Papists or profane
drunkards, or swearers, or adulterers, and should be excommunicated for such
wickedness, yet still they having a right to the Ordinances, as a Freeman
has of a Corporation, although for the present he be in prison, and cannot
make use of it, till he has compounded with his adversarice, and this man
given satisfaction to the Church; therefore his children ought to be baptized,
unless the Parents turn Turks, and so renounce Christ and christian Religion,
yet if but one of them should do this, their children are holy, and ought to
be baptized, notwithstanding all other failings whatsoever.

Twelfthly, thee object, if none must be baptized, and so receive the token of
the Covenant but such as have the Covenant, then Infants (...) not be baptized;
but they say the first is true, because they are incapable to receive the
covenant, therefore they ought not to be baptized, which is the token of the
covenant. Here I might answer, that christian Infants are as capable both to
receive the covenant and the token of it, as the Jewish Infants were; but it is
not true to say they only that have the covenant must have the signs and
tokens of it, for the male children of the Jews all had the token of the
covenant, both the elect and reprobates without any difference, and women which
were in the covenant of grace as well as men, yet the sign and token of it was
set only on men, though reprobates, rather then on women, though never so
faithful; for the token of the covenant is not given as a personal benefit to
all that have it, but it is given for the good of Gods people, who ought to
rejoice and be thankful for it wherever they see it; God made a covenant
with Adam, but the token of it was set on trees; and God made a covenant with
Noah, but the token of it was set in the clouds; so God might have set the
token of the covenant of grace in the clouds or on trees, or only on wicked
men if he had so pleased; then shall we quarrel with God, and say, we will
have the token of the covenant set only on such as have the covenant, as if
the rainbow should be set on all men since Noah's flood; no, let us do as
faithful women did in the Church of the Jews, who could rejoice and be
thankful for the token of the covenant of grace, although it was not set on
them but on men only, and many of them reprobates; you we do not find that
ever they murmured against God, because they had not the token of the covenant
upon them as well as men; then I conclude, notwithstanding these objections,
that christian Infants ought to be baptized.

But Master Tombs has some more places of Scripture to examine, the first is
Genesis 17.7. from which we prove that God did establish his everlasting Covenant
to Abraham; and verse 21. he established that everlasting covenant also with
Isaac; and being established thus to Abraham and Isaac, then it was also
confirmed unto Jacob, for an everlasting covenant, Psalm. 105, 10. But this
covenant was made with Christ from all eternity; so Prove. 8.23. 1 Pet. 1.20.
Titus 1.2. now circumcision was a token of that everlasting covenant, Genesis
17.10, 11. and not a token that they should enjoy the land of Canaan, and so it
suits with baptism, which is also a token of that everlasting covenant, which
God the Father made with God the Son from all eternity; but Master Tombs
says, that Covenant to which circumcision had relation, being established to
Abraham, that he says was a mixed covenant, and therefore not the same with
ours. I answ. All temporal promises both to Abraham's posterity and also to us,
are but the overflowing of those promises contained in that eversting
covenant, for godliness has the promise of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. seek the righteousness of Christ, and all these
things shall be added unto you, Matthew. 6.33. so then, we have as many promises
of outward things as the Jews had; but then to increase his doubting, he
says, Abraham's seed is many ways to be taken. I answ. The seed to whom the
covenant was made was but one, and that was Christ, Gal. 3.16. and to all the
elect when they are grafted into Christ by faith, as we enter into the first
Adams covenant when we come to have his image of nature, so we come into the
second Adams covenant when we come to have his image of grace; now circumcision
was the token of this covenant to the Jews, as baptism is to Christians; but
I shall speak more fully of this, in answer to Captain Hobsons first argument.

Secondly, Master Tombs says, to increase his doubtings, that if baptism
succeed circumcision, then none but males ought to be baptized, because none
but males were circumcised, and John Baptist did baptize before circumcision of
right ceased, therefore it does not succeed circumcision, although they both
signify the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11.6.3. 1 Pet. 3.21. and the same
sanctification of the heart, Col. 2.11, 12. But says he, they differ in some
things; first, circumcision did signify, that Christ should come of Isaac,
Genesis 17.21. but baptism does signify his death and resurrection. I answ.
although they are both tokens of the same covenant, yet they may in some things
differ in their signification, and yet agree well together, thus: circumcision
more lively signified mortification, and the death of sin in the crucifying
and death of Christ, and of justifying the sinner by the blood of Christ; and
baptism more clearly signifies the burial of sin in the burial of Christ,
and rising from the death of sin to the life of grace by the resurrection of
Christ, and washing away our sins by the spirit of Christ, he being under
water, and arose out of the water, and as water washes away the filth of our
bodies, so the blood of Christ washes away our sins; but to say circumcision
was a token, that Christ should come of Isaac, Master Tombs contradicts it
himself, saying; John baptized before circumcision should of right cease, and
yet Christ was borne thirty years before, which hangs together like harp and
harrow; and Paul circumcised Timothy after Christ's assention, see Acts 16.3.
and after he had preached of his resurrection many times; but this had been
notoriously wicked, if circumcision had signified that Christ was yet for to
come of Isaac: secondly, he says circumcision signified that the Israelites
were separated from all Nations; but I say no, for if any would turn to the
Jews Religion they should be circumcized, let them be of what Nation they
would; so then it was only a note of distinction of their Religion from all
other, and that they only had the true visible Church of God, and so baptism
is one mark of the christian Church, whereby it is known from Turks and
Infidels: Thirdly, he faith circumcision signified that Moses Law was to be
observed, from Gal. 5.3. But how can that be, when it was not given till four
hundred years after: fourthly, he faith circumcision did sign the promise of
the Land of Canaan to them, and baptism signs eternal life by Christ: But I
say, they both signify and sign the promise of that everlasting covenant made
with Christ for the elect, yet not to all that have it, but to Gods people that
are amongst us; and for Canaan, I say it was but an overplus, of those promises
which we enjoy as well as the Jews, when as spiritual and eternal mercies
were the principal things intended in that everlasting covenant; and whereas
he said, if baptism succeed circumcision, then none but males must be
baptized. I have answered, the command by Christ is now enlarged to all
Nations, and to females; if this man be not faithless, but faithful, I
suppose this may satisfy the doubt from this Scripture, why christian infants
may not be baptized.

Thirdly, his examination of other Scriptures, to increase his doubtings are
these, Acts 16.15, 32, 33.18.8. 1 Cor. 1.16. he says, the words to the Jailer
were spoke to all in his house, and he rejoiced, believing God with all his
household; and Crispus believed God with all his house, and was baptized; hence
he concludes, that the name of the whole house is to be understood, that those
which believed in it only were baptized: But I have answered already, that if
but one of the Parents become a christian, the children are holy, which cannot
be denied by any Scripture or sound reason: And again, he has said nothing of
Liddiahs household; and besides, although the Jailer had servants which believed
by hearing and seeing the Apostles carriage in the prison, yet Liddia was a
stranger, going to hear Paul preach, was converted, and he came and baptized
her whole household immediately, and it may be never saw them before; neither
was it material, whether children was of age or not, it may suffice, that they
baptized whole households, of which Infants was a part; and I say again,
although they were unclean before, if but one of the Parents believed, and was
baptized, yet now they are holy, and if both Parents profess themselves
christians, which is our case in England, the matter is out of doubt, there
Infants ought to be baptized. Again, when God gave the token of the covenant
to Abraham, he commanded that the token should be set on all the males in his
house, and he accordingly obeyed, and did so, Genesis 17.12.27. and says the
Lord, I know that Abraham will teach his children and his household after him to
keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18.10. and says Joshua, as for me and my
household we will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. Now I have said and proved
before, that Christ came not to take away the token of the covenant, but to
change it, and to enlarge it, but the covenant and the command are both the
same, and remain still; see my answer to the ninth Objection; then it is
clear, that if households were circumcised and baptized, then our Infants may
and ought to be baptized.

I shall answer two Questions: Suppose where heathens and christians live in a
land together, yet at some distance, and the heathen should take away a
christians Infant before it be baptized, and resolve to keep it by violence
from them, only they will give the christian leave to come with a Minister and
baptize it, but they will not part with the child; now may this man go and
baptize it, and engage himself to bring it up in the christian Religion: I
answ. No; it were sin and folly to promise that which he cannot perform, the
child being kept out of his hands by Infidels; yea, it were as bad and sinful
to do as those did under the Prelates government, who did engage themselves,
that the child should forsake the devil and all his works, and all the lusts
of the flesh, and believe the Articles of the christian faith, and keep all
Gods Commandments, therefore it ought not to be done. The second Question is
this; suppose a child of heathenish Infidels should by some providence of God,
lawfully come under the government of christians, ought the child to be
baptized? I answ. Yes, because they have power to bring it up in the christian
Religion, therefore Abraham was commanded to circumcise all the males in his
house, some of them being children of Infidels, because the Lord knew that
Abraham would command his household to do that which is right in the sight of
the Lord, Genesis 18.19. and christians have the same power to bring up those
under their government in the christian Religion; and this also may answer
Master Tombs, when he says, Infants baptism may be a means to baptize them
of uncertain progeny: But I say, if christians have power to bring them up in
the christian Religion, and they can bring them up in no other, because the
whole Kingdom has embraced it; neither need they now to have any sureties to
engage themselves to bring them up in it, seeing the whole Kingdom has
embraced it and do profess it.

Fourthly, Master Tombs says, Baptism is doubtful, because it cannot be
proved that it was in use in the next age after the Apostles. Fifthly, Master
Tombs says, Infants baptism is doubtful, because in the succeeding age
afterward, it was held to be a written tradition. I answ. If it be proved that
it was in the Apostles times, and that by the command of Christ, then the
Apostasy of the times cannot make it unlawful; but the first is proved
sufficiently, yet more shall be said to it in answer to Captain Hobson's third
argument; then this does not justly hinder christians Infants from baptism.

Sixthly, Master Tombs says, Infants baptism has occasioned many humane
inventions to underprop it: First, sureties in baptism; secondly, episcopal
confirmation; thirdly, the reformed union by examination before the Communion;
fourthly, the Church Covenant as it is in New England. I answ. these are all
mere scandals cast upon the Presbyteriall government, which does utterly
suppress them all.

Seventhly, Master Tombs says, Infants baptism has occasioned or has been
as the birth to foster many errors; first, that baptism conferres grace by
the work done; secondly, baptism is regeneration; thirdly, that Infants dying,
are saved by the faith of the Parents; fourthly, that some regenerate may fall
from grace. I answ. The abuse of Infants baptism does not nullify it, neither
can it be truly said to be the ground of these errors, for we hold that it may
be done upon reprobates as well as circumcision was, neither is it a personal
benefit to those that have it, but it is only given as a benefit to the godly,
who live amongst them; and so the baptism of reprobates may benefit the godly,
although it does not benefit themselves that have it.

Eighthly, Master Tombs says, baptism of Infants causes many faults in
discipline, and in divine worship, and in conversation, such as these; first
private baptism; secondly, baptism of Infants; thirdly, baptism by women;
fourthly, baptism of uncertain Progeny; fifthly, baptism in the name of the
Lord, who know not the Lord nor have ever consented, and perhaps will never
consent to the confession of the name of the Lord: sixthly, it has brought in
the admission of ignorant and profane to the communion of the Lords supper:
seventhly, it perverts the order of discipline to to baptize and then to
catechize: eighthly, it turns the Sacrament into a ceremony or profane
feasting: ninthly, it makes men forget that ever they were baptized: tenthly,
it takes away or diminishes zeal and industry to know the Gospel. I answ.
Most of these are scandals without any proof, as the five last, and there is
but one of the other five altogether unlawful, and that is baptism by women;
and yet this is held by some Anabaptists to be lawful, which is not lawful,
but abominable, and he makes a perhaps to the fifth, where there is no cause,
for the Parents have power to bring them up to profess the christian Religion,
which is as much as the Apostles required before they did admit them to
baptism; then these ten faults are not sufficient to hinder christian Infants
from baptism.

Ninthly, Master Tombs says, that Infants baptism is an occasion of many
unnecessary disputes, fostering contention, which can never be determined by
any certain rule, such as these; first, baptizing Infants of excommunicated
persons: secondly, baptizing Infants of apostates: thirdly, baptizing Infants
of Parents that are not members of a gathered Church: fourthly, baptizing
Infants of those whose Ancestors were believers, and the next Parents remaining
still in unbelief. I answ. the first and last of these the Church of England
makes no doubt of, nor of the second, unless they turn Turks, and so renounce
the christian Religion; and the third is a mere cavil of Independents, for he
that is baptized into the christian faith and Religion, is a member of the
christian Church, wherever he is; then notwithstanding this argument,
christian Infants ought to be baptized.

Tenthly, Master Tombs says, That Baptism of Infants was opposed in the
midst of the darkness of Popery, by the same men that opposed invocation of
Saints, and prayer for the dead, and adoration of the Cross. I answer, In the
midst of that darkness some light might be hid from those that sought to bring
in the light of the Gospel; but we need not to fetch proof from those dark
times, for Luther denied some part of Scripture to be the Word of God, and he
held consubstantiation, ubiquity of Christ's body, and yet he withstood Popery
more powerfully then any of those before him. Then this cannot hinder Infants
Baptism.

Eleventhly, Master Tombs says, the assertors of Infants Baptism do not
agree amongst themselves, upon what foundation they may build it. I answer,
Though several men bring several arguments for it, this cannot (...) it.
Again, they all agree in the command of Christ, and the promise of sanctifying
grace, and the blessing and testimony of Christ on them, and of that holiness
of distinction from Turks and Infidels; and if some bring more arguments to
confirm it, shall this make it void? and what truth is that which was never
opposed by some? then this cannot hinder Infants Baptism,

Lastly, Master Tombs says, Infants Baptism seems to take away one of the
prime ends of Baptism, which was to show and confess himself to be a
Disciple; but this I have already answered several times, so then,
notwithstanding all these doubtful arguments, here is nothing that may justly
hinder Christian Infants from Baptism.

All these doubts are briefly mentioned by Master Tombs in the beginning of
his Book, Entitled, An exercitation of Infants Baptism, before his Answer to
Master Marshall, therefore I forbear to set down the several pages to find
them.

Here I shall speak something touching re-baptizing, or often baptizing,
because Master Tombs in his great Book seems to favor it, saying, If we had
as clear Scripture for Infants Baptism as we have for re-baptizing, our
controversy would soon be ended; and by other such like passages in his
Book. It appears that he favors re-baptizing or often Baptism; then suppose
any that is baptized in the Church of England should question the lawfulness
of their Baptism, saying, I was not rightly baptized because I was an Infant,
and knew not what was done, but this I have already answered; then suppose
another say, I was sprinkled, which is to rinse and not to baptize, therefore I
was not rightly baptized; this I shall answer in the second point. Then suppose
another say, I was baptized either by a drunken Priest, that cannot preach and
baptize as he ought, Mat. 28.19. or else by a Popish Priest, who had his
Ordination from Popish Bishops, therefore I was not rightly baptized, and may
be rebaptized. But here I would know how our Anabaptists Preachers can prove
their own calling lawful; If they say that they are teaching Disciples, then
where is their Ordination? it was either from men of other callings, who have
nothing to do in it, or else they have none at all; and how was their first
teacher made? it was sure the Devil that first moved him from his place and
calling to become their Teacher. And if they say, his Calling was
extraordinary, like that of the Apostles, then we would see their extraordinary
Gifts, and till then we cannot believe their Calling to be lawful, and so
themselves ought not to preach nor baptize; thus while they judge our Ministers
they condemn themselves; And for our Bishops and Ministers I answer and say,
That they were ordained by men of their own calling, to preach and to
administer the Sacraments, and thus it has been successively from the
Apostles, and although the Bishops had power and authority given them by men to
rule over their Brethren, which they ought not, yet that did not make void that
which they had from God, for then that or any other sin, would make that or
any other calling void, so that a man must either live without sin or be
cas^^red of his calling; so then our Ministers standing is lawful, and their
Baptism warrantable. I need not speak of the Service Book, the Cross, and
Sucplesse, which were the only things that troubled them, but they are
removed, and yet they stand out as much as ever, which shows they have proud
and froward hearts, rather then any just cause given to them, why they should
forsake our Churches. But suppose there were some exception against our
Ministers entrance or execution of their office, yet that will not make their
Baptism void; the Lord was wrath with Moses, and would have killed him because
his child was not circumcised, but when that was done his wrath ceased,
although it was done by his wife, a woman, and an outlandish woman, and in her
rage against God for commanding such a service, and against Moses for being
willing to yield unto such a service, see Exud. 4.24, 25, 26. Then may not our
Ministers baptize as lawfully and acceptably as this woman might circumcise.
Now I grant, if our Ministers should baptize in their own name, then their
Baptism would be void, 1 Cor. 13.15. but they use the right form which Christ
gave the Apostles, in the name of the Trinity, Matthew. 28.19. and they use the
right matter, which is water, Mat. 3.22. and on the right Subject, Christians
Infants, as has been proved, and to the right end, which is, no distinguish
them from Heathens and Infidels, and to engage them to obey the Covenant, of
which Baptism is a figne or token; and all this is done by Ministers lawfully
called, therefore they ought not to be rebaptized. Again, Baptism is a
Sacrament of the new birth; and although we may come often to the other
Sacrament, 1 Cor. ^1.25. yet we can be borne but once; therefore we must take
this Sacrament but once, which is the sign of it. Again, there is but one
Lord, one Faith, and one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. therefore the Sacrament of
Baptism is to be administered but once. Their Objections are now to be answered.

First, they object, That if Christ said he had another Baptism beside that he
had of John, Matthew. 3.17. Then we may be again baptized, but he says, I have
a Baprisme to be baptized with, and how am I straightned till it be
accomplished, Luke 12.50. then they may be again baptized. I answer, That
Baptism of Christ was his sufferings, for, says he, to the Sons of Zebedy
can ye drink of the Cup that I drink of, and be baptized with the Baptism
that I am baptized with, and they said, we are able; Then he said, you shall
indeed drink of the Cup that I drink of, and be baptized with the Baptism
that I am baprized with, Mark. 10.38, 39. Therefore, says Paul, We are
baptized into his death, and buried with him by Baptism, Romans 6.3, 4. So then
Christ was but once baptized with water, no more must we; but then as Christ
was killed and crucified afterward, so must we kill and crucify our finnes
daily afterward; Then here is no warrant to be rebaptized.

Secondly, They object, That if those that look for a resurrection must be
baptized at their death, then there is more Baptismes then one; but Paul says,
if the dead rise not, why are they baptized for the dead, what shall they do
that are baptized for the dead, 1 Cor. 15.29. therefore they may be again
baptized. I answer, Baptizing signifies washing, and it was the custom to wash
the dead Corpse, for when Doreas was dead they washed her body, Act. 9.37. but
they that will be so baptized must tarry till they be dead, neither shall it be
done by the Minister, but by them that shall wind them up and put them into
the Coffin to be butied; but here is no Warrant to be rebaptized, from this
Text, till after they be dead.

Thirdly, they object, That if some were twice baptized, then so may we, but
some were first baptized by John, and afterward by Paul, Act. 19. v. 3, 5.
then we may be again baptized. I answer, some do expound those words to be
thus understood; saying, They were first baptized by some false Disciples of
John into his name, and so it was void, and therefore they-were baptized again
in the name of Christ, but this cannot be the meaning, for then Paul would have
inquired after those Heretics, for Paul was newly come from Corinth, v. 1.
where he had cleared himself from the same thing, 1 Corinthians. 1.13, 15. then
sure he would not so put it up at Ephesus. 2. Some expound those words thus,
saying, They were when Paul came to Ephesus only taught the Doctrine of John,
but not baptized of him, and so were baptized by Paul; but this is not the
meaning neither, for they were believers and they were Disciples, v. 1, 2.
therefore they were baptized of John, and yet they had not learned his
Doctrine, for they neither knew Jesus Christ nor the Holy Ghost till Paul had
told them, v. 3.4. Thirdly, The Anabaptists expound it thus; saying, They were
baptized with water first by John, and then again with water by Paul; but this
is not the meaning neither, for their second Baptism is not done with water;
but while Paul was expounding to them who it was that John said should come
after him, and baptize them with the Holy Ghost, that is, says Paul Jesus
Christ, v. 4. Now when they heard this they were baptized in the name of the
Lord Jesus, v. 5. that is, while Paul was expounding, their souls was converted
and baptized with the Holy Ghost; neither is here any word that Paul baptized
them, only he made known Christ to them, and when the work was done they
were baptized, as it was while Peter spoke the Holy Ghost fell on them which
heard the Word, Act. 10.44. So then here is the full meaning of these words,
they were baptized with water by John, for they were Disciples and believers,
that is, they believed that the Christian Religion was the true Religion, so
that they were converted from heathenisme to christianity, but they were not
converted from the state of corruption to the state of grace, though John had
said, He that comes after me shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, but him
they knew not, till Paul said, that is Jesus Christ; by that word when they
heard that they were converted and their souls washed or baptized with the Holy
Ohost. But it may be they will object, saying, The Holy Ghost was given to them
afterward, v. 6. I answer, That was the gift of miracles, to cure all
diseases, to cast out Devils, and to speak with diverse Tongues, yet this also
is called Baptism, for says Christ, You shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost
not many days hence, Act. 1.5. that is, the gift of miracles, but they had the
sanctifying gift before, for it was the sanctifying gift that John had from the
womb, Luke 1.15 this is that promise made to us and our children, Act. 2.38.
so then some times the outward form is called Baptism, and sometimes
sanctification is called Baptism, and some times the gift of miracles is
called Baptism, as Act. 1.5. and all these three are together in that 19. of
the Act; for first they were baptized by water of John, and then baptized by
the Holy Ghost by Paul's teaching, and then they received the gift of miracles
by Paul's laying on of his hands, and all this is but one Baptism, only the
outward form is distinguished from the inward and real work of the Holy
Ghost. Then this Text will not warrant their re-baptizing the second time with
water.

Fourthly, they object, That if Paul spoke of Baptismes in the Plural Number,
then there is more Baptismes then one; but Paul speaks of Baptismes in the
plural number, Hebr. 6.2. therefore there is more then one. I answer; It is
like Paul speaks of the outward and inward Baptism, and the gift of miracles,
and calls them altogether Baptismes in the plural number; or it may be he puts
the sufferings of Christians, and washing their corpse after death, which are
called Baptismes, because the very next thing Paul speaks of is the
resurection; howsoever if Paul here speaks of diverse kinds of baptismes which
it is most likely he does, then this Text will not warrant a second baptism
with water, but Paul here speaks of the Doctrine of Baptism and not of the
form, therefore it makes nothing for the outward form to re-baptize them
again with water.

Now as I was desired I shall give a brief Answer to Captain Hobsons five
Arguments; First says he, the Baptism of Infants does directly deny Christ to
be come in the flesh, because it keeps on foot that which was before Christ,
and ended by Christ as come in the flesh; That is says he, the Covenant God
made with Abraham which ran in the flesh, and was intailed to Generation, Genesis
17.7, 12. to this Covenant says he, Circumcision had reference, now those
natural branches are cut off Romans 11.20, 21. and now there are no Seed or
Sons of Abraham, but believers, Gal. 3.9.14.22.28.29. now the Promise is not
a carnal, but a spiritual, John 3.5.

I answ. To say the Covenant which Circumcision had reverence to was a Carnal
Covenant, shows but a carnal understanding of it, for it is called an
everlasting Covenant many times in that Chapter, Genesis 17. neither was this
Covenant of Grace made with Abraham, but says the Lord, I will establish my
Covenant with thee, and thy seed, every man child shall be circumcised, and
this shall be a token of the Covenant, and this token shall be in your flesh
for that everlasting Covenant, and my Covenant shall be established with Isaac.
Then the Covenant was no more made with Abraham then it was with Isaac, but
established to both by that token of Circumcision, so then that circumcision
was not a token of a carnal covenant, but a token of that eternal Covenant
made between God the Father, and Christ his Son in our nature from all
eternity: For, says Christ, I was set up from everlasting before the world
was, Pro. 8.23. he was foreordained before the foundation of the world, 1 Pet.
1.20. God made promises to Christ before the world began, Titus 1.2. so then
this eternal Covenant was not manifested by a token of it from the beginning
of the world till Abraham had it, because till then no whole Nation was called
into the visible Church; but if Abraham and his posterity had only a token
that they should enjoy the Land of Canaan it had been but Esaus blessing.
Again, to say that eternal Covenant was made to Abraham is to make him our
Redeemer, for then he must perform the conditions of it for all the Elect, but
(poor man) he had failings as well as other men, and not able to satisfy for
his own sins, much less for the sins of all the Elect; so then that
covenant was made with his seed, and says Paul, that seed was Christ, Gal.
3.16. Again mark the conclusion of Master Hobson, who said, Abraham received
a token but of a carnal covenant, but if that were true, Abraham is damned;
and then by and by he says, the Seed and Sons of Abraham must be believers,
Gal. 3.7.9.14.22.28.29. then sure he received the token of that everlasting
Covenant. But how are we Gentiles the Seed and Sons of Abraham? I answer. By
receiving the sign and token of that everlasting covenant as a seal to our
faith, as he did, Romans 4.11. and we are his children by receiving the same
faith in Christ as he had, but we are not Abraham's children as Christ is our
everlasting Father, who stood as a general Person representing all the Elect,
and receiving a covenant for them, and able to fulfill the conditions of it,
and to satisfy Gods Justice for the breach of Adams covenant, and able to
work faith in us to enter into his covenant: But when Abraham is named, we
must understand him as an Ambassador, representing Christ the King of his
Church, with whom alone the new covenant was made, as the first was made with
Adam, and all we come under it when we take upon us his natural Image; so the
second covenant was made with Christ, and the Elect come under it when they
receive his spiritual Image: so then the tokens of the covenant were before
Christ came in the Flesh, and Christ did not come to take away the token of the
covenant, but to change them from Circumcision to Baptism, and to enlarge them
to all Nations, and to Females as well as Males, Acts 8.12. then the keeping on
foot this token of the covenant which Christ instituted after his coming in
the flesh does not deny his coming in the flesh, neither is this to hold
circumcision which was the token before his coming in the flesh, then this
Argument falls to nothing, whereby he would prove Infants Baptism to deny the
coming of Christ in the flesh. But then he says, the Pharisees and Saduces
pleading that they were Abraham's Seed, and would be Baptized, and yet John
would not till they repent and believe, Mat. 3.7.8.9. I answer. If they had
repented of their Sects and Schisms he would have Baptized them, for no
ignorant Person was refused by him, although they had not heard whether there
was any Holy Ghost, yet John baptized them unto repentance and bid them
believe, and such were made Disciples, Acts 19.12, 34. but John knew that such
Sectaries would be but as Vipers to the true Religion, therefore he would not
baptize them unless they would leave their Heresy and Schism. Then it was
not because they were of the Seed of Abraham that he refused it, but because
they would not leave their Heresies and Schisms, this cannot keep Infants
from Baptism which have no Sects nor Schisms to repent of. But he has
another Argument to prove that the baptizing of Infants directly denies the
coming of Christ in the flesh, and that is this, He says it takes from Christ
his Prophetical and Kingly Offices, which the Holy Ghost gave him, as come in
the Flesh. I answ. Christ had those Offices before he came in the flesh, he was
King, and Priest to the Church of the Jews, although not so manifest as to the
christian Church, but how the baptizing of infants should rob Christ of those
Offices is a Paradox to all wise men. But he says, because it makes the Old
Testament to expound the New, but what of this, Christ eats with sinners, and
some were offended at it, and he sends them to the Old Testament, saying,
Learn what that means, (...) will have mercy and not sacrifice, Mat. 9.13.
but did Christ by this lose his Prophetical Office, by sending them to the Old
Testament to expound his doings in the New? there is no truth in this Argument,
nor in the thing that he would prove by it. But then he says, baptizing of
Infants robs Christ of his Kingly Office in giving Laws, and making it a duty
to baptize infants. I answ. They have a command from Christ to teach and
baptize all Nations, but how is a Nation taught but when those of years
receive the christian Religion, and make profession of it by a positive Law of
that Land, or else it were unpossible that any Nation should be either taught
or baptized, and so the Commission of Christ would be to no purpose, and if
children were excluded, how shall the Nations come in, as is promised? Isa 22.
Micah 4.2. but the truth is, if the Parents be of the Christian Religion it is
potentially in the child, and the Parents have power to bring them up in that
Religion, and therefore ought to baptize them in it, but I shall speak more of
this in answer to his third Arment; but this may suffice to prove that we have
a command to baptize infants. Then we do not entrench upon the Kingly Office
of Christ, and there is neither sense nor reason to say, if we did entrench
upon his Kingly Office, that this were to deny his coming in the flesh, when
as his Kingly Office was before as well as since his coming in the flesh, then
all this hinders not infants Baptism; so much in answer to his first Argument,
I shall be briefer in the rest.

His second Argument is this, Infants Baptism has no part of Righteousness
in it, therefore it ought not to be done, his Proposition is proved thus;
Whatsoever is considered as a part of Righteousness was seen in the Person or
Practice of Christ, but infants Baptism was neither seen in his Person nor
Practice, for he was not baptized in his infancy, neither did he baptize any
infants, and yet he says it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness, Mat.
3.15. therefore infants may not be baptized. I answer; Christ came to fulfill
the Moral Law, and so to free his people from that bond of perfect obedience
to it, and he suffered the penalty due to our sins to free us from the curse
of it; thus by his Active and Passive obedience he fulfilled all
righteousness, this he did in his own Person alone, and there was none with
him, Isa 63.3. Psalm. 47.8. but here in his answer to John Baptist he does not
say, it becomes me, but it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness, Mat.
3.15. Nay the action was John's, and not his, for Jesus came to him to be
baptized, verse 13. so then I conceive the meaning to be this, John was sent or
commanded to baptize with Water, see John 1.33. and he that believed that Jesus
was the Son of God was to be baptized, Acts 8.37. but Jesus, as a man,
believed this, and therefore in obedience to that command was to do it, and
Jesus to suffer it, thus says Jesus, It becomes us to fulfill all
righteousness, but it did not become John to baptize before he was sent to do
it, nor Jesus to suffer before the command was given to John to baptize, John
3.33. Then he could not be baptized in his infancy, because the command was not
then given. Again, if he had been baptized in his infancy, then it might be
questioned whether men of years might be baptized; neither would the Heathen
have suffered their children, unless themselves had been admitted to baptism;
and Christ was baptized in the middle of his age, that neither infants; nor old
age might be excluded from baptism. Again, Jesus came to be Baptized as soon
as there was one appointed and sent to do it, then if we have lawful
Ministers found to baptize our Infants, we ought to suffer them to do it,
because it becomes us to fulfill the righteous command of Christ; but if it
be with us as it was with Christ, that we have no lawful Minister to do it
till we be of his age, then we may lawfully stay as long as he die before we
baptize our infants. But then the Captain says, If God would have had Jesus
baptized sooner, he would have sent one sooner to do it. To this I may say, If
God would not have our infants baptized, then he would not send Ministers to
them so soon to do it. And whereas the Captain faith, It is no part of
righteousness because Christ baptized no infants. To this I may answer, Christ
baptized none at all with water, John 4.2. then if this Argument were good, it
is no part of righteousness to baptize infants either young or old; but I
shall prove it to be a part of righteousness to baptize infants in answer to
his next Argument, but for the present you see his proves removed by which he
would prove infants baptism to have no part of righteousness in it, and
therefore his Proposition must needs fall; and notwithstanding this Argument
christian infants ought to be baptized.

His third Argument is this, The baptism of infants is not the baptism of
Christ, because it does not answer his commission, Mat. 28.19, 20. which is,
Go teach, discipling and baptizing, hence he concludes, that they must be
taught, and disciplined, and believers before they can be baptized, Mark
16.16. and this no infant can be, and so cannot answer the commission,
therefore must not be baptized. I answ. That infants baptism is according to
the commission of Christ, for according to his Exposition whole Nations must be
taught, and disciplined, and made believers, else they were sent to do that
which is impossible. But how can a whole Nation be taught, disciplined, and
made believers I answ. There is a two-sold conversion, and two Sacraments
answerable to this twofold conversion; the first conversion is a turning from
false religion to the true religion, and the other is a conversion from
corrupted nature to the state of grace? now he that has the first of these to
believe Christ to be the Son of God, and that the Christian Religion is the
true Religion, this man may be discipled being thus taught, and so may receive
the first Sacrament; yea thus a whole Kingdom may be taught and may believe the
true Religion, and so discipled, and receive the Sacrament of Baptism; yea
when the Governors of a Kingdom shall be taught and believe the Christian
Religion to be the true Religion, and shall settle it amongst them by a
positive Law of the Land, and all parents and people of years in that Kingdom
consent unto it, then all that Kingdom is taught and must all be baptized; for,
what the parents have done, the children have potentially done, because it is
in the power of those parents to bring them up in that Religion, and not suffer
their infants to be of any other; and having this power, they may also set the
token or mark of distinction upon them, to baptize them that they may be known
from Turks and Heathens. Now if parents had not this power, then no Kingdom
could ever receive the Gospel and be a holy Nation as the Jew's was; and so
their privilege would exceed the privilege of all Christian Kingdoms; for
there will be children to the end of the world; for till then, they will marry
and be given in marriage till the last day. Then, as Abraham and the Jews
received their Religion for themselves and their children, so must Christians,
and set the token of the Covenant upon them as they did. But then, for the
other conversion which makes them fit for the other Sacrament, the Lords
Supper, it is not in the power of the parents; although they can bring them up
in the Christian Religion, yet they cannot convert them from the state of
corruption to the state of grace; and although they be able to discern when
they conform to the true Religion, yet they cannot see into their souls whether
there be true Faith in them; that new name written none knows but he that has
it: then, although it be said, Teach and baptize all Nations: yet it is not
said, Teach and give the Lords Supper to all Nations; for it is not in the
power of man to teach effectually the heart of another, nor to know when they
are so taught; none but himself knows whether he discern the Lords Body, or
whether he seed by Faith or remember the Death of Christ, or whether he have
truly examined himself; therefore the worthiness or unworthiness lies upon
himself, and the charge also. Let every man examine himself, and so let him
eat. Neither must any baptized Christian be kept from the Lords Supper, unless
he by the leaven of error seek to undermine the truth of Christian Religion,
or by profaneness trample the Christian profession underfoot, Matthew. 16.12. 1
Cor. 5.12, 13. 2 Cor. 2.5, 6. Gal. 5.9, 10. and then it must be done in a
legal way, not by the Minister alone nor by the Congregation alone, but by the
Eldership, the offense being scandalous. So then, the first conversion being in
the power of the parents, and potentially in the children already, they may and
ought to be baptized. But then he says, The Baptism of infants cannot be a
Baptism of Faith and Repentance, and therefore it is not the Baptism of Christ.
But in regard he has no proof for it, I refer him to my answer to the second
and third Objection, and conclude that Baptism of infants is not excluded from
the Commission of Christ; and it is a Baptism unto Faith and Repentance, and
therefore they ought to be baptized.

His fourth Argument. He says, Baptism of infants does cause inconveniences in
the Church; first, because we make them Members of the Church before they be
called of God, which is contrary to these Scriptures, 1 Cor. 1.1. and 2 Cor.
1.1. I answer, Though the Corinthians were sanctified in Christ Jesus, and
called to be Saints, yet all in the Church were not such; for there was
heresies and profaneness: the incestuous person was not cast out; and the Lords
Supper was profaned; and more carnal men then spiritual; and many divisions,
some of Paul and some of Apollo. Then, Were these all Saints? No. He writes in
the judgment of charity, and directs his Epistle chiefly to such as were
Saints indeed; so then in the judgment of charity, we should think the best of
those in the Church that use the means to attain salvation; and so you may
judge of infants who are brought up in the true Religion: And although Heathens
must have a call to Christianity, yet when Christians are called, their
children need not to tarry for such a call, because they have no false Religion
to be called from. Neither was it any inconvenience to the Jews that their
infants had the token of the Covenant upon them before their calling; but
rather a grace and glory to their Church, and a benefit to those infants to
engage them to obedience of that Covenant when they came to age, of which they
had received a token. So all the people and the Publicans justified Christ when
they heard him being baptized of John; when as the Pharisees and Lawyers
rejected the Counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of him,
Luke 7.29, 30. Then as we would have them justify Christ and not to reject his
Counsel, let them be baptized. But he says, Another inconvenience it is to
have our infants baptized, because it will intaile privileges to us in
reference to generation. But to these privileges he says, They must be
sanctified, quoting that place I answered already, 2 Cor. 1.1. Yet I say they
are sanctified or set apart from Turks and Heathens for the Christian Church;
else were they unclean, but now they are holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. then they ought to
be baptized. But he has a third inconvenience, and that is, If infants be
baptized, it will make a separation and distraction in Christ's conjunction, and
that is to baptize such as they will not give the Lords Supper, nor admit them
nor others to break Bread; Christ would have them to do both, and they will
admit such as cannot do both. But he has no reason why some may not do some
duties when they are disabled to do others; and therefore I refer him to my
answer to the tenth Objection, and hither too: for all his inconveniences, I
see no good Argument to keep infants of Christians from Baptism.

Fifthly: He says, The baptizing of infants does directly cross the
proceedings both in the time of the Law and in the time of the Gospel, and
therefore it ought not to be done; for they did all, both under the Law and in
the time of the Gospel, by a rule; else Lot might have pleaded the same
privilege with Abraham, being a Believer as well as he; and Ishmael who was no
Believer in God, yet he was circumcised. I answer: The promise to Abraham was,
that his seed in Isaac should be the visible Church, who only should have the
token of the Covenant; and this excludes Lot from this privilege: and for
Ishmael, he being one of his Family, by virtue of another command, was
circumcised, when the Lord would have Abraham to make his own house an example
or a pattern for all his posterity, to circumcise in his house, Genesis 17.12, 13.
But, says the Lord, I will establish my Covenant with Isaac, ver. 21. Only
Strangers had this benefit by living amongst them. So then, by the like reason
our children (although as bad as Ishmael) may be baptized; when as some true
Believers amongst the Turks may not be baptized except they come to us and make
an open profession of the Christian Religion; then they may have this benefit
amongst us. But have not we a rule for what we do, when as the command of
Christ is our direction, who commands all Nations to be taught and baptized?
and if he command it, he will have it done, although the Anabaptists would bar
the Christian Church from that benefit to be a holy Nation, as the Church of
the Jews was flat against many promises that whole Nations should come into the
Christian Church, and Christ's command to teach and baptize all Nations. But I
have answered this in reply to Master Hobson's third Argument; and so
notwithstanding their Objections and Arguments made against baptizing of
Christian infants, I see no sufficient ground to bar them from the Ordinance of
Baptism.

The second Point is, that sprinkling the baptized more agrees with the mind
of Christ, then dipping or plunging the baptized in or under the water.
Now I come to the second Point to prove that sprinkling the baptized more
agrees to the mind of Christ, then dipping or plunging the baptized in or
under the water:

First, Because Baptism is a Sacrament or visible sign to our corporal eyes,
to put us in mind of the thing signified, as the Rainbow shall be seen in the
clouds, which was the token of the Covenant, Genesis 9.11, 14. and Moses took
blood and sprinkled it on the people and said, Behold the blood of the
Covenant, Exodus 24.7. But when the baptized are plunged under water, they can
neither behold the signs or token of the Covenant, nor hear the words of
Institution to put them in mind of the Covenant or thing signified; they
cannot have their senses exercised as they ought, Heb. 5.14. because their life
is in danger to be lost; and a drunken man or a mad man is as fit to make use
of the sign, as a man under water, being out of his element; therefore the
baptized ought not to be plunged under water.

Secondly, If they should stand on the bank and plunge the baptized into the
water, in so doing they may break his neck against the bottom, if the water be
shallow; or if deep, they may drown him; neither date they jump in to save his
life lest they drown themselves; and if they should hate one in the River to
catch him, then there cannot be less then two to baptize one man, which is
contrary to all examples in Scripture. Then, it being so dangerous to plunge
the baptized into the water, whether it be deep or shallow, I would entreat
them to show me when there is neither too much nor too little water, to avoid
these dangers; for till then, I shall hold it unlawful to plunge the baptized
in or under water.

Thirdly, The Jailer and all his were baptized in the night; but if they had
been so plunged, sure they would have either killed or drowned them; neither
could they avoid it, because at midnight they could not see their rising;
neither do I read that they jumped in to endanger their own lives to save them:
then sure they were not plunged into it.

Fourthly, If they so plunge the baptized into the water, being naked, it is
against modesty; But, says Paul, let all things be done decently, 1 Cor.
14.40. and so doing were a temptation; for David seeing a naked woman washing
her self, was tempted to that foul sin of adultery, 2 Samuel 11.2, 4. and Christ
has taught us to say, Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil,
Matthew. 6. Then sure the administration of this holy Ordinance must be free from
so foul a temptation as to see the nakedness of each other. Then it is
unlawful to plunge the baptized naked into the water.

Fifthly, If they have drawers for that use, they are sure the holy Breeches of
Aaron, as bad as the Prelates Surplesse; and for Women to wear them, being man's
Apparel, is an abomination to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 22.5. therefore not to be plunged
in drawers appointed for that use.

Sixthly, If they say that they were plunged in their Wearing Clothes, is more
then they can prove; yea, it seems they were not so plunged in their Wearing
Clothes; for when Lydia and the Jailer were baptized, although at several
times, they feasted the Apostles straightway, Acts 16.15, 33, 34. But we do
not find that they shifted themselves either before or after that Ordinace;
Then, did they sit at meat together dung-wet as they came out of the water? If
they say, yea, then they must prove it, and till then, we shall not believe
that they were plunged into the water in their Wearing Clothes.

Sevently, If they had any Clothes upon them when they were plunged into the
water, then the water could not touch them all over, and so they had as good be
sprinkled on one place for all.

Eighthly, Many were baptized in their Houses, as Paul and Cornelius, and
others, Acts 9.17, 18. and 10.25, 48. And the Jailer was baptized at midnight
in the Prison; But what Vessel could these be so plunged in, and where had they
such a Vestel in the Prison, and filled with water so suddenly, as to be all
baptized the same hour, and at midnight? And what Vessel had Peter to baptize
three thousand in some few hours space? Acts 2.41. If their Vessel could hold
but two or three together, did they empty it so many times? And who fetched all
that water? And it may be some of them were diseased, and others would not be
plunged in the same water, and so they emptied it three thousand times over:
But did Peter stand in the Vessel all that time, or was he in the water at all,
or Ananias when he baptized Paul in the House, or Peter when he baptized
Cornelius in the House, or Paul when he baptized the Jailer? Till this be
proved, we shall not believe that they were plunged in the water.

Ninthly, The Sacraments must be Administered where the Word is Preached; for
says Christ, Teach all Nations baptizing them, Matthew. 28.19. He does not say
Preach in one place, and then take them to a River to plunge them: And to hold
that one Ordinance alone is to be administered apart from the meeting place of
the Assembly for all other public duties, is sure the Popish Pilgrimage, or at
least his going a Precessioning; for it was never justified of Christ, and
therefore to be abhorred of Christians.

Tenthly, Water is a sign of the Blood of Christ, which is called the Blood of
sprinkling, having sprinkled our hearts from an evil conscience, Heb. 10.20.
and 12.24. And Moses sprinkled the people, and said, Behold the blood of the
Covenant, Exodus 24.8. And the Lord says, I will sprinkle you with clean water,
and ye shall be clean, Ezekiel. 36.25. Then why should not this Prophecy be
fulfilled in sprinkling the baptized? And why should not the sign of Water
resemble the substance by sprinkling? Therefore the baptized ought rather to be
sprinkled, then plunged into the Water; and because Christ says, If I wash one
part, thou art clean every whit, John 13, 8. Then sprinkling and not plunging,
is most agreeing to the mind of Christ.

Lastly, I fear they do not so plunge the baptized as they do profess, but
rather let them wade into the water themselves, and so themselves baptize half
their body without their help, and without any word of Institution from them,
and then they come afterward and baptize the other half in the name of the
Trinity: But if this be their manner, they contradict their own Tenet, and
condemn themselves in so doing: And what shameful thing it is for them to
report that they plunge the baptized into the Water, when as they wade in
themselves? And so while they judge us for baptizing one part for all, they
condemn themselves for doing the same thing, Romans 2.1. From these grounds we
may safely conclude, That sprinkling the baptized is more agreeing to the mind
of Christ, then to plunge the baptized into the water.

But to these Arguments Master Patience said some thing, although to small
purpose.

First, says he, I take dipping to be the command of Christ, because Master
Daniel Rogers does say That the Greek word does signify washing by plunging;
and he says, Sprinkling is rinsing, and not to baptize, as Master Blackwood
does prove from Greek Authors; but I then replied saying, Are you a Teacher in
Israel, and know not these things? John 3.10. Have you the care of souls
committed unto you, and do you feel them by hearsay, because you are not able
to interpret the Word your self? What is this But the blind leads the blinds,
till both fall into the ditch? And what comfort will it be to you at the day of
Judgment, having seduced many souls, in giving them poison instead of
wholesome food; for you to say then that men told you it was good for them,
when as Christ never told you so? And if we should go by hearsay, we might
bring multitudes of Orthodox Divines and Churches that well understand the
Language in which Christ spoke unto his Church, to witness, That the word
Baptize signifies as well Sprinkling as Plunging.

Secondly, But then he said Baptism signified Burial, and putting on whole
Christ on whole man: But this I grant, For in sprinkling, the baptized are
under water, as well as in plunging; for the Minister holds the water over the
baptized, and so the baptized is wholly under it; when as in plunging them into
the water, it may be some part of them was not wholly under it: And besides,
when the Minister holds the water over them, it is all one as to put them under
it, when as it may be the Anabaptists wade in and put themselves half under,
flat against their own Tenet: And then they grant, that the putting the other
half into the water, is a putting on whole Christ: Then by the same Argument,
by sprinkling one part, Christ may be wholly put on as well as by their
practice; and the Jews by circumcising one part, they were circumcised all
over, and so put on whole Christ. Again, although it be said Baptism saves, it
is not by the outward washing, because every part of the body was washed, but
rather by the answer of a good conscience. But this is not done by Burial, but
rather by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1 Peter 3.21.

Thirdly, Then he said that John Dipped in Jordan; but I may as well say; he
Sprinkled in Jordan; for he says, I indeed baptize with water, Matthew. 3.11.
But the word with is not always in there; there was with the Angel a multitude,
Luke. 1.13. I hope you will not say they were in the Angel; and if I were with
you, I hope you would not say that I were in you: So then to baptize with water
may be by sprinkling the baptized, and not by plunging them into the water; and
to put in for with is as bad a mistake as that of the Prelates, who would bow
at the Name of Jesus instead of In the Name of Jesus, from that place Phil.
2.10. So you will baptize with the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
instead of in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: Because to baptize
with water, you will have it all one as to be baptized in the water, by
plunging the baptized under, or into the water.

Fourthly, Then he said, If Christ command to dip, then sprinkling is but a
gresse invention of man; but then he did not prove that Christ did only
command to dip, and not to sprinkle, but to baptize, which signifies both: Then
we may sprinkle the baptized with as good, if not better warrant, then they may
plunge them into the water.

Fifthly, Suppose they say Christ came out of the water, Matthew. 3 16. And it is
said Philip and the Eunuch went both into the water, Acts 8.3^ Hence they
conclude, That the Baptized ought to be plunged into the water. I answer, If
they waded into the water, then they were not plunged into it: Neither is it
said that either Christ or the Eunuch were plunged into the water; neither does
their going into the water hinder but they may be sprinkled; for in those hot
Countries they went barefoot, and it is likely they went in some distance from
the side, that they might come at clear water, and then both John and Philip
might sprinkle them In the Name of the Trinity: And I think the Anabaptists
have nothing to say from Scripture or Reason against it.

I shall: here conclude with one Quere, which is this, If our Ministers be
lawfully sent and authorized from Christ, and the Presbytery, to Preach and
Baptize, and they do administer this Ordinance of Baptism in the right Form In
the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and with the right Matter, being
Water, and on the right Parties, being either men of years when they are
converted to the Christian Religion, or to Infants born of Christians; and to
the right end, which is to distinguish them from Turks and Infidels, and as an
engagement to us all to go on in obedience of the true Christian Religion: And
lastly, That Christ should ratify that outward Form of Baptism according as
John the Baptist foretold, and baptized them with the Holy Ghost,

I would know this of the Anabaptists, how they dare to renounce this outward
Form of Baptism thus rightly administered in our Church, and ratified by the
Holy Ghost, and all because it was done upon them when they were Infants;
therefore the very Baptism of the Holy Ghost despised; or it may be because
they were not plunged into the water, Therefore the outward Form and the inward
Baptism of the Holy Ghost is despised of them; when as they may see the vanity
of plunging by (...) forementioned Arguments against it. But will they cast
away (...) outward and inward Seal and Token of the Covenant, when (...) by
persons lawfully called to do it, who do it in the right Form, on the right
Parties, with the right Matter, and to the right end* and all (...) confirmed
by the Holy Ghost as by a faithful witness that cannot ^e? But will they
despise the Baptism of the Holy Ghost, because it was do^^ upon Infants, or
because they were sprinkled and not plunged into the water? And so like Witches
renounce the Covenant of Grace, and (...) away both the outward and inward
Seals of it, when they enter into Covenant with the Devil; so these people, it
is to be feared, many of them do commit that unpardonable sin, when they turn
Anabaptists, despising and trampling under feet the Spirit of God, whereby they
should be S^^led to the day of Redemption; For commonly they go on in a final
(...), and not one of Ten thousand ever returns; yea, many of them in these
days are ran so far from God, that they do not believe that there is either God
or Devil, Heaven or Hell, Church of Grace or Glory; Thus they are now fallen to
notorious Atheism, calling themselves Seckers of the forementioned things,
which for the present they have lost.

FINIS.

