THE ORDINANCE OF Excommunication Rightly stated and vindicated From several
false Opinions concerning it.
By a Lover of TRUTH and PEACE.
Feb. 17. 1645.
Imprimatur.

John Downame.

THere has been much debate about the Ordinance of Excommunication: some say
there is no such thing, others say, it is a humane Ordinance, and to be
executed by the Magistrate; others hold it to be a divine Ordinance, and yet
all the Members of the Church must have equal power in the execution of it:
others say it belongs only to the Eldership, yet not to be done without the
consent of the Church, that they may the better preserve the unity of it: and
some say, they are to be cast out from all the public Ordinnances: Others say,
they are to be cast out only from some of them: And some say, they are to be
cast out for ignorance, or at least suspended from the Lords Supper: others
say, none but only for scandal. These divisions have hindered our expectation
of a settled government; we have waited long, and still Reformation sticks in
the place of breaking forth of children, Hos. 13.13. and the mean time the
soul of the Church (like the Shunamite) is vexed and grieved within her, and
all the Prophets seem to say, Let her alone, for the Lord has hid it from me,
and has not told it me; 2 King 4.27. They speak not, then I said, I will show
mine opinion, the Spirit within me constrains me, Job. 22.16, 17. because the
child of Reformation is come to the birth, and there is no strength to bring
forth, Isa. 37.3. therefore we mourn and humble our selves, that scandalous
persons might be taken from among us, 1 Cor. 5.2. and the Ordinances of Christ
kept from pollution, that we might offer unto the Lord a pure offering, Mal.
1.11. that the Lord might smell a savor of ^est, and that the glory of the
Lord might dwell in our Land, Isa. 8.59.

The Ordinance of Excommunication may be thus defined, It is a divine censure,
inflicted by the E^^ership being Church Officers) in a ^egall ^a^, upon
scandalous persons, that ^ither by the leaven of false Doctrine undermine h^
Truths o^ the Gospel, or by the leaven of Prophannesse, trample it under foot,
and the extent of it is to debar them from all the public Ordinances of
Christ, till they be ashamed, and upon Reformation and satisfaction to the
Church they may here-admitted in again.

The two first branches of the definition I shall put together, because the
proving of one proves the other.

First, Excommunication is a divine Censure, because both the keys were given
to the Ministry, the key of Doctrine, and the key of Discipline: It is not said
to the Church, that they shall have the keys, but says Christ to Peter, I
will give thee the keys; Mat. 16.19. and whatsoever the Ministry, or
Church Officers shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and what they
loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven; Chap. 18.17, 18. and, what sins ye
remit, shall be remitted, and what sins ye retain shall be retained, Joh.
20.23.

Secondly, it is a divine Censure, because it was inflicted only by
Church Officers: Paul says, I have judged, and do not ye judge those that are
within: cast out therefore that wicked person, 1 Cor. 5.12 13. and says Paul,
he that troubles you, shall have his judgment, whoever he be, Gal. 5.10. and
he received of the Lord that which he delivered to them, 1 Cor. 11.23. it was
not done by the Minister alone, nor by all the Church, but it was inflicted by
many, 2 Cor. 2.6. and this was the Eldership or Church Officers, because,

Thirdly, If this divine Censure be not done, the Church Officers only are
blamed for it, the Lord said unto the Angel or Ministry of the Church of
Thyatyra, I have some thing against thee, because thou suffer Iezabell to
seduce my servants, and the Lord has something against the Angel or Ministry
of the Church of Pergamus, because they had some among them that hold the
Doctrine of Balaam, Revel. 2.14, 20.

Fourthly, Excommunication is a divine Censure, and not a humane Ordinance,
because it was in the Christian Church before they had either humane Laws or
Magistrates in it: and afterward, when they had Kings and Einperours in the
Church, they have submitted themselves to this Ordinance.

Fifthly, It is a divine Censure, because the Church is commanded to obey them
that have the rule over them, who also have spoken unto them the Word of God,
and they watch for their souls, as they that must give an account, Heb. 13.7,
17. as they rule in their family, so they must rule in the Church; for both
must obey them, 1 Timothy 3 4 5.

Then this is contrary to their now Model, who utterly deny that there is any
such Ordinance, and would have the Magistrate to rule in the, Church with
regal power, as they rule in the State, but this is to dethrone. Christ of his
Kingly Office in the Church, who placed them to rule so in the State only, and
not in the Church, by the positive Laws of the Land. But Ministers rule
Ministerially by the Word only, and in obedience to Christ and not to men.

Secondly, This is contrary to them who hold that all the Congregation must
rule, judge and censure, but if all should be rulers, who should they rule? and
if all should judge and censure, who should they judge and censure? it was the
Apostles and Elders, those Church Officers in that Synod at Jerusalem that made
Decrees to be kept, and laid it upon them, they concluded and passed sentence,
Acts 15 19, 28, 16, 4, 21, 25 this Censure of Excommunication was not inflicted
by all, but by many; see 2 Cor. 2.45, 6.

Thirdly, This is contrary to those that would have this divine Censure to be
but a humane Ordinance, and to be inflicted by the Magistrate saying tell the
Church, is to tell the Magistrate, Mat. 18.17 but sure Christ did never intend
that brethren should go to law for every small private offense, but rather tell
the Officers of the Church, and they would admonish them better: then the true
meaning of Christ is this; There was a private offense which one neighbor had
done to another, which should have been decided by two swords, but could not;
hereupon it was brought to the Eldership, and being a private offense they
could not punish him that did the wrong by Excommunicating him, although he was
desperate and was neither sorry for what he had done, neither would make
satisfaction for the wrong now the Eldership could only admonish him
privately, and if that would not reclaim him that did the wrong, from private
injuries, the party wronged was to refrain his company, and to esteem of him
as a heathen or a Publican, but neither the Church, nor other men must, so
esteem of him, till they have the same experience of his injurious dealing with
them: for the Church does not say, we will so esteem of him, but let him be so
to thee, then this could not be a civil Court of Judicatorie, for they had
more power in their hands then to admonish him by words, although the offense
was private, they might imprison, fine, or correct him for his private offense,
in regard he would be neither sorry for his wrong, nor make satisfaction, see
Luke 12.58, 29. Mat. 5.25, 26. but the Eldership could only admonish for a
private offense, although they might cast him out for a public scandal,
having the consent of the Church, then Excommunication is not a humane
Ordinance to be executed by the Civil Magistrate, then this does directly suit
with the Presbyteriall way of Government, who refer matters to the Eldership
(as the Kingdom does to the Parliament) and that Government in this point more
agrees with the Word of God, then any of the other.

The next thing in the definition is, that they ought to be legally
excommunicated, if a man go on in a way of error, so that he undermines the
truth of Doctrine, or Discipline, or by prophannesse trample it under foot,
then the Minister ought not of himself to keep back such a man from any
public Ordinance of Christ; for if this power were in one man's breast it were
as bad as the Pope, or any Prelate in his Diocese, it must be inflicted by
many, 2 Cor. 2.6. then the people must not urge their Minister no do it, nor be
offended with him if he do it not; for he has no power to keep them back from
any Ordinance, nor to keep the Ordinance from them, for necessity is laid upon
them, and we be unto them if they preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16. and
this necessity lies upon them to dispense all the Ordinances of Christ to all
in the Church, till they be legally cast out.

Now the legal way of Excommunication is this; First, there must be a lawful
conviction of the party that is to be cast out, by witnesses before the
Eldership, how this man by error undermines the truth of the Gospel, or by
profaneness tramples it under foot, then the Eldership must admonish him to
leave that wicked course of life: this it may be will make him at least promise
amendment or Reformation; then they must wait a while upon trial, and it may
be he may leave his error, or profane life, but if not, they must call him
before them again, and urge him of his promise, and tell him also, if he do
not reform, they must proceed to cast him out; this it may be will make him
promise more seriously to leave that sinful course, then they ought to
forbear, and try him again, to show themselves loath to cut off a member, if it
be possible to heal it.

But if he have passed the first and second admonition without Reformation,
they must proceed against him, and conclude that he deserves to be cast out, as
Paul says, A man that is an heretic alter the first and second admonition,
reject, Tit. 3.10. yet although they have passed their private censure among
themselves, that he deserves to be cast out, rather then the Ordinance of
Christ should be polluted, as Paul did; and it is likely there was more with
him when he said, I have judged already though absent, that he who has done
this deed may be taken from among you, 1 Cor. 5.2, 3. yet he was not to be
actually and solemnly cast out, till they were gathered together in the Name of
Christ, and with the power of the Lord Jesus Christ, Verse. 4. and to keep the
unity of the Church, they must inform them how they have proceeded against
this man by way of admonition, and still he goes on in his scandalous life,
either undermining, or trampling the Ordinances of Christ under feet, and if
the Church be willing they shall proceed to censure and cast him out: but in
case there be more in the Church against it then for it, then for the peace of
the Church they must forbear and try him again by admonition, and if he go on
still, make it again known to the whole Church, and it may be they will consent
to have him cast out; but if they will not, the Eldership must forbear upon
further trial by admonition, lest they make a breach in the Church, and so the
remedy will be worse then the disease. Thus using the means of admonition, no
doubt in time the man will either be reclaimed, or the Church will give consent
to cast him out, and the peace of it still preserved.

The next thing in the Definition is, to show who must be excommunicated.

I answer: Only scandalous persons, and they are of two sorts; either such as
by the leaven of false doctrine undermine the truths of the Gospel: Or
secondly, such as by the leaven of a profane life trample the Gospel under
foot, both these must be kept out of the Christian Church, or they will be the
mine of it.

First, if any man shall broach and maintain any error, or heresy, against
the truths of Chirst, and by that means seek to destroy the doctrine, or
discipline of the Christian Religion, this is the leaven of the Pharisees and
Sadduces, Matthew. 16.10, 11. and so long as they hold such errors, John would
not admit them into the Christian Church, because like Vipers they would have
eaten out the bewels of the Christian Church: See Mat. 3 7. And for such errors
(says Paul) they must becast out; for a little of this leaven will leaven the
whole lump: therefore (says he) I have confidence in you, in the Lord Jesus
Christ, that you will be none otherwise minded; but he that troubles you shall
have his judgment, whose ever he be, Galat. 5.9 10. If any cause grief to the
Church, sufficient to such a man is this punishment, which was inflicted of
many. 2 Cor. 2.6.

Secondly, this divine censure must be inflicted upon such as have the leaven
of a profane life, else they will make the Lords people abhor the offerings of
the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.17, 22, 24. And Paul hearing of the incestuous man, judges
him worthy to be cast out, and says; Do not ye judge those that are within,
purge out therefore the old leaven, that you may be a new lump; and if that man
will not repent, refrain his company; and if that will not reclaim him, cast
out from among your selves that wicked person, 1 Cor. 5. For as the leaven of
error will eat out both the truth of Doctrine and Discipline, like a canker,
as did the words of Himineus and Phile^us, 2 Timothy 3.17. so profaneness casts
filth upon Religion, and the Professors of it, and makes both to be despised.

But some would have ignorance to be a sufficient cause of casting out, or at
least to keep them from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; but I can find no
such Text, for all came to the Passover without exception, unless they were
legally unclean, and so cast out; and all those young Converts came to the
Lords Supper without any exception, Acts 2.46. and 20.7. If they were baptized,
they were not debarred the other Sacrament; and they baptized multitudes
together, Matthew. 3. and some of them knew not that there was any Holy Ghost,
neither did they know Jesus Christ, till Paul had taught them, Acts 19.1, 2, 3,
4. Yet here is no encouragement for ignorant persons to rush upon the holy
things of God, for they sin fearfully, unless they know God in his names and
Attributes, his works of Creation, works of Grace and Providence, and Jesus
Christ as Mediator in his two Natures, and his Offices, and himself in the
state of innocence, and in the state of corruption, and restored by Christ to
grace here, and to glory in the soul after death, and in the body after the
day of judgment; for, the sinle without knowledge is not good, Prove. 19.2. See
the danger of it, Isa. 5.13. Hos. 4.1. 2 Thessalonians. 1 8. not discerning the Lords
body, they drink judgment: Mark. not the Minister, but to himself, 1 Cor.
11.29. Then if a faithful Minister has showed them the danger, in coming
without knowledge, and labored to teach them, and still they are willingly
ignorant, he may say, Though Israel be not ga, thered, yet shall I be glorious
in the eyes of the Lord, for my work is with my God Isa. 49.4, 5. Here is a
sweet savor to Christ in them that are saved, and in them that perish, 2 Cor.
2.15. This (I say) may comfort him, when they will neither learn knowledge,
nor yet abstain from the Sacrament, and the Church has no power to keep them
back, nor cast them out, unless they oppose the Truth by profaneness or
error.

The next thing in the Definition, is the extent of it, from what must they be
excommunicated?

I answer: From all the public Ordinances of Christ in the Church, Miriam for
sedition against Moses was smitten with leprosy, and the Lord commanded to
shut her out from the camp seven days, Number. 12.8.14. And Vzza for burning
incense, was smitten with leprosy, and dwelt in a several house till the day
of his death, he was cut off from the house of the Lord 2 Chronicles. 26.19 21. And
says Paul, Put away from among your selves that wicked person; and says he, I
would they were even cut off which trouble you, Gal. 5.12. By this it is
plain, that they were cut off from all public Ordinances, which is contrary
to those that would have them debarred from the Lords Supper only, and yet
freely enjoy all other Ordinances, which is no excommunication at all, neither
can any sound reason be given, why they should be kept from one ordinance, when
as they may freely enjoy all the rest.

The last thing in the Definition is, the time how long they are to stand
excommunicated? I answer: Till they be ashamed, and by repentance and
reformation give satisfaction to the Church, and then they may again be
readmitted: the Lord said, that she may be ashamed, shut her out of the camp
seven days, and after that receive her in again, Numb. 12 14. And says Paul,
Have no company with him that he may be ashamed, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. But although
Miriam being a good woman, was ashamed, and repented, yet Vzziah was cut off
from the house of the Lord all the days of his life, because he repented not,
to give the Church satisfaction, they are cast out of the Churches protection
into Satan's hands, to correct them with shame and sorrow, using the very
Devil for the health of the the soul, as Physicians use poison for the health
of the body; but when they (through grief and sorrow) are ashamed, and repent,
and promise reformation, they ought to be again admitted, lest Satan get
advantage, and lest they be swallowed up of overmuch sorrow, 2 Cor. 2.6.7.11.
for their end must be, when they deliver them to Satan to be corrected, that
their spirits may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.5. Neither
does excommunication cut off their right to the Ordinances altogether, only for
the present their souls are desperately sick, and no easy physic will cure
them: says Paul, Himineus and Alexander I have delivered to Satan, that they
may learn not to blaspheme, 1 Timothy 1.20 I suppose there was more with Paul,
when he did this, although they are not expressed; but they were not given
into Satan's to dispose of them at his pleasure; but as the Lord delivered Job
into his hands to correct him, to humble him for his good, so does the Church
deliver them to Satan for shame and sorrow, to make them leave blaspheming,
that their spirits may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus; but they have not
cast them out of their prayers, admonitions, exhortations, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. And
it was to keep the Ordinances from pollution, both for theirs and the Churches
good; but then, if after all this, he shall upon self malice oppose Christ and
the Gospel, as Julian the Emperor did, and the Church discern him to commit
that unpardonable fin, they may declare this, and so leave him to his final
estate, and cease to pray for him, being a sin unto death, and not to be prayed
for, 1 John 5.16. and rather pray for justice upon him, than for any mercy to
him, as Paul did for Alexander the Copper-smith, when he did him much evil, 2 Timothy 4.14. If they bear malicious hatred to the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
anathema maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.22. And if in malice to Christ, they teach any
other Gospel, let them be accursed; yea, I say, let them be accursed, Gal.
1.7.8, 9. If they blaspheme against the Holy Ghost, they shall never be
forgiven, because they say he has an unclean spirit, Mark. 3.29, 30. Such as
tread under foot the blood of the Covenant, whereby they should be sanctified,
and do despite unto the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10.29. Such as these indeed the
Church is to rid their hands of, and leave them to their final estate; but
such a case as this we hear of none but Julian since the Apostles days; but
yet the Ordinance of Excommunication may be inflicted in much mercy to the
soul of him that is cast out, and in love to the Ordinances of Christ, when
they seek to keep them from pollution. And this was the cause why this
Ordinance was given to the Church, to keep the Ordinances from pollution by
heretics and profane persons, the Church having no humane power to defend it
from pollution by the enemies of it in Doctrine and Discipline: But now whole
Kingdoms have received the Christian Faith, and Kings and Magistrates do
assist it, and they make such positive Laws, as may suppress both error and
profaneness, and they are as a Guard about the Church, although they may not
rule as Kings in it, yet they are to see their own Laws observed for the good
of the Church, as nursing fathers to it, and to punish the disturbers of it,
Ezra 7.25, 26. And when Church Officers declare to them, how error eats out
the Truth, and profaneness makes it to be despised, and the Magistrates will
not punish it according to their positive Law, then the Church has this power
to cast them out from the Ordinances of Christ, and not suffer them to be
undermined by heretics, nor trampled upon by profane persons.

But in case the Magistrates be faithful in their places, to punish error and
profaneness, when it is discovered and complained of, according to their
positive Laws; then the Church Officers need not to excommunicate any for many
years together; for this remedy was given to the Church when they had neither
humane Laws nor Magistrates in it, to keep the Ordinances of Christ from
pollution, and it is still to be used, in case the Magistrates be negligent in
their places: As the greater Presbytery is in little use in the Church, it the
lesser Eldership be well governed; but in case that be negligent, the greater
Presbyt^ has the more trouble: For if Magistrates be faithful, they will much
ease them both. But in case they be nor, then (I say) God has provided this
help for the Church, to keep his Ordinances from pollution.

Now that Church Officers may be able to discover error and profaneness, the
Officers must all be proved before they be put into ani^ office, 1 Timothy 3.10.
If Deacons must be so proved, much more should ruling and teaching Elders, they
must be known to have discerning eyes, to foresee the first rise of error,
and of a holy life, to contradict profaneness; when as the chief Magistrate
comes to his place by inheritance, and sometimes is a woman, a child, or weak
in wits, if not profane and careless; and subordinate Magistrates sometimes
are ignorant or careless, and must have Lawyers to make known, who offend
against the Laws of the Land: So the Church had need to have those that are
well skilled in Gods Law, to make known who offends against it, and to judge
of those offenses, and will labor to have them redressed, or their persons
punished, that undermine Gods Law by error, or heresy, or that trample upon
it by profaneness.

Now if profane or erroneous persons shall excommunicate themselves from the
public Ordinances of Christ, either by negligence, or going a whoring after
any Sects, or Schisms, and say their conscience must be free to do so, then
the Magistrate by his positive Laws, must fetch them in, and command obedience
to those public Ordinances in the Church, as the Kings of Judah did, 2 Chro.
17.6, 19, 10, 11, 31, 4, 35, 16. and if they will not obey the Law of God and
the Law of the King, let judgment be speedily executed upon them, either to
death or banishment, confiscation of goods, or imprisonment, Ezra 7.26. and for
their conscience it may be as free as they will to the public Ordinances of
Christ, and the command of man cannot hinder it, unless they despise obedience
to God, for the very hatred they bear to the Magistrate for commanding it: but
by this it appears, that they labor only to have their consciences free to
evil, for they may be free to as much good as they will, and none will hinder
them.

THOMAS BAKEVVELL.

Printed for Henry Shepherd at the Bible in Tower Street, and William Ley at
Paul's Chain near Doctors Commons. 1646.


