REPENTANCE AND PRAYER: OR, The two Fundamental Pillars of the NATION. BEING
The substance of Four Sermons preached at St. Peter's Poor, London.

By that Famous and Reverend Divine RALPH BROWNRIGGE, Formerly Vice-Chancelour
of Cambridge, and lately Lord Bishop of Exeter.

Rev. 14.13. -- Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth,
yea says the spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works do
follow them. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Riland, and are to be sold at the Hand
and Bible in Ducklane. 1660.

To the READER:
Christian READER,
BEing unwilling the Nation should be deprived of so great a benefit as the
works of so eminently learned and pious a Divine, as this our reverend Author:
I could not but (in charity to thee, and in duty to our Authors sacred memory)
offer to public view these Four ensuing Sermons: being preached at St. Peter's
Poor London, when that famous Pillar of the Church, Dr. Holsworth was Preacher
there. As for the Subject matter of them, it is principally concerning the
Duties of Repentance and Prayer, the two Fundamental Doctrines, which every
individual Christian, and the whole Nation in general ought to put in practice;
which duties as they were then Seasonably preached, so I hope they will be now
as opportunely published; this being an Age, wherein there is so much want of
both. I shall not need to expatiate my self, in giving thee a character of our
worthy Author, be being so generally known: I question not but the benefit
which thou shall reap by reading them, will answer the fervent desires of him
who is

Thine in the Lord J. K.

The Texts of the four Sermons.
JOEL 2.14. WHo knows if he will return and repent and leave a blessing
behind him, even a meat offering and a drink offering unto the Lord our God.
PSALM, 78. verse. 34, 35, 36, 37. When he slew them, then they sought him and
turned them early, and enquired aster God, and they remembered that God was
their strength, and that the high God was their Redeemer; nevertheless they did
but flatter him with their mouth, and dissembled with him in their tongue, for
their heart was not whole with him, neither continued they steadfast in his
covenant. LUKE 22. verse 31, 32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan
has desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat: But I have p^ayed for
thee, that thy faith fail not; and when thou art converted, strengthen thy
Brethren. LUKE 11.13. If ye then, being evil; know how to give good gifts unto
your Children; how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to
them that ask him? Joel. 2.14. In Jejunio Publico.
Who knows if he will return and repent and leave a blessing behind him, even
a meat offering and a drink offering unto the Lord our God.
THis prophesy of Joel. 14. It was directed to the Kingdom of Judah in the
reign of Hezekiah and Manasses, after the great overthrow which God brought
upon the other ten Tribes, by the King of Asyria, and in it the Prophet
foretells the Captivity of Babylon, threatens a great Judgment and destruction
upon the whole Land.

And this Judgment it is described under the representation of an army, and
that army of Locusts, either thereby intimating a succession of two sorts of
judgments; First of Famine, by a dreadful swarm of noisome Locusts, that
should consume the fruit of the earth. the Second is of war, by the power of
the Chaldaeans that should wast and destroy Judah and Jerusalem, and carry them
away Captive to Babylon.

These two, the breakings of the staff of bread, or sending amongst them the
Sword of the enemy which are Gods two puissant armies against a sinful Nation:
or otherwise, the Army of Locusts, betoken but one Judgment, either that of
Locusts, noisome vermin shall come upon their Land like a mighty Army, he
destroyed Egypt with such an Army, and verse. 25. God himself calls them his
great Army or else it signifies the Army of the Chaldeans, and they shall come
upon the Land like a swarm of Locusts to wast and destroy.

Thus the Egyptians and Assyrians, are compared to Bees and Flies, Isa. 7.18.
God shall hiss for them, and they shall come flying, and light upon the Land
of Judah, take them either way, the one is a fit resemblance and tipe of the
other, the Locust they are Gods Army, they shall come in battle array and make
spoil of the Land; or otherwise, the Chaldeans they are as a swarm of
Locusts, their enemies shall break in upon them like Caterpillars and Locusts,
and shall waste and consume, as those creatures do without any resistance. This
judgment being denounced against them, the Prophet calls the Jews to
re^entance, that being the only possible means to divert this judgment.

Flesh and blood indeed, when we heat of Armies of enemies, cast about for
other ways to defend them; this seeking ^o God by repentance, and casting our
^elves upon his help, they have no list to (...); when the Assirians assaulted
Judah, God offered King Ahaz, this help, no, he ^ould not trouble God, he would
not ^empt the Lord forsooth, he was so modest as not to be beholden to God for
a^ deliverance; any other way would please him better, as Dominicus Soto tells
us, of a ridiculous and superstitious practice i^ Spain, to drive away Locusts,
when those swarms, anoyed the Country, the country people would enter an action
against the^ in their Courts; and Proctors and Advocates, were assigned to
plead for them and then the Judge, he sentenced them and did excommunicate and
accurs^ them.

Sure all others means without this (...) repentance are of no use, mere
charm^ and mock-helps; neither Caterpille^ nor Chaldeans, Armies of Locusts,
(...) swarms of enemies, can be driven bac^ but by repentance; so then the
pu^pose of the Prophet in this Chapter to call them to repentance, and he
pr^scribes repentance suitable to their condition;

First to the condition of their si^ their sins were general and nationa^ they
had all corrupted their ways.

Secondly the judgment threate^ that was general, an overflowing sw^^ as
Isaiah calls it. Isa. 28.15. Sword go through the Land: Ezekiel. 14.17. An end is
coming upon the four corners of the Land. Ezekiel. 7.2. Now sure the Plaster
must be as broad as the sore.

First. So accordingly he invites to a general and national humiliation, it
was to be proclaimed by the sound of the Trumpet, verse. 15. not by a knock at a
private man's door, the trumpet was to call together the whole congregation,
Number. 10.2. And if ye look to the first ^erse of this 2 Chap. of Joel, then the
judgment comes with a trumpet, it sounds an alarm, it threatens all the
inhabitans of the Land; if God threatens with a trumpet, we must call to
repentance with a trumpet; with as loud and shrill a sound, that the whole
nation may be warned; it must be Zephanies humi^iation, Zeph. 2.1, 2. Gather
your selves together, O Nation not to be desired, it must be like the fast of
expiation, which was the yearly fast in Israel, all must numble themselves, it
is a day of atonement, Levit. 23.28, 29. For to make an atonement for you
before the Lord your God whatsoever soul it shall be that shall not be
afflicted, in the same day he shall be cut off from among his people;
personal, and private humiliation, is not of that prevailing efficacy in
general danger; God tells the Jews that the prayers of two or three, though
never so righteous men, Ezekiel. 14.14. As Noah, Daniel, and Job, should not
divert a judgment from a whole Nation, they might escape themselves; but if
the Nation repented not, the whole Land should perish; there is more must go to
the removing of a general judgment; we may spit out a spark, or one man's
diligence may quench a small fire, but when a whole Town is on fire, every man
must bring his Bucket. One man's prayer to remove a National Judgment, is as if
we go about to quench a raging fire by spri^kling a little water out of a
casting bottle; see this practiced by the Jews, 1 Samuel 7.2. all the house of
Israel lamented before the Lord, and see how they expressed and testified it,
verse the 6. they gathered together to Mispah, and draw water, and poured it
out before the Lord, and fasted on that day, and said there, we have sinned
against the Lord, their eyes were as buckets, their heads fountains of tears.

And is not a fire kindled amongst us, how many smoking firebrarnds are
scattered through the Land, we may say of our present sad condition as our
Prophet Joel speaks, Joel. 1.2. Hear this you old men and give ear all the
Inhabitants of the Land, has this been in your days, or in the days of your
fathers, who can remember such distractions in our kingdom, when did this
kingdom shake and totter as now it does; first troubles in the North, when
that's quenched, the flame breaks out in Ireland, sparks scattered amongst our
selves, as Ezekiel prophesies, mischief shall come upon mischief, and rumor
shall come upon rumor, Ezekiel. 7.26. Thus out humiliation should be general,
and as it must be general humiliation, so secondly it must be solemn by the
help of a fast not to eat the bread of men.

First to testify our inward sorrow, the body must be afflicted.

Secondly, by this solemn fast to protest our unworthiness of the least
support of life or refreshing, not worthy of the portion (of Whelps) of the
crumbs that fall from the table.

Thirdly, to express our earnestness and importunity of prayer, and calling
upon God, that we will lie prostrate before God, take no denial, not eat bread
till he granted our petitions, as Saul vowed, not once to eat till he had
obtained his victory; as David vowed, not to sleep or slumber till he had
effected his desire, now this duty of repentance and humiliation, it is pressed
upon them by a double motive; the first is the denouncing of judgment, and
that not barely foretold, but exactly described in a dreadful manner the more
to affect them; God musters up his force and sets them in battle array, from the
2. verse to the 12. the Chariots of God are 20. thousand, even thousand of
judgments, and the Lord is among them to turn the battle to the gate, ah, this
will work fear, and fear is a good ingredient to repentance; thus he urges his
people to repentance by the presenting of terrors; Amos 4.12. Therefore thus
will I do unto thee O Israel, and because I will do this unto thee prepare to
meet thy God O Israel; thus Habbakuk was afflicted with the threatenings of
judgment chapter 3.16. when I heard my belly trembled, my lips quivered at the
voice, rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in my self; God
looks for this submission, that we should be startled at his judgments, the
Lion has roared who will not fear, Amos the 3.8. moved with fear, that's one
motive, and that drives us to repentance.

But then he adds a second, and that's hope that draws us to repentance;
repentance it is a compounded thing of fear and hope, it takes motives, both
from Law and Gospel, and yet it works most kindly by Evangelicall means,
that's hope of mercy, and that is the motive in my text, quis novit, who knows,
so that the former was an affrightment to repentance, this in my text is an
encouragement to repentance upon hope of mercy, and in it observe two things.

First the matter of their hope.

Secondly the measure of their hope.

First see the matter of their hope and in it, there are 4 particulars.

First, the matter of their hope is, their regaining of Gods favor, he will
return.

Secondly the recalling of his judgments, he will repent.

Thirdly, the renewing of his mercies, he will leave a blessing behind him.

Fourthly, the reestablishment of his worship amongst them, a meat offering and
a drink offering to the Lord our God, that's the first thing, the matter of
their hope. The second thing is the measure of their hope, and that's somewhat
strange, it is very considerable, it is quis novit who knows. Come we to the
matter of their hope.

The first is regaining of Gods favor, that he will return, his turning away
signifies his displeasure, that he has no delight in us, but is provoked and
offended; his returning to us, it is the renewing of his favor, and of his
good will toward us when he vouchsafes us his presence, and rests amongst us,
so then for the understanding the nature of this mercy, this return of God will
afford us these Considerations.

First, it is the main happiness of a nation to enjoy Gods presence, to have
him dwell amongst us.

Secondly, it is the bitter fruit of sin that causes God to withdraw his
presence and to turn away from us.

Thirdly, it is the blessed fruit of repentance that recovers Gods presence,
causes God to return graciously to us.

First I say it is the main happiness of a Nation to enjoy Gods presence, to
have him dwell amongst us, this happiness by Gods presence will appear by
three great advantages which his presence, and abode, brings a people.

The first advantage is, Gods presence and abode with a people it is the
holiness of a Nation, where he dwells and vouchsafes his presence, that people
by virtue of that presence becomes an holy Nation, all Holiness comes by
participation it is not inbred in us, but derived from him who is holiness it
self, and participation comes by union with him, a people near to him are an
holy people, he is the Holy one of Israel, and by that near relation, they are
made an holy people to the Lord their God, Deuteronomy. 7.6. We see that this presence
of God makes a people holy, even by that legal and cerimoniall holiness
amongst the Jews.

First the Land of Israel it was called an holy Land, because God dwelt in it,
and vouchsafed his presence in it; he would not have it polluted or defiled;
defile not the Land which ye shall inhabit, wherein I dwell, for I the Lord
dwell amongst the Children of Israel, Number. 35.34.

2 Jerusalem it is called an holy City because it was the city of the great
King, God dwelt in her palaces, therefore it was accounted a sacred, and a holy
City, the Temple, because his name dwelt there, 2 Chronicles. 7.16. I have
sanctified this house that my name may be there for ever. All other Nations
because God was estranged from them, were an unclean people, every other Land
a polluted Land; here is one great excellency a Nation gains by retaining of
God amongst them, they were more to God then all other Nations in the world, a
kingdom of Priests and an holy Nation; thus we see God promises to dwell in
the midst of Sion, Zech. 2.10. And then he tells them (in the 12th verse) that
he will inherit Judah his portion in in the holy Land; for this cause the
unclean were to be put out of the Camp of Israel, Number. 5.3. That they defile
not their Camp in the midst whereof God did dwell; while we retain his
presence amongst us, we are unholy people; but if we cause him to depart, we
are as the uncircumcised and a profane people.

2. A second advantage of Gods presence is, that it is the glory of a Nation,
it is the high dignity and renown, and honor of a people that God abides with
them, as St Paul speaks, Romans 3.1. What advantage then has the Jew, what is
this dignity in having God so near them? much every way, thus Moses sets out
the dignity of the Jews from the near reference 'twixt God and them, Deuteronomy.
26.18. God has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, and to make
thee high above all Nations which he has made, in praise, and in name, and in
honor, this nearness of his presence he compares (in the 13. of Jeremy, the
11. verse) to a girdle, cleaving to his loins; as a girdle cleaves to the loins
of a man, so have I caused thee to cleave unto me, that they might be unto me
for a people, and for a name, and for a praise and for a glory: So likewise,
Isa. 43.4. Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, and
I have loved thee; when God reckons up the dignities of his people, this is the
main, of Sion, it shall be said that he was born in her; thus Moses reminds the
Israelites, wherein their dignity consisted, Deuteronomy. 10.21. He is thy praise, and
he is thy God; many titles of honor amongst men, but this is the truly
honorable title that we have a God near to us, Deuteronomy. 4.7. What Nation is there
so great who has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is to us; while he
vouchsafed his presence to them, how renowned were they, when he withdrew
himself and cast them off, then were they a vile people? the hatred and scorn
and hissing of all Nations.

A third advantage, that Gods presence brings, it is the strength and safety of
a Nation, Psalm 46.5. God is in the midst of her, therefore shall she not be
moved; Balaam could not fasten a curse upon Israel while God was amongst them,
and this encouraged the people of Israel against the Canaanites, Numb. 14.9.
Their defense is departed from them, and the Lord is with us, fear them not,
though Giants and Cities walled up to heaven, yet fear them not. So Moses
incourages them, Deuteronomy. 4.21. Thou shall not be affrighted at them, for the Lord
thy God is among you, a mighty God and terrible. And so on the contrary, when
the people would needs go up to fight against the Canaanites, Numb. 14.42.
Moses dissuaded them, God had then withdrawn himself, Go not up, for the Lord
is not among you, Sampson wist not that God was departed from him, Moses
laments when God said he would not go with them; so the Psalmist, Thou go
not forth with our Armies, his presence is our Palladium, our shield and rock,
the shields of the earth belong unto God; well then if such good comes from
Gods presence amongst us, it is worth the iniquity, wherein does this presence
of God consist, how is he said and known to dwell in a Nation? Go^ has a
manifold presence.

First his substantial presence, so he (...) present in all places, he fills
heaven an^ earth, Jer. 23.24. The heaven of he^^vens cannot contain him says
Solomon Stand in aw of him, he is in all places.

Secondly, he has a glorious presenc^ there where his glory and Majesty mos^
appears, that is in the heavens, I will dwell in the high and holy place, Heaven
i^ his Throne.

Thirdly, he has a powerful presence, when he manifest^ himself by any
remarkable work, thus the Israelites questioned his presence when they were in
want, is the Lord among us yea or no? Jacobs vision made him say, God was in
this place.

Fourthly, he has a gratiou, presence by which he dwells amongst us, I that
gracious, and merciful, and beneficial presence is that we speak of, there
where he dwells.

First, God dwells in a Nation which he chooses to be his peculiar people, the
people of his Covenant and Worship, a^ David said, the Lord has chosen Jacob
to be his inheritance, thus Hosea calls the Nation and Country of the Jews,
Hosea 9.3. the Lords Land, and the world is his by dominion; but by special
purchase and possession; so the Church is his, that is like the Lords Demeans.

Secondly the place of Gods delight, that is the residence of his presence,
delight fixes a man to his abode, when we are such a people that God takes
pleasure in us, Here will I dwell for I have a delight in it, Psalm 132.23, 14.
The Lord has chosen Sion, he has desired it for his habitation, here will I
dwell.

Thirdly there we are to reckon of Gods presence, where he settles his family;
that is the usual place of presence and abode, where we see God gathers to
himself a Church, is daily collecting to himself a people to know him and
worship him; there we may conclude that God vouchsafes his presence, Christ is
thus described to walk amongst the seven golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1.13. where
it may be said of a people or place as God said of Corinth, Acts 18.10. I have
much people in this City, many names amongst you, there resolve that God is
present; when they grow thinner and thinner, God is removing.

Fourthly, There we conclude is a place of presence and abode, where a man
bestows most cost, a Lord will keep up all his possessions, so does God the
world, but his choicest care is for his Mansion House; do we see a people
enriched with his choicest blessings, his eyes are over them continually, no
favor too dear for them, sure God dwells amongst such a people.

Fifthly, a man is said to dwell where his abode is most constantly; Sometimes
God makes in his progress, some excursions into other places, as he did to
Ninive by Jonah, he may be sometimes as a wayfaring man that lodges for a
night, Jer. 14.18. Some rare tokens of presence; but where his Ordinances are
constantly, and he fixes them, that is the place of his presence, we have done
with the first, his presence it is the happiness of a Nation.

Secondly, consider, it is the bitter fruit of sin, that causes God to withdraw
his presence, and to turn away from us; this is the malignanant effect of sin
in general, that is parts God and us, causes him to withdraw and turn away from
us, his delight is to be in the habitable world, to be amongst the sons of men,
but sin and wickedness causes him to withdraw and estrange himself from us,
thus Cain complained, Genesis 4.14. I am cast away from thy face, So Saul upon his
disobedience cried out, 1 Samuel 28.15. God is departed from me; it was the
woeful condition of all mankind, that by nature we are strangers from God, nay
without God in the world, so Paul tells them at Lystra, that God suffered all
Nations to walk in their own ways, never owned or regarded them, our sins
separate twixt God and us.

Secondly, not only the world of wicked men reap this fruit by their sin, but
Gods own people find this uncomfortable desertion, when they grievonsly
offended, he turns away from them, this Moses showed them a visible resemblance
of, Exodus 33.7. the people there had sinned against God, then it is said, Moses
took the Tabernacle and pitched it without the Camp, afar off from the Camp;
thereby signifying Gods displeasure against them, and his departure from them,
as appears, the Tabernacle was to be in the midst of the Host; but he was
offended and withdrew himself.

Thirdly, may not only his visible Church, but even his darling Saints find
this woeful effect, that their sins brings upon them, that God stands aloof
off, and withdraws from them; how often does David mourn for this, and pray
against it, Psalm 10.1. Why stand thou afar off O Lord, Why hidest thou thy
self in time of trouble, Psalm 38.21. Forsake me not O Lord, O be not far from
me, upon his sin of adultery, O cast me not away from thy presence, this the
Saints find often and feel if they turn unto folly, God stands afar off, not to
hear them, nor to help them, not to own them; Tertullian gives a reason, the
holy spirit is a delicate thing, it will not rest in a defiled soul.

Fourthly, especially some sins of his people are of higher provocation, set
him off from us.

First, as blood, and oppression and violence, that cast off Cain; so God says
he would remove Judah out of his sight for the bloodshed of Manasses, When you
make long prayers I will not hear you, your hands are full of blood, Isa. 1.15.
verse.

Secondly, a secure neglect of Gods offers of grace, that turns him from us,
when he stretches out his hands to us, and we will not come into him, then said
God I will get me to my own place. This cost the Spouse sorrow, when Christ
knocked, and she refused to open, Cant. 5.6. At last I opened to my beloved, but
my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone.

3 Thirdly, falseness in his covenant, or^upting of his Religion, that turns
him from us: So what that works, Zach. 11.^. My soul loathed them and their
soul also ^bhorred me, it was the casting off of the ^sraelites, Psalm
106.39.40. They were de^led with their own works, and went a whoing with their
own inventions, then he abhorred his own inhetitance; it made him forsake the
tabernacle in Shilo, the tent which he had pitched amongst them, 78.60.

Fourthly, incorrigiblness in the use of the means of reformation, when God
strives with them and they resist him, it was the case of the old world; his
spirit should strive no more with them, but he cast them off. They rebelled
against him and vexed his holy spirit. Isa. 63.10. Therefore he was turned to
be their enemy and he fought against them, thus God is giving over Judah as
desperate, Isa. 1.5. Why should ye be smitten any more.

Thirdly, consider it is the blessed fruit of repentance, that it can recover
God presence, causes him to return graciously to us; when I name repentance, I
understand, a real, cordial, spiritual repentance, that, and that only can
regai^ Gods favor, and return him to us; tha^ you may the better acquaint your
selve with this necessary and sovereign duty not to enter into any large
discourse o^ the nature of it, this solemn repentance will require of you these
three actions.

First, humiliation; Secondly, lamentation and deprecation; Thirdly,
reformation.

I will exemple to you out of the repentance of the Ninivites.

First, they put themselves to great humiliation, the King himself rose from
his throne, laid his robes from him, and covered him with sackcloth, and sat
in ashes, nay, man and beast were covered with sackcloth, prostrating, and
debasing themselves before an angry God; we must put our mouths in the dust,
to be ashamed, and abasht, and abhor our selves in dust and ashes; that's their
humiliation.

Secondly, their lamentation or deprecation, they cried mightily unto God;
Jonah 3. verse 8. The spirit of lamentation and supplication must abound in us;
not ordinary perfunctory prayers, but we must strive and wrestle in prayer, as
it is said of Jacob how he prevailed with God, he had power over the Angel and
prevailed, he wept and made supplication unto him, Hosea. 12.4.17. This God
prescribes to the Priests, let the Priests the Ministers of the Lord weep
between the Porch and the Altar, and say spare thy people O Lord.

Thirdly, their reformation, that's a main point in the Ninivits repentance, let
them every one turn from his evil way, and from the violence that is in their
hands, violence that was the sin of Nineveh, it was an oppressing people, it
was that which mainly prevailed with God, see verse the 10. God saw their works
that they turned from their evil way, and God repented, he saw their
humiliation, he heard their lamentation, but yet that which pleased him best
was their reformation; that's the fat of the sacrifice; is this the fast that I
have required or chosen, a day for a man to afflict his soul, to bow down his
head like a bull rush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him; is not this
the fast that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to let the
oppressed go free, Isa. 58.5.6. Such repentance is like to prevail with him,
let him be turned away he will draw near to us and vouchsafe us his presence,
see two places, Psalm. 38.18. The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken
heart, and saves all such as be of a contrite spirit, Isa. 57.15. I dwell in
the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite spirit, revive the
spirit of the humble.

First, repentance so pleases him that the very thoughts and intendments of
repentance prevail with him, thus David found it: Psalm 32.5. I said I will
confess my sins unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin, so
God promised before you speak, I will hear and answer you.

Secondly, the imperfect acts of repentance prevail with him, if true and
sincere though not according to the purification of the sanctuary, David cries
out I have sinned, presently God absolves him.

Thirdly, nay God is so propitious to repentance, that even outward repentance
(if it be serious) has some good success with him for the escaping of temporal
judgments; Ahab was a wicked man, his sorrow was not for sin, but for fear of
punishment, yet God passed by him for that time upon his humiliation; so the
Israelites repentance, Psalm 78. Was an unsound repentance, yet upon that he
was so merciful that he would not destroy them.

First reason, it is the property of a gracious nature to relent upon
submission and deprecation, not to be implacable and revengefull, it is so with
men, how much more is God graciously inclined, he is slow to anger, ready to
forgive; two rare properties amongst men, those that are soon angry, if they be
soon pleased, we count them good natures, on the contrary they go too often
together, hardly angered and hardly pleased; but God is hardly angered, soon
pleased; if thy brother comes and say it repents me, forgive him.

A second reason, especially when the breach is amongst friends, then love will
be soon revived, thus it is twixt God and his people, though he be angry, yet
he remembers his old loving kindnesses, as Isay. 16.6. I will remember the
days of thy youth, twixt God and his people, there is a league of love, and
love it is soon intreatable, repentance removes the matter of Gods anger and
displeasure, fire burns no longer then the fuel feeds it, our sins are the
fuel of his wrath, repentance removes them, and his wrath cease, namely it
is his own gracious covenant, the sweet condescension of the Gospel, he has
conditioned with us, if ye repent, he will be merciful we owe it to Christ,
and the Gospel, thus our Repentance prevails with him.

Come we to the second particular of this hope that he will repent, that's
another gracious effect of our Repentance, it will cause God to repent; a
strange work to see God repent, Repentance it is for man, and for sinful man,
God is not as man that he should repent. 1. Sam. 15.29. Repentance it is but in
two cases, neither incident unto God.

First, when any thing happens upon our actions which we did not foresee, God
is not mistaken, known to the Lord are all his works from the beginning.

Secondly, when we do that which we do not approve, Gods works are all holy and
unblameable, why should he repent? and yet we see the Scripture uses this
language, it repented the Lord that he had made man, and it grieved him at his
heart. Genesis 6.6. So it is said in Samuel it repented the Lord that he had made
Saul King. 1. Sam. 15.35. Not that God has those motions and affections which
we find and feel when we repent.

For first Repentance changes us, there is no change in God.

Secondly, Repentance afflicts us, God is not subject to any sorrowful
affliction.

Thirdly, Repentance condemns and blames that action of which we repent, all
the actions of God are just and holy, and unreproveable; it is a speech after
the manner of men, not that God has the affections of Repentance, but he
exercises those actions which in man do flow from Repentance; when God changes
his deeds and dealing with men, then the Scripture says he repents; Repentance
in God imports a change in some affect of his, no change of his mind, Gregory
says he is said to reverse his sentence, but not to alter his Council; or take
it thus, Repentance has a double aspect, first, it looks backward to what has
been done, so it is Nolle fecisse, I wish I had not done so, this action is not
in God, he is never sorry for what he has done.

2. Repentance looks forward and so it is Noble ultra facere I will do so no
more, this God assumes to himself. I will punish no more; I will change my
dealings, bless where I cursed, promise where I threatened, yet we must not part
with this sweet expression of Gods repenting toward us, we see God clothes
himself with this repenting and melting affection, it repented the Lord because
of their groanings, Judges. 2.18. He repented according to the multitude of his
mercies, Psalm 106.45. So God threatens many Judgments, then adds, the Lord
repented of this, it should not be, Amos 5.7. See how Gods relenting and
reversing his threatenings, agrees with his repenting.

First, in all their afflictions, he was afflicted, Esaias. 63.9. How does he
seem to condole their punishments, She has received of the Lords hand double
for all her sins, Isa. 40.2. How shall I give thee up Ephraim, my heart is
turned within me, my repentings are kindled together.

Secondly, that is another expression of Repentance to break off the curse that
was intended, thus God assumes Repentance, if he has punished, he will cease
from punishing, if he has threatened he will cancel his threatenings, if he has
passed Sentence he will reverse it, he desires to repent of the evil he has
purposed against them.

Thirdly, he that repents is angry with all that provoked him to do what he
repents of, or were helpers, or instruments in the doing of it, thus does God
all those that had any hand in afflicting o^ his people, he is highly
displeased with them, as a Parent casts the rod into the fire; he will afflict,
those that afflicted his people: thus God threatens Edom Thou should not
have looked upon the day of thy brother, in the day that he became to be a
stranger, Obad. 12. verse: thus Go tells Abraham, The Nation that shall oppress
them I will judge.

Fourthly, he that repents of what (...) has done, will do the quite contrary
so God repents over his people, has (...) affrighted them with threatenings,
(...) will refresh them with promises? Ha^^ he afflicted them with punishments,
he will comfort them with blessings, He has wounded us, and he will heal us.

Fifthly, a true penitent will vow the contrary, so does God swear to them to
spare them; for this is as the waters of Noah unto me; For as I have sworn that
the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth, so have I sworn that I
would not be wroth with thee nor rebuke thee, Isaiah 54.9.

Sixthly, a true Penitent will not only do the contrary, but do a great deal
more, redeem his former action by a double amendment, so God repents of
afflicting his people, for a little anger a great deal of love and mercy, For a
small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather thee,
in a little wrath I hid my face from thee, but with everlasting kindnesses will
I have mercy upon thee, Isa. 54.7, 8.

3. The third matter of their hope, is he renewing of his mercies, he will
^eave a blessing behind him, here is a ^hird benefit, by repenting, it gives us
^ope to recover his former mercies, it prevails with God, not only to free
(...) from judgments, but to store us with blessings, this good we get by
turning an^ repenting, we shall not be losers b^ Gods Judgments and
afflictions, it i^ here graciously promised, verse 25. (...) will restore to
you the years that the Locust have eaten, the Canker-worm and the C^terpiller
and the Palmer-worm, my great Army which I sent amongst you, not only no more
annoyance by them, but yo^ shall regain your losses, not feel the smart of
former Judgments, these a^^ the welcomes that Repentance finds a Gods hand, it
does not barely set us i^ the state we were before, but betters o^^ condition:
thus the loving father received his Prodigal, Luk 15. and not only pardons
him, but embraces him, not only clothes him, but adorns him: this is the
Superperdium of mercy, this is the dow^ry of Repentance; where he pa^dons, he
does not only take off hi^ Judgments, but brings mercy upon them; is this the
manner of me^^ O Lord, we count it fair favor to e^cape deserved punishment,
but over a^ above to be laden with mercies; and the manner of expression is to
be observed.

First, It is called a blessing.

Secondly, a leaving a blessing behind him.

First to leave a blessing, no doubt they meant plenty and abundance, that
which the Locusts had not already devoured; First this speech acknowledges our
being undone, and desert to lose all; that is one fruit of Repenrance; If we
enjoy any comfort it is his goodness, a true penitent confesses he has
forfeited all, it is his goodness that he takes it not.

Secondly, see how Repentance has purified and refined their Language;
Prosperity, Plenty, the fruits of the earth were our own before, all in Esau's
style, I have enough, or in Nabal's, My bread and my flesh, it is either
Natures bounty, or the fruits of our labor, all of our own acquiring, thus we
over possess the things of this life, but when we repent the Prophet will
teach us to call them as they are, blessings from his holy hand, our peace,
before it was the wisdom of the State, or the dread of our enemies, or our
riches and strength; but after a judgment, Repentance will teach us to call
them as they are, blessings from God, and to whom to ascribe it.

Thirdly, see how Repentance will cause us to set a right estimate upon them,
not so much to own them, as comforts, as love them as blessings, that is to
take comfort in them as fruits of his hand, pledges of his favor, seals of our
Reconciliation.

Fourthly, it will point us to the true Author, they are not fortune, but his
hand leaves them to us, not our enemies, not the Surplussage of a judgment,
but he has commanded a blessing for us.

2. It is said, leaving a belssing beind him, What means that? It has three
powers in it, in it are three intimations.

It sets out the just order of blessing, First, favor, then fruit of favor,
Repentance. First aims at recovering of favor, Pardon my sin, O Lord, cast me
not away from thy presence, most anxious for that after, that it hopes and
expects other mercies, Oh a true Penitent prises Gods favor better then life
it self, or the means of life, other means are additions, it is an unworthy
love to love God for his blessings, and for himself.

Secondly, it sets out the measure of blessing; Repentance counts it an high
favor, though God afflicts us, yet that he does not consume us; though the
Locusts come, or any other judgment, and God means to chasten us, yet it shall
be in measure; it is our comfort, that when he punishes, that he remembers
mercy not to suffer his whole displeasure to rise, that he punished us in
judgment, not in fury, this Isaiah acknowledges, Isa. 1.7. Except the Lord had
left us a small Remnant, we had been as Sodom; so Jeremy acknowledges this
mercy in the captivity, That we are not utterly consumed: So God promises
Ezech. 14.22. Yet behold, there shall be left a remnant, both sons and
daughters.

Thirdly, it shows the continuance; though he chastise us, yet he leaves a
blessing, it is a comfort to a Penitent, that God reserves mercy till
afterward, that his anger it is like a Land flood, non durabit aetatem, that he
will do us good at the latter end, after our chastisements, as it was a great
encouragement, that Jeremy was commanded to purchase at Anathoth, fields shall
be bought, here is the contrary vicissitude of Gods dealing with the wicked, he
may begin in mercies, but he will end in judgments; contrary with his Church,
he may begin with chastisements, but it shall close up well; he will leave a
blessing behind him, Job 's portion, his captivity was returned to do them good.

Fourthly, come we to the fourth matter of their hope, a meat offering and a
drink-offring to the Lord our God, that is a main blessing, they hope to recover
by their repentance, it is a pregnant prayer, and many particulars in it.

First, the end they aim at in seeking deliverance from their enemies; that
they might appear in his Temple, and worship him; if then we ask peace and
safety to the purpose, that we might enjoy opportunities of serving of God, let
him have the glory, so Zachary teaches u^ this Lesson in the 1. of Luke, 74,
75. That we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies might serve him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
life, it troubled David that he was excluded the house of God, Paul teaches us
to pray for our Governors, 1 Timothy 2.2. That we may live in peace and
quietness in all godliness and honesty, peace without piety it is a carnal
peace; this made David pray for the peace of Jerusalem, Our feet shall stand in
thy gates. Peace is Gods hedge, about his Church, if his service prosper not
break down the hedge.

Secondly, it is the fruit of our Repentance to offer meat offerings, what were
the Sacrifices of thanksgiving, Psalm 51. I, when we have appealed by
Repentance, then our Services and Sacrifices shall be accepted, till we be
reconciled, all our oblations are abominations, he will not smell in our solemn
Assemblies; incense is an abomination, but repent, and then God accepts thy
offerings, an impenitent sinner is as if he blessed an idol when he prays, but
the penitent shall speed.

Thirdly, it is the Dedication of a blessing, they hope for a blessing behind
him; of plenty if they may see, they will devote it to his worship and service,
plenty every man wishes for, but will thou serve God, honor him with thy
riches, the failing of this foretells all, because thou servest not the Lord
thy God with gladness of heart for the abundance of all things, therefore thou
shall serve thine enemies in hunger, Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48.

First, it is an holy care for Gods public worship that it be maintained; God
challenged the Jews for it after captivity, the times was not to build the
Temple, but to stay till they had store, build private houses, let Gods house
lie wast, see they aim at that, if we may have Gods worship, it is all they aim
at; brown bread and the Gospel is good fare.

First, God shall have the glory:

Secondly not verbal, but with cost too.

Thirdly, and not a present but provide for a lasting worship, so much of the
matter.

Secondly, the measure of hope, who knows; a strange kind of encouragement, yet
sometimes in Scripture this form is used. I find four places, the first is
Jonah 3.8. Who can tell if God will turn and repent, it was the speech of a
heathen King to a heathen People, not acquainted so well with Gods dealings,
the second is Daniel 4.27. Break of thy sins it may be a lengthning of thy
tranquillity; the third is this of Joel, the voice of the Prophet to the people
of God. The fourth is Zeph. 2.3. Seek the Lord ye meek of the earth, it may be
ye shall be hidden in the day of the Lords wrath, it is but a may be, though
the voice of the Prophet to the heathen people, it is a strange speech seeming
contrary and inconsistent.

First, with Gods goodness, it is an excellency in every good nature to be
easy to pardon, which of you that are evil know how to forgive; yet the King
of Israel, much more the God of Israel is merciful.

Secondly, inconsistent with his present invitation to Repentance, he
prescribes Repentance, peradventure who prescribes Physic, so Jonas thought
him ready to pardon.

Thirdly, inconsistent with the encouragement in Isa. 33.13. The Prophet
reckons up all Gods sweet Attributes, now seems to cross all and dishearten^
their Repentance, by quis novit he will abundantly padon, Isaiah. 54.

Fourthly, it seems contrary to his absolute covenant and promise to pardon
penitents, Ezekiel. 18.21. If the wicked do that which is right he shall live, it
is the Tenor of the Gospel, what shall we think of it, even this promise, and
even this half promise and intimation may be useful.

First, it shows the grievousness of sins, great sins are hardly pardoned,
Simon Magus.

Secondly, it shows the hope that is left, after sin our hopes are much weakened.

Thirdly, it shows the difficulty of the benefit, we may be in such danger.

Fourthly, it shows the uncertainty of temporal freedom.

Fifthly, it shows mercy, and to be undone if we cannot challenge it. Here are
two things the lowest step of hope, if we have no more, yet hold this, I will
wait and pray, if I cannot get assurance.

Secondly, we when we have sinned against Gods covenant, then we have nothing
to plead, but quis novit, who knows; not according to thy covenant.

Psalm, 78. verse. 34.35.36.37 When he slew them, then they sought him an^
turned them early, and inquired after God, and they remembered that God wa^
their strength, and that the high God wa^ their Redeemer; nevertherless they
di^ but flatter him with their mouth^ and dissembled with him in their tongue^
for their heart was not whole with him neither continued they steadfast in his
covenant.
THis Psalm; Ingratiarum action publica.
w^ may term it ^ Psalm of record or a Psalm t^ bring to remembrance, it is an
holy Pane^gyrick or a song for the whole Nation o^ people of the Jews; a solemn
recital o^ the many memorable passages in tha^ Commonwealth from their first
se^tlement, and it has been the wisdom of Kingdoms and Commonwealths to have
their Chrongraphos, those that should record and register the several passages
and affairs of their State, to keep upon record their beginnings and
foundation, their Acts and Monuments, the good and ^ll events that have be^ided
them, and accordingly the wisdom of God authorized and employed his sacred
Penmen and Secretaries to inroll and register up the se^erall passages of the
Church, and to ^^ansmit them to posterity, in particular, ^esides those sacred
Annals of his Church ^ontained in the Historical books of Scripture, the holy
Ghost has purpose^y framed, some more summary and com^endious, but yer full
and perfect relati^ns of the affairs of his Church, and this ^kewise composed
and framed into songs and psalms, to make them more fit carri^ge for memory,
and that by the pleasant^esse of them they might sink more ^eeply into their
hearts, and more strongly ^ffect them. Thus Moses after all his Ser^ons, and
commemorations made to the people, 32. Deuteronomy. Of Gods dealings with them and
their carriage toward him, at l^^ he composed a song, and it to the people and
commends it to posterity as a lasti^^ Monument for all generations, thus (...)
poets among the heathen (whom Tit^^ Paul, calls their Prophets) had carmi^^
seculario, their state songs comprisi^^ the affairs of their Common-Wealt^
answerable was that sweet singer of ^^rael, the Prophet David is studious (...)
frame such sacred songs; as first this pr^sent Psalm, so again the 89. Then the
105.106.107. All public Psalms a^^ songs of commemoration; David do^ that
which the Prophet Isay speaks o^ Chap. the 5.1. I will sing to my well-b^loved
a song of my beloved touching b^^ vineyard, I termed it a Psalm of record or of
commemoration, and so it is, if we respect the materials of which it consist^
it is a recital of Gods gracious dealing toward his people and of their
ungrac^ous dealings toward him again; but ye^ I find another name given by the
Psalmist; it is called Maschil in the title (...) the Psalm, and that name
respects the end and purpose of it. Maschill is (...) Psalm to give
instruction; it is not only ^istoricall but Doctrinal, even these Hi^^oricall
parts of Scripture are not only Gods day book to tell us what has passed
before, but they must be to us a Law ^ook to teach us what we must do, it is ^ot
only a Psalm to bring to remembrance which is the title of 38. and 70. Psalms,
but Maschil a Psalm for instruction, when he commemorates his ancient ^ercies
to their forefathers, that's Mas^hill a Psalm of instruction, we have heard
with our ears O Lord, and our fathers have ^old us, what works thou did in
their days, ^n the times of old, what is the instruction of that, it should
teach us confidence in God; Psalm 7.1. That they might set their hope in God.
When he commemorates ancient deliverances from persecutions and enemies, that's
Maschill a Psalm for instruction, to look for the like deliverances from him in
our dangers and distresses, many a time did he deliver them, then deliver us
amongst the hea^hen, Psalm. 106.477. When he commemorates the wicked and
ungracious courses of their forefathers, that's Maschill a Psalm of instruction,
to avoid their fathers sins, not to be as their forefather a stubborn and
rebellious generation that set not their heart aright, and whos^ spirit was not
steadfast with God, and thi^ instruction was not only for them, tha^ the after
times of the Jews should make a profitable use of the former times, bu^ it
reaches to us Christians; Saint Pau^ tells us that the times of the Jews
concer^ us Christians, Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were written before time,
were writ^ ten for our learning, and again, 1 Cor. 10^ He acquaints them what
befell the Jews then adds verse the 6. These things were written for our
examples, to the inten^ we should not lust as they also lusted, and then
telling them of the Judgments tha^ befell the Jews, in the 11. Verse he says,
these things happened to them for examples, and they were written for our
admonirion, so then this Psalm sets forth the great disobedience, and
stubbornness o^ the people of Israel under Gods government.

First, it upbraids them with forgetfulness of his mercies.

Secondly, it objects unto them their ^^proficiency and untractablenesse even
^y miracles.

Thirdly, it reminds them of the probane abuse of his patience.

Fourthly, it reproves them for their ^^corrigiblenesse by his chastisements.

Fifthly, it shows them withal the false^esse and unsoundnesse of their
hypocri^icall Repentance.

The Text it contains this last, and so ^ake the purpose of it to be Gods
censure and reproof of the Jews unworthy Repen^ance, and in it observe these
two parti^ulars.

First, the several Acts of their Repen^ance.

Secondly, the many defects and faults ^f their Repentance.

The first, will show us, how far they ^ent in the practice of Repentance.

The second, will discover their fal^ings, how much they came short of a ^ue
spiritual saving Repentance.

First, the Acts of Repentance, which ^ere they performed, they are four.

First seeking they sought him.

Secondly, returning, they returned.

Thirdly, inquiring they inquired ea^ after God.

Fourthly, Remembering, they remembered that God was their strong rock, a^ the
high God their Redeemer; these as the four Acts and exercises of their
Repentance such as they were.

Secondly, the Text sets out the defect of their Repentance, how much they
fai^ed in it, they likewise are four.

The first defect and fault of their Repentance it was untimely, delayed
Repen^ance, that's implied in this word when no^ till such a time, then, not
till then.

Secondly, it was an enforced Repen^ance, not ingenuous and voluntarily
undertaken; it was extorted by plagues, the repented when they were under the
ro^nay under the sword, it was when he sle^ them.

Thirdly, it was an unsound Repentanc^ not true and sincere, but fained and act^
only, 'twas a flattering and lying Repentance, they flattered him with their
mou^ and they lied unto him with the^ tongues.

Fourthly, 'twas a momentany, transitory, unsettled, unconstant Repentance not
firm and lasting, their heart was not right with him, neither were they
steadfast in his Covenant, these four faults.

First, untimely and backward.

Secondly, enforced and extorted.

Thirdly, unsound and dislembling.

Fourthly, vanishing and unconstant.

These are usually linked together, one draws on the other, these four twists
makes up Esays Cart rope of sin.

First he that puts off and procrastinates, and delays his repentance, he will
never bethink himself of it, or set himself to ^it, till some judgment awakens
him and constrains him to it.

Secondly, he that repents not but by constraint, and when he is under the
lash, usually, if he look not well to it, it will be but a show of Repentance
and outward humiliation, and no better.

And then lastly, unsound Repentance will never prove lasting Repentance, he
will soon be weary of it, and return to his former wont again,

Come we to the first, briefly take (...) view of the Acts and exercises of
their Repentance; seeking, returning, inquiring after god, and remembering of
him. Actions all of them in their own nature good, all of them if rightly
performed penitential Acts, good ingredients into Repentance.

First put them together, they are such acts as accompany Repentance, and will
afford us a double meditation.

The first meditation arises by way of supposition.

The second by a direct position.

First, by way of supposition; these actions of seeking, returning, enquiring,
remembering, being acts, and duties, and exercises of Repentance, they all
suppose the quite contrary actions that accompany our sinning, as thus.

First, when we repent we set our selve^ to seek God, therefore when we commit
sin we part with God, repentance that is a seeking, therefore sin and
wickedness, that is a losing of God.

Secondly, in Repentance there is a returning to God, it is a work of
conversion, therefore in our sinning there is a departing from God, and a
forsaking of God, that is more, forsaking is more then a losing.

Thirdly in Repentance there is an inquiring after God; therefore in a course
of sin and before we repent we never think of him, but slight and neglect
him.

Fourthly, in repentance there is a remembering, there is a remembering of God
and of his mercies, therefore by sin we do not only not actually think of him,
but we grow into forgetfulness of God, we have no remembrance of him, these
four evil effects of sin, take notice of them by sinning against God.

First we lose him, nay we forsake him, nay we never so much as think of him,
nay we remove him out of our memories we utterly forget him, here is the
condition of a stubborn and a wilful sinner, a man that lives and lies in sin,
he does wretchedly cast off all communion with God, rejects and abandons him;
though he may have some vanishing notions of God, yet to all good purposes he
is an arrant Atheist, without God in the world, no interest in him, no
effectual cogitation of him, this estimate the Scripture puts upon a wicked
people.

First it calls them forsaken of God, a^ sinful Nation, they have forsaken the
Lord, Isa. 1-4. So your fathers have forsaken me, Jer. 16.11. as Saints are a
generation of Seekers, so these are a generation of forsakers.

Secondly the Scripture calls them departed from God, Ezekiel. 6.4. They have
departed from me with a whorish heart: David describes a wicked man, Psalm
18.21. I have not wickedly departed from my God, there is a wicked departure,
the Apostle forewarns them of it, Heb. 3.12. Take heed of an evil heart, to
depart from the living God.

Thirdly, the Scripture calls them revolters, Isa. 31.6. The children of Israel
have deeply revolted, they are grievous revolters, Ier. 6.28. The Scripture
represents them, as thrusting God from them. Cause the Holy One of Israel to
cease from before us, Isa. 30.11. and for the matter of inquiry or thought, or
remembrance of God, the Scripture makes this the mark, and guise and Character
of a wicked man, to lay aside all thoughts of God, the wicked through the pride
of his countenance, will not seek after God: God is not in all his thoughts,
Psalm 10.4.5. God is far above out of his thoughts, he tushes at the name of
him; Pharaoh said that which every wicked man thinks, who is the Lord, I know
not the Lord, Exodus 5.2. Ye that forget God; it is a wicked man's description,
all the nations that forget God; it should beget some sad thoughts in us were
there nothing else in sin, no other mischievous consequences following it, it
should strike upon the heart of obstinate sinners; what while I live in sin am
I no better then an Atheist? Is this the fruit of all my courses, do they
utterly estrainge me from God? I lose him and the thoughts of him, and the
remembrance of him; yes that thou do; thou may go for a Christian, and be
reckoned amongst the people of God, and seem to a vow him and to be acquainted
with him, but while thou live in thine impenitency, thou art wholly estranged
from him even the children of God, in their failings and infitmities they find
these sad effects partially, and in some degrees; not a fault that they commit,
but it sets them off some degrees from God; it weakens their hold of him, they
lose him in part; it dumbs their thoughts of him, it dulls their remembrance of
him; but a wicked man in an impenitent course, has all these mischiefs in
extremity; that's the first meditation, their supposition.

A second meditation is by direct inference and position, that true Repentance
will enforce upon us a seeking of God whom by sin we have lost, a returning to
God whom we have forsaken, an inquiring after God whom we have neglected, a
remembering of God whom we have forgotten.

First, it will put us to a seeking and that's the first act of estimation, it
values that it seeks; if we count it as good lost as found, no great matter
whether we hit or miss there will be no seeking; if we meet with it by chance;
well and good, but lightly valued, is but lightly sought for; it must be (...)
precious pearl that the Merchant seeks for, Math. 13.45. When we come to this
resolution, if we miss of Gods favor we are undone, if I find it again, I am
made for ever, then we seek as we should, because we value it as we should, thy
favor is better then life it self, Psalm 63.3. See how David valued it, be not
silent to me, least if thou be silent to me, I become like them that go down
into the pit, Psalm 28.1. It is death to miss him; better then life to find
him.

Secondly, it will put us to a seeking, that's an act of diligence, search
implies labor, and anxiety, and all possible endeavor, such are the seekings
of Repentance; not a few flugish wishes, but it will be active and industrious,
it lights up the candle and sweeps the house, Luke 15.8. A penitent soul will
give no rest to it self, till it have recovered God and his favor that's the
seeking God will accept, ye shall seek and find me, when ye shall search with
all your hearts, Jer. 29.13. Not the lasie seeking of the spouse, In my bed by
night I sought him, but I did not find him but when she gets up into the
streets amongst the watch men, then at last she finds him, that's the first.

Secondly, it will put us to a returning, it will make us tread over all our
steps, and strainings and wanderings from God with sorrow, and undo what we
have done before; do the quite contrary, it will make us resolve with the
Church in Hosea 2.7. I will go and return to my first husband, for then it was
better for me then now, so again Hosea 6.1. Come let us return unto the Lord,
it is called a conversion, a full and pregnant word, not a mere aversion from
sin, Repentance it is not a mere cessation and giving over what we did before,
and then rest, a man that's out of his way recovers not himself by a mere stop
and stay, no, he must go back again.

Secondly, it is not a mere diversion, give over this sinful course and turn
into another, I will be no more prodigal, but I will fall into some other
carnal or sensual practice.

But it is Thirdly, a full conversion, that brings him to the first point from
which he strayed; thus Jeremiah, 4.1. Directs, If thou will return, O Israel,
says the Lord, return unto me: it brings a man round about, makes him a quite
other man, Repentance it will put us to inquiring, that's a busy work,
inquiring and searching diligently, Saint Peter in 1. Peter 1.10. Puts them
together, our Savior calls it; seeking, and asking, and knocking, consulting
with others that can direct us, thus the penitents in the Acts of the Apostles.
Acts. 2.7. enquired of Peter and John, Men and brethren what shall we do? help
and direct us, so the penitent Jayler, Acts 16.30. Sirs what must I do to be
saved? the Prophet Jeremiah shows them this duty, stand in the paths, and ask
for the old paths, where is the good way; and Isaiah quickens them to this
inquiry, Isaiah 21.11.12. Bids them enquire of the watchman, and what says he,
if ye will inquire, inquire, that is do it, and do it again, do it to some
purpose; enquire of the guides that God has set up. Enquire of those that have
strayed and wandered, and lost him and now have found him; what course took
they, and it must be early, take the wings of the morning; early beginings may
do much. Isaiah gives us this Item, the watchman says the morning comes, and
also the night, if ye will enquire, enquire, return and come, the days are
short, the morning spends, the night hastens, early seekers seldom miss, but
late begianings most commonly fall short.

Fourthly. Repentance it will quicken our memories, they remembered that God was
their rock, and the high God their Redeemer, it will make us recall to mind all
the goodness of God toward us, thus the revolting Church of Israel, when she
bethinks her self of returning to God. She recounts how well 'twas with her
when she kept her self to him. So the returning prodigal, Luke 15. He
remembered the plenty of his fathers house, this remembering of Gods gracious
dealings with us has great force in the work of repentance.

First. It will upbraide us for our base unthankfulness, Do ye thus reward
the Lord ye foolish Nation, is not he thy Father that has bought thee, has
not he made thee and established thee, Deuteronomy. 32.6.

Secondly. It melts our hearts into remorse and sorrow, oh, the love of Christ
constraines us.

Thirdly. It incourages and puts heart into our repentance, I will remmber the
years of the right hand, we have seen the 4 acts in which their repentance
consisted, now follows the second thing observable, that's the failings and
defects of their repentance that made it unacceptable and they were 4.

First. It was untimely.

Secondly. It was extorted and enforced.

Thirdly. It was false and hipocriticall.

Fourthly. It Was momentary and unconstant and fickle

First. It Was untimely, a delaid repentance, they sinned, kept not his covenant
Psalm. 78.10. Again, they sinned yet more, verse 17. still they went on again,
for all this they sinned still, verse. 22. wheeled off and delaied, and set
back their repentance. Even this is a malignant circumstance, breeds a great
flaw and blemish in our repentance, the late date it bears, oh repentance
would be a timely a speedy, and an early work.

It Is presently done, as soon as we have sinned, so, ratione officij, by the law
of right and reason, a man is bound to be sorry as soon as we have done evil,
it is Gods Dove and he demands it presently; even in lending, Solomon bids us not
put off till to morrow, much more in paying thy debts.

Secondly. It Is good repenting betimes ratione incerti, do it while thou may
do it, while we have time, in the morning sow thy seed, thou know not what
a day will bring forth, Eccles. 11.6. hereafter repentance may be hid from
thine eyes; we all pretend our resolutions are to repent, we grant we must
repent, and resolve to repent before we die, be it so, be sure thou repent
before thou die, and then thou must retent speedily, for time to come is most
hazardous; uncertainty, the Jews have a rule, he that vows to do any thing
before he dye, he must do i^ speedily, because he is not certain whether he
shall live till to morrow, and then his vow it is broken, and he must answer for
it.

Thirdly. It Is good repenting betimes, ratione facilitatis, timely repentance is
the most kindly, and gentle, and easy repentance, a wound is best taken when
it is green, defer to dress it, and it will ranckle and fester, a bone is best
put into joint as soon as it is out, neglect it any time it will hardly keep
in; repentance is the physic of the soul, and physic ye know is best taken
in the morning, thus Peter went out presently. When I was instructed I smote
upon my thigh, Jer. 31.19.

First. This is the failing of these men repentance, it is all dilatories, put it
off as long as may be, it shows they took little pleasure in it.

Secondly. They came unwillingly to it, as a Bear to the stake, you must fetch
him about with a ring in his nose, not set to it by any inward principle of
grace, but upon other inducements, or inforcements rather; but yet there is one
word in the text, which seems to set a timely date upon their repentance, it is
said they enquired early after God, how can this stand with this
procrastinating, when mane properabunt, says Calvin, in the morning they
hastened, diluculo veniebant, so others by day break, true, true, all this
takes not off the charge and imputation of late repentance.

First. It is an holy scorn and derision of their slow and sluggish returning
unto God. Yes, yes, after so much time wasted and mercies abused, and
provocations multiplied, now you bestir your selves, is this your early return
to God, so shaming their backwardness in this needful duty.

Secondly. The Scripture even in the same place it upbraids sinners with
delays, yet then uses this term of early seeking, Prove. 1.24. Because when I
have called ye refused, I have stretched out my hand and no man regarded,
verse 28. Therefore then they shall call upon me, but I will not answer, they
shall seek me early, but they shall not find me, here are two extremities, very
late, nay too late, and yet early, such conversations, they have an early and a
late, or rather, and an early, an evening and morning.

First. They have vesper tinum culpae, look at the time of their sinning, oh
it is very lare ere they repented, all the day long and they never thought of it.

Secondly. There is matutinum penae, the morning of their punishment, when Gods
Judgments break in upon them then they bestir themselves; take their day of
sinning, so it is vesper, take their day of suffering so it is, mane, sero quoad
culpam, cito quoad penam.

Or thirdly. They seek and inquire, early, and yet very late, that's early, or
mane, when one awakens, the sluggards morning, when he breaks off sleep, that
may be at noon or night in true computation, secutity lays a sinner in a deep
sleep, when Gods hands awakens him, that's morning, till then they are asleep,
that's the first fault, untimely.

A second defect of their repentance is that 'twas inforct, cum occideret, when
he slew them and his judgments fell upon them, then they bethought themselves
and turned unto him, that's a second malignant circumstance, that marres much of
their repentance, till then they never thought of him, many other times there
were that would have become their repentance, much better then this, when he
slew them and fell upon them with a destroying judgment.

First. Quando pecarunt, as soon as they had sinned, had they any grace they
should have repented, I told you before repentance is presently done as soon as
we have sinned, God calls all that delays it, fools, Prove. 1.22. Ye fools how
long will ye love foolishness, as Tertullian, Deus dedicavit penitentiam in
paradiso, so, the time as soon as ever Adam had sinned, God summond him to
repent; wisdom and grace would have us do so, thus it is with David when he
numbered the people, presently his heart smore him, he saw his fault and
sorrowed for it.

Secondly, well, suppose they took not the first time, there were more
intermediate times before he came to slay them, quando, benefacit iis, when he
did good to them, that should reclaim them, they sinned and yet he ceased not
from blessing them, they murmured and yet he blessed them, they tempted him and
yet he fed them, they would pose his power whether he could fetch water out of
the rock, and he did it for them. O that's high time for Repentance, when Gods
goodness wrestles and strives with our wickedness, and would over come us,
Saint Paul charges it deeply upon impenitent sinners, tells them it makes them
inexcusable, R^m. 2.4. Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness and
forbearance, and longsuffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads
thee to Repentance.

Thirdly, there is another time when they should have repented, quando
invitavit, when by the Ministry of Moses and Aaron he found fault with their
sins and called them to repent, that sure is a just time for us to repent, when
Gods word calls us to Repentance; it is that which Christ commends in the
Ninevites, Mat. 12.41. The men of Nineveh shall rise up in judgment with this
generation, they repented at the preaching of Jonah; no sooner did God dispatch
a Prophet to them to call them to repentance, but they yielded presently; it is
that which Saint Paul takes comfort, in the matter of his conversion, Act.
26.19. I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision, 'twas that also that
commanded the conversion of those penitents, Acts 2.37. When they heard this
they were pricked to the heart, one Sermon of Saint Peter's reclaimed them
presently in the audience One look of Christ took Peter; the Ministry of the
word is the great sanctified instrument to work us to Repentance, it is a great
aggravation to our impenitency to live unconverted under that Ordinance.

Fourthly, yet there were other importunities that in all reason they should
have to repent, though they slighted the former, that's quando castigavit, when
he did visit their sins with more moderate and fatherly chastisements, we know
God had his ferulaes, and rods, and fatherly corrections with which he did
visit them. Deuteronomy. 8.2.3. He humbled thee with hunger and drought, want of
bread and water, the wilderness in which he led them, was a School of
afflictions, and therefore in allusion to that, afflictions ate called a
carrying into the wilderness, I will bring her into the wilderness and speak
comfortably into her, Hosea 2.14. It Is the usual way that God takes with us,
when his word alone will do us no good, to write our lessons on our back with
his rod, prosperity makes us wanton, afflictions many times hunt us in and
bring us before him; sickness and poverty, and losses and other uncomfortable
events, they are usual means to reclaim 'us. Hosea compares afflictions to an
hedge of thorns, Behold I will hedge up thy way with thorns, Hosea 2.6. So that
we shall have little list to break out, thus was Manasses converted, captivity
and imprisonment wrought him to Repentance. 2. Chron. 33.12. When he was in
affliction he sought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the
God of his fathers, 'twas Luthers speech. Schola Crucis, it is Schola Lucis, and
it is the great aggravation of wicked King Ahaz in the time of his distress
that he did trespass yet more against the Lord, this is that King Ahaz, that's
his brand, as if should say here is a sinner that afflictions will not tame;
it is to great purpose that Solomon advises us, Prove. ^.11. my Son despise not
the chastiseing of the Lord, gentle corrections must not be despised nor
slighted; and David his Father counted it an happy thing to get good by such
chastisiings, Psalm. 94.12. Blessed is the Man whom thou chastenest O Lord, and
teach him out of thy Law: He shows it will prevent this same accident,
verse. 13. That thou may give him rest from the days of adversity, until
the Pit be dug for the wicked. Happy chastisement that prevents slaying, to
do a^ Isay speaks, Isay 26.16. Lord, in trouble have they visited thee; they
poured out (...) prayer when thy chastening was upon them. No, this wrought not
with them, quan^^ castigauit.

So then here is the unworthy servile baseness of their repentance, no time
would serve but quando occidet, when he slew them, never till their heads were
o^ the block; yea this is Pharaoh's repentance, he stood out many a stroke, bu^
when it came to a destruction, then (...) seeks to Moses, Oh I have sinned,
sa^^ me from this death only. We condem^ it in Pharaoh, and wonder at it here,
in the Israelites, and yet upon due examination we shall find it the case of
many of us take it first either more collectively, an^ largely, for our
national repentance.

Or Secondly, more privately and pe^sonally for each Man's particular.

First, Let us look abroad not to censu^^ and descant upon other Men's estates,
but yet we may soberly consider the sins of the times, and lay them to heart;
have we not passed all the former quandos, the seasons of repentance with small
amendment.

First, Not when we sinned, God knows many sins stand upon the score uncanceld.

Secondly, Not when he blessed us with deliverances, with peace, plenty, and
freedom from annoyances, yet small fruits upon it Edentibus beneficiis ingrate.

Thirdly, Not when he has by his word invited to repentance, nay, that Manna
comes out at our nostrills, we begin to loath it, ye begin to question whether
God speaks by us.

Fourthly, Not when he has chast'ned us in measure, shot off warning pieces,
rather then murdering Cannons, commotions, and plagues, and unnatural
discontents, we despise those chastisements.

Fifthly, When he comes to slay us, then we will bethink our selves, when the
kingdom is in a light fire, and invasions of enemies, or intestine rebellions
begin to destroy us, then it is to be hoped we will repent.

Secondly. Let us take it more privately and personally, and then asks your
hearts what time you set for your repentance; it is cum occidet; when we are on
our death beds, and no hope of life; when God sends his last executioner to cut
us off from the Land of the living, then we resolve to repent, well, it is
possible you may do so, depoenitentia non desperandum quem patientia Dei sinit
vivere.

Yet consider first. It Is infamia penitentiae, here is a brand set upon it by
the holy Ghost.

Secondly, It Is incerta, dubia, there is small incouragment the scripture gives
to it, rather rejects it, see what entertainment such seekers are promised to
find at Gods hand Prove. ^.24. Because I have called and ye refused, I have
stretched out my hand and no man regarded it, verse 26. I will also laugh at
your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes, when distress and anguish
comes upon you. verse 28. Then they shall call upon me, but I will not answer,
they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me, see what encouragement
such seekers have.

Thirdly, it is suspiciosa penitentia, there is great cause to suspect the good
of such repentance, which is forced from us, cum occideret when the fear of
death surprises us.

First, Because that lust that reigned in him is imp't and forced back by his
afflictions, it is like the sap of a Tree in winter weather, all shrunk to the
root, sorrow, and sickness, and any great affliction, it is like Winter
weather, it imps the branches, hinders our corruption from sprouting and so we
think it is dead, but the root holds life and sap, warm weather, prosperity will
make it spring again like Jobs trees, chap. 14.8, 9. through the heat of the
weather they will bud.

Secondly, in the fear of death, or any sore affliction, we may take our
selves to be mortified, because afflictions will justle out temptations, a Man
laid on his sick Bed will have little list then to entertain the temptations of
sinful pleasure, he has lost his relish of them for a time, as sick men can
find no sweetness in meats (which otherwise they delight in) because their
taste is for a time imbittered, let them recover health, and they will fall to
again.

Thirdly, in sickness many take themselves mortified, not because sin is
weakened in them, but nature is infeebled, that withdraws her strength, by which
sin was active; recover nature, and sin will recover, as a graft in a Tree, let
the Tree spring, and that will spring too; it is not the body of sin that's
mortified, but the body of nature, that is infeebled, put not thy conversion
then upon hazardous adventures, stay not till he come to slay thee by death,
it is an infamous, it is an uncertain, it is a suspicious repentance, thou may
be mistaken in it.

Come we to a third defect of their repentance that's falsenesse and
dissembling, it was a flattering, unsound, hypocritical repentance.
Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouths, and they lied unto him
with their tongues, all their conversion and turning unto God, 'twas but
flattery and falsehood, and this flattery and falsehood will appear.

First in their professions. Secondly in their promises, flattering
professions, and false promises.

First. Flattery is seen in profession, first a flatterer will profess a great
esteem of goodness and worth in the person whom he applies himself to; ready
to ascribe much unto him, so did these hollow converts in their affliction,
they acknowledged God was their rock and strength, and the high God their
redeemer, thus the Herodians flattered Christ, Mat. 12.16. Master we know that
thou art true, and teach the way of God in truth, and regards no man's
person, Christ discovers them, why tempt ye me ye Hypocrites, such are the
soothings of unsound repentance when afflictions presses us, O then we will
acknowledge God and his goodness, as Benadad did with the King of Israel, oh
the Kings of Israel are merciful Kings, but yet false and treacherous for all
their profession.

Secondly. Flattery is seen in profession of great love and affections, Judah's
his kiss, a profession of great love, as if Christ were dear to him, such
professions Hypocritical repentance will make under affliction; such love Ziba
shows to David, professed great love and loyalty to him, the Jews had such
blandishments to Gods word, Esa. 29.13. That they drew nere him with their
mouth, and with their lips did honor him, in our extremities, who but God and
Christ are in our mouths, then we seem much to affect them.

Thirdly. Flattery is seen in profession of sorrow for any offense, a
dissembler to escape his due deserts will confess all, and profess great
sorrow for former offenses, thus did railing Shimei to David 2 Samuel 19.18. Oh
who so sorry for his offenses, who so submisse in confessing it, and such
professions an Hypocrite under the lash will make to God, the Israelites when
thunder and lightning were about their ears, 1 Samuel 12.19. Oh we have sined in
asking a King, besides all our other sins, these are there flattering
professions.

Secondly, as they flattered in their professions, so they were false in their
promises, repentance will make vows and promises and so will this false and
counterfeit repentance abound in promises, ask Pharaoh, if God spare thee this
time, will thou let Israel go? O yes, no longer stay, an Hypocrite will bribe
God with promises, spare me this one time, yet all false, here observe a double
falsenesse, false in intention, say what he never means, his tongue
contradicts his head.

Secondly, false in performances, he never makes good what he says, David calls
it lying fained obedience, Psalm. 63.3. Through the greatness of thy power
shall thine enemies yield fained obedience to these false and counterfeit: So
then in that these Jews were thus false and fraudulent in their repentance, it
will discover to us the dangerous condition of this sin of hypocrisy.

First, see the guilt of Hypocrisy, rather then fail it will counterfeite and
act any duty, though never so unacceptable, as repentance is, no duty in
religion goes down so hard with hypocrisy as repentance, repentance is a
shameing duty, a Penitent must confess and acknowledge he has sinned, take
shame and confession to himself, cry out with the Leper I am unclean, now
Hypocrites are animalia gloriae, all for their credit and reputation, in matter
of opinion they are in no error, quod volumus sanctum est. Joh. 9.40. what are
we ignorant and blind also, in matter of conversation they are without spot or
wrinckle, you are they which justify your selves before men, Luke 16.14. It Is
hard to bring them to acknowledge either error or fault, but yet if it stand
for their turn they will even act a penitents part, and confess and recant and
seem to be sorry for sin, so did Simon Magus, and King Saul.

Secondly, See the pertinacy and obstinacy of hypocrisy, 'twill act and
counterfeit, and never give over, no not in the greatest affliction, cum
occideret, when Gods hand is in slaying them, yet then they will counterfeit,
neither mercies, not miracles, nor chastisements, nor plagues will alter or
change them, Isaiah 26.10. Let favor be showed to him, yet he will not learn
righteousness, nay let Gods hand be lifted up, yet they will not see it; of
all other sins the hypocrite is the most hopeless and incorrigible,
afflictions have brought home profane sinners, but an Hypocrite will stand to
that too, either accuse God for afflicting him, or dissemblingly accuse
himself, like some desperate cutpurse, that will steal and pilfer in the
Sessions house or at the Gallows.

Thirdly, See the brutish and stupid sottishness of hypocrisy, 'twill not
only undertake to deceive men, but God also, think to mock him with flatteries
and lies, as Ahaz, how did he cover his infidelity, Oh he would not tempt God,
what says Isaiah, Chap. 7.13. Is it a small thing to weary men, but will you
weary my God also, an Hypocrite will not only faulter with men, seek to delude
the world, but they are lying children to God, Isaiah 30.9. Thus Peter charge
Ananias and Saphira, that they lied not to men, but to the Holy Ghost, Acts
5.4. Thus Isaiah brings in the Hypocrites of his time, boasting even to God of
their hypocritical service and devotion, Wherefore have we fasted and thou
see it not, wherefore have we afflicted our souls and thou take no
knowledge? Isaiah 58.3. Indeed ^ypocrites are in truth secret Atheists, they
turn the glory of God into an Idol, so hoping to put him off with vizards and
counterfeits, worse then Jacob toward Isaac, God can neither see, nor feel,
nor find out their mockeries, that's the third, the falsenesse of their
repentance.

Come we to the fourth defect of their repentance and conversion; it was
momentary and unconstant, their hearts were not right with him, verse 37.
Neither were they steadfast in his covenant. and this clause comes in as proof
of the former, it is a conviction of their unsound and Hypocritical repentance,
and here is a double conviction by which an Hypocrite may judge of himself,
their repentance was false and fained.

First because it was not hearty, true repentance is hearty repentance if the
heart be wanting it is counterfeit and hypocritical, their heart was not right
with him.

Secondly, Because 'twas not lasting and durable, they were not steadfast in his
covenant.

First, It Was hypocritical because it was not cordial, and hearty, how was it
not hearty, were they not in earnest, was it mere outside, acted, pretended
repentance it is likely not, theirs a double hypocrisy.

First, Formal and express, when he that acts it, intends only to
counterfeit, means nothing else, that's gross hypocrisy: such were the
Pharisees in Christ's time, and the world is full of them; hardly can we think a
man in such a case, as these Israelites were now in, at the point of death,
would be so gross, to mock God expressly.

Secondly, There is an Hypocrisy of a finer thread, that's interpretive
hypocrisy wherein we deal falsely with God and our selves too; such as God
will Judge, hypocrisy how is that, when a man rests in some acts of repentance,
but it fails and falls short in the main, and is careless of that.

As first, There are some actions of repentance, as confession of sin, calling
of mercy, promising amendment, these are good, but yet more is required.

Secondly, There are some affections and passions of repentance, as sadness,
and sorrow, and fear, and anxiety of mind, and other passionate motions, these
all are good, but yet fall short.

Thirdly, What then is wanting, the main of all is that the heart must be
changed, I say changed, it may be affected, dejected and troubled, and yet
remain as bad as ever, so it is with Pharaoh, the terrors of God deeply
affected him, so was Ahab strangely cast down at Elias threatenings, he was sad
in good earnest; and what think you of Judas, was not he much affected, but no
new change was wrought in their hearts, they were the same men still, Pharaoh
an oppresser in his heart, Ahab a persecuter.

Here then is that which makes up repentance to be true and spiritual, and
such as God will accept, when it puts a new heart into us, changes our natures
from what we were before, begets in us new resolutions, that we choose what we
refused, love what we hated, frames the very heart anew, in this case,
hypocrisy works like art, sincerity like nature, how is that; why natures works
begins within, frames the inwards of a man, first the heart, then shapes the
outward members, so does sincerity, but art that works upon the outside, alters
the figure, and outward lineaments goes no further, so does hypocrisy.

Judge thy conversation by this trial, art thou another man, a new frame put
into thee, has God taken away thy stony heart and given thee a heart of flesh;

A second conviction of the unsoundnesse of their repentance is, that it was a
fleeting momentary unconstant repentance, they were not steadfast in his
covenant, true repentance will prove lasting repentance, hypocritical
repentance is slippery and unconstant.

First, A true convert has an inward principle of repentance planted into him,
grace is a second nature, and works constantly as nature does, but an
hypocrite in his actions of reformation and repentance is moved, not by an
inward principle of God, but by some outward motion, when that crosses, his
conversion sails; the motion of piety in a good Christian are like natural
motions, the motions of an hypocrite, are as artificial motions, the motions
of the Sun and of the clock keep time alike, and for a while we will say a
clock goes as the Sun, I but here is a difference, the one moves out of an
inward principle, naturally the other, the clock is moved by an outward
principle, the weight and plummet makes it go, and when that is down the Clock
stands still, or as in waters, the natural stream flows always, it is fed
with a stream; but a sudden Landflood though it runs strongly for a while, yet
it will dry up, it has no Spring or Fountain to feed it.

A great difference 'twixt affection that will tire, and affection that will
hold out, a great difference 'twixt passion that is sudden, comes and goes,
and 'twixt resolution that is constant, sudden flashing^ of hear are one
thing, and the kindly warmth at the heart is another, a good Christian is the
same out of affliction that he is in affliction, an hypocrite oh he is a new
Man on his sick bed, recover him and ye discover him, as covetous and profane,
in affliction he vows, in prosperity he forgets his vow, what says David,
Psalm. 57.8. My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: I will sing and give
praise. Psalm. 66.13, 14. I will pay thee my vows, which my lips have uttered,
and my mouth have spoken when I was in trouble.

In repentance he has renewed his Covenants with God, and he will not break
with him, failings he may have, but yet he revolts not, David's resolution is
this, Psalm. 119.93. I will never forget thy Commandments, for by them thou have
quickened me.

Luke 22. verse 31, 32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has
desired to have you, that b^ may sift you as wheat: But I have prayed for thee,
that thy faith fail not; and when thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren.
IN this Chapter the Evangelist relates to u^ our Saviors approach and
preparation to hi^ death. Now this So^ of righteousness being to leave the
Horizo^ of this World, and to descend under the Earth, and sit in a Cloud, he
was dismayed and affrighted, and perplexed with the expectation and fear of
death; but as the Sun in a clear evening, when it is nee^^ setting, casts
forth most beautiful and glorious beams of light; So our Savior now
approaching toward death, shines forth in most heavenly meditations and
exhortations to his Apostles. He does that which the Prophet Isaiah persuaded
Ezechiah to do when death approached, he set his house and family in order,
Like holy Jacob when he drew toward his end, he called his twelve sons, and
forewarned them of what should befall them, and instructed them, and blessed
them, so here our Savior calls his Twelve Apostles, and forewarns them
likewise of what should betide them, and seals up his love and blessing to them.

First, He makes here his last will and Testament; and publishes and seals it
up to them by the institution of the Sacrament, verse 19. This is the new
Testament in my blood.

Secondly, He makes here a bountiful and blessed bequeathment to his
Disciples; as Jacob to his Son Joseph, he bequeathes him the portion that he
had won to himself by his bow and by his sword, so here our Savior bequeathes
to his Disciples, to the Church of God the great conquest of his own blood, the
purchase of his death and passion; I bequeath ^o you a Kingdom says he, verse
10.

Thrdly, He foretells them of troubles and afflictions, he forewa^nes them of
temptations that should befall them; he gives them notice of their grand
Adversary that would labor to disapoint them of their inheritance, and defeat
them of the Kingdom.

Simon Simon Satan has desired to winnow you as wheat, etc.
SO then the Text you see is a seasonable gracious prediction of a great
temptation. The hour of temptation was now falling upon the Apostles, and Satan
was now dragging his nets and framing his pits, and setting his snares to take
them. And our blessed Savior not only by the Spirit of prophecy but by his
alseeing eye of divinity discovers all the intendments of Satan; and gives them
notice he carries an eye on all Satan's plots least Satan should have advantage
against us for he is ignorant nor of his devises as the Apostle speaks, he has
his constant eye upon his Saints and upon their enemies, his eye is upon
Leviathan the old Serpent least he should annoy the Church of God. I the Lord
will watch over it day and night, Hence Bernard taking into his meditation the
constant practice of Christ in forewarning his Church of temptations; he terms
Christ the creature that has simpathy with man, That creature when it sees a
man asleep, and a Serpent or Snake making toward him to hurt him; runs to him,
and strikes him and awakes him that he may escape (...) mischief, So here
Christ sees his Apos^^^ slumber in security, and the old Serpent making toward
them to annoy them; he rouzeth them out of their security by this watch word,
and tells them Simon Simon, Satan is on you and desires to winnow you, etc. In
the words themselves observe these three particulars.

First, A danger foretold Simon, Simon, Satan bath desired to winnow you as
wheat, etc.

Secondly, Here is a deliverance assured them, but I have prayed for thee that
thy faith fail not.

Thirdly, The duty of thankfulness required of them, and then when thou art
converted strengthen thy brethren.

For the first, the danger foretold them there are three things observable in
it.

First, The person forewarned that is in this word, Simon, Simon.

Secondly, The enemy foretold, Satan has desired.

Thirdly, The mischief intended by him to winnow you as Wheat.

First, The Apostle here warned, it is said here to be Peter, Christ directs
his caveat to him, and awakens Peter especially by this quick compellation, and
it carries briefly with it a threefold consideration.

First, This compellation that our Savior uses is no men personate, he
directs it here in a particular special term to him, he names him here Simon.
He does not direct his warning and caveat in general terms, he says not the
Church of God is in danger, and Satan labors to bring in mischief on
Christianity, but he brings it home to Peter in particulars, and gives the
caveat to him in particular, and it carries a threefold intimation.

First, On Christ's part, and so it is an intimation of special care, he
carries a particular eye upon Peter, and upon every one that belongs to his
care and providence, he speaks to him in individual punctual terms, he is
tender of his protection, it argues the large and unlimited compass of his
knowledge, he takes notice of every man, he sees our condition, he observes our
actions, he beholds our carriage in all the turnings of our lives, his eye is
on whatsoever can befall us. As it was rare and excellent in that great
Commander that knew every Soldier in his Army, and could call every one by his
name. I say it argues not only his knowledge and inspection, but his especial
regard and affection, he fixes the eye of his providence upon every poor
Christian that belongs to him, as Austin sweetly meditates, O tu omnipotente,
etc. O Lord God, (says he) thy care reaches to every particular man as much,
as to the whole Church, and thou as much tendrest and art provident over every
particular man, as of the whole frame of Christianity.

We are told indeed by some that he absolutely intends the salvation of the
Church in general, he will provide that the Church of God shall not be ruined*
he has built it on an impregnable Rock^ but notwithstanding they say that this
o^ that particular may, any one Christian may fall away and perish. No verily,
the providence of Christ is as careful for Peter and Paul and every one whose
names are given up to him. He bears every one on his breast and on his
shoulder, as well as he supports the whole Church. This was foretold by David
Psalm, 72. he says not only that he will have a care that the Church shall
flourish in his time, and that there shall be abundance of peace, but he will
have a care of the poorest sort, he will deliver the poor soul from violence,
and precious is every poor soul in his sight: It was typified in that charge
that was given up to Moses when he took the charge of the Government of the
people, all the people were delivered him by Pole and by tale; a muster was
made at his first entrance into his Government, and God surveyed all the Army,
a particular of them was given to Moses, and when he resigned them to God again
he gives them by tale. It was typified on Aaron, he bore the names of all the
Children of Israel in his bosom, not only our persons, but our hairs, are
hairs of the heads of his children, their persons then are under his eye and
observance, under his regard and particular inspection. That is the first thing
it is an intimation of particular inspection.

Secondly, This personal name carries an intimation on Satan's part of malice,
he desires that no flesh should be saved, he thirsts after an universal
destruction, but notwithstanding his more special spite is against the Church
of God, he takes more felicity in the ruin and overthrow of one Christian then
in the damnation of a 1000 others, to recover one that is gotten out of his
snare to bring Israel back, after they are gotten out of Egypt it is a great
joy and comfort to Satan; but above all he rejoiceth that the most eminent
Saints, Peter and such as are Pillars of the Church, the overthrow of them is a
great Conquest to him. One David is more then 10000. of Israel, and to bring
him to sin is his chief aim, he hates those above all. The choicest Saints
are the mark of his greatest malice: the image of God where it is clearest,
enrageth Satan's malice most. He hates us all, but those that excel in virtue,
and bear the livelyest Characters of God are his chief aim.

Secondly, Above all, he fears Saint Peter and such as he, if they stand they
work great ruin to the power of Satan. Peter killed his thousands, and Paul
his 10000. If these stand they make havoc of the power of Satan, and trample
on principallityes and powers. Therefore as Pharaoh made it his plot to destroy
the male Children,, so does he to destroy the most masculine Christians of the
highest improvement of grace. As it was the plot of Sampson when he would
destroy all the Philistines, he goes to the Pillars and pulls them down, so it
is his policy above all others, he goes to Peter, and the Apostles, and the
chiefest Saints, that is the second intimation of Satan's malice.

Thirdly, This compellation, Simon, Simon, it carries an intimation on Peter's
part, that is of special care and circumspection in case of temptation, it is
not enough to rest in general promises, the Church of God is sure, it is built
on a Rock, and there we rest our selves, but we must make provision for our own
safety. As in the case of War and invasion, men are not content that the Coasts
be guarded, and the Castle fortified, and that there be public care to watch
over the kingdom, but every man provides for himself, and has Armor for his
own use. So in the case of temptation, we are not to entrench our selves with
general promises of the Church that is built on a Rock, and it shall stand,
and the power of Hell shall not prevail against it. It is true Satan in his
War against the Church will loose the maine battle, and he and his instruments
that fight in a damned quarrel, they shall be overthrown. O but if thou look
not to thy self, thou may have a wound and be taken in the battle.

See this care of personal provision how Paul urges it, Gal. 6.1. Brethren if
any be overtaken by infirmities, you that are spiritual restore such an one
with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self least thou be tempted. In
the exhortation, first he begins in the Plural, Brethren, you that are
spiritual recover you such a one; but when he comes to caution consider thy
self. A man would think it were sollecisme, and indeed it seems to be a slip in
Grammar; Brethren, look to thy self, and you that are spiritual see that thou
be not tempted. No, it is an elegancy, for in compassion all must come in, but
in cantion every man must look to himself; Brethren help one another, but let
every one look to himself in case of temptation: consider thy self least thou
be tempted. Thus we see the first consideration, it is a name of personal
compellation, Simon Simon.

Secondly, This compellation it is a name more natural to him then his other
name; he calls him not Cephas and Peter, and by these names after he uses to
call him, but Christ passes by these, and calls him by the name he brought
with him before he was a Disciple; Simon especially now in the case of
temptation he does not mind him of his privilege; thou art ^ Rock, thou art a
stone, and these shall secure thee and the divine promises; but confider what
thou art in thy self a weak man divested of all privilege and security by thy
own natural condition, and compassed about with many infirmities.

In case of temptation the safest way is not to consider our strength but our
weakness.
NOt what we are by privileges that comes from without us; but what we are in
our own weakness, if we be left to our selves. As the Lord speaks in Isaiah to
the people of Israel, when he tells them of their danger, he calls them, thou
Worm Jacob; he puts them not in mind of their excellencies and prerogatives,
but what they were in themselves, poor Worms, unable to rescue themselves or to
resist any force. The best way is to consider what we are in our weakness, and
not in our strength; Thoughts of strength breed security, and are forerunners
of ruin; but thoughts of weakness and insufficiency awaken diligence to
prevent our danger; still we see in all the supplies and employments that the
Saints had, they spe^ best that were conscientious of their weakness: What
furnished Moses and made him so complete a man for his service, but the urging
of his own weakness. First he pleades his own weakness, Lord I cannot speak,
God supplies that; And then another, I am fearful, and he argues many
insufficiencies of himself, and the pleading of his insufficiencies gained him
abundance of strength from God: in temptation remember the best of us, as the
spirit is willing, so the flesh is weak: And consider not only that we are
built on a Rock, but our old foundation in the dust; not to remember that we
are Peter's and Ceph's, and are strengthened by privileges, but Simon, Simon
compassed with infirmities. That is the second, it is a natural name.

Thirdly, This compellation it is a name ingeminated, our Savior is not
content once to jogg and awaken him out of his drowziness, and infirmities, but
he doubles it and quickens him up with a vehement compellation, and that for
these reasons.

First, There is some quickening sharpness in this ingemination, Simon Simon, a
little before the Apostles were fallen into a strange dispute; and debate among
themselves who should be the greatest, they were at a great dispute, they would
needs know who should be the supreme, they imagined a kind of Popery, who
should be the leader of all the rest; our Savior sees it and pitches it, and
calls them off with sharpnes and acrimony: are you thus disputing for
Mastership and spremacy; the common enemy is upon you, Satan is at hand ready
to swallow you up, and you are together by the ears.

It is the usual condition of the Church of God, when they are in the greatest
dispute and objecting one against another for supremacy, and Mastership they
are in the greatest danger, the greater severity is on them.
Thus Jeremiah takes of the ambition of poor Baruch, The Lord will bring a
captivity upon the land, and seek thou great things for thy self; The common
enemy is upon us, and has cast in his fire balls of contention, and shall we
contend who shall be Mistress, it is a secret check, he shows, that while they
were disputing about supremacy they were in danger, while they think they stand
in the height, they fall down as Bernard says.

Secondly, This ingemination that our Savior uses; it carries with it a great
strength of warmth and heat of affection, he looks on their danger, he pitties
their security and tenders their welfare, therefore he is stirred in all
tenderness of affection; to bring them out of the snare? O Simon Simon; It is
the gracious love of our Savior, he has not only an eye of inspection on our
danger, but his bowels are stirred with compassion; they are rolled together,
his heart melts in our afflictions and temptation.

This form of speaking is used in any extremity of the Church: In their sorrow
in captivity, Exodus 3. See how God speaks, I have seen, I have seen; In the
danger of Isaac to be slain by Abraham, God posts an Angel out of heaven, and
the messenger comes upon the wings of the wind; and says Abraham Abraham, etc.
So in the case of desolation and sorrow that the Church was in, how comfortably
God speaks to his people; comfort ye, comfort ye my people, etc. There is no
tender hearted Mother, that springs forth into passion and tenderness of
affection, upon sight of the danger of her child, as God is stirred to
compassion, and his bowels yearn to catch us as firebrand out of the fire, to
deliver us out of the snare of Satan.

Thirdly, It is a quick speech Simon Simon, to awaken and stir them out of
their greatest security. The Apostles were at leisure to fall into many
disputes, and never considered the danger of them; Christ is fain to double his
voice, and to lift it up as a Trumpet to awaken them, As a man that sees fire
break out of his neighbors house; and knows that they are all asleep, he
bounceth and knocks at the door, and calls to awaken them out of danger: so
Christ is vehement and impotunate. There is a kind of Lethargy that falls on
Christians sometimes that they must be affrighted out off by fearful
compellations: The best of Gods Saints have need of these warning pieces to be
shot off at their ears, not only the wicked that lie benumed in security, and
are taken by Satan at his pleasure in every temptation; but the best of Gods
children. And our spiritual dangers do no more affect us, then the bodily
danger of Lot when he was loath to escape, and it seemed a fable to his sons
when they were told of it, therefore Christ is earnest and importunate with
them; so you see the first thing the person warned Simon.

The second is the enemy foretold, Satan desires to winnow you; And here are
these two particulars.

First, The enemy himself that is Satan.

Then secondly, the provision and preparation he was to do this mischief, he
did earnestly desire.

First, Here is our enemy Satan, it is one of the names, that the Scripture
deciphers the enemy of our salvation by, some times he is called Diabolus the
Accuser sometimes (...) the Tempter, sometimes Apollyon a destroyer, here Satan
an enemy, and it is a great aggravation of the danger to know the greatness of
the enemy that besets us, he is Satan.

First, A malicious deadly enemy, he hunts for the precious souls of men.

Secondly, He is a subtle crafty enemy he knows, as John speaks, he has the
mystery and depth of temptation.

Thirdly, He is an old inveterate experienced enemy, he is beaten to this
trade, he is excetcised and versed in the art of temptation. See the danger of
this enemy by three reaches and depths of mischeife that he conveyes in his
temptation.

First, This temptation that he sets on Peter by, it was an importunate
temptation, there was great importunity in this temptation to set on Peter and
the Apostles. There were many discouragements that might have detered him from
setting on the Apostles, the Apostles were not unarmed, they lay not naked,
they were not as a City whose walls were broken down, open to invasion, but
there were many things considerable in the Apostles that might have driven him
off from his temptation, and yet he would assault them.

First, They were in Christ's society, a great privilege, and it was a great
discouragement to Satan to set on Christ's se^vants, those that lived and were
in the sanctuary of his society. If Satan had set upon strangers, those that
were out of Christ's love, as a bird from the nest. So is a man that strayes
from his places says Solomon, a man that is out of the society of Christ and
of good men, he lies open to every free booter, Satan may take him at his
pleasure, if Satan take (...) man at a Stage Play, he seizes upon him on his
own ground, but the Apostles were in the Sanctuary of Christ's society; ye^
Satan dares break into Christ's family, and offer temptations and assaults upon
his own servants about his body; no society, not the whole Church of God, (...)
the society and presence of Christ ca^deter Satan from assaulting by
tempta^^ons, so it was in Judas, he won hi^ from his Masters company, he rook
hi^ from his heels, and carried him away b^ temptation, as it were in spite
of Christ that was the first determent they were in, Christ's company and
family, yet Satan sets on them.

A second, discouragement that might have kept him from tempting the Apostles,
they were in the state of grace in a blessed condition, they were regenerate.
Having sanctifying grace, it strengthens us against temptations. Grace in the
heart of men is as a Garrison that God has set to keep us from Satan, as the
Apostle speaks, ye are kept by faith to salvation. The word signifies so to
keep, as a Castle is kept by a Garrison. God sets a strong Garrison in the
heart of a Christian, faith and grace beats off Satan's assaults,
notwithstanding the evidence of grace in the hearts and minds of these
Apostles, it discourageth not Satan, but he sets on them. The holiest man, the
greatest Saint, nay Christ himself, Satan dares assault by temptation, as
Gregory on that place of Job speaks of Leviathan, he drinks ^p whole Rivers,
the wicked of the world, ^ay he thinks to drink up Jordan, the Church of God,
he will try if he can swallow the Saints, nothing can discourage him, no, not
grace in the regenerate.

A third determent that might have kept him, and yet he is importunate, they
were supported with the but resse and strength of promises, they had special
assurance that they should not fall; None that are committed to him, Father I
have kept them all says Christ, and they shall not perish, yet Satan in
despite of all Gods promises wrastles with his Children, and will see if he
can beguile them, as it was with him, he disputed Gods truth, has God said ye
shall dye. No, so he disputes, with a faith of a Christian, has God promised
that you shall not fail, has he assured you of your perseverance, no such
matter, it is false doctrine, he will assure us, there is no such ground and
privilege, the promises of the Gospel, are no discouragement to him.

Fourthly, Here was a new supply of grace that might have discouraged him, they
had been even now at the Sacrament, first the Sacrament of the Passover, there
was the blood of the Lamb sprinkled o^ them to keep them from the destroying
Angel, yet he durst set on them, and then the Sacrament of the Lords supper,
that great conduit pipe of grace, they had received new strength from Christ,
notwithstanding all these advantages that the Apostles had, the malice of Satan
is thus great, and his opportunity, that he sets on them.

In what case are they that neither live in the society of Christ, but in the
walk and range of Satan, that have not the least part of grace, that have no
hold upon the promises, that have not any strength from the word and
Sacraments. If he does thus upon the green Trees, Peter and the rest, what will
become of the dry ones, those that are destitute of all these privileges. That
is the first consideration, the danger of this enemy of his importunities.

The second, Is the consideration of this temptation and the danger of it, that
Satan sets upon them, we find it was a humane temptation, the temptation that
Peter and the rest of the Apostles were assaulted? with what was it no
diabolical suggestion but save thy self, preserve thy self from danger,
provide for thine own run not into needless trouble, thou can do no good,
as Jeremy says, it was a mere natural incentive, it was not diabollicall.
Our own course dictates this, escape danger, go not into needless trouble, he
bids him not curse Christ and Blaspheme, and speak horribly of him; but he
comes with a temptation of natural affection. Here is a second cuning reach of
Satan. We are not troubled at him; but when he appears in his own shape, as
Bernard speaks, when he comes with horrible Blasphemies. O but he folds up
himself in our bowels, and hedges his temptations in our own natural
affections, he bids the Apostle, thou shall provide against danger, be secure
against trouble, and this is the most dangerous temptation when he works with
our selves, and shoots our own arrows in our own faces; as the Axe borrowes
the helve of the wood by which it is cut down after, so, Satan borrowes
temptations from our affections, he goes on in our own temper of nature and
disposition, he bids us love our lives and provide for our selves, but they are
hissing Serpents, those temptations are most dangerous and deadly that come
under a humane notion. This is the second.

Thirdly, Yet it was a temptation of an Adversary, a man would think it were a
very freindly temptation, provide for thy self, escape danger. If Satan should
come with a horrid temptation, destroy thy self, make thy self away, rush on
danger, these are horrible; but he comes in the hearts of a friend, and tells
him he may do a great deal of mischeife to himself, and incur the
displeasure of the high Priest, and loose his friends, and hazard his estate,
and run into danger without advantange. This is the voice certainly of a
friend, but this was the voice of an Adversary. The most dangerous temptations
are those that come under the semblance and appearance of good will and
council. We can start back when one bids us rush into mischeife, and cast our
selves down, but to save our lives and provide for our profit, to take care of
our familyes, to enrich our selves for hereafter, to provide against hard
times. O we thank every man for these counsels, he is a good friend, yet
notwithstanding Satan maskes himself in this habit above all other. A false
friend is the worst foe; as those Pirates are most dangerous that hangs out
false colors, that pretend league and yet set on us, we are afraid of Satan
when he comes in his own appearance, but when he comes like Samuel in the
Prophets mantle, when he comes to Christ in the shape of Peter, when he comes
in the persuasion of a wife in the necessityes of Children, in the council of
friends; yet we should discern these to be the temptations of the Devil, thus
you see the first thing the enemy that tempts, it is Satan.

The second is the nature of the temptation, he has desired, that has two
things.

First, Here is the great bent of his will, and then the restraint of his power.

The bent of his will, he earnestly desires to bring temptation, but he must
desire it. But if you would know the suspension of his power, he is not able to
do that which he most desires, he is bounded and limited; he longs for it,
and he must desire it.

First, Here is the great earnest desire of Satan to assault by temptation, and
to bring us to sin, Take his desire in these three things.

First, See, it is the very bent and inclination of his nature to do mischief,
his desire is not for desire to do good for himself, but only for ill to us,
he longs not for his own salvation, but for our perdition; As it is natural
for Lions to be cruel, and for Serpents to be venomous; so it is the nature of
Satan to do mischief, malice seeks not its own good; but to do others hurt; you
may know Satan by his ymps, and the old one by his whelps, says Solomon, a
wicked man desires to ^o mischief, it is death to Satan not to do ^urt.

Secondly, See his desire further, in that ^o do mischief in his daily
malicious ac^usations, it is that term of infamy that ^^e Scripture puts on
him; he is the Ac^user of the brethren, that accuses before God day night, the
great Informer against ^e Church. There is no sin passes by us, but he scores
it up; did not I see this, and this has not such a Saint committed such a sin?
He is the great Doeg of the Church, as David curses Doeg for his information,
and it is Austins observation and direction for us on those Psalms, when we
sing those Psalms where David curses Doeg and those that accused him to Saul;
we should turn from the little Doegs of the world, to the great Doeg of the
Church, Satan that accuses them day and night, and thirsts after their
destruction, and weaves cunning accusations against the Church of God.

Thirdly, This great desire of our ill appears by the earnest importunity, he
uses to God himself that we may be given over to him. He prays not for his
own pardon but for damnation, he prays not tha^ himself, may go to Heaven, but
that we may go to Hell; he makes no prayer to God, but against the Church no
petition but to ill. See how ready he was to seduce Ahab, here am I, he
proffers his service he desires employment to work mischief how submissively he
desires that he man winnow Peter, how he sollicites Chri^ that he would not
cast him out, but that he would suffer him still to torment the bodies of Gods
people. It is strange, he is a proud spirit, and pride disdains to stoup, but
his malice overrules his pride, and he falls on his knees, and solicites, and
begs, and importunes God that he may have so much leave as to do mischief.

Then as you see the bent of his will, so in the second place, if he desires
it, here is a second thing observable, the suspension of his power, he is
restrained and chained up, he has a clog upon him, a limitation, to fall a
begging, he is fain to desire it, without leave he can do nothing.

First, He has an Original prohibition, he is cast out of all power and
authority, he is the basest of all Gods creatures, he has no power over the
meanest, he can do nothing to Job but by permission. But you will say Job was
an holy man; He could do nothing to Ahab but by Gods allowance, nay he had not
power over the Swine without he beg Christ's leave. Its Tertullians Meditation,
he cannot not hurt a hair of our heads (says he) nay even the very hairs and
bristles of the Swine, he has not power over them, he must beg leave of God to
enter into the heard of Swine, his restraint is such.

Secondly, If ever God allow him, in all his permissions God manageth them with
his wise dispensation, he cannot do what he would, but what God gives him
leave, God always carries a power over him, he holds the end of the chain in
his hand. In the trial of Job he could do nothing while he had leave given
him, God slips one link of the chain, he lets him try what he would do, he
does that to the utmost and then he stops; God gives him another link of the
chain, but there he stops. It is that, that gives us great security, he
carries him in such a sort as that he can take him off, he limits him, and sets
him bounds of moderation, he has great strength of malice, great desire, great
cunning but his power is limited, he walks as a Thief with his keeper, he is a
dangerous Thief, but the keeper walks with him, and he has shackells on his
heels. This is the second thing.

I come to the last, the mischief intended to Winnow you as wheat, Now this
action of Winnowing it is an ordinary familiar action conceivable by any, and
this represents unto us the nature of Satan's temptation, and that in these
three respects.

First, Winnowing or fifting it is no action of strength, of force and
violence, but of skill and cunning and dexterity. He that comes to purge corn
by Winnowing, he pours not all out, he uses no violent action on it, but by
slight of hand as it were a cunning dexterity and art that he has, he uses
this action that we call Winnowing so all the temptations of Satan they are
actions of cunning not of power, he may persuade and seduce us by the dexterity
of his skill by inveigling us by temptations, but he cannot force and compel
us says Austin he has a great deal of power, and strength and cunning, he may
circumvent us but he cannot powerfully overthrow us. It is not in the power of
Satan to force the will of any to yield to his temptations. It is represented
in the first temptation, he assumed the body of the Serpent a subtle creature,
not of a Lion; a creature of force he cannot break in upon us by force, he
cannot open the door and come in upon thee, if thou open not thy own heart. It
is only God that has power immediately, to enter into the soul, he only that
has omnipotency, can frame and work and bend the will according to his
pleasure; Satan can follicite and tempt us, and persuade us, he cannot
overpower us, he can only overreach us, he cannot ravish thy soul, he may
inveigle it. If thou resist and beat him back; The will of any man is
impregnable to Satan, it is only in the power of God to work on the soul; it
is only an art or slight that Satan has, he is an intreater, and seducer, not
an overthrower, That is the first, it is a mere trick of exterity and skill.

Secondly, Winnowing it is not one motion or action and there is an end, it is
not presently done, but often and often, it is a frequent action an agitation
rather, He that comes to Winnow corn he uses not one motion and then cease,
but he repeates and renews it, he exercises the same action again and again;
So it is with Satan's temptations, it is not one suggestion, that he is content
with, and if you deny that he is gone, yet he knocks at the door again, he is
importunate, he will take no denial, but sollicites and renews his onsets and
compasses us about afresh: it is his continual course as Paul says, it is
the buffeting of Satan, Satan's buffets are blows and blows; a second and a
third blow over and over. This is the course of Satan, he will not be beaten
once and then leave, but he will come the second and the third time, and he
then leaves but for a season, and after renews all his forces.

First, We know his malice is infinite and restles, he can never give over
doing hurt.

Secondly, Satan knows not what temptation will prosper and succeed; he knows
not truly and infallibly the ground of our hearts, when one temptation
therefore fails, he will try another, and another. He goes to Job and tryes
him in his goods, it may be those will vex him, and then in his children, it
may be a tender father may be overcome, but Job overcame him, then he tryes him
with a shrewd wife, and then with unfaithful friends, he knows not the
disposition of the heart.

And then he knows that we are not always in a temper, sometime we are more
watchful, sometime more drowsy, therefore he sets upon us at all seasons.

Lastly he knows that importunity will weary and tire a man; that those that
will not yield out of love, will out of vexation give an answer to be quit,
Thus Satan he makes his Winnowing a frequent act.

Thirdly, Winnowing is an action of great stirring and motion, a combustion and
beating together, there is a great stirring and beating together in temptation:
Satan brings no temptation that falls upon the soul of a Christian like this,
to be under the buffetings and winnowings and assaults of Satan. It puts the
whole of a Christian man's heart to it, it makes him weary, I go mourning all
the day long says David; It makes the Saints of God dejected in spirit, weary
in soul, that Satan will never let them rest, but sets on them with continual
buffetings, fightings without, and fears within; temptations on all sides, It
makes them loath themselves that Satan should see so much evil in them, as to
think to draw them to such sins by such tempations. As Gregory mourned when he
was advanced to the Papacy says he, Lord I see that the world sees some ill in
me, I am not Crucified to the world as I should. As a chaste spirit is grieved
that the Devil should think him such a one as would yield to the temptation of
uncleannes, It makes them mourn, there is no bitterness to this, to be under
the temptation of Satan, to be always in the sive and in the fan, always to
have the flayle, and to be buffeted with temptations.

Fourthly, Winnowing it is an action, that discernes and tryes, a man sees a
heap of Corn lie on the floor, but he knows not which is good, and which is
light Corn; so promiscuously when we live all at ease and peace, and settle on
our dreggs, we know not who are sound Christians, but come to the wind and to
the fan, come to the trial and see what temptations will do, you shall see
which is weighty and full corn then; and which is chaff and dust and light
corn, so temptations shows a man to himself, it makes known who are probata,
and who are not, who are reprobate corn and dust and chaff in the Church, and
who are good grain and weighty Corn; says Jerome a man is to be thought to be
such a one as he approves himself to be in the Whirlwind of temptation. Can
thou endure afflictions and not murmr? can thou grapple with Satan, and his
temptations, and not yield? O says James, we account them blessed that
undergo temptations. It will show thee to thy self, it will make thee know
whether thou be an empty husky Christian, or whether there be good corn in
thee; It is a matter of trial.

Last of all this winnowing is a purging action, it is vexatious, but it is
always profitable, it purges out some corruption, wheresoever there is
winnowing. Indeed Satan intends all for destruction but the live is Gods,
though Satan use it, and the Church of God is always the better and the purer
the more it is purged from all dross, by these temptations. What does Satan
get by all the temptations and afflictions? by all the stirs that he raises in
the Church of God? He purges the Church, he cleanses it, he makes it pure, he
purges the dross from it.

The Corn before it is winnowed it is bigger, it is more in bulk, but after it
is winnowed it is purer in substance. The Oar before it is cast into the
fyning Pot it is a bigger mass, but after it is purer in metal, so the
Church of God in all these trials of false doctrines and innovations what ever
comes to try the Church, there is falling away, and men are gone, to faction
and carried away to sedition and fractions; but all our comfort is, it is but
the light dust and chafe that is blown away with the wind, the good Corn
remains. In all Satan's geting, all his gain is nothing but a heap of chafe,
not one true Christian at the heart is drawn away, as it is Amos, 9. Not one
grain of corn shall fall to the earth, all that Satan gains by all the
troubles in the Christian world, by all his false doctrines who are they? They
are set down in the Revelations, they are such as there names are not written
in the book of life. As it was in the war between the Israelites and the
Midianites, all the Midianites were slain, and not one of the Israelites
perished, so in all the temptations and assaults that the Church suffers, not
one Saint perishes, not one grain of Corn miscarryes, the gain that Satan
has, is the light Chafe, all that fall away by these seductions are but the
loose hairs that fall off from the head of the Church in that sickness. Thus
you see the third thing; the mischeife intended, it is the winnowing. So much
for this time.

FINIS.
LUKE 11.13. If ye then, being evil; know how to give good gifts unto your
Children; how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them
that ask him?
IF we cast back our eyes to to the former Verses, we shall find in the Context
a Gracious Encouragement of Christ to his Disciples, and in them to the whole
Church, to quicken them to the exercise of Prayer, for the unfolding their
wants to the throne of Grace. Were we well acquainted with the nature of this
duty of Invocation; or, did we consider the necessity of this duty; it is the
Lock and Key of Heaven, it opens the Storehouse of the Mercies of God; it is
the Bucket that draws up the Water of Salvation. Or,

Secondly, Did we consider the Dignity it puts upon us, it sets us in a degree
into the presence of God, gives access to his presence; it maintains continual
intercourse between Heaven and us. Or,

Thirdly, Did we consider the Comforts that arise from it; it mitigates Sorrow,
composeth Distractions, it comforts in Distresses; and what not? Were these
things well considered, a man would think we should have little reason to
enforce this Duty.

On the contrary, in the Neglect of this; Did we consider the alienation of our
Souls from God. Or,

Secondly, our own guiltiness, that makes us shie to come into his presence;
the dullness of our hearts to any spiritual service, and with what weariness we
serve the Lord. Or,

Thirdly, that we think well of our own Infidelity, which makes us conceive
there is no profit in our prayers; that makes us say in our hearts, all our
prayers vanish in the air.

These things well considered, Encouragement is necessary.

In the second Verse he first prescribes a form of Prayer, frames our
supplications for us: We know not how to pray as we ought. He himself draws our
petitions. Did a King draw a Petition to be put up to himself, it would be a
hopeful sign of a Grant. He teaches not only what to pray, but he prescribes
a manner how to pray, so to offer up out Suits that they may be successful. If
we fail in the manner, we may return empty, it will not be acceptable; they
must be fervent, constant, and confident, and so our Savior teaches.

It Is a great Encouragement, that he invites, persuades, exhorts to abound in
prayer. Be of good comfort; he calls us, persuades us to come. S. Austin says,
Do thou think that he will deny thee that calls thee? Nay, he sues to thee to
come: And then, the main Encouragement of all, is the gracious assurance he
gives to us; Thy prayers (says he) shall be accepted, granted and rewarded.
God takes it in good part, he despises not the prayer of the poor, but
graciously accepts of it: And,

Secondly, he yields, grants, and subscribes to our petitions, answers all our
desires; he puts us not off with a bare acceptance, but fulfils and grants.

Thirdly, he not only accepts, fulfils, and grants, but rewards and gives all
that we ask; nay, he gives more than we ask, because we are subject to ask
amiss; he does not only regard us, but relieves us and rewards us.

So the words, they are a gracions assurance that Christ gives to the Church,
that they should not only be heard, but speed in all their prayers: and not by
way of hopeful insinuation: a bare insinuation, as that in Zephaniah Chap. 2.
v. 3. Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the Earth, which have wrought his
Judgment, etc. It may be ye shall be hid in the deep of the Lords Anger. Or
like that insinuation of the Prophet Joel. Who knows if God will be merciful
unto us. -- No it is more, it is not only a bare promise that we shall be
accepted, but an assurance that our prayers shall be granted; and Faith, when
it meets with a promise, it works wonders: Yet there is more, our Savior
assures it, and proves it by force of Arguments and Demonstrations, he contends
and disputes with our infidelity. St. Austin says, Lord, I am assured of it,
because thou say it: But how much more when Christ proves it by argumen s;
Speak but the word Lord, and Faith will rest upon it; but when arguments and
reasons are added, what Faith can deny? Christ argues, proves, and confirms it
to us. Oh happy men that we are! that for the establishment and confirmation of
our Faith, Christ will argue, dispute, and strive with our Infidelity; and what
wretches are we if we do not yield. See how his arguments are framed, by way of
a double similitude.

First, from the similitude of a friend, there is hope. Which of you having a
friend, etc. v. 5. Kind importunity admits no denial. I have made you my
friends, says Christ to his Disciples. This is a strong argument, and yet a
doubting Faith objects, that friendship may be broke, love may grow cold; I,
but Christ argues from the similitude of a Father, friends may prove unkind,
yet a Father will not grow unnatural to his Child. God is our Father: O the
bowels of a loving Father, that is far beyond the bosom of a friend! What can
Infidelity object against this? Observe in this discourse three particulars.

First, the proof of the Argument, set down in the similitude; If ye then being
evil, know how to give good gifts unto your Children.

Secondly, the Conclusion, drawn from the Argument; Shall give the holy Spirit
to them that ask him.

Thirdly, the Illation or strength of the Argument, how much more shall your
etc. So there are three things to be considered.

First, the proposition of the Similitude.

Secondly, the Conclusion.

Thirdly, the proportion, how it holds, how much more.

Let Us come to the Similitude it self, and consider, first the matter of it,
secondly the use that Christ makes of this Similitude.

The Similitude it self lies upon these words: Ye that are evil men know how
to give good gifts unto your Children. Here are three truths supposed by our
Savior.

First, Ye, all the sort of you, this is your state and condition, Ye are evil
and sinful.

The second is this, Ye that are evil, have some principals of good in you,
some truths remain in you; you know how to do some things right and good.

Thirdly, you that are evil and sinful have this principle preserved in you,
you know how to give good gifts to your Children, how to love and seek the
welfare and good of your Children.

First, you that are evil and sinful. This Tincture of evil, Christ objects
against them. It points not at the most godless profanest sinners, sinners of
the first magnitude; as murdering Cain, traitorous Judas, wicked Absalom; we
yield these to be wicked men, and yet this title reaches to them also, they
are not free from this imputation. But further, the men that Christ speaks too
here, they are his own Disciples, such as put themselves under his Doctrine and
Discipline; nay more, they were men regenerate, such as might call God Father,
as St. Austin says, such as God accounts and ownes to be his own Children,
and they own him their Father; nay more, men that had made a great progress in
Religion, men given to Devotion and Prayer; Lord teach us how to pray.
Notwithstanding their dignity of Apostleship, the privilege of their Sonship,
their piety and devotion, Christ tells them they are evil and sinful; this
should put all, even the very best, to blush, and cry out with the Leper in the
Law, I am unclean, I am unclean. We are all unclean, it should make us take up
John's confession, If we say that we have no sin, there is no truth in us; this
is not only a strain of humility, but a true confession of verity, we are all
sinners. But, how far may these men be said to be evil men and sinners?

First, it was not by their natural estate and condition, that they were evil,
as the Manichees unfold this Text; for God made all good, and very good, we
came unspotted out of his hands; also, Original sin was much abated in them,
and new principles of grace infused, so they could not be said to be wicked
men; he accepts his for Saints, and they are washed, and cleansed in his sight;
then, how far may the Saints of God be said to be evil men?

First, the best and holiest men may be said to be evil, and wicked; as in the
very best of men are the relics of much foul Corruption, which makes them
evil and sinful: Original sin, though perfectly pardoned, yet imperfectly
purged; purged from the death of sin, but not from the disease; the best of us
all have the swaddling Clouts of our first Conception, in which we were wrapped;
the defilements of original sin, stick close by Adam's fall: We were not cast
only into a puddle of mire, but upon a heap of stones, having so bruised us,
that this is subject to the very best of us to be styled evil and sinful.

Secondly, the best of Gods Saints, are liable to this imputation of evil, and
sinful; the good that is wrought in us, by regeneration, is so weak and feeble,
by our Corruption; the Conflicts that the grace of God finds in us, makes all
the graces of God imperfect, as St. Austin says of Civil war. There are those
contrary principles in us, that the best of us are liable to this imputation,
as Da^id says, O Lord thine eyes, see thee feeble imperfections of grace, thy
eyes behold the weak beginnings of grace, thy eyelids try the Children of men:
not when he looks with the eye of Justice, but with the eyelids of his Mercy;
whereby he connives and winks at us, that he may find us unblameable; the best
of all Gods Saints have those imperfections, that makes them cry out, We are
evil and sinful.

Thirdly, they are evil and sinful; our Savior puts them in Compare with God;
the very best of Gods Saints are nothing but Corruption; if we have
sanctification, it is by participation from him; the stars withdraw their
light, when his glory appears, the view of which, made the Saints of God to
tremble.

Woe unto me (says the Prophet Isaiah) I am undone.

And, Job says, I have seen the Lord.

Thus you have the first truth verified. -- Ye are evil and sinful. I come now
to the second; though by nature ye are sinful, and evil, and tainted with
Corruption, yet there are some impressions of equity, some principles of common
honesty still preserved; not only those that are comparatively, but those that
are totally evil; those that are unsanctified, have some rules of honesty
engraven upon them, some impressions of the image of God, that image not wholly
defaced, concerning truths and rules of morality, which nature has still
preserved. Nature it self starts back at some abominations in an unregenerate
man, the Conscience of an unregenerate man, checks it self at some horrible
impiety. In a spiritual sense, all moral virtues are but vices; as St. Jerome
says, all sacred truths are not to be known, but by revelation, natural
endowments are beneficial, as one benefit of the remainder of nature is, that
they which cross not the rules of morality live more innocent; For, were it not
that those principles bare sway in most men's lives, common honesty and justice
could not be maintained.

Secondly, by nature we can never attain to grace, and so by those virtues we
cannot prevail with God for Salvation; Yet they may for a temporal reward, as
in the Romans, God rewarded moral virtue with victory and prosperity.

The third benefit it gets, they that observe the rules of nature, their
account at the last day shall be far more easy; indeed, the Heathen shall be
all turned into Hell, but the Damnation shall be more easy; Socrates less
punished than Cato.

Lastly, a man that lives according to the rules of nature, keeps within the
compass of these principles; though not able to reach at Salvation, yet their
Conversion is more easy; it is more possible to gain him to grace, this stock
of nature is fit to graff grace and religion on more kindly; yet at the best it
cannot fructify, and bring forth fruit to eternal life, but grace being
graffed, it will fructify to Salvation. A man within the sphere of morality,
that lives peaceable, sober, just, and of an humble mind; there is more hope of
salvation in that man, he is not so far from the Kingdom of God, as those that
sin against nature; evil and wicked men have some principles of knowledge; ye
are evil, and yet ye know some good things.

The third truth is, Ye that are evil, among the decays, ruins, and rubbish
of nature, yet this truth is preserved, ye are tender affected Parents, and
seek the good of your Children; God has placed this forcible instinct, as the
bowels of most unnatural men is natural love to their Children. In the first
original, God did create us all one flesh, and one blood; men were not created
apart, as Angels, one independent from another, but all one blood, one root,
and the sap of all this is natural affection; it is this that glues and holds
all the world together, it keeps the world in being, without which all would
fall asunder; this tender and kindly affection of parents to Children, it is the
Conveyance of all nurture: Thus Wisdom in the Proverbs, takes upon it the place
of a Father, O my son keep the instructions of thy father, and what my son, etc.

How forcible are these persuasions to piety and virtue!

Thirdly, this is a spur to labor and industry; what is that that keeps the
world in action, not all for the belly, but keep something for the Babes; it is
that that quickens industry, this is the plummet that turns the great Wheel of
all the world, that makes perpetual motion of labor, to leave something behind
for Children.

Fourthly, the sweetness, as that it takes off the harshness of all the toil
and care incident to parents, the care in bringing forth, the care in bringing
up; they account it no labor, or a labor much sweetened by this tender
affection. St. Austin says, that the labor of loving and tender parents to
their Children, is either no labor, or sweet labor.

Lastly, this tender affection, is a provocation to piety. Salvin urges it,
Do thou love thy Children? be religious and pious; those that are pious claim
a blessing to their Children, and the want of this affection is a sign of a
reprobate mind: Want of this natural affection, Romans 1. also Tim. 2. you may
see what it is, if natural affection be wanting, it signifies some great
mischief. And so much for the first.

Now I come to the second, and that is the use and improvement that Christ makes
of it, he clothes himself with this affection, this similitude of a loving
Father to Children; he uses this language, of love to us, conveyes these
thoughts in the sweetest expressions, that we may feel the sweetness of the
love of God in the sweetest expressions. Take it in three manifestations.

First, as to himself, the most careful resemblance, compares himself to a
watchman; he that watches over Israel, neither sleeps nor slumbereth:
Would thou conceive his Care to feed and provide for thee? he compares
himself to a Sheepherd that feeds his Sheep: Would thou conceive his
Tenderness? he presents himself as a Hen that gathers her chickens under her
wings, Mat. 23. And as a Hen bears up her wings, etc. Deuteronomy. 32. or as the
Eagle. St. Bernard says, all of these are sweet resemblances of his tender
Care.

Secondly, as he takes to himself the sweetest resemblances, so the most loving
relations, a friend is a sweet relation, a brother a sweet relation; Abraham
believed, and he was accounted a friend of God; a father is a tender relation,
I will be thy Father; a husband is a sweet relation, I have married thee to my
self: And because all these relations fall short, he joins all together, he
that does the will of my Father, is my Father, my Mother, my Brother, etc. and
in the Canticles, Open unto me, my love, my dove, my undefiled.

Thirdly, he clothes himself with the tender affection of love, as in St. John;
Pity, that is a tender and melting affection, the Lord is exceeding pitiful, as
in S. James; he has a fellow-feeling of our sorrows, as in the Prophet Esaias,
he assumes, that he is void of passion; nay, he has bowels of Compassion,
there is the rolling and turning, and yearning of his bowels. So we have seen
the first main particular of the text, Ye that are evil and sinful.

I come now to the second, the Conclusion drawn from this Argument; Your
heavenly father knows how to give the holy spirit to them that ask him: Fathers
upon earth provide gifts and portions for their Children, but here is the gift
of the holy spirit. Here are three particulars Considerable:

First, the Donor, your heavenly Father.

Secondly, the gift, the holy Spirit.

Thirdly, the qualification of those that receive it, they must ask.

First, your heavenly father he is the Donor, look upon it as a hint of
encouragement, heavenly father; here is but three words in all.

First, a father, it is a word of much kindness and affection, it argues his
forwardness and propensity to help us.

Secondly, heavenly father, it argues his allsufficiency, God father of heaven,
Lord of heaven and earth, he is abundantly able to supply our necessity.

Thirdly, your heavenly father, its a word of engagement; Ye may believe your
father; this word gives us our right and portion, that in humble confidence, we
may lay Claim to his goodness: here is alinck of love, father, heavenly father,
your heavenly father; these three put together prevents three doubts that faith
may object when a Christian is to pray.

First, the doubt of the poor Leper, Matt. 8. Lord if thou will, thou can
make me clean. O never question his willingness, for he is a father, and what
will not a loving father do for his Child.

The second doubt that faith may object, is the doubt of the poor man for his
son; Lord if thou can, etc. He needs not question his power, he is a heavenly
father, he has al-sufficiency.

The third doubt is that in Mark 4. Lord, do thou not care if we perish? etc.
never question that, for he is your heavenly father, this it is that makes up a
full comfort; without these, infidelity would be ready to cast off all hope,
and give over all prayer to God, as thinking God will neither do good nor can;
or else objects there is no engagement: Put these three together, he is a father,
and is willing; a heavenly father, and is able; our heavenly father; and
therefore engaged by these three, a Child of God has assurance of hope and
strong Consolation.

Now the gift intended here, is the holy Spirit, Matthew. 7. it is said, Your
heavenly Father gives every good thing; I, but most sweetly are our prayers
Confined here to the begging of Gods Spirit; whatsoever a Child of God asks, it
should be things of necessity; superfluity that is not for Children to ask, nor
a wise father will give it; the Spirit of God is necessary, bread is not so
necessary for life, as grace for salvation; all necessaries for life, and all
superfluities are not so much, as this absolute necessity of having the Spirit;
it is not necessary I should live, but it is necessary I should be sanctified and
saved.

Secondly, a Child should ask that which is useful and profitable, and of all
other gifts, the gift of the holy Ghost is most useful, it is a gift of the
highest nature.

First, it is the richest that God can bestow; one dram of grace, one blessed
suggestion from the Spirit of truth, one blessed motion darted into the heart
by the holy Ghost, is more worth than all the world: All things in this world
may be called good, but makes them not good that have them; St. Austin says,
Riches are good, if a man have grace to use them, so he may do good with them,
but grace makes good; there is no man can put virtue to an evil employment,
grace is always the ^ountain of good; it is the foundation, the pledge, the
assurance, it gives all other blessings; Solomon when he asked the spirit of
wisdom, God could not deny him any thing, riches, honors, every thing.

Thirdly, if a Child should ask of a father, a sign of his love, the greatest
manifestation of a fathers love; the surest sign, and richest evidence of Gods
love, is the gift of the spirit, the love of God when it is shed abroad in the
heart by the holy Ghost; we feel the taste of it, rejoice in the comfort of it,
it is a seal of Gods love, as St. Bernard says, a dram of Gods grace is a
certain token of a determined Election of the assurance of glorification; he
that asks Gods Spirit loves God, and God love him; such prayers as these
always prevail; forgive us our sins, increase our repentance, sanctify our
souls, purge our consciences, subdue our corruptions, overcome our temptations:
Lord, what prayers should prevail with thee, if such prayers as these prevail
not; other prayers may hit or miss, but prayers for Gods Spirit never returns
empty.

Now for the third, the parties, those that ask, how can we pray for the
spirit, without the spirit, none can say Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy
Ghost? it was the the Pelagian error to say, that our prayers must prevent
Gods grace; the Spirit of God is not the fruit of our prayers, but our prayers
the fruit of Gods Spirit; our desires are wrought by Gods Spirit, answers our
desires; in this case, how sweetly St. Austin says, indeed his first grace,
his preventing grace fore-runs all our prayers; I am found of them that sought
me not: but his Concomitant grace, that may be the fruit of our prayers, yet
all supplies of grace are of Gods Spirit; St. Bernard says, it is the surest
sign of grace, if we desire grace; prayer it is the breathing of Gods Spirit,
and there must first be a drawing in of Gods grace, before there can be
ascending out: Matthew. 44. there the grace of Gods Spirit; the Kingdom of heaven
is compared to a treasure found in the field not looked for, there is preventing
grace, the touch of the spirit that works upon the heart in the first
prevention, verse. 45. The Kingdom of heaven is likened unto a Merchant, that
sought pearls, and found them; here is first the grace of prevention, a treasure
found in a field, not thought on, as St. Austin says, faith is given, first,
as the prime grace, then the prayer of faith, that is the breath; it is prayer
that obtaines supplies of grace, the matter of our prayer must be for the
supplies of grace, prayer increases new supplies.

Secondly, prayer may obtain the sealing up of our adoption, the kiss of peace
and love, that seals up assurance of pardon for sins.

Thirdly, besides the first stock of grace, look for assisting grace; we can
not make good use of grace, without the help of grace.

Fourthly, prayer will obtain the spirit of strength and fortitude, to
encounter against temptation; ask thy father this, and he will grant it.

Lastly, prayer obtains the spirit of perseverance, without the which all holy
motions and inspirations are like a wind, that passes away, and comes not
again.

Now I come to the Illation drawn from the argument, how much more; it is a
proportion with advantage; indeed it had been well, if the Argument had gone,
and the Conclusion drawn with some abatement, one spark of mercy to so unworthy
Children; the place of a servant, nay, the bread of a servant, had been too
good for so unworthy Children.

Secondly, if the argument had held but so much, as in Psalm. 100. Like as a
father pitieth his own children; or like pity, the Lord teaches to those that
fear him, David takes comfort in this, but this Scripture offers more grace,
how much more? why here is full measure, shaken, pressed down, it runs over.

The third expression in this proportion is; if earthly Parents have such
provident Care for their Childrens welfare, how much more in God, though
earthly parents be never so wise and provident for their Children, yet they may
be mistaken, or wish things unfit, and to the hurt of their Children, as old
Isaac was mistaken in his blessing, the mother of Zebedees Children asked she
knew not what, but the all-wise God hears all our desires, and orders all
things graciously for our welfare.

Secondly, Ye men that boast of your power, if ye are parents, and have any
portion to bestow upon your Children, how much more God your heavenly father;
all that earthly fathers enjoy is but borrowed, the oil in the Cruze may fail,
the oil in the barrel may be spent, all ye have is but borrowed, etc.

Thirdly, if ye that are parents have tenderness of affection toward your
Children, how much more your heavenly father? God is full of bounty and mercy,
ye are evil and evil natured, God gives liberally and upbraids not, to compare
with him the goodness of men, is not so much as one dust of sand, to the glory
of the whole earth, like a spark to the whole element of fire.

Parents, what do they give to their Children, trifles; God gives the best
things, his Spirit, his own flesh.

God fills the world with his goodness.

Fourthly, men are but Stepfathers of the flesh in respect of God, he is father
both of soul and body; Ezekiel. 23. he charge, etc. wordly fathers, thou have
taken, etc. God is our being, and the preserver of our being. Abraham knows us
not, Jacob has forgotten us: And Christ said, Call no man father upon earth,
as to compare with God.

Lastly, as the nearest father, so the dearest affection; the affection of the
father or mother are cold and dead, in regard of the ardent affection of God
toward us; Parents they first beget Children, and then love them: God loves
first, and then begets us to himself; a flowing of nature is parents love, but
an eternal love is Gods love; we had a being in him, before we had any in our
selves, he that planteth the ear, shall not be hear? and he that planteth the
tenderness of Parents to Children, shall not he have Compassion? nay, how full
must he needs be of Compassion?

To shut up all the height and improvement of affection in God, must require
reciprocation on our parts; and it is set on a three fold proportion.

First, if ye that are Children cast care upon your Parents, Be not careful
what ye eat, or drink, or what ye put on, for your heavenly Father cares for
you.

The proportion of obedience is the second; If reverence be due to the Parents
of the flesh, how much more to the parents of the spirit? how much more
reverence and obedience to your heavenly Father?

The third is the proportion of love; If ye give love to earthly fathers, how
much more to your heavenly Father? So you see the sum of the Text is; Ye that
are evil, can give good gifts to your Children; how much more shall your
heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him?

FINIS.
LEst Obliquie or Malice should assperse the Candor and Integrity of these four
Sermons, I was desired by the Seller of them, to read and censure them. Having
seriously perused them, I find the true Pourtraicture of the late deceased (yet
never to be forgotten) most reverend Bishop Brownrigge. My censure can extend
no farther than the Printers Errors; The principal one whereof I find to be in
the first Sermon, in the first pages being a transposition of the Title:
Wherefore, in stead of, Is the Safety of a Nation True Repentance, read True
Repentance is the Safety of a Nation. In short, let me advise your charitable
minds not to study how to carp at literal faults, but study the matter, and
you will soon be a sharer with me in the pleasure and profit of reading them.
This I thought fit to write, as to antidote it against the tongues of
maliciious and envious persons.

R. H. M. A.


