CERTAIN QUERIES CONCERNING The lawfullnes of imposing, and taking of the
NEGATIVE OATH; Propounded by some MINISTERS under restraint in the Garrison of
WEYMOUTH.

AND ANSWERED By E. B. and P. I. Ministers of Weymouth, and Melcomb-regis.

LONDON Printed for Rich. Royston, at the Angel in Ivy Lane, M DC XLVII.

The Negative Oath.
I A. B. Do swear from my heart, that I will not directly, nor indirectly,
adhere unto, or willingly assist the King in this War, or in this Cause,
against the Parliament, nor any Forces raised without the consent of the two
houses of Parliament, in this Cause or War: And I do likewise swear, that my
coming and submitting my self under the Power and protection of the
Parliament, is without any manner of Design whatsoever, to the prejudice of the
proceedings of this present Parliament, and without the direction, privity, or
advice of the King, or any of his Council, or Officers, other then what I have
now made known, So help me God, and the contents of this Book.

To the Reader.
THese Queries were privately propounded, by men pretending a sober desire of
satisfaction, and this Answer (whose contrivement was not the expense of full
24. hours) as privately returned. The men were so far from having their
Consciences unscrupled by any thing here said, that we were constrained to
offer them a dispute, Ore tenus, which (after time, and place, and Moderator,
agreed upon, and all parties met) was prudently declined, since which time (as
I have been assured by some godly Ministers, and others) it has been given
out, by one or more of the Parties themselves, how little could be said for the
Parliaments practice, and some aspersions cast upon my self in particular;
whereby I am necessitated to own these Papers, and to make them public, that
the world may see, that what I have here said, was enough to cast me by choice
upon that side I ever was, since these differences began, though not enough to
fetch those men off, who are not willing they should now end.

Thine in the Cause of Christ, and the Kingdom. EDWARD BUCKLER.

Certain Queries concerning the imposing and taking the Negative Oath, etc.
1. Quere.
SInce Faith, (that is, an assurance of the warrantablenesse of any particular
undertaking) must be the ground of a Christians action, and such Faith can rest
on nothing but Gods word, We demand, what warrant there is in the Gospel,
(which restraines the use of Oaths) for the contriving, and imposing an Oath,
(which is a solemn Act of Religion) in order to politic ends? This the rather
we desire to be satisfied in, because our experience teaches us, that this
Oath is made use of as an Engine of State, since it is not urged generally on
all, but pressed upon some, not without Design upon their estates, and
liberties.

Ans. Your first Quere is, what warrant there is in the Gospel for the
contriving and imposing of an Oath, in order to Politic Ends?

1. An assurance from Gods word of the warrantablenes of any particular
undertaking, must be a Christians ground of that undertaking.

2. The Negative Oath is in order to Politic ends, being an Engine of State.
For

1. It is not urged generally on all, but only on some. 2. On those some, not
without design upon their 1 States. 2 Liberties

1. we observe,

1. An ill Omen: viz. a stumbling at the threshold, you demand what warrant
there is in the Gospel, etc. and the reason of your demand is, because there
ought to be a warrant in the word. We hope Gods word, and the Gospel, are not
with you terms contemptible, so that if we find warrant in the word, it will be
enough.

Oath, in order to Politic ends, and so this can be no scruple of your
Consciences; for whether lawful or not, you are not concerned in it.

2. We answer,
1. To your Quere. viz. What warrant there is in the word, ( for that must be
the sense of your Quere) for the contriving and imposing of an Oath in order to
Politic ends?

We desire you to look into these following Scriptures; where you shall find,

Oath, in order to politic ends, both in 1. Precept, Exodus 22. 8. 11. 2.
Practice, 1 Reg. 8. 31. Genesis 24. 2. 3. Neh. 5. 12. (2 Chronicles. 36. 13. compared
with Ez^k. 17. 13. 16.)

A negative Oath* 1 Reg. 2. 42. 43. Genesis 24. 3. Judge. 21. 7

Oath not urged on all, but some, as when an Oath is explanatory, or cautionary
(as in the case in hand) it is only pressed upon the suspected, not urged on
all. Number. 5. 19. Exodus 22. 11. the man suspected, not all the men in the
neighborhood. Ezr. 10. 15.

Oath not without influence ((...) without Design) upon their

1. Estates, Neh. 5. 12. 2. Liberties. 1. Reg. 2. 42.
O^j. These texts are all in V. T. But the Gospel restraines the use of Oaths.

1. You either were not able, or not willing, to give us any sense of this
parenthesis, at our first meeting. 2. You show us where the Gospel restraines
the use of Oaths in any sense that will serve your purpose. 1. mentioned with
approbation, Heb. 6. 16. 2. used Rom 9 1. 2 Cor. 11. 31. 2 Cor. 1. 23


2. To the reasons of your Quere, to the

1. V^z. An assurance from G^ds word of the warrantablenes of any particular
undertaking, must be a Christians ground of that undertaking.

Ans.
and a necessary ground of Quere, when we do indeed doubt of the
warrantablenes of any thing that is required of us. But we do not think our
selves, or others, bound to suffer, till we can satisfy our selves of a
warrant for what is done by others; as in the case of this Quere, viz. of a
ground for contriving and imposing of oaths -- To the

2. The Negative oath is in order to Politic ends, etc.

See in order to what end those oaths were contrived and imposed, Ans.
which you saw in the texts above cited. -- To the grounds of this viz.

1. This oath is not urged on all. If by (all) you mean 1. All the Subjects of
this Kingdom (oaths not being either to be multiplied or extended beyond
necessity) we say that the State need not engage their own party, by any other
way, having sufficient Ans.
2. All of a kind. viz. Of such as have adhered to the King in this war; we
believe (and have been informed) that the Ordinance intends all, and the
nonexecution of it, is to be written down, among the Errata of their
Instruments. 2. On some, not without design upon their 1. Estates. 2. Liberties


We might find here some incongruity between this, Ans.
and viz. (not urged on all.) Why not, if this be the design? It Is possible that
other men upon whom this oath is not urged, may have estates and liberties, of
equal consequence with such as speak this by experience. We could say much
of the animosity, etc. that is descended in such expressions, but we remember
the point.

3. We demand whether
1. There be less ground in the Gospel for the negative Oath, then for the
Oaths of Allegiance, of Canonical obedience, the Protestation mentioned in
the fourth Quere, etc.

2. All, or most of those oaths be not in order to politic ends, and so
engines of State?

3. In relation to a ground in the Gospel, there be not as much reason to
question their legality of contrivement and imposition, as of this?

4. Such as are not able to show more warrant in the Gospel for those, then
this, may not lawfully take this, or must not necessarily repent for taking
those?

2. Quere.
We desire to know what ground there is in Gods word, for a Christian by Oath
to obliege himself in future contingents? Or whether such obligations
concerning mutable affairs of State, not under our power, may not prove
pernicious snares to Conscience: and therefore to be in christian prudence
prevented, since one exception against the Popish Vow of continency, is, that
it is a snare to conscience?

Your second Quere is, what ground there is in Gods word for a Christian to
obliege himself by oath, concerning mutable affairs of State, not under his
power, this being to obliege himself by Oath in future contingents?

Reasons of this Quere are,

1. Such obligations may prove pernicious snares to conscience. 2. One
exception against the Popish Vow of continency, is, that it is a snare to
conscience.
1. We observe,




2. We answer.
1. To your Quere, what ground there is in Gods word, for a Christian, etc.



2. All promissory oaths are obligations to future contingents, for how
necessary soever any thing may be in its causes, and to God, yet if it be not
present, it is contingent to us, who knows what a day may bring forth? vide
Iam. 4. ver. 14.

To your reasons of your Quere, -- to the

1. Such obligatious may prove pernicious snares to consciences.

Ans. Never the sooner for the contingency of the thing concerning which they
are obliged, for

1. Then so many promissory oaths as are made, so many David 119. Psalm. 1. 6,
and Iosuah, and the Princes of Israel, Ios. 9. 15. Cum multis aliis, made
snares for their Consciences. 2. If the contingency of the thing about which
we swear, impose upon us a real impossibility of performance, the obligation
is Ipso facto, made null.
2. One exception against the Popish Vow of continency, is, that it is a snare
to Conscience.

Ans. The case is not like, for

1. That Vow is of something not in our power, Mat. 19. 11. not so this oath.
2. That Vow is of that which is nullo jure, necessary, Heb. 13. 4. 1. Tim. 4 3.
not so this oath. vid. infra.
3. We demand whether,
1. That which is sworn to in the Negative Oath, has more of contingency in
it, then what is sworn to in the Oath of Allegiance, Canonical obedience, etc.

2. That which is ind^^d a snare to Conscience, be a greater evil, then that
which is a wound to Conscience?

3. Those persons may (in any charity) be supposed to act purely, according to
the light and dictates of conscience, in one thing, that do not discover any
Conscience at all in other things?

4. To pretend Conscience for what we act from other principles, be not a
great sin?

3. Quere.
Whereas the wisdom of Parliament looked upon an Oath, for the never consenting
to the alteration of the Discipline by Law established, as Tyrannical, and
prevented the general imposing of it, by the declaring the illegality of all
Oaths not imposed by Act of Parliament. We desire to know, how the imposing
of this Oath, of not adhering to the King, can escape a hard construction?

Your Third Quere, is, How the imposing of this Oath, of not adhering to the
King, can escape a hard construction? Reasons of this Quere, are

1. The Parliament looked upon the etc. Oath, as tyrannical. 2. They declared
all Oaths illegal, not imposed by Act of Parliament.
1. We Observe,
Vbi fraus latet) and cannot tell what you do indeed mean by a hard
construction. Quere and its grounds together, this must rationally be presumed
to be your meaning, viz. that this oath of not adhering, is 1. Tyrannical. 2.
Not imposed by Act of Parliament.

You must own it in this sense, or discharge the Parliaments looking upon the
etc. Oath as tyrannical, and their declaring the illegality of all Oaths, not
imposed by Act of Parliament, from being reasons of this Quere, -- and so

2. We answer,
1. To your Quere, how this oath can escape the construction of being 1.
Tyrannical. 2. Not imposed by Act of Parliament.

You will be satisfied (we hope) upon the making good of these two things, viz.

That the imposition of this Oath

1. Is not tyrannical. 2. Is imposed by an authority equivalent to an Act of
Parl.
contra 1. aquum. 2. bonum. 3. leges.

1. aquum, 1. There is jus regni, in all that by the Parliament 2. Its all
equity in the world, that those persons who will live in the Parliaments
Quarters, should declare themselves, at least, not to be their enemies. 2.
Bonum esse, you prejudice the State, in giving (as we remember 3. Leges, vide
infra (26.) etc.

2. It is imposed by an authority equivalent to an Act of Parliament, we shall
offer unto you, (as to ingenuous men,) these Propositions. viz.

1. That the King wilfully absenting himself, or dissenting,

If the Parliament have not this power, it is either, because of ergo.

The minor is proved thus,
If the Kings dissent can hinder a Law, the Parliament assenting, then the
Kings assent can make a Law, the Parliament dissenting, -- but, etc. ergo.

The major is proved thus,
If there be an equal Power in the King to do both, then he may as well do the
one as the other. -- but, etc. ergo.

The minor is proved thus.
If the doing of both do equally concern the Kingdoms good, then there is an
equal power in the King to both, [for whatsoever the King* quatenus King, is
or has, he is, and has it for the Kingdoms good, as the means is for the
end, Romans 13. 4.] but the doing of both, does equally concern the Kingdoms
good, [the Kingdom is as much concerned, that (good) laws be made, as that
(evil) laws be hindered] -- ergo.

2. Not to allow Ordinances ( ut supra) equivalent to Acts, Sedente curia was
never questioned) is to necessitate the continuance of old Laws, though never
so prejudicial, and to impossibilitate the making of a new, though never so
necessary, if the King will; contrary to that known rule in Politiques, Lex
debet Reipub* accommodari, non respub. legi.

3 It makes the King absolute, and his government arbitrary, it being all one
to rule without a Law, and to rule by a Law of his own making, and which could
not be made without him.

3. We demand whether,
Ius gladii (if the Parliament were pleased, or had need to plead it) does not
entitle them to power enough to impose this Oath? 2. The King had any more, for
imposing his Protestation, in places under his power? 3. The imposition of that
Protestation (being not by Act of Parliament, nor by any power equivalent) be
tyrannical, and capable of a hard construction?
4. Quere.
Since there is a natural all allegiance due to the person of King Charles
from all his Subjects born (so that it is a declared treason to distinguish
between the natural, and politic capacity of the King, as it is evident in
Cooks Report of Calvin's case) which the founders of our Government have
thought fit to ratify, by Oaths of fealty and allegiance, which obliege all
Subjects to adhere unto, and assist King Charles in time of War, as well as
in time of Peace: and since by a late Protestation, taken at the instinct of
Parliament, we have obliged our selves in our several places, and callings,
to maintain with our lives and fortunes, the Kings person, honor and estate,
and to endeavor to bring to condign punishment all those who oppose them, we
desire to know, how any power on earth (without being Antichristian) can
absolve us from this allegiance, or disingage us from our vows of adherence to
the King, in maintenance of his right, such as is the power of the Militia,
acknowledged by the Parliaments Petition at Windsor, to be a flower of the
Crown.

Your fourth Quereis, what power on earth, (without being Antichristian) can
absolve us from our oath of Allegiance, or dis-ingage us from a late
Protestation taken by instinct of Parliament, oblieging us to maintain the
Kings person, honor, and estate, and to adhere to him in the maintenance of
his right, such as is the power of the Militia, etc.

Reasons of this Quere, are,

1. There is a natural allegiance due to the person of King Charles, from all
his Subjects born. 2. This natural allegiance, the founders of our Government,
have thought fit to ratify by Oaths of Fealty and Allegiance. 3. These Oaths
obliege all Subjects to adhere unto, and assist King Charles in time of War, as
well as in time of Peace. 4. It Is a declared Treason to distinguish between the
natural and politic capacity of the King, as is evident in Cooks Report of
C^lvins case, vid. 11. Hen. 7. 1.
1. We observe.
1. That you insinuate a power to be claimed by the Parliament 2 That you
insinuate this power to be Antichristian. 3. That it is exercised in imposing
the Negative Oath.
2. We Answer.
1. To your Quere, what power on earth? etc. That by the Negative Oath you bind
your selves from nothing, which you are bound unto by the oath of Allegiance,
or the late

That neither Oath nor Protestation obliege us to any new duty, but only bind
us, (in the sacred Bond of an Oath) to perform that which was ever due. This
truth we have from the Series of your own arguments, there is (as you call it)
a natural allegiance, which is (you say) ratifyed (not added unto) by Oaths
of Fealty and allegiance. -- Thus then

If the Negative Oath bind you from nothing, which is (by your natural
allegiance) the Kings due, then it binds you from nothing, which you are bound
unto by the Oath of Allegiance, or the late Protestation. -- But, etc. -- ergo.

Ob. It binds us from adhering unto, or assisting the King in this War.

Sol. This is not the Kings due. -- We prove it thus.

Nothing is the Kings due, but what he can claim, either by the Law, or by his
Prerogative; [wee never heard of a third title, and The Law is the measure of
our power. And we conceive that the measure, and the thing measured are not
greater, nor less one then another. But for your good, you shall have in the
Prerogative to boot] -- etc. but the King cannot claim assistance in this
war, either by Law, or by his Prerogative. Ergo.



1. The sense of the Law is to be judged of, by the mind of the Lawgiver, and
we cannot yet think that the Parliaments mind was to give the King a power to
cut their own throats. King seems to allow the Parliaments sense of the law
to be authentic, though directly opposite to his own sense of it, as in
Strafords case. 3. Then the Law binds you to endeavor the destruction of all
those godly persons in the Kingdom, who are of the contrary party, and this
we have found was (as long as they appeared) at least finis operis. 4. Twere
good that Law were produced which inables the King to claim your assistance in
a War against his two houses of Parliament, [his Majesty himself saw so
little of Law in it, that he himself protested himself as ready to War
against his own Children]
Obj. We have directed you in the Margin, to the Statute of 11. Hen. 7. Chap.
1.

Sol. And we direct you to the Parliaments exposition of, and Declaration upon
that Statute, printed above three years since.

Obj. The Parliament acknowledged the power of the Militia to be a flower of
the Crown.

Sol. To use for, not against the Kingdom, according to Law, not will, vid.
supra (26) ^t infra (42.)

2. The King cannot claim your assistance in this War by his Prerogative,
we shall endeavor to hold you ou^ what Prerogative

1. is not. 2. is. 1. Prerogative is not 1 A power in the King to do what he
pleases, Parliaments, etc. [tis not (we hope) for this cause, we pay
Tribute, Romans 13. 6.] -- this is not Prerogative. For 1. The King every where
disclaims it. 2. To what purpose laws, if a Sic ^olo, were enough? 2. A power
to do what he pleases, in cases, not provided for by Law -- We shall again
resume his Majesty's acknowledgement: The Law is the measure of Our Power,
where 1. Is not meant our power drawn into a Law, that is not elegant enough,
for a Penner of his Majesty's Declarations. but here 2. Is meant our power,
left free, and i. e.) our Prerogative will enable us to do whatsoever the Law
may be presumed would have allowed us to do, if there had been a Law made.


2. Prerogative is A power in the King, to do the Kingdom Prerogative is not
a jot more then this. 1. If the wisdom of a State, could foresee every thing
that would need a Law, they would make a Law for it, and leave no Prerogative
at all. 2. We see that there is still more and more of the Kings power drawn
out of his Prerogative into his Laws, as inconveniences not foreseen, do
immerge. 3. That the King should (as the necessity of the Kingdom calls for
it) thus empty his Prerogative into his Laws, not left Arbitrary, but it is
his duty, vid. supra (26) 27)




2. To the Reasons of the Quere, to

There is a natural Allegiance due to the person of K. Charles.

Ans. This does no more bind you to assist the King in any thing that is evil,
then the natural Allegiance of either of you to a Father does bind you to
help kill a man, (only ^o nomine) because your Father calls for your
assistance.

2. This natural Allegiance, the Founders of our Government, etc.

Ans. We shall note, that 2. They may contrive, and impose oaths, in order to
politic ends. 3. What influence the Kings assent or dissent has, you have
heard above (26.)

3. These oaths obliege all Subjects to adhere unto, and assist King Charles,
etc.

Ans. That supra 30. 2. What is premised in the oath of Allegiance, is in
opposition to that usurped power of Potentates, etc. abroad, not to the lawful
power of the Kingdom at home, ( vid. 3. Jacob. 4.) 3. This oath must receive
its exposition, from whence it did its composition, viz. from the Parliament of
England. 4. There is (at least virtually) as much of the Negative Oath, as in
the oath of Allegiance.

4. It Is a declared Treason to distinguish between the natural and politic
capacity of the King, as is evident in Cooks Reports.

Ans. 1. From the authority of Cooks Reports, we refer you to the Reports of
Finch, Barcley, etc. in the case of Ship Money, Monopolies, etc. 2. Parliaments
are not tied to the reports of Judges but have power to araign and condemn both
Reports and Reporters.

3. We demand, whether
1. Our natural Allegiance to the person of King Charles, be quatenus Charles
(i. e.) such a determinate, individuum, or quatenus King ( i. e.) a person
invested with such a power, or quateum both?

2. If any person (by conquest or otherwise) should be established King of
France, as William the Normand was of England, (the present French King yet
living) to which of these two is the natural allegiance of the subjects borne
of that Kingdom, due?

3. If a King be non compos mentis, any Oath of Allegiance to him, when he was
sanae memoria, does bind his subjects to assist him (by virtue of his verbal
or written precept) in war and peace?

4. We of this generation (unsw^rne) be bound to make good those ^athes of
Fealty and Allegiance which were taken by our Progenitors, upon pain of perjury?

5. A Prince having (as an acknowledged Flower of the Militia, and going about
with any part of that Militia to destroy himself or his children, ought to be
assisted in it? -- This to your Queries. -- Your

5. and last is a Proposition, -- viz.
All Oaths being to be taken in the common grammatical sense, this oath ties
the taker from all manner of assistance to the King during this war. Now since
the violence of battle may be directed against the sacred person of the King,
and the mis-guided fury of the common soldiers, has bent it self against,
and may hereafter attempt the life of our gracious Sovereign, we cannot safely
abjure all, s^^cours to the preservation of him, whose life is worth ten
thousand of us.

5. Your Proposition is, -- This Oath ties the taker from all manner of
assistance to the King, during this War; and the taking of it, were to abjure
all succors for the saving of his life.

Reasons of this Proposition are.
1 This Oath is to be taken in the common grammatical sense. 2 The violence of
battle may be directed against the sacred Person of the King. 3 The
mis-guided fury of the Common soldiers has bent it self against the life of
our gracious Sovereign. 4 It may hereafter attempt the like. 5 The Kings life
is worth ten thousand of us.
1. We observe,
Quaerentes, here you are Determinantes.

2. That you would intimate, that the Parliament would bind you by oath from
saving the Kings life, if it were hazarded.

2. We answer,
1. To your Proposition, -- This Oath ties the taker, etc.

during this War, but, in this War or Cause. We do not here call your candor
and ingenuity into question.

2. The oath ties not the taker from all manner of assistance to i. e.) in
relation to this war, Ex. gr. if Cooks Reports were tied from assisting you in
this Cause, viz. in proving a distinction between the natural and the politic
capacity of the King, Treason: are they thereby tied from all manner of
assistance to you, till this controversy be ended? may they not yet assist you
in a case of tenure of lands, Quare impedit, etc?

I. N. and I. S. are in a suit of Law, I A. B. do swear not to adhere unto,
nor willingly to assist I. N. in this suit; does the grammatical sense of my
oath tie me from inviting I. N. to dinner, or from pulling of him out of a
ditch? etc.

2. To the Reasons of your Proposition. To
1. The Oath is to be taken in the common grammatical sense. Answ. This sense
abjures not all succors, ut supra (45.) 2. The violence of battle may be
directed against the sacred Person of the King. Answ. We hold 1. That the
person of the King, and of every supreme Magistrate in any State, is
inviolable, and not subject 2. That in this War, no Soldier ought willingly to
take away the Kings life. 3. That if the King will wilfully adventure his
person in battle, the Parliaments Army may and ought to fight, not
withstanding the Kings presence in the enemies Army, -- because 1. If his
person be in danger, it is not the Parl. fault, (who would not have him there)
but his own, and his adherents, who prize his life at no higher a rate. 2. The
Parl. are acting within the sphere of their own power, and so doing their duty,
not so the King, ut supra, (26, 27.)


4. That if I see the Kings life in danger, (as a soldier striking, or
wounding him) I may rescue him, and save his life, the Negative Oath
notwithstanding, -- for 1. This is no more an adhering unto, or an assisting 2.
This being necessarily understood in the Negative Oath, is contained in the
grammatical sense of it. [Shew us in what this Rule is false, -- Quod
necessario intelligitur, non deest.] 3. In all promissory oaths, something
must ever be understood, [as the Casuists resolve, Sum. Angelica in verbo
Jurament. 4. Qu. 5.]



3. The misguided fury of the common soldiers has bent it self against the
life of our gracious Sovereign.

Answ. This is matter of fact, and if we knew that you spoke

4. It may hereafter attempt the like.

Answ. We cannot prophecy, but if the King suffer in his Person by the
Parliaments succeedings in this War, it will be his own fault, ut supra (46)

5. The Kings life is worth 10000. of us.

Answ. We will not dispute the value of His Majesty's life; but if it be worth
no more, his will has cost above twice as much, as his life is worth. 3. We
demand, whether

1. This clause [the Kings life is worth 10000. of us] be to be taken in the
sense that all Oaths are? 2. Cooks declared Treason in Calvin's case, must not
be pardoned to make this clause good? (40). 3. A man that has taken the Kings
protestation may not (which is some assistance during this War) hold Sir
Thomas Fairfax his Horse, without guilt of perjury? Diximus.
FINIS.

