A Sermon ON the 5th of November, BEING The last which was preached BY THE
Reverend Father In God, Bishop Brownrigg. Bishop Of EXON.

London: Printed for Rober^ Crofts at the Crown in Chancery Lane under Serjants
Inn, 1660.

Dan. 6.21,22. O King live for ever, etc.


THis Chapter (upon a summary viero) represents unto us a malicious conspiracy,
and a miraculous deliverance, The proseprity and honor of holy Daniell was
envied by the Babylonian Princes, envy stirred them up to seek his ruin:
Nothing will satisfy, for they consult, conspire, and effect their purpose:
the Prophet is condemned, yet he is snatched from the jaws of death, and from
thence the mighty hand of God does wonderfully rescue him. The words are
Daniells thankful acknowledgement of this great deliverance, and it is directed
to King Darius by whom he was cast into this dangerous destruction; and it
stands upon these particulars,

1. A reverend Compellation, O King. 2. A loyal salutation, Live for ever. 3 A
particular declaration of this deliverance, My God has sent his Angel, etc.
Come we to the first, the reverend Compellation. (O King) The Prophet here
acknowledges and honors Darius for his Prince and Sovereign: To understand
this particular we will consider Darius in this fourfold consideration.

1 Darius was a Heathen Prince, an Alien from the People of God, estranged from
the Church of God and that holy society, yet the Prophet does honorably
acknowledge him as his Prince and Sovereign: it affords us this observation,
That Religion does not rescue and exempt us from the power and authority of
such Governors and Magistrates though Infidells, Heathens and strangers to
Religion; the ties and bonds of our obedience to them are inviolable, Dominion
and Sovereignty are the constitutions of God, not as he is the author of Grace
and Redeemer of the Church, but as Author of Mankind and Governor of the
world. It 's a true Maxim, Dominium temborat non fundit in Gratia,
supernatural grace does not constitute its authority, but it 's the act of God
in his providence; Thus our Savior acknowledges he was subject to Pilate; and
the authority he had over him was from Heaven; Thus Paul appeals to Caesar, and
accounts himself abnoxious to his judgment and tribunal as his Prince; Thus
Christ paid tribute to Caesar. Some teach that Religion and Christianity does
exempt us from obedience unto other Magistrates, and thus they affirm, that
Christianity and the Gospel does utterly discharge us from any obedience to
Heathen Magistrates: No, we see Christ, Paul, and all the Primative Churches
acknowledge it otherwise, Daniell, Ezekiell, and the whole state of
Christianity does abhor that Doctrine, and acknowledge their Magistrates
lawful authority.

2 Darius was not only an Alien but an Enemy, he held the Church of God under
Tyranny and his command; yet notwithstanding the Prophet acknowledges him as
his lawful Prince: Observe, Obedience to Magistrates it is nor only to those
lawful and just, but though they be oppressors, yet notwithstanding their
subjects owes to them all due obedience, Thus Jeremiah exhorts the Jews to
take upon them the yoke of the King of Babylon and submit to him, to study the
peace of his Government and to pray for him. Thus the primative Churches
submitted to the Emperor of Rome even when it was Tyrannus; and Paul exhorts
the Christians to submit to Magistrates even when they were persecutors; Thus
the whole Army of Marters submitted to Julian that hateful Apostate: it is true
what Tertullian says, Christians had rather be murdered then murder others;
and it was told the Emperor in his time that the Christians would wage war
against the Emperors that did slay and destroy them but that Religion and
conscience did enforce obedience.

3 Darius comes under a third account consider how he made wicked laws here
prohibiting all the worship of God, assumes all divine worship here to
himself, and yet notwithstanding the Prophet Daniel acknowledges him as Prince
and Sovereign. Indeed active and actual obedience to their unlawful commands
we may not, we must not perform (so to be obedient to them is to be rebellious
to God) but yet notwithstanding though we refuse their personal commands in
doing of them, yet it must be with all submission and acknowledgement of their
power and authority; thus Readiness servants were obedient to him, though they
would not obey his command in killing Gods Priests. This is certain,
Magistrates and Rulers (though their commandments be unjust) we must
acknowledge their Authority, though we do not fulfill their commands: says
Austin, good laws serve to bind men that are bad, and evil laws serve to
prove the constancy of Religion in them that are good: This is the Piety of
Christianity, we know who to obey, yet notwithstanding to refuse those commands
that are made against God.

4 Darius was he that cast Daniel into the Lions Den: His Law did insnate him,
his sentence condemned him, his seal shut him up and sealed him up in the Den
of Lions, yet notwithstanding he did here acknowledge him as King and
Sovereign: No wrongs that we can receive from Magistracy and Superiors must
free and disingage us from our obedience to them; Thus the primative Church did
obey those Princes that yet notwithstanding brought them into danger.

Having seen the consideration of Daniel in it self; Now let us look upon his
salutation (O King live for ever) he wishes him long life, peace and prosperity
here, and salvation hereafter.

1 He does not pray against his Tyranny and Impiety; He charges not upon him
the cruelty of his office, much less does he threaten him with wrath and
judgment from God, least of all like the Pope that past sentence of death
against Henry the second that for the death of a rebellious Papist, presently
sentenced him and cast him out of his Kingdom: No, here is the piety of a
Christian to pray for those that revile and persecute him: says Saint Paul,
pray and curse not, Romans 12. This is not to be overcome of evil, but to
overcome evil with good: it is that Saint Paul says, he approves himself to
be a good Christian in all patience, in affliction, in suffering, in
persecutions, in bonds and imprisonments. Indeed the spirit of the Law it was
more direful and more severe, Elijah calls for fire from heaven upon his
persecutors; I but the Gospel calls us to an other spirit, the spirit of the
Gospel is a spirit of meekness, gentleness, goodness; there we must not
take upon us unlawful revenge but prayers and supplications: We learn
curseing, and execrations, and slaughters from the malignant Church, they are
the brands of those that are the worshippers of the red Dragon; we that are the
followers of the Lamb, and adore him, must be like the Lamb full of meekness
and gentleness. Zechariah the son of Jehoiada (out of the spirit of the Law)
when he was stoned, prays to God for vengeance, 2 Chronicles. 24.20. But Steven when
he was stoned (out of the spirit of the Gospel) he prays for his Persecutors,
Lord lay not this sin to their charge. Thus the Apostle when hardly used by the
high Priest is falling to his prayers; not to punish and plague his Enemies:
but to win and convert them. This is the spirit of the Gospel to yield to, not
rise up again in any mutiny and rebellion.

2 Orat pro Rege, Daniel will not pray to the Emperor, but he prays for him:
Here Is the trial of Daniells Allegiance to his King, he refuses indeed to pray
to him, but he never gives over to pray for him. This is the duty we owe. Alas,
his Enemies counted him an Idolatrous man, a worshiper of strange Gods, and one
that will not honor the King; but whether is not Daniel a better subject that
does not pray to the King as an Idol, but does earnestly pray to God for him?
The King is to be honored, non pro Deo, but propter Deum, not instead of God,
but in the behalf of God and Gods cause; we honor him not as an Idol to pray
to him, but as the great Magistrate of God, and so we pray for him. Thus the
primative Church did, they would not worship the Emperor as God, nor sacrifice
to him; but prayed for his office for good success, for continuance in the
Empire, and for all prosperity.

The Third thing is the representation of the danger it self; and it stands
here upon five particulars.

1 The Author of this deliverance, and that is (God.) 2 The Instrument of this
deliverance whom God imployes, and that is an (Angel.) 3 The manner of this
deliverance how it was wrought (He stops the mouths of Lions.) 4 The measure of
this deliverance how far it proceeded, (He had not the least hurt by it. 5
The motive that stired up God to do this for him, and that is two fold, 1.
Innocentia personae, the Innocence of his person, (Before God he was found
innocent) 2dly. Innocencia causa, The Innocence of his cause (Before thee O
King have I done no hurt.
Thus the Prophet Daniell reckons up all the Causes of his deliverance in
opposition to all his Enemies; 1. They plotted to take away his life; here is
releef against that, God Almighty has saved and rescued: 2ly. They excluded
him out from the Kings favor; well, here is a remedy for that, he appropriates
to himself the favor of God, My God has sent his Angel. 3ly. The Princes
and Potentates of Babylon they conspire against him to cut him off; but here is
a Potentate of Heaven, a holy Angel he comes with a rescue. 4ly. They made
sure of him, shut him up, put him into the Lions Den and sealed it up; This
Angel of God has sealed up the Lions that they could not hurt him.

First the Author of this deliverance; herein two things are observable; the
author of this deliverance and that is God; and then the hold that he lays
upon this God for his help, and that in this pronoune Meus, he is my God.

First God is the Author of it. Indeed all deliverances especially of his
Church and People, they are all the works of God, it is he works salvation and
deliverance in the middst of the Earth; and what says David? God is a God of
Salvation, and to God belongs the issues of life, Psalm. 68. but especially of
this great deliverance that we have now before us in three respects, three
particular works of God, three Ecces.

1 Contra tantum inimicum, To rescue this Man from so potent a Prince as
Darius. 2 A Tantillo, To suckor so helpless and forlorn a Man, that is God's
peculiar. 3 A Tanto periculo, from such great danger to bring him out from the
pit of destruction.
1 Contra tantum inimicum, for to rescue this Prophet from Darius it must be
the work of God. The strong man may be at peace and hold what he will till a
stronger then he spoils him and takes away his goods: so all other powers
whatsoever. Private wrongs may have other adresses, but when the Magistrate
does argue Law and Auhority, that is a peculiar case to God. St. Ambrose,
Basil, Chrysostom, when the people would have rescued them from the ill will
of the Emperor; oh they utterly forbid it, O no, God and God only is terrible
to Kings.

2 A Tantillo, for so forlorn and forsaken a Man, this is a case God only can
dispose it; he is utterly forlorn, cast out of the Kings protection, no
mediation used for him; here is a peculiar to God: It was David's case, Psalm.
142.4. I looked on my right hand and beheld, but there was no man that would
know me, resuge failed me, no man cared for my soul, (then he says) I cried
unto the Lord, I said, thou art my refuge and my portion in the land of the
living, deliver me from my Persecutors, for they are stronger then I, this is
the God that does give it, he is the helper of the helpless.

3 A Tanto periculo, God alone can rescue him from this danger: The King
himself if he would never so fane cannot save him: he is past the reach of any
humane help: this is the case wherein God will be seen, he is the helper then
from the greatest danger, when all is forsaken and lost, when they see no hope
in man as the condition of the Prophet is now desperate God steps in. Thus Paul
makes his thankful acknowledgement when he was pressed in Asia he despar'd of
life; he received the sentence of death in himself, yet he acknowledges God
delivered me from so great evil. So he gives an account when he appeared first
before Nero that cruel Tyrant, all men forsook me, no man stood by me, I but
God stood by me, and I was delivered from the mouth of the Lion: David in the
depth, Jonah in the Whales belly, the three Children in the fiery Furnace,
these are cases peculiar to God that works salvation in the midst of the
earth. You have seen the help;

Come we to the second, which is the hold which he lays upon this help, for
it is not sufficient to see help at hand but we must lay hold upon it, lay hold
upon my strength says God in Isaiah. Indeed at all times we must put our trust
in him; but in extremities, in dangers, when life begins to fail and to sit in
the snares of death then the Prophet clasps close to God: here is not only
contactus fidei, but complexus fidei, he lays hold upon him close, he will not
let him go, as it was with Jacom when he was in danger, his brother coming
against him with 400 armed Men, he would not let the Angel go. This is that,
that magnifies the faith of a Christian when he draws near to God. No
nearness can be too much, no approach too much; when we make God our refuge,
then we shall be sure he will not fail us.

To understand this particle Meus, my God, we will resolve it into these
particular expressions.

1 The Prophet calls him my God, he is the God of my special service and
Religion, the God of my faith, of my piety, and of my devotion. Nature
discovers a God; and infidelity will give us leave to trust in him; but faith
brings us near to him in close application; this is that will give us good
ground of help in trouble when we come near to God, and make the Lord our
trust, and confidence, and repose. Stick to God and he will stand for thee, we
deal with God as the Israelites in time of distress send and think Assiria
will help at a pinch; No, let us stick close to God.

2 He is Meus, my God by public profession, and open adoration, the Prophet
boasts of his God in that time when he was forbidden to name any other God but
an Idol; he laves hold upon God and the worship of God even at that time when
it was danger to him, nay it might be death and destruction. I this is that
gives you assurance to God when you will own him in the face of dangers. It
was a base and unworthy speech of them in Micha, hold thy peace, we will not
name the name of God: No, what says Christ? They that confess me before men,
my Father will confess them at the last day. This is that, that makes us to be
truly belonging to him when we own his Religion and maintain his cause. Alas we
fail God too often, and therefore it is just with God to fail us and leave us
to our selves.

3 He is my God, the God of my faith and of my affiance. Indeed this pirticle
Meus, is faiths possessive, it works it self into nearness to God. Common
faith leaves it at random, and particular saving faith brings us home to God in
the greatest closeness; what says Paul, he loved me, and gave himself for
me. What, says Chrisistome, did Paul ingrosse all to himself? did Christ dve
for him alone? No, he does not exclude others, but to be sure he will include
himself. This makes us draw near to God when we have a special interest and
affiance in him. If we maintain his cause he will maintain our cause and will
deliver us. This is the property of faith, my Beloved is mine, and I am his
says the Spouse; here are mutual imbrasings of Christ and the Church. dic
anima (says Austin) say securely Deus meus es tu, and then God will say to thy
soul, I am thy salvation.

4 He is my God by present evidence and experience of this great deliverance
and rescue; it is that, that makes him now to renew his Covenants with God; God
does assure him as he does speak of his people, I will be know to thee by my
name Jehovah, when I bring thee out of captivity from the Land of Egypt, God
gives us then trials and experiences of his love, as is said of the Jews,
three times a year they shall go up to Jerusalem and leave all their Towns
unmanned and unguarded (what says God?) not any of thy enemies shall desire thy
Land, they shall make no inroad nor invasion.

5 He is my God by Resolution in the engagement to all holy thankfulness, now
Daniel does obliedge himself to God by new Covenants, as the people when they
returned from Captivity they entered into a new covenant with the Lord to be his
people. Has the Lord delivered thee from any danger? raised thee from any
affliction? O then devote thy thankfulness to God; as it was with David, how
does he bless God for his own and his peoples deliverance out of dangers, O
this God shall be our God for ever and ever, our guide unto death. So Psalm.
116.16. I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son of thy handmaid, why
so? Thou have loosed my bonds, I will offer to the thee sacrifice of
thanksgiving. O When God has vouchsafed such mighty salvation as to this
Nation, for us to sit loose by God, to grow strange to him, to be false in his
Covenant, to linger aftter false worships and false Gods; O it is most odius and
execrable unthankfullnesse.

The second particular is the Instrument by which this salvation was wrought;
it was done by an Angel; and this speech is considered upon two Reasons.

1 It Is not said Angelus meus, but Deus meus, he does not say God sent my
Angel, but my God sent his Angel; he places this possessive word upon it is
proper object. Indeed the assignement of particular Angels to particular men,
it is a dispute in the Schools, it may pass for a likely and probable opinion,
but whether it be so or no, we are sure of this, it was Gods Angel, and
appointed by him to deliver his servant. Among the Jews it was a common
opinion that every man had his particular Angel; when Peter was delivered out
of prison he knocked and they said it is his Angel; but what says Saint Peter?
he answers otherwise, the Lord has sent his Angel and brought me out of
prison: so Paul, Acts 27. Says, the Angel of the Lord whose I am, and whom I
serve appeared to me, etc.

2 The speech is observable for an other reason; he does not say Angelus venit,
but Deus misit, the Angel came, but God sent his Angel to do it.

Indeed those holy Angels and blessed spirits are most ready, most forward to
assist us in all our dangers, in all our temptations; but here is that, that
makes it comfortable, the Angel came not by his own motion, but by Gods
mission. As the evil Angels can do us no hurt, but by Gods promission, so the
good Angels cannot assist us but by Gods mission, and commission; they are all
ministering spirits sent forth for the good of them that are the heirs of
selvation. It was that that comforted David, Psalm. 71 thou have given a
commandment to save me. Our deliverance it is Gods appointed commandment, and
it is their appointment. Had the Papists the setting out of this story, they
would have told us the name of this Angel who he was, and what order he was,
and he should have an office, and they would have published solemn praise and
thanksgiving to the Angel; no, but Daniel that was conversant with Angels
overlookes these, but gives thanks to God; as when Mannoah would have
worshipped the Angel, O says he, if you sacrifice, let it be to God, and let
him have the honor. It Is Athanasius his description of an Angel, an Angel is
an invisible creature living for ever, and always singing praise and laud unto
God. So then in that this delivery of the Prophet was wrought by an Angel, it
puts upon this deliverance three excellencies.

1 In that an Angel does rescue him from the power of the Lions it makes this
rescue to be comfortable: If Daniel be now excluded from men, and cast amongst
wild beasts, I but here is his comfort, forsaken of men and visited by an
Angel. It was our Saviors case, Mark 1. He wandered in the wilderness among
wild beasts, but Angels came and ministered to him. Let the world spare their
favors and visits (such as they are) here is the comfort, Gods distressed
Children are forsaken by men, but visited by Angels.

Second, Excellency it is an honorable delivery: such a servant of God as this
Prophet shall not only have safety but honor put upon him; as Elijah was not
only fed with a Raven, but an Angel came and brought him his meat, an Angel
was his Steward and Cupbearer, and ministered to him. The King of Isreal's
Children it is said were placed with the great men of the City that they might
take care of them and attend them: Gods Children are placed not with the great
men of the City but with the Angels of heaven, they are compassed about with
Legions of Angels.

Third, Excellency it was and avoidable an unirresistable deliveranee such as
could not be disappointed: They shut him in, and sealed him in: what then? can
they withstand the entrance and power of an Angel? It was thus with Saint
Peter, Herod clapped him up into Prison, there were four Quaternians of Soldiers
to watch him; the Iron gate that was fastened upon him; Alas, poor help
against an Angel; the Angel of God came and presently knocked off his shackles
and opened the Iron gate and delivered him out of prison. If men can clip an
Angels wing, and pinion those mighty powers and withstand their entrance, then
and not till then shall they have power against the Church of God. Thus those
two Apostles Peter and John were clapped up by the Highpriests, (but mark their
delivery) the Saduces shall know God has Angels in heaven, the Angel of the
Lord came and opened the prison door, and bid them go into the Temple, and
preach the word of life to the people. I this is their great security; they may
withstand us, but not those holy Angels, those mighty powers that have done his
will; this makes it to be an extraordinary deliverance.

Thirdly, come we to the manner of this deliverance, and that is set down in
these words (they stopped the mouths of the Lions.) God had infinite ways to
deliver his people from destruction; he might have altered the mind of Darius,
and of his nobles, and given them more moderate thoughts, as Ahasuerus he made
a bloody Law, but God altered his mind; and Esaias comes marching against Jacob
with 400 at his heels, but God gave him a tender and brotherly affection;
Laban drives after him furiously, but God stood by him by night, and commanded
him to speak neither good nor evil to him: God might have sent a message to
him as to Pilat, have nothing to do with this just man; but God lets them go
on, no stop is put to them yet, but here comes a watchman, and a holy one from
heaven, and dashes all presently. So then this deliverance was from the Lions
mouths, God might have wrought it otherwise, but this was the most glorious
deliverance to bring him out of it; sometimes God delivers us by way of
prevention, suffers us not to fall into danger: sometimes God delivers us by
way of subvension, reaches out the hand, and plucks us out of danger: but here
God works by way of preservation, lets us be in danger, yet preserves us in it;
to teach us in the greatest extremity not to despair of the favor of God:
when the snares of death are about us, when we are at the pits brink, nay at
the pits bottom, he is able then to bring us out, he is able to restrain the
roaring Lion that it shall not devour us; they may show their teeth, but not
lay their paw upon us; the bush may burn, but it is not consumed; there may be
fire kindled, and persecution may be against the Church of God, but it shall
not be destroyed. But how then did he stop the mouths of the Lions.

Ans. 1. By abating and restraining their violence and fierceness that they
should not lay hold upon him: Thus the Viper that venomous beast that fell on
Paul's hand did not hurt him: God is able to withstand and abate the rage of
cruel men, he can cast them into a dead sleep that they cannot prevail over
us. This is that God that is able to deliver us and give us salvation in the
midst of our enemies.

2. God did stop the mouths of these Lions by ordering their fancy into a more
moderate and mild apprehension: Thus God promises to deal with his people,
the Lion shall lie down with the Lamb, and a little child shall lead him; God
makes a covenant with them and the beasts of the field, and the stones in the
streets: Noah, Daniel, and Job, Ezekiel. 14. Shall suffer no hurt by wild beasts.

3. He does stop the mouths of the Lions by making Daniel appear awful and
dreadful to them. The Image of God in Adam in innocence gave him Sovereignty,
and a powerful command over all the beasts, they were all in subjection to
him: now this Image of God shining gloriously in this holy man Daniel, makes
the Lions quake and tremble at him (thou shall walk upon the Lion, and the
Adder shall not hurt thee) this is the portion of Gods children, they are at
peace with God, and he makes peace with the creature. Our rebellion to him
makes the rebellion of the creature against us. If we keep close to God they
shall obey us.

The fourth particular is the degree of it, how far he was delivered (it is
said, he was not hurt by it) this makes it a perfect and complete deliverance.
Indeed the Prophet that went to Bethel the Lion slew him, but did not devour
him; but here was neither Jaw nor Paw, neither Tooth nor Talon fastened upon
Daniel. Otherwhile God delivers his people out of many afflictions, but not
without some marks and scars as their deliverance out of Captivity (are they
not as a brand snatched out of the fire?) they were like a brand half burnt,
they were not consumed, but shrowdly singed and scorched: the same Prophet
tells us, it should be as a sheppard that takes out of the mouth of the Lion,
two legs, but a remnant shall be saved: God suffers the King of Egypt to come
and sack Jerusalem, and tells them they shall not prevail, but yet you shall
serve him for a time that you may know my service and the service of him: So
God speaks to his people, Jer. 30. I will not make a full end, but will correct
you, I will not suffer you to go on wholly unpunished: I these judgments are
laid upon people for their sins, for their disobedience and falsenesse to God;
but Daniel, and Shadrech, Mesech, and Abed-nego, God delivers them entirely,
they were witnesses for God, they avouched his worship, and stood in defense of
it, therefore God gives them complete deliverance.

Fifthly, the Motive that is here used that God takes notice of, and it is
double, the first is the innocence of his person: (before God he was found
innocent) secondly, the innocence of his cause (before thee O King have I done
no hurt.

1. The Innocence of his person. Certainly Daniel was as all other men a
sinner, himself confesses it, Chapter 9. I confess mine own sins, and the
sins of my people. So asserts John, if we say we have no sin we woefully deceive
our selves, and there is no truth in us. Daniel he was highly beloved of God,
and yet he had weaknesses, frailties, and infirmities.

2. Innocentia causae, I have done no wrong to thee O King.

Object. But he did not obey the Kings commandment, for did not the King sorbid
him to pray, yet he will still be praying? Yes, he did so, yet he was an
obedient subject, though he did cross the Kings command. He is a disobedient
subject that does break and trample under his feet, just, good, and profitable
Laws; but if the Law be against God and his will, we may well depart from it,
but upon these three cautions.

1. It must be in manifest evil: if the Magistrate lay such commands upon us
as are repugnant to God and his word, there our obedience must be restrained:
yet when doubtful as it was in the case of numbering the people, Joab misliked
it, it was vanity in the King; though he diswaded him from it, yet the Kings
Commandment took place, and he went about it.

2. Our disobedience must be without contempt of their persons and callings.

3. It must be with offering of our passive obedience: If we cannot do their
wills we must obey their punishments; in the text you may observe our
Combinations.

1. Here Is Duplex obedientia, a double obedience; obedience to God, and
obedience to the King too; they must go together, we must not sever them
asunder: we must not be Herodians, all for the King, if Herod be King all is
well, no matter for God and his Religion: nor must we be Pharisees, only very
strict and nice upon some cerimonious point of Religion, but false hearted to
the King; no, we must be both good Kings and good Subjects.

2 Here 's Duplex tribunal, the tribunal of God, and before him Daniel is
acquitted, and counted innocent; then here is the tribunal of Darius, and
before him he is cast and condemned. Well, here is our comfort, though the
tribunal of Men may condemn us, yet let them know there is a higher then they,
Solomon speaks it for our comfort, if we can justify our selves before God.

3 Here Is Duplex solicitudo, a double care; this Prophet shows his duty to God
and man; first he does here plead his innocence before God: then he does avouch
his innocence before men, it is that that Paul teaches us, I have exercised my
self to have a conscience void of offense both toward God and men.

Indeed he first prefers God, afterward man, I count it no great matter to be
judged by man's law: Good Christians first observe their conscience to God, and
then their credit with the world, they will not be scandalous, nor give offense
to any man.

4. Combination, here is Duplex purgatio, a double purging of himself; first
before God a purgation of evidence; God cleared him, and past a sentence; but
before men purgatio protestationis, he does protest and avow it before men.

Application to the day.
LEnd me your attention to some application of this Treason, and the
deliverance which this day we are bound to commemorate with all possible
thankfulness. See the comparison betwixt these two.

1. By way of similitude, how they both agree and are alike. 2. By way of
dissimilitude, how the Treason of this day exceeds that in the Text.
First the similitude in these particulars.

1. They had the same Authors: who are they that would have ruined the Prophet?
It was the Babilonian Princes: And surely the Treason of this day was framed in
the same womb, it was the Babilonian Princes, the Pope and his accomplices
plotted this great ruin to this Church. Says Austin, here 's two Babylonians,
Babylon the Mother, and Babylon the Daughter; the Eastern Babylon that 's the
Mother; the Western Babylon, that is the Daughter. We may say of this Treason
what God says, Ezekiel. 24.2. Son of man write the name of the day, even of this
same day, the King of Babylon set himself against Jerusalem this self same
day.

2. They agree here in the Motive: What was the Motive that stirred up these
Babilonian Princes to seek the ruin of Daniel? It was envy (as indeed envy is
always in treason) they envyed him: so those that plotted our ruin, O it
galled and vexed them that King James succeeded in the Crown.

3. The Plea that they make for themselves; what is their Plea? The sentence of
Darius was unalterable, he was condemned by the Laws of the Meades and
Persians that could not be changed: And the Traitors of this day has the same
Plea, Pope Clemens sent to the Papists not by any means to admit a protestant
King here; for all the world like their forefathers the Priest and Elders that
condemned Christ, we have a Law, and by our Law he must dye.

4. Their pretext was to preserve the honor of the King, the King should be
worshipped, and all must concur in this course of worshipping the King, and of
him only: And was not this the same amongst our Traitors, the Popish religion
bringing in Mass, burdening the Church withal those trumperies? Nay, it was
to worship their Popish Darius to acknowledge his Supremacy, and no Religion
should take place here among us, but only by his allowance.

5. They had a Cave, a Den of Lions: So had these, and all in order to blow up
and destroy.

6. Here Is a like deliverance: he was delivered by an Angel: and certainly as
great power from heaven did watch over us, the letter that gave notice of this
treason (consider it as ordered by Gods providence) it was written with a pen
that was made of an Angels wing; as he there speaks of writeing the Scripture,
the Devil hates that Fowl, that Bore, that Wing, that made that Pen by which
the Scriptures were written.

7. We were all delivered, the snare was broken, our King and Parliament
preserved though at the point of death, but all rescued by Gods holy hand.

Secondly, the dissimilitude and disagreement of these Traitors with those of
Babylon; the deliverance of this day does much exceed it.

1. The Conspiracy of the Babilonian Princes were only against one man, if
they could but get Daniel inward, and cut him off, they were fully satisfied:
But the conspiracy of this day was not against one man; nay, the King, State,
the Lords spiritual and temporal, the Law, reverend Judges, all the flower of
the Gentry were all to be blown up at one time; it was a universal destruction
like Hamans conspiracy scorning to reveng himself upon Mordecai alone, but he
sought the ruin and destruction of all the Jews.

2. The conspiracy here against Daniel, it was against one that was of the
children of the captivity of Judah a forreigner: but the traitors of our days
were against their own country men, their own brethren; they were all of them
English men; the shame of our Nation to say so, that Vipers should be thus bred
among us, but such they were) if Jacob did abhor the cruelty of his two sons,
upon the Sichemites, how would he have digested their cruelty toward their
brother Joseph?

3. The Cospiracy among the Babilonians, was against a man that was a Subject
to King Darius: I but these men they plotted against King, Queen, Prince,
Parliament, and all the Nobles of the Land, all the blood Royal: This is that
makes them extreme odious, they would have destroyed, not only one man, but
the whole nation.

4. This Treason and conspiracy, here it was against the Prophet that was a
Holy man of God, and the men that did it were secular men, Princes, Commanders,
Governors; but the Treason of this day was wrought by Clergy men, men of the
Church, holy Fathers of the Church of Rome, great Grandees of the Jesuits.
Indeed for secular men to masicre the Priests of God is a high provocation; but
for Divines, men of the Church to plot treason and conspiracyes, to be
incendiaryes of all seditions, that is a double evil.

5. They were cruel, yet there was some mercy in it. First the Prophet has
some warning given him, there was a Law published and made known. Then they had
fair proceeding, he was convented, examined, convicted, and so was condemned,
the Prophet had time to look about him to prepare himself for death to
address himself to God for the saving of the soul: But here was no warning,
they did digg deep, and hide in Hell; it was as sudden destruction that
should have been brought upon us.

6. After this deliverance by the Angel Darius blesses God for it, gives
testimony to that Religion that was thus honored, repents himself of it,
punishes those that plotted this mischief against them, and does advance
Daniel to be the chief man in his Kingdom: But our conspirators hung their
heads, bit their lips, nay the Pope himself was so far from saying with Jacob,
cursed be their anger, that he had not so much as the spirit of old Eli to
chide and reprove them; O my Sons I hear an ill report of you, you would have
blown up the Parliament and destroyed Nations. No, they were far enough from
that, for he does canonize some of them for Marters, Books were written for
their defense. When Elijah prevailed over Baal's Priests in bringing fire from
heaven, the people all renounce Baal, and cried out the the Lord is God; but
when the Lord answered us from heaven, not by kindling fire, but by quenching
fire, but still they stand out in their obduration.

O Let us thankfully acknowledge this great mercy. O that men would therefore
praise the Lord for his goodness, and set forth his loving kindness before
the sons of men. If you count it now a day out of date, an old day, and it may
now be forgotten, take heed a second war does not finish that work that those
Traitors would have done but could not accomplish. That speech may truly be
said of us, never people were more wonderfully delivered by God, and never was
people so woefully and wretchedly undone by themselves.

FINIS.

