JULY 19. 1642.

AN EXACT RELATION OF TWO Victorious Battles Fought by the English: Wherein
they put to flight 2200, and killed 700 of the Rebels at Cardoughen in the
Province of Munster; and 500 more at Youghall* at both which places they took a
great quantity of Ammunition, goods and victuals from the Rebels.

As it was sent to Mr. Buller, a Member of the House of Commons, and another
Gentleman of quality.

Wherein is likewise a true Relation of the death of the Lord President.

London, Printed by L. N. and I. F. for E. Husbands and I. Franck.

Cardoughen, 3. Iulii, 1642. IN MUNSTER. DEar Brother, my kind love remembered
unto you.
This is the third of my writing since my arrival in Ireland, where we want
both men and money, which if we have not supplied suddenly we shall be forced
to retreat unto the Seaports. As for News, you may be pleased to take notice,
that on Tuesday last, there were 500 Musketeers, and two troops of horse,
which fell on 3000 of the Rebels, and beat them out of their quarters, taking
all their baggage, and killing about 400; we only lost three men, and had
five hurt, whereof my Corporal was killed, my Sargeant run clean through the
body, but is yet living, my Drummer dangerously hurt, with another of my common
Soldiers. My Lo: President dyed yesterday about seven of the clock in the
forenoon, the Rebels had besieged his Castle, but were likewise beaten off by
the Lord Inchequeen, who killed between 6 and 700 of them, and possessed himself
of all the baggage, there were of the Rebels above 2200, over and besides what
they killed. Thus with my duty to my father and mother, I rest

Your loving Brother, IO: BVLLER.

YOVGHALL, 4. JULII, 1642. Honest Mr. BAILEY,
HAving this opportunity, and some good news to communicate to you, I could not
choose but acquaint you, that upon Wednesday last a party of 500 Musketeers,
and 3 troops of horse marched from the camp at Dunarraile, into the county of
Limrick to Shandrithe, where 2500 horse and foot of the Rebels were quartered,
whom our men (despising their numbers) very valiantly assailed in their
quarters, but not before they were provided for them; for they had long before
taken the Alarm, and had sent out a Troop of their horse, and after that their
whole body, whom our men declined until they came into good ground, and then
made a stand ready to receive them, but then they retreated to their quarter in
the Town, and ours advanced both Foot and Horse, they entertained a pretty
Skirmish with our foot, wherein we lost two men and had eight hurt, at last the
Lord of Dungarvans Troop commanded by Lieutenant Carleton, observing that they
with-guarded the entrance of their quarter and not suddenly to be releived flew
in and forced it, whereupon as their manner is they fell to their heels, and
our horse to execution for three miles space, until they came to a wood their
common refuge; there fell of the Enemy between four and five Hundred: We took
one Captain and twelve others of quality, six Ensigns, six Drums, two
bagpipes, two wagons, one Hundred and twenty Muskets, abundance of Pikes, and
some Ammunition* we had only two horses hurt. Yesterday the Lord Browhill with
his Troop, and between two and three Hundred Foot going to relieve Sir Richard
Osborn, who was in great Dishes at his Castle, was encountered by Sir Nicholas
Welsh (near Cappa) with three Troops and six or eight Colors of Foot, after an
hours Skirmish they fell into disorder, brake and fled: Our men did execution
upon them until they got the wood to their shellter, they found two Hundred
and fifty dead bodies, took forty Muskets, abundance of Pikes, some powder
and bullets, and a great deal of good cheer, wherewith they intended to be
merry, after they had washed their hands in English blood: we lost one only
Gentleman Master Maynard, eldest Son to the Lady Maynard, whom we all much
lament.

Your assured loving friend Thomas Moore.


