A SERMON PREACHED In the FRENCH CHURCH, in LONDON On the 29. day of August
1652. At the Imposition of Hands on Mr. Stouppe

By JOHN BULTEEL, Minister of the Word of God.

With the Action and Circumstances thereof.

LONDON, Printed by T.M. for Edward Archer, and are to be sold at the Sign of
the Adam and Eve in Little-Brittain, near the Church. 1654.

To his Reverend and honored Brethren, The Pastors, Elders, and Deacons of the
French-Church in London.
Reverend and Honored Brethren,
THe Ambassador of the Emperor of Germany, who was sent to the great Emperor
of the Turks writes that he saw at Constantinople an Emblem represented on a
piece of Tapestry, made of an exquisite work, containing four Candlesticks with
four Candles, which represented four sorts of Religions; as namely, the
Heathenish, the Jewish, the Christian, and the Mohammedan. Three of these
candlesticks were turned topsie, turvie, with their three Candles extinguished;
but the fourth Candlestick stood upright, with its Candle burning: There was
this Arabicall Inscription. This is the true Light, thinking to make to world
to believe, that the Mahometane Religion is the only and true light; and that
the three other lights extinguished are false ones. But we know that the
Christian Religion is the only and true Light, represented and presented, not
in, nor by the books of the Philosophers, nor in the Talmud and Cabala of the
Rabbis, nor in the Alcoran of the Mahumetans; but within and by the holy
Scripture, which represents and presents unto us, our Lord Jesus Christ the
true light, who lights every man that comes into the world, that whosoever
believes in him and follows him, shall not walk in darkness, but have the
light of life. It is he that is in the midst of the golden candlesticks, who
has in his right hand seven stars; out of whose mouth issues a sharp two
edged sword, wherewith he smites the Nations, whose countenance is as the
Sunshine in his strength. It is that Jesus Christ the Son of righteousness,
who by his beams does inlighten the stars, who are the Angels of the
Churches; it is he that walks amidst the golden Candle sticks, which are the
Churches, and does enlighten them by his holy word, which is a lamp unto their
feet, and a lantern of light unto passengers in the dark nights on sea, which
does enlighten them within the glittering rays of his holy spirit. It is that
divine word, that glistering light of the Old and New Testament, of the Law and
of the Gospel, carried by the Torch-bearers, the excellent and holy Prophets,
Apostles, Evangelists, and Ministers of the word of God. But the world of
unbelievers, whether Heathens, Heretics, or Profane persons, has not known
nor received this mavelous light of this sacred word, but has rejected it,
endeavored to exinguish it, either in whole or in part.

The Pagans have rejected the holy Scripture altogether. The Manichees have
refused all the old Testament. The Ptolemaits have rejected the five books of
Moses, which the Sadduces did only embrace, refusing all other books of the
old Testament. The Anabaptists reject the book of Ecclesiastes, and the
canticle of Canticles. Porphyrius did refuse the book of the Prophet Daniel,
and the Nicolaitans did the like of the Psalms of the royal Prophet David.
The Jews reject all the New Testament. The Ebionites have only Saint Matthews
Gospel, and Cerinthus approved that of Saint Mark; Cerdon that of Saint Luke;
the Valentinians did only embrace that of Saint John, and the Tatians, only
the book of the Acts of the Apostles. These are those that have blot out the
passages of holy Scripture, which were contrary to their opinions and
practices. Mareion the Heretic did blot out the passages of Luke and John, and
of the Apostles Epistles, that maintained the Deity and humanity of our Lord
Jesus Christ. The Papists do raze out many sentences that repugne their false
dogmes, and among others, the second Commandment of the Moral Law. Thou shall
not make unto thee any graven image, etc. is left out, as appears in many of
their Printed books. But behold a strange case, that among those of the
reformed Religion there are some here in England, that have caused some
Passages of the holy Scripture to be razed out that were written on the walls
of Churches. As for Example, there was a suffragant of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, who a little before these troubles did excommunicate two
Churhwardens, because they had not blotted out that notable and true sentence
written on the wall of the Church (where he kept his Spiritual Court) My House
shall be called the House of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves; yea
there was at the same time a Bishop in England, who caused the Clark of a
Parish in his Diocese, to blot out that Divine sentence written on the wall,
just right over the Ministers pulpit. Necessity is laid upon me, yea woe is unto
me if I preach not the Gospel. An insupportable boldness, and which cannot be
paralelled, these persons would in all appearance have endeavored to have
blotted these Divine Sentences out of the books of holy Scripture, if it had
been in their power. Cumanus a Heathen Governor of the Romans, caused a
Roman Soldier to be beheaded: for tearing the books of Moses, at the Sack of
a city, to appease the tumult of the Jews, who were scandalized thereat. Surely
God says in the Apocalipse chap. 22.19. If any man shall take away from the
words of the book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the
Book of Life, and out of the holy City. Now whereas I have expounded in your
Church the aforesaid passage of the 1 Corinthians. 9.16. For though I preach the
Gospel, I have nothing to glory of, for necessity is laid upon me; yea woe is
unto if I preach not the Gospel. I do represent and present the Sermon unto
you, because it is due unto you, having been the occasion thereof; for being
requested by Letters signed by the Pastor and some of the Elders and Deacons of
your Church, in the name of them all, to come to London, to assist to the
examination of the Honored brother Mr. Stouppe, where diverse reverend
brethren, Ministers did assist, with the Elders and Deacons of the Coetus of
the Dutch and French Churches of London; and having heard him both in his
Sermon ad Clerum, and his Latin Theses, as also in his Answers to what
objections soever were propounded unto him; the company did receive such
contentment and satisfaction, as he was judged able and capable to be received
and confirmed in the holy Ministry. Ye did me the honor to request me to
preach and perform the Action on the day of his Ordination, at which assisted
the Reverend Brethren, Mr. Calendrin Pastor of the Dutch Church, and Mr. Cismer
Pastor of your Church: we all three together gave the Imposition of hands on
the said honored brother Mr. Stouppe. Now I put this Sermon in print, because
this Action of Imposition of hands, has been little frequent and used in your
Church; for there are very near 50 years since, Mr. Aurelius, deceased son of
an Italian was the last that received the Imposition of hands, and was received
Minister of your Church; the other Pastors that came since, were ministers, and
the most part old ones, before they were Pastors of your Church. Besides there
are Ministers, especially in France, who have caused their Sermons to be
printed on occasions of the like subject, and of the same nature. Add unto
this, that there are many that could not be present at the Sermon, that will be
glad to read that which they have not seen nor heard; and there are others that
will be content to refresh their memories thereby. I have added here and there,
and especially that which concerns this Country and Nation, which the
shortness of time did not permit me to publish in the Pulpit. I hope that I
shall have the same liberty permitted unto me, which the worthy English
Ministers have had, that have preached before the Honorable Houses of
Parliament; setting forth to light that which they had conceived, and
premeditated in their thoughts, which the brevity of time did not give them
leisure to preach; and that without any prejudice either of the Christian
hearer or Reader, but rather with pleasure and much profit, and have been both
praised and thanked for it. As concerning the Imposition or laying on of the
hands, by us the Ministers that were present, on our said brother; it is true,
that France, Holland, and here among us, and elsewhere; it is ordinarily done
by one Minister alone, where there are no other ministers present, yea by one
minister alone, although there are other ministers present, that give only the
right hand of fellowship to the minister confirmed. Notwithstanding the Action
of the Imposition of hands is a thing indifferent in the opinion and judgment
of many learned men, whether one minister, or many ministers together do give
the Imposition of hands on that person that is received into the ministry, so
that the practice of the one ought not nor cannot prejudice or condemn the
practice of the other. We have all three ministers laid our hands on Mr.
Stouppe. Certes one of the Councels of Carthage, did ordain that the ministers
present, should lay hands on the head of the minister ordained; the which has
been practiced at all times, yea and among the Papists; and there are Acts of
Parliament in England to that effect, in the time of King Edward the 6. and of
Queen Elisabeth of happy memory, and it is practiced at present in London,
among the English ministers; for the laying on of hands, is done by diverse
ministers of the company of the Presbytery. And indeed if we mount up higher,
we shall find that that was practiced in the Primitive Church, in the time of
the Apostles, for it appears, that Saul or Paul received the Imposition of
hands by many, Acts chap. 13.3. and the same Apostle writing of the Imposition
of hands given unto Timothy his own son in the faith, says, Stir up the gift
of God which is in thee by the putting on of my hands, 2 Timothy 1.6. but he had
said before. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given thee by
prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. and
notwithstanding he makes mention in these two places of one same action, and of
one same person, namely Timothy ordained and confirmed: Paul as he was an
Apostle, being the primary and the principal in this action of the Imposition
of hands, with the others. But alas we have in these times in this Land, some
that say they are enlightened, having found new Lights, who are notwithstanding
wandering stars, as Saint Jude says; who care neither for the laying on of
hands, nor of the right hand of fellowship; who as the Enthusiasts have
revelations and visions; and run and prophecy (as heretofore the Anabaptists
did) without any ordinary or extraordinary calling; taking a Privilege above
Jesus Christ and Aaron, who took not that honor unto themselves, nor glorified
themselves, but were called of God, they are blind guides, and leaders of the
blind, and if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch. God the
Father of lights enlighten them, and transport them from darkness to his
mavelous light, transforming them by the renewing of their minds, that they
may prove, what is that good, that acceptable and perfect will of God. I
beseech the same good God, that he will be pleased to strengthen you in the
knowledge, which he has given you of his holy truth in his holyword, working
in you both to will, and to do, of his good pleasure, that ye may be without
reproach and blameless in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation,
among whom ye shine as lights in the world, holding forth the word of life.
This is the wish of him, who hopes ye will accept this small present in good
part, threreby ye will add an obligation to the precedent obligations unto him
who is and remains.

Reverend and Dear Brethren, Your most humble and most affectionate brother,
and servant in the Lord, John Bulteel.

1 Cor. 9.16. For though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory of, for
necessity is laid upon me; yea woe is to me, if I preach not the Gospel.


THE Lord gave a Commandment unto Moses, to put into the Ark of the Covenant,
the golden Pot that had Manna, Aarons rod, the tables of the Covenant, and the
Cherubins of glory, shadowing the Mercy seat. The Tables of the Law did
represent the preaching of the Law; the Cherubims of glory shadowing the Mercy
Seat, did show forth the preaching of the Gospel; the Manna did declare the
Sacraments; and the Rod of Aaron did signify the Discipline. This Ark was
carried by the Priests and Levites of the Law; no other among the Jews could
nor ought to carry it, to show that there are none but the Ministers of God,
that have authority to preach the word of God, either of the Law or of the
Gospel; to give the Sacraments, and exercise the Ecclesiastical discipline. It
was a particular, honor unto the Priests and Levites, but it was also a
burden; and indeed the name of Priest in the holy language signifies a Prince
and a servant. A Prince, there is Honor, a servant, there is service. And that
excellent Apostle Saint Paul, that vessel of Election says, 1 Timothy 3.1.
This is a true saying, if any man desire the office of a Bishop he desires a
good work, in saying, excellent, he denotes the dignity of the Charge, in
qualifying it a work, he signifies the charge of the Dignity, an honorable
labor. In the same place he describes the duties of the Ministers of God, and
the qualities that they ought to have, in the seven first verses of that
Chapter.

It is that which the Apostle propounds in the ninth Chapter of this first
Epistle to the Corinthians; he sets forth unto us explicitly and implicitly,
two sorts of Pastors; The one sort of Pastors, are such of whom an ancient
Father speaks, namely Chrysostom, there are many and there are few, many by
name, but few in effect: who have the charge to preach the Gospel, but do not
preach it; Isa. 65.10.
They are watchmen that are blind, they are dumb dogs that cannot bark, as the
Prophet Isaiah styles them; and therefore woe unto them because they preach not
the Gospel, as the Apostle teaches us covertly and implicitly, in this
sixteenth verse of our Text. The second sort is of those that are Pastors, not
only by name but also in effect; whom the Apostle subdivides in two ranks, The
one, that preach the Gospel, but against their will, though the dispensation of
the Gospel is committed unto them, Cor. 9.17.
in the 17 verse of this Chapter, as the Prophet Jonas, who preached the word
of God to the Ninivites against his desire, and as it were perforce. The others
that do preach the Gospel willingly; whom the Apostle does again subdivide into
two ranks. Such as do preach the Gospel willingly and live of the Gospel, for
the labourer is worthy of his hire. and Saint Paul in the 1 Cor. 9.19.
14 verse of this chap. even so has the Lord ordained that they which preach
the Gospel should live of the Gospel; So Saint Peter, and the brethren of our
Lord Jesus, and the rest of the Apostles, preaching the Gospel have lived of
the Gospel, as the Apostle does declare unto us openly in the beginning of this
Chapter. The others that do preach the Gospel, notwithstanding do not live of
the Gospel, as Paul and Barnabas among the Corinthians 1 Cor. 3.4.5, 6, 7.
Have we not power to eat and to drink? have we not power to lead about a
sister, a wife, as well as other Apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord and
Cephas? or I only and Barnabas have we not power to forbear working? Who goes
to Warfare at any time at his own Charges? who planteth a vineyard and eats
not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock and eats not of the milk of
the flock? etc. Now S. Paul does glory in regard of the Corinthians, because he
preached the Gospel for naught, although he might have lawfully taken a Salary,
which was due unto him, and according to the ordinance of Jesus Christ: and
therefore he glories not in respect of God, or in respect of the Apostles; but
partly in respect of the Corinthians, partly against the false Apostles. He
glories not that he preached the Gospel, but that he preaches the Gospel
gratis, for nothing; for it were better for him to die, than that any man should
make his glorying void, as he says in the verse that precedes our Text. But
for that he preaches the Gospel, he cannot, no more than he ought not to
glory, as he teaches us in this 16 verse of our Text, which we have read unto
you.

For though I preach the gospel, I have nothing to glory of, for necessity is
laid upon me, yea woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel.

A notable and noble passage of Scripture, an excellent, emphaticall, and
patheticall sentence, wherein there is not a word but has its weight; in the
which, we are to consider by Gods grace and assistance, these two points; the
first is the duty, the office and exercise of the Apostle; which is to preach
the Gospel; for he says, Although I preach the Gospel. The second point is,
that the Apostle does not glory in that he preaches the Gospel, and that for
two reason, the first is, the necessity, for necessity is laid upon me. The
second is the threatening, Woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel.

We will not stand here to represent unto you what the word Gospel, and to
preach the Gospel, signifies; because we have understood not long ago what this
word signifies in the expounding of these words. Gal. 1.8.
Though we or an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, than that
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Only we will observe,
that the word Gospel, is a Greek word, which in profane Greek authors
signifies,

First of all, good and happy news.

Secondly, it signifies, the sacrifice, that they offered unto their gods, for
the good news they had received, and that sacrifice was called Gospel.

Thirdly, it signifies the Salary and reward, or the gift that was made unto
him that brought the good news and that gift and Salary was called Gospel. But
in holy Scripture; the word Gospel signifies by excellency the good news; and
solemn publication, of 1 Timothy 3.16.
the Son of God manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of
Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into
glory. Apoc. 14.6.
The everlasting Gospel, which has been preached since the fall of man in the
beginning of the Creation; and shall last unto the end of the world. The
Franciscans had invented and published a book full of horrible blasphemies,
which they named, the Gospel of the holy Ghost, or the everlasting Gospel;
saying, that the Gospel of Christ should not last above fifty years. But the
Book was refuted by Guiliemus de sancto amore, condemned by the Pope and
secretly burnt.

Now the holy Apostle Saint Paul, did preach the Gospel in Arabia, at Damascus,
in Antioch at Cyprus, in Licaonia, at Lystra, at Pisidia, in Macedonia, at
Athens, at Corinth, in Asia, in Europe, at Troas, at Miletum, in Jerusalem, at
Rome, in Pamphilia, at Pergamus, in Attalia, in Mysia, at Salanus, at Paphos,
in Samothracia, at Neapolis, at Philippi, at Berea, at Thessalonica, and other
places. Romans 15.19.
Through mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the spirit of God, so that
from Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum, he fully preached the Gospel of
Christ. The Apostle therefore preached the Gospel of Christ, and that at all
times, and in all places, according to his Apostolical charge, and labored
more abundantly than all the Apostles 1 Cor. 15 10.
: Yet not he, but the grace of God which was in him. Now although he preached
the Gospel in this manner, with so much labor and pains, he has not wherein
to glory, and that is the second point that we have to observe; when he says,

I have nothing to glory of. Although the Gospel is an excellent thing, and the
preaching thereof an Honorable work; although I have preached the Gospel, I
have nothing to glory of; he glories indeed in many other things, in that he
has exercised his office to teach with a pure conscience. 2 Cor. 1.12.
For our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity
and godly sincerity, we have had our conversation in the world, and more
abundantly to you ward. He glories in the hope of the Glory of God, and in his
afflictions. Romans 5.2, 3.
We rejoice in hope of the glory of God, and not only so, but we glory in
tribulations also. He glories in his infirmities. 2 Cor. 12 5.
Yet of my self I will not glory, but in mine infirmities. He glories in the
Cross of Christ, Gal. 6.19
God forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ by
whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world, But we read not that
he glories in that he preached thd. Gospel; because he did not seek his own
Glory, nor the glory of men, but the glory of God. Romans 5.11.
We joy in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. The Pharisees did love more the
glory of men, than the glory of God; but the Apostle who had been a Pharisee,
was no more one, and did not seek his own glory; but was an Apostle, and
servant of Jesus Christ; did imitate his Master; who said, Joh. 8.50.59.
I seek not mine own glory. If I honor my self, my Honor is nothing; and
Saint Paul says, 1 These. ^.6,
nor of men sought we glory, neither of you, nor yet of others. So we speak not
as pleasing men, but God, which tries our hearts. We are your servants for
Christ's sake, and we do not preach our selves, but the Lord Christ? he Joh.
7.18.
that speaks of himself seeks his own glory, but he that seeks his glory
that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him, says
Christ; and therefore, 2 Cor. 5.12.
we commend not our selves unto you, but give you occasion to glory on our
behalf, not being covetous of vainglory. 1 Cor. 35 6, 7.
I have planted, (says Paul) Apollo watered, but God gave the increase, so
then neither he that planteth any thing, nor he that waters, but God that
gives the increase. Who then is Paul, and who is Apollo? but Ministers by whom
ye believed? The Apostle therefore had no other aim nor end, but the
advancement of Gods glory, the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the salvation of
men: he was not swollen with ambition, nor desirous of vain glory, but he
endeavored only to cause the light of the Gospel of the glory of Christ to
shine: he did glory not in his parentage, nor in his riches, nor in his
wisdom, nor in his strength, but in God; according as Cor. 1.31.
it is written, He that glories, let him glory in the Lord. He might well
glory that he was elected, Luke 110.20.
that his name was written in heaven, but although he preached the Gospel he
had nothing to glory of, and gives the first reason; saying, For necessity is
laid upon me, to wit, to preach the Gospel; that which I necessarily do, has
nothing of Apostolical glorying; for necessity takes away all matter and
occasion of glory. Now this necessity is laid upon me, and therefore I have not
wherein to glory.

Where observe here, that the Apostle speaks not here of a necessity of
constraint; (as we speak in the Schools) as if the Apostle did not preach the
Gospel willingly, but against his mind, and will: God forbid that we should
suspect any such thing of our Apostle; who was not only ready and willing to
preach Christ; Act. 21.13.
but he was ready also to be bound, yea to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the
Lord Jesus. And in this Chapter, here of our Text, he does 1 Cor. 9.17, 18.
it willingly and heartily; which appears, because he preached the Gospel
without charge. 1 Pet. 5.2
Ye fed the flock of God, not by constraint but willingly, not for filthy
lucre, but of a ready mind, as Saint Peter writes. Behold the ready courage of
the Prophet Isaiah, as soon as he hears Isa. 6.8.
the voice of the Lord, saying, whom shall I send, and who will go for us? he
presents and offers himself immediately, and says, Here am I, send me. In like
manner the Apostle Romans 15.15.
was ready to preach the Gospel, as much as in him was; for as soon as he hears
the voice of the Son of God thundering from heaven; he asks Acts 9.6.
trembling and astonished; Lord, what will thou have me to do? and immediately
ob^ys the voice of Christ; he speaks freely in Damascus, c^nfounds the Jews,
and confirms that Jesus is the Christ; and therefore, O King Agrippa, Acts
26.19.
I was not disobedient unto the heavenly vision, but showed unto them of
Damascus, and at Jerusalem, and throughout all the coasts of Judea, and then to
the Gentiles, that they should repent, etc. and therefore the Apostle did
preach willingly and not by compulsion; he speaks not of a necessity of
coaction, but he speaks of another necessity. This necessity is twofold; the
one in regard of the people, and the other in regard of himself.

First of all, in regard of the people; for it was necessary that the Apostle
should preach the Gospel unto the people of God; because that the Ministry of
Gods word is so necessary, that the savior of the world says Luke 10.42.
One thing is needful. And the wise King Solomon foretells; Prove. 29.18.
Where there is no vision the people perish, and there is no light of the
sun, nor meat nor drink, so necessary to foment and nourish this animal and
corruptible life; as the ministry of the Apostles and Pastors, is to preserve
the Church of God, and to foment and cherish it with the word of God, which is
the spiritual food of our souls.

The second necessity is in regard of himself, in as much as he was an Apostle;
for necessity was laid upon him to preach, which was in respect of the
necessity of obligation, and that was double.

1. In regard of the Commandment of God, for God had called Paul to the
Apostleship, and had commanded him to preach, Romans 1.1
Paul was called to be an Apostle separated unto the Gospel of God and as it is
said of the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer. 1.5.
Before I formed thee in the belly, I knew thee; and before thou came forth
of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a Prophet unto the Nations.
So the Apostle tells us of himself. Gal. 1.15 16.
When it pleased God, who separated me from my Mothers womb, and called me by
his grace to reveal his son in me, that I might preach him among the Heathen.
And Cstrist calls unto Paul, Acts 26.16, 17.
rise and stand upon thy feet, for I have appeared unto thee for this purpose,
to make thee a minister and a witness both of these things which thou have
seen and of those things in the which I will appear unto thee; delivering thee
from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I send thee. And
therefore Amos 3.8.
The Lion has roared, who will not fear? The Lord God has spoken, who can but
prophecy? Amaziah the Prief of Bethel said, Amos 7.12, 13, 14, 15.
unto Amos; O thou Seer, go flee thee away into the Land of Judah, and there
eat bread, and prophecy there; but prophecy not again any more at Bethel; for
it is the Kings Chapel, and it is the Kings Court. Then answered Amos and said
to Amaziah, I was no Prophet, neither was I a Prophets son, but I was an
herdman, and a gatherer of Sycomore fruit; and the Lord took me as I followed
the flock, and the Lord said unto me, go prophecy unto my people Israel. As if
Amos had said, I did not heretofore prophecy, but now I do prophecy, for
there is a necessity laid upon me to prophecy. So Saint Paul was neither an
Apostle, nor an Apostles son, but a Pharisee, and a persecutor of the Apostles,
and disciples of Christ, and of his Church; but after he received a
Commandment from Christ, Go, I do ordain thee a minister of the Gentiles: this
necessity was laid upon him to preach the Gospel. This necessity of Gods
command did make Moses to teach the people of the Jews, although he was adopted
son of the daughter of Pharaoh. It was this that induced the Prophet Isaiah to
prophecy, although rich, and noble, being the uncle unto the King Manasses
(according to the opinion of the Hebrews) So likewise Paul though an Hebrew of
the Hebrews, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Pharisee as touching the Law, brought
up at the feet of Gamaliel, did preach; for the necessity of Gods Command
occasioned the necessity of obligation: Saint Paul was obliged by the
Commandment of God to preach the Gospel, without any glorying therein; Luke
17.10.
When ye shall have done all those things which are commanded, you say, we are
unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to do, says Christ
the Savior of the world unto his Disciples.

2. Saint Paul was bound to preach the Gospel by his calling, for his office,
and those excellent and eminent titles of his vocation did oblige him to do it,
the prophets, the Apostles, the Evangelists, and Ministers of the word of God,
are styled the Chariots of Israel, and the horsemen thereof; Angels, watchmen,
Bishops, overseers, superintendants, fishers of men, the light and salt of the
earth, workers and laborers, yea laborers together with God, builders,
vine-dressers, Pastors, spiritual Fathers, Stewards of the mysteries of God,
saviors, stars in the right hand of Christ; and other such titles and
admirable names that are attributed and appropriated unto them in holy
scripture; to show and signify their calling, their charge, their duty, and
their honor. We read that Timotheus the Musician was so expert, learned and
admirable in his art; that he made of men, Lions or Lambs, when he would; for
playing on his instrument, he did so stir up and encourage Alexander the great,
that he did arm himself with all his armor, animated and provoked with
courage, and force to go and fight against his enemies, and then on a sudden
changing the tune and notes, he touched so sweetly on the strings of his
instrument, that he did pacify and mollify King Alexander, he did calm him
and made him as supple and quiet as a Lamb. The Ministers of God are entitled
Boanerges, which is the sons of thunder, Mark 3.17. who animate and encourage
the faithful Ephesians. 6 19 15, 16, 17.
to take the whole armor of God, having their loins girt about with t^ruth,
and having on the breast plate of righteousness, their feet shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace, above all taking the shield of faith, and
the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God.
By these heavenly weapons they fight against the Devil, the world, and the
flesh, and have the victory over them. They are besides in another
consideration styled Boanerges the sons of thunder, to thunder the Judgments
of God against sinners, and to draw them to repentance and humility, and to
reclaim them, and make them as tame, and quiet as lambs. The ministers are also
named Barnabas (which is being interpreted the son of consolation, Act. 4.36.
to comfort all that mourn) Isa. 61.1.
to preach good tidings unto the meek, to bind up the broken hearted, to
proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the prison to them that
are bound. They are styled Barsabas, Acts 1.23. to wit sons of Conversion,
converting sins to repentance, yea and they are called Bar-jonas sons of the
dove, that is to say, sons of peace and reconciliation. So that these titles
which are given them do show their Office and duty, their honor and charge, for
it is not an idle dignity, but a work and honorable burden. Thus in the Old
Testament Habbak. 1 1.
The burden which Habbakuck the Prophet did see, and Saint Paul in the new
Testament calls it Romans 1.5.
grace and Apostleship or charge of Apostle. Now these titles above mentioned
did appertain unto Paul as an apostle and Evangelist, to represent his
vocation, office, obligation, and therefore necessity was laid upon him to
preach the Gospel.

But besides this twofold necessity; there was another necessity that did
press and urge him, namely the threatening and curse of the Lord, in case he
showed himself refractory, and disobedient and would not preach the Gospel, and
that is that which the Apostle propounds in the last place, which he says,
Yea woe is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel.

Here we must observe that the word Woe is taken in holy Writ two manner of
ways.

1. It does signify a corporal woe, a temporal curse, calamity and misery.

2. A spiritual and everlasting woe and curse. When Jesus Christ said, Mat.
24.19.
Woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those days;
he speaks not there of a spiritual and eternal woe, but of a temporal and
corporal woe, whereunto women that are with child and that give suck, shall be
subject in those times. But when he says, Luke 6.25
Woe unto you that are rich, for ye have received your consolation, etc. He
speaks of a spiritual and everlasting woe: so the rich man that had had here on
earth his consolation, was in eternal desolation and misery in hell. For Luke
16.5.
Abraham said unto him, son, remember that thou in thy life time received good
things, and likewise Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted and thou art
tormented. And the Reprobates do feel in hell unspeakable torments, which eye
has never seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of man,
crying out uncessantly, Woe, woe unto us.

Now when the Apostle says here, woe is unto me, he means it not in the first
sense, he speaks not of a temporal and corporal woe; he would and should
rather have said in that sense, woe is unto me that I preach the Gospel, and
happy should I be, if I did not preach the Gospel, for the apost^e because of
the preaching of the Gospel, was in temporal misery, in afflictions, in
tribulations, in persecution in prison, wipped, stoned, and in extreme danger
of death. The prophet Jeremiah cries out Jer. 15.1^.
Woe is me my mother, that thou have born me a man of strife, and a man of
contention to the whole earth, and elsewhere he says, I Jer. 20.7.8
am in derision daily, every one mocketh me, for since I spoke I cried out, I
cried violence and spoil, because the word of the Lord was made a reproach unto
me, and a derision daily. Even so the Apostle might very well say of himself;
woe unto me that I preach the Gospel, for I am esteemed a man of strife for the
Gospels sake, 1 Cor. 9.9 13.
We are made a spectacle unto the world, unto Angels and to men, we are made as
the filth of the world, and are become the offscouring of all things unto this
day. The Apostle therefore takes not this word woe in this sense; but he means
first and principally of internal and eternal woe; everlasting damnation and
death hangs over my head, if I preach not the Gospel, and this necessity is
imposed on him if he will not incur eternal death, therefore he adds in this
ninth chapter of our Text, Least by any means when I have preached to others, I
my self should be a cast away. And else where, 2 Cor. 13.6.
I trust that ye shall know that we are not reprobates. And therefore he
exhorts his disciple Timothy, 1 Timothy 4, 16.
Take heed unto thy self and unto the doctrine, continue in them, for in doing
this, thou shall both save thy self, and them that hear thee. It is not to say,
that Pastors are the saviors of men, but God does use and employ their
ministry to save them; they are like the finger of Saint John Baptist, showing
them Christ, and saying, Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of
the world. Or like unto those that brought unto Jesus Christ the blind or
lunatic, or that had the palsy, or possessed with Devils, or such like, that
he might heal them. Now the word of God threatens those shepherds that do not
their duty, nor execute their office, Ezech. 39 2.
Woe be to the shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves; should not the
sheperds feed their flocks? in like manner the Prophet Jeremiah speaks in the
name of the Lord, Jer. 23.1.
Woe unto the Pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my Pasture (says
the Lord) and our Lord Jesus Christ did pronounce the sentence of woe against
the Scribes, Pharisees, and Doctors of the Law; Mat. 23.13, 16.
Woe unto Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye shut up the Kingdom of
heaven against men, for ye neither go in your selves, neither suffer them that
are entering to go in, etc. Woe unto you blind guides. It is not therefore
without ground and reason that the Apostle says here, woe unto me, if I preach
not the Gospel of Christ.

Observe again, that the Apostle says here, if I preach not the Gospel; he
says not if I preach not the traditions of the Pharisees, the ceremonies of
the Jews, the injunctions of men, or the Statutes of Princes, but the Gospel
which Jesus Christ has preached and commanded; and therefore not another
Gospel, it is not to say that there is another Gospel, another Jesus, another
spirit, 2 Cor. 11.4. (for there is but one true Christ, one true Gospel, to
speak properly) but it is Gal. 1.7.
a perverting of the Gospel of Christ, as we call the false Church, a Church
but abusively, and clear from the right use and sense; now as woe is unto him if
he preaches not the Gospel, so woe is unto him if he preach another Gospel than
the Gospel of Christ. Therefore the Apostle protests Acts 20.27.
That he has not shunned to declare all the Council of God, and that he had
received of the Lord that which he had delivered unto them, 1 Cor. 11.23. not
man's tradition in lieu of Gods commandments (as Christ reproaches the
Pharisees) but teaching and observing all that was commanded to the Apostles to
keep and teach, according to this commandment, Saint Peter says, 1 Pet. 9.1.
If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God: this was represented by
Aaron who had round about the hem of his garment bells of gold and pomegranates
between them, Exodus 28.33. the sound of the bells signified the preaching and
that divine and excellent harmony of the true and pure Doctrine of the word.
And certes, Pastors are the Ambassadors of God. Now as an Ambassador of a
King dares not advance any thing of his own, nor exceed or go beyond his
Commission; but governs himself according to his commission and prescriptions
that are given him in writing by him that sends him. Even so the Ministers of
the Gospel who are the Ambassadors of the great God, do in like manner. The
voice of God says unto Isaiah the Prophet, Isa. 90.6.
Cry; he dares not notwithstanding cry of his own head, or put forth his own
intention, his own invention, but he says unto God, What shall I cry? then the
voice does suggest unto him the matter and subject of the cry; thence it came
to pass that he was accustomed to close all his prophesies with this sentence,
as he says in the precedent fifth verse of that chapter, for the mouth of the
Lord has spoken it. Isa. 1.7.9.
The Lord says unto Jeremiah, whatsoever I command thee, that thou shall speak,
and the Lord put forth his hand, and touched his mouth, and the Lord said unto
him, behold, I put my word in thy mouth. It is that which the Prophet Ezekiel
represents unto us, what God speaks unto him, saying; Ezech. 3.1, 2, 3.
Son of man eat this roll, and speak to the house of Israel; then I did eat it,
then he said, go, get thee unto the house of Israel, and speak with my words
unto them, giving to understand thereby, that his prophesies were a recital of
the words contained in the roll, which was given him to eat; according to which
the Prophets ordinarily began their prophecy. Thus says the Lord, and the
mouth of the Lord has spoken it: To give us to understand, that the Prophets,
Apostles, and Pastors, ought not to teach or preach any thing, but the word and
will of God; for if they prophecy, teach or preach any thing but the word of
God and the Gospel of Christ; woe will befall them.

These things being thus briefly expounded, it remains that we apply them unto
our selves, to our use, and for our instruction.

From hence we have an use of redargution; for this Doctrine condemns those of
whom Gregory speaks, the world is full of priests, and notwithstanding, there
are found but few Laborers in the harvest; they take upon them the office, but
do not execute the charge, they leave the charge, the preaching and the office,
and take the benefice and benefit thereof, such are Archbishops, Cardinals, and
Bishops among the Papists; we may also say, some of our Bishops, and some of
our Ministers of the word of God among us in this Land, who esteem nothing in
this world more unworthy of their persons, than the charge of teaching; and
seems unto them that it is a thing too low, contemptible and inferior unto the
Episcopal and Ministerial dignity, to preach the Gospel, and notwithstanding
they do possess and enjoy great Benefices and revenews. Saint Paul says here,
woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel, but they say clean contrary, woe unto
us if we do preach the Gospel. The Apostles said, Act. 6.2.9
It is not reasonable, that we should leave the word of God, and serve Tables;
but we will give our selves continually to prayer, and to the Ministry of the
word. But the Popes, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, in a contrary sense do
the quite contrary, it seems unto them that it is not reasonable, that they
should leave the politic affairs of the State to preach the word; they esteem
it to be a base and vile thing to preach the Gospel, whereas Pet. 1.12.
the angels themselves desired look into it, to search and know the depth, and
the bottom of this profound mystery of the Gospel, yea they were joyful and
ready to preach the birth of Christ Luke 2.10 13, 14.
; Behold I bring you tidings of great joy, and with the angel there was a
multitude of the heavenly host, praising God and saying, glory to God in the
highest, and earth Peace, good will towwards men. The charge of the Ministry is
so honorable, the burden so heavy (says Chrysostom) that it is formidable
unto the angels, that the Angels themselves notwithstanding, would esteem it an
honor, and would crouch and stoop their shoulders to bear it; and therefore,
how noble, how rich, how honorable soever men are let them not think that the
Ministry is too vile or unworthy of them, but rather that they are unworthy of
the Ministry, as it appears by the forementioned and forenamed titles; for they
are fellow servants with the angels, yea they are styled angels; yea to which
of the angels, unto which of the Princes of the world, did God at any time time
say, that which he said unto his apostles and ministers? Mat. 16.19.
whatsoever you shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, Whatsoever you
shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. And John 20.23.
whose soever sins ye remit they are remitted unto them, and whose soever
sins ye retain they are retained. But if the Cardinals, Archbishops and
Bishops of the Romish Church do preach, it is but rarely and seldom; and when
they preach and teach, they do not preach the word of God, but false doctrine,
the traditions of men; the superstitious ceremonies of the Pope; they feed the
people with Fables, and curious Questions; so that in what manner soever we do
consider them they are ranked and comprehended within and under the curse, Woe
unto them because they preach not the Gospel.

2. This condemns those that swell and raise up themselves against God and
against his Church, by oftentation, ambition or vain glory; a vice altogether
unworthy of pastors, and Ministers of Gods word, and notwithstanding a common
vice, but a dangerous one; so that it is a safer thing to hear the word of God
than to preach it; for he that hears Gods word learns to humble himself, but he
that preaches, is in danger to exalt himself; for the more he receives the
graces of God, the more he is subject to ambition, and certes we see, that the
Apostle Paul was in danger to exalt himself above measure, in that he was an
Apostle, 2 (...) 4.7
And through the abundance of the revelations, caught up to the third heaven
into Paradise, heard unspeakable words, which is not lawful or possible for a
man to utter; there was given unto me a thorn in the flesh, the Mssenger of
Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted above measure. Pirncipally this
sin is incident to novices and young ministers 1 Timothy 3.6
who are in danger to be lifted up with pride, and to fall into the
condemnation of the Devil; as if he should have said, he will glory in that he
is a minister, Mat. 7.22.
and preaches; Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? O we must not
glory in that, for though I preach the Gospel (says Saint Paul) I have nothing
to glory of. If Saint Paul, so great, so excellent an Apostle, could not glory
in that; who in all his Epistles abaseth himself, that God may be his all, and
may be thereby exalted and glorified, who will know nothing, save Jesus Christ,
and him crucified; who protests that he will glory, not in his virtues, not in
his merits, but in his infirmities, that the power of God may rest upon him. If
such an Apostle so sensible of his infirmities, so humble by reason of them,
such an Herald of the mercy of God, such an enemy of the merits of men, such a
trumpeter of their sins and demorits, if such an Apostle could not, would not
boast of such things, and especially would not glory in the preaching of the
Gospel, because necessity was laid upon him, and woe unto him if he did not
preach it: how much less the Pastors and ministers of the word of God,
inferiors to so great an Apostle, have they matter and occasion to glory
therein? by reason of that necessity and of that threatening.

But to come nearer unto our selves, and to apply those things and uses to us
that are Pastors, and to the brother whom we are to establish and ordain unto
the holy ministry, (without making a particular application unto our said
brother, as we might) We learn, and he also, our duty, which is proposed at
length in this 9. chapter of the 1 Cor. and in the first of Timothy chap. 3.
and in first chapter of Titus, which we will read to you anon.

The first and principal duty is to preach the Gospel, and teach the truth,
and will of God contained and revealed in the sacred Scripture, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
Given by inspiration of God, and profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto oll good works, sufficient not only for our
salvation, which the Papists confess, but also for our instruction which they
deny; witness Bonner, Bishop of London, who examining a martyr and telling him
that he was a right Scripture man, and would have nothing but Scripture; and
his Chaplain, who said that he would have nothing, but his little pretty Gods
book. And is it not sufficient said the martyr for our salvation, yes said he
it is sufficient for our salvation, but not for our instruction: O replied the
martyr, God send me the salvation, and you the instruction; and truly if it be
sufficient for the one, it is also for the other; for in the 13th v. of the
same chapter, it is able to make thee wise unto salvation, and that not only
the man of God, the minister, the Doctor; but also the simple, the ignorant; it
makes wise the simple, Psalm. 19.8. for if it appertains only to the learned
and wise to read the Scriptures, it appertains to none; for no body is
learned and wise before he has read the holy scripture: We read not the word
of God because we are learned and wise, but to become so. It is that holy
scripture, which is styled a long Epistle, which the Creator sends to the
creature; the Testament of God the son, and the Library of God the holy Ghost;
the book of the love of God; the mirror of man's misery, and of divine grace,
the rich treasury of the King of glory (wherein the spiritual manna and the
water of life are to be found) the Arsenall and Armoury of the faithful, a
sword with two edges, a touchstone of truth, a lantern to our feet, and an
anchor in the time of tempest yea, the sacred Scripture is called a Paradise;
God (says Ambrose) walked of old in Paradise, and now God walks in Paradise,
when I read the sacred Scripture, Genesis is a Paradise, Deuteronomy is a
Paradise, the Gospel is a Paradise unto me, etc. and truly well may it be
called a Paradise, for the faithful cannot find a pleasanter place than in the
Paradise of holy Scripture, where the tree of knowledge is, not that was
forbidden, but that which is appointed of God for the elect; where stands in
the mids thereof, the tree of life which is Christ, the door whereof is not kept
by Cherubims with the fiery sword, but is opened unto all that are hungry;
there are the rivers of lively waters to refresh those that are a thirsty,
there are trees planted by God, that is, the Patriarks, prophets and Apostles,
where the air is calm; the sweet air and refreshing breathing of the Holy
Ghost; it is there where the voice of God is heard, not calling Adam where art
thou, but inviting all sinners unto him, Come unto me all ye that labor and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, leading them directly unto the tree
of Life, refreshing them and comforting them. The Garden of Eden out of the
which Adam was thrust forth, had but the shadow of the true, solid, and sweet
pleasures which the faithful do enjoy in this Garden of holy Scripture,
wherein they hear the voice of God, see the apparition of Angels, are
conversant with the holy Patriarks, and Prophets, and Apostles, yea with Christ
himself, and do feed with great delight on the fruit of the tree of Life; and
therefore let us content our selves with this Paradise, and contain our selves
within the limits and close of the holy Scripture, without going for h out of
it.

Again the sacred Scripture is compared unto a Map, containing a description of
the place of our sojourning here in this vale of misery, of our journey toward
our heavenly Jerusalem, containing all things necessary for us in this our
pilgrimage, both for our instruction and provision, as also for our salvation.
Beyond this sacred Scripture, and without the Map thereof, there are nothing
but uncertain and unknown things. The Cosmographers who describe the world, are
wont to place in the lower most part of their Maps, the far distant Regions and
unknown unto them, these words, Terra incognita, and say beyond these Countries
are nothing but wildernesses of sand, without water, full of foul, wild and
venomous beasts, or ponds of unnavigable mud, or Scithia unhabited for cold. So
beyond the sacred Scriptures, there are nothing but unknown Lands, deserts full
of sands of humane traditions, stinking pools, cruel and venomous beasts, that
is to say, of false opinions, and detestable heresies, unknown and doubtful
ways. Beyond this holy Scripture, there is nothing, but Scriptura incognita,
the unknown Scripture, and unwritten word dangerous gulphs, where the anchor of
our faith can take no hold, where all our sounding plummets are too short, and
cannot sound the bottom thereof, and where we must of necessity make shipwreck
of our faith; and therefore we must of necessity keep our selves within the M^p
of the holy Scripture, the Sea-mans compass, the rule of sobriety, the bridle
of our discourse, the limit of our faith, lest we be tossed and cast upon some
unknown coast and so perish; we rest our selves in the haven of the true faith
(says Austine) where no tempest of troublesome curiosity, or of false doctrine
can either trouble us, or at least drown us, and therefore let us be strong in
faith, and hold that which we have, as Christ exhorts the angel of Thyatira,
let us hold steadfast that which we have received, and continue fast and
constant in the Doctrine that we have, which is the true and old Doctrine, and
not new, as that of the Heretics.

For we may demand of the Heretics and with good ground, as Optatus did of the
Donatists; an account of the beginning of their Chair, to wit of their
Doctrine, which like unto Jona's gourd came up in a night, and perished in a
night; having taken their beginning and birth since few days. Now if they
demand where is the beginning of our Chair, or Doctrine, we answer in the and
from the sending of the Apostles; if again they ask a testimony thereof, we
will produce the same Doctrine which the holy Scripture contains, which
resounds in our pulpits, which sounded or rather thundered in the Chair of the
Apostles: The ancient Heathens believed and held, that the fountain Arethusa
which did spring out in Syracusa in Sycilie, was the river Alpheus; by what
argument could they be persuaded, that the same water which loses it self in
the sea, or under the mediterranean sea, could in so long a space spring and
rise up from the Land of Moreah, as far as Sycily; because that those things
that were cast into that river were found again by the means of the said
fountain in Syracusa. Even so we affirm that our Chair or doctrine has taken
its beginning from the time of the Apostles, although it has been mixed or
swallowed in the sea of this unclean world, full of corruptions, of false
Doctrine, and manners; because it brings back unto us that precious pearl,
carried away and as it were ingulphed into the bottom of the sea, by the power
partly of error, partly of persecutions, (but from the presence of those only
unto whom God has sent the efficacy of error, because they would not receive
the love of truth, that thereby they might be saved) Consider thou Jonas, the
type of the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore also of his Church,
thou see him swallowed up by the Whale, thou see him devoured, and thou
have some reason to believe it; at the only word, at the twinkling of the eye
of the Lord, this monster vomits out Jonah upon the dry land, a Herald ordained
to go from thence to preach unto the Ninivites, to a people aliens from the
Church; and do thou find it strange that this poor Church, which Popery as
it were swallowed up, God willing it, having foretold it heretofore, maugre her
power and malice, she has vomited it up again, and rendered it in our days,
and for to preach the Gospel more gloriously, yea and that to our selves? So
then we bring that which the Apostles have brought, have delivered unto us, and
have taught us; and therefore let us retain and maintain these Doctrines.

And let us reject all false irregular and erroneous doctrines, which have too
much the vogue and sway in these Countries. For England that was heretofore a
Paradise, even as the Garden of the Lord, is alas become a Bochim, a valley of
tears, an Aceldama, a field of blood, a Golgotha and Mount of Calvary, a
Charnel of skulls, a common sink and sewer of all sorts of Heresies, and that
there are here among us as many or more sects and opinions than there are among
all the reformed Churches in Europe. There is a place near London, named the
Isle of dogs, but alas how many kinds of dogs are there in this Island of
England. The sacred Scripture compares diverse kinds of persons to dogs; the
Mat. 7.6.
profane persons, Phil. 3.2.
the Schismatics, Isa. 56.10
mercenary Pastors, Ps. 22.17.
the persecutors, the Apostates; and especially those may be called dogs, that
do bark against the Deity of God, or the Trinity of persons, 2 Pet. 2.22.
as Arrius, Sabellian, Servetus, Socinus, and other blasphemous Heretics. Such
an one was Lucian, a dog in condition, who for his impiety was devoured by
dogs. Such an one was Julian the Apostata, who being struck with an unknown
dart, casted up his blood with his hand toward heaven, crying aloud, Thou have
overcome O Galilean, thou have overcome. The Arminians, and Socinians do agree
together in many errors, that a man may say of them as of old, as of Plato and
of Philo; either Philo does Platonise, or Plato does Philonise: So either the
Arminians do Socinianise, or the Socinians do Arminianise in diverse points, as
concerning Predestination, original Sin, the unperseverance of Saints touching
the kingdom of Christ, universal grace, the Sacrament of Baptism, and of the
holy Supper of the Lord, and diverse other things, and among other points
concerning the Son of God; saving, that the Son of God cannot rightfully and
truly be called Jehovah, God of himself, and by himself, that the arguments
taken from the works of the creation, from the attributes of eternity, from the
name of Jehovah, etc. are not sufficient to prove the Deity of the Son of God;
that Christ is named the Son of God in respect of his mavelous conception,
his anointing, his resurrection, ascension, and his sitting at the right hand
of God; and is it not that which the Catechism of the Socinian Churches in
Poland, and in Lithuania does teach; affirming that there is but the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the only true God; that that man Jesus of
Nazareth, born of the Virgin is not God, etc. A book full full of blafhemies
against the son of God: a book that has been reimprinted in England, without
the knowledge of the superior powers. A book which deserves to be burnt) and it
is said it has been) the Printers and furtherers thereof worthy to be
punished, but O Lord how long? we read a notable example in the Ecclesiastical
history. Amphilochius, an orthodox Bishop in Licaonia, made a request unto the
Emperor Theodosius, to be pleased to make a decree for the banishment of the
Arrians out of his Empire, but the Emperors rejected it, as an unjust and
cruel request; and which could not be executed without danger. Now the Bishop
thought on a way how the Emperor might be moved to consent to his request He
came one day with other Bishops to the imperial Court, Theodor l. 5 c. 16.
at the time that the Emperor Theodosius sat on his throne and Arcadius his
son sitting on his side, newly designed Emperor with him to congratulate them;
which the Bishops did and did congratulate both the Emperor and his son
Arcadius, but Amphilochius did bow to the Emperor Theodosius, with all
reverence and humility, but he did it not to his son Arcadius; the Emperor
thought he did not do reverence to his son, either because he saw him not, or
by forgetfulness; shows him his son, and advises him to salute and honor
him; but Amphilochius told him, He that honors the Father honors the son;
the Emperor taking this act, this fact to heart, with a kind of indignation
replied unto him, He that dishonors the Son dishonors the Father; and
commands those about him to cause him to avoid the Court. Amphilochius having
that which he desired to attain unto his aim and end, cried out, O Emperor
do thou take so to heart the contempt of thy son? do thou think that in
dishonouring thy son, I dishonor thee? and do thou not think, that in
dishonouring the son of God, thou do not dishonor God the Father? remember
that God hates those that dishonor his Son: does he not say Josh. 5.23.
that all men should honor the Son even as they honor the Father; he that
honoreth not the Son honoreth not the Father which has sent him. The Emperor
was so much moved with this answer, admiring the wise boldness of the old man,
that he descended his throne, embraced the Bishop, confessed he had told the
truth, asked of him pardon, and made an Edict, banishing the Arrians out of his
Empire: And certes Saint John says, 1 John 2.23.
Whosoever denies the Son the, same has not the Father; but he that
acknowledges the Son, has the Father also. Whosoever therefore preaches
another Gospel, another Jesus, another Spirit, is accursed; and if any man love
not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha. 1 Cor. 16.22. O that
these Blasphemers that sin against God the Father, in sinning against God the
Son, either in regard of his person, or of his divine or humane nature, or of
his offices, were suppressed in England: For how can we be said to honor God
the Father, if we permit that God the Son be dishonored?

2. The Ministers of the Gospel ought and are to preach the Gospel, not only
in regard of the Doctrine, but also in respect of a holy conversation of life;
edifying the Church of God, as well with the one hand as with the other; by the
preaching of the word, and by good example. For otherwise the Pastor will ruin
the Church of God, more by his bad life, than he will edify it by his
wholesome Doctrine; He will destroy that which he has built, and will pluck up
with one hand, that which he has planted with the other; for the people look
as much or more to his life and conversation, than to his preaching. He that
preaches well, and lives ill, is like the statue of Mercury, who shows the way
unto others, but does not bow one step; he resembles the Scribes and Pharisees,
that sent the wise men of the East, that came to adore Jesus Christ to
Bethlehem, but stirred not from their houses; they are like unto the Comedian,
who crying with a loud voice, O heaven, showed with his finger the earth, which
the principal Magistrate beholding, could not fit longer in his place, but
rose and withdrew himself from the company in a fury, saying, this man has
made a solecisme with his hand. So they that have Heaven at their tongues end,
and the earth at their fingers end, speak false and bad Divinity, whereas they
might avoid such an incongruous irregularity, and make a congruity between the
tongue and the hand, if they did as they speak, and lived as they preach. They
are like to those that built the Ark of Noah, but did not enter into it, and
were not saved; so that those who build the Church of God by their preaching,
but are not of the Church by faith, which works by good deeds, shall not be
saved. They will say in the last day of Judgment to Jesus Christ the Sovereign
Judge, Mat. 7.22, 23
Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name done many
wonderful works? but the Judge will say unto them, I never knew you, depart
from me ye that work iniquity Psalm. 50.16, 18.
Ps. 50, 16, 18
What have thou to do to declare my statutes? or that thou should take my
Covenant in thy mouth? seeing when thou saw a thief, thou consendest with
him, and have been partaker with adulterers. Origin being excommunicated, for
offering Incense on the altar, and so denying covertly Jesus Christ, requested
by some to expound unto the people a a passage of Scripture, fell by Gods
providence on these 16, 17, 18 verses of this 50. Psalm; shut up the book, not
able, not willing to expound that place, and wept, and all the people wept with
him. Romans 2.21, 22 23, 24.
Thou which teach another, teach thou not thy self? thou that preachest a
man should not steal, do thou steal? thou that say a man should not
commit adultery, do thou commit adultery? thou that abhorest Idols, do
thou commit Sacrilege? thou that make thy boast of the Law through breaking
the Law, dishonourest thou God? for the name of the Lord is blasphemed amomg
the Gentiles through you. And therefore let us endeavor to marry our preaching
with our life, lest that by any means having preached to others, we our selves
should be cast away and reprobates, 1 Cor. 9.27. Let us build the Church of God
with the one and the other hand; 1 Timothy 4-13. 12.14.
Let us give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to Doctrine, and be also
patterns of the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit in
faith, in purity, and that in consideration of the laying on of the hands of
the Presbytery, as it is in the 19. verse of that same Chapter.

We intend not to discourse here of the Imposition, or of the laying on of the
hands upon the sacrifices, upon particular persons in blessing them, or in
healing them, and such like things. But we say that the Imposition or the
laying on of the hands, is not a naked ceremony (as some suppose) as if it were
of no efficacy; or on the other side, as if it did imprint an indelible
character, which cannot be blotted out, (as the Papists say) or in breathing on
persons as the Bishops do, and saying to them Receive ye the Holy Ghost, they
received the Holy Ghost; as Christ in breathing on the Apostles, and saying,
Receive ye the Holy Ghost, they received the Holy Ghost; or as the Apostles in
laying the hands on some who received the extraordinary gift of the Holy Ghost,
as it was in the time of the Primitive Church, when God did enrich his Church
with that miraculous gift, when those that had received the Imposition of
hands, did speak strange languages, etc. No such matter; but the laying on of
the hands, which we that are Ministers have received, and which our dear
brother here present is to receive; does signify other things: For it
signifies that the Minister is not sent by himself, no man imposes hands on
himself, Aaron himself has been chosen; Heb. 5.4.
For no man takes this Honor unto himself, but he that is called of God as
was Aaron; So also Christ glorified not himself, but was called, and truly,
Romans 10.17, 14, 15.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, how shall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a
Preacher? and how shall they preach, except they be sent. Jer. 23.21.
I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran, I have not spoken to them, yet
they prophesied. The laying on of hands therefore signifies a sending: The Holy
Ghost said Acts 13.2, 3.
separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them; and
when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them
away. So Moses Number. 27.22, 23.
laid his hands upon his servant and successor Joshua before all the
Congregation, and gave him a charge as the Lord commanded him; Besides it
signifies the power and authority given unto him to preach, that receives the
laying on of hands, authority according to the power that is given by Jesus
Christ, not to destruction but to edification; the laying on of the hands does
also signify, that every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and
comes down from the Father of lights, Jam. 1.17. that God gives necessary and
convenient gifts to the discharge of the Minister in his Ministry, Christ
ascended far above all heavens, that he might fill all things, and he gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers, etc. The laying on of the hands therefore does show that God governs
the Ministry, and guides his Ministers by his hand, and his Church by the hand
of his Ministers. Ps. 77.20.
Thou leddest thy people like a flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron. It
declares the hand of God and his help, that he will be with his servants in all
things and every where, will preserve them in all dangers, and against all kind
of evils. 1 Kin. 18 46.
The hand of the Lord was on Elijah, he girded up his loins, and ran before
Ahab to the entrance of Jezreel. In a word the imposition of hands signifies,
that the Minister who is ordained of God, is assured of his calling, is not for
himself, but for God and his Church; and that the Minister ought to preach, and
there is a necessity laid on him: and therefore he ought to take care, look
diligently to his Commission, for his office and Commission is great and heavy,
and has need to pray to God to bless him in his calling and mission.

On the other side, the laying on of the hands does declare the hand of God to
be heavy on him, not for good, but for evil, if he does not his duty. For as on
the one side God says, Ezech. 33 9.8.
Son of man if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it, if he do not
turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou have delivered thy
soul; but if thou do not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked
man shall die in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand; and
so woe unto us, if we preach not the Gospel.

And therefore the laying on of the hands does admonish us, that as on the one
side 1 Timothy 5.22.
we lay hands suddenly on no man; so on the other side, 1 Timothy 4.14.
we neglect not the gift that is in us, which was given by prophecy, with the
laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. And 2 Timothy 1.6.
Let us stir up the gift of God which is in us, by the putting on of hands. Let
us hearken to that which Saint Paul says to Archippus, Col 4.17
Take heed to the Ministry which thou have received in the Lord, that thou
fulfill it. Let us here the summons of the Apostle Paul; I 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.
charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick
and the dead, at his appearance and his Kingdom, preach the word, be instant
in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and
doctrine. And elsewhere, 1 Timothy 5.21.
I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect angels,
that thou observe these things, without preferring one before another, doing
nothing by partiality. And again, 1 Timothy 6.13, 19.
I give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickens all things, and before
Jesus Christ, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession, that thou
keed this Commandment without spot, unrebukeable, until the appearing of our
Lord Jesus Christ And that thou fleest 1 Timothy 6.10.
Avarice the root of all evil. Avarice which Bernard represents, drawn by a
Chariot with four wheels of vices; The first is faint heartedness; The second
Inhumanity; The third, the contempt of God; The fourth, the forgetfulness of
death: this Chariot is drawn by two horses coupled together, the one forcible
taking, the other force to retain things taken; the Coachman that guides this
Chariot and commands it, is Covetousness or the love of money, who guiding the
covetous man in such a dangerous Coach, and with such furious horses, leads him
out of the true way, makes him to err from the faith, to fall into temptation
and snares, and does plunge him into destruction and perdition, as the Apostle
tells us in the 9. and 10. verses of this sixth Chapter: Therefore he does
exhort his disciple Timothy in the 11. verse, But thou O man of God flee these
things, and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience,
meekness; as thou art, and as much as thou art a man of God, not only in
regard of the Creation, and of redemption, but more particularly in regard of
thy vocation, a man of God, a Minister of the word of God. Which place of
Scripture we expounded unto you in a Sermon last Wednesday, as a preparative
and forerunner to this action; declaring what the Minister must flee, what he
must follow after, before God and before men.

3. We that are Ministers must learn that to preach the Gospel well, and render
our preaching fruitful and of efficacy, we ought to be united together. Psalm.
133.1, 2
Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in
unity, it is like precious ointment upon the head of Aaron (when he was
ordained and consecrated an high Priest) that ran down upon the beard, even
Aarons beard, that went down to the skirts of his garments. But alas, Satan to
hinder the course and progress of the Ministry, does cast the apple of discord
between the Apostles themselves, and between the Ministers of the Gospel also,
One while for precedence, Luke 22, 29.
There was a strife among the Apostles, which of them should be accounted the
greatest. Another while for a difference concerning a third person, as between
Paul and Barnabas, concerning John surnamed Mark; Acts 15.37, 38, 39, 40, 41.
Barnabas determined to take with them Mark, but Paul thought it not good to
take him with them; and the contention was so sharp between them that they
departed asunder one from the other. So Barnabas took Mark and sailed unto
Cyprus; but Paul chose Silas and departed, being recommended by the brethren
unto the grace of God, and he went through Syria and Cilicia confirming the
Churches. Sometimes for the small respect which one bears another, and by false
reports. We read that there was enmity between Chrysostom and Severian,
Bishops; Serapion who wedded the quarrel of Chrysostom, passed by Severian
and did not salute him, Severian provoked with the little respect Serapion
showed him, gives way to his passion, Socrates Ecclesiastical history.
and said, If Serapion die a Christian, Christ was not made man. Serapion
reports the words of Severian at half and omits the first part of the Sentence,
and tells Chrysostom, that Severian maintained that Christ was not made man;
thereupon Chrysostom chaseth Severian out of the City, the Empress Eudoxia
puts her self between these two Bishops, and endeavors to appease the choler
of Chrysostom, and brings her son Theodosius, who falls at Chrysostoms feet,
to obtain by entreaty a reconciliation, which by much ado he compassed. If
there had been no contention between these two Bishops, this had not happened;
If Serapion who was Chrysostoms friend, had prevented Severian with honor, as
the Phil. 2.3.
Apostle exhorts; or at least had given him the honor that was due to him, and
in Lowliness of mind had esteemed him better then himself; Severian had not
uttered such terible and unchristian words; if Serapion had not made a false
report to Chrysostom concerning Severian; and if Chrysostom had not been so
light of belief, but had examined both the one and the other party, and had
reserved one ear for the other party as Alexander the great did, he had not
expelled Severian. Hence we see what divisions among Pastors can do; it is
necessary that Pastors Gal. 6.2.
bear with one another burdens, that is, to say to bear with the infirmityes
of one another, and so fulfill the Law of Christ, to support them, redress and
restore them with the spirit of meekness. In the time of the reformation of
the Church of God; God stirred up two excellent and eminent persons but of
contrary constitutions and dispositions, Luther, and Melancton, Luther was hot,
Melancton cold, Luther was of a choleric inclination, but Melancton was of a
temperat and sweet disposition, Luther was courageous and bold, Melancton was
timorous, Luther was as oil and fire to warm his coldness, Melancton was as
water to temper the heat of Luther, Melancton was as a bridle to Luther, Luther
was as a spur to Melancton: by these means so contrary, and tones so diverse,
there was by Gods providence a holy harmony and fair corespondence between
these two great instruments of God, and restorers of Gods Church, being happily
joined together, and bearing with one another infirmities. But if enmities
continue between Pastors, and that there is an apparent danger of a schism by
their divisions; Let us observe what Constantine the great Emperor did, who
having received diverse letters from the Bishops full of defamatory invectives
of the one against the others, and seeing that the Bishops were more inconsed
to wrangle one with another, than careful to unite themselves, and fight
against the error of Arrius. He cast all their papers into the fire, without
reading any of them, exhorting them to a mutual peace, and brotherly concord
one with another; and therefore let the Ministers of the word of God preach the
word of God purely, let them live holily, let them love one another cordially;
O then they will edify the Church of God more and more; and having finished
their course, they shall receive their Crown of glory, Enter ye faithful
servants into the joy of your Lord; and as they have been Rev. 1.20.
stars in Christ's right hand, in the sphere of this militant Church, Dan. 12.3
having turned many to righteousness; they shall shine as the brightness of
the firmament, and as the stars for ever and ever, in the sphere of the
Triumphant Church in heaven; Rev. 22.9. and 20.
as they are fellow servants with the angels, yea styled angels here on earth,
they shall be like the angels in glory in heaven.

Now as we that are Ministers have heard our lesson, ye also (my brethren) have
here your lesson too; for if woe is unto Saint Paul, and unto the Ministers of
Gods word, if they preach not the Gospel; it follows that woe is unto the
Corinthians, and unto you, if they hear not, if you hear not the preaching of
the Gospel; for if a necessity is laid upon Saint Paul, and upon P^stors to
preach; there is also a necessity laid upon the Corinthians, and upon the
people of God to hear the Gospel. It is that necessity whereof Christ Jesus
speaks, Luke 10.41, 42.
Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things, but one
thing is needful, and Mary has chosen that good part, which shall not be
taken away from her. He speaks of the necessity of the word of God, Romans 10.17.
For faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, and as he is of
God that preaches the word of God, John 8.47.
So he is of God that hears Gods word. The same God that requires of the one
the preaching, requires of the other the hearing; and therefore the same curse
that is pronounced and threatened against dumb Pastors, is pronounced against
deaf hearers. Woe unto them that preach not the Gospel, but also Mar. 11.23.
thou Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, thou shall be brought to hell;
for if the mighty works which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom
it would have remained until this day. In Sodom, there was a Lot, in
Capernaum a Jesus; Lot was a man, Christ God and man; Lot was a sinner, Christ
innocent; Lot did no miracles among the Sodomites, Christ did miracles in
Capernaum; Sodom saw not any Judgments on Jerusalem, as Jerusalem saw those
fearful and terrible Judgments on Sodom, written in characters from heaven of
fire and Brimstone; so that one might, as it were, read them in running, The
Lake Asphaltites or dead sea, is a fearful testimony of Gods wrath upon them;
and therefore it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of
Judgment than for them; verse 29.
according to that the Apostle teaches us, Heb. 2.2, 3
That if the word spoken by angels was steadfast, and every transgression and
disobedience received a just recompense of reward; how shall we escape if we
neglect so great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord,
was confirmed unto us by them that heard him. And therefore a necessity is laid
upon the people of God to hear his holy word.

The second duty of Gods people is, to pray for their Pastors, the people think
that it is the Pastors Office, and duty to pray for them, and that is true, for
the Minister of God is Gods mouth to the People, and the peoples mouth to God;
it is he that makes intercession between God and the people, 1 Samuel 12 23.
God forbid that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray for you,
says Samuel; and truly Moses interceding for the Jews; Samuel and Daniel in
like manner, have been powerful intercessors, and their prayers have been of
great force toward God, for the good of the people of God, in the name and
intercession of the Messiah to come, namely Jesus Christ: but you must know it
is also the duty of the people to pray for their Pastors and teachers; for so
great an Apostle as Saint Paul had need of the prayers of the Church, and said,
Pray for me that the door of utterance may be given unto me, that I may speak
boldly, to make known the mystery of the Gospel, Ephesians. 6.19. and and you also
helping together by prayer for us, that for the gift bestowed upon us, etc. 2
Cor. 1.11. how much more we that are inferiors to so great an Apostle, have
need of your prayers. Acts 12.5.
Prayer was made without ceasing of the Church unto God for Peter. And certes
we fear, that by reason of the want of the prays of Gods people for their
Pastors, God takes away sometimes the Ministers of his holy word; as God has
taken away to himself out of your Church three Pastors in nine months. Mr.
Marmet, Mr. Mary, Mr. Primrose, Anno 1642.
And God suffers sometimes Ministers to fall into strange and irregular
opinions, into heresies, or into some scandalous sin, because the Church
prays not with that zeal and fervor for their Pastors as they ought: if
therefore you desire that God continue his Ministry among you, and preserve
your Ministers, it behooves you to pray to God for your Ministers; for that is
their desire: So the Martyrs were accustomed to close and finish their Epistles
to their friends, with these words, Pray, Pray, Pray for us, etc.

Thirdly, Gods people ought to be united, and not divided; for where the spirit
of division is, there cannot be the spirit of prayer nor of concord. Now as the
amity and concord of Pastors one with another, and of Pastors with the people,
is of great profit; so their division is of a dangerous consequence; the chiefs
and principalls, disagreeing have always their adherents. The Apostle
condemns these divisions among the Corinthians. 1 Cor. 1.12.
It has been declared unto me of you, that there are contentions among you;
for every one of you says, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and
I of Christ, Is Christ divided? is Paul crucified for you? or were you baptized
in the name of Paul. 1 Cor. 3.3, 5.
There is among you envying and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and
walk as men? who is Paul? who is Apollo, but ministers by whom ye believed? By
this he gives us to understand that there is nothing more dangerous and
pernicious, than the division among the people, concerning Pastors; especially
when there is more regard to one minister than to another, and some are
admirers, yea idolaters of their persons; as the Jews preferred Abraham, Jacob,
Moses, and esteemed them above Christ, an insupportable blasphemy: Luther,
Calvin, and others have been too much esteemed, and preferred before other
Ministers. The report is, that there was a man in Geneva that made so much
esteem of Calvin, that he said, if Saint Paul should come down from heaven, and
preach at the same time that Calvin preached, he would rather hear Calvin then
Paul. O let us not be admirers and adorers of persons; it is God that gives
diverse gifts unto Pastors by the same spirit. Such an one will expound the Text
wondrous well, and cite to the purpose the Passages of the sacred Scripture;
another will apply well; another will be an excellent and eloquent Orator. Such
an one will be a great disputer of controversies, Another as a Boanerges will
thunder forth Judgments of God; Another will be a Barnabas admirable in his
consolations; This man will be patheticall in his uses; That man will be
admirable in his prayers. Another will be excellent in Consistory and in
Council, and it may be there will be some other that has not these and the
like gifts, which will be more humble than all the rest. There is not one among
a thousand that has all these gifts together, as Elihu said to Job, if there
be a messenger with him, one among a thousand, to show to man his uprightness,
1 Cor. 4.1.
Job 33.23. Therefore let us esteem them all, and so account of them as of the
Ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God, and of the diverse
gifts o his Spirit, and that there be no divisions among us, which ruins and
turns upsided down the Church of God, as sad experience teaches us. That as
the Tythean stone, though a great one, yet as long as it is whole swims, but
being broken in pieces sinks to the bottom. So the Church of God united,
subsists; but divided sinks down; sure no house, no city, no Church, no
Kingdom being divided can stand. And therefore if we desire the prosperity of
Gods Church, the good of this Church, be united together, Acts 2.1.
be all with one accord in one place, fall not out by the way, Genesis 45.24. If
Phil. 2.1, 2, 3.
therefore there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, says
Saint Paul, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord,
of of one mind, let nothing be done through strife, vain glory; Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5,
6.
endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace: there is one
body and one spirit, ye are called in one hope of your calling, having one
Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and father of all, who is above all, and
through all, and in you all, and one mother the Church.

Now he who is is the Almighty God powerful to confirm and strengthen us,
according to his Gospel, and the preaching of Christ; fortify us more and more
in faith, and in the truth of his Gospel, and brotherly concord and charity,
make us firm and stable therein, that when Jesus Christ shall come in his glory
and Majesty, pouring down the cataracts of his indignation upon the wicked, he
may find us holding that which he has admonished us of, observing that which
he has taught us, doing that which he has done, retaining his Gospel till his
coming; Then may we be assured that we shall be saved in that last day; Pastors
and sheep governed and guided in one sheepfold, under the hook of that grand
and Sovereign Shepherd of our souls Jesus Christ, to be fed by him, received in
his Kingdom and crowned with glory, there we shall live with the Patriarcks,
the Prophets, the Apostles, with the angels, with the Saints, and with our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be given
all honor, glory, power, Majesty, and dominion for ever and ever, Amen.

The Sermon being finished, the Minister spoke unto the people saying,
YE have heard (my brthren) that the brother John Baptista Stouppe, being
chosen by the Consistory of this Church, to be a Pastor of this said Church,
has undergone the examination; wherein he has made apparent his dexterity,
both in his Latin Sermon ad Clerum, as also in answering unto the objections
which have been made and propounded unto him, concerning the principal points
of the Christian Religion; so that he has been judged capable to be admitted
unto the Ministry; who having been published two succeeding Lords-dayes
publicly in this Church, and having heard of no opposition on your part; we
take your silence as an approbation of his Ministry among you; and therefore we
will proceed unto his reception unto the Ministry. But first we will read unto
you that which is written the 1. Epistle to Timothy, chap. 3 from the 1. verse
to the 7. verse inclusively, and after that the 1. chapter to Titus the 4.
verse to the 10. verse exclusively; and you may read at your leisure the 9.
chapter of the 1. Epistle unto the Corinthians; then we will take a promise
from our brother, and afterward we will proceed to his ordination unto the
Ministry.

So having read that which is written to Timothy and Titus, concerning the
charge and duty of Pastors of the Church of God. The Minister spoke to Mr.
Stouppe, saying,

You John Baptista Stouppe do promise before God and his Church, that you will
serve him faithfully in your ministry to the which you are called; preaching
truly the word of God, to edify the Church, and that you will not abuse the
Doctrine, to serve your carnal affections, or to please any man living; but
that you will use it in a sound conscience to serve to his glory, and the
benefit of his people: you do promise also that you will keep the
Ecclesiastical ordinances, and the Discipline received in this Church; and as
your charge is, admonish those that fail, to acquit your self faithfully,
without giving any place to hatred, favor, vengeance, or any other carnal
affection, and in general do that which belongs to a good and faithful
Minister: Item you promise to keep and maintain as far as lies in you, the
good and preservation of this estate, procure in what possible you can the
peace and union thereof, and not to consent any manner of way to that which may
be contrary and hurtful to it.

The brother Mr. Stouppe by his gesture signified his promise, and answered,
yea.

The Minister said to him, God give you the grace to accomplish your promise.

The Minister being descended from the Pulpit (and the brother Stouppe kneeling
on a cushion within the enclosure where Ministers and Elders si^) accompanied
with Mr. Calendrin Minister of the Dutch Church of London, and with Mr. Cismer
minister of the French Church of London; having all three their hands on his
head, his back turned toward the people, and his face toward the ministers.
The minister made this prayer as follows.

ALmighty God, heavenly Father, who after the fall of our first Parents was the
first preacher of the Gospel in Paradise unto our said Parents, and our Lord
Jesus Christ being descended from heaven on earth for our sakes, honored and
sanctified the holy ministry in his own person, and ascending up into heaven to
give gifts to man, he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and teachers for the perfecting of the Saints for
the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ; seeing it
has pleased thee to call our dear brother, and thine humble servant,
prostrated here on his knees before thee, to be ordinated and ordained Minister
of thy holy word We beseech thee to give him sufficient graces, that he may
thereby acquit himself virtuously and duly of his charge in this his Ministry,
and denounce the secret of thy Son, that he may manifest it as he ought; create
in him a new heart, in changing his heart into another, as thou did unto Saul
being anointed King transform him by the renewing of his mind, that he may
prove what is that good, that acceptable that perfect will of thine enlighten
his understanding from above, with the rays and beams of thy divine light,
warm him and fill him with the true zeal of thy glory, and sincere intention to
thy Service; open his lips, and his mouth shall set forth thy praise guide him
in all truth, that be walk not deceitfully nor falsify thy word but that he
hold fast the faithful word, which is according to instruction, let him not
have the spirit of fear and timerousnes, but the spirit of strength and of
courage, let the word be given to him with a door of utterance and with a
covenient boldness, that he may speak freely as he ought, and fear not those
that can kill the body and not the soul, but rather that he fear thee (O God)
that can destroy body and soul in hell. Let the Tummims and Urims, to wit
perfection and light be upon him; give him grace that in any part of his
calling he be not moved, nor carried away with ambition or covetousness; but
as a man of God, not as he is to thee, such an one by creation or redemption,
only, but as he is a man of God, by this particular calling, he flee these
things, and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience,
meekness; dispel from him the desires of the world, which may interlace in his
thought, and traverse his holy resolution, permit not (O good God) that the
world by his allurements and baits, or his own flesh by its infirmities have
the upper hand, but strengthen him by thy holy Spirit, that he may be
victorious in the midst of assaults, by faith that may be his victory that
overcomes the world. Give him thy grace to preach thy holy word purely, to
live holily and religiously, and marry his holy life with his preaching, that
he ruin not that with one that which he builds with the other, but that he may
be an example to the faithful in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit,
in faith, in purity, lest by any means having preached to others, he himself
should be a castaway. Govern him by thy holy spirit, that he attribute nothing
to himself, but to the virtue of thy holy spirit, and acknowledge that it is
not Paul that planteth, nor Apollo that waters, but it is thou O God that
give the increase; give him grace that he may have prudence in his guiding,
efficacy in his preaching, that he admonish the unruly, comfort those that are
of a low spirit, and feeble heart, cheer up the weak ones, that he be of a mild
spirit toward all; and that he walk in his calling as it is fitting to the
glory of thy great name, to the advancement of the Kingdom of thy Son our
Lord, to the edification and consolation of this Church, and to the salvation
of his own Soul, Amen.

After the Prayer ended, the Minister added and said, in ordaining and
consecrating him, the two other Ministers, continuing their hands on his head
with him.
IN the name and by the authority of the Almighty God, the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost; at the request of the Consistory of this Church, and according
to the Commission and charge which has been given us, and we have accepted of.
We Ministers of Gods word do institute thee John Baptista Stouppe, do
consecrate thee, and confirm thee Minister of the word of God, in the Church of
God, and particularly of this Church; we give thee power and authority, to
preach the word of God, to distribute the Sacraments, to exercise the
Ecclesiastical discipline conformable to Gods word; and to do all the
functions that appertain to the man of God, and Minister of Gods word.

And to the end that God ratify in heaven that which we do here on earth, we
beseech him who is the God of peace, who through the blood of the everlasting
covenant, has brought again from the dead that great Shepherd of the sheep,
Heb. 13.20 21.
who is our Lord Jesus Christ, make you perfect in every good work, to do his
will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory for ever, and ever Amen.

Paranymphi.
Then the two Ministers brought back the Minister, newly ordained and confirmed
to the seat of the Ministers, who sat between them both. And the Minister
ascended the Pulpit; made the ordinary prayer, but there where it concerned
Pastors, he interlaced a prayer for the Minister confirmed, and among other
things concerning the laying on of the hands on his person. The prayer ended,
he caused the Psalm 133. to be sung, O how happy a thing it is, and joyful for
to see, brethren together fast to hold, the band of amity, etc. and that
according to the subject, concerning the consecration of Aaron, and concord;
then afterward he blessed the people in the prescribed form, in the 6. chap. of
Numbers, The Lord bless thee and keep thee, the Lord make his face to shine
upon thee, and be gracious unto thee etc.

Afterward the Pastors and Elders entered into the Consistory, and as James,
Cephas and John gave the right hand of fellowship to Paul and Barnabas; Gal.
2.9.
so the three Pastors gave the right hand of fellowship to Mr. Stouppe their
fellow brother, with convenient congratulations, and holy wishes; then the
brethren Elders one after another, did the like unto him. So this Action ended
to the contentment of the Church.

Amen.

