THE PRIVILEGES OF AN AMBASSADOVR: Written by a CIVILIAN to a FRIEND who
desired his Opinion concerning the Portugal AMBASSADOR.

-- Et sanctum populis per secula nomen
LEGATUM; --
Printed in the Year 1654.

SIR,
I Received your Letter concerning the Portugalls outrageous action in the New
Exchange; and by that Empire you have over me, you may challenge my private
opinion concerning it, how our State may justly vindicate the blood of our
Natives, shed by the train and followers of an Ambassador; Although the
Judges having already acted by their imprisonment in the Common-goal, may seem
to have decided the Controversy, by subjecting their persons to the
Common-Lawes, not allowing them privileges as Comites Legati ought to have.
But I find Sir Edward Cook himself censured, by a most learned Civilian, to
be, Juris quod cum exteris obtinet non adeo peritus; And therefore the present
Judges may allow themselves not infallible in a point not deduced from
Littleton or Magna Charta, (and so bounded within the Narrow Seas) but
referring wholly to the Laws and practice of Nations.

Sir Edward Cook in the Jurisdiction of Courts treats but incidently of
Ambassadors, Cap. 26.
as it were Confessing them exempt from the Jurisdiction of the Common Law. In
the same Chapter he delivers it for Law, that if a man banished for any heinous
offense be sent Ambassador to that place whence he was proscribed, he ought
not to be detained or punished: and the same Legantine office may in reason
as well protect him that offends Durante offic^o, as exempt that person from
punishment, in that place where he is Employed Legate, after a Crime committed.

The most worthy Seldom tells us, Ad Fletam. dissert. cap. 8. 4.
that Renatus Choppinus and other learned men are deceived, that rashly
affirm, the English retain no use of the Caesarian Laws; and declares that
all Leagues and transactions between this Nation and other Princes and States,
and the rights of Legation, are Governed and expounded by those Laws, and the
interpreters of them: and therefore the use of these Laws is admitted in the
Consistories of both our Universities, and in the Court of Admiraltie, that
Forainers that come to study and merchandise may be regulated by those Laws
that are well known to themselves.

The Legate brings with him the Laws and rules of Nations; Kirckner. l. 2. c.
1. n. 126.
according to which he squares his proceedings; and his actions are only
examined by these, and not by the municipall Statutes of particular nations:
the Interdict in some Cities in Italy, that no man shall under a great
penalty wear a sword in public, cannot extend to a Legate (thither sent)
who according to the custom of his nation, Aeinacem and telum gerit.

Ferdinand the Emperor shut up a Grove near to his palace in Vienna for his
privacy and delight, and prohibited all persons under an heavy mulct to enter
or cut down any trees there: the King of Poland's Ambassadour's Coachman rudely
entered the place, and carried away a Cartfull of the forbidden trees, and
though the Emperor frowned hereat, yet Legationis tutamini impune res illa
cessit, quod aliis fraudifuisset.

An Ambassador, Dd. in leg. quoties ff. ad Leg. Jul. Maj.
that Conspireth the destruction of that Prince to whom he is sent, cannot be
accused of Treason, for non subditus non potest peccare in majestatem; and
though he be punishable, yet not by the municipall Laws of that place where he
offends, which usually punish affectum pro effectu, Leg. post. Div. God^eod.
suasum and Consilium sceleris pro consummato, but natural reason, and the Law
of nations, make a difference between Intentions, and Facts, Gentilis de legate.
lib. 2. Cap. 17.

The Venetian Ambassador resident in England about the year 1628. was
deprehended by the husband (if not (...) yet) in bed with his wife; the husband
consulting the learned in the Laws for revenge upon the Ambassador, found,
that (inanis erat actio quae exceptione repellitur) the Legate was Privileged;
and therefore was content only to sue a divorce adniterium a mensa and thero:
though adultery be held natura probrum ac turpe, and (by the Law of the God)
styled faedissima nequitia. leg. 20. cad. ad leg. Jul de adult.

Cicero says, Orac. 3 ^^ verrem.
that the name of Ambassador ought to be so holy and inviolable, quod non modo
inter sociorum Jura, sed etiam hostium tela incolume versetur, idque non tam
humano quam divino scito sancitum: They were as sacred as Mercury sent from
Jupiter, and thereupon Cato Oraculously says, Caduceatori nemo nocet: And
therefore the Romans esteeming Embassy the only Umpire and preparative of
Peace and War, and that Legates in their employments do put off the nature of
Enemies, did set up a College of twenty Feciales or Heralds, that if any
Ambassador was violated by a Roman, they might deliver up the offender without
any respect had to the honor and dignity of his person: for to that Heroic
nation, Legati nomen gravius erat, quam ullius Injuriae aestimatio. Alber Gent.
H. Grotius. etc.
The most eminent Civilians hold, that if an Ambassador offend (even through
Treason or sedition) he is to be remitted to his own Prince to be punished, or
yielded up by him, unless the danger from the Ambassador be imminent and
sudden, in which case he may be justly killed, yet non per modum poenae, sed
per modum naturalis defensionis. And though Ambassadors have sometimes been
more roughly dealt with upon their committing offenses, yet the sacred
privileges of Ambassadors (as the Bishop of Rosse Ambassador for the Queen
of Scots answered the Lord Burleigh (upon the same pretenses against him) were
never violated, Camd. Eliz. anno 1571.
via Juris, sed via Facti; and that by barbarous or ignominious persons.

The Ambassadors of the Tarquins being sent into Rome to demand their goods,
Live.
although they had conspired with some Roman Youths, and taken a resolution to
let in the Kings clancularly by night: yet the Consuls (to whom this Treason
was discovered by a slave, deprehending all the Conspiratours, and casting them
into Prison) dismissed the Legates as inviolable by the laws of Nations, whose
very persons are Asyla, protecting both themselves, and others.

Scipio African, having taken a ship filled with many Carthaginians, remitted
them all untouched, because they averred themselves to be Legates, although it
was manifest to him, that they falsely assumed the name of Ambassadors to avoid
the present danger. And the learned Gentilis (though Advocate in England for
the Spaniard) has these words, De legate. l. 2. c. 18.
Justissime actum his diebus in Anglia cum legato Hispanico, qui in vitam
Principis and regnum ejus conjuratus, dimissus est dimittendum Legatum exist
imamus optimis docti rationibus, and exemplis. We read of Sacra lagationum, and
Sanctimoniam legatorum. Pomponius: l. si quis: ff: de legationibus: Sancta
corpora Legatorum: Varro lib. 3. de ling. lat. ab omni injuria tectis jure
Gentium, Servius ad 10 Aeneid: tutique regressus legato. Papinius. lib. 2.

I shall not deny but that some learned men do hold that the law of nations is
reciprocal, and may be violated by the Legate as upon the Legate: and that it is
one thing to violate the Ambassador, and another thing to punish him, this
supposing a Crime, that an Injury, and hoc juris illud facti nomen est: and
though a Legate is esteemed holy and inviolable by the laws, ff. l. 8. de rer:
divis.
yet Marcianus in his elegant definition of the word Sanctum, delivers that to
be so, quod ab injuria hominum (non autem a jure magistratus) defensum atque
munitum est, and therefore if an Ambassador, Jure gentium sanctus habetur,
Jure-gentium etiam delinquens obligatur ad paenam: like as a sanctuary will
save a man's life from manslaughter, but not when manslaughter is committed
within the Sanctuary. Cap. in audientia. ex. de sent excom.
Frustra siquidem Ecclesiae implorant auxilium qui in eam committunt.

To this it may be replied, that by Remission of an offending Ambassador to
his own Prince, the offense is not pardoned, but the tribunal changed; his
Mercuriall rod does not free but reprieve him: he may be interrogated, and his
examinations transmitted to his Prince to punish him: And if an Ambassador
ought to be remitted for offenses against Princes and Commonwealths, which are
Crimes, contra Jus inter Gentes (quod Jus inter Principes and populos
diversarum Gentium communiter intercedit) how much more for offenses against
private persons that are Crimina solum Jure Gentium, such as are Homicide,
Felony, and Lying, etc.

Now whether that security given to the Legates themselves may be extended to
their followers, comes home to the Portugalls Case. It is a received rule, that
privilegium concessum personae singulari extenditur ad personas accessorias
sine quibus privilegium exerceri non potest. Rebuffus de privilegiis, etc.
privileg. 166. cap. licet. Plut.
de privileg. in 6. (...). And we see it granted at home and abroad to
Ambassadors, their followers being comprehended to use divine service after
their own Country Rites, Argum. le^. 16 ff. d^^ffio. pr^^s. 12 q. 2. cap.
ecclesiar.
and Religion: eademque Privilegia prudentum interpretatione derivantur and
extenduntur ad Comites, cum aequissimum sit oneris and periculi socios quinimo
muneris vicarios, and morum testes, honoris quoque and favoris esse participes.
And therefore they are equally guilty by the Julian Law who have injured either
the Ambassadors or their Comites. ff. ad leg. Ju^. de repub. l. Julia lege. De
Jure Bell. and pac. l. 2. c. 18.. 8
And the most excellent Grotius says, Comites sancti sunt accessorie, and
therefore if they do transgress, the Legate may be demanded to yield them up,
but they are not to be taken away by force, which being once done by the
Achaeans upon the Lacedaemonians (who were in company with the Roman
Ambassadors) the Romans exclaimed The Laws of Nations were broken. Paus. lib.
7.


And if the Ambassadors refuse to deliver up the offenders, satisfaction may
be required of that Prince or State, that commissioned the Legate.

The mere Law of Nature exacts punishments in the place where the Crime is
committed, L^g. 2. God. ubi crim. God ubi sen. leg. 1. ff. l g^ eo fa cto. de
vulg. Subs.
and by the Civil Law, quisque conveniendus est ubi deliquit, vel ubi
reperitur, it seeming to be reason that reatus omnem honorem excluderet, and
that immunitas desineret cum incipit esse damnosa, Yet the Law of Nations
exempts those that come upon public Faith, by which Law many things are
forbidden that are allowed by the Law of Nature. Also by the Canon Law Clerico
delinquenti datur praescriptio fori, And the Civil Law speaks De subditis, who
are to be tried where they have offended.

If Ambassadors and their Comites should be only secured from outrages and
injustice (other men being so far protected) they enjoy no special favor,
or privilege. Besides, the security and remission of an Ambassador and his
Comites, is of more concernment than their punishments, for punishments ought
and may be had from that Prince and State, which sent the Ambassador. And if
they refuse (just interpellati) war may be denounced in vindication. And
therefore those Laws which subject Stangers to the Laws of those Territories
where the Strangers are found, suffer an exception in the persons of Legates
because they represent their Princes. The Civilities and Violations done to
their Ambassadors being esteemed by Princes as done to themselves.

We find him in the Civil Law to be guilty of Treason, ff. leg. 6 ta. ad leg.
Jul. Majest. 19. Obs.
qui statuas aut imagines Imperatoris jam consecratas conflaverit, aliudve quid
simile admiserit: and Cujacius (like our own Law) affirms him guilty of the
penalty in the Law Cornelia: qui monetam vultu Principis signatam conflaverit.
7. Variar.
Cassiodorus brings in King Theodorick speaking, Monetae debet integritas
quaeri, ubi and vultus noster imprimitur; quoduam erit tutum, si in nostra
peccetur effigies, etc. Dio. Ap. in Mithr.
And Philip did therefore overthrow Athens, because the Athenians had but
bespattered his Image with Urine. And if the Abusers of the Statues and
Pictures of Princes, have been so severely handled, how may they be dealt with,
that shall violate the vocal and animate Images of Princes (prope dixerim
animum and Linguam) the Legates themselves.

Idiaco Secretary to Philip the second, King of Spain, told Waad the
Ambassador of Queen Elizabeth, Camd. Eliz.
that the affronts and injuries the Queen had done to Mendoza (anno 1584) as
formerly to Despesi, the Spaniards Ambassadors ( anno 1569.) were offered to
the Catholic King himself.

An Ambassador therefore representing his Prince, enjoyes the same privilege
his Prince should do, were he in another Nation. And there is a notable
President cited out of Fleta, Lib. 2. cap. 3.
that Kings carry an exempt Jurisdiction being in another Nation, where
treating of the Jurisdiction of the Court of Marshalsey, it is said, And these
things they may lawfully do by Office, (that is to say) the Steward of the
Kings household, notwithstanding the liberty of any other, although in another
Kingdom, where the offendour may be found in the Kings house; according to
that which happened at Paris, held in the 14. year of Edw. 1. of one Ingelram
of Nogent, taken in the household of the King of England, (the King himself
being then at Paris) with silver dishes lately stolen, at which deed the King of
France being present; and whereupon the Court of the King of France did claim
Cognizance of the Plea concerning that Theft, by Jurisdiction of the Court at
Paris, the matter being diversely debated in the Council of the King of France;
at length it was ordered that the King of England should use and enjoy that his
Kingly Prerogative of his household; where being convicted (by Sir Robert
Fitz-John Knight, Steward of the Kings household) of the Theft, by consideration
of the same Court he was hanged on the Gallows in St. German's fields.

It may be objected that by this Remission of the offenders to their own
Masters, the like attempts may be encouraged, the Train and followers of
Ambassadors being not stinted by the Laws of Nations, and then, not legatio
sed Legio mittatur, Proc. lib. 2.
whereupon Georgius Romanus, Governor of the City Dara under Justinian the
Emperor, refused to admit the Ambassadors of Cosrhois the Persian King into
the City, being four hundred Persons, lest they might prevail upon the City.

It is replied, No man can justly object his fear of the multitude of
Ambassadors; for my right is not taken away by another man's sear, and so much
the less, because there be many ways of Caution and prevention of danger.

It is true, that Embassies of Congratulation carry more pomp usually than
business, and the Attendants are many; In these Embassies of business, fewer,
because transactions are more expeditious (and more secret) that are managed by
few; And therefore that little beast the Naturalist calls Millepeda, omnium
reptilium tardissimum est animalculum: And though Demetrius taking it heynously
from the Lacedaemonians that had sent only one person in Embassy to him, sic
exclamasse fertur, unum ad me Lacedaemonij? to whom the Legate replied site
and breviter, sed non ad Legationis pompam ac decorem, (...), And Isidor. lib.
4. speaks of Belus rex Babyloniae (who first introduced Commerce by
Ambassadors) that he was content with two: Like old Cato that had one or two
Boys only in his company when he was Ambassador. Plutarch.
Yet our modern Lawyers commend sometimes the splendour of an Embassage, and
our Stories express them most successful in their Treaties, that are most
honorable in their carriage, and Copious in their trains. And Kirchnerus
observes the French to be reputed ignominious by the parsimony of their
Legations.

But heretofore (as well as at present) the Portugalls in their Embassies, as
Warser. de Legate. speaks, Lusitani Regis in Hispaniam legationem instar
exercitus appulisse, and the master of the Household appointed to quarter them,
demanding how many they were, being answered by a Portugal, that they were 500
like unto Gods, and 500 like unto other men in that Embassage, replied that the
God-like should go into the Temples, and these like men into the Inns.

In this delivery of my Judgment, I have not endeavored to flatter my
Contrymen into the usurpation of an illegal privilege, but rather
advertised them to amplify their renown by a generous observation of
Hospitality, and respect to strangers and Ambassadors: and have impartially
searched after truth, because though there is no man before whom I might more
safely err, yet there is none whom I would more unwillingly seduce than my
Second self.

FINIS.

