GOD ALL IN ALL: OR THE HIGHEST HAPPINESS OF THE SAINTS.

Jn two Parts.

The I. Asserting this Happiness to consist in the Enjoyment of GOD. II.
Enquiring into the Quality of that Enjoyment.


Together with a short APPENDIX, wherein is very briefly considered, The claim
of Natural Reason, and private Inspirations to a guidance of us in the things
of GOD. Also what courses dishonor the Gospel, and what Duties we owe it.

By EDWARD BUCKLER, Preacher of the Gospel.

Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee. Psalm. 73.25. London, Printed for Luke Fawn, at the sign of the
Parrot in Paul's Churchyard. 1655.

To the truly, and heartily Religious LADY, Grace Sydenham, Wife to the Right
Honorable Colonel Willam Sydenham, Governor of the Isle of Wight, and one of
his Highness's most honorable Council.
MADAM,
YOu have been pleased to make me an object of your exceeding many and great
favors, which you could not have done, had it not been your principle to be
good, gratis; that I might not miss an occasion (which I may never be able to
offer my self again) of putting this into a public acknowledgement, is much
of what I have to plead for sending you these Papers. I had never any thing to
return you but my thanks, and how much I am hitherto in arrear for due
expressions of it, the less you do account, the more I yet owe you.

The further errand of this discourse is not to tell you where your happiness
is: you know GOD too well to be able to mistake in a concernment of that
consequence, nor to tax you for seeking it where you know it is not; You love
God too well, to suffer any thing in your heart to sit above him. Have not I
observed the delicacie of your spirit, how tenderly you meddle with the Earth,
from a holy jealousy lest your conversation should not be enough in Heaven?
But it is (Madam) to offer it self as a poor instrument in the hand of a great
GOD, of some addition to the heaven you are already in, the comforts of this
here (though not the joys of that hereafter) are capable of an augmentation.
Who can tell, but that even by this means, your Communion with your God may be
furthered? And if but one glimpse the more of divine beauty shine in upon your
soul, and raise but a rapture the more upon your spirit, I shall not be totally
disappointed in what J aim at: And if you saw my heart, you would find it very
full of wishes, that J were able to do you, not better service, but more of
this.

Many do already very well know, and J do hereby publicly declare, That there
is not that man alive, to whom J am so much in debt as to your Honorable
Husband; and very much am I below any possible evidence of gratitude to him,
unless it be of this kind.

If you shall ask, Why then do I not direct this (if this be all) unto
himself? Why! Madam, what do I else in directing it to you? But if this
satisfy not, I must discover my design in doing it by you. It is (to confess
all ingenuously) that this naked acknowledgement, unable otherwise to signify
half enough, might be rendered (by a medium of conveighance so extremely
well-pleasing) sufficiently acceptable. If I miss not here, though I may beg
of you some other favors, you shall never be solicited to do me a greater;
and J shall constantly pray, That the Lord (your exceeding great reward) would
wrap up your soul in the bosom of his love, give you so much of Himself, as
may be had by any means, at any time, and in it a comfortable fore-taste of
what cannot be all had, till you come to enjoy him immediately for ever.
Doubtless I may be guilty of many failings as to other things, but this
retribution for your many favors shall be daily paid, by,

Madam, Your most humble, and very much obliged Servant, EDWARD BUCKLER.

To the pious Reader.
I Have no intent to make an Apology for appearing in Print; for who
constrained me? Or to talk of any influence the importunity of Friends has
had upon these Papers to thrust them out into the world: This were to publish a
supposition of no very great abundance either of friendship or judgment, in
those I stand to in this relation. I have no mind to crave pardon for meddling
with so high and glorious a subject: we are doubtless allowed the
contemplation of what we are promised the fruition. Nor do I go about to excuse
my very weak and unanswerable management of it; is any man bound to
impossibilities? J do not know what you will do, but God accepts according
to what a man has. You have indeed this upon no other account than the sense
of my duty, to pay contribution toward the welfare of the Saints, though out
of my own Parish. J have taxed my self to what I ought, because to what J was
able: If it offer any of your souls an occasion of meeting your God but once
the oftener, you will be no loosers; because the discourse is not qualified unto
any probability of giving you satisfaction, J have purposely chosen a subject
that can do it abundantly. GOD can fill up, and content all the soul; whom J
know you will be glad to converse with by any means, though (if that were
possible) it should be less considerable than this, tendered by

Your unworthy Servant in the things of CHRIST, E.B.

1 COR. 15.28. -- That God may be All, in All.


PART. I.
Sect. I. The Text Explained.
IN this Chapter there be two things, which it is the Apostles principal design
to make good; viz. 1. The Doctrine of the Gospel by the Resurrection of
Christ. 2. The General Resurrection of the dead.


The latter is prosecuted from the twelfth verse forward, of which you have,
the 1. Confirmation by many Arguments. 2. Order of their rising. 3. Quality of
the raised.


The Second only of these is, what we are engaged to take cognizance of, which
the Apostle speaks to, v. 23. -- though we shall all be made alive, yet will it
be done in a certain method, every man in his own order. Christ himself rose
first, as the first fruits of them that sleep; but the whole crop of Christians
shall not rise till his second coming, which the Apostle having mentioned, he
spends the five following verses (by way of digression) in setting down of this
coming of Christ. 1. What shall follow it. 2. To what end.


1. What follows it, you have from Verse 23. to the Text inclusively, in these
five Particulars, viz. 1. The end of the world. 2. The delivery up of Christ's
Kingdom. 3. The putting down of all Rule, and all Authority and Power. 4. The
subduing of all Enemies. 5. The subjection of the Son himself.


2. To what end, and this you have in the Text, That God may be all in all.
That these few words may the better be understood, I shall say a little to each
of these three things, viz. 1. Their reference. 2. Their aim. 3. Their meaning.


First, To what passages of the Chapter do they carry a relation? to me, truly,
they seem to be the result of all, and of each of those five things but now
mentioned: The world shall be ended. Christ's Kingdom shall be delivered up. All
Rule, and all Authority and Power, shall be put down. All Enemies shall be
subdued. The Son himself shall be subject, and all, and every one of these,
That God may be all in all.

Secondly, their aim is to hold us out, wherein consists the Final, and
perfect Happiness of the People of God, they be high expressions, and do
signify some incomprehensible glory, flowing from God himself, which the
Saints shall be filled withal Significatur magnificentissimis istis verbis
incomprehensibilis, quaedam gloria, quae a Deo promanans nos totos, implebit.
Beza in locum.
. We shall be the readier to believe it, if we consider these

Four Particulars.
1. It Is plainly much of the Apostles design in this Chapter, to convince
Believers of a condition hereafter, perfectly glorious and happy; if their
portion in the next world, should be no better then it is in this, they were of
all men most miserable, Verse. 19. which would be abundantly absurd to imagine
of a people for whom Christ dyed.

2. That this happiness is not so complete and full, as it shall be. 1. Till
all enemies be subdued, and the last of all destroyed, which is death. Nor, 2.
So long as Christ reigns by virtue of his Mediatorship, and therefore this
Kingdom must first be delivered up to God the Father.


3. The end of Christ's taking up this mediatory Kingdom (next behither Gods
glory) was the advancement of Believers to the highest pitch of felicity that
they are capable of, and so it cannot be otherwise, but that,

4. The accomplishment of this end must needs fall in with the last result of
the administration of this Kingdom, and that in the language of the Text, is,
That God may be All, in All.

Thirdly, for the meaning of these words, they are a Periphrasis of our
complete enjoyment of God. That God may be All, in All; is, That we may enjoy
him al one to all purposes, Sebast. Mejerus in locum.
Zanch. de 3Ds Eloh. l. 3. c 11.
neither wanting, nor willing any thing besides him, Aqu in locum.
when nothing shall be in us that is not as God himself, Aqu. in locum.
in whom the soul shall totally acquiesce, and who alone shall be its
blessedness.

For a person to be all in all to me, is for me to have such an enjoyment of
him to all purposes, as that I neither do, nor have need to enjoy any thing
else: for God to be so to his Saints, is for them to enjoy, to converse with,
to have to do with nothing, but God.

Look back again upon the relation between these words, and the precedent
verses, and you may discern in them such an enjoyment of God as shall be,

1. Without partners. God shall be all, we shall have nothing else.

2. Without defect. God shall be all, in all: every thing to every purpose.
Deus ipse nobis omnia suppeditabit, quippe qui and cibus nobis, and potus, and
amictus etc. futurus est. Athan. in locum. Deus erit vita and salus, and
virtus, and gloria, and omnia. Aqu. in locum. Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 22. c. 30.


3. Without means. Word and Sacraments and the like, in which God is enjoyed
here, shall cease, that Kingdom where these administrations are made use of,
shall be delivered up, ver. 24.

4. Without opposition. All enemies shall be subdued, Ver. 25.

Without end. Death shall be destroyed, Verse. 26. and even our bodies shall be
raised in incorruption, and shall put on immortality.

All this I conceive to be in the Text, though I cannot say that this is all.

SECT. II. The Doctrines of the Text propounded, and one of them opened.
THe words of the Text do now plainly lay us down these two Propositions, viz.

1. The highest happiness of the Saints, is the enjoyment of God. 2. That
enjoyment of God which is the Saints highest happiness, shall be immediate,
Sole, free, full and everlasting.
First Proposition.
The highest happiness of the Saints is the enjoyment of God.

For the Explication of which, it will be necessary to enquire what 1. The
enjoyment of God is. 2. Is our highest happiness.


First, What is the enjoyment of God?
You may not expect an exact account of this while we are on this side Heaven,
we are not fully agreed what enjoyment is, of which several men have several
apprehensions; and as much as we can well do, is to determine what God is not.
Facilius dicimus quid non sit, quam quid sit. Aug. in Ps. 86.8.
All I shall adventure upon is but this offer, whether to the enjoyment of God
there must not be a concurrence of (at least) these four things, viz.

1. Knowledge of him. 2. Influences from him. 3. Acquiescence in him. 4.
Converse with him.
First, The knowledge of God. We can never enjoy what we have no acquaintance
with, Fruimur cognitis. Aug. l. 10. de Trinit.
our desires cannot so much as move after an unknown object, how much less can
they be satisfied with it. Knowledge is the intellectual eye which the soul
sees by and when our sight shall be at the clearest, our enjoyment shall be at
the highest, 1. Cor. 13.12.

But it must be the knowledge of God in Christ, to know him otherwise, is to
see too much in him of terror, for us to approach unto; a wad of stubble is
not very well qualified for any communion with a consuming fire. We cannot walk
together except we be agreed, Amos 3.3. and God is no where but in Christ,
reconciling sinners unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.19.

Neither is it every Knowledge of God in Christ, that will let us in to the
enjoyment of him, it must be influential upon our hearts and practices; if our
actions drive a trade of contradiction to our intellectuals, and our lives keep
no correspondency without profession, God will not know us, Mat. 7.23. And how
much weaker then a Spiders web, is that poor man's hope, who in such a case
shall but dream to enjoy him? an understanding head is not qualification enough
for this happiness, those whom God owns, are men of understanding hearts.

The Apostles great aim, is the enjoyment of Christ, and its inlet into the
soul, is by the way of the understanding: upon this account it is that he
throws dung in the face of all enjoyments else, that he may know Christ, Phil.
3.8, 9, 10.

And thus whom God means to to hold communion with, he does first let into his
acquaintance, by opening.

1. His own face. 2. Their understandings.
First, His own face, for he is sometimes a God that hides himself, Isa.
45.15. and in such a case is not discernable enough to be enjoied, hence surely
is it, that when the Saints would continue their comfortable apprehensions of
their God, they beseech him not to hide his face from them, Psalm. 143.7. And
when he is at any time out of sight, that darkness is left upon their spirits,
there is no way to set him within their view again, but the lifting up of his
countenance, and the uncovering of his face to shine upon them: and for this it
is that the Saints are so often upon their knees. Lord lift thou up the light
of thy countenance upon us. Psalm. 4.6. Make thy face to shine upon thy servant,
Psalm 31.16. but this is not enough, unless God open,

Second, Our understandings. The Well and Hagar in the Wilderness, were near
enough one to the other, yet till God opened her eyes she did not see it, Genesis
21.19. Christ was with his Disciples, yet whilst their eyes were held they did
not know him, Luke 24.16. look in what degree the Lord is pleased to open our
understandings, in such a degree we apprehend him; even those discoveries of
God that are in Scripture, are by none of us any further receiveable, then
himself makes them way. Christ opened their understandings, that they might
understand the Scriptures, Luke 24.45. He had opened the Scripture before,
Verse. 27. And so there was light enough about the object; but this did not
suffice, till there was light too in the faculty, till he had opened their
understandings to let it in. Our understanding is Dei Infundibulum (so I have
heard it called) Gods Tunnel, which he does enlarge according to the infusions
which he is pleased to afford us of himself. This is the first requisite to
enjoyment, the Knowledge of God. How sad is the condition of ignorant souls?
then may they come to the enjoyment of God, when midnight may dwell in the
sun. What communion has light with darkness, 2 Cor. 6.14.

Secondly, Influences from God. When we receive all that God can afford, and we
are capable of, as assurances of his being ours, and experiences of his being
ours, to all intents and purposes, with that peace passing all understanding,
and that joy unspeakable and full of glory, which is wont to wait upon such a
condition, so Solomon calls that the enjoyment of a thing, when it derives unto
us all the good that it can afford; Eccles. 5.18.

Thirdly, Acquiescence in God, as neither finding contentation in any thing
less, nor desiring a jot more; To enjoy God is Frui, est amore inhaerere alicui
rei propter seipsam. Aq. 1ae. 2ae Qu. 11. Art. 1.
to love God, and to cleave unto him for his own sake. Frui est uti cum gaudio
and delectatione, Lomb. l. 1. Did. 1. c. 8.
It Is to possess God with complacencie, and all possible satisfaction: Suavitas
quaedam de ultimo fine, Aqu. quo sup.
It Is a sweetness tasted in God, even to the ravishing of our affections, as
much of this as is enjoyable here below, you have a relish of in these and the
like Scriptures.

Cant. 2.3.4. Psalm. 73.25. Psalm. 104.34. to which add, That Heaven which is not
above the reach of Saints upon earth, in 1 Pet. 1.8. which Scriptures I hope
you will have time enough to turn to, and dwell upon, till all that delight,
and Sweetness, Acquiescence, Complacencie and satisfaction in God, dropped
thither from the bosom of those Saints, be taken out, and copyed upon your own
spirits.

Fourthly, Converse with God. Then we enjoy him, when he dwells and walks in
us, 2 Cor. 6.16. by his spirit, graces, comforts, when we walk with him upon
earth, Genesis 5.24. and converse with him in Heaven, Phil. 3.20.

Secondly, What is our highest Happiness?
I think their description of Happiness, to be full enough, who make it to
consist in the possession of a perfect good, excluding every evil, and
satisfying every desire Aqu. 1ae. 2ae. Q. 5. Art. 3.
.

1. The Possession. It may be some degree of Happiness to be entitled to such
a good in reversion; but the height of happiness it cannot be, where any thing
desirable is wanting, it is an abatement of felicity.

2. Of a perfect good. All things and every thing, that may be called by that
name, blessedness, is a condition made up of the aggregation of all good
things, not one must be left out; yet is it not necessary that we possess every
good in kind, it is enough that the good we possess, be as much as every good in
value.

3. Excluding every evil, both of sin and suffering, when either of these are
incident to a condition: either that condition is not happy, or these are not
evil, as long as we can either sin or suffer, we are under some degree of
infelicity.

4. Satisfying every desire, when we are so filled with the good we have, that
as we do not want, so we cannot wish a jot more. So you have the point
explained.

SECT. III. The Point propounded, proved by some Scriptures.
AL those Scriptures may pertinently be called in to the making good of this
proposition, which assert our highest happiness to consist in Gods presence, in
being with God, in seeing God, in being satisfied with God, etc. which are all
but diversified expressions of our enjoyment of God. I shall take these that
follow into consideration, Psalm. 16.11. In thy presence is fullness of joy, at
thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

1. Here is fullness of joy, and eternity of pleasures: and is not this a plain
description of our highest happiness? so Christ the Head, had this joy set
before him, Heb. 12.2. and when he puts any member of his into possession of
that Kingdom which was prepared for him from the foundation of the world, his
livery of Seisin is conceived in these terms: Enter thou into the joy of thy
Lord, Mat. 25.21. I have not met with one Exposition, that does not find in
this assertion of David (or rather of Christ in David's person) a plain
description of our highest happiness. But where is all this to be found? Why

2. In Gods presence, or in Gods face, and is not this as plain a description
of the enjoyment of God? the showing of whose face, does signify such a
manifestation of himself, as does let us so into his acquaintance, as we are
wont to be in theirs, with whom we familiarly converse. Sometimes the face of
God seems to be full of frowness, Levit. 20.6. it is his smiling face that is
here mentioned. God has smiles of grace for us, whilst we are in our journey,
Ps. 4.6.
these are smiles of glory, when we shall come home, the twilight of his
Countenance is our enjoyment of him here, the full noon of it shall be so
hereafter.

Psalm. 17.15. I shall be satisfied, when I awake with thy likeness. Here is
every desire full, and what does fill them but Gods Image? some expound this of
Christ, the express Image of his fathers person, Heb. 1.3. and what does this
amount to less then the enjoyment of God? There be three sorts of Images. 1.
Imago representationis so there is something of God in the ininferior
creatures, Romans 1.20. 2. Imago similitudinis; so there is much of God in man,
Genesis 1.26. 3. Imago aequalitatis, and so there is all of God in Christ, Col.
2.9. Others make glory and Image all one, as they are made. 1 Cor. 11.7. and
this the sense, when I shall awake up out of the dust, and have admission to
see and enjoy thy glorious presence, Post hanc vitem contemplando clare Deum.
Lorin in locum.
I shall be satisfied with that object; neither shall I want, or desire any
more.

Mat. 5.8. Blessedness is placed in seeing of God, and who is it that writes
upon this subject, but does deny it to consist in any thing else Vltima and
perfecta beatitudo non potest esse nisi in visione divinae essentiae. Aq. 1ae.
2ae. Q. 3. Art. 8. vid. apud. Dionys. Carhus. in 4. Sent. did. 49. q. 4.
? when Christ prays for the glorification of believers, his request is, They
may be with him. Joh. 17.24. what are the earnest groanings of the Saints for,
but to be present with the Lord? 2 Cor. 5.8. Phil. 1.23. the great comfort that
Paul prescribes against all that death can do, is, That we shall be with the
Lord. 1 These. 4.17. and what is the ods between our grace and glory, but this,
That now we see through a glass darkly, but then we shall see face to face, now
we know in part, but then we shall know even as we are known, 1 Cor. 13.12. to
enjoy God face to face, and to know God in the same manner (for (...) as, is a
note of similitude, not of equality) though not in the same degree that God
knows us, is the top of our beatitude, which in 1 John 3.2. is said to consist
in seeing God as he is, such a vision only being completely beatifical.

SECT IIII. Reasons of the Point.
THat our highest Happiness is the enjoyment of God, the Scriptures (you see)
bear sufficient witness, the reasons why it is so may be wrapped up in this one.

There is in God, what ever is necessary to a perfect happiness, and it is not
in any thing else.

That what our felicity is made up of must be good, is beyond dispute: evil, as
such, cannot be the object of any appetite, much less can it be propounded as
the last end by any agent that is rational, Eustac. Eth. part 1a. in initi^.
Aq. 1ae. 2ae. qu. Art. 1.
yet will not every good reach far enough to make us happy, it must be

1. A pure and simple good. If there be in it any mixture of evil, 'twil never
do it, if it be penal, it is either of sense, and then there is something more,
or else of loss, and then there is something less then can constitute a
blessedness: if it be sinful, the case is worse, because the evil is greater
Culpa habet plus de ratione mali quam paena. Aqu. Part. 1. Qu 48. Art. 6.
, if it be pardoned, yet it is a burden to be groaned under, Romans 7.24. if it
be not, it leaves us open to the Curse, Galat. 3.10.

Now such a good is God, Light in whom there is no darkness at all, 1 John
1.5. Light here below is purissima qualitas, very pure and simple, yet scarce
enough so to be a shadow of that above, which no man can approach unto, 1 Timothy
6.16. God is a good in which there is no evil at all.

But nothing else is so; the goodness of the Creature is mixed with something
that is not good, how could they else be vanity and vexation of spirit? Eccl.
1.14.

2. A sufficient good: Let us (at least in a supposition) be free from evil;
yet if the good we have be not enough, we are under a condition of want and
indigencie, and can that be happiness?

Such is God, a good that is all-sufficient, as he calls himself, Genesis 17.1.
able to afford what ever, is desirable In quo nihil desiderari possit boni.
Zanch. de not. dei l. 4. c. 1. Qu. 1.
an immense fullness, an ocean of goodness, containing in himself all the good
that is in other things with an incomprehensible overplus: There is no good in
Wife, Child, Friend, Health, Beauty, Honor, Learning, Wisdom, Wealth, Power,
etc. but is all found in one God; though not formaliter, the same in kind, yet
eminenter, more infinitely, more than the same in value, Dr. Archbold Ser. in 1
Pet. 1.16. p. 6.
the whole world and God put together are not a jot more excellent than God
alone: For if there be any excellency in the Creature, it is more eminently in
God already, and your addition will signify nothing: Aug. in Ps. 27.9.
Whatsoever God will bestow upon me, let him take it all away, and give me
himself, it was Augustines offer, and he knew his bargain would have been good
enough.

But nothing else is so: All the creatures in the world, if they stand by
themselves are but so many ciphers, unless God (as a solid number) be added to
them they signify nothing: Set God aside, and there is not an all sufficiency
in the whole Creation for one soul. He that has most of the world has not
enough, and he that has least has too much, if he cannot say with him, Omnis
copia quae non est Deus meus, mihi egestas est. Aug. Solil. q.c. 13.
All abundance, if it be not my God, is to me nothing but poverty and want. It
must be

3. A satisfying good; able to fill, quiet, and content the Soul. Delectation
is of the essence of happiness, and is caused by the satisfaction Ex quiet
appetitus in bono adepto. Aqu. 1. 2. Qu. 4. Art. 1.
of our desires in the good which we possess. Whatever we have, if it be not
enough to silence our appetite from craving more, we are short of happiness.

Such is God; beyond whom there being nothing imaginable, its impossible there
should be any thing desirable. Plato himself could define God to be Summum
bonum quo nihil melius excocogitarri potest Ex Zanch. de not. Dei. l. 4. c. 1.
Qu. 1.
the chiefest good, than which nothing better can fall so much as within our
imagination. Surely the good that God is, as well as the good he can do, is
above all that we are able to think, exceeding abundantly above it, Ephesians. 3.20.

But nothing else is so: Leave God out, and whatever you take in, the heart
will still be capable of desiring more; all the world cannot fill it, nor can all
the creatures that it is stockt withal give a complete satisfaction to the
desire of one soul. Is it because what is spherical (as the world is) can never
fill what is triangular (as the heart is) but some places will be still empty? or
is it that our concupiscible faculty is of so large a size that the whole earth
and the fullness thereof cannot fit it? or that no creature can fill two places
at once, as money for example, the chest, and the heart at the same time? or is
it the unsutablenesse that is between that object and this faculty? or is our
appetite raised by having, as a fire is increased by the fuel it is fed
withal? or is it rather because we naturally are carried out after our own
perfection, and so cannot terminate our desires in any thing that is short of
it, as all the creatures are? what ever is the reason of it, sure we are, that
he that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver; nor he that loves
abundance with increase, Eecles. 5.10. As nothing can be the perfection, so
nothing can be the satisfaction of the soul, but he that made it: She will
never be at rest till she rest in God: there is no full contentment in her
pilgrimage, and her only home is Animae patria est Deus ipse. Aug.
God himself; no good but the chiefest can suffice us.

SECT. V. The further illustration of the point.
THere will a little more of light be let in upon the Doctrine, we have under
consideration, from these three particulars.

First: The happiness we have here is that enjoyment of God which we have
here, and look at what rate our enjoyment is, at the same is our happiness,
and for this we will be tried, by 1. God, and 2. His Saints.


First, does not God promise this as the greatest happiness? Exodus 29.45. I
will dwell amongst the children of Israel, and will be their God (i. e.) I will
settle mine habitation and divine presence among you, Ainsw. in locum.
it was the greatest sign of Gods grace toward his people; Id. in Ex. 25.8
and the promise of it is noted to wrap up in it an eminent blessing, 2 Cor.
7.1. compared with chap. 6.16. And on the other side, it is a woe with an
emphasis unto a people when the Lord shall depart from them, Hos. 9.12.

Secondly: Whether the Saints do not look upon that enjoyment of God which is
afforded them on earth, as their greatest happiness, till they shall have more
of it in heaven, is easily resolved by observing in them these five things, viz.

1. Before all things in the world they desire this, Psalm 27.4. One thing have
I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of
the Lord, all the days of my life to behold the beauty of the Lord, etc. To
see, or behold it, is to enjoy it, is this one thing all that David would have?
Do we not ever and anon find him upon his knees before the throne of Grace, for
one blessing or other beside this? We do so; but this one thing especially,
this blessing above any other: This is it that the Saints pant after, as the
Heart pants after the water brooks, Psalm. 42.1, 2.

2. Above all things in the world they prize this; it is not the increase of
Corn and Wine, but the light of Gods countenance which they value, Psalm. 4.6.7.
his loving kindness is better than the life it self, Psalm. 63.3. than any
life, what ingredients soever may be in it to make it valuable: And yet what a
rate are we wont to set our lives at! men will bleed, sweat, vomit, purge, be
cupp'd, scarified, wear issues, plasters, part with an estate, yea with a limb
or two to preserve their lives; as he cries out, give me any deformity, any
torment, any misery, so you spare my life Debilem facito manu, deb^lem pede,
coxa, tuber adstrue gibberum etc. vita dum super st been est.
. It is reported that Queen Elizabeth could not endure so much as to hear death
named Sen. Epist. 101.
; and Lewis the eleventh of France was said to be of the same temper: so do
men prize their lives, but yet a value infinitely above it do the Saints set
upon the enjoyment of God.

3. No loss in the world lies so heavy upon their spirits as the loss of this.
Other afflictions may make him cry, but under this they cannot choose but roar,
Psalm. 38.8. others may make their bones ache, this does break them in pieces,
Psalm. 51.8. is there any pain more tormenting then of broken bones? yet this
does David pitch upon to offer you a guese at that smart which seized upon his
spirit, under a loss of communion with his God. Job can lose his estate, his
servants, his children, and be quiet, Job 1. But when the Arrows of the
Almighty are within him, etc. his grief is then heavyer then the sand of the
Sea, Chap. 6.2.3.4. Outward losses to some men have been unsufferably
afflictive, Roger. Episc. Sarisb. tempore regis Stephani-Exutus opibus in
amentiam versus est Nubrigens.
one being turned out of his estate runs out of his wits ed out of his estate
runs out of his wits Aegeus in mare se praecipitem dedit Plut. vita ejus.
another for the death of a son, throws himself headlong into the Sea. This to
the Saints is comparatively nothing, their great loss is to lose the sight of
their God.

4. Nothing can trouble them, whilst they have this, Psalm. 23.4. Though I walk
through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: There is danger
enough, the hazard of life is as little as can be signified by the shadow of
death, can death it self be far, when we are within, yea when we walk through
the shadow of it? or take the valley of the shadow of death to signify so
thick a darkness as the grave is covered withal, whether death carries us; yet
it is a supposition of a condition black and dreadful enough, how hard a matter
is it, not to have some degree of affrightment upon us in the dark? not to be
afraid of the terror by night has, and therefore needs a divine promise,
Psalm. 91.5. Augustus that great Emperor, durst not sit in the dark nisi aliquo
assidente Suet. vita ejus.
without company, and was it not in thoughts from the visions of the night,
that fear come upon Job, and trembling which made all his bones to shake, Job.
4.13.14. amongst those very many acceptations of darkness which are in
Scripture, does one of them signify any thing that is not uncomfortable? Here
is you see matter enough of danger, yet no fear of it, and whence all this holy
security, but from the presence of God? I will fear no evil for thou art with
me: See also Psalm. 27.1.2.3. much to the same purpose.

5. Nothing can comfort them if they want this. Hoc scio do^ine deus meus, quia
ubicunque sum sine te male est mihi Aug. Soliloq. cap. 13.
What wanted David of any outward blessing, when those expressions fell from
him, in Psa. 30.6.7. In my prosperity I said I shall never be moved. Lord by
thy favor thou have made my Mountain to stand strong; but see what follows:
Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled, thou withdrewedst the sense of
thy favor and loving kindness, Mollerus in loc.
which I had fondly enjoyed, and miserable comforters did I then find all other
enjoyments, and indeed: When God gives quietness, who then can make trouble?
and when he hides his face, who then can behold him? whether it be done
against a Nation, or against a man only, Job 34.29.

This is one thing that does illustrate the point we have in hand: That at what
rate our enjoyment of God is here below, at the same is our happiness; and for
this the Lord himself and his Saints, have given in their verdict,

2. Gods own blessednessse does consist in the enjoyment of himself: For if we
believe the Schoolmen, Lomb 1. Did. 1. g.
he does not enjoy any thing else: he has some use of the Creatures, but no
Fruition, or if he had, there is not in them that absolute freedom from evil,
nor perfection of goodness which is requisite unto happiness that must needs
be Gods blessedness which he aims at, and rests in as his utmost and last
end; but that God in all his actions and administrations aims at, and rests
so in himself, besides the testimony of diverse Scriptures, Pro. 16.4. Apo.
1.8. Romans 11.32. Apo. 4.11 Is. 43.7.21.
seems even by reason it self not impossible to be demonstrated: Let us look
upon these

Six Propositions.
1. Prop. All things in their motions and actings, aim at some end or other
which they may Acquiesce and rest in Arist, 2. Phys. c. 8. Text. 77. etc.
. If this Proposition were doubted, it would be proved by another, that God and
Nature do nothing in vain.

2. Prop. The end of all designs and actings (at least in every reasonable
nature) is something that is good, either truly so, or in appearance, (see
before Sect. 4. about the beginning) hence is good in general defined to be
that which all do desire Id quod omnia appetunt. Arist. 1. Eth.
.

3. Prop. The last end of all motions and actings in every reasonable nature,
is the chiefest good: All, even natuturally desiring to be blessed and happy
Scot. in 4. Sent. ^ist. 49. Q. 9.
, though many do not distinctly know what happiness is, or which is the way to
it.

4. Prop. If there were no blindness in our understandings, that we could with
clearness apprehend what the chiefest good were, nor any perversity in our
wills to rebel against the dictates of our understandings, we should then
particularly and distinctly aim at it, and rest in it.

5. Prop. This chiefest good is God; being good naturally, independently,
perfectly; and the only cause of all that good, which is any where else.

6. Prop. God perfectly and disstinctly knows himself to be the chiefest good
Aq. part 1. Q. 14. Art. 2.3.
, his understanding is infinite, Psalm. 147.5. From all which it seems to look
like an impossibility that God should aim at, or rest in any thing as his last
end but himself. This is the Second. The blessedness of God himself is the
enjoyment of himself before any thing else was, he was the blessed God,
neither has he received any addition to his happiness by the things which he
has made.

Thirdly: The greatest misery of the damned in hell is, that they are denied
the enjoyment of God Biel exposit. Can. miss. lect. 33. e.
; this is enough to make a hell of it self, yea it has ten thousand hels in
the womb of it. What is that darkness which the damned are threatened to be
cast into? not the absence of the light of the Sun; for the Saints in heaven
have not this light, because they need it not, and how should such a darkness
be any punishment to the condemned Angels, who never made any use of such a
light? It is rather the absence of the light of heaven, which is God himself
See Willet Synops. cont. 20. Q. 5.
. Surely that the damned are said to weep and to gnash their teeth, does
proceed from the greatest of their torments, which Christ tells us shall be from
this, when they shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets
in the Kingdom of God, and they themselves thrust out, Luke 13.28.

Punishment of sense, though it be infinite as to the duration of it, yet as to
its extremity we may have leave to judge otherwise: for if it were infinite
(not to mention how inconsistent this would be with that diversity of degrees
in the pains of hell, which (with good countenance from Scripture Mat. 11.24.
Mat. 23.14, 15. Luke 12.47, 48.
) is by many believed;) it would follow that God could not punish them a jot
more, but it is a medium by which we are wont to prove the Lords omnipotency,
that he never does so much in reference to the creature, but that he is still
able to do more Zanch. de not. Dei, l. 3. c. 1. q. 3.
: So what the damned suffer in their pain of sense is but a finite evil, what
they are excluded from in their pain of loss, is an infinite good. It Is in
Gods power to lay upon them a greater evil than what they suffer, it is not in
his power to deny them a greater good than what they want.

SECT. VI. First Use, for information.
LEt us from this Doctrine in the first place, see what may be concluded for
the better information of our judgments. It follows,

First, That God is of a transcendent and infinite goodness; both

1. In himself: Many good things do we read of in the Scripture, and of many
persons that are passed under that character Act. 11.24.
, and yet we are told again, that there is none good but one, that is God, Mat.
19.17. Are there contradictions in the Scripture? or is not this the meaning,
that goodness is not any where at the rate that it is in God? It Is in God
originally, it is in the creature but by way of participation; in him as in a
fountain, in them but as in a vessel; in him universally, in them but to some
purposes; in him an ocean, in them but a drop; theirs so deficient that they
need something else to their happiness in earth; Gods so full, that we shall
need nothing else to our happiness in heaven. How transcendently good is our
God, that even in heaven it self nothing but himself can make us blessed! we
have none in heaven but him, Psalm 73.25. and,

2. To all his people, that he will bestow himself upon them: What he promised
to the Father of the Faithful he will make good to all his children, he will
be our exceeding great reward, Genesis 15.1. not causally in giving other things,
but formally in giving himself, the reward and the rewarder shall be all one:
Said the Angel to Abraham, Now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have
not withheld thy son, thine only son from me, Genesis 22.12. May we not a little
vary the expressions, and send them back again? Lord, now we know that thou
love man, seeing thou do not withhold thy self, thine own self from him.
Let out your understandings to the uttermost, and conceive if you can, what,
and how great a good that is which is God himself Aug. in manuali cap. 33.
Quantu^ and quale est illud bonum quod deus est.
.

Secondly: That of those things which are afforded us here below, in such of
them there is most of happiness, in which there is most of the enjoyment of
God. In his Ordinances especially is God wont to communicate, and to offer
himself to be enjoyed, there is his presence in the midst of us, Mat. 18.20.
there he walks, Apoc. 2.1. there his beauty is to be beheld, Psalm. 27.4. the
God and King of his Saints may be seen going in his Sanctuary, Ps. 68.24. here
is most of God; and see if the Scriptures do not place here, upon this
account, most of happiness, Psalm. 65.4. Ministerii externi commendatio
diligenter hic est observanda, etc. Mollerus in locum.
Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto thee, that
he may dwell in thy Courts, he shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy
house; even of thy holy temple. Read the 84 Psalm, and if David may be judge
there is more of heaven in the Ordinances, than can be enjoyed any where else,
till we come thither.

Thirdly, That those men give us a false draught of heaven, who do not place
it in the enjoyment of God. The Heathens had their Elysium -- per amplum
mittimur Elyzium. Virg. Aen. 6. v. 744.
, where they supposed good men's souls to take up their habitation Vbi piorum
animae habitant.
, which some place in the earth, some in the Firmament, others in the sphere of
the Moon, full of all delights that are imaginable Vives in Aug. in civit. dei.
l. 21. c. ult
but these poor souls knew not God. The Turks have their Paradise where they
expect a felicity in the enjoyment of silken Carpets, pleasant Rivers,
fruitful Trees, beautiful Women, Music, good cheer, and choice Wines,
precious Stones, Gold and Silver, Plate, and such conceits as these Rosse View
of all Religions,. 6. p. 146.
. And what have Vid. Martiniu^ de vera Religione in 8vo. p. 119.120.
some dreamed of even amongst Christians? Sure some of a (...) a return of the
soul into another body; some of an eternal life, somwhere out of the kingdom
of God; others of a happiness made up of sensuality and the pleasures of the
flesh, and many ignorant persons called Christians amongst us, have but a very
little more refined apprehensions of the joys of heaven; supposing them no
others than may very near be enjoied by the beasts of the field. This is a
happiness fancied by those who cannot taste what God is, which must first be
done, before we can so much as guess what heaven is.

Fourthly: That amongst those many pretenders to a desire of going to heaven,
the greatest number do it either not knowingly, or not heartily; for as much as
they desire not the enjoyment of God. Is this a slander? oh how contentedly,
how joyfully should I do penance for reporting it, did it not appear to be a
sad truth.

1. In some by their proclamation of defiance to the ordinary means and ways
of enjoying God; and are not the Ordinances of the Gospel such? and how
sufficiently these have been mocked, and buffeted, and spit upon, is too well
known. Yea have there not been clamours that they might be crucified? How many
will not at all own them, how many do seldom or never use them? there be a
woeful number that will have nothing to do with preaching, or praying, that
will not so much as call upon God once or twice a day in their families, you
cannot mention an ordinance, but they are above it; do these men desire to
enjoy any communion with God, who will neither hear him, nor speak to him? yea
not so much as bid him good night, or good morrow?

Object. There be many good people, who doubtless desire to enjoy God, who own
not the Ordinances, etc.

Sol. To that fancy of enjoying God here without Ordinances, I may speak
something when I shall come to the second Doctrine, Sect. 2. In the mean time,
as to the goodness of the persons, I shall lay before you these four
particulars.

1. Perhaps all the testimony they have of their goodness is from themselves,
or from others very near of the same character, or at best from the mistaken
charity of such as are godly indeed. However

2. This is no expression of their goodness, being a sin against the precepts
and directions of the Gospel. See 1 These. 5.17.20. Heb. 10.24.

3. It Is not a goodness that good men formerly were wont to be guilty of. David
was not. See Psalm. 27.4. and 84.1, 2, etc. and 122.1. If these three, Noah,
Daniel, and Job were here, they would not do so. See 2 Pet. 2.5. Dan. 6.10. Job
23.12.

4. 'T was not accounted goodness in the days of old, not in the time of
Solomon, Prove. 28.9. nor of Isaiah, Is. 30.9, 10. nor of Jeremiah, Ier. 11.10.
nor of Christ, Luke 11.28. nor of the Apostles, Acts 13.46. We must find out
a new definition of goodness, or some other way to express ours than by
laying aside the Ordinances of God.

2. In others, by their trading in those practices which they cannot expect the
enjoyment of God in. There be diverse (even among pretenders to Religion) who
walk licentiously and loosely, spending a great part of their precious time, in
rioting and drunkenness, chambering and wantonness, for whom the Apostles
character of those whom he could not mention without tears is as fit as if it
had been made for them, Phil. 3.18. Do these men desire the enjoyment of God,
who daily put themselves into an incapacity of it? are not these practices
works of darkness, Romans 13.12? and is not God light, 1 Ioh. 1.5? and what
communion between these two, 2 Cor. 6.14? Pray read 1 Ioh. 1.6. and chap. 2.
ver. 4.6.

Fifthly: That the greatest enemies that a people can have, are such as would
strip them of the means they have of enjoying God. See what brake Ely's neck,
and his Daughter in laws heart, 1 Samuel 4.18. etc. And what ingredients made up
the Churches bitter Lamentations, Lam. 2.6, 7, 9. Those are none of our friends
who would put us into so sable a dress, to mourn over the Funerals of our
Religion: Or if you will needs say you are, we beseech you express your
friendship to us some other way.

SECT. VII. The second Use, of Reproof to such as place their happiness in the
enjoyment of the world.
IF our highest happiness be in the enjoyment of God, where shall we find, or
how shall we make a reproof sharp enough for their folly who place it in the
enjoyment of outward things? whether there be any such or no, I shall no
otherwise determine than by leaving every Reader to an application of these
three things, viz.

First: Do we look so far as, and no further than the world, in our
thoughts, studies, designs, etc. then is the world our happiness: if we
thought it to be in any thing beyond it, we would look further; it is as
possible not to be, as not to look every jot as far as we suppose any
happiness may be found.

Secondly: Do we spend more of the strength and spirits of our soul for the
world than we do for God? has it, not the ordinary actings, but the intension
and utmost vigor of our hearts? our operations stretched to the highest pin?
ex. gr. the highest search of our invention to find out means to get it? the
highest reach of our reason and judgment, to determine whether this or that
(suppose this sin, or that duty) be the nearest way to it? the exactest strain
of our diligence to act according to this prudent determination? Do we move
toward it with the strength of our affections? And be our fears and
jealousies never so deep concerning any thing, as, lest we should miscarry
about it? doubtless the mind would not be carried out at such a rate, after
any thing less than a supposed happiness; where all our heart is, there is
all our treasure.

3. Are we wont to deliberate about owning of our God? whether it be safe,
prudent, advantageous? but to be resolute, and never put it to the question,
about prosecuting the things of the world? then assuredly is the world our
utmost end; the very top of our felicity, it never comes under debate whether
that which is our last end should be pursued, or no De fine non est
aeliberandum.
. If any of us be found in this predicament, the Lord make us see our folly, to
express it is not possible. Can any of these things here below make us happy?
I shall call you out no further then experience. Is happiness

1. In Riches? I do not remember you of their Luke 8.14. 1 Timothy 6.10.
thorns whilst they stay; nor of their wings Prove. 23, 5.
, to be gone. Only you may not forget him who had more wealth than he knew
what to do with, to have died a fool, Luke 12.17.20.

In Pleasures? which way then went Dives into that place of torments, Luke
16.23.28? And what beast is it that may not be accounted happier than we?

3. In honors? no English man, I hope, is so simple as to believe it, who has
seen the fountain of it dropping its last upon a scaffold, and most of the
vessels filled by him, emptied into the dust. If you labor for these things,
or ought else of the like nature, you labor for the wind, Eccl. 5.16. And to
lay out for it time, strength, spirits, wit, wisdom, body and soul, must needs
be a folly of the first magnitude.

SECT. VIII. The third Use, of Exhortation.
LEaving then out of our hearts those vain things that cannot profit us, let us
be exhorted to fill them up with that which can, scorning to waste our spirits
about the enjoyments of the world where happiness is not, let us employ all
our strengthin laboring after the enjoyment of God, where it is, the more we
can possess of this, the more we have of heaven. It Is doubtless our sin as
well as misery, that we should need any motives to such a duty, indeed to such
a privilege as this is; but because we do, I shall lay down this one, viZ.

The transcendent excellency of this enjoyment above all others, and that both
in regard of 1. The Object, God. 2. The Act, Fruition.


First, in regard of the Object, God. In whom

1. There is nothing that is not amiable, and desirable; whatever is not good,
perfect, excellent, to be sure that is not God. Divine beauty is unmixt, look
upon the choicest of the Creatures, Est aliquid quod se dedecuisse putes.
and if there be beauty, there be also blemishes; not so our God, you cannot
attempt to describe him, but removing from him all imperfection: If all beauty
cannot draw out our souls, and melt them into ardent desires of fruition, then
nothing can.

2. There is in God every thing that is good and lovely. Divine beauty is
complete and perfect, there is nothing in the world for an affection to close
with, that is not in him: If it be Greatness, and Power, and Glory, and
Victory, and Majesty, they are all his, 1 Chronicles. 29.11. If it be peace he is
the very God of it, 1 These. 5.23. If it be wealth, the Heaven, even the Heavens
are the Lords, Psalm. 115.16. If it be love, God is love, 1 Ioh. 4.8. and what
ever else you can imagine that is desirable.

3. These and all perfections else are in God, in an unparralleld way of
eminency, not of the sieze they are in us; that one Volume contains more, then
the several editions of all the creatures, that are under Heaven, or in it:
what is scattered elsewhere is but a drop to this Ocean. We may speak
excessively of other things, but not of God.

4. The Beauty that is in God, is permanent, it is everlasting, not fadeing and
perishing as the Creatures is, out of whose garden every day plucks a flower
Florem decoris finguli carpunt dies.
. Yea, the Heavens themselves, which for their pre-eminence of beauty, are
called, praestantissimum Corpus, a most excellent piece indeed, and are by some
supposed to consist of Ex quinta essentia.
a finer matter then any of the four Elements, which go to the making up of
other beauties; even these glorious bodies shall wax old as does a garment,
etc. Heb. 1.11. it is God only that has immortality, 1 Timothy 6.16. and in whom
there is no variableness, etc. Jam. 1.17.

5. All the beauty and goodness that is in the Creature, is of Gods putting
there, and what ever is in the effect, is more eminent in the cause, how
glorious is that Sovereign of the skies, the Sun, and that Queen of Heaven the
Moon! There is beauty in the Heavens; how gallantly are they bespangled with
Stars! There Is beauty in the Earth, how finely is it embroidered with fruits and
flowers! There is beauty in men, women, etc. how much more is there in God that
made them? that little that is in the channel does many times extreemly ravish
us, and we are sick of love till we can enjoy it, what should not that do that
is in the Fountain? Si sic in creaturis laboremus quid in ipso Deo?
if the Creatures have so much, their maker cannot challenge less then all.

6. When we have said and imagined all that we can of the excellency of God,
when we are swallowed up and and have lost our selves under the contemplation
of it, we come infinitely short of what is indeed in him. Nullus intellectus
creatus potest deum cognoscere ut cogn^scibilis, est Aq. par. 1. q. 12, Art. 7
God is in all his glorious perfections incomprehensible.

Now truly if there be nothing in God that is not desirable, nor a want of any
thing that is; if what ever we dote upon in the Creature, be no more then a
spark to that sun, and that too, let down from that Father of Lights; if all
the beauty and goodness we can see in him, be short of what indeed it is, and
all that is, be everlasting, to supply sufficient matter for our delight and
complacencie to all eternity; how excellent is the enjoyment, when this God
shall be the Object of it.

2. In regard of the Act, Fruition, which (as we have seen already Sect. 2.
) is a cleaving unto God by love, for his own sake, as the choicest emanation
of the soul, is love; so of all loves that which pitcheth upon God, which is
then in its highest glory and excellency, when it carries out the soul after
him, for his own sake; for the good that is in him, rather then the good that
comes by him. This love has most of excellency in it, whether you look upon.
1. The kind of it. 2. The degree.


First, Its a love of a Nobler kind, flowing from higher principles, refined
from those dregs that lie at the bottom of other loves. Ex. gr.

1. We may love God merely because he is able to do us good, having all in him,
that is wanting in us. This is but Amor indigentiae, a necessitous love, and
has something of self in the composition of it, and we may

2. Love God merely that he may do us good; This is Amor concupiscentiae, a
mercinary love, as like to theirs as it can look who followed Christ for
loaves, Ioh. 6.26. and is not so much a love of God as of our selves, and we may

3. Love God because he has done us good, given us health, peace, etc. this at
best is but Amor gratitudinis, a thankful love, and may easily flow even from a
good nature; but the love that is in Fruition, is of another character, when
God is loved for himself. Then.

1. The desires of the soul are carried out after him with a large wing,
thirsting after him as a dry and parched land for rain, Psalm. 63.1. and panting
after him as the chased heart for the brooks of water, Psalm. 42.1. to whom she
thinks she can never be near enough; and there is not any way of Communion that
she does not ardently long to meet him in. To see him, and to gaze upon his
beauty as long as she lives, Psalm. 27.4. To hear him, his mouth is most sweet,
his lips are like Lillies, and every syllable is Myrrh that droppeth from them,
Cant. 5.13.16. To be in his arms, one hand must be under her head, and the
other must embrace her, Cant. 8.3. Yea, to be in his very heart, and to be set
there as a seal, Cant. 8.6. Yea all the familiarities that God affords her here
do not satisfy; to be in the body is to be at too great a distance, and is
upon that account a burden that she groans under, 2 Cor. 5.4. A dissolution is
looked upon as far better, Phil. 1.23. toward a fuller enjoyment of him, no
pace will serve but the swiftest, Cant. 8. ult. and her prayer is not only
Come Lord Jesus, but come quickly, Apoc. 22.20.

Where art thou Lord (says Augustine Soliloq. cap. 1.
) why do thou hide thy face? Perhaps thou will say, No man shall see me and
live: Eia domine moriar, ut te videam, if that, Lord, be all, let me dye upon
that condition. This now is amor unionis, a desire of enjoying God as
immediately as we may. When God is loved for himself, Then

2. The soul is possessed with a full contentment in God, as portion enough,
Psalm. 16.6. She will see more in him than in all the world beside, and there
will rest Ama illud bonum in quod sunt omnia bona, and sufficit. Aug. manual.
c. 34
(see before Sect. 2.) this is amor complacentiae, a love made up of nothing
but delight. And

3. The soul will be inclined to all possible compliance with God, that love
which ties us to him for his own sake, is an imperative affection, it will lay
us at his feet, 1 Cor. 13.7. it will never give us leave to say of any duty
that God commands us, that it is either dangerous, see Dan. 6.10. Acts 4.18,
19. or Quid non cogit amor? nihil amantibus durum nullus labor difficilis.
difficult, Joh. 20.15. or tedious In eo quod amatur, aut non labor laboratur
aut amatur.
, Genesis 29.20. 1 Ioh. 5.3. or unprofitable, of so excellent a kind is this love
of God; it is amor amicitiae, a friendly love. And

Secondly; for the degree of it, it is a ravishment of spirit, Raptus ex
intuitu divinae pulchritudinis ortus.
even unto sickness, Cant. 2.5. begotten by a contemplation of divine beauty;
it is amor inebrians, prevailing upon the soul even to a spiritual drunkenness;
it is love intended to the uttermost, the highest strain that the heart can
reach unto: Other things does such a soul think may be loved too much, but the
measure by which she loves God, is to love him without measure; it is love as
hot as fire, not glowing a little in the ashes, but affording most vehement
flame, Can. 8.6. nay heat in fire may be put out by a little water; many waters
cannot quench this, Can. 8.7. as it was said of Laurence frying upon the
Gridiron Segnior fuit ignis, qui foris ussit, qua^ qui intus accendit.
, The fire without was less than the flame within; it is a love that moves our
bowels which an ordinary qualm of affection can never do, Cant. 5.4. Such
impressions can it make upon believers, when it is duly acted, who do bear
about upon their souls (as Paul did in his body) the marks of the Lord Jesus,
Gal. 6.17. but we cannot yet give over so sweet a theme, let me offer you a
further taste of its excellency in these four particulars.

1. God himself takes it into his proprieties, if it be not rather his very
essence; God is love, 1 John 4.8. and God is nothing but what is excellent.

2. It is the womb of all duties else which we owe to God, and 'twill bring
them forth as occasion shall be offered, as Augustine Domiue dilige, and fac
quicquid vis.
said to Christ, God does freely say us, First love me, and then do what you
will.

3. All our abilities, all our doings and sufferings will find no
entertainment above, unless this love of God give them a certificate, that
they came from her. See 1 Cor. 13.1, 2.

4. It Is something that this will continue to be a duty, when most duties else
shall be obsolete, and out of date; they are practicable on earth, this in
heaven. They have their time, this its eternity.

Now if there be so much of excellency in the Object, God, and in the Act,
Fruition, this is motive enough, if the Lord will vouchsafe to set it on, to
aspire after the enjoyment of God, above all the enjoyments else that are under
the Sun.

SECT. IX. Some brief Directions as to the forementioned Duty.
IF the Saints would be as much in heaven as is here possible, and grow up more
and more in this unspeakable happiness of enjoying God, they must follow these
directions.

First, you must endeavor to increase your knowledge of God, and your
acquaintance with those excellencies that he is clothed withal. Much of that
time which you spend in the study of other things, will be very well worth the
redemption to be laid out upon this. Incognitum non potest amari. Aug.
What you do not know, you cannot love, what you do not love, you cannot so
much as desire to enjoy. There must be some appresion of the object before
there can be any motion of the faculty toward it. See before Sect. 2.

Secondly, you must endeavor to get and maintain an assurance of your interest
in God; give all diligence to put this out of question, 2 Pet. 1.10. If there
be never so much beauty, goodness, love, power, grace, holiness, etc. in God,
you can never enjoy it, in case it be not, or you think it is not there for
you. Fruition does presuppose propriety, and some knowledge of it. He that is
in his sins God will not own him, and he that is in Christ, and yet doubts it,
will not easily be persuaded to own God; and be sure to build your assurance
upon good grounds. I have read of a melancholy man, that supposed all the Ships
in such a Haven to be his own Thrasilaus putavit omnes naves in Pireum portum
appella ntes suas esse.
; and of a Gentlewoman in Mantua, who would not be persuaded but that she was
married to a King Marcel. Donatus de hist. med. mirab. l. 2. c. 1.
; as that poor man enjoyed those vessels which he had no title to an inch of,
and that woman the husband whom she never saw, so do those men God who have no
interest in him but in a dream.

Thirdly, abate of your desires to enjoy other things. Love not the world; that
is, Let not your hearts go out immoderately after it; if any man do so, the
love of the Fathers is not in him, 1 Ioh. 2.15. A River let out into many
channels, must needs run the shallower in some. It Is grown into a Proverb, that
those persons who love over-many, are never wont to love overmuch Alterius
vires subtrahit alter amor.
. The love of God and of the world are like two buckets in a Well, while one
goes up the other goes down. We must leak our hearts, and let out all that is
too much of our love to the world, they will then be the better at leisure to
contemplate the beauty, and to be ravished with the excellencies of our God.
Shall we suffer any thing to be competitors for our hearts with him? What is
the enjoyment of a wife, a child, a friend, an estate, an office, a command, to
the enjoyment of a God? Indeed what is any thing to him, before whom all the
Nations of the world are less than nothing, Isa. 40.17?

Fourthly, walk close with God; the nearer you walk up to him, the more you are
like to enjoy of him. More particularly,

1. Walk lovingly: Let all your doings be done in charity, 1 Cor. 16.14. Let
Gods love in your souls be as a weight in the scale Quod est pondus in libra,
hoc est amor in anima.
, carrying all your designs its own way. Let this love be the poize of all
your actions, and go no other way but whither this shall lead you Amor meus
pondus meum, illo feror, quocunque feror.
. Draw out the exercise of this grace, as far upward toward God as you are
able. Love is a sociable affection, it will carry you into the company of God,
and bring him into yours; you are promised so much in Ioh. 14.23. If a man love
me, my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with
him.

2. Walk beleevingly: Keep your eye of Faith as open as you can; you have no
way else of seeing him who is invisible, Heb. 11.27. Neither is God wont to
dwell in our hearts but by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. If this eye of our soul be shut or
drowsy, we may say with Augustine, Mecum eras, and non eram tecum, God was
with us, but we were not with him. We can have no converse, even with those
friends that are about us, whilst we are asleep. In a word,

3. Walk holily: This is to walk with God, Genesis 5.24. and to have our
conversation in heaven, Phil. 3.20. then is God most enjoyed, when a gracious
life shall go along an equal pace with a gracious heart; if the Saints cannot
sin themselves out of Gods favor, yet they may out of his familiarity. How
often in Scripture is peace, and comfort, and the enjoyment of God, promised
unto his people in a way of holiness? See Psalm, 50.23. Galat. 6.16. Phil. 4.8,
9. Pretend what you will you converse but a little with God, who converse much
with sin. See 2 Cor. 6.16. 1 Ioh. 1.6, 7.

SECT. X. Of the enjoyment of God in Ordinances.
BEcause the most ordinary way of Gods conversing with his Saints here in the
body is by his Ordinances, as we have in part seen before Sect. 6. I shall
enquire briefly into the causes why the Saints many times enjoy so little of
God in them, that they may see and remove those abatements of their felicity.
Is it not

1. Because we do not seek God in his Ordinances? but think we may enjoy as
much of him any where else? To how many are the Ordinances of God as
indifferent things? If once it become indifferent to men, whether they eat and
drink, or not; no wonder if they find neither their palats pleased, nor their
bodies nourished.

Qu. May not God be enjoyed, his goodness, love, and sweetness tasted, out of
Ordinances as well as in them?

Sol. If this may be, yet see whether.

1. It be to be injoied by those that neglect his Ordinances? What did the King
do, when such as were invited to his feast made light of it, did he carry, or
send his Provisions after them, that they might fare as well at their Farms,
and Merchandise, as at his Table? you will find it otherwise, if you read Mat.
22.7. Or,

2. It be so much of God as is wont to be enjoyed when we meet him in his
Ordinances? if it be, why have not the Saints been contented with it? see Psalm.
27.4. and 48.9. and Psalm. 84.1, 2, etc. places that may better be tasted then
explained. Or,

3. It be not rather a re-tasting, and rellishing again of that sweetness and
comfort which was left upon the Soul, when God in his Ordinances communicated
himself unto us, a making good of that gracious promise of Christ, in Joh.
14.26.

Ob. But diverse Saints that do constantly use the Ordinances, do yet complain
how little of God, they enjoy in them.

Sol. This perhaps may be:

2. Because we do not seek God there; or not seek him principally, possibly we
rest too much in them, and do not send up our souls to God through them, we do
not carry our hearts high enough, but are ready to take in satisfaction merely
from the work done, seeking that in the Ordinances, which we shall never find
but in God. Let us rectify this miscarriage, we shall not undervalue the
Ordinances to account them empty things unless God fill them, Wells of
Salvation, but no Water there for us, Breasts of Consolation, but Dry ones, no
milk for us, unless we can taste and feed upon God in them; if we would enjoy
our God, we must be pleased with nothing, no not in the Sanctuary, unless we
can see our God, and our King walking there, Psa. 68.24. Or,

3. Because we do not seek God in all his Ordinances; some Christians are
altogether for private Ordinances, and do despise the public; some for public
Ordinances, and neglect the private, if we will not meet God in one, can we
expect that God should meet us in another? if we neglect Christ's company in the
midst of two or three in private, Mat. 18.20. may he not walk in the midst of
the Candlesticks in public, and not suffer us to see him? Apoc. 1.13. pray
consider that those Saints who have sought God in all his Ordinances, as their
duty, have found him in every one of them to their comfort, see Psalm. 42.4. and
63.5, 6. Cant. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Or,

4. Because we do not seek God there after a due order, 1 Chronicles. 15.13. with
that frame and temper of spirit, that preparation of Heart and Soul which is
requisite. Perhaps

1. Prepossessed, too full, and too well satisfied with some thing else, now
truly Intus existens prohibet alienum.
, if the Stomach be full, though it be but with husks that the Swine do eat, it
will taste but little sweetness, even in that bread which is in our fathers
house: Or

2. Without prayer, that God would let fall influences from himself, through his
Ordinances upon us, do not we know that God expects some employment, as he is a
God hearing prayers? Psa. 65.2. Ezekiel. 36, 37. We have not, because we ask not,
Jam. 4.2. can we expect, that God should look upon those that will not so much
as speak to him?

This for the first part, our highest happiness is the enjoyment of God, we
must now consider the quality of that enjoyment.

Part. II.
WE have seen in general, that the highest Happiness of the Saints is the
enjoyment of God, it remains that we now inquire, what kind of enjoyment it
must be, in order whereunto we shall take into consideration the

2d Proposition. That enjoyment of God which is the Saints highest Happiness,
shall be immediate, sole, free, full, and everlasting.
Each of which five particulars, I shall endeavor to prove and apply, as they
lie in order.

SECT. I. That our highest Happiness shall be to enjoy God immediately.
HEre below we enjoy God by means, not so hereafter, not in Ordinances, graces,
blessings, or through any such Mediums, as we enjoy him now, all these, though
they be great conducements to that happiness, which we are capable of on
earth, they be yet great abatements of that, which we shall be crowned withal
in Heaven, to enjoy a friend in his picture, letters, tokens, is short of what
we enjoy, when we have his personal presence; neither does the Sun heat, or
light us so comfortably through a cloud, as when the glorious body of it is
open to us, without any interposition: our happiness in God will be without
its perfection, till our enjoyment of God, shall be without means Deus sine
ullo mediatore aut medio causa immediata erit -- and objectum immediatum
nostrae felicitatis, Zanch. de not. Dei. l. 2. c. 8.
. Let us consider:

1. Christ's Kingdom shall be delivered up, that God may be all in all, (i. e.)
all Ordinances, and administrations, which are means of our enjoying God here,
shall cease and expire, that we may be fully and completely happy,, Christ has
some things in his Kingdom, that bears an Analogy to the means and instruments
of governing in the Kingdoms of men, and in each of them is God injoyable. He
has his Militia and his laws, with promises and threatenings in the Ordinances
of his Word; his Seals to confirm to his people, his free grants of privilege,
in the Ordinance of his Sacraments; his Ambassadors and Offieers for the
management of spiritual affairs in the Ordinance of his Ministry, the ceasing
of Christ's Kingdom is the cessation of all these, that God may immediately
succeed to fill up the measure of our promised blessedness to the full.

2. All Rule, and all Authority and Power must be put down, ver. 24. which (
Aqu. in locum Mr. Jo. Goodwins (...) p. 15.
diverse expound of lawful government, and) are remoter means of our enjoying of
God, by preserving to us, and protecting us in the use of those Ordinances
which God appears in, and upon this account must even these be put down, That
God may be all in all, that is, That our happiness may be completed.

3. To enjoy God by means, is to know him but in part, and to see him in a
glass darkly, in aenigmate, to have such apprehensions of God as we have of a
Riddle, which we do not fully understand, but that degree of happiness which
we shall be advanced to hereafter, is to see him face to face, to enjoy him
immediately, and all this you have in 1 Cor. 13.12. and altogether as much,
though in fewer words, in 1 John 3.2. that what we shall be in glory and
happiness, above what we are, will be this, That we shall see God, as he is
(i.e.) clearly and immediately Dionis. Carthus. in locum.
.

4. Was it not the highest pitch of happiness which the Apostles so earnestly
groaned after 2 Cor. 5.4.? and what was that but to be present with the Lord,
v. 8? why had not these Saints the presence of God already? Sure they had in
his graces and Ordinances, and they had the earnest of his spirit, ver. 5. they
enjoyed God by these means, 't was the enjoyment of God without them, 't was
his immediate presence which they groaned for; so Paul in Phil. 1.23. I desire
to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better, were not Paul and Christ
together already? Sure they were near, very near, one to another; see Gal.
2.20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, etc. he had the presence of
Christ by faith, and this was very good; his desire to depart, was to have the
presence of Christ by sight, to enjoy him immediately, this is far better.

SECT. II. This Branch of the point improved by way of information.
IT will follow from what we have now said.

1. That the enjoyment of God by means, is but a little drop of that Ocean of
sweetness and satisfaction, which the Soul shall be filled with, when she
shall come to enjoy God without them. All the ravishment of our spirits in
prayer, hearing, meditation, etc. is but a sip of those Rivers of it, which we
shall have in Heaven, so that unspeakable solace of our Souls meeting God in an
Ordinance, may something help us to guess at the inconceivable bliss of a
Soul meeting God in Heaven. Will you stay then a little, and see what it is to
be in Heaven below, to enjoy God by means and at a distance?

If David look but upon the Sanctuary where God gave some evidences of his
presence, he is transported with apprehensions of felicity in being there, oh
how amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts? and some suppose the latter
part of the 3d. v. to be an abrupt expression, not at all depending upon the
fore going words, Thine Altars O Lord of Hosts, my King, and my God, as men are
wont to express themselves concerning any thing that they are ravished withal,
see also Psalm. 27.4. and 43.3.

If God in Ordinances be so desirable, so satisfying, so amiable, so ravishing;
what shall God be without them? if the picture please so abundantly what will
the person do? if so much bliss be cast upon the soul from a copy, what may we
not expect from the original?

The Saints here rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory 1 Pet. 1.8. and
yet does this result but from our enjoyment of God by the medium of Faith, the
degrees that will be added unto it by vision must needs render it
inconceivable, and running over; if some of the Saints here are so swallowed up
of Divine sweetness, that they desire God to forbear Xaverius clamabat satis
est, Domine satis est, nec enim men's mea in hac vita, tantu^ gaudioru^ pondus
capit. referente. A Lapid. in Cant 2.3
, we can but (yea we cannot so much as) imagine what will be.

The remembrance of God in a private meditation is sweet, Psalm. 104.34. and if
a gracious Soul can entertain her self with some conferences with her God, she
is satisfied as with marrow and fatness, Psalm. 63.5, 6. our entertainments
below are a great feast, Luke 14.16, they are promised us as such, Isa. 25.6.
we are invited to them as such, Isa. 55.1, 2. Prove. 9.5. they are fed upon as
such, Ps. 34.8. Cant. 2.3. Psalm. 119.103. we are cheered up at them as at a
feast, Cant. 5.1. can a created understanding guess, what shall be provided for
us above?

In Gods Kingdom of grace we are made to drink of the Rivers of his pleasures,
Psalm. 36.8. but when God shall immediately possess the Soul, and fill it; when
the Soul shall immediately possess God, and be full of him; when this Kingdom
of grace shall expire, and all the administrations of it (as so many Eclipses
of our happiness) shall vanish away, shall we not then drink of the Fountain?
surely feasts, and sweetness, and marrow, and fatness, are terms exceedingly
too diminutive to give us any more then a small hint, of that incomprehensible
satisfaction.

2. That when the happiness of the Saints is at highest, then will be the
time, when they shall be above any need of Ordinances, when you shall enjoy God
immediately, then you shall have no need of means to enjoy him by; and when you
shall so enjoy God, you shall be perfectly blessed.

If any would vouchsafe to read this who pretend to the enjoyment of God, and
yet deny it to be in the use of means; I would adventure to argue the case
with them thus. If you do indeed enjoy God at all, it is immediately, and such
as so enjoy him are perfectly blessed: and are you of that number? is every
evil removed? have you never any pain, sorrow, affliction, sin? is every
desire satisfied? do your appetites go out after nothing in the World? no body
will believe it, and so you are not yet fully blessed and happy, whatever you
may be, and by consequence your immediate enjoyment of God, is but the
enjoyment of a fancy.

The Apostle tells us, that now (i. e.) in this life, if we see God at all, it
is in a glass, we have need of such mediums to do it by; the immediate vision
of him face to face is reserved for hereafter (i. e.) the life that is to come,
1 Cor. 13.12.

Add hereunto, that if you enjoy God here immediately, you so enjoy him, as
you shall hereafter, and so not only your present, but your future condition
is apparent, it appears what you shall be, as well as what you are: and, how
then is it possible you should be accounted of their number, who are now the
sons of God, but it does not yet appear what they shall be, 1 John 3.2?

SECT. III. A further Improvement of the point by way of exhortation, against
the fear of Death.
YOu see that it must be an immediate enjoyment of God, that can let us in to
the fullness of our happiness. Let us hence be exhorted rather to desire
Death, then to be afraid of it, if the end be desirable, why should the means
be dreadful? to be happy is to enjoy God immediately, which we shall never do
except we die: There shall no man see God and live, Exodus 33.20. we shall not
indeed see him till we be like him, 1 Jo. 3.2. nor be like him enough to see
him, till we be sinlesse, nor be so, whilst we are alive, Eccles. 7.20. God as
a founder, must melt us before we shall be sufficiently refined to come so
near him, and the Furnace he will do it in, is Death. God pardons our sin by
the death of Christ, but totally destroies it by our own: we die in sin, and to
sin by a metaphorical death, but we only die from it, by a natural one, and
this must be done, its not enough that sin be totally pardoned, that it have no
guilt, it must be totally abolished, that it have no being, before we shall be
meet enough to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.

As Death destroies the being of our nature, so 't is exceeding formidable, and
the King of terrors: but as it destroies the being of our sin, to let us into
the presence of our God 't is exceedingly desirable. Socrates professed himself
willing to die upon this account, that he might enjoy those worthies that went
before him, as Orpheus, Hesiod, Homer, etc. our encouragement is, we shall come
to enjoy our God, after this the Apostles groaned earnestly, 2 Cor. 5.2.8. and
if Christ say, surely I come quickly; the spouse will answer, even so come Lord
Jesus. Apoc. 22.20. We should not be afraid of our passage into the immediate
imbracements of our God, which we then enter upon, when into his hands we
commend our spirits; flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor.
15.50. we could not be happy, if we were not mortal.

SECT. IIII. That our perfect Happiness shall be in the sole enjoyment of God.
WHat ever others may suppose, we cannot but place our happiness when it shall
be at the full, in the enjoyment of God alone, excluding the enjoyment of every
thing else. Here below the Saints have their God, and this is their happiness;
but they have withal something else, Wives, Children, Friends, Houses, Money,
Lands, Honors, etc. and this is a diminution of their happiness, it will never
be at highest til they shall enjoy God alone, God and nothing else. Let us
consider:

1. The phrase of the Text: God shall be all, we shall have nothing else:
Himself Premium virtutis erit, qui virtutem dedit.
shall be our exceeding great reward, Genesis 15.1. our draughts of Happiness shall
be taken in immediately from the Fountain, and not be lessened by their
conveyance to us in any channel.

2. Then comes the end, ver. 24. which is expounded of Ego puto simpliciter
intelligendum de fine mundi Piscat. Schol. in locum.
the end of the World, there shall be an end of all the accommodations this
world was wont to afford, nothing shall remain that a heart may be set upon.
When shall this be? Resurrectione completa Carthus. in loc.
When the Saints are entering upon the consummation of their blessedness. And
why shall this be? Why shall there be an end of whatever might be an object of
delight in the whole Creation? You are answered in the Text; then comes the
end, that God may be all in all, that we may be fully happy in the enjoyment of
God alone.

3, As all our happiness is in enjoyment, so much of our enjoyment is by love,
as we have noted already [ Part 1. Sect. 2.] so that the less we love God, the
less we enjoy him, and as long as we have any thing beside God will not some of
our love go out after it? so that what I aim at is easily concluded; we shall
not be perfectly happy, til we perfectly enjoy God, nor perfectly enjoy him,
til we perfectly love him, nor perfectly love him, til we have nothing to love
else. So it is the sole enjoyment of God, which our Happiness when it is at
the highest, shall consist in. And I think.

4. This was David's meaning in Ps. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? he
had in the former verse, expressed his confidence of Gods receiving him to
glory, in this he declares what the glory was that he thirsted after, it was
the sole enjoyment of God, God alone, and nothing else, and indeed, though
while our love has its infirmities, it has other objects, yet Perfecta
charitas solum fitit quod summum est, Bern.
when it shall be perfectly healed, it will pitch upon nothing but God alone.

SECT. V. 1 Use of this Branch, by way of Exhortation.
J Have some thing from the last mentioned part of the proposition to commend
unto you by way of exhortation, I shall beseech you but to suffer these 4 words.

1. Learn in whatsoever state you are, therewith to be content, Phil. 4.11. we
should never grumble at any dispensations of our God, were we not guilty of
some mistakes about the matter of our Happiness; are you in a mean condition,
and have you but a little of the world? be contented, you must have less, you
must have none; before ever you will be happy.

You have not that Estate, Honor, Credit, greatness in the world which others
have; and you whine, and sigh, and take on, and repine, and murmur: what ails
you? are these things your happiness? nay, can you ever be truly happy,
whilst you have any one piece of them? is not your blessedness alone in God?
why then should it discontent you to want something, seeing you will never be
contented as long as you have any thing? you will never have enough, till God
shall be all.

2. Let your Conversation be without Covetousness, Heb. 13.5. are you thirsty,
immoderately thirsty after more and more of the earth? how foolish is such an
appetite; the more we enjoy beside God, at the greater distance we stand from
happiness. What ground have we for an insatiable desire of such things, which
we cannot possess but upon condition of being miserable? it is an
un-Saint-like folly to grasp after much of the world, as if we could not be well
without it, when we know it is impossible for us to be well enough with it; even
God himself in conjunction with other things is not enough, it must be God
alone that can fully bless us: God in the creature (I desire to speak it with
reverence) is an inconsiderable enjoyment, in comparison of God in himself.

3. If Riches increase, set not your hearts upon them, Ps. 62.10. carry a holy
jealousy over your souls, lest you cleave to them with a bird-lim'd affection.
Beg God to keep your hearts loose enough, the world is a sea, and every lust is
a Tempest strong enough to sink us, unless Christ enable us (with Peter) to
walk on top of it; this we must do, or we shall be miserable: the more we love
other things the less we have of happiness, because the more solely we love
God, the more solely we enjoy him: the heart can have but a slender communion
with him, if it be too much taken up with other company; he can but by halfs
enjoy his wife and children, who is daily troubled with the entertainment of
strangers.

4. In your patience possess ye your souls, Luke 21.19. whatever losses we
meet with in the World it is our folly, and our sin, that if we loose our
friends or our goods, we have much ado to keep our selves, as if we had never
heard of the patience of Job; when a stroke is directed but to our goods, we
are simple enough to direct it upon our selves; like the Irish, who if they
have a good Scymiter, rather then their weapon shall be hurt, will receive the
blow upon their arm Stamhurst. Hibern. hist.
. This folly would be cured, if we would be persuaded, that we shall never be
happy till we have lost all, till we have no friend no estates, no enjoyment
but God alone.

SECT. VI. 2d Use of this same point by way of Instruction.
IF our highest happiness be the sole enjoyment of God, we may take out some
lessons thence for our instruction; these that follow seem to be very legible.

1. That it is an impossibility to make the Saints of God miserable; because it
is impossible to deprive them of their God, in whom alone is all their
happiness. They may lose

1. Their Liberty, as Joseph, Peter, Paul, Silas, etc. the primitive
Christians, by the Heathen persecutors In Carceres conjecti fideles, locis
tenebrosis, etc. Ecclesiast. l. 5. c. 1.
, and the Orthodox by the Arrians Theodorit. hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 22.
, Christ himself may be imprisoned, Mat. 25.43. and Satan may make the
mittimus, Apoc. 2.10. but this is not their happiness, this is not the
glorious liberty of the sons of God, Romans 8.21. their God will be in prison with
them, Genesis 39.23.

2. Their Estates, they may suffer the spoiling of their goods, Heb. 10.34. of
a great part, or all, as it shall please their more potent enemies, of which we
have examples Socrat. Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 11. Eusebius. de vita Constable. l. 1. c.
45.
enough in the History of the Church, but this is not their happiness, they
have in heaven a better and a more enduring substance, Heb. 10.34.

3. Their Lives, as the noble Army of Martyrs did. But this is not their
happiness, they may sav to the proudest of their persecutors Occidere quidem
potestis, nocere non potestis.
, you may kill us, but it is not in your power to hurt us; they have a life
which is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3.

Our happiness is not in any thing that the gates of Hell can reach unto; it is
in God only and solely, and who can take away our God from us? what condition
can leave us without him? pray ask the Apostle in Romans 8.35.38, 39.

2dly. That (did we rightly improve it) the less we have of the world, the
more we may have of happiness, this I doubt will seem a paradox to most, but
yet before you be too peremptory in concluding it so, consider if happiness
consist in the sole enjoyment of God; does it not follow that the more solely
we enjoy him, the happier we are? and may we not the better so enjoy God, the
less we have to enjoy beside him? even the troubles of a family do so far
unblesse us, that they hardly give us leave to attend upon the Lord without
distraction, 1 Cor. 7.35. what then have they leave to do, who are troubled
with more then this a thousand fold?

Are there none of us, whose possessions and employments in the world are more
then they were wont to be? it would be well to consider (if we have so much
leisure) whether our enjoyments of God be not so much the less; whether a
great part of that time, and those meditations which we were wont to lay out
upon God, be not now wasted, and cast away upon other occasions.

You that have but a little to do with the world, pray make much of that
condition, 't is your own fault if you have not the more to do with God; you
have little else to take up your hearts, God may dwell and walk in them without
disturbance. God and you may be together a great part of your time, and the
sweetness of your communion not hindered, whilst others are casting up their
accounts, you have leisure enough to say with David, how precious are thy
thoughts unto me O God, how great is the sum of them; if I should count them,
they are more in number then the sands! Ps. 139.17, 18. Whilst others are
following their suits at a Court of Justice, you may follow all you have at a
Throne of grace: whilst others are numbering their flocks and herds, al your
Arithmetic may be employed to number your days: whilst others cannot get out
of the clutches of the world, you may get into the imbracements of your God:
you may be in heaven whilst others cannot see it for the interposition of too
much earth. Truly a mean condition seems to be capable of more happiness,
then that which over-loadeth us with outward things.

3d. That little cause have the Saints to be troubled at the dissolution of al
things: That al these things here below shall be dissolved, he cannot doubt that
is a Christian, 2 Pet. 3.11. and the dissolution of them shall be by fire, the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also and the works that are
therein shall be burnt up, ver. 10. that glorious heaven which rouls over our
heads, shall be rouled together as a Scrowl; and al their Host shall fall down, as
the Leaf falls off from the Vine, and as a falling Fig from the Fig Tree,
Isa. 34.4. and the earth under our feet the mother of so many good things, with
her whole offspring shall flee away, neither shall any place be found for her,
Apoc. 20.11. it moves our bowels to behold the rage of fire in some petty
desolations; it will you will say be a melancholy prospect indeed, to see it
bury the whole world in its own ashes. Well, suppose we should be of those, who
shall be found alive at the last day; should it trouble or pity us that such a
world as this should be destroyed? sure not a jot; unless we would continue
to our prejudice: for this end must come, That God may be all in all, that
there may be nothing for us but God, that is, that we may be perfectly happy.

SECT. VII. Showing our happiness to constst in the free enjoyment of God.
AS our happiness in the height and perfection of it, shall be to enjoy God
immediately without helps, and solely without partners, so it will be as
necessary that we enjoy him freely, without interruption or opposition: Here
sin stands in our way with power and pollution, and Satan with his fiery darts,
and the world meets us with a thousand contradictions, and whatever stands in
the way of our enjoyment, stands in the way of our happiness, which will not be
perfect til al these impediments be removed. Let us consider

1. All enemies shall be subdued, v. 25, 26. Satan and sin amongst the rest,
which are the great disturbers of our enjoyment of God, these shall trouble us
no more; and the end is, That God may be all in all, that we may enjoy him
freely without any contradiction.

2. It follows rationally that if our enjoyment of God be not free, our
happiness in God cannot be full: every disturbance of enjoyment is an Eclipse
of happiness; every evil is not excluded, where there is any thing left
standing between God and us, nor every desire satisfied, when one great desire
is to have these rubs out of our way: we are so far from perfect happiness, as
long as Satan, or sin, or any thing shall thwart us in our enjoyment of God,
that we are indeed miserable and wretched men; and such an apprehension I think
the Apostle had of this condition, in Romans 7.24.

SECT. VIII. A threefold use of this Point.
IF we shall not be fully happy, till we shall enjoy God freely, and have
nothing to oppose, or interrupt us

First, It will inform us, that in case our sins should go up to Heaven with
us, we should never be happy, because we should not be able to enjoy God
freely: here they cross us, and do ever and anon interrupt our Communion, and
would they not think you, do so there too? so those carnal persons that pray
for Heaven, and yet would not part with their sins, do (like the sons of
Zebedee) ask they know not what. To be in Heaven is to enjoy God Vita ubi non
est adversarius impugnans ubi nulla peccati illecebra, etc. Aug. meditat. c. 22.
freely, which neither the guilt of sin, nor the pollution of it, will suffer
us to do.

2ly. This does teach us what course to take, if we mean to be as much in
Heaven, as it is possible to be here upon earth: we must enjoy our God with all
possible freedom. If you ask how shall this be done? pray consider, what you
would do to enjoy a friend freely, from whose society you fetch much of your
delight, would you not get your self and your friend together? and exclude all
other company? and in case of intrusion, would you not refuse to admit them?
pray try ('it is a Noble experiment) if such a course will not bless your spirits
with a more free enjoyment of God, then you do ordinarily attain unto.

1. You must get God and your souls together, by walking with him, Genesis 5.24.
and conversing in Heaven, Phil. 3.20. by sending up your faith and love, and
bringing God into your hearts, to sup and walk, and dwell there: that you may
look upon him, and hear him, and speak to him and throw your selves into his
Arms, and solace your souls in his Bosom as your God: when you stand, stand
fast in the Lord, Phil. 4.1. When you walk, let it be in Gods ways, Psalm.
119.1. When you sit down, let it be under his shadow, Cant. 2.3. When he
invites you go with him into his Banqueting house, Cant. 2.4. and eat and drink
abundantly, Cant. 5.1. open your Os corporis modica implet buccella,
capacitatem animae solus Deus. Lor. in locum.
mouths wide, that he may fill them ( Psalm. 81.10.) with what ever his presence
of grace brings with it, to feast your souls. But if you mean to do this
freely, you must

2. Exclude all other company, every care that is superfluous, and every
thought that is carnal must be shut out of doors. When Joseph meant to discover
himself to his Brethren, he cried, Cause every man to go out from me, Genesis
45.1. When Abraham went to sacrifice his Son, he said to his young men, abide
you here with the Ass, and I and the Lad will go younder and worship, Genesis
22.5. Joseph could not have unbowel'd himself freely, nor Abraham have met God
in the Mount without interruption, had they not dismissed their company: so
must we deal with all other businesses of the heart, cause every one of them to
go out from us, and abide behind, if we would converse with God freely, The
cares of the world, and the lusts of our hearts are obstreperous and turbulent,
they will keep such a noise in our souls, that shall loose very much of that
communion with God, which we come together for; they will provide us such
avocations and distractions, that a great deal of our heart, which is al too
little to be spent upon God, will go out upon these.

3. If they offer to intrude themselves again, when God and the soul are in
communication, you must by no means admit them. Carnal lusts are sufficiently
saucy and immodest, they have impudency enough to thrust themselves into the
soul, though she be never so private and never so busy in the company of her
God: one errand or another will they pretend, and be importunate for audience if
you give them admission, you are sadly interrupted. And because do what we can,
these impediments will be, and will more or less disturb us while we are here. It
is

3dly. Matter of comfort to the Saints, that when their happiness shall be
perfect, their enjoyment of God shall be free, without any disturbance at all:
every enemy shall be subdued: Beatum nihil quod non caret peccato. Ambr.
when we shall stand before the Lord in in Heaven, we shall have no Satan at our
right hand to resist us, his everlasting chains will eternally keep him at a
sufficient distance; neither shall one of the lusts that haunt us here go along
with us: it will be a world where dwells nothing but righteousness, 2. Pet. 3.13.

SECT. IX. Our full happiness is in the full enjoyment of God.
THe Fruition of God without means, or partners, or oppositition, though it
amount to very much of our felicity; yet not to all, it must be full too without
any defect: not as if the soul which is finite, could take in the whole Essence
of God which is infinite, and so incomprehensible; but the soul shall and must
be so full of God, as that it shall not be able to receive or desire a jot more.
Let Us consider,

1. That the difference between our enjoyment of God here and hereafter, is but
in degrees. Here it is inits infancy Gratia est aetas infantilis gloriae.
there it shall be in its full age: Here it is in drops, there it shall be in the
Ocean. Here it is per modum passionis transeuntis.
as light is in the Air there it shall be as Per modum formae permanentis
light is in the body of the Sun: Here we see Gods back parts, there we shall
see his Face, not his second face (as some distinguish) which is grace and
favor enjoyed by faith, but his first face which is, his divine Essence
enjoyed by sight: it is the same love whereby we cleave to God here and in
Heaven (love never fails, 1 Cor. 13.8) only here it is love militant against
Vt voluntas in presenti vita, infermitati non cedat, in futura infermitatem non
habeat, and nunc recreetur iuvamine medicaminis tunc fruatur aeterna
plenitudine sanitatis Fulgent. l. 1. p. 8
many weaknesses, there it shall be love triumphant over al. And God loves us
with the same love now, which he will love us with in Heaven; only here it is
but upon its design, there it will be in Execution. In a word, the Apostle sets
down the difference of our enjoying God here and hereafter to be in this, That
now it is but in part, and then it shall be at full, 1 Cor. 13.12.

2. As long as our enjoyment of God is not at full; we are capable of more, and
as long as we possess more we can desire more, and so our happiness is not
perfected, because every desire is not satisfied.

SECT. X. The Uses of this Branch for Information and comfort.
FIrst we may from what we last said, be informed, that the happiest sight we
can have of God out of Heaven is that sight of him which we have in the Gospel,
because it is the fullest. God is seen

1. In his creatures. Here (at least) his eternal power and Godhead are
legibile enough, Romans 1.20.

2. In his Law, we cannot but see his Sovereignty, his Holiness, and and his
Justice, if we look here. But

3. In his Gospel: our sight of God is much fuller. Here we see 1. More of
this. 2. More then this. 3. More clearly.


First, More of this, then ever was seen before. I shall instance in these
Particulars, viz,

1. More of Gods Power. Much of this, very much was evidenced in making the
world, having nothing but nothing to do it withal. Put together the whole Posse
of men and Angels, and allow them no preexistent matter, and see if they be
able to make so much as one hair. To enlarge here were to suppose my Readers
something worse then not christened: only thus, I will praise thee (O Lord)
for I am fearfully and wonderfully made: mavelous are thy works and that my
soul kuoweth right well, Psalm. 139.14.

But is there not more of Gods power discovered in the Gospel? to pardon a
sinner is an act of great power, Numb. 14.17, 18, 19. To quicken him, is an act
of exceeding great power, Ephesians. 1.19. compared with chap. 2.1. The Vtrum
Justificatio impii sit opus miraculosum? Aq. 1ae 2ae q. 113. Art. 10.
Schoolmen do enquire, whether the Justification of a sinner be a miracle or
no? a Question that could not proceed but from an apprehension of some, more
then ordinary, evidences of Gods power in this work. But what shall we think of
the uniting of God and man in one person to bring this to pass? I shall not so
much as endeavor to puzle you, by inquiring into the mysteries that are in it.
Vid. Aq 3. part q. 1.2.3. etc.
If you study how little you are able to O admirabila mysteriu^! O inenrrabile
co^mercium^ Aug. meditat c. 16.
apprehend of it you will confess a longer manifestation of power in this one
act to redeem the world, then was put forth at first to make it. And where is
this discovered but in the Gospel?

2. More of Gods Wisdom, whose design is to be advanced in the salvation of
sinners. Now set aside the Gospel, and let all the men in the world and all the
Angels in Heaven, lay their heads together, and tell you (if they can) by what
means this shall be brought to pass, they are sinners that must be saved; this
indeed will advance Gods mercy, but what then shall become of his Justice? One
Attribute of God must not go down, whilst another is set up, this were not for
God to advance his whole self. There is no imaginable way for Justice to
satisfy it self, but either upon the sinner himself, or upon some other in his
stead, if upon themselves the design is lost, it must pay sin its wages, and so
the sinner perishes, Romans 6.23. if upon some other, who should that be? if but
a man, he cannot satisfy; if a God, he cannot suffer; if sinful he must suffer
for himself; if sinlesse where shall such a one be found? if willing how should
he be able? if not willing how were it just to lay it upon him?

It Is the Gospel that unriddles all this, and in doing so discovers an
incomprehensible wisdom: hence are we told of this contrivement to save
sinners, that it is, the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 2.6. a wisdom that no natural or
moral helps, or parts, can raise us to the comprehension of, 1 Cor. 2.6. wisdom
in a mystery, 1 Cor. 2.7. A great mystery, 1 Timothy 3.16. a mystery which the
Angels desire to look into, 1 Pet. 1.12. a discovery of the manifold wisdom of
God, Ephesians. 3.10. there is more of this attribute opened in the Gospel, then in
that immense volume the whole world. But one instance more

3. More of Gods Justice, much of this was set on work in not sparing the
Angels that sinned, etc. 2. Pet. 2.4. do not they seem to suffer the severity
of Gods justice, who (for ought we read) sinned but once, and are yet under an
eternity of wrath, without hope or means or possibility of restitution? and it
was much of justice that fell upon the old world, in so dreadful a shower, that
All in whose nostrils was the breath of life perished, Genesis 7.22. and upon
Sodom read, Genesis 19.24, 25. and upon Corah and his company, read Number. 16.32, 33.

But yet we have a manifestation in the Gospel of more justice then all this,
here we have God not sparing his own son, Romans 8.32. his only son, Joh. 3.16.
the son of his love, Col. 1.13. the son of his bosom, Joh. 1.18. though he did
no sin, 1 Pet. 2.22. though he fulfilled all righteousness, Mat. 3.15. yet
having taken our sins upon him, he did not spare him though he offered up
prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, Heb. 5.7.

Secondly in the Gospel we see more then this; that is, what neither the book
of the creatures, nor of the law did ever discover unto us: you may look else
where in vain; but look into the Gospel, you shall see God in Christ reconciling
the world unto himself not imputing their trespasses unto them, 2 Cor. 5.19.
quickening such as are dead in trespasses and sins Ephesians. 2.1. bringing life and
immortality to light, and offering it to the greatest of sinners, 2 Timothy 1.19.
Act. 3.26. here we see a free grace, a full Christ, a general pardon, a way fot
sinful creatures to the enjoyment of a just and holy God. The Gospel of Jesus
Christ, were not by way of eminency to be called by that name Vid. Chemnit.
loc. com. part 2. edit. 1594 in 4 to fol. 242.
, were any thing else able to bring us glad tidings of these good things.

Thirdly what we see of God in the Gospel, we see more clearly, then we can see
it any where else, here below; and are therefore said to behold his glory with
open face as in a glass, 2 Cor. 3.18. that the Jews under the administration
of Moses had a clearer discovery of God, then the Gentiles (who saw him but in
his works) is not to be doubted: and how much clearer ours is under the
administration of the Gospel, then theirs was under Moses, is that we have
produced the Apostle for. It is as much clearer, as the seeing of an object
with open face in a glass, is a clearer vision then to look upon it, but
through a vail: no picture can represent a thing so lively as a glass does. So
the happiest sight of God out of heaven, is to see him in the Gospel, because
it is the fullest. I hope men will take heed how they carry themselves to such a
Gospel as this is, and I will anon speak with them about it.

Secondly, It is comfort for the Saints that their highest happiness shall be
in the full enjoyment of God, your hungrings and thirstings after more of him,
shall one day end in a complete satisfaction, you shall have as much of him as
your souls can hold here, it is much of your happiness, to have some glimpses
of his glory shining upon you, and some drops of his favor distilled into your
hearts: hereafter it shall be all your happiness to have it poured in til you
shall be able to receive no more; and because all your Lords joy cannot enter
into you, to be sure of having enough you shall enter into it, Mat. 25. v. 21.

SECT. XI. That the enjoyment of God in which our highest happiness shall
consist is to be everlasting.
ALL that we have said of the enjoyment of God, though it rise to very much,
yet were it of any shorter date then eternity, it would not be enough for an
absolute blessedness. He ce

1. The Scriptures do every where express it to be everlasting and without
end. We shall be ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4.17. and the pleasures at his
right hand are for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. our weight of glory shall be
eternal, 2 Cor. 4.17. and our inheritance incorruptitible, which fades not
away, 1 Pet. 1.4. and you know it is called life eternal and everlasting, in a
multitude of Scriptures.

2. Were it any thing short of this, two things would prove it short of its
perfection.

First, There would be a possibility of being one time or another miserable,
and so every desire would not be satisfied. Misery, set it at what distance you
will, is not only what we do not desire to come under, but what we cannot
Miseri esse non solum nolumus, sed nequaquam velle possumus, Aug.
.

2d There were then some places for fear, and so for pain, 1 John, 4.18. and
consequently for evil, and that condition is not perfectly happy, which is
capable of this, for every evil is not excluded.

SECT. XII. This briefly applied by way of exhortation and comfort.
WE have seen the immediate enjoyment of God, that nothing may shadow our
happiness: the sole enjoyment of God; that nothing may abate it: the free
enjoyment of God; that nothing interrupt it, we have seen it so full, that
there is no room for more; and yet all this must and shall be eternal too, that
we may Beatitudo non est de eujus eternitate dubitatur. Aug.
never see the expiration of it. And shall we not hence

1. Be exhorted, not to place our happiness in any thing that shall have an
end? and (not to nauseate you with particulars) such are all that our eyes
behold here below, the things that are seen are temporal, 2 Cor. 4.18. were
there no other insufficiency in them, yet would this prove their enjoyment
infinitely short of happiness, that they can be enjoyed but for a time, and
upon this account the Apostles did not think them worth the looking upon, 2
Cor. 4.18. what a fool was he, that comforted his soul with goods laid up in
store for many years? Luke 12.19. it seems the enjoyment of God himself would
not amount to an absolute beatitude, were it not everlasting; how much less
the enjoyment of the creature, which to the happiest man under the sun, cannot
be above a span long, Psalm. 39.5.

2. Is not here comfort for the Saints, in all their afflictions? these can be
suffered but for a time, God shall be enjoyed to all eternity, are we a while
groaning under a burden of sin? Romans 7.24. we shall be loaded with an eternal
weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. have we a spirit full of wounds for a time? Prove.
18.14. we shall have a soul full of God, for an eternity. Does God forsake us for
a small moment, Isa. 54.7. We shall be ever with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians, 4.17. Does
heaviness endure for a night? Psalm. 30.5. joy shall come in a morning that has
no night at all, have we pains ever and anon? We shall have pleasures for
evermore, Psalm. 16.11. do we die daily? we shall live everlastingly. Saints,
comfort your selves, Comfort one another with these words, 1 These. 4.18.

SECT. XIII. A brief Application of the whole.
FRom all that has been said of the quality of our enjoyment of God, when we
shall come to be at the happiest. We may learn

First, That not one of the Saints is perfectly blessed in this life, because
not one of them does enjoy God, either immediately, but what we do is darkly
through a glass, by such mediums as do eclipse much of what, that Lumen
gloriae, the light we shall have in heaven will discover unto us: or solely, but
in conjunction with other enjoyments, which call out much of our hearts, and
many Item's of our love, which hereafter shall be totally summed up, and all
laid out upon one God: or freely; but are thwarted with a thousand impediments,
which shall all be left behind us when we go to heaven: or fully, they are but
part of his ways that we trace him in, and how little a portion is heard of
him? Job. 26.14. we shall never see the compleatment of our happiness, until
we go hence, and be no more seen.

Ob. Why then do some persons say that they are as happy, and do enjoy as much
of God, as ever they shall?

Sol. Can I tell? perhaps it is too true in reference to some of them, others
may be under a temporary delusion; but sure I am, they be none of the Saints,
who have their portion in this life. Psalm. 17.14. [ See before Sect. 2.]

Ob. Saints are happy in this life.
But why do the Scriptures so frequently call the Saints blessed and happy?

Sol. I shall lay before you what I conceive of it in these 6 particulars. Its
because

First, 1 Pretio.
The price by which we have a title to the happiness we have enquired into, is
already paid and accepted of: the possession of God, is a purchased possession,
Ephesians. 1.14. and the purchase is made to our use, upon which account our names
are written in the book of life, to be of those many children whom God by the
sufferings of his son meant to bring unto glory, Heb. 2.10. when a captives
ransom is paid, he may be said to have his liberty, although his Manu-mission
be a while delayed.

2. 2 Promisso.
God has made us a promise of this happiness before the world began to
Christ, for us, Titus, 1.2. and since the world began to us in Christ, John
3.16. to have any thing in a promise, is to be as sure of it, as if we had it
in full possession; it being as impossible for us to miss it, as it is for God
to lie, Heb. 6.18.

3. 3 Primitiis.
We have the first fruits of Heaven here upon the earth, Romans 8.23. something
of God drawn upon our souls, and so some converse with him, and influences from
him, and it was never known that such as came so far as to gather the first
fruits, fell short of reaping the whole harvest.

4. 4 Dispositione.
We are put into a capability of this happiness, being (in some measure) made
meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1.12.
having our robes washed and made white in the blood of the Lamb, that we may be
before the Throne of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple, Apoc.
7.14, 15.

5. 5 Spe.
We are saved by hope, Romans 8.24. and by whatever we are saved, by the same we
are made happy, hereafter we shall rejoice in possession, but in this life we
rejoice in hope of the glory of God, Romans 5.2.

6. 6 Sen.
The Saints have some taste here of that full meal of happiness, which they
shall eternally be feasted with hereafter, Psalm. 34.8. Cant. 2.3. and even this
does sometimes ravish them so abundantly, that they value one days enjoyment
of God, above the revenues of the whole world.

In all these (and perhaps in some other) respects, the Saints are said to be
blessed and happy; though they be not perfectly and fully so. And we may learn

2dly That no nature below ours is capable of an absolute happiness, as not
being capable of such an enjoyment of God: Scot. in 4 Sent. q. 8. did. 49.
we owe God very much for this benefit of our creation. I cannot tell whether
it be not better then if he had made us Angels; they, 't is true, were capable
of happiness as well as we, and of losing it as well as we, but when it is lost,
they are not capable of recovering it again as well as we, 2 Pet. 2.4. Jud. 6.
however God might have made us any of the lower creatures: look upon a house, a
tree, a worm, a heap of dirt, and say, Cur non ego talis? Why had not I been
such? and we shall be worse then such, if we enjoy not God: other creatures
attain to all the happiness they are capable of not so we. And we may learn

3dly That they speak like Atheists, who said it is vain to serve God, Mal.
3.14. is such an enjoyment of God so? if you be indeed christians, pray be
steadfast and immovable always, abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much
as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58.

AN APPENDIX (Especially) To Part 1. Sect. 10. And Part 2. Sect. 2. and 10.
HAving spoken in the precedent discourse, of the enjoyment of God here by
means, and of that full sight of him, which is offered us in the Gospel, and
observing how much this glorious Gospel is undervalued, and vilified, by the
subordination of it to natural reason, or supposed Revelations; and the
dishonor that is cast upon it by some other miscariages. I shall here subjoyn a
consideration of these four particulars, viz.

1. Whether we are bound to believe and rest in no more of the Gospel, then our
reason will subscribe to? 2. Whether we may be guided by any supposed
inspiration, or impulse of spirit, that is beside or contrary to the word of
God? 3. What courses dishonor the Gospel; and the evil of them? 4. What our
behavior ought to be toward it?
SECT. I. Whether we are bound to believe and rest in no more of the Gospel,
then our reason will subscribe to?
TO this (having a purpose in each, to use as few words as may be) I shall only
offer these

Ten Conclusions.
1. Conclusion, When Reason was in its primitive perfection, before it was
purblinded by sin: it was a very much better guide then it is now,

2. Conclus. Even in that state, as perfect as Reason was, we were not merely
left to the guidance of it; but a Law was added to be our directory, Genesis 2.17.
We were not left in the hands of single reason even when it was possible for it
not to mis-guide us.

3. Conclus. After the fall, all the reason that was left in the world, was not
able to direct us into a way of restitution: If it was, why did Adam hide
himself from the presence of the Lord God, amongst the Trees of the Garden?
Genesis 3.8.10. Yea, so far is a way to life for sinners, from being discoverable
by reason, that when it is discovered, if reason may be Judge, it is mere
foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.23.

4. Conclus. Where there is the fullest discovery of God, and is withal what
himself does limit us unto, that must be our rule, and we may not measure how
fit it is by any thing else. Now such is the Gospel, and Christ speaking in it,
Mat. 17.5. Act. 3.22.23. Gal. 1.8.9. We are not sent to natural reason for
orders in spiritual things.

5. Conclus. In things where reason and the light of nature can guide us; we
are yet to be guided by a surer direction (in case it be afforded us)
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them, is a
Principium naturaliter notum, in agibilibus. Dio^. Carth. in Locum.
principle in Nature and Reason; yet is our obedience to it pressed upon
another account; do it, not for this is rational; but for this is the Law and
the Prophets, Mat. 7.12.

6. Conclus. Reason even in men very rational is exceeding dark: Why else in
matters of that cognizance, are wise and learned men so much divided? Truly
then in matters of Religion, he that will be merely his own Scholar, is not like
to have an infallible master.

7. Conclus. What we rest upon by faith; from the credit of God the revealer of
it in the Gospel, is more certain then what is demonstrable by reason: Because
we conclude it from a higher and safer principle. Reason has its evidence but
from our own wisdom: Faith has hers from the Wisdom of God. Aliae scientiae
certitudinem habent ex naturali lumine rationis humanae que potest errare:
theologia ex lumine divinae scientiae quae decipi non potest, Aq. 1. p. q. 1.
A. 5.


8. Conclus. To believe no more then we have reason for is (in a strict sense)
to believe nothing at al. Faith is an assent to what God reveals, not to what
reason dictates, and does then loose it self when it looks for grounds in
natural reason, without which it will not bottom. So then if we will believe
nothing but what we have reason for, and will indeed believe so much, we must
believe that we believe nothing at all: for this is proved by reason. (See a
relation of the conference between Laud and Fisher, Edit. 1639. in folio p. 75.)

9. Conclus. To believe and practice what God to that purpose reveals in the
Gospel, is the greatest reason, because the truth and certainty of it depends
upon a wisdom that can neither deceive, nor be deceived: upon a light in which
there is no darkness at al, 1 Ioh. 1.5. The Lawyers say, that natural reason
may be alleged where the Law has not determined Ratio naturalis potest
allegari ubi deficit. Lex.
; so it may where the Gospel is silent; but in other cases it must stand mute.

10. Conclus. To take upon us to control the dictates of the Gospel by, or to
refuse them upon their non-adaequation to our reason: a design of being wiser
then the wisdom; the manifold Wisdom of God: a folly too ridiculous to have any
residence in a sober imagination. I hope, the foolishness of God is wiser then
men, 1 Cor. 1.25. In matters of Religion Non aliam putes esse sapientia^, nisi
veritatem. Aug.
, nothing is wisdom, but what is truth; and nothing is truth for us to believe,
to walk by, to subscribe to, but the Word sapientia est sapida de Deo scientia.
. Religious wisdom is a savory knowledge of the things of God, and not to be
attained by any other mediums then what God has ordered to be written for our
instruction, Romans 15.4. and if any previous disposition be necessary to fit a
man for it, it is to become a fool, 1 Cor. 3.18, to deny himself and al his
carnal wisdom Abnegando seipsum, and carnalem, suam sapientiam. Piscat. in
locum.
.

SECT. II. Whether we may be guided by any supposed inspiration, or impulse of
spirit, that is beside, or contrary to theword of God?
THat I may not seem in the least, to limit the Holy one of Israel, I shall
answer by laying down this Proposition

In matters of Faith and practice, in case it were not the only way, yet it is
the safer way to be guided by the Scriptures, then by any impulses suggestions,
or revelations within us supposed to be from the spirit. Of this

First in Hypothesi, in case it were not the only way, the contrary to which I
am abundantly persuaded of, from these Grounds.

1. Ground, It seems to me a truth sufficiently bottomed upon the Scriptures,
that the Spirit of God does not immediately reveal any thing (in these latter
days) beside or above what is revealed in the Scripture. Because

First, The Scriptures contain al things necessary to salvation, 2 Timothy
3.15.16, 17. If an inspiration be for Doctrine or reproof, or correction, or
instruction, or to furnish us to any good work, all this is done by the
Scripture; and so the inspiration is not beside, or beyond it: If it be for
more then this, it is for more then is necessary.

2ly. There is a curse pronounced against adding any revelations or discoveries
as of the mind of God, to those that are in the Scriptures already read Apoc.
22.18, 19. and note

1. That this book is a discovery of the mind of God concerning the affairs and
duty of his Church, cha. 1.1.

2. That it is a discovery of what shall concern the Church of God from the time
it was written to the end of the world, chap. 1.19.

3. That it is a discovery of no more then is sufficient; therefore he is
cursed that shall take any thing from it, Chap. 22.19.

4. That (together with what we have in other Scriptures, for so I would in
each particular be understood) it is a discovery of as much as is sufficient
and all the discoveries we must look for; and therefore is he cursed that shall
add to it Vid. Aret. and Forbes in locum.
.

2. Ground, What was unquestionable from the Spirit of God, was not yet imposed
upon us any further then as it was confirmed by the Scriptures. That the
Apostles spoke by in spiration, I shall take it for granted, ( Gal. 1.1.11, 12.)
Yet

1. They were wont to prove their Doctrine by Scriptures, and that you may see
the sweet correspondency that is between both Testaments (as they are called) I
shall set you down these instances

Romans 2.24. Proved by Is. 52.5. Romans 2.24. Proved by Eze. 36.20.23 Romans 4.5.
proved by Psalm. 32.1, 2. Romans 9.7. proved by Genesis 21.12. Romans 10.9 proved by
Isa. 28.16. Romans 11.7. proved by Isa. 29.10. 1 Cor. 2.29. proved by Ier. 9.23.
That the Gentiles should be called the Apostle affirms was made known to him
by revelation, Ephesians. 3.5.6. yet he proves it from Genesis 12.3. Gal. 3.8. And

2. Those that would not receive these inspirations until they had examined
them by the Scriptures, are passed with a noble character for so doing, Acts
17.11, 12. From these grounds am I convinced, that in matters of faith and
practice our only way is to be guided by the Scriptures. However,

Secondly. In these it is a safer way then to be led by any impulse, suggestion
or revelation within us supposed to be from the spirit: which I am constrained
to believe by these Reasons.

1. Reason, Many have pretended to revelations from the Spirit of God, when
there was no such thing: but the pretenders were either Impostors, and
deceivers, or deluded by a lying spirit, and deceived, See 1 Reg. 22.23. 2
These. 2.11. 2 Timothy 3.13. of this we have examples of above 1500 years old,
Rosse his View of all Religions, sect. 7. p. 184. Martinium de vera relig. p. 58
and in our days, if there be two men pretending to an immediate inspiration
from God, and the spirit that is in one be contradictory to the spirit that is
in the other, one of them (at least) is a spirit of delusion: Whence a

2. Reas. We cannot so certainly know whether it be God that speaks in us, as
that it is God that speaks in the Scripture, in that we may be mistaken, 2
Cor. 11.14. not so in this, 2 Pet. 1.21. Ioh. 9.29. Heb. 1.1. Galat. 1.1.11, 12.

3. Reas. Be the Inspiration or Impulse from whence it will, yet must the Word
of God be obeyed before it. I argue thus: That Power that is supreme, must
(caeteris paribus) be obeyed before that which is but subordinate: But the
power of Gods Word is supreme, and the power of Inspirations (as such) is
subordinate to it; ergo, etc. the minor proposition only needs proving, which
the definition of a supreme power will sufficiently do. Now a Summa potestas
est cujus actus alterius juri^n^n subs^nt. Grot. de jure belli, l. 1. c. 3.
ect. 7.
supreme power is that which is not questionable by any other jurisdiction: But
every Inspiration is so far under the jurisdiction of the Word of God, as that
it ought to be tried and judged by it; for which see, Gal. 1.8. 2 These. 2.2. 1
Ioh. 4.1. Acts 17.11. And this hinteth a

4. Reas. That which proves Inspirations to be true (in case they be so) must
needs be more certain and infallible (at least) to us, than the Inspirations
themselves. Else it were to prove ignotum per ignotius, a less obscurity by a
greater: Or thus that which has its evidence and certainty that it is such or
such from it self, Vera and perspicua censentur ea, quae non ab aliis, sed a
seipsis fidem habent. Sanderson. Just. Dialect. l. 3. c. 2.
is more evident and certain than that which borrows it elsewhere; but the
Scriptures (I speak to such as grant them to be the Word of God) have their
evidence and certainty ( viz. that they ought to be the rule of our faith and
practice) from themselves: revelations pretended to be from the spirit have
theirs elsewhere: [as before Reas. 3.] therefore the Scriptures are more evident
and certain, and by consequence a safer guide.

5. Reas. I am bound to follow the written Word of God absolutely, whatever
contradict it; not so Inspirations, which in case they be contradicted by the
Scriptures, I am to suppose them not to be from the spirit of God, which were
not a spirit of truth, Ioh. 14.17. nor of holiness, Ephesians. 4.30 were it contrary
to it self, to say one thing in the Scriptures, another thing in the Saints.

This is my faith as to this particular; those Impulses that are indeed from
the Holy Spirit of God will not; sanctified Reason will not, and (by the grace
of Christ) carnal reason shall not tempt me from seeing as much of God as I can
(where there is so full a sight of him) in the Gospel of his Son.

SECT. III. What courses dishonor the Gospel, and the evil of them.
I Shall not mention any thing of the language of those tongues against the
Gospel, which have been set on fire of hell, and endeavor to fasten upon it a
complexion as black as the mouths it drops from, lest I should teach what my
design is to reprove nor the opinion that some persons have of such as esteem
the Gospel of Christ, and profess to believe and practice by it, lest I should
seem to accuse an age of very high pretenses to religion and piety of suffering
the definition of both to be turned in and out. There be three ways of
dishonouring the Gospel, which I shall desire leave to complain of, viz.

1. When we profess it, and walk answerable to it: when we do see so much of
God in it, and do copy nothing of God upon our hearts, and practice from it;
this exposes it to the derision and contempt of the vilest men. Have not some
of them said, Aut hoc non est Evangelium, aut hi non sunt Christiani, Either
this is not the Gospel in which there is so much goodness, or these are not
Christians in whom there is none at all? Did not one wish, Sit anima mea cum
Philosophis, Let my soul be with the honest Philosophers who were Heathen, than
these wicked and lewd men called Christians? Have not others ascribed the
upholding of our Religion all this while to the excellency of our faith Hall
Christian Moderation, l. 2. p. 118.
, being well assured that our works were so bad, they could never have done it.
Who is it that hopes to be happy in the fruition of God, that can choose but
make tears his meat day and night, to see that Gospel reproacht, which is so
full of this God?

2. When we are not only lewd and licentious, but plead allowance for it from
the Gospel, pretending the liberty it proclaims to be carnal, and a license
for us to sin, by turning the grace of God into lasciviousness, Jude 4. and
expounding the design of it into a provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts
thereof. Is it not a damnable faculty those men have, to be able to fetch any
thing of hell out of that Gospel where there is so much of heaven? Is that
(...), that great gulf 'twixt these two places removed, that they can raise
such a line of Communication? This is to throw dirt in the very face of Jesus
Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. it is to accuse the Gospel of little less than panderism
to our most abhorred lusts.

3. When we measure the exhibition of our respects to the Gospel by our worldly
interests; owning or disowning the truths and ordinances of it, according to
what it is like to advantage or prejudice us in our outward concernments.
Joseph. Antiq. l. 11. c. 8.
It is the manner of the Samaritanes when the Jews are in affliction to deny
all acquaintance with them, they have no relation to any one of the Tribes; but
if the Jews (as such) have any beam of prosperity breaking out toward them
then the Samaritanes are their nearest Cosens, they can derive their pedigree
from Ephraim, and Manasses the Sons of Joseph. Those men no doubt have wit
enough to make some use of this story, who have not grace enough to make a
better use of the Gospel: A very foolish and sottish sin! Is not all that of
God which is discovered in the Gospel a prospect worth the looking upon,
unless you can see the world there too? Will you not have as much of heaven as
you may, lest you should not have so much of earth as you would? Will you have
nothing to do with God, unless you can enjoy him in conjunction with other
things? Pray consider, whether the full enjoyment of God in heaven, be to be
adventured upon, until we have studied, how it will suit our interest.

SECT. IV. What our behavior ought to be toward the Gospel.
THis will not seem impertinent to the times we are fallen into (however it may
to the precedent subject) if we have any sense how much we do underlive our
most holy profession. Yet, this additional sheet not being in my first
thoughts, I shall be as brief as in the rest of it, and only point at these
Duties.

1. Duty: Bless God for bringing you forth in Gospel Times, when Alexander was
born, his Father Philip blessed such Gods as he had, not so much that he had a
Son, as he had him in Aristotle's days Diis gratias agere debeo, non quia natus
est mihi filius, sed quod tuis temporibus ipsum nasci contingit.
; he was thankful for natural and moral discoveries. The Gospel is a discovery
of God, yea it is a vision of him in the next degree of clearness to that
which we shall have in heaven. The blessing of these gracious times is short of
nothing else but the blessing of that glorious eternity. The Saints had their
Hallelu-jah's for darker dispensations, Psalm. 147. ult.

2. Duty: In all your doubts and scruples have recourse to the Gospel. Never
ask what the Pharisees or Rulers do. Sure where there is most of God, you are
like to find most satisfaction.

3. Duty: Acquiesce and rest in the determinations of the Gospel. Will you
appeal from God? or is there more of him any where else?

4. Duty: Love the Gospel. Is any thing amiable that is not here? Sure I am, if
it be wisdom, here is the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 2.7. Beauty, here is the face of
Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. the fairest of ten thousand, Cant. 5.10. Splendour,
it is a glorious Gospel, 2 Cor. 4.4. Truth, it is the word of truth, Ephesians, 1.13,
Goodness, it is the good Word of God, Heb. 6.5. Piety, it is a Doctrine that is
according to godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3. Power, it is the arm of the Lord, Isa.
53.1. Peace, it is the Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6.15.

5. Duty: Take off by your practices whatever disparagements shall be cast upon
the Gospel. Will any say it is not the Word of God, and so make it such an
imposture as would cheat the whole Christian world of their precious souls?
Pray confute this blasphemy, by giving it such a power over your hearts and
lives, as none but the Almighty God can either challenge or exercise. Suffer it
to sway you, simply without any quatenus or limitation, against any
counter-co^mand under heaven. Will any say it is not a complete Rule for belief
and practice? You must disprove this slander, by keeping only and constantly to
it; and by professing that you do so; that peace may be upon you and mercy,
Gal. 6.16. because it is able to make you wise unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15.
because you may not receive any other, though an Angel offer it you, Gal. 1.8,
etc.

6. Duty: Be not ashamed of the Gospel, Romans 1.16. Will you be ashamed of your
God, will you blush at any degree of heaven? Timor justae vituperationis, and
rei turpiter actae.
Shame is a fear of reproof for some unseemly action, and is it such to own
your highest blessedness? It was a preamble to Peter's denial of Christ, that
he followed him afar off, Mat. 26.58. and Nicodemus was but in the infancy of
his Discipleship when he came to Jesus by night, Joh. 3.2. [Read 2 Timothy 2.12.
Luke 9.25, 26.]

7. Duty: Hold fast the Gospel: Do not part with one truth, one ordinance, one
duty of it. You have sad experience of the Devils nibling away of one piece of
some men's Religion after another, till they have no more left than David's fool
had, Psalm. 14.1.

8. Duty: Let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. So holy,
humble, harmless, honest, sober, just, chaste, peaceable, as becomes persons
owning a Gospel so full of a holy God. See Phil. 2.15, 16. 1 Timothy 6.1. Tit.
2.10. Why else do ye profess it? Answer that Quaere of Christ if you can in
Luke 6.46. See Mat. 7.23. Mat. 3.10. The Christianity of those that live
counter to this Gospel is but merely Qui non vivit ut ipse docuit, certum id
documentum est, non esse Christianum. Just. Mart. ad Anton. orat, p. 128.
titular, that which is indeed true, Christianismus est similitudo Dei quantum
possibile est humanae naturae. Basil.
is as fair and full a draught of God upon the soul as it is capable of in a
body of death. For a conclusion take Phil. 4.8, 9.

The Table.
PART. I. The First Proposition, viz. The highest happiness of the Saints is
the enjoyment of God. This is
1 Explained by showing.
FIrst, What the enjoyment of God is made up of 1 The knowledge of God, to let
in Which he opens 1 His face, 2 Our understandings
2 Influences from God 3 Acquiescence in God 4 Converse with God Secondly, What
our highest happiness is viz. 1. A perfect good. 2. In possession. 3. Excluding
every evil. 4. Filling every desire.

2. Proved,
1. By Scripture. 2. By Reason, all that makes us happy, is in God only being a
good 1. Pure, 2. Sufficient. 3. Satisfying.
3. Illustrated, by
3. Particulars.
First, All our happiness here, is in what we enjoy of God here, proved by 1.
God. 2. The Saints.
Secondly, Gods blessedness is in the enjoyment of himself, Proved by 1.
Scriptures, 2. Reason.
Thirdly, The greatst misery of the damned is, that they do not enjoy God.
4. Improved, by way of
First, Information in five Particulars, viz. 1. God is of a transcendent
goodness, 1. In himself, 2. To his people.
2. In things where there is most of God, there is most of happiness. 3. It is
a false draught of Heaven that is not made to consist in the enjoyment of God.
4. Most men but pretenders to a desire of going to Heaven, as 1. Defying the
means where God may be enjoyed. 2. Trading in practices, where they cannot
expect it.
5. Who are a peoples greatest enemies.
Secondly, Reproof, of such as place their happiness in outward things, where
Their 1. Charracter, 2. Folly.
Thirdly, Exhortation: To labor for the enjoyment of God, where First,
Motives: From the excellency, 1. Of its Object, God, 2. Of its Act, in respect
of Its 1. Kind 2. Degree.

Secondly, Directions, viZ. 1 Increase your Knowledge, 2 Maintain your
assurance. 3 Abate of your love to the world. 4 Walk close with God.
Fourthly, Declaration why we enjoy no more of God in Ordinances, either we do
1 Neglect them. 2 Not seek God in them. 3 Not seek God in all of them. 4 Not
seek after a due Order.

PART. II. The Second Proposition laid down.
That enjoyment of God which is the Saints highest Happiness, shall be
immediate, sole, free, full, and everlasting.

FIrst, That it shall be immediate, is. 1 Proved, by 4 Particulars, viz. 1
Christ's Kingdom shall be delivered up. 2 All rule, etc. shall be put down. 3 To
enjoy God by means is to see him but in a glass. 4 Gods immediate enjoyment
groaned after by the Saints.
2 Applied in 3 particulars, viz. 1 The enjoyment of God by means, far short of
what it shall be without them. 2 When the Saints shall be above the need of
Ordinances. 3 Death desirable.

Secondly, That it shall be Sole. 1 Proved, in that 1 God shall be all. 2 The
world shall be ended. 3 Much of our enjoyment is by love. 4 The Saints thirst is
after God Solely.
2 Applied, by way of First, Exhortation to 4 duties. Secondly, Instruction in
3 things, viz. 1 Its impossible to make the Saints miserable. 2 The less we
have of the world, the more we may have of happiness. 3 No cause to be troubled
at the dissolution of all things.


Thirdly, That it shall be Free. 1 Proved in that 1 All Enemies shall be
subdued. 2 Every disturbance of Enjoyment is an Eclipse of happiness.

2 Applied, for our 1 Information, No Heaven where any sin. 2 Instruction, how
to be much in Heaven here. 3 Comfort, In Heaven we shall enjoy God freely.
Fourthly, That it shall be Full. 1 Proved, in that 1 Our enjoyment here and
hereafter, do but differ gradually. 2 Else, every evil not removed, etc.
2 Applied, To show us, that 1 The happiest sight of God, out of Heaven is in
the Gospel. 2 The longings of the Saints after more of God shall be satisfied.

Fifthly, That it shall be everlasting. 1 Proved, by 1 Scripture. 2 Reason,
else. 1 A posibility of being miserable. 2 Some place for fear.
2 Applied by way of 1 Exhortation, Place not happiness in any thing that shall
have an end. 2 Comfort, afflictions short, happiness Eternal.

The whole Applied very briefly. 1 In what sense we are said to be happy in
this life. 2 No nature below ours, capable of blessedness. 3 It is not vain to
serve God.

ERRATA.
PAge 5. lin. 25. for all one, read alone, p. 7. l. 3 prefix to the beginning of
the l. 5. p. 10. l 7. for without r. with our. p. 17. l. 22. for frownesse r.
frowns. p. 30. l. 12. dele ha^^ p. 30. l. 17. for come r. came. p. 31. l 13.
for fondly r. formerly. p. 46. l. penult. add 2.

FINIS.

