To the Right Honorable William, Earl of Craven; John, Earl of Bath; John,
Lord Berkley; George, Lord Cartret; Anthony, Lord Ashley; Sir John Colleton,
Barronet: Being Proprietors of Carolina, and the Bahama Islands.
Thomas Bulkley, a Freeholder, Inhabitant and Merchant of New Providence (one
of the said Islands) Humbly presents the following Address, Viz.
WHereas (by sundry papers Presented to Your Lordships for Your perusal;) I the
said Bulkley, have informed You largly and particularly of the Numerous and
Highly aggravated Crimes and Misdemeanors of Cadwallader Jones, late Governor
of Your last named Province, in and through the whole time that he presided
there; and of my long continued Cruel Sufferings (under his Usurped Tyrannical
power) for my Loyalty to the King, Fidelity and Zealous Service to Your
Lordships, and the Inhabitants of Your said Province: And that after I was
delivered by Law, I demanded Legal Process against Jones, his wicked Abettors,
and Agents; but it was Corruptly denied to me by Nicholas Trott, (whom Your
Lordships Commissioned to succeed Jones in the Government of the Bahama
Islands, and by Governor Blake, and the rest of Your Judicial Officers at
Carolina, and presented Proposals to Your Lordships, Viz. That You would put me
into a Capacity by Law to Obtain speedy Justice in the Reparation of my
Damages, and the Condign Punishment of my barbarous Oppressors, and those who
by a perjurious neglect of doing Justice, have promoted their Escape, all which
Papers I hope Your Lordships have thoroughly perused, and duly considered, and
my just Expectations and Supplications as aforesaid, the Reasonableness
whereof, I humbly offer to Your Lordships further consideration, in the
particulars following.

I.
Because the Office and Exorbitant Power whereby Jones was enabled and
imboldened to commit those horrible Crimes Alleged against him, and to Oppress
me so cruelly for my opposing him therein regularly and according to the duty
of my Place and Station in the Government, was Conferred on him by Commission
and instructions from Your Lordships without due Examination of his fitness for
discharging the dutys thereof, for, if You had made but a slight inquisition
into his inabilitys for Government, You would soon have discerned that
privatively and positively he was utterly unqualified for the meanest Office of
Power and Public Trust instituted for the common benefit of humane Society,
being destitute of all Moral Endowments requisite thereunto, and habitually
propense to such Vices which to restrain from, and punish for, was a principal
end of Erecting and Establishing Government among Men.

II.
Because soon after he was Instaled in his Office, his Address to Your
Lordships, his Letters to Col. Colleton, Governor of Carolina, against
Proprietor Southwel, to Sir Robert Robinson Governor of Burmudas, to Mr. Simon
Musgrave, Atorney General at Jamaica, and to Mr. Samuel Trott, Collector at
Burmudas, being all stuffed with Nonsensical Rallery, and nauceous scurrility,
manifested him to be an impudent shatter brained Idiot, fitter for Bedlam, or
Bridewell, than any place of Authority; yet you continued him near four years
in the Administration of that Suprem Office; wherein his whole managment has
been greatly to the dishonor of Your Lordships, and damage of the people
inhabiting Your said Province.

III.
Because all his barbarous and unjust dealings with me, have been done by
Color of his Office, and by pretended Authority from Your Lordships, whose
Names he has constantly used to imbolden his Agents in the Execution of his
unlawful Precepts; Viz. To Imprison people without any cause, detain them
during his pleasure, break their Houses and Rob them of their goods, etc.
Whereby he has Represented Your Lordships as a company of Nimrods, that
delight in hunting men to destruction, and therefore send such beasts of prey
to Rule over them.

IV.
Because Nicholas Trott (who succeeded Jones in the Government of the said
Province by Commission from Your Lordships,) denied me my
Birth-right-priviledge, viz. the benefit of the Laws of England, for my own
relief, and the Exemplary punishment of my merciless oppressors; the chief of
whom he preferred to places of great Dignity and Authority in the Government,
though guilty of, and accused for Traiterous and Felonious Conspiracys,
Burglarys, and other heinous Crimes, and at the same time held me a close
Prisoner, denying me Bail, and delaying my Trial two months after he became
Governor, though I had then been hardly imprisoned under Jones his Usurpation
14 months, and when I was cleared by Law, and in the King's Name demanded Legal
Process against Jones, and Graves; he permitted both to Re^ire out of the
Province, whereby they have Escaped Demerited-punishment, and because the said
Trott has Assumed and Exercised an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Power over the
Persons, Libertys, and Propertys of the Kings Subjects inhabiting Your said
Province, ever since he came to the Government.

V.
Because through the denials of Justice by Your Lordships Ministers at
Providence, and Carolina; I am Necessitated to leave the Place of my Settled
Habitation and Trade, my Lands, Houses, Goods, and Debts of great value, and to
Expose my self to great Perril of Life and Liberty, and to great Expense of
time and money in Traveling 3000 miles over the Seas, viz. From Providence to
England, to spread my deplorable Case before Your Lordships, to whom only (
Trott says) Jones is answerable for the male Administration of his Office; and
by the Denials aforesaid, I am deprived of witnesses here [viva voce] to prove
the matters of Fact which I have Aledged against them, and for which I am bound
to prossecute.

VI.
Because they who have the disposal of Offices for Administration of Justice,
ought not to put into them any but such as are duly qualified, and for whom
they will answer, the Law says Respondeat Superior, which is the reason why
Security is required for such Officers before they can Execute their respective
Offices; otherwise the Persons sustaining* damage by their ignorant or corrupt
Errors, would be destitute of remedy, whereby those Offices that are appointed
for common benefit, would become the most Common and only Remediles grievances.

VII.
Because Your Lordships (by whom Jones, Trott, Blake, etc. were Vested with the
said Offices and Exorbitant powers which Enabled and Imboldened them, their
Abettors and Agents to do those Acts of monstrous Cruelty and Injustice to me,
and whereby I have been deprived of the benefit of the Laws for my own relief,
and their punishment) are beyond expression better able to repair my Losses and
Damages, than I am to bear them, who have lost a Virtuous Wife (frighted to
Death by the Burglarious and other Terrifying Acts of Violence done by the said
Jones and his Accomplices) my own health, by hard and long Imprisonment, my whole
Estate in Lands, etc. as aforesaid; am put out of all manner of Employment,
disabled to pay my Debts, and to betake my self to the Free and Public
Exercise of any Occupation, for maintaining my self and Offspring; or to be in
any considerable degree useful in my Generation, in which Case, Life is
undesirable to a good man.

The Exorbitant Powers (in the first f^r^going Reason) said to be Conferred by
Your Lordships upon Jones, were that by Commission You empowered him, and by
instructions directed him to appoint a Deputy to Each Proprietor according to
his pleasure, and every Deputy so appointed to be always a Member of the Grand
Council, and of the Upper House in the General Assembly, and to hold those
Places of Dignity and Authority during his pleasure: And he with the consent of
three Deputys of his own Election and appointment, to Ratify or Reject such
Laws as should be chosen by the Peoples Representatives Convened in a General
Assembly, also to Adjourn, Prorogue and Dissolve the Assembly at their
Arbitrary will and pleasure, which Powers the said Jones has corruptly used to
the Subverting of the very Ends of Government, in appointing Indigent
Illiterate and Vicious Men to be your Deputys; whereof some have been
Notoriously guilty of Capital Crimes: These being introduced by his favor and
holding their Places duranto been placito, by their servile Compl^ance with him
in his Arbitrary and oppressive Practices, and Traiterous Conspiracies, have
furthered the Execution thereof, and frustrated the good Effect of all Legal
means used, for limiting his Exorbitant power, and Redressing the Peoples
intolerable grievances, under his Tyranny. By the Advice and Consent of such
dependent Creatures, he has procured long Intermissions, undue Elections, and
abrupt Dissolutions of General Assemblies, and thereby has Defeated the chief
Ends of the Constitution and Convention of that Supreme Court, viz. Enacting
beneficial Laws, Redressing Grievances, and correcting the Exorbitances of
pernicious Favorites and corrupt Ministers of State

To evince the truth of what is said concerning his choice of Deputys, I
present Your Lordships with a Catalogue of the Names, and a description of the
Persons who were appointed to be Your Deputys, by Cadwallader Jones, in the
time of his Tyrannical Government of Your said Province, viz. from the 19th day
of June Anno 1690. to the 16th day of April 1694. viz. Himself, whose
description you have had before; Bartholomew Mercier, an indigent French Alien,
and a Robber of French Protestant Refugees; John Graves, a perpetual
Incendiary; Gilbert Ashley, Bowen Clasen, Allen Abbot, a Pirate, Timothy
Rumney, a reputed Papist, [the two last were chosen Deputys to strengthen a
Conspiracy to Banish Bulkley, for opposing Jones his Tyranny in a Parliamentary
way] Richard Holloway, Daniel Jackson, a Notorious Pirate; Martin Cock, a
servant to a Punch-house-keeper; Thomas Cumber, an Illiterate man, who could
not write his own Name; Thomas Peck, Thomas Williams, a Notorious Pirate;
Ashley and Clasen (being sencible and sober men) were displaced by Jones, and
Halloway avoided the same fate, by going to Jamaica.

That the Character I have given of Jones may be Evidently verified, I have
inserted his Letter to Mr. Samuel Trott, and the Answers thereunto, also Sir
Peter Colleton's Letter to Jones, as a Specimen thereof, Viz.

A LETTER from Cadwallader Jones, Governor of the Bahama Islands in America
(by Commission from the Right Honorable William Earl of Craven, John Earl of
Bath, John Lord Berkley, George Lord Cartret, Anthony Lord Ashley, and Sir
Peter Colleton, Barronet, being Proprietors of the said Province.) Superscribed
to Sam. Trott, Esquire, Governor would be of the Bahamas, and his Counsel, in
Barmudas. Humbly present, per Capt. Walmsley.
My nefarious Friend, Samuel Trott,
Let thy Villainies and Treasonable Conspiracies rot.
Your little thoughts, and Forging Hands,
Will bring you where the Gallows stands.
By chance a Collector, but now a Projector,
Will Murder do, to prove your self a Hector.
First to begin, he causes Reports of Walmsley,
Bridge was sure of him, I Would make Mummy.
Great is our God and does Commiserate,
Those Inprinciples that Sin do hate.
Your Mountain has brought forth a Mouse,
Your Petition and Faction I value not a Louse.
There is no danger of a Popish Successor,
And of the Church of England I Will be a Professor.
Call your Conventicle and be Damned,
I Will make you know in Province I stand.
Nassav, October. 12, 1691. Cadwallader Jones.

Postscript.
Sarra,

I desire no Dogs from your Island, with their Families to settle here, you may
remember St. John in his New Jerusalem, Without are Dogs, Sorcers, etc. which I
take to be Non-con's, that St. John means, such as you and your Subscribers,
which makes me use his just Title given you.

Its true, I cannot hinder you, the Land is before you; but I Will make you pay
the Church Honorably by a Vestry. I expect an Ordained Minister every day, and
Sarra let me tell you it is in my power in Spite of your Malice; you have not
all the Bishops in the Tower yet, and more I have Escaped, being murdered by
you and your Subscribers Machinations. The 29th past is worse on your sides.

In few days a Parliament meets, the Discourse of the City is That to prevent
your Factious Masters of Sloops daily Robberies in our Out Plantations, and to
obstruct your Trade, be it Enacted, That any Barmuda Men (coming into our Ports
or Havens) that cannot say the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and the Ten
Commandments, shall not have liberty to Trade; it is as rational as the Jews and
Samaritans, you the Jews daily contriving the Killing of Kings. I Will say no
more of you the World Rings.

Nassau, October. the 12th 1691. Cadwallader Jones.

Governor Jones's Accrostick on the name of Trott, follows, viz.

True its said your Sisters anells shape
Rough thou and Brow, much the Ape.
Ought Sip thou shall for thy Rebellion,
Tric'd I doubt not by a second Gideon.
C. J.

An Answer to the foregoing Letter from the said Samuel Trott, Collector at
Barmudas, the Inscription being as follows, viz.
To the much Admired Cadwallader Jones, Esquire Capt. General and Governor of the
Islands called New Providence, Elutheria, Exuma, Cat Island, and Hog Island,
and over all Persons therein of what Color soever, Whites, Blacks, or
Muletto's, and of all Animals, and Insects, of every Kind and Quality.
Great Sir,

TO you these Lines are Dedicated, for (having received yours dated the 12th) I
could do no less in gratitude than return you an answer, not doubting your
acceptance thereof. I intended to have followed your method of Verse before
Prose, but considering you put me in remembrance of St. John in his New
Jerusalem, in return threunto, I send you one of King Solomon's Proverbical
Ethics, viz. Answer not a Fool according to his Folly, least thou be like him.
What I have now written may serve to settle your Windmil-Brain, when you return
from your Exchange, Vulgarly called a Rum-Punch House. The Superscription and
Seal of your Letter, was very pleasing to me, much more the Poetical Ingenuity
of your Verses, and the Courtly style of your Prose, the rarity whereof, my Pen
is too dull to Express. It exceeds Tom Thumb in Folio, or Don Quixot de Sancta
Delapancha, the whole being so Savory, that all the Salt brought from Cat
Island by our Interlopers (without your Clearings) could not have given so
Savory a Relish. I mention the said Learned Authors supposing you have spent
much of your time in Reading them, in order to better accomplish you for
Government: O how unfortunate have I been, so long to be unacquainted with you,
being a person of such Incomparable parts, and Admirable Qualifications, that I
am persuaded no Academy in Europe has produced your Equal, except the College
of Bedlam, where I presume you have passed all Degrees. I am unwilling to
trouble you with a long Epistle, else I would give you some account of the
Medicinal Virtues and wonderful Operations of your Letter upon some People here
(on which account, I think it well deserves to be called Coll. Jones's
Catholicon) but you will have it from another hand. I had been more speedy in
my answer, but a report of your being put on Board a Vessel in order to your
Transportation, diverted me. If you please to send any more of your
Compositions, they shall be posted up for public Advertisement. I have naught
to add, but conclude Saluting you with a Panegyric Poem on your Excellencies
singular Endowments, Achievements, and Merits, viz.

Blaze forth Great Jones with thy ingenious Fire,
'Twill make the Aged and the Wise admire.
Display the Beams of thy rare Virtues, and
Raise Castles great by thy Industrious hand,
Near tell us that in Providence you stand,
More fit you are Utopia to Command:
Such thundering Words as yours, how could they come
From the dull Spirits of insippid Rum.
For we assure you, never yet before,
Such Lines have reached our Petrified Shore.
Brave Jones be stout, and still have Courage Bold,
Rum very shortly will be cheaper Sold.
But stay my muse, and let him have the Praise,
Nature has crowned his Head with wreathed Bays.
Postscript.
Sir,

I almost forgot to answer your Accrostick, pray accept the following, from
yours, Samuel Trott.

Jones from Virginia lately ran away,
October was the Month as People say,
Now he tells us in Providence he does stand,
E're long he will run from thence or will be Hanged,
Such Fools as he nere knew how to Command.
An Abstract of a LETTER from Barmudas to Cadwallader Jones, Governor of the
Bahama Islands.
Sir,

YOur Letter directed to Governor would be of the Bahaman's and his Counsel,
has come to my hand; and I (having a great respect for the person to whom it
was sent) thereupon held my self obliged to give my own and others thoughts of
that Letter. The style of your verses I much admire, but they run not very
smooth, through the inequality of their Feet; a certain person who had a sight of
them, said, if a Schoolboy seven years old had writ such stuff, he would have
Jerk'd him till he Beshit himself.

Your said Letter has produced various Effects here, for in all Companies
(when merrily disposed) we have News from Nassau. The Women have it too, and
use it instead of Raw Head and Bloody Bones to Affright their Children out of
cross grained Humors. Some more of your Compositions would be of great use
here, for I am informed the sight of them (pasted up over the Pissing places)
will cure a Clap more Infallibly than Aqua Tetrachy machacon, or, Mercurius
Dulcis. An unlucky Doctor (to a person much troubled with Gross Humors)
prescribed a Dose of it as Purging Physic, of which, the Patient taking but
one Verse, it gave him Fifteen Stools. A Maggot Pated Fellow (like your self)
ancy'd he had an Allegator or young Crockadile in his Belly, and to deliver him
of it, a Vomit was judged most propper, and a Potion of the Infusion of Crocus
Metallorum, fitter for a Horse than a Man was prescribed, but it proved
ineffectual, not being strong enough; Then said an arch wag, give the Gentleman
part of Governor Jones his Letter, thereupon they agreed to give him your
Accrostick on the name Trott, but before the Patient had taken half of it, they
thought he would vomit up his Heart, Liver and Lungs, by the violent opperation
of this strong Emettick.

Sir, I have no other News whereof to Advertise you, but for as much that I
have heard the same of your profound Wisdom, in resolving intricate Questions
(being a second Solomon in your own conceit) I propose this Question to you,
viz If a Man be found to be Felo de se, by the Coronors Inquest, whether the
Law in such case will afford him the Benefit of the Clergy, and desire the
Favor of your opinion by the first oppertunity: In granting thereof, you will
Infinitely oblige him that (with an Accrostick on your Surname) takes leave,
remaining, Sir, your Extraordinary welwisher -- Palmarin de Olwa, alias,
Lazarill des Agnes I tell thee what, Cad. Jones thou art the sport,
Of each Lewd Fellow, and the Common sort.
Never such a Fool as you, who would seem witty,
E're yet was found in Nassau City.
So far you well, if more I Am sure it is pity.


A Letter from Sir Peter Colleton (then a Proprietor of Carolina and the Bahama
Islands) to Cadwallader Jones, Governor of the said Islands, Directed for him,
in Providence, as follows,
Coll. Jones,

I Wrote to you by Coll. Ludwell, since when no Oppertunity has presented
until now, I have read several Letters from you, and have also had the perusal
of your Packet Directed to the Earl of Craven, and take notice of the Letters
you writ to Mr. Musgrave, and Mr. Trott, in which Packet, Coppys of them were
enclosed; and have also seen the Copy of the Letter you wrote to Sir Robert
Robertson, Governor of Barmudas; I was in hopes you had seen your Error in
writing such Letters as that was to Sir Robert; But those you sent since to
Simon Musgrave, and Mr. Samuel Trott, Convince the Lords you have not; but
persist in the same indiscretion: For no man that sees these Letters, but must
conclude they came from the Pen of a Man out of his senses; And that you
Expose, the Reputation of the Lords by them: For what will the world think of
their Employing a Man as Governor, that has no more prudence than to send
such Extravagant Letters, up and down the world, and send Coppys of them to the
Lords Proprietors, that they also may be witnesses of his Indiscretion. They
(to vindicate themselves) have thought fit to Empower Mr. Nicholas Trott to be
Governor of the Bahama Islands, to whom you are to Surrender the Government: I
am heartily sorry it should so fall out, The Lords have a great kindness and
respect for you, and will be willing to do what is in their power for you, but
they are answerable to the King for the good Government of the Places granted
to them, and cann^t answer the not doing what they have now done. Write me what
you think may be of advantage for you, that they can do, and I will get it
dispach'd for you: I am your very Affectionate Friend.

P. Colleton.
London the 3d of Febr. 1692.
Postscript.
My Lords,

THE Sufferings that undeservedly I have undergon by the Oppression and
Injustice of your Ministers, ( viz. Jones, Trott, and your Deputys Chosen and
Appointed by them) have been so Great, and continued so Long, that I cannot
digest them, therefore I have waded through great Difficulties and Dangers in
coming from Providence to England for Redress. And since my Arival here, I have
truly represented my Case to your Lordships, so as would move the Hearts of
every one (that is not degenerated from Christianity, M^rality, and Humanity)
with pity to the Oppressed, and Indignation against the Barbarous Oppressors.
As to my self, when I reflect upon the resentment Expressed by all the tribes
of Israel (the Culpable only excepted) in the Levites Case, Recorded in the
Sacred History, viz. the 20th Chap. of Judges, from the 1st to the 14. Verse, I
am filled with Astonishment at your strange Vnaffectedness with the Relation
that has been made to you of the Agents Monstrous Villainies, and the patients
dreadful Sufferings in this Case (which far exceeds the Levits in heinous
Aggravations) especially if you consider how much you have contributed to both,
by putting the too Edged Sword of Supreme Authority into the hand of an
Indigent-Vitious-Frantick-Fool, who has daily used it to the dishonor of your
Lordships, and destruction of the Kings best Subjects inhabiting your Province,
ever since he was admitted to the Government, and above all others to the ruin
of me, who once more apply my self to you for Redress, the which if you do not
speedily grant me, I shall be obliged to bring my Complaints against your
Delegates, and your selves, before the King and Counsel, to whom Sir Peter
Colleton (in his Letter to Jones) has acknowledged you are accountable for the
Government of the Provinces granted to you by the Charters of His Majesty's
Royal Predecessors.

Your Lordships Answer to this my last Adress, is Humbly Expected and Desired
by your Actively and Possively welldeserving, though Ignobly and Unmercifully
disregarded Servant,

T. B.


