THE Duke of Buckingham HIS SPEECH To the King in Parliament April 4. 1628.

LONDON Printed Anno Domini, 1641.

The Duke of Buckingham having been all the day ill disposed in his health,
and his countenance very sad, stood up and said.
Sir,
ME thinks, I now behold you a a great King, for love is greater then Majesty.
Opinion, that your people loved you not, had almost lost you in the opinion of
the World: but this day makes you appear as you are, A glorious King, loved at
home, and now, to be feared abroad. This falling out so happily, give me leave,
I beseech you, to be an humble Suitor to your Majesty, that I, who have had
the honor to be your Favorite, may now give up that title unto them: They to
be your Favorite, and I to be your servant. My second suit is, That they
having done so well, you will account of them all as one: A body of many
Subjects, but all of one heart. Opinion might have made them differ; but
Affection did move them all to join with like love, in this great gift: which,
though for proportion it be less then your occasions may ask, Yet is it more
then ever subjects did give in so short a time. Nor am I persuaded it will rest
here; For this is but as an earnest of their affections; to let you see, and
the World know, what subjects you have: and that when your Honor, and the good
of the State is engaged, and Aid asked, in the ordinary way of a Parliament, you
cannot want; This gift not being five Subsidies alone, but the opening of a
Mine of Subsides, which lies in their hearts. This good beginning has wrought
already these effects; That they have taken your heart, Drawn from you a
Declaration, that again you will love Parliaments; and this will be met (I make
no question) with such respect, that their Demands will be just, dutiful, and
moderate. For they that know thus to give, know well what is fit to ask. Then
cannot your Majesty but outgo their Demands, or else, you do less then your
self or them: For your Message begot trust, Their trust of your promises, must
then beget performance; And this being done, then shall I (with a glad heart)
hold this work as well ended, as it is now begun. Then shall I hope that
Parliaments shall be made hereafter so frequent by the effects, and good use
of them, as shall have this further benefit, to deter from approaching your
ears, those Projectors, and inducers of innovation, that disturb both Church
and Commonwealth, and who dare not appeaer but at these times, when they judge
there is no Union of hearts and affections, between your Majesty, and your
people.

And give me leave Sir, to say, that this Parliament has given me more then
your felf, since they have now, by giving themselves to you, given me liberty,
to serve both in one, without jealousy in either: So that now, I am in more
then a hope to re-gaine that which I esteem dearer then my life, that is,
their love.

And Sir, to open my heart, and ease my griefs, May it please you to pardon me
a word more. I must confess, I have long lived in pain; Sleep has given me no
rest; Favors and Fortunes, no content: such have bin my secret sorrows, to be
thought the man of separation, which divided the King from his people; and them
from him. But I hope it shall appear, They were but some mistaken minds, that
would have made me the evil spirit, that wrought ill Offices, between a good
Master, and his Loyal subjects; whereas, by your Majesty's favor I shall ever
endeavor, to approve my self a good spirit, breathing nothing but the best of
services to them all: And therefore this day. I account more blessed to me then
my birth day, to see my self able to serve them; To see you brought in love
with Parliaments, And a Parliament to express such love to you.

Love them I beseech you: And God so love me and mine, as I joy to see this day.

FINIS.

