THE ANTINOMIANS CHRIST CONFOVNDED, AND THE LORDS CHRIST EXALTED.

In which is contained a brief confutation of Dr. CRISPE and Mr LANCASTER.
Also, a Combat with the Antinomians Christ in his Den, his arraignment; and the
fainting Soul built upon the true rock, against which the gates of hell shall
not prevail, Mat. 6.18.

Imprimatur James Cranford.

If any man will do his will, he shall know the Doctrine, whether it be of
God, or whether I speak of my self,

John. 7.17. Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might
be saved; for this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should
believe lies, that they all may be damned who believe not the Truth, but take
pleasure in unrighteousness,

2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. Many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and
shall deceive many; then if any shall say unto you, lo, here is Christ, or
there, believe it not; for there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets,
and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch, that if it were possible,
they shall deceive the very elect; wherefore if they say unto you, behold he is
in the desert, go not forth; behold he is in the secret chambers, believe it
not,

Mat. 24.5.23, 24, 26. London, printed for Thomas Banks, and are to be sold at
his shop in Blackfriars on the top of Bridewell-staires. 1644.

To the READER.
Christian Reader,
IN my first Book against the Antinomians, I gave thee a short view of their
Errors in five general heads, with a brief and plain answer to them; and
having laid open to the world their ugliness, in their own native colors,
they began to be ashamed to own them, and like common Whores, who seek to
escape away and to leave their, bastards upon the parish, so these men when
shame followed their errors; they sought to escape away from them, by denying
of them; but witnesses came in so fast both from their Sermons and from their
books, and from conference with them, that they could not so rid their bands of
them; yet being unable to maintain them all, away they fled to Gods decrees
for a protection, and for maintenance of the first of those, which is this,
That a man is justified actually in the sight of God, before and without faith
and calling; this being immediately begottten by them, their care was more for
it then for the rest, which they did but rake out of Eatons dunghill, and their
labor there was but to raise up children to their eldest brother; but as for
this which was of their own begetting, was very dear unto them, and they say
that they will be torn in pieces with wild horses before that they will leave
it; hereupon they ride post to Gods decrees to fetch from thence some
maintenance for it, but a faithful messenger was sent after them to try their
power in that last place of refuge, and in his pursuit of them, he found their
Christ exalted above all by Crispe and Lancaster but he being a burden too
heavy for them, down fell he and fled to his den; but the faithful messenger
being sent, and having commission from the Lords Christ, followed him to his
den, and there he was set upon by seven of his chiefest soldiers, and a true
relation of the combat, and of his victory over them, and how he sore wounded
them with uncurable wounds, and brought away their Christ to his trial; and
after a true discovery of him, comparing him to the Lords Christ, he was sound
not worthy to be trusted in for salvation, but rather to be condemned for high
treason and blasphemy, and the Lords Christ alone exalted alove all for ever;
therefore try all things, and hold fast that which is good, 1 These. 5.21. and
be no more carried about with diverse and strange doctrines; for it is a good
thing that the heart be established with grace, Heb. 13.9. as ye have therefore
received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him, rooted and built up in him,
and established in the faith, as ye have been taught abounding therein with
thanksgiving; and beware least any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain
deceit, Col. 2.6, 7, 8. and that thou may be built upon the true rock Jesus
Christ, and stand like Mount Zion unmovable, Psalm. 125.1. Mat. 16.18.7.24. 1
Cor. 3.12. I have laid here before thee the grounds of true Christian Religion
by way of Question and answer; read it with an honest and sincere endeavor to
be settled in the truth, and I doubt not but thou shall see that the spirit of
God will lead thee into all truth, John 16.13. and the Comforter, which is the
holy Ghost, whomthe Father will send in the name of Christ, he will teach you
all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, John 14.26. therefore I
pray thee read it, and if thoureceive any benefit, give God the praise, and me
remember in thy prayers; and so I commend thee to God, whom I know is able to
keep that which I have committed unto him, 2 Timothy 1.12. and so I rest, unless
I be again provoked by these troublers of Israel, but the mean time I remain

Thine in all Christian duties, THOMAS BAKEWELL.

THE ANTINOMIANS CHRIST Confounded, and the LORDS CHRIST EXALTED.
I Borrowed those fourteen Sermons of Doctor Crisps in which the Antinomians
say, Christ alone is exalted, but I found so many errou^s in it, that it would
have been endless to have answered them all distinctly one after another; and
having the Book but two days in my hand therefore I thought fit to gather the
substance of them to these c^r^aine heads; first those errors about
redemption: secondly those about possession; thirdly those about justification;
fourthly, those about the new Covenont: fi^^ly those about a holy conversation;
with a brief and plain answer to them, to show how Christ alone by them is
exalted. First, their errors about redemption, the Doctor says, we may
collect the universality of redemption of all and every particular man in the
world, page 296. this he illustrates by this comparison saying, That the Lord
pardons sinners as when a King by proclamation sends forth a general pardon
for all Thieves without exception; so that if a man be but a Thief it is
enough the pardon is sent him as a deed of gift universally exhibited page 162
163. but says the Lord to Jerusalem, how shall I pardon thee for this? thy
children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no gods they commit
adultery and assemble themselvesn ^^roops to the harlots houses, Jer. 5.7. obey
his voice, provoke him not, for he will not pardon your transgressions for my
name is in him. Exodus 23.21. some sinners shall never be purged from their
filthiness. Ez^k. 24.13. he that blasphemes against the holy Ghost shall never
be forgiven Mat. 12.31. then is his pardon for all sinners, he calls none but
those that are heavy laden with their sins Mat. 11.28. and excludes those that
cry Lord Lord and will not do the will of his Father, M^l. 7.21, 22. and casts
him into utter darkness that comes without his wedding garment Mat. 22.12.13.
he is the author of eternal salvation; but to whom? answ. to them that obey
him. Heb. 5.9. then did Christ redeem every particular man in the world? if
this be so, then the Evangelist was much to blame to say, he gave his life a
ransom for many if he redeemed all. Mat. 20.18. and if this were so, why did
not Christ say, that he laid down his life as well for Goats as for his Sheep,
John 10.11. and Christ says I pray not for the world, but for those that thou
have given me: then would not Christ vouchsafe to pray for all and would he
spill his blood for all? John 17.9. so then I conclude that Christ was
foreordained for you who do believe in God that raised him from the dead, and
gave him glory that your faith and hope might be in God, 1 Pet. 1.20 21.

Let this suffice because Master Lancaster was so shamed when he was very
briefs to soea^e against the Arminians; and I demanded whether it was not
Arminianisme to say that Christ redeemed every particular man in the world, he
answered, yes; then I showed him this of the Doctor, at which he was so blank
that he had not one word to say, but that the Printer had mistook it, so much
for the first head of errouts.

The second head of errors is about possession, the Doctor says that Christ
is actually delivered unto a man before ever his blind eyes be opened or they
come out of prison, or before they have any gracious qualifications whatsoever,
page 154. I demanded of Master Lancaster how this could be, for he that is in
Christ is a new creature, 2 Cor 5.17. and further, I said that the humanity of
Christ is in heaven, and the essence of Christ fills all places and is in all
creatures as well as in men, for in him they live, move, and have their being,
Acts 17.28. then said I this cannot be understood, that Christ should enter
personally and take possession, but graciously when he works grace in the
soul, and stampeth his own Image upon it; to this he replied, that it was a
gracicus possession and yet before any qualification; I replied again, that it
was nonsense to say that Christ enters into the soul, and before that he
works grace when as the infusion of grace is the entance of Christ into the
soul; he said, this grace was the love and favor of God; to this I said, the
words are, he has a possession of Christ, which cannot be without faith, this
he granted; but says he, Christ may enter into us and have a possession before
any gracious qualification; I having drawn out his full meaning, answered,
that it was horrible blasphemy to say that Christ lives graciously in that
soul where the devil reigns as lord and king, or to say that Christ dwells in
a cage of unclean and filthy lusts, or to say that he is an idle spirit doing
nothing, or an underling to the devil, or to say that the devil is the Lord
and rules any of the living members of Christ; yet says Crispe, art thou
rebellious, an enemy, ungodly, a harlot, nay, art thou worse then enmity it
self, Christ came for thee; mark, while thou art thus, and no better then
thus, before thou art any better, page 67. whosoever thou art in this
Congregation, suppose a drunkard, a whoremonger, a swearer, a blasphemer, a
persecutor, a madman, in iniquity, yet could thou but come to Jesus Christ,
I say only come; mark he mean^s a carnal coming for says he it is no
matter though there he no alteration in the world in thee I say, at that mstant
although t^ou be thus vile as can be imagined, do but come to Christ and he is
untrue if he cast thee out, page 314. and he says, such a person as this
without any change or alteration in the world, it his heart do but say, I
would have Christ, all that sinfulness though continued in, is no bar in the
world to hinder this man from claiming his portion in Christ page 320. here
this seducer makes no exceptions of any sin, no not the blasphemy against the
holy Ghost, which shall never be forgiven, Mat 12.31. for, says he, in a
carnal manner, those that receive him were made the sons of God, John 1.12.
but he, like the devil, leaves out To them that believe on his name; yea
further he says, to take Christ upon his general tender is as good security
as any in the world; yea, most blasphemously he says, it is as good as any God
can make him, page 163. but does not the Apostle say, give all diligence to
make your calling and ^^^^tion sure, 2 Pet. 1.10 but the Doctor says God has
so passed himselso over to man as that he has no more command over himself
then the creature can have power over him, page 277 now follow his reasons, why
christ is made over to men before they have any gracious qualifications.

First, says he, Christ is the beginning of all things, then as the builder of
the house does not come after the house is begun to be builded, but is present
to lay the first stone thereof. I answ, and grant, that Christ was from all
eternity; but this is not our question, whether Christ was before men, or
whether man be before his house; but here is the question, whether a man will
possess his house before he build it, or whether Christ will dwell in the
sonle before any qualification; then by his own argument, as man fits his
house before he possess it, so Christ firs the soul before himself will
dwell in it: his second reason, Christ is the head of the body, and all the
senses are in the head therefore says he, men do not see before they have a
head, etc. I ans. will it follow, because Christ is the head to his Church that
are members of his body therefore he is so to them before they are any part of
his Church or members of his body. Thirdly, he says, Christ is the life, and
all that come to the Father come by him, John 14.2.6. and Paul says, I live,
yet not I, but christ livith in me, Gal. 2.20. hence he concludes, that a man
cannot live before that life is breathed into him; I ans. if this seducer had
read the whole verse he might have found faith where he found christ, for mark,
I live by says of the Son of God. Gal. 2.20. Christ dwells in your heart by
faith, Ephesians. 3.17. then christ does not come and dwell in the soul before
faith. We have access by says into this grace wherein we stand, Romans 4.2. and
God ha^h given repentance unto life, Acts 11.18. Here Master Lancaster affirmed
that faith and repentance were both the same thing and that he knew no graces
of the spirit, but testimonies of Go^s love, and (it we call these) graces,
then says he, our riches money, and clothes, and victuals are graces also; I
might here show that these are cemporall and not spiritual; and again, some
that are spiritual are common and some are special, your heavenly Father will
give his spirit to them that ask him, Luke 11.13. this is not to be understood
the third person, but his gifts or good things, Mat. 7, 11. desire spiritual
gifts, 1 Cor. 14.1. abound in this grace also (after he has named other
graces) as faith, utterance knowledge and love, 2 cor. 8.7. stir up the gift
of God that is in thee, 2 Timothy 1.6. and to say that repentance and faith are
the same thing, cannot be for repentance con^sts much of godly sorrow, beway
ling the breach of the first Cevenant and our misery that came upon it. but
faith is fixed upon the second Adam, fulfilling the second Covenant for us,
believing and applying the happiness that came upon it; but more of this anon:
for the present it may suffice that here you see qualifications before that
Christ do actually possess the soul.

But he replies saying, that it is a sordid and a gross conceit in the hearts
of some persons, to think that there cannot be humiliation for sin, except
perions be brought to di^paire, page 3^4. I ans. a man cannot he humbled for
those sins in himself, unless he dupaire of all hope in himself; thou
sardest not there is no hope, thou hasi found the life of th^ne hand, therefore
thou wast not gr^e^ed Isa. 57.10. he that does not deny himself and forsake
all and follow Christ, is unworthy of him he cannot be his Disciple. Luke 14
26.27. but says he although a man be nt^erly undone before Christ come into
the soul; yet says he, the man is not sensible of it till Christ be actually
given and come into the soul to work that sensiblenesse, page 201. I ans. the
worst of men have been sensible of their undone condition altrough Christ never
came graciously into their souls witness Cain, Pharath, Saul and Judas. all
these by the law saw their undone condition for by the law is the knowledge of
sin, Romans 3, 20. but he replies, that a though the law be a light like the Sun,
yet it gives no eyes to see: I ans. that it did give those reprobates a sight
of their undone condition, and as an Instrument in the hand of Christ it may
give a greater light, so the law may convert the soul, make wise the simple,
rejoice the heart and enlighten the eves. Psalm. 19. but howsoever the law may
show a wicked man his sinful condition, because some remainders of it are left
still in nature; The Gentiles by nature do the things contained in the law
which she^es the work of the law that is written in their hearts, Romans 2.14 15.
this may suffice to show that a man may be sensible of his own undone
condition, before that Christ comes graciously into the soul; but further,
when Christ comes into the soul, he comforts those that mourn, he gives joy
for mourning, and the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, Isa.
61.2, 3. then sure they do not mourn before they are sensible wherefore; all
this shows that Christ works some qualification before he come to possess the
soul; says Christ to Paul, I send thee to open their eyes, and to turn them
from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to God; mark, that they may
receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among all them that are
sanctified by faith in me, Acts 26.18. here you see that forgiveness of sins
which is a great part of justification, is not the first work in the soul? but
much preparation of common grace which goes before, but ^peciall grace is the
entrance of Christ as I said before, which brings me to the third head of
errors which are abont justification.

He says, that Christ enters actually and justifies a person before any
gracious qualification be wrought in them, page 155. he says, they are
justified while they are ungodly, page 136. I ans. this is horrible blasphemy,
for it makes God an unrighteous Judge, to pronounee a sinner just before that
he is just either by inherent righteousness, or by that imputed righteousness
of Christ, whereby alone he may be just: but says Crispe. faith is a work and
the Apostle says, to him that works not, but believes on him that
justifies the ungodly, Romans 4.5. it seems he takes this for a carnal
believing, such as may be in the ungodly, remaining such, for he leaves out his
faith is connted for righteousness, but it is of faith that it may be of grace
To. 4.16. we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, being
justified by faith we have peace with God. Romans 5.1, 2. yet as faith is a work,
we renounce it in point of justification, as a poor lame Cripple cannot get
his living by working, yet he can receive an alms with his lame hand that
shall maintain him as well and better then working, but says Crispe, Christ
is put upon a finner before they have any hand to put him on, as a Physician
uses to do with an unruly Patient who shuts his teeth against his physic,
then he forces his mouth open and powers it cowne his throat, so says he, the
Lord forces Christ upon us page 150 151. and he says, Christ gets upon us as
we get up to break a horse, so says he, was Ephraim yoaked and fettered: I
ans. this is nothing but the plowing and breaking that is by the law, before
that Christ enters graciously to justify us; but if this breaking be before,
this confounds his former tenet, that Christ enters before any qualification or
any prep. ration be made for him so then the Lord plowes up the soul to make
it fit for the seed of saving or justifying faith; for says Christ, I stand at
the door and knock, he does not enter till the will be changed and made
willing to receive him; I do dot say as the Arminians do that Christ waits
till we will, but till he himself has changed our hearts, I say till then he
will not enter graciously, nay, if his own^ Spouse be something unwilling he
will depart, cant. 5.2. but says Crispc, Christ may come to us graciously as
well as we may casta garment upon a dejected body, having no hand to receive it,

I answer, the comparison is not equal for all although this dejected body
have no hand, yet he has life and a heart to receive that mercy thankefully,
but we are dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians 2.1. then how can a dead
stone receive any thing that has neither heart nor hand, life nor motion to
do it? so then, faith must be wronght in the soul to receive chrut first,
before that we can receive him to justify us; we have access by faith unto
this grace wherein we stand. Romans 5.2. with the heart man believes unto
righteousness, Romans 10.17. the Gentiles attained to this righteousness
because they sought it by faith, but Israel (...) not attained to this
righteousness, wherefore? because they saught it not by faith, Romans 9.31, 32.
so then, we must have faith before and by which we must receive the
righteousness of Christ, for before faith was wrought in the soul there was
none righteous no not one, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world
may be guilty before God; mark, I do not say guilty before men, but before
God, for all have sinned; till the righteousness of God be imputed to us which
is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all that believe, for there is no
difference, Romans 3.10, 19 22, 23. but the Doctor would feign be justified
without faith, against the clear light of the Scripture, and cannot tell how
to make it appear, therefore he almost yields; but yet he has one starting
hole more, saying, although faith justifies yet says he, this faith is
confined in the person of Christ and not in us: I ans. with Paul, even we have
believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ,
that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe,
Gal. 2.16.3.22. but when he comes to make his matter good at the end of the
seventh Sermon, he unawares confounds all that he has said both before and
after, in this point; for says he, we are all like Jeremiah in the dungeon
when Christ comes into us, and he is like Ebedmelike who let down the ropes of
his faith and pulls us out; so then, here you see Ebedmelike did not go down
to Jeremiah, but cast down the ropes by which he drew him up to him, so our
Ebedmelike Jesus Christ does not first come into our filthy souls while the
devil rules and reigns but first he casts down the grace of faith into our
souls, and by that faith he draws us out of our sinful condition, so then
our Ebedmelike did not go down and get upon our backs as we go to break a
horse, and as a Physician powers down the Physic in spite of the Patient,
but first reaches down the ropes of faith, and presently we are made willing
to come out, for by this rope of faith Christ and us are (...) together;
neither does the rope of faith manifest to our selves nor others, So^ it was
cast into the dungeon, and as hard to be known as justification it self; for
Jerenmiah had the ropes, yet he saw them not till he came out neither did he
see Ebedmelike till he was out, yet he trusted by that rope to get on although
he saw it not; so Job, although thou hidest thy face from me and hold me for
thine enemy yet says he, though he slay me yet I will trust in him. Job
13.15.24. and says the Prophet, he that walks in darkness and sees no
light, let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God, Isa.
50.10. but both Crispe and Lancaster affirms, that faith acts no longer then
it manifests it self, for say they, faith is the evidence of things not seen,
Heb. 11.1. but I had rather take Paul's word then both theirs, who says we walk
by faith and not by sight, 2 Cor. 5, 7. sight is reserved till faith is ended,
then we shall see Christ face to face, 1 cor. 13.12. but does faith evidence
all things to them that they believe? hence I gather, that their faith is the
evidence of hell, for they believe it if they be not Atheists and it is not
seen, and there is a bastardly faith very full of confidence, as the true
borne faith of a Christian, like the stony ground full of joy, which fails
them when they have most need of it; but says Crispe, faith acted by believers
is full of sin, but if this man had known what true faith had been, he would
rather have said, that faith acted by believers is full of Christ, and a weak
faith may take hold on Christ and be justified, as well as a weak eye could
look on the brazen Serpent and be healed John 3.14.15. so then God justifies by
pronouncing us just, and christ justifies by his merits purchasing it for us
and Faith justifies by applying those merits of christ to our selves, and works
alone declare it, James 2.21.25. or thus as faith acts by receiving or taking
christ and his righteousness, so it justifies, and as it works by love, and
acts all other graces so it sanctifies and manifests it self to our selves and
others; this they deny, saving, that act which justifies is manifestation.

The fourth head of errors is about the new covenant: In his sixth Sermon he
says, christ has made a covenant without any conditions on our part, page
124. and he says, in way of condition of the covenant we must do nothing page
128. he says, it is probable that christ was the first covenant, page 124. but
was christ the first covenant? then how came the first to be faulty? will they
tax christ with faults, which was without sin? and again, how came the
second covenant better then the first and built upon better promises? Heb. 8.8,
9. is any thing better then christ, and any promises better then those that are
made in him? me thinks men should be ashamed and tremble to preach and print
such hellish blasphemy; so then the first covenant was made to Adam and all
mankind in him by nature, and the second covenant was made to christ, both God
and man, and to all the elect as they are in him by grace, now as no man was
bound to the conditions of the first covenant nor guilty of the breach of it
till they have a being in him by nature, so none of the elect are bound to the
conditions of the second covenant, till they have a being in him by grace; but
both Crispe and Lancaster affirm, that this new Covenant is without conditions
on our part: I answ. in this they show themselves to be sons of Belial, that
say of God and Christ his Annoy ^ed, let us break heir bonds asunder and cast
their cords from us, Ps. 2.2.3. but this is to about (...) new Covenant, and
quite overthrowes the Gospel of Jesus Christ, I do admire h^y are not ashamed
to call it a Covenant when as they deny the conditions of it: I must confess
Lamaster was ashamed to call it a Covenant and would have it to be only a
legacy, or a will or testament, but this we grant as well as he that we have
nothing but what was freely given us of God by will or testament, but this
testament and the new covenant may stand well together; for the first Adam had
nothing but what he received from God as a free gift, yet that did not nullify
the conditions of the covenant, and make it void to him and his posterity; so
the second Adam receiving grace without measure, John 3.34. and out of his
fullness we receive grace for grace, John 1.16. yet all this hinders not the
conditions of the new covenant, and as we were all bound to the conditions of
the first covenant so that when Adam fell we all fell in him and as soon as we
had our being in nature, we took that guilt upon us for the breach of that
covenant, so as soon as we are in the state of grace in the second Adam, then
we are bound to those conditions of the new covenant, which is not another
distinct and contrary to the first covenant, but Christ has fulfilled that
first covenant which we had broke, and now our conditions are made more easy
for us to keep; the first was made with a weak man therefore he soon fell,
and we in him, but the second was made with him that was both God and man
therefore he was able to keep the conditions of it, and not only so, but to
give us power to keep our conditions also, which are these chiefly, first,
repentance and all those graces that may humble us for that great sin in
breaking the first covenant, and then faith to believe that Christ has
fulfilled for me; in particular therefore, the tenor of the Gospel runs thus,
Paul testified both to Jews and Gentiles repentance toward God that was for
the breach of the first covenant, and faith in the Lord Jesus christ, Acts
20.20. repent and believe the Gospel, Mark. 1.15. therefore the Apostles were
sent to preach repentance and remission of sins, Luke 24.47. and when men did
repent of their sins, then says christ, only believe, Mark 5.36. and when
the Jailer repented they said, if thou believe in the Lord Jesus thou shall be
saved. Acts 16.31. whosoever believes in christ shall not perish but have
everlasting life Ioh. 3.15. and Christ blamed the Priests and Elders because
they believed not in him though the publicans and harlots believed on him yet
says he ye repented not when ye had seen it, that ye might believe in him,
Mat. 21.31. so then, we must repent for our breach of the first covenant, and
grieve and mourn for those sins for which our Savior suffered, and then we
must believe that he has fully satisfied the law for us upon these conditions
we enter into the new covenant; yet I grant that faith is the gift of God, Ephesians.
2.8. and that Christ is exalted to be a Prince and a Savior to give repentance
to Israel and remission of sins, Act. 5.31. yet all this hinders not, but
these are conditions on our part in the new covenant, they are given as a
Legacy by will or testarment, to be employed as conditions of the new covenant:
but says Crispe, it is called an everlasting covenant, then says he, if it
stood on these conditions, we should daily fail and make it frustrate, as Adam
did, and then it could not be everlasting, except says he man were so
confirmed in righteousness, that he could never fail on his part; but this is
not true, for God made an everlasting covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. although
he had his failing as well as other men; and whereas he faith, we should make
it frustrate as Adam did. I answ. that we upon the conditions of faith and
repentance cannot totally nor finally fall away, for in this new covenant of
grace we do not perform them in our own strength, but in the power of
christ, and he has put his spirit in us to cause us to walk in his statutes
and his fear in our hearts, that we shall not depart from him, Jer. 32.4.
Ezekiel. 36.27. now those that want these inward abilities, may be in the outward
covenant as it was made with Abraham and his seed, but if they have not faith
and repentance they frustrate the covenant of grace, for he that believes not
shall be damned, Mar. 16.16. except ye repent ye shall perish, Lu. 13.3.5. But
says Crispe, these things are by way of consequence, after we are in covenant
with God, as fruits and effects of that covenant; but says he, they are not
true by way of antecedence, page 124, this Lancaster affirmed also. I ans. man
will not enter into covenant till he is agreed, for there can be no covenant
without agreement of the parties that are to enter into that covenant,
therefore the Lord sends forth his Ambassadors to beseech us to be reconciled.
2 Cor. 5.20. now man's heart is not fit to enter into covenant till he repent
for the breach of the old covenant, and believe that Christ has fulfilled the
new for him in particular, therefore of necessity repentance and faith are
antecedents and concomitants of this new covenant of grace; for what fellowship
has righteousness with unrighteousness? what concord has Christ with
Belial? but God has said in this new covenant, I will be their God, and they
shall be my people, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. but says Crispe, because God
gives all, therefore nothing is required of man. I answ. the legacy or
testament is wholly of God, but the covenant that follows is not so and these
may be clearly distinguished, although not divided; in the legacy, says the
Lord. I will have mercy on her that had not obtained mercy; then follows the
covenant. I will say to them that were not my people thou art my people and
they shall say thou art my God, Hos. 2.23. thus God in his great mercy puts his
fear in our hearts, and writes his laws within us, to enable us to enter into
covenant with him, and then he takes us into covenant with him, and wherever
you find this covenant mentioned between God and his people, you shall always
find these gracious qualifications going before see Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. then
the covenant in the 28 ver. and so in all the rest; but says Crispe and
Lancaster both, we may do some duties and service to God, but not as
conditions of the covenant; but he has no proof to confirm it; so then, when
God takes us for his his people in covenant with him we again take the Lord to
be our God and as God binds himself to us to do us all manner of good, so we
again bind our selves to God to do him all manner of service, duty and
obedience; as when a Master makes a covenant with his Prentice, he binds
himself to find him all manner of necessaries, and the Prentice binds himself
to do him all manner of service; and wherefore serve our Sacraments but as
seals of this covenant that is betwixt God and us and as often as we receive
them we do (as it were) renew our bond of obedience unto him: The Doctor says
when men are justified, then God has made a covenant with them; but says he,
this was done before man could do any thing, before the children had done
either good or evil; it was said Jacob have I loved and Esau have I hated. I
answ. that was not spoken before, but a long time after by Malachy the Prophet.
Romans 9.13. but there is no such thing in Genesis, so that all which was
spoken before the children were borne was this, that the elder should serve the
younger. Romans 9.11, 12. and for that other place, Romans 4.5. see his wicked
inference, because it is said, to him that works not, therefore faith is not
required to justify ^s, when as the words are clear, to him that works not,
his faith is counted for righteousness, but says he, because it is not of
works therefore it is not of faith, when as the words are express that it is of
faith and not of works; and because the ungodly are said to be justified
therefore he would gather hence that they are justified and yet remain
ungodly; but if he were not blind he might read his says and he that believes
on him that justifies the ungodly; now although the ungodly here be named as a
man may be said to marry a Widow does she remain so after marriage? so if
Christ justify the ungodly, must they needs remain so after they are
ustified? no here is faith as soon as ustification: but faith the Doctor if
these things must be as conditions then Christ justifies the godly and not the
ungodly: I answ. No: but the act of justification makes them just and therefore
godly: but says Crispe, the covenant is nothing else but Gods love to man: I
answ. it is to covenant at all till man close with God by faith; yet we grant
that God is the Author of all this, and therefore all the glory is to be given
to him and not to us at all, for he both makes us capable and then of his
infinite goodness takes us into covenant with him; but says the Doctor, faith
is not a condition, because it is a work of ours; it is true, the works of the
law are excluded, but faith is a work of grace; again, faith as a work does not
justify, but as an instrument, not for the worthiness of it, as a grace, but
in regard of the worthiness of the object; for as the hand feeds not the
body as being food it self, but as it receives and ministers food unto it,
hereby it is sustained; so faith justifies by receiving and applying Christ to
be our righteousness and life; but the Doctor denies that Christ should
justify by faith, because says he, if Christ should do so, then he must have
a partner to justify us: I answ: it would be counted a folly to say, when a
poor man puts out his hand to take an alms, that the man did not of himself
give that alms; but says Crispe, he had a partner, and because David had a
sling and a stone to kill Goliath, therefore he had a partner to do it; this is
the Doctors free grace, that will not admit of faith wrought in us by Christ,
to receive and apply his righteousness unto us, this says he, is to make
himself a partner with Christ, but if a common Whore do but believe that
Christ has done this with such a faith as may stand with her whorish heart,
then she is justified, because she did not repent and then believe that she
should be justified, but still remaining a Whore with a bastardly faith
believes that she is justified, this is that heretics devinity; and old
Lancaster affirms the same; but we receive the promise of the spirit by faith,
even we believe in Jesus Christ that we may be justified by faith, Gal. 2.16.
being justified by faith we have peace with God through Jesus Christ, by whom
we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, Romans 5.1, 2. it is
of faith that it may be of grace, Romans 3.16. let him take hold of my strength
and so make peace with me, Isa. 27.5. and Christ dwells in our heart by faith,
Ephesians. 3.17. by grace ye are saved through faith, Ephesians. 2.8. we are kept by the
power of God through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.

Thus Christ will neither take possession of us to dwell in us nor justify us,
nor adopt us nor enter into covenant with us, nor save us without faith; then
what cursed seducers are these that would make faith but an idle spectator, to
see all those great things that are, as they say, all done before and without
faith: thus the devils instruments do not only seek to abolish the law of
God, but the Gospel also, by taking away the conditions of the new covenant,
so to make it void to their eternal ruin of body and soul for ever.

The sift head of errors is about a holy conversation; he says, that Christ
did not only put an end to the curse, but also to the life of the law, page
237. thus that law that should guide us in all holy obedience to the will of
God, this says he, Christ has put an end to the very life of it; but must we
believe this seducer or the Prophet of God which says, all his commandments
are sure, they stand fast for ever and ever, Psalm. 111.7, 8. thy word is settled
for ever in heaven, Ps. 219.89. the Angels do his commandments, harkening to
the voyc, of is word, Ps. 103.20. then has Christ put an end to the life of
the law, which is for Saints and Angels for ever; what a hellish tenet is this:
and says Crispe, a blameless walking according to Gods own law established
is a fruit of ignorance and a cause of man's not submitting to the
righteousness of God page 206. what cursed blasphemy is this! is not the law
holy, and the Commandment holy, just and good? Romans 7.12. is not the Lord
righteous in all his ways? Ps. 1^5.17. when Zacharias and Elizabeth walked in
all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless, the text says,
then they were both righteous before God. Luke 1.6. but were they both
righteous before God, and yet not submit to the righteousness of God; the
Gospel reveals the righteousness of God Romans 1.17. and does not the law the
same? Paul had not known sin but by the law, then did the law that showed
sin, make him ignorant of righteousness, and did his obedience to the law make
him disobedient to Gods righteousness? what blasphemy is this to affirm that
Gods law should make a man despise Gods righteousness: again says this
Doctor, righteousness puts a man away from Christ, and yet he says that no
sinfulness in the world can debar them from him, yet righteousness may
debar them from him, page 249. upon these things I tarried so long with Mr.
Lancaster that he was almost spent, and his wife cried out, that her husband
was almost spent, and so my friend and I left him; and were it not for his wife
who looked very big about the middle, I would have a third battle with him, in
which I am confident he would yield upon quarter, for I perceived his munition
was almost spent now, for his argument that righteousness hinders a man from
Christ, when as no sin in the world can do it, although it be the sin
against the holy Ghost, which shall never be forgiven, Mat. 12.32. this might
convince him, if he were not mad upon his error, but he confidently affirmed,
that Christ excepts against no sin whatsoever, but only righteousness saying I
came not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance, Mat. 9.13. to which I
replied that Christ came as well to call those that are righteous in their own
eyes to repentance, as those that are profane and wicked livers, for Paul was
such a one, as touching the righteousness which is of the law blameless,
Phil. 3.6. yet Christ called him to repentance; then said I, why should any
such be excluded from the call of Christ, but this did so inrage M. Lancaster
that he was scarce himself and yet he would hold and maintain, that Christ
came to call none but profane sinners as whores and drunkards; but if this be
so, then all that come to the ordinances before conversion have barred
themselves from Christ, unless they return to their former profaneness
Christ will never call them to repentance, and by Lancasters judgment, Christ
will call more to repentance from the bandy stews at Venus then from our
assemblies; for if any come to the assemblies, or conform to any ordinance
before he be truly called, this man has barred himself out of heaven; O most
horrid and hellish doctrine! can they show me an example from all their hellish
meetings, that ever God called three thousand, as he did at one Sermon Acts
2.41. again, if this were true, the Gospel would damn us all, for we all
have an outward conformity before we have any inward truth and sincerity, thus
Lancaster acts the devils part, to keep all before conversion from u^ing any
means that they may be called; now you shall see what he says for those whores
and drunkards whom he says are justified; says the Doctor and Lancaster, all
this sanctification of life is not a jot the way of a justified person to
heaven, page 69. thus you see that neither justified nor unjustified persons
must use any means to come to heaven; but Lancaster said, there is a twofold
sanctification, one in the person of Christ, that says he is necessary,
because Christ is the way, the truth, and the life; but then there is another
sanctification in us; but says he, that is not a jot the way to heaven. I
answ. and grant that the holiness in the person of Christ is the cause of our
coming to heaven; but here I am not speaking of the causes but of the way to
heaven, now that way shall be called the way of holiness, Isa. 35.8. for no
unclean thing shall enter into heaven. Rev. 21.27. the pure in heart shall see
God, but without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Mat. 5. Heb. 12.14. I may
may clear it thus; suppose I have a friend come to London, and I ask him the
cause of his coming, he will answer me, such a business was the cause of it;
then I demand by what way he came, then he will tell me, such a road way; so
the holiness of Christ is the cause of our coming to heaven, but our
sanctification is the way thither; but he replied and showed me many Authors,
whom he said, was of her judgment, that Infants may go to heaven without
inherent righteousness; for says he, they are not capable of faith nor
knowledge, much less of practice, therefore says he, unclean ones may go to
heaven; and further he said, all those places I mentioned was to be understood
of men of years, and he said, faith came by hearing the word, but let any
rational man judge, whether this place be not rather to be understood that the
word is the ordinary means to work faith and holiness in men of years, and
for Infants or Idiots, or those people that have not the word God is able to
work it in them by his spirit, for certainly it must be wrought in them before
they come to heaven, for without faith none can please God, he that believes
not shall be damned, for the wrath of God abides on him, John 3.18.36. and
another text I may retort back upon him, which he mentioned without any wit or
reason, saying, he that will not work, neither let him eat, but says he must
none eat but men of years then what shall Infants and aged people do; I know
not how he applied it to any sense, but I may retort it back, thus shall none
have faith and holiness but men of years, then what will become of Infants,
seeing none without holiness shall come to heaven. But is this their free
grace to damn all the world but only a few men of years that have the word
preached unto them, but for any other, they must either go to heaven without
holiness, or else not at all; but there being but one way to heaven, God is
able where ordinary means are not to supply the want of it by his spirit; thus
when he has made the way to heaven so broad that some may walk in it thither
without holiness: then he comes to answer an objection, saying, strait is the
gate and narrow is the way that leads unto life, Mat. 7.13, 14. to this the
Doctor answers point blank against our Savior Christ, saying, the way to
heaven is the most easy to walk in of any in the world, and they are false
Prophets that say you must walk so precisely, telling you that the gate is
strait and the way narrow that leads unto life, for says he, there is
abundance of largeness and ^bbe-roome in Christ the way, so then, this says
he, is the meaning of Christ, that the way to heaven has not that latitude in
it, but is too strait to contain man and his righteousness, so that all a
man's righteousness must be cut off that walks in that way, see the end of the
fifth Sermon; and therefore he blames men when sin abounds for fasting and
praying to suppress it; and when wrath breaks in upon us he says, we must not
think that this is the way to deliver us, this says he, is the way to make our
righteousness an Idol, page 109.110. he says, there is nothing to be gotten
that we have not already if we be in Christ, page 219. I ans. We have a right
to all things, but the prayer of faith must fetch them out for our use, Ezekiel.
36.37. he says, we must do these for the good of others and not for our
selves, to praise God and to serve our generation page 230. for says the
Doctor, the way to heaven is full of music and flagons of wine, as to a
drunkard, who delights always in tippling: but I answ. that we must go through
much tribulation to heaven, Acts 14.22. this is part of the narrowness of it,
we must take up our cross and follow Christ; but the Doctor says, all tears
shall be wiped from our eyes while we are here, and that God has taken away
every thing by Christ, that can disturb our peace and comfort, page 242, 243,
244. he says, a man reconciled, God cannot tax him for any sin, page 306. he
says, all occasion of quarrel or controversy between God and thee is
absolutely taken away, page 303. he says, God does never punish a believer for
sin committed page 25. the reason, because the travail of Christ gave the
Father such satisfaction, that he says, it did the heart of God good to see
his Son tormented for us, he saw it and was satisfied, page 46 47. I ans.
This is hellish blasphemy, for when our sins were upon him, yet then says
the Lord, Thou art my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; and in his agony
he sent an Angel to comfort him, and that place in Isa. 53.11. is spoken of
Christ himself, he saw the travail of his soul and was satisfied, not that
the Father saw it and rejoiced to see it; the Doctor says, although the free
man of Christ fall into the same sins that a reprobate does, yet although the
law say to the reprobate thou art damned for this, yet the law cannot say one
word to the free man of Christ, so that he may esteem of the curse of th law,
as an English man may esteem of the laws of Spain, page 189. but Christ
threatened the damnation of hell and other judgments to the Churches of Asia,
Mat. 23.33. Rev. 2.3. chap. the Doctor says, if a believer fall into some
scandalous sin, as murder and adultery, as David did yet he may look upon
Christ and in Christ, at that very time he commits them he may see a discharge
of his sins and reconciliation by Christ and his part in Christ; nay, further
he says, a believer cannot commit those sins that may give occasion of
suspicion, that if he come to Christ he should cast him out, page 330 331. this
also puzzeled Lancaster that he came off basely; I demanded of him, if a
believer (having a clear apprehension of God in Christ) can commit those foul
sins; he answered 10; now this was well for says Joseph, how can I do this
great wickedness and sin against God, Genesis 39.9. th^n I demanded of him
whether David or Peter or any other in the act of those foul sins did see God
in Christ to their comfort; he answered, whether they did or no, yet a man may
do it; I answered it was a flat contradiction, for he said before if they had
that clear apprehension, they neither could nor durst thus sin, and now he
said in the act of those sins they may have this clear apprehension, then he
discerned himself to be almost foiled and shuffled it thus saying, although he
had not that clear light in the entrance into that sin, yet God may show it
him before the act is over; I told him that he was yet upon his contradiction,
but then he shuffled it off thus, saying that he ought to see his part in
Christ at that instant, and nor to add unbeliese to his other sin; I
answered he ought not to sin at all; but we are not ^^^king what he ought to
do but what he can do at such a time; but he could not find a starting hole
ready, therefore he said the Doctors meaning was, that at such a time they
ought to see their part in Christ; yet I suppose all this will hardly clear
the Doctor; for I suppose in the act of such a foul sin, that a man ought
not to lay his foul singers on Christ, for some are too forward to close with
Christ; but faith the Lord your hands are full of blood, go wash you, make you
clean, and then he says come, now let us reason together, Isa. 1.15 16 18. I
need not to speak how David being hurried in temptation, and saw it not till
Nathan said thou art the man; and Peter was in a passion and not himself, when
he came to himself he wept; and the Prodigal, when he came to himself he
went home; but these were so far from comfort in the time of those sins
that I suppose they rather never obtained their former joy but they had some
grudging of them to their dying day: says David, ache away blood guiltiness, O
God; and in his old age says he, pardon the sins of my youth, Psalm. 25.7.11.
so then, I rather think he that can sin thus, and think he may then close
with Christ, that as yet he never had any true faith in Christ: but the Doctor
says, believers need not to be threatened, for says the Doctor, the son said
to the father, thy people shall be a willing people in the day of thy power,
Ps. 110. which is flat against the text, and that the Son brought down the
Father to his articles, which overthrowes the tenor of the Gospel, which
says, the Father sent the Son, and the Son came to do the Fathers business
and to finish his work and not to do his own will, then he says, Christ is the
way for whore and drunkards in his fourth Sermon: I answ. Christ is the way for
imitation to walk as he walked, 1 John 1.6. we ranst learn of him, Mat. 11.28.
Jah. 13.15. we must follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21. and Christ is our
Counsellou^ Isa. 9.6. Rev. 3.8. now he that thus walks imitating Christ and
obeying his counsel, this man walks in Christ, Col. 2.6. because the word of
Christ rules in their heart, 3.16. but for any to say, they walk in Christ, and
yet for at naught his counsel, he will laugh at their destraction, and mock
when their fear comes, Prove. 1.24. these men are led away with their Insts,
Jam. 1.14. now such the Lord may justly give up to their own hearts Iusts, to
walk in their own counsels, Ps. 81.12 but blessed is the man that walks not
in the counsel of the ungodly, Psalm. 1.1. but freely yields himself unto
Christ to be guided by his counsel, and afterward brought unto his glory,
Psalm. 73.34.

So much in answer to Doctor Crisp and Mr. Lancaster, in which their Christ is
exalted above all, now follows the combat in the Den.

A combat with the Antinomians Christ in his Den.
WHen we seriously consider poor heathen people who naturally seek after a
God to worship and cannot find the true God nor rightly how to worship him,
then we bewail the great loss that all mankind had by the fall of Adam,
wherein we lost the knowledge of the true God and rightly how to worship him:
but what shall we say when Israel is a long time without the true God. 2 Chronicles.
15.3. or at leastwise halt between two opinions as not being resolved whether
the Lord or Baal be the true God, till the Lord himself by fire from heaven
decide the controversy, 1 King. 18.21.38, 39. but to the astonishment of all
people that lay it to heart; when Christians under the glorious Sunshine of the
Gospel shall dispute and contend about the true Christ, this is most
abominable to all that hear it: it is true, when Christ came in the flesh he
came to his own, and his own received him not. Job. 1.11. and some said he
was a good man, and some said nay, but he deceives the people; some said this
is the Christ, others said, shall Christ come out of And the Priests a ked him
are thou the Christ the son of the blessed? and Jesus said, I am Mar 14.61,
62. And Mattha said, I believe that thou art Christ the son of God which should
come into the world, John 11.27. Yet the Jews had decreed, that if any man did
corsesse that he was Christ, het should be put out of the Sinagogue, Job. 9.22.
The Centurion said, truly this is the sen of God; But others mocking, said, let
Christ the King of Is rael d^scend from the cross that we may see and
believe, Mar. 15.32.39.

Bu^ now he is declared to be the son of God with power, according to the
spiret of holiness by the resurrection from the dead. Romans 1.4. Apollos
mightily convinced the Jews, she wing by the Scriptures that Jesus was Christ,
Acts 18.28. And Paul was pressed in spirit, and testified that Jesus was
Christ, verse. 5. And he increased in st^ength, and confounded the Jews. proving
that this is very Christ, Acts 9.22. Then what a miserable shame it were for
such taught Christians to dispute whether this be the true Christ? Yet thus it
will be according as be himself prophesied long ^gone, saying, many shall come
in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many, Math. 24.5.

The time when these false Christ's shall arise, is when you shall hear of
wars, famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes in diverse places: and when
Gods people are hated, afflicted, and killed for the name of Christ, and betray
and hate one another, and iniquity shall abound, and the love of many shall wax
cold, and the abomination of desolation standing in the holy place. These
things have been all fulfilled since these troubles began, and now the Devil
has been very busy to sow the tares of heresies; But says the true Christ,
If any shall say unto you, lo here is Christ, or there, believe at not; For
there shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets and shall show greas signs
and wonders, insomuch that if it were possible, they would deceive the very
elect, verse. 23, 24. Now observe the earnestness of Christ to prevent these
subtle deceivers, that the Elect can hardly escape their hands saying, Behold
I have told you before: wherefore if they shall say unto you, behold he is in
the d^sart, go not forth, behold he is in the secret chambers, believe it not,
verse. 25.26. Why must we not go into their secret chambers, nor come at their
private meetings? Because of this sort are they which creep into houses, and
lead captive silly women laden with their lusts, who are ever learning, and
never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3.6, 7. Now the true
Christ comes openly. Jesus answered him, I speak openly to the world, I ever
taught in the Sinagogues and in the Temple whither the jews always resort,
and in secret have I said nothing, John 18.20. As the lightning comes out of
the East, and shmeth even unto the West, so shall the coming of the son of man
be, Math: 24.27.

But before I proceed to make a further discovery of these false Christ's, give
me leave to declare the tidings of that faithful meslenger who was sent to try
the Antinomians power (in their last place of refuge) being sent forth by the
true Christ to maintain against them that none are actually justified,
sanctified, called, and ^d^pted, and in the love and favor of God from all
eternity: and so be having a (...) of protection from his Master, that the
gates of hell should (...) him, Math. 16. And when he went through fire and
water (...) with him, that it should mather burn nor drown him, Isa 45.1, 2.
(...) it of victory, went on boldly to his den, and in this den he was ser
upon, and now if you will attend, you shall hear the true relation of the
(...) in that den.

First, there steps up a servant of the Antinominns Christ, saying, that he
was (...) before the act of believing; his first argument was this, Insants
(...), but Infants are justified. Therefore says he, some are justified (...)
leeve; now his reason why Infants do not believe, is because that says comes
by hearing, Romans the 10. verse. 17. And how shall they h^are (...) a Preacher,
verse. 14. The messenger of the true Christ answers, First, that although
preaching be the ordinary means to beget faith in men of veares, and in that
place where it is truly preached: yet God has not so bound himself to that
means, that among those people that have not the word preached, they cannot
have says wrought in them some other way extraordinary, where that ordinary
way is not to be had, as also that they which live in a place where the word is
truly preached; If they be not able by some defect or other to hear it, the
messenger of the true Christ is not so cruel, as to judge all the world to be
damned, which have not the word truly preached unto them, and also all children
that dye before they be able to hear it. But the true Christ says, he that
believes not, shall be damned, Mar. 16.16. Then of necessity all must have it,
or else he shall not see life but the wrath of God abides on him, Joh. 3.36.
Then consider the cruelty of this censure, and be informed that the spirit of
God is able to help all our infirmities. Romans 8.26. But is this the honor you
give to the spirit of Christ, to think him unable to work says without the
help of your own abilities? Agame, faith may grow and act where we see it
not, as well as trees grow in the winter downwards in the root, and we see it
not. Again, Infants are sanctified, which flows from faith, Ier. 1.5. Luke
1.15. Again, Infants are entered into the Covenant with God by virtue of their
Fathers faith: for God engaged himself to be the God of their Father and his
seed: into which Covenant they are infolded; And if they have but the seeds of
faith in them, their fathers actions may be accounted theirs: For if the root
be holy, so are the branches, Romans 11.16. And if the Parents be holy, so are
the children, 1 Cor. 7.14.

Then steps up a second servant of theirs saying, he that is in Christ is
justified, but we must be in Christ before that we can believe: therefore we
must be justified before that we can believe. But here the servant b^trays his
Mr. to be such a Christ, that any limb of the Devil may be a real member of
his body, and any strumpet whore remaining so, may be his spouse. But the
mestinger of the Lords Christ says, If any man be in Christ, he ^s a new ere
ture: Old things are dine away, all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.17. And he
takes it for blasphemy to say any such remaining so are members of his body:
what, a member of Christ, and a member of a harlot? (God forbid) he that is
joined to the Lord to one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.15.17. That is, one spirit, acts all
the members of Christ, as one spirit acts all our members. Now here you will be
put to your shists, for either you must be forced to say all those
abominations which are done before gonver on, are the actings of Gods spirit
in them, or else you must deny that the spirit of God acts them by his grace.
But if you say the spitit of God is not in them, then says the Apostle, they
are none of his, Romans 8.9. And so not justified. But you play the sophister to
prove that all our sinful actions are moved by the spirit of God before
conversion, saying, the act of believing is the fruit of the spirit, Gal. 5.22
But this will not cover your naked nesse, for that is the grace of faith: yet
all other graces are the fruits of Gods spirit, because he wrought them in us,
but the actings of those graces are partly from Gods spirit and partly from
ours, and cannot so properly be called the fruits of his spirit. Again, what a
damuable stuggard is the spirit of the Antinomians Christ to lie as a drone in
their souls twenty or forty years, and do nothing? well may they pull their
shoulder from the law of God and from all works of sanctification, being led
by such an idle spirit. But the true Christ, has no idle members, nor the true
Vine no barren dead branches. But you say, if faith be a good fruit, men must
be good trees, else we may gather grapes of thorns, and sigs on thistles. I
answer, Faith is the fruit of Gods spirit, which is a good tree, and cannot
bear evil fruits. But what a faith have these Antinomians, that will not make
the tree of their body good? Again, you say, he that has the spirit of
Christ, has Christ, so I say too, but you say you have the spirit before you
believe, and therefore have Christ before you believe: but have what spirit you
will, you are no child of God by adoption, till you receive Christ by faith,
John 1.12. And have what spirit you will, it is not the spirit of adoption,
unless it make you cry Abba Father, Galat. 4.5, 6. He is called the spirit of
grace and supplication, Zech. 12.10. Which none can have before conversion. But
here I smell an empty trunck for their Christ to move in personally, and he
must move them as we move a stone, according to their tenets. But the true
Christ makes us living stones to offer a living sacrifice aceptable to God, 1
Pet. 2.5. But they will not come to him that they may have life, John 5.4. He
that has the sonke has life, and he that has not the son has not life, 1
John 5.12. Then here is the cause, why they still remain dead stones and empty
trun^ks.

A third stands up, saying, the Elect are justified, therefore some that do not
believe are justified before they believe: your argument, they that cannot be
charged with any thing, are justified; but who can lay any thing to the charge
of Gods elect? It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ that
dyed, yea rather that is risen again, Romans 8.33. But will it follow, because
some of the elect are justified called, and glorified, that therefore all the
elect are so? Says the true Christ, Other sheep I have which are not of this
fold, them also I must bring in, John 10.16. Neither let them bring in their
common divellish evasion, saying, that is meant of their own apprehension: but
is it the voice of the sheep, or the voice of the shepherd that spoke this?
Christ says, that they are not of this sold; but I hope Christ was not
mistaken through misapprehension: says the holy Ghost, He that believes not
the son shall not seelife, but the wrath of God abides on him, John 3.36.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, Acts 9.4. Was not this chosen vessel here
taxed with sin? And such were some of you says the Apostle) being moved by
the Holy Ghost, and ye were carried after dumb Idols, 1 Cor. 6.11, 12.2. And
says Paul, he that wrong^t effectually in Peter, the same spirit, was mighty
in me. Now by the same spirit he withstood Peter to his face, because he was to
be blamed, Gal. 2.8.11. see 13, 14. And says the Angel, thou shall be dumb,
because thou beleevest not my words, Luke 1.20.22, And sin and death is
passed upon all men, Romans 5.12. Then are the elect charged with nothing: He
that commits sins the servant of sin, John 8.34. Till the Son of God make
him free, and then they are free indeed. verse. 36.

A fourth stands up, saying, they that have their sins taken a way are
justified, but the elect have their sins taken away before they believe, Ergo,
the elect are justified before they believe; Your first part you say is proved,
that sins are taken away, because David says, they are covered Psalm. 32.1. And
the minor you say is proved, because Christ is the Lamb of God that takes away
the sins of the world, John 1.29. And because the Lord laid on him the in
quities of us all. Isa 53.6. Himself bare our sins in his own body on the
Tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. Our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin
might be destroyed, Rom 6.6. But is cove^ing a thing the taking away the being
of it? Sin is compared to things most loath some: but when such a thing may be
covered, yet it has a being under that covering, Deuteronomy 23.13. Genesis 9.23. And is
Christ come and has begun to take away our sins? Yet we are not free from
sin till death, Romans 6.7. Again, our sins were not taken from us and
lofused into Christ, no more then we have stripped him of his righteousness:
bu^by imputation they are accounted to be his, although they remain in us: and
his righteousness is accounted to be ours, although it remain in him still:
and for what was laid on Christ, was nothing but the guilt and punish nent; He
was woanded for our transgressions, and bruised for ur in quities, and the
chastisement of our peace (...) on him, and by his strepes^ve a^e b^aled, Isa
53 5. But if our (...) had been infused into him, they had been his and not
ou^s: and if his rig^te^ suesse had been infused into us, it were ou^s and not
his: for sin and punishment they go together, so that often he one is named
for the other: if thou do ^ot well, sin lies at the door, that is,
punishment lies at the doo^ for sin (...) lay then within him, ^en. 4.7. see
13. Nay further although the ^^g^ing power of none b^ taken away, yet the being
of sin is not taken away, no not in the justified: Thus he runs into one
ertour (...) def^^d another: yet all is too little to make a falsehood to be
truth, yet thus they do in that den.

Then a fifth stands up, saying, we were made sinners in the first Adam,
before that we had done either good or evil: Therefore we are made righteous in
the second Adam, before that we have done either good or evil: The consequence
you say is proved, Rom 5.18.19. As by the offense of one, judgment came upon
all to condemnation: Even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came
upon a^ unto justification of life. Now say you, the Emphasis hes in these
words, us and so, but why may not a^l be put in without fear to the universal
gracious. For as all men being in the first Adam by nature, sin and death
came upon all men: Even so, all that are by faith in the second Adam: the gift
came upon all to justification of life; Yet here is no universal grace for all
men without exception but for all the faithful that are translated out of the
first Adam, and grafted into the second. But you it seems can find no better
man of your judgment, then that Popish Beliarmin of stinking memory, whom you
bring in with his hellish Tenet, saying, that Christ may be put on without any
proper act of the seule. But if I would confi^^ne this by men, I could show you
one long before Bellarmin, and of better crenite, that said, he that made thee
without thee, will not save thee without thee: But this dead stone and empty
trunk, neither desires to ^e ^^ed with grace nor delights in actual motion,
but still remains among the dead, and as void of grace as an empty trunk.

A sixth comes and acts his part; saying, where there is full satisfaction made,
and the party offended accepting of that satisfaction, and contented to rest in
it, there must needs follow perfect remission of sins: But in Christ
crucified before we believed, was full satisfaction made, and God was contented
to rest in that satisfaction, therefore there will follow perfect remission of
sins. Then you prove the fullness of Christ's satisfaction from Heb. 10.11,
12, 13. And of Gods acceptance from Math. 3.17. Isa. 53.11. But to what
purpose you prove the fullness of Christ's satisfaction, or of Gods acceptance,
I know not: For I suppose you never heard any of our Divines make any question
of it: the which if you could, why did you not produce him, that he may be
ashamed of it, and clear your self of that which thousands know to be
scandal, to your eternal shame be it spoken. Then here is your error, this
argument is not rightly stated: For all men were in the first Adam by nature,
and he standing as a public person in the room of all men, so that what he
did, it was reputed to all men, so by his sin all dyed; So the second Adam
standing as a public person for all the elect, as they are in him by says, so
they are justified. But as none is guilty of Adams sin, till they have a
being in Adams nature, so none is righteous by the second Adam, till they have
a being in him by grace: and they must have a being in the first Adams nature,
before that they can have a being in the second Adams grace; And while they
were only in the first Adam, there was no difference between the Elect and
reprobate, between us and them before faith, Acts 15.9. Rom 3.22. The Scripture
has concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might
be given to them that believe. Gal. 3.22. We which believe do (...) into
rest, but those that do not believe, cannot enter in, although the work (...)
the foundation of the world, Heb. 4.4.

A seventh (...) up in the den, and sets upon the faithful messenger, saying,
if (...) in the sight of God, then we are hated of him, for he hates (...)
workers of unquity. And if this be so, absurdities will follow, then God will
(...) to day, and hate to morrow, or hate to day, and love to morrow. I answer,
(...) properly, God hates nothing but sin, he loves his own work in the very
(...) and reprobates. Hence your inference is false, to say that God wholly
hates (...) his Creatures. But thus it is is, when the devils and reprobates
have re^^^^ed God to be their Lord, and seem to wear grace which is his
livery in (...) teasonable creatures, but choose to serve sin and to wear his
livery, and so yield themselves servants to sin, John 8.34. Now when God
beholds sin, and ^^ndes the heart and affections of devils and reprobates
incorporated in it, he comes accidentally to hate them, because where the
hearts and affections are, there be those men and Devils.

Hence it is, that their affections being so incorporated in sin draw all
their a^i^^es to serve sin: In this condition lay all men, both the Elect and
reprobate in (...) fall of Adam: As soon as they had any being, the Devil and
sin set upon them, and got their heart and assections incorporated into it,
till Christ comes, who is strenger then this streng man, who binds him and
casts him out, and spoils his goods, and turns the stream of his affection
upon himself: so that although they slow but slowly that way, yet now being
incorporated or fixed on Christ; So that when the Lord looks upon his own
son in whom his soul delights, (...) finds there the affections of his
people, he comes to love them with the same (...) that he loves his son
although not so high in degree, yet with the same kind (...), because these
affections being set upon Christ, draw all the stream of (...) obedience to
serve him, that he delights in, although we have some interruptions which do
much hinder the stream of our obedience; yet he considers this as (...) burden
and infirmity, and looks not so much upon the work done, as upon the heart
and affection where it is placed; And finding them in Christ, his holiness and
righteousness is put upon all our obedience and makes it acceptable and well
pleasing to him. But before, when our affections were enclosed in sin, we
were esteemed accordingly then as a slave to the Devil, and a servant of sin,
and now as a child of God. For of necessity there must be a change in us, from
the (...) of Saton to God, Acts 26.18. The stony heart taken out, and the heart
of (...) given to us. For as there was a change from the state of innocence, in
which God loved us, Ge^. 1.27.21. So there renst be a change into that
condition (...) God may (...): Put for the present, we are not werthy to be
beloved, ^eph. 2.2. Before the decree being forth, then I will call them
beloved, which ^ere not beloved, (...). 9.25. Yet as soon as we are borne, we
have (...) thing (...) God loves, but not as his children by adoption, till we
have faith, which knits (...) Christ, and makes us beloved. The Apostle sets
down the way of Gods proceeding thus; First, Elect, then holy, and then
beloved, Coloss. 3.12. Then I conclude, that we are neither beloved nor
justified before faith, see Pet. 3.17. Thus the faithful messenger of the Lord
Christ defended himself with the sword of the spirit which is the Word of God,
against this seven-headed Hidra in be Dan.

Now I (...) show you those five incurable wounds that this faithful messenger
gave him, that cut so deep, that a man might see the very bone perished. In
this wound was written that we are justified by faith, therefore not before
faith, this was harsh to him that had none. But the servant of the Antinomians
Christ, thought to salve it up, saying, that he spoke of the act of believing,
as though that faith in the true Christ could be in the soul, and no act of
believing. But this shows what a faith theirs is. The Apostle of the true
Christ says, Faith without works is dead, James 2.17. Now if their faith be
no better, I grant that they may be justified as well without it as with it, But
it seems he has gotten some old heretic of his side, which said, that it was a
wresting of the Scripture to say that we are justified by faith, but he is
ashamed to name him, and therefore I suppose his conscience is convinced, and
has checked him for speaking of it: but he said a man may be both justified
with faith and without it, in a different sense. First, to be reputed and
accounted just; I answer, but this is Gods work alone. But then secondly, It
may be taken to declare or manifest us to be just, as works Justify; I
answer, as faith is a work, it declares, yet not to others, but to our selves.
Have thou faith? have it to thy self before God, Romans 4.22. But faith it self
is many times as hard to be known as our justification: I mean that act of it
that justifies us, which is to take and apply Christ and his benefits unto us;
Thus it justifies, and is very hard to be known, but as it works by love, and
acts all other graces, so it sanctifies and may easily be known: and by this
means we come to know that we are justified. I hose fruits of faith justify
the truth of our faith, that it is living and not a dead faith when it
brings forth fruits. But faith is the hand of the soul, taking hold of
Christ the Iustifier, and so it is counted for righteousness, Romans 4.5. So
then God justifies by forgiving and pronouncing a sinner to be just, and our
works justify by declaring to others that God has justified us, but faith
justifies by receiving and applying Christ and his merits, and so makes us
just. If you did but know what true faith was, you might soon know where to
place it in point of Justification, so should you not exalt it into Gods place,
nor abase it into the place of works.

The second deadly wound that was given to Hidra, in his Den, was this; He that
believes not shall be damned, Mar. 16.16. And this cut so deep, that he
almost despaired of help: For says he, if it be final, it is a note of
damnation. Now this is all that we require, for we do not say that every man
shall be damned that is in the state of unbeleife, for then all should be
damned: but we say that final unbelief damnes the soul: and this you grant,
and yet you said that Infants are justified before they have faith; Now if they
should dye being justified, are they damned, because they do not believe? or
are they saved, and yet dye in unbelief? How will you get out of this circle?
This den may be called the land of darkness without order, Job 10.22, Being
full of Thieves, and without government, dashing and splitting themselves one
against another.

A third deadly wound the faithful messenger gave him in his den, was this;
Without faith it is impossible to please God. Therefore we cannot be
justified without it. Now a man pleases God when he does those things that God
requires, and in that manner that he requires, and to that end as he requires;
Now these he approves to be well done, because they are grounded upon his Word,
and acted by a justified person, and tend to his glory; Now this you grant,
saying, we cannot come to God without faith, and therefore cannot please him:
but you being sensible that your faith is naught, if you have any, and
therefore you seek another way to cure it, saying, although we cannot come to
God before we believe, yet God can come to us, and Justification is Gods act
upon a sinner, and not a sinners act upon God.

I answer, For to pronounce a sinner just, is Gods act, but to take and apply
that righten snesse of Christ that makes us just, is our act of faith. And to
say that God will pronounce any just, before that they have by faith put on
Christ, Rom 13. This were to make God an unrighteous Judge to pronounce them
just which are not just: For what justice has a sinner, till the justice of
Christ is made over to him, and accounted for his? Therefore faith in Christ
must needs go before God pronounce them just.

Again, they do not only blasphe are God as an unrighteous Judge, pronouncing
them just which are yet unjust: When at he will by no means clear the
guilty, Exodus 34.7.

But also by this we may see what a Christ our Antinomians boast so much of which
comes sneaking a day after the fair, and brings them faith, when they are just
before, and brings his righteousness when they need it not, and comes to help
them when they have tried their cause before the Judge, and quitted before he
comes! Such a Christ is not worth seeking after. But what is your meaning of
Gods coming to you, when you have no faith to come to him? Is God come to you,
and yet you remain at a distance from him, or does God moove personally to
you, and you sit still, as a man may come to you while you are sitting? I had
thought God had filled all places, and did not move from place to place as man
does; These are but poor fig leaves to hide your nakedness, then the truth
is, Gods coming to us, and our coming to him is the same thing, only the
cause of the motion is in God, and the motion it self in us: So then when God
moves us to come to him, this is his coming to us, and then we cannot be
asunder; Now he moves us by his spirit, infusing faith into us, and so our
faith taking hold on him, we are drawn by his spirit into unity and communion
with him.

The fourth deadly wound given to Hedra in his den, is this; Whatsoever is not
of faith, is sin, Romans 14.23. This is terrible to him that has no faith:
Therefore he being sensible that there is something in it that would bite
cruelly, if he should suffer it to fasten upon him: therefore he shifts his
hands of it with all the speed he can, saying, he answered it in the third
already, when as the mean time it gnawes upon his conscience as a gangreine
that is incurable, for God and fin are at a deadly enmity, Psalm. 45.7. Iam. 4.4.

The fifth deadly wound that this faithful messenger gave to the Antinonsians
Christ is his den, is this; We are by nature children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3.
This he knows not well how to rid his hands of, but says, if we could prove it
to be so in Gods account, as well as in our own esteem, and that we are so
exempted from grace until we believe, it were something.

I answer, God esteems them as they are in themselves before conversion,
setting his own purpose aside, to be but as Reprobates. Neither was he moved
by any love to them from all eternity, to have such a purpose toward them. The
cause of Gods decrees and purposes was love to himself, to set forth his own
glory. This was the ground of all Gods purposes to us, for then there was
nothing else but himself to love; Now all reprobates have their descent from
the Devil as they are reprobates. Ye are of your father the Devil, for his
works ye do, John 8.44. And they are called the seed of the Serpent, Genesis
3.15. Know you not. that to whom ye yield your members servants to obey, his
servants ye are, to whom you obey, Romans 6.16. Now before conversion, the Elect
are servants of sin, as well as the reprobates. Ye were the servants of sin
(says the holy Ghost) but now ye are become the servants of righteousness,
Romans 6.17, 18. A gain, the seed of the woman (says the holy Ghost) is none
but Christ. He says not to seeds, as of many, but as of one, which is Christ,
Gal. 3.16. So then as all mankind lie in the fall of Adam. They are the seed of
the Serpent, till they are begotten again by the immortal seed to a lively
hope, 1 Pet. 13.23. And borne again of the water and the spirit, John 3.5. So
then what is said of Reprobates, is said of the Elect before conversion. For
they are of their father the Devil, that do his works, going on in a course
of sin: These are in the snare of the Devil, led captive at his will, and yet
may be recovered out of lt, 2 Timothy 2.26. Such were some of you, but ye are
washed; ye were carried away unto these dumb Idols, 1 Cor. 6.10, 11, 1.2, 2.
Ye were without Christ, being aliens and strangers from the Covenants of
promise, and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. And says the holy Ghost;
He that believes not the son shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him, John 3.36. And the Lord calls them his adversaries and enemies.
Yet he wl purge away their dross, and take away their tin, and Zisn shall be
redeemed with judgment, Isa. 1.24.25.27. I have wounded thee with the wound of
an enemy, yet I will restore health unto thee, and heal thy wounds says the
Lord, Jer. 30.14.17. And the Lord hates all workers of ^^iquity. and the Lord
will ab hor the bloody and deceitful man, Psalm. 5.5, 6. Here is no exception
made, whether they be elect or reprobate, but upon the condition of faith and
repentance. For says the holy Ghost: There is no difference, for all have,
sinned, Romans 3.22, 23. And says Peter: He put no difference between us and
them, purifying our hearts by faith, Acts 15.9. Here comes the difference, when
the Lord gives faith, and by it we receive Christ and his benefits. What have
thou th^a that thou did not receive from God, so he made thee to differ from
another, 1 Cor. 5.7. And the holy Ghost says, I will call them my people which
were not my people, and her beloved which was not beloved, Rom, 9.25. Thus you
see I bring Gods own testimonies because that you shall not say men speak of
them from misapprehension. Now let God be true, and all the Antinomians liars,
which would by a subtle evasion overthrow all the Scripture, saying; When God
shall command any duty. or forbid any vice, or promise any mercy, or threaten
any judgment for sin, all the Scripture must be brought to this. Do they
apprehend it ^^pi^ they do not, it is not so. Suppose the Propher say, thou
wast angry with me, Isa. 12.1. This they put off with misapprehension. And when
Paul says, I was a Persecutor, a Blasphemer and injurious, this they say was
misapprehension, when any speak thus of themselves before conversion. But what
will they say to those words of Christ; Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me,
Acts 9.5. And when the Apostle says; We had our conversation in times past, in
the lusts of the flesh, and we were children of wrath by nature, even as
others. This they put off with misapprehension, Ephesians 2.3. But how will
they put off this; You were dead in trespasses and sins, and ye were Gentiles
in the flesh, and ye were without Christ, and without God in the world, verse.
1.11, 12. Thus you see the wound is incurable, it cannot be healed, which the
faithful messenger gave the roaring lion in his den.

Now I shall proceed to see how the Antinomians Christ is able to stand in the
presence of the Lords Christ. First, their errors were laid open to the view
of the world in five general heads; And then perceiving them to fly, a
faithful messenger was sent after them to their last place of refuge, and so
he going to their den was set upon, and I have given thee a just account of
their Combat, and now we shall see whether they have been led all this while by
the true Christ or not. Now this Messenger has brought him to his trial. Now
if the Antinomians Christ be the true Christ, then we will follow him. But if
those whom they scornfully call Legalists, serve the true Christ, let all follow
him, we will compare them together and both with the Word of God.

Our Christ was promised when Adam had sinned, Genesis 3.15. And in that promise
by faith, all the elect were saved before his coming in the flesh. But our
Antinomians Christ tells ther^^, that they were saved before his coming in the
flesh, for their sincere obedience to the moral law of God. This Simpson
affirmed before the Committee of Divines in my hearing; And that promised seed
of the woman, (they say) was nothing concerning redemption, but only it was a
word spoken to the Serpent as a part of his curse, therefore they renounce it.
This was witnessed by four of them, viz. Mr. Wetton, Mr. George, Mr. Banes,
and one more against me, and some others.

Our Christ is the substance of the Covenant of grace, Isa. 42.6. And all the
Elect are saved by him. But the Antinomians Christ was the substance of the
first Covenant, the Covenant of works, witness Dr. Crispe in his book, page
121.

Our Christ comes openly, saying, I speak openly to the world, I ever taught
in the Sinagogues and in the Temple, whether the lows always resort, and in
secret have I said nothing. John 18.20. And faith Paul, I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ, Romans 1.16. He went into the Sinagogue and spoke boldly, Acts
19.8. But the Antinomians Christ creeps into houses, and leads captive silly
women laden with sins, and led away with diverse lusts, ever learning, and never
able to come to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3.6, 7. He is in the secret
chambers, or in the desars, Math. 24.26. He is in their private meetings, the
nurseries of al heresies, while there is liberty to worship the Lord openly.

Our Christ comes into the soul with power, pulling down the strong holds of
Satan binds the strong man, and spoils his goods, Math. 12.28. And casts him
out by the spirit of God, verse. 29. But the Antinomians Christ comes into their
soul, and lives there as an underling in that soul, where the Devil reigns
as Lord and King, and leads them captive at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26, The Prince
of the power of the air rules in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2,
See Crisp. page 320.

When the spirit of our Christ comes into the soul, he takes out the stone out
of the heart, and renews a right spirit in us, Psalm. 51. In righteousness and
true holiness, Ephesians. 4.23.24. It is God that works in you both to will and
to do of his own good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. But the spirit of the Antinomians
Christ is an idle spirit, living many years in the soul as an underling to the
Devil, doing nothing.

When our Christ puts his spirit into us, this spirit causes us to walk in
his statures, and to keep his judgments and do them, Ezekiel 36.27. The holy Ghost
will teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance, John 14.26.
And brings in every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. And leads
into all truth, John 16.1^. But the Antinomians Christ puts neither life nor
motion into those where he comes, but still they remain dead stones and empty
trunckes. See the tree of knowledge and counsel to Laodicea. Again, when our
Christ comes into the soul, he comes as a King, and commands obedience to the
moral law, being the statute law of heaven, Psalm. 119.89.103.20. Saying, you
have heard that it has been said thus, but I say unto you thus, Math. 5. He
taught as one having authority, and not as the Scribes, Mat. 7.29. He cleared
the law from these false glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees, and delivered it
in his own name; And when one asked what he should do to have eternal life,
then he sends him to the Law. But the Antinomians Christ frees them from all
obedience to the moral law, and makes them as idle as himself.

Our Christ commands us to take heed of drunkenness and surfeiting and cares
of this life, that we may be accounted worthy to escape the dangers of the
dreadful day, and to stand before the son of man, Luke 21.34, 35. But the
Antinomians Christ persuades them that a Drunkard or Whore-monger, or any vile
person without any change or alteration in the world, if his heart do but say;
I would have Christ: all that sinfulness though continued in, is no bar in the
world to hinder this man from claiming his portion in Christ, see Dr. Crisp,
page 314.320.

The Apostle of our Christ says; Ye lust and have not, and ye ask to spend it
on your lusts. Ye adul erers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friend-ship
of this world is enmity with God. James 4. But the Antinomians Christ persuades
them that David did not offend the Lord in the sin of adultery, nor Paul in his
persecution of the Saints of God: for all occasion of quarrel and controversy
is absolutely taken away, see Dr. Crispe, page 303. Nay further they affirm,
that if a man refrain adultery in obedience to the law, he sins more then he
that commits that that fearful sin in despite of the law: which makes them
forsake all their acquaintance that live in obedience to the law, and choose to
themselves such profane company that they may be sure aro of their own
opinions.

The Apostle of our Christ says, every member is necessary, being led by one
spirit into all truth, Ioh. 16.13. And baptized into one spirit, and rejoice in
each others happiness, and grieve at any injury done to their fellow members,
there is no schism in his body, 1 Cor. 12.12.13.25.26. But the Antinomians
Christ leads some of his members, but the Devil leads many more of them then
he, being whores and drunkards, without any change or alteration, see Crisp. p.
314.320. Who defy the law of God. For one of them said, I am not bound to live
with a dead man, I will take to me a spiritual husband. And she like a
strumpet forsook her husband and took another, and yet a member of their
Christ: witness Mr. Rushbrook and his wife. If any shall say, he is a member
of our Christ, and bear no fruit, he takes him away, and casts him into the
fire, being a withered branch and good for nothing, Joh. 15.2.6. He is not an
unrighteous Judge to call evil good, he will not justify the wicked, Isa. 5.
He will by no means clear the guilty, Exo. 34.7 He went into his garden to see
the fruits of the valley, whether the Vine flourish, and the Pomgranat budded,
Cant 6.11. He says: Herein is my Father glorified that ye bear much fruit,
(mark) so shall ye be my Disciples, Joh. 15.8. But the Antinomians Christ
pronounces an unrighteous sentence, calling evil good, justifying the guilty
before they have any faith to receive the righteousness of Christ, whereby
alone they may be just.

Our Christ says, being justified by faith, we have grace with God, Romans 5.1.
Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of
the law, Romans 3.28. He that believes on him that justifies the ungodly (now
mark) his faith is courted for righteousness, Romans 4.5. But the Antinomians
Christ says, they are justified before and without faith, while they remain
ungodly, see Crisp. page 136.155.

Our Christ says, he that believes not shall be damned, Mark 16.16. Neither
shall he see life, but the wrath of God abides on him, Joh. 3.36. But the
Antinomians Christ says, a man may be saved without faith: see the counsel of
Christ to Laodicea.

Our Christ when he comes into the soul, he comes by water and blood to
sanctify as well as to justify, 1 John 5.6. But the Antinomians Christ comes to
justify them, and yet not to sanctify at the same time. Nay further he says,
sanctification of life is not a jo^ the way of a justified person unto heaven,
see Crisp p. 69.

The spirit of our Christ is always working in us where it is, and by this
working we know our selves to be justified. But the Antinomians Christ
persuades them that their justification cannot be known by their
sanctification, but by a revelation only.

Our Christ says, whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin, Joh. 3.34.
But the Antinomians Christ tells them, if they act any sin, that he is the
author of it. For alas they cannot sin, they are dead stones and empty trunks.
Alas they do nothing but what the spirit of their Christ leads them into: See
the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

Our Christ says, we that are in him are new creatures. Old things are passed
away, and al things are new. 2 Cor. 5.17. We are passed from death to life, and
made living stones to offer a living sacrifice acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. But the Antinomians Christ loves his members as well when
they were slaves and servants to sin and Satan, as when they are set free and
become his children by adoption: he loves them as well when they are profane as
when they are holy. Nay he gives a charge to all his members, that if one sin,
the rest must not tell him of it, But comfort him; for to mourn for sin is a
dishonor to their Christ.

Our Christ says, when God sends forth the spirit of his son into our hearts,
we will cry abba Father, Gal. 4.5, 6. It is the spirit of grace and
supplication, Zech, 12.10. And he greatly delights in their prayers, Prove.
15.8. Cant. 2.14. But the Antinomians Christ tells them they need not pray. For
says one of them, nothing grieves me so much as the time I have spent in
prayer and other duties, that has held me so long from my comfort.

Our Christ says, When you have done all that you can, you are unprofitable
servants, Luke 17.10. You have done but your duty. But the Antinomians Christ
tells them, that all Christian duties are but dirty dungy duties of
sanctification.

Our Christ says, If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins,
John 8.24. But the Antinomians Christ says that faith is not absolutely
necessary to salvation, for it is but a work of ours.

Our Christ saw nothing to love in us, which moved him to redeem us; Till he
adorned us and made us lovely there was no difference. For all have sinned, and
come shore of the glory of God, Romans 3.22.23. Says Peter, he put no difference
between us and them, purifying our hearts by faith,, Acts 15.9. But our
Antinomians Christ saw some cause of love before he came, even from all
eternity, which moved him to redeem them.

Our Christ makes us righteous by his righteousness, when we are in him by
grace: as the first Adam made us sinners when we have a being in him by nature,
but not before. But the Antinomians are made righteous by their Christ before
they be in him by grace. And, Adam never made them sinners, for they were
justified from all eternity, and always as righteous as Christ.

Our Christ tells us that God pronounces us just and faith applies the
righteousness of Christ to make us just, and works declare it. But our
Antinomians Christ cannot direct them where to place their faith in point of
justification, that it may not be exalted in the place of God, nor abased in
the place of works. But if their Christ were able to give them true faith, he
could direct them where to place it.

Our Christ will not have his Temple defiled. For the Temple of God is holy,
which Temple ye are, 1 Cor, 3.16, 17. He desires truth in the inward parts,
Psalm. 51.6. But the Antinomians Christ regards not where he dwells. It is all
one to him if he live to a habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul
spirit, and Cage of every unclean lust, Revel. 18.2.

Our Christ himself bare the guilt and punishment of our sins, and carried our
sorrows: he alone trod the wine-pres of Gods wrath, and there was none with
him. Isa. 53.4.63.3. He says I am he: Therefore if ye seek me, let these go,
John 18.8. But the Antinomians Christ comes sneaking a day after the fair, and
brings them faith when they are just before, and righteousness when they need
it not, and comes to help them when they have tried their cause before the
Judge, and quitted before he comes.

Our Christ, as God fills all places, and his humane nature is in the third
heaven, till the restitution of all things, Acts 3.21. So then as he is God, he
does not move, and as he is man, he will not come till the day of judgment.
Therefore when it is spoken of his coming to us, o^ our coming to him, it is
the same thing: only the cause of this motion is us God, and the motion it
self in us: for when he works faith in us by his spirit, our faith takes hold
again, and so we are drawn into unity and communion with him. But our
Antinomians Christ can come to them before that they have faith, while that
they are at a distance from him. But how this can be, themselves know not; see
Den's 7. arguments.

Our Christ says, If thou beleevest, thou shall be saved, Acts 16.31. Yea he
says, only believe, Mar. 5.36. But the Antinomians Christ t^lls them that he
will save them without any such conditions; which says he, is the doctrine of
legal teachers: See counsel to Laodicea: see Dr, Crisp, page 128.

Our Christ tells us, the only way to pacify conscience, is to exercise faith,
for it is the hand of the soul, whereby we receive all our mercies and
comforts from Christ; And it brings us into unity with christ, and into
obedience to the spirit of christ. But our Antinomians Christ tells them, that
those which say we cannot be saved without faith, do perplex the conscience,
and denies our mercies, and resists the spirit of God, and does not consist
with the right end, for which faith was wrought in them: see counsel to
Laodicea.

Our Christ came preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, and saying,
repent and believe the Gospel, Mar. 1.14, 15. And he says, Do unto all men,
as ye would they should do unto you, even so do to them. And gives a reason,
saying, this is the law and the Prophets, Math. 7.12. But the Antinomians
christ will neither have them to believe nor repent as a duty, nor do to others
as we would have them do to us: For say they, this is legal teaching; see
counsel to Laodicea.

Our Christ says, humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, James 4.10.
And blessed are they that weep now, for they shall laugh, Luke 6.21. And
blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted, Math. 5.4. And our
Christ said unto us; The time will come that the Bridegroom shall be taken from
you, and then ye shall fast, Luke 5.35. But our Antinomians christ teaches
them that they must neither humble themselves, weep not mourn, last nor pray
for sin or affliction: see Crisp, page 109.110.230.

Our Christ gave the Sacrament the night before he suffered, saying, Take,
eat, drink, do this in remembrance of me, 1 Cor. 11.24.25. Neither did christ
blot out the forth commandment, when he cleared them from the false glosses
of the Scribes and Pharisees, but rather showed his Disciples how they ought
more strictly to observe and keep them. But the Antinomians christ tells them
this is legal teaching: for the law is void to them, and ought not to be
observed: see counsel to Laodicea.

Our Lord Christ commands us to grow in grace, 2 Pet. 3.18. 1 These. 4.1.

But the Antinomians christ says, they are as righteous as he in respect of
degrees, and therefore cannot grow in grace, neither need they to receive the
Sacrament for that purpose.

Our Christ was tempted of the Israelites in the wilderness, 1 Cor. 10.9. Yet
he was reconciling the world to himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. And afterward when he
came in our nature, they cried out, crucify him, and murdered the Prince of
life, Acts 14.15. Yet he prayed for them, and his prayeres was heard. But the
Antinomians christ tells them that they never did offend him, but were
reconciled to him from all eternity, and pronounced them just before they were,
and so born as righteous as christ without any original sin.

Our Christ came to adopt all his sons that did receive him. For as many as
received him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God, to them that
believe on his Name, John 1.12. For ye are all the children of God by faith in
Christ Jesus, Gal. 3 26. But the Antinomians Christ tells them that they were
adopted from all eternity.

Our Christ says, search the Scriptures, John 5.39. And the noble Bereans are
highly commended for searching the Scripture, Acts 17.11, But the Antinomians
Christ tells them that they need not the written Word, without they are so
full of light within, and that any thing is Scripture, if it be but written,
and of an equal vallew with it; see the tree of Knowledge. But they rejecting
the Word of the Lord, what wisdom is in them? Ier. 8.9.

Our Christ said, If ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me: But if ye
believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words, John 6.47, 48. But the
Antinomians Christ and Moses are at a perpetual enmity, because Moses requires
obedience, and they are led by an idle spirit, which neither infuseth grace
into them, nor do they desire it, lest they should be bound to improve, or to
increase it.

Our Christ says by his Apostle; If we or an Angel of heaven should preach
any other Gospel then that we have preached unto you, let him be accursed, Gal.
1.8, 9. But the Antinomians Christ by their own confession has revealed to
them a new light, that Gods faithful people never saw before. But they that
bring it, are false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into
the Apostles of Christ, and as Ministers of righteousness. And no marvel, for
Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14. But
they that say they see by his light, their sin remains, John 9.41. They think
of men above that which is written, therefore they are puffed up one against
another, 1 Cor. 4.6.

Our Christ is become a surety for us, Heb. 7.22. And his righteousness is
imputed to us, and accounted ours. But the Antinomians Christ tells them that
he has stripped them of their sins, and they have stripped him of his
righteousness, so that they are deified, and he is degraded of his Godhead,
and now they are made righteousness in the abstract. See Honeycomb. And he is
made sin in the abfor them.

Our Christ by his Apostle, bids us to strive together for the faith of the
Gospel, Phil. 1.27. And says, ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving
against firm, Heb. 12.2. He said the time would come, that he which has no
sword, should sell his garment to buy one, Luke 22.36. And when the Soldiers
came to him to know what they should do, he bad them do no violence by
plundering any man, but be content with your wages. But he did not bid them
leave fighting for the Gospel and Religion, Luke 3.14. But the Antinomians
Christ will not have them fight for the Gospel nor Religion, yet he will give
way to fight for other things, which shows him to be a carnal Christ, framed
in their own fancy, and he and his Pros^lites are all alike, who say that they
will fight for carnal things, but not for the Gospel nor Religion.

Our Christ is given for a Covenant of the people, Isa. 49.8. And says the
Lord, they shall ask the way to Zion with their face thitherward, saying, come
let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant that shall never be
forgotten, Jer. 50.5. But the Antinomians Christ will cause them to despise all
bonds and covenants to the Lord and to his Christ, saying, let us break their
bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us, Psalm. 2.3. Yea, they abhor
the very seals of that covenant already made with the Lords Christ, lest by
them they should grow in grace, which is very hateful to the Antinomians
Christ. These be those trucebreakers, having aforme of godliness, but deny the
power of it, from such turn away, 2 Timothy 3.3.5.

Our Christ is that good shepherd which gave his life for his sheep, Ioh.
10.11. He says, I pray not for the world, but for those that thou have given
me, for they are thine, John 17.9. But the Antinomians Christ tells them that
he dyed for the whole world. Therefore says Dr. Crispe, we may collect the
universality of redemption of all and every particular person in the world: see
his book, p. 296.

Our Christ tells his followers aforehand, what it will cost them to be a
Christian, saying, he most sell all and give it to the poor, Lu. 18.22. and
deny himself, Luke 9.23. And hate father and mother, wife and children,
brethren and sisters, and his own life also, else he cannot be my Disciple,
Luke 14.26. But the Antinomians Christ tells them of ^at pastures, and fullness
of pleasures: see Crispe, p. 31.

Our Christ was angry at the buyers and sellers in the Temple, and whipped them
out of it, Math 21.12.13. But the Antinomians Christ tells them that
afflictions for sin are the smiles of God, and his choycest embraces and
strokes are the greatest manifesting of Gods love to them, p: 43.

Our Christ says, God spared not his only son, but gave him up for us all,
Romans 8.32. But the Antinomians Christ tells them that his Father broke out
furiously against him, and he was satisfied to see his son tormented: Yea, it
did his soul good to behold it: see blaspheming Crispe, page 46, 47.

Our Christ requires of us thirsting, coming, buying, eating, harkening,
seeking and calling upon God, Isa. 55.1, 2. But the Antinomians Christ requires
nothing, b^^ to take the offer of him in a carnal manner, to keep them from
punishments.

Our Christ bids us to ask, seek, and knock, Mat. 7. And to strive to enter
into the straight gate. But the Antinomians Christ like Judas, says, what
needs all this wast? for he brings justification, loving kindness and
salvation, and lays it at our doors, and yet we will be doing and running 100.
miles about in vain: see Crispe, page 63.

Our Christ only admits of such guests as have on their wedding garment, Mat.
22.11.12. But the Antinomians Christ puts back those that have some holiness,
and admits of whores and drunkards remaining such, page 66, 67.

Our Christ approves and requires selfe-denyall, fasting and prayer, and all
other graces. But the Antinomians Christ tells them, that these are but the
devices of the world: see Crispe, page 68.

Our Christ came to seek and to save that which was lost, Luke 19.10. But the
Antinomians Christ comes to save those that were never lost, but justified and
beloved from all eternity.

Our Christ was offended with Peter for sin after conversion, and said, Get
thee behind me Satan, for thou art an offense unto me, for thou savourest not
the things that be of God, but the things that be of men, Mat. 16.23. But the
Antinomians Christ cannot be offended with them for sin, Crispe p. 303.

Our Christ at his first visible coming, bare the sins of many. And for them
that look for him, he shall appear the second time without sin unto salvation,
Heb. 9.28. But the Antinomians Christ is expected to come to them once more to
reign as an Emperor upon earth 1000. years before the day of judgment.

Our Christ when he ascended up on high, he gave gifts unto men, Ephesians. 4.8. Of
his fullness we receive grace for grace, John 1.16. But the Antinomians Christ
gives no grace, but only comes personally into the soul, and still they remain
dead stones and empty trunkes: see three of knowledge.

Our Christ greatly desires out beauty, being all glorious within, and our
garments of wrought gold, Psalm. 45.11, 13. He says our voice is sweet, and
our countenance is comely, and is ravished with one chain of our neck, and
says, our love is better then wine, and our garments smell as Lebanon, Cant.
2.14, 4.9, 10, 11. But the Antinomians Christ neither bestows grace where it
is wanting, nor delights in it where it is.

Our Christ calls upon us to purge and cleanse our selves from all filthiness
of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. But
the Antinomians Christ persuades them from it, and tells them that he will do
that himself.

Our Christ is King of righteousness, as well as King of peace, Heb. 7.2. He
gives rest to them that are heavy laden, Math. 11.28. But he gives no peace to
the wicked, Isa. 57.21. But the Antinomians Christ brings peace to none but to
the wicked in their corruption, unconverted before faith and calling.

Our Christ by his Apostle says, work out your own salvation with fear and
trembling, Phil. 1.12. And he says, godly sorrow works repentance to
salvation, 2 cor. 7.10. And the end of our faith is the salvation of our
souls, 1 Pet. 1.9. But the Antinomians Christ tells them that works of
sanctification and holy walking is not the way to salvation: see Crispe, page
69.20.

Our Christ says he loved his own that were in the world, and so he loved them
unto the end, Ioh. 13.1. He will never leave them nor forsake them, Heb. 13.5,
6. But the Antinomians Christ tells them that any sad jealousy concerning
their present or future estate, puts them quite out of Christ: Dr. Crisp, p. 29.

Our Christ will chide, rebuke, and threaten where he sees cause, as well as
comfort, Rev. 2, 3. chap. But the Antinomians Christ is all for music and
flaggons of wine, page 80.31.

Our Christ says, the gate of heaven is straight, and the way narrow, and few
there be that find it, Math. 7. Therefore he bids us strive: For many shall
seek to enter, and shall not be able, Lu. 13.24. And he said, how hardly shall
a ^ich man enter into the Kingdom of heeven, Mar. 10.23. The righteous shall
scarcely be saved, 1 Pet. 4.18. We must through much tribulation enter into the
Kingdom of God, Acts 14.22. But the Antinomians Christ tells them that the way
to heaven is the most easy to bit of any in the world, and without any
hardness, they may make any progress in it: Crisp, p. 83.18.

Our Christ says by his Apostle, that we are blessedd in the deed or in the
way of doing, Iam. 1.25. But the Antinomians Christ tells them that they
provoke God that seek for any blessing in the duties of holy walking: Crisp, p.
113.4.

Our Christ says by his Apostle, give all diligence to make your calling and
election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Bu the Antinomians Christ says, if they take him
upon his general tender, it is as good security as any in the world; yea, it is
as good security as God can make them: see Crisp, p. 163.

Our Christ calls the weary and heavy laden sinners, Mat. 11.28. And excludes
those that say Lord, Lord, and will not do his will, Mat. 7.21. And casts out
him that came without his wedding garment, Mat. 12. But the Antinomians Christ
sends out his general pardon for all thieves and whores without exception: see
Crisp, p. 162. And if they will but carnally take him, they may be thieves still.

Our Christ says by his Apostle, that in every Nation, he that fears God and
works righteousness, is accepted of him, Acts 10.34. But the Antinomians
Christ tells them that righteousness is that which puts a man a way from
Christ, but sinfulness cannot: see Dr. Crisp. p. 149.

Our Christ when he comes into the soul, changes the will to embrace him,
(...) to receive him gladly. But the Antinomians Christ comes into the soul
violently against the will to justify him: As a Physician when he brings
physic to his Patient, who shuts his teeth, and will not receive it, then he
forces his mouth open, and poures it down his throat: see Crispe, p. 151.15.

Our Christ requires faith and repentance as conditions of the covenant, Mar.
5.36. Acts 8.38.16.31. Although these graces are his gifts: see Ephesians 2.8. Acts
5.31. But the Antinomians Christ tells them of a covenant without any
conditions on their side, see Dr. Crispe, p. 184.

Our Christ loves righteousness and hates wickedness, Ps. 45.7. Isa. 7.14.14
But the Antinomians Christ is kept off by righteousness, but not by sin: see
Crisp p. 249. He only hates righteousness, but he does not hate sin: witness
Mr. Wetton, Mr. George, Mr. Baines, and one more, affirmed against me and
others on these grounds. First, sin is nothing, then how can God hate nothing.
Secondly, sin cannot hurt of it self, then why should God hate it? Thirdly,
sin had its first being in God, then why should God hate i^? Fourthly, God
created Adam a sinner, which appears by his fall, and he says, I create evil,
then why should he hate it? Fifthly, God is the author of all things, and
motions, therefore of sin, and why should God hate it? Sixthly, God does punish
some for the glory of his justice, but not through any hatred of their sin.
This last reason affirmed by Mr. Banes, is now revoaked; Thus we see by what
spirit these men are led, being ashamed of his error.

And now I have set before you the Christ of the Legalists, as they scornfully
call us, and the Christ of the Antinomians. Now if it seem evil to you to serve
the Lords Christ: choose you this day whom you will serve, whether the
Antinomians fained Christ, or the true Christ of God. But as for me and my
house, we will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. Halt no longer between two opinions:
But if Baal be God follow him, but if the Lord be God follow him. And like
Iehn, destroy the name of Baal out of Israel, 2 Kings 10.28. Hos. 2.17. Let us
not put the Lord to decide the controversy by fire from heaven, having his
word the true Judge of all controversies. Therefore whosoever shall despise the
Word shall be destroyed, and he that fears the Commandment, shall be
rewarded, prove. 13.13. Then be not led away with a fained Christ, but cleave to
the Lords Christ, who is able to keep that which thou committest to his trust,
and to present thee faultlesse and unreprovable in his sight, Coloss. 1.22. Now
the Lord open thine eyes to see clearly into all these things that differ, and
give thee grace to hold fast that which is good, that thou may be settled upon
the true foundation, and there stand like mount Zion unmovable for ever, Psalm
125.1.

The grounds of true Christian Religion very necessary to build us on the true
Rock, Jesus Christ.
WHat is the true Christian Religion? Answ. It is the way to worship God
through Jesus Christ according to his own appointment. First, it is called the
way of holiness, Isa. 35.8. The new and living way, Heb. 10, 20. The narrow
way, Mat. 7. the way everlasting, Ps. 139.14. And it must be in Christ. For God
was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, 2 Cor, 5.19. And according to
his own appointment. For all those Ceremonies and Types of Christ were done as
the Lord commanded Moses Exo. 40. Therefore Christ as a son over his own
house, Heb. 3.6. Spoke as having authority, and not as the Scribes Mat. 7.29.
He says, all power in heaven and earth is givento him, ver. 28.18. Therefore
he in his own name says; Thus you have heard, but I say thus unto you, Math.
5.28.

What are the parts of Religion to be known? Answ. They are two. First, is
concerning truths to be known, that you may prove what is that good,
acceptable, and perfect will of God. Thou art a Jew and know his will, Romans
12.2, 3.18. The 2 concerning truths to be practiced. Thy people shall be willing
in the day of thy power. Ps. 110.3. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat
the good of the land, Isa. 3.19. Not he that says Lord, Lord, but he that does
the will of my Father shall be saved. Math. 7.21. The doer of the work shall be
blessed in the deed, Iam 1.25. Let us hold fast our profession, Heb.
4.14.10.23. He that holds out to the end shall be saved, Mark 13.13.

What are the grounds of Religion? Answ. They are two. First, it is a right
knowledge of God, as he has revealed himself unto us in his word, concerning
his unity of essence in the Trinity of persons, his names and attributes, and
works of Creation and providence. The second maine ground of Religion, is a
right knowledge of our selves, as we were first created righteous and holy after
Gods own Image, Genesis 1.26. Since the fall none is righteous, Romans 3.10. Thirdly,
as we are in the state of ^race righteous in part, Phil. 3 12.15.16. Fourthly,
in the state of glory perfect in degrees as creatures. Heb. 12 23.

How do you know there is a God? Answ. I know there is a God by the testimony
of conscience, accusing for sin committed, and is ^^ were Gods deputy to
arraign and condemn us for it; which could not be but from a displeased God, 1
Kings 17.8. John 8.9. Secondly from the comfortable refreshing we find in our
souls, when we are faithful and conscionable in our obedience to the Lord, 2
Cor. 1.12. Romans 9.1. Acts 22.1. Thirdly I know there is a God by the frame of
the world. By these v^^ble things are clearly s^en his eternal power and
Godhead Romans 1.20. The heavens could not make themselves, because they cannot
keep themselves from perishing, Psalm. 102.25.26. Heb. 1.10.11. Neither could
the earth make it self, nor the silly creatures that are in it could not make
it, nor themselves, they being all mortal and vanity: which plainly shows that
their first beginning was by a divine power: Fourthly, all nations do
acknowledge that there is a God, and that he ought to be worshipped, although
they cannot find out the true God, nor truly how to worship him. Fifthly, I
know there is a God that provideth food for all creatures; and not only so,
but in making their food nourishing being of it self without life, yet without
which they could not live; although our clothes being void of heat, yet
keeps our bodies warm, which could not be without a God; also that all the
creatures being at variance, and feed one upon another, and yet every kind
preserved, which could not be without a God.

How many Gods be there? Ans. There be many idol-gods, which are nothing in the
world, and many that are called gods and Lords. But to us there is but one God;
There is none other Gods but one, Cor. 8.4, 5 6 In this God there are 3. real
distinct Persons, having subsistence in the same Essence; The Father, the Word,
and the holy Ghost, and these three are one ^ John 5.7.

How do you know the true God from all false gods? Answ. First, the true God is
known from all false gods, by the simple purity of his divine nature, being
void of all composition: the creatures are made up of the 4 Elements, but God
is not so, and his essence is free from all division or parts. We may not say
this is one part of God, and that is another, as we say of the creature. Again,
what is in God cannot be multiplied or increased, as to have more wisdom or
more strength. Neither can there be any decrease of any thing that is in God.
Again, no accidents can cleave to him or add any thing to his perfection: but
what ever he is, he is the same essentially.

But are not the three Persons so many parts of his Godhead? Answ. No, the
Father is God, the Son is God, and the holy Ghost is God; and yet not three
Gods, but one God. This Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity is a holy
mystery, and is rather to be religiously adored by faith, then curiously
searched by reason, further then God has revealed in his word. The mean time
let us neither confound the Persons, nor divide the substance of his perfect
Essence.

Secondly, we may know the true God from all false gods by this, that he is
infinite; First, in his unmeasurable greatness. Great is the Lord, and greatly
to be praised, and his greatness is unsearchable, Psalm. 145.3. Behold God is
great, and we know him not, Job 36.26. Behold heaven, and the heaven of heavens
cannot contain thee, 2 Chr. 6 18. He is omnipresent in all places. Whither
shall I go from thy presence? To heaven, thou art there, to hell, thou art
there, to the bottom of the sea thou art there, Ps. 139.7 8.9. But no other God
is so. Secondly, God is infinite in his unmeasurable age and time of his being,
there was none before him, nor shall e any after him. He is Alpha and Omega, the
first and the last. Rev. 1.8. His days cannot be searchen out Job 36.26. Thy
yea^es have no end, Psa. 202.27. From everlasting to everlasting thou art God,
Psalm 90.2. The Lord is the true God, he is the living God, and an everlasting
King, Jer. 10.10. But no other God is so.

Thirdly, God is infinite in his wisdom and understanding. Oh the depth of
the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God; how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out Romans 11.33. Great is the Lord, his
understanding is infinite, Psa. 147.5. The Lord knows the hearts of men, Psalm.
94.11. He sees not as man sees, he looks on the heart, 1 Samuel 16.7. He
knows all things, John 21.17. Thine eyes are open upon all the ways of the
sons of men, Jer. 32.19. All things are naked and open unto the eyes of him
with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13. Yea the darkness hides not from thee,
but the night shines as the day, the darkness and the light are both alike
unto thee, Psalm. 139.12. But thus no other God can do.

Fourthly, God is infinite in this, that he is unchangeable or immutable. The
finite creatures change daily; But the Lord is the same yesterday, to day, and
for ever, Heb. 13.8. I am the Lord, I change not, Mal. 3.6. With him there is
no variableness not shadow of turning, Jam. 1.17. The heavens wax old as a
garment, and as a vesture shall be changed. But thou art the same for ever, Ps.
102.27. Heb. 1.12. God said to Moses, I am that I am, Exo. 3.14. That men may
know that thou whose name alone is Jehovah, art the most high over all the
earth, Psalm. 83.18. He has his being, of and from himself, being alone
Independent, who gives ceing to all his promises, and all creatures have their
being from him. In him we live, move, and have our being; he gives to all life
and breath, and all things, Acts 17.25.28. Therefore he alone is unchangeable,
but all other Gods are vanity, Zech. 10.2.

Fifthly, God is infinite in his righteousness and holiness? The Judge of all
the earth will do right, Genesis 18.25. The Almighty will nor pervert judgment,
he accepts not the persons of Princes, nor regards the rich more then the
poor, for they are all the work of his hands, Job 34.12.19. And his holiness
is such, that cannot be defiled with sin, although he is in all places where
sin is committed, and has a hand in all finfull actions. The hand that is
stretched out to slay another, is moved by the Lord, and the tongue that
blasphemes his holy Name is moved by him. For in him we live, move, and have
our being, Acts 17.28. Yet he is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all
his works, Psalm. 145.17. His work is perfect, for all his ways are judgment: a
God of truth without iniquity, just and true is he, Deuteronomy. 32.4. He will by no
means clear the guilty, Exodus 34.7. Nor spare his own Son when our sins were
imputed to him, Romans 8.32. Who is able to stand before this holy Lord God? 1 Samuel 6.20. The Angels cover their faces, as not being able to behold the glory
of his holiness; and they cover their feet, being ashamed that he should
behold their infirmity. And they cry out one to another, saying, holy, holy,
holy, Lord of Hosts, the whole earth is full of thy glory. And the Prophet
cries out, saying, Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean
lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips. For mine eyes
have seen the King, the Lord of Host, Isa. 6.2.3.5. For who among the Gods is
like unto thee, glorious in holiness, Exodus 15.11.

Sixthly, God is infinite in power, he can do more then he will do, Mat. 3.9. Is
any thing too hard for the Lord, Genesis 18.14. Ier. 32.17. Who has resisted his
will, Romans 9.19. Our God is in the heaven, and has done whatsoever he pleased,
Psalm. 115.3.135.6. Our God in fix days made the heavens, the earth, the sea,
and all the creatures in them, Exodus 20. But those gods that have not made the
heavens and the earth, even they shall perish from the earth, and from under
those heavens. But our God has made the earth by his power, he established the
world by his wisdom, and has stretched out the heavens by his discretion,
Ier. 10.11, 12. Then let us not halt between two opinions. When the people saw
his power, they fell on their faces, and said, the Lord he is the God, the Lord
he it the God, 1 Kings 18.21.39.

Of what did the Lord make the world, and by what means is it continued and
upheld? Answ. The Lord made all things of nothing. Things that are seen, were
made of things which do not appear, Hebr. 11.3. And he upholdeth all things by
the word of his power, Heb. 1.3. For the earth hangs upon no thing, Job 26.7.

But was man made of nothing? Answ. The first matter was made of nothing, being
the earth and the rest of the Elements. And then the Lord God formed the body
of man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrills the breath of
life, and man became a living soul, Genesis 2.7.

But had not the woman also a soul given to her? Answ. Yes, Hannah poured out
her soul before the Lord, 1 Samuel 1.15. And says Mary, my soul does magnify
the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior, Luke 1.46, 47. And the
Lord opened Lidia's heart that she attended unto those things that were spoken
by Paul, Acts 16.14. And Mary kept the sayings of Christ in her heart, Luke
2.19.51.

In what estate or condition was man created? Answ. In a blessed estate: In the
image and likeness of God which consisted in knowledge, Col. 3 10. In
righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians 4.24. And in his sovereignty over all
the creatures here below, Genesis 1:28: Psalm 8.6, 7, 8.

Wherefore did God create all things? Answ. God made all things for his own
glory. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the earth shows forth his
handy work, Ps. 19:1: The Lord made all thing, for himself, Pro. 16.4.

In what did God require that Adam should glorify him? Answ. In fulfilling a
Covenant of works. Ye shall keep my statutes and my judgments, (which if a man
do) he shall live in them; I am the Lord, Levit. 18 y. Gal. 3.12.

Had Adam power to fulfill that Covenant of works? Answ. Yes, for he then had
the moral law written in his heart, for some remainders of it are yet left in
man by nature. The Gentiles which have not the written law, do by nature the
things contained in the law, which show the work of the law written in their
hearts, Romans 2.14, 15.

What is the sum of the moral law? Answ. The ten Commandments which are
called the tables of the Covenant, Deuteronomy. 9.9.11. In which are contained all
duties both to God and man. For what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but
to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to
fear the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul, to keep the
Commandments of the Lord and his statutes which I command thee this day for
thy good, Deuteronomy. 10.12, 13.

What is the sum of the first Commandment? Answ. It forbids the having of more
gods then one, 1 Cor. 8.6. Also it forbids to choose or to set up any thing for
our God that is not God, thou shall have no other god. Also it commands us to
take the Lord for our God. Choose you whom you will serve; I and my house will
serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. And to cleave unto him, Deuteronomy. 10.^0. Thou have
avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18.

What is the sum of the second Commandment? Answ. It forbids al true divine
worship to be given to any false god; Thou shall not bow down to (...) nor
worship them. And it forbids all false worship to be given to him in (...).
They worship me, teaching for doctrine, the precepts of men, Mar. 15.9. Being
no more vain Oblations. Also it commands all true divine worship to be given to
the true God. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve, Mat. 4.10.

What is the sum of the third Commandment? Answ. It forbids all unreverent
speaking of the name of God or of his Attributes, or swearing by him upon
slight occasions; Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.
Also it forbids al unreverent corriage toward the Lord in the way of his
worship, in his Ordinances, or toward the works of his providence. Also it
commands all reverent speaking of the name and attributes of God. For holy and
reverend is his Name, Ps. 111.9. As also toward him in his Ordinances. God is
greatly to be feared in the assembly of the Saints, and to be had in reverence
of all that are about him, Ps. 89.7. Also in the works of God; When I consider
the heavens, the works of thy hands, the Sun, Moon, and Stars which thou have
ordained. What is man that thou art mindful of him? Psalm. 8.3, 4.

What is the sum of the fourth Commandment? Answ. The sum of the fourth
Commandment respects the time when God will chiefly be worshipped, served,
honored, and reverenced, and that is on his own day by him appointed for the
same use, and therefore it is called the Lords day. Rev. 1.10. The Sabbath of
the Lord thy God sanctified and set apart for that use; So that we must neither
rob God of his day, or any part of it to employ it about any other occasions,
not minding our own pleasures, nor speaking our own words, Isa. 59.13. Also it
forbids us to appoint any days for divine worship, to dedicate them to the
Lord, except it be days of humiliation or thanksgiving to remove some
judgment, or to seek some mercy, or to render praise for some blessing
received, and for some certain time, and then to return to their first
Institution, which was to labor 6. days. Thus we must choose the true God, and
worship him with true worship and reverence in his own time. And this is the
sum of our duty to the Lord immediately as it is contained in the four first
Commandments, being the first Table of the law.

What is the sum of the fifth Commandment?

Answ. It forbids all negligence and disobedience to Magistrates or Parents, or
any that the Lord has put in authority over us; such as those filthy draemers
that despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities Jud. 8. also it commands us
to give them vivell honor and reverence, and obedience; see Romans 13.1. Tit.
3.1. Ephesians. 6.2.1. Tim. 2.1, 2.

What is the sum of the sixth Commandment?

Answ. It forbids all injuries done to the bodies or souls of others, as envy,
hatred, malice, or stripes, or murder it self, thou shall not kill: also it
commands all duties of love and charity which tend to their preservation either
of body or soul.

What is the sum of the seventh Commandment?

Answ. It forbids all unchaste thoughts tending to adultery and adultery it
self, and all idle words and gestures tending that way, let not fornication be
ence named among you, as becomes Saints. Ephesians. 5.3. also it commands to avoid
all suspected places and persons, abstain from all appearance of evil 1 These.
5.22. Prove. 5.8.

What is the sum of the eighth Commandment?

Answ. It forbids all fraud, or deceit, or stealing, or any wrong to others in
their estate. Thou shall not steal; also it commands all duties of
neighborhood and friendship that may preserve or increase it.

What is the sum of the ninth Commandment?

Answ. I it forbids all reproaches and scandals unjustly cast upon them, and
should neither raise a false report against them, Exodus 23.1. nor take up a
false report raised by others, Psalm. 15.3. but as the north wind drives away
rain, so does an angry countenance a backbiting tongue, Prove. 25.23. also it
commands all duties of love, for love suffers long and is kind, charity envieth
not, vanteth not it self, is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly,
seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5.

What is the sum of the tenth Commandment?

Answ. It forbids the rising of sinful lusts to any of the forenamed evils,
and it commands to suppress those sinful lusts in their first risings before
consent be given to them; now whereas all the Commandments forbid lusting with
consent, this forbids it before consent, and commands to suppress it before
consent, this is the sum of the morrall law, the covenant of works.

How did the Lord try man's obedience to that covenant of works?

Answ. By prohibiting only one tree in the Garden, saying, of the tree of
Knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat of it, for in the day thou
eatest thereof thou shall surely dye, Genesis 2.17.

When Adam was permitted to eat of all the rest, would not he refrain that one
at Gods command?

A. No, although he had power sufficient given to him whereby he might have
stood, yet in case Adam lost that ability, all new supplies were shut up from
him; it is true, he had a great portion of grace given to him into his own
hands to keep, but no supportance from the Lord to keep him from falling, and
he being a mutable creature could not but fall and nothing is immutable but God
alone, and Satan in the serpent beguiled them, saying, you shall not dye, but
ye shall be as Gods knowing good and evil, and they saw the tree was good for
food and pleasant to the eye, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, so
they did both eat of it and fell together, Genesis 3.4.6.

Why did not God support them from falling?

A. That man might see his weakness, and that God might make known what he
had decreed from all eternity, and for the honor of his justice and mercy in
the execution of his decrees in redeeming some and leaving others in that
miserable condition.

What is the state of all men since the fall of Adam?

A. We have all lost our righteousness, so that now there is none righteous,
no not one, Romans 3.10. and we have lost our holiness, we are all as an
unclean thing, Isa. 64.6. and we have lost our knowledge, so that every man
now is brutish in his knowledge. Jer. 10.14. having the understanding darkened
being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them,
because of the blindness of their heart, Ephesians. 4.18. and we have lost the
sovereignty over the creatures here below; will the Unicorne now be willing to
serve thee? will thou trust him because his strength is great? will thou leave
thy labor to him? will thou believe that he will being home thy seed and
gather it into thy Barn or does the Eagle fly at thy command? Job 39.9.11, 12.
Thus we have lost all our happiness wherein we were created, and not only so
but we are children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.2. and slaves of Satan led captive at his
will, 2 Timothy 2.6. and under the curse, Gal. 3.10: and liable both to a
corporal, spiritual and eternal death, Romans 5.12. 1 Cor. 15.22.

Was that actual sin of Adam our actual sin as some would have it?

A. No; for by one man's sin death entered into the world and (...) ^he offense
of one many be dead, by one that sinned, for the judgment was by one to
condemnation, for by one man's offense death reigned by one, and by the offense
of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation, and by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners. Romans 5.12.15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

Then how came that sin of Adam to be ours if we did not then actually commit
it?

A. It is ours potentially, we being all then in his loins as the fruit is in
the body of the tree, and also being begotten and borne by those polluted
parents, we receive original defilement from them, for Adam being defiled
begat his children in his own likeness, Genesis 5.3. and so his defilement
spread over all men, as when bondslaves had children they were all borne slaves
by the law of God, Ex. 21.4. and by man's law, the fathers treason cuts off his
posterity from his inheritance.

But cannot we recover our selves out of this miserable condition?

A. No; we cannot think one good thought as of our selves, all our sufficiency
is of God. 2 Cor. 3.5. it is God that works in us both to will and to do of
his own good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. we are all dead in trespasses and sins,
Ephesians. 2.1. none of them can by any means redeem his brother nor give to God a
ransom for him, for the redemption of the soul is precious and cease for
ever, Psalm. 49.7, 8. so that man has neither power nor will to help himself
but is dead in sin, O Israel thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy
help, Hosea 13.9.

What means has God appointed and decreed to help us out of this damnable
estate?

A. By Jesus Christ the eternal Son of God, he took our nature upon him
that so he might be a fit mediator between God and man, the Word was made flesh
and dwelt among us Ioh. 1.14. he took not on him the nature of Angels but he
took on him the seed of Abraham, wherefore it behooved him to be made like unto
his brethren, that he might be a merciful and a faithful high Priest in all
things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people,
Heb. 2.16.

Wherefore must our Redeemer be both God and man?

A. He was man to dye and suffer in that nature that had sinned, and he was
God, that he might overcome death and rise again, which none could do but God
alone: again, he must be God and man to sanctify that nature that had sinned
and was defiled with it, and he was God, that so by the worthiness of his
person, he may bring a satisfaction sufficient to reconcile an offended God,
for in that he dyed for us, it was a thousand times more in value, then if all
men and Angels had dyed eternally for one poor sinner, for it is unpossible
that creatures should bring a satisfaction worthy of the acceptance, and
sufficient to appease the wrath of their Creator.

But if our Mediator was both God and man, then he must be two persons, but how
can that be?

A. Although he be both God and man, yet he is not two, but one Christ, as one
body and soul make but one man; neither are they one by turning the Godhead
into flesh but by taking the manhood into God, as the misletow lives in the
Oak without any rooting so is the humarity in the Godhead by a hupastacicall
union unconceiveable unto us, neither may we without danger, search too far
into this holy mystery.

In what manner did God the father make that new covenant with God the son,
touching our salvation?

A. The Father promised to give unto christ his Son all the elect as they fall
in the several ages of the world, upon condition, that the Son will give him
a full satisfaction for their ransom; hereupon says the Son, O father
deliver them from going down into the pit, for I have found a ransom, Job
33.24. upon this they concluded, and the son of man came not to be ministered
unto, but to minister and to give his life a ransom for many, Mat. 20.28. for
says John, thou have given him power over all flesh, to give eternal life to
as many as thou have given him, Ioh. 17.2. so the father set the son a day to
pay the ransom, and took his word to perform it, and gave him all the elect
that fell in the times before his coming in the flesh, in the time of their
being; and now christ has actually paid the ransom, he takes his fathers word
for all the rest of the elect that fall in the several ages of the world,
since the debt was actually paid.

Then has Christ paid this ransom, and in his humanity dyed for his people?

A. Yes; he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed Isa. 52.5. christ has once suffered, the just for the unjust, that
he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the
spirit, 1 Pet. 3.18. who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth;
who when he was reviled reviled not again; when he suffered he threatened not,
but committed himself to him that judges righteously, who his own self bare
our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead to sin should
live unto righteousness, by whose stripes ye are healed, 1 Pet. 2.22, 23, 24.
thus christ has passively suffered all the penalty of the law to free us from
the curse and penalty of it, and to sanctify both afflictions and death unto
us; O death where is thy sting, O grave where is thy victory! the sting of
death is sin, but thanks be to God which has given us victory through our
Lord Jesus christ, 1 cor. 15.55 56.

To what use serves the active obedience of christ to the law of God?

A. It serves to sanctify all our disobedience and failings in the
performance of holy duties, so that now a willing mind is accepted according to
that a man has, 2 cor. 8.12. row Christ takes notice when the spirit is
willing, although the flesh be weak, Mat. 26.41. for our Savior has performed
perfect obedience to the law of Gad for us, it was his meat and drink to do
his Fathers will, John 4.32.34. he says, I do always those things that
please him, John 8.29. I seek not mine own will, but the will of him that
sent me, John 4.30.7.16. as by the disobedience of one many were made sinners,
so by the obedience of one many were made righteous, Romans 5.19.

But did Christ obey or suffer for himself as some would have it?

A. No; for although his humane nature was a creaturne, yet being united to the
second person, and so making one Christ, there was no obedience due from
himself to the law, neither came he by the ordinary way of mankind into the
world, therefore free from that law that Adam was bound unto with all his
posterity.

But did we actually do all that which christ did in our nature as well as he,
as some would have it?

A. No; the gift by grace is by one man, Jesus Christ, and by him has abounded
to many, and righteousness shall reign in life by one Jesus christ; even so
by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all to justification of
life; by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous, romans 5.15, 16, 17,
18, 19. hence I conclude, that we did not act in Christ's person as well as
himself, saying, it was a common lump of all mankind that christ obeyed and
suffered in; we for him, as well as he for us, and he for himself as well as
for us; This is Antinomian blasphemy.

But if we did not act as well as christ, how comes his righteousness to be
ours?

A. By imputation; for as he is a blessed man to whom the Lord will not impute
sin, romans 4.8. so he is a blessed man unto whom God will impute
righteousness without works, romans 4 6. now as Adams sin is imputed to all
in Adams nature so the second Adams righteousness is imputed to all that are
in him by grease; to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies
the ungodly, by faith instrumentally it is countrd for righteousness, romans 4.5.

Then did christ alone in his own person do all the works of our redemption?

A. Yes; he looked and saw there was none to help, therefore his own arm
brought salvation, and his righteousness it sustained him, Isaiah 59.16.6^.5.
neither is there salvation in any other; there is none other other name given
under Heaven among men whereby we must be saved, Acts 4.12. he trod the
Wine Press alone, and there was none with him, Isaiah 63.3. he by himself
purged our sins, Hebr. 1.3. and he washed away our sins in his own blood,
revel. 1.7. he is the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the word,
John 1.29.

Did Christ dye for all men without exception?

A. No; for Christ would not so much as pray for the world, much less would he
spill his blood for them, but the first is true, therefore not the second, Joh.
17.9. again, if Christ had dyed for them and they not saved, either the Father
brake Covenant, and did not give him all that he bought of him, or else the
world, and the devil, and sin were too strong both for the father that have
them, and the son that bought them, which were no other then blasphemy to
think.

How do you know that Christ dyed for you?

A. The good Sbe^heard gave his life for the sheep, Joh. 10.11. and I know my
self to be one of his sheep, for I know his voice, Joh. 10.4. both the secret
voice of his spirit and the public voice of his word, when I am charged to let
the word of Christ dwell in me richly, Col. 3.16. when I turn aside to the
right hand or to the left, I still hear his voice saying unto me, this is the
way walk in it, Isa. 30.21. and I know it is the voice of my beloved that
knocks saying open to me my sister cant. 5.2. because he leads me into al
truth and makes me see an excellency in him above all other. Cant. 5.9.10, 11,
12 13, 14, 15, 16. Psalm. 45.2. then says Christ, I know my sheep and I am
known of mine. Joh. 10.14. and they will esteem of all things else but as
dung, aad dross, and loss, for the excellent knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3.78.

By what other mark do you know that you are one of the sheep of Christ for
which he dyed?

A. The sheep of Christ do not only know his voice and delight in hearing of
it, but in obeying it and follownig him, Joh. 10.4.27. they will walk as
Christ walked, 1 John 2.6. and they will learn of him that is meek and lowly
in heart, and they shall find rest for their souls, Mat. 11.29. and as he
said, it as my meat and drink to do the will of him that sent me, and to
sinish his work, and he did always those things that pleased him. Joh.
4.34.8.29. and concerning his surferings, he said. I lay down my life. no man
takes it from me, Joh. 10.17, 18 the cup that my father has given me, shall I
not drink it? John 18.4.11. Christ suffered, leaveng us an example that we
should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21. to you it is given in the behalf of
Christ, not only to believe on him, but to suffer for his sake, Phil. 1.29.
they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, these were redeemed from
among men. Rev. 14.4.

What other reasons have you to prove that Christ dyed for you?

A. Christ loved the church and gave himself for it, that he might sanctisie
and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word Ephesians. 5.25.26. and the
church is his body, chap. 1.22, 23. for as the body is one and has many
members, so also is christ, 1 cor. 12.12.

But how do you know your self to be a living member of christ?

A. As all our members are acted and moved by the soul or spirit that is in
us, so are alll the members of christ by his spirit, for by one spirit we are
all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, bond or free, and
have been all made to drink into one spirit, 1 cor. 12.13. and our body dies
when the soul is gone; but says Paul, ye are not in the flesh but in the
spirit, if so be that the spirit of God dwell in you, now if any man have not
the spirit of christ he is none of his, romans 8.9. and so if on of our members
suffer, all the members suffer with it, or if one member be honored all the
members rejoice with it, if we do so then we are the body of Christ, and
members in particular, 1 cor. 12.26, 27. hereby we perceive the love of God,
because he laid down his life for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for
the brethren, 1 John 3.16.

What are the conditions between God and his reople in the new covenant, being
the covenant of grace?

A. God will say, it is my people, and they shall say, the Lord is my God Zech.
13.9. that is, God makes many gracious promises unto us, and we by faith shall
receive and apply them to our selves; yea, that faith on our part whereby the
covenant is made to us, it also is within the promise made on Gods part, they
shall say, the Lord is my God. the covenant it self is a promise, I will make
an everlasting covenant with them, and the conditions on our part are all
within that promise, I will put my fear in their hearts that they shall not
depart from me, besides all other promises on Gods part that are included in
that covenant, for says the Lord, I will bring upon them all the good that I
have promised them, Ier. 31.40 41. 42. Heb. 8.

But is not the righteousness of christ imputed to us for our justification,
before that we have faith?

A. No; for our persons must be united to Christ by faith, as Thomas believing,
said, my Lord and my God, John 20.27, 28. so we come to have a true right and
title to the righteousness of Christ, for as we were all in the loins of Adam
by nature, when God made that covenant of works with him and all his Posterity,
so none has right to the righteousness of the second Adam till he be cut off
from the old Adam, and by faith grafted into Jesus Christ, and so we come to
partake of the root and fatness of the true Olive tree, romans 11.17.17.24.

How is Jesus christ tendered in the Ghspell?

A. The Angel said unto them, fear not, for behold I bring you good tydengs
of great joy, which shall be to all people, for unto you is borne this day in
the city of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord, Luke 2.10.11. says the
Lord I will give thee for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth to
cause to inherit the desolate heritages, that thou may say to the prisoners
go forth, Isa. 49.8, 9.

What is requ^red of them to whom he is thus tendered? A. Only believe, Mar.
5.36. believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, Acts 16.31.
Whosoever believes on him, shall not perish, but have everlasting life, John
3.16.

What is that faith that gives us right to Christ, and a true title to all his
merits in the work of our redemption? A. It is a saving faith, and not a
historical faith, such as the Apostle James speaks of, Jam. 2.19. and it is a
living faith and not a dead faith, Jam. 2.17. I live by faith in the Son of
God, who gave himself for me, Gal. 2.20. and it is called a justifying faith,
not for the worthiness of it, as being an excellent grace of God, but as an
instrument applying Christ's righteousness for our justification.

How came we by this faith? and how is it wrought in us? A. Faith is the gift
of God, Ephesians. 2.8. and it is wrought in us by his spirit: thou have wrought all
our works in us Isa. 26.12. Phil. 2.13. the isntrumental means that the
spirit of God, for the most part, uses, is the Preaching of the Word: so then
Faith comes by hearing the word preached, Romans 10.14.17.

What call you the Word of God? A. The two Testaments: the first is from the
beginning of Genesis to the end of he prophecy of Malachy; this is called the
old Testament: and from the first of Matthew to the last of the Revelation is
called the new Testament.

How do you prove these two Testaments to be the Word of God? A. First,
because of the true relating of things to come, and the accomplishment of them
at the time appointed, which none could do but he that knows all things both
past, and to come. Secondly, they lay open the particular and secret thoughts
and lusts of the heart, which shows that they are the words of him in whose
sight all things are naked and open, Heb. 4.12.13. Thirdly, they command all
duties of piety, equity and sobriety, and forbids all vice in such a sort,
that all the writings of men though laid together, could not d^e. Fourthly,
they discover a state of damnation to man and conclude him in it, and they
reveal a sure way of salvation, which never could enter into man's heart, but
as it was revealed by the spirit of God, which found and ordained that way.
Fifthly, it is a word of power, to the pulling down of strong holds, and casting
down imaginations and every high thing that exalts it self, and every thought
to the obedience of Christ, 2 cor. 10.4, 5. Sixthly, the universal consent and
agreement it has, though pend by diverse, and at sundry time, which argues,
that holy men spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 2.21.

What part of this word of God is the most concerned in the covenant of grace?
A. In the promises of the Gospel, and fulfilled in the person of Christ, both
in his active and passive obedience, as I said before, and working faith and
all other graces in his people.

But are christians that ore entered into this new covenant contained in the
Gospel, are they I say freed from the old covenant contained in the law? A.
They are freed from the curse and penalty of the law, and from the legal
fulfilling of it, to that end which Adam was bound to do it in the time of
innocence, for although the ten Commandments published at Mount Sina^ were the
same for substance that was in Adams heart before the fall; yet the manner of
Adams obedience and theirs differ much: thus Adam was then bound to a covenant
of works, but they stand as a people redeemed not only from Pharao^^s
bondage, but from the bondage of sin and satan, Gods wrath and damnation,
figured out by that from Egypt in the preface; again, Adam was to stand by
his perfect obedience to it, or to fall if he failed in the least title; but
the law at Mount Sinai was a rule to square their obedience by, but the penalty
is taken off, as I said before, and they and we are bound to do our utmost
endeavor to obey it, although we can never legally fulfill it, but
evangellically as we are in Christ, to testify our thankfulness and obedience
to our Redeemer, 1 cor. 6.19, 20.

What are the maine differences between the covenant of works, and the
covenant of grace? A. The first covenant was of man's works, the second of Gods
grace; again, the first was made to Adam, and in him to all his posterity; the
second was made with Christ, and so in him for all the elect; called the seed
of the woman, but not with the seed of the serpent, Genesis 3.15. again, the
first stood upon man's righteousness, the second upon the righteousness of
Christ, made ours by imputation; again, the first was soon broken, standing
upon the mutability of man's will, but the second stands upon a sure foundation,
being Gods unchangeable will, and so never can be broken; for says the Lord, I
will establish with thee an everlasting covenant, Ezekiel. 16.60. again, the
first was a covenant of justice without mercy, the second was a covenant of
mercy, yet in Christ justice and mercy met together, Psalm. 85.10.89.28. again,
the first man is of the earth earthly, the second man is of the Lord from
heaven, and as the earthly, so were all they in that covenant, and as the
heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly, and as we have borne the image
of the earthly we shall also bear the image of the heavenly, 1 cor. 15.47
48.49.

What be the offices of Christ to make him an alsufficient savior? A. First,
he was a Priest, as he was both God and man, and he sacrificed his body, Mat.
20, 28. and his soul was made an offering for sin, Isa. 53.10. upon the
altar of his Godhead, Heb. 13.16. so christ was once offered to bear the
sins of many Heb. 9.28. also by his integrity or purity of his humane nature,
and his obedience in performing all that the law requires, as I showed before;
thus Christ has satisfied for our sins, and he makes intercession for us.

How does Christ make intercession for us? A. He appears continually before
his Father in heaven, romans 8.34. Heb. 7.25. making their prayers acceptable to
God by Jesus christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. Ephesians. 5.2. by applying the merits of his own
perfect satisfaction to them, rev. 9.3.4.

What other office has Christ? A. He is a Prophet, to reveal unto his church
the way and means of salvation; it is written in the Prophets, and they shall
be all taught of God every man, therefore he that has heard and has learned
of the Father comes to me, John 6.45, he teaches continually by the
ministry of word, and by the inward teaching of his holy spirit, John
14.26.16.13.

What other office has Christ? A. He is a King, that he may bountifully bestow
on us all the means of salvation, he overcame the devil, and hell and the
grave, and death, as aconqueror, see Acts 2.24.32.10.14. 1 cor. 15.55.57. all
power in heaven and in earth is given to me, go ye therefore and teach all
nations, Mat. 28.18, 19. on this rock will I build my church, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it, Mat. 16.18. thus he is both a King to
furnish, and to defend his church.

You told me that faith was wrought in the soul by the fririt of God, by the
preaching of the Word, now the question is, how the Lord prepares the soul to
receive that excellent grace of faith? A. The Lord says, I will give them one
heart, and I will put my spirit within you; but the manner how this is wrought
is this, I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and then I will give
them an heart of flesh, then they shall walk in my statutes and keep mine
ordinances and do them, Ezekiel. 11.19, 20. here you see the first work is to
take the stone out of the heart, which (in reason) should be as painful as to
take the stone our of the bladder, this is done by that sharp knife of the
moral law, when it bruiseth and humbles us, and works in us a sight of our
sin, for by the law is the knowledge of sin; I had not known sin but by
the law for I had not known lust, except the law had said, thou shall not
lust, romans 3, 20.7 7.

What is sorrow for sin? A. It is when a man's conscience is touched with a
lively feeling of Gods displeasure for any sin; they were ^oricked in their
hearts, and said what shall we do? Acts 2.37. with an utter dispairing of
salvation in regard of any thing in our selves; O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death! romans 7.24. and so acknowledge our
deserved shame should be eternally, czra 9.6.

How does God work this sorrow in us? A. By the terrible curse of the law,
thus he which breaks but one of the commandments of God, though it be but
once in all his life time, and that only but in thought, is subject too, and
in danger of eternal damnation for it, Gal. 3.10. Jam. 2.10.

When the heart is thus prepared how does God ingraf^ faith in it? A. By
casting into it inward motions, which are the seeds of faith; first, when the
heart is humbled under the burden of sin, then to acknowledge and to feel that
we stand in need of christ, this is the seed of faith, for we see that we have
spent our money for that which is not bread, and our labor for that which
satisfies not, Isa. 55.2. secondly, a hungry desire and a longing to be made
partaker of christ and his merits, these also are the seeds of faith, for such
are blessed and promised to be filled, Mat. 5.4. rev. 21.6. thirdly, using the
means when we see the need of christ and have a longing desire after him
flying from the sentence of the law, pricking the conscience, to the throne of
grace such shall obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need, Heb.
4.16.

How is this done? A. First as the Prodigal did, to think our sins
pardonable, and to say, Father, I have sinned against heaven and before thee,
and am no more worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of thy h^red
servants, Luke 15.18, 19. then with loud cries for Gods savor in christ, in
pardoning sins with a fervent perseverance herein, till the desire of our
heart be granted, as the woman of Canaan did, Mat. 15.22, 23.

What follows after this? A. Then God according to his merciful promise lets
the poor sinner feel the assurance of his love wherewith he loves him in
christ, see Mat. 7.7. Isa. 65.24. Job 33.26. this assurance is a lively
evidence of faith.

Are there diverse degrees and measures of faith? A. Yes; the least measure of
faith that any man can have is this; when a man of an humbled spirit, by reason
of the littleness of his faith, does not yet feel the assurance of the
forgiveness of his sins, and yet he is persuaded that they are pardonable,
and therefore he desires they should be pardoned, and with his heart prays
to God for pardon, and though he see no light, yet he will stay upon his God,
Isa. 50.19. this may be called smoking flax or a bruised reed, Isa. 42.4. or
the grain of mustard seed, Mat. 17.20.

How do you know that such a man has faith? A. These desires and prayers are
testimonies of the spirit, romans 8.23.26. gal. 4.6. whose propesty it is to
stir up longings after heavenly things with sighs and groans for Gods
favor and mercy in christ, now where the spirit of God is, there is christ
dwelling, Ephesians. 3.17. and where christ dwells there is true faith, how weak
soever it be, Ephesians. 3.17.

What is the greatest measure of f^^i^h? A. When a man's faith increases daily,
and at length he is fully persuaded of Gods love to himself in particular, and
that his own sins are fully pardoned and forgiven, for the merits of christ;
I am persuaded that nothing is able to separate us from the love of God that is
in Christ Jesus our Lord, romans 8.33.^9. this (...) very evidence of a strong
faith.

Has a christian this full assurance of faith at the first? A. No^ the
righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, romans 1.17. and they must
pray the Lord to increase their faith, Luke 17.5. and they must with all
diligence add to their faith virtue, 2 Pet. 1.5. and fight the good sight of
faith, 2 Timothy 4.7. but they a estro^g who are of fullage, and by reason of use
have their s^nses exercised to discern both good and evil, Heb. 5.14. such
are not weak in faith, they will not stagger at the promise of God through
unbelief, but being streng in faith they will give glory to God, being fully
persuaded that what God ^^oneised he was able also to perform, romans 4.19.20 21.

Is this justifying faith commanded in the law? A. No; not by the law of works,
but by the law of faith, romans 3.27. the law does not reveal it, and th^^fore
it does not command it; but the law is so far from revealing justifying says,
that it never knew it; and Adam had the moral law written in his heart and yet
he had no justifying faith, which apprehends Christ as a Savior and
Redeemer; this says Adaem knew not by the law of works, till the law of faith
came in the promised seed, Genesis 3.15.

What benefits come by this faith in Christ? A. Hereby we are both justified
and sanctified, being justified by faith, romans 5.1. and sanctified by faith in
me, Acts 26.18. purifying their hearts by faith, Acts 15.9. then our persons
are accepted with God, Genesis 4.4.

What is it to be justified before God? A. It comprehends two things: first,
to be cleared from the guiltiness and punishment of sin; who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifies, rom 8.33. there
is no condemnat on to them which are in Christ Jesus; who is he that
condemns? it is Christ that dyed, ye rather that he is risen again, romans
8.1.34. secondly, we are accepted as perfectly righteous before God by him, all
that believe are justified from all things from which they could not be
justified by the law of Moses, Acts 13.39.

What other benefits comes along with justifying faith? A. Then all our prayers
and and services are acceptable with the Lord, Genesis 4.4. Prove. 15.8. Romans 5.2.
and it makes us to escape all the dangers threatened against the wicked at the
day of judgment, Luke 21.36. and it makes us worthy of the Kingdom of God,
Luke 20.35. 2 These. 1.5. Yea Christ is yours, and all is yours both things
tresent and things to come, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22.

How may a man know that he is justified before God? A. He need not to search
the secret counsel of Gods decrees, nor seek for revelations, or an Angel
from heaven to tell him; but this is the way for any that would truly find it,
we must search to see whither we in heart and life be sanctified, and if we
find this we may safely conclude our selves to be justified.

What is sanctification? A. It is a renewed holiness which fits and prepares
the creature for the Lords use; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye ^eane
that bear the vessels of the Lord, Isa. 52.11. for he will be sanctified in
all that come nigh him, Levit. 10.3. if any man purge himself, he shall be a
^essell unto honor, sanctified and meet for the Masters use, and prepared unto
every good work, 2 Timothy 2.21.

But may not a man have faith and be justified without sanctification? A. No;
for faith as an instrument both justifies and sanctifies; for as it receives
and applies Christ and his merits to us in particular, so it justifies; and as
it works by love and acts all other graces in their lively motion, so it
sanctifies.

But Infants may be justified, are they also sanctified? A. Yes; before I
formed thee in the belley I knew thee; here is Gods decree, but as yet not
brought forth, Zeth. 2.2. the man is not formed therefore as yet neither
justified nor sanctified, but says the Lord, before thou came out of the
womb I sanctified thee, Ier. 1.5. many shall rejoice at the birth of John,
because he shall be silled with the holy Ghost, enen from his mothers womb,
Luke 1.14, 15.

Proceed: What be the parts of sanctification? A. Two, mortification and
vivification; mortification is that power whereby sin is abated and crucified
in the faithful; how shall we that are dead to sin l^ve any longer therein,
romans 6.2. they which are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections
and lusts, Gal. 5.24.

By what means is mortification wrought in us? A. By the death and burial of
Christ, we are buried with him by baptism into his death, romans 6.4. our old
man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, ^o. 6.6.

What is the other part of sanctification? A. It is vivisication, whereby
inherent holiness is begun and increased in us, we receive the first fruits of
the spirits; be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put on the new man,
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.23, 24.
you has he quickened that were dead in trespasses and sins: I am crucified
with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I but Christ lives in me, and the
life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the son of God,
Gal. 2.20. we which have the first fruits of the spirit do groan within our
selves, waiting for the adoption (to wit) the redemption of our bodies, romans
8.23.

What is the efficient cause whereby these graces are wrought in us? A. The
holy Ghost applying the power of the death and resurrection of Christ works
holiness in us; he will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his
life shall see the light; lo all these things works God oftentimes for man;
to bring back his soul from the pit to be enlightened with the light of the
living, Job 33.28; 29.33. that the offering up of the gentiles might be
acceptable, being sanctified by the holy Ghost, romans 15.16.

How is this grace preserved in us? A. It is preserved by the virtue of christ's
resurrection; that I may know him and the virtue of his resrurection, phil.
3.10 first christ did in his own flesh overcome death and sin and live to God,
and was exalted above every name, and then he infuseth this power into us and
we receive it by faith, whereby we dye unto sin daily, and live to God in
newness of life.

In what part of us is this grace of sanctification wrought? A In every part of
body and soul, the very God or peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray God your
whole spirit, soul and body may be perfect and blameless unto the coming of
our Lord Jesus christ, 1 These. 5.23.

How do you know when the mind is sanctified? A. When spiritual understandding
is given unto it, to acknowledge the known truth of Gods word and when
spiritual wisdom is given to apply that truth known, to the well ordering
both of things and actions, as person, place, and time requires, then we come
to discern both good and evil, heb. 5.14. and to discern of things that are
excellent, phil. 1.10. and to try the spirits whether they be of God, 1 John
4.1. and to try doctrines, Joh. 7.17. 1 These. 5.21. Acts 17.11. and so we come
to med^tate on the word and works of God, and to delight in his law and to
exercise our selves in it night and day, Psalm. 1.119.15. and we discern our
own want of knowledge, by which means we shall entreat the Lord to teach us,
Psalm. 119.18.33.

When is the memory sanctified? A. When it is made a treasury of good things; a
good man out of the good treasure of his heart; brings forth good things,
Mat. 35. Mary kept all those sayings in her heart, Luke 2.51. and David said,
thy word I have hid in my heart, that I might not sin against thee, Psalm.
119.11. Secondly, when we remember our sins to loath them; then shall ye
remember your own evil ways, and your doing that were not good, and shall
^^^th your selves in your own sight for your iniquities, and for your
abominations, Ezekiel. 36.31.16.63.

When is the conscience sanctified? A. When it does excuse us for all sin; when
we are certain that they are forgiven us in Christ; having faith and a good
conscience, which some have put away, 1 Timothy 1.19. I know nothing by my self,
yet am I not hereby justified, 1 Cor. 4.4. I have in all good conscience served
God until this day, Acts 23.1. herein I exercise my self to have always a
conscience void of offense both toward God and toward men, Acts 24.16. try
me, O Lord, and prove me, examine my raines and my heart, for thy loving
kindness is before mine eyes, and I have walked in thy truth, Psalm. 26.1, 2.3.
hence arises in us that peace of conscience that passes all understanding
which shall keep our hearts and minds through Christ Jesus, Phil. 4.7. this
makes the righteous as bold as a lion, Pro. 28.1. if our hearts condemn us not
then have we conscience toward God. 1. Ioh. 3.21.

When is the will sanctified? A. When our wills is regulated by Gods revealed
will; when the spirit is willing though the flesh be weak, Mat. 26.41. When to
will is present but how to perform that which is good we find not, romans 7.19.
for it is God that works in us both to will and to do of his own good (...)
Phil. 2.1^.

When are the affections sanctified? A. Our hope is sanctified when we wait for
the accomplishment of our redemption, romans 8.23, 24, 25. and when we show the
same diligence in full assurance of hope unto the end, Heb. 6.11. Our fear is
sanctified, when we fear to offend the Lord because of his goodness, Hosea
3.5. they shall fear and tremble for all the goodness and for all the
prosperity that I will procure unto it, Jer. 33.9 If ye call him father, pass
the time of your sojourning here in fear, 1 Pet. 1.17. our love of God in
Christ is sanctified when it is as a fire that cannot be quenched; many waters
cannot quench love, nor the floods drown it, cant. 8.7. when this love burns
up all other love, and when we esteem of all outward things but as loss and
dung for the excellent knowledge of Christ, and to win christ, phil. 3.7, 8.
our zeal is sanctified when we regard not what becomes of us, so God may be
glorified, Exodus 32.32. romans 9.3. our sorrow and anguish of mind is sanctified,
when our eyes can gush out with tears, because men keep not Gods law, Psalm.
119.136. as Lots righteous soul was vexed with the filthy conversation of the
wicked, he dwelling amongst them, in seeing and hearing vexed his righteous
soul from day to day with their ungodly deeds, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. our joy is
sanctified when Gods countenance more rejoices our hearts then the increase of
come and wine, Psalm. 4.7. and when we rejoice that the Gospel is preached,
phil. 1.18. and when we rejoice in the fruitfulness of is, in the conversion
of souls, Luke 15.7.

How do you know when the body is sanctified? A. When it is a fit instrument
for the soul to accomplish that which is good, as ye have given your members
servants to uncleanoesse and to iniquity, to commit iniquity, so now give your
members servants unto righteousness in holiness, romans 6.19.

Cannot we be saved without holiness? A. No; for heaven is promised to them
that are sanctified, Acts 26.18. and no unclean thing shall enter into it,
rev. 21.27. without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. the pure
in heart they shall see God, mat. 5.8.

Are there degrees in holiness or sanctification? A. Yes; that ye may grow up
into him in all things, which is the head, even christ, Ephesians. 4.15. being kn^t
together we may increase with the increase of God. col. 2.19. I beseech you
brethren, and exhort you, by the lord Jesus christ, that as you have received
of us how you ought to walk and to please God, so ye would abound more and
more, for this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that every one may
know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honor. 1 These. 4.1.3, 4.

May a man attain to perfection in degrees of his sanctification the^e? A. No;
says Paul, not as though I had already attained either were already perfect;
but I follow after; if that I may apprehend that for which also I am
apprehended ^n christ Jesus; brethren I count not my self to have apprehended
but this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and
re^ching f^rth unto th^^se things which are before, I press toward the mark;
for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.12, 13, 14.

What means has God appointed to help us in our groth of grace? A. The
sacraments and prayer.

What is a sacrament? A. A sacrament is an outward sign whereby Christ and his
saving graces are by certain extetnall rights signified and sealed to a
christian; Abraham received the sign of circumcision, and it was also the
seal of the righteousness of faith, which he had when he was yet
uncircumcised, rons. 4.21. ye shaell circumcise the foreskin of your flesh,
and it shall be a sign of the covenant between me and you, Genesis 17.11.

Has any others power to make a sacrament besides christ? A No; for the sign
will consirme nothing at all but by the consent of him, at whose hands the
benefit promised must be received; then none but christ can appoint signs of
grace, because none but he alone has power to bestow grace; christ is the
author of our salvation, therefore he alone may appoint the means, which are
the word and sacraments; christ is the only Lawgiver, who is able to save and
to destroy, Iam. 4.12. and he alone can make a sacrament offectuall by his
spirit, and he by his wisdom best knows of what to institute the
sacramental signs, neither may any presume to add or to diminish to that he
has done, rev. 22.38, 19.

How does christ make a sacrament? A. By bringing the word of institution to
the element; the word is twofold, either a word of command, as in baptism,
go ye into all the world baptizing them, In the name of the father, son and
holy Ghost; and in the Lords supper, take, eat, drink, do ye this; the other
part of institution is a promise, whereby christ ordained elements that they
might be instruments and seals of his grace, as in baptism, I baptize thee in
the name of the father, of the senne, and of the holy Ghost; and in the Lords
supper, this is my body which is given for you, and this is my blood of the new
Testament; therefore the word of institution ought to be pronounced distinctly
in the administration of it.

May the impiety of the Minister make a nullity of the sacrament to a worthy
receiver? A. No; no more then the piety of a good Minister can profit an
unworthy receiver, because all the efficacy and worthiness thereof depends
only upon Gods institution.

What be the parts of a sacrament? A. They be two: the outward sign or
sensible matter of the element, or the action conversant about the same.

Is there any natural change in the sign or element after consecration? A.
No; it is but severed from a common to a holy use, therefore there is no force
or efficacy in the external signs, to make us inherently holy, as there is in
Bathes naturally to purify corrupt diseases; but all the efficacy is
appropriate to Gods holy spirit; yet so, as it is an inseparable companion of
true faith and repentance, in such as turn to the Lord; therefore by Gods
ordinance a certain signification of grace, and sealing thereof agrees to the
sign.

What is the thing signified by the outward element. A. It is Christ and his
graces: first of Christ, and then of his graces; for as no man can receive
fruit of any ground till first he have a just title to it, no more can we have
benefit by Christ before we have a true title to him by faith.

What is the action of God in the sacrament. A. It is either the offering of
Christ, or the application of Christ and his graces to the faithful receiver.

What is the action of Faith in the Sacrament? A. It is the consideration,
desire, apprehension and receiving of christ, in the lawful use of the
Sacrament.

What is the end why Sacraments were ordained? A. For the better confirmation
of our faith, for God does as it were, by certain pledges bind (...) ^selfe
unto us, yet the sacrament does not strengthen us, by any inherent power of it
self, as a sovereign medicine does cure a patient, but rather by a certain
reasoning upon using the signs framed by the holy Ghost thus:

All such as are converted rightly using the sacraments shall receive christ
and his graces.

But I am converted, and either do now or else heretofore.

I have rightly used the sacraments; therefore I shall receive christ and his
graces.

What is another end why the sacrament was ordained? A. That it might be a
badge of that profession, by which the true church of God is distinguished from
all other congregations; a third end is, that it might be a means to preserve
and to spread the doctrine of the Gospel: a fourth end is, that it might
preferve and bind the faithful to continue loyal and thankful to their Lord
God: fifthly, it serves as a bond of mutual amity among the faithful.

Is a sacrament necessary to salvation? A. No; yet the covenant of grace is
absolutely necessary to salvation for it comprehends christ Jesus, who is the
substance of that covenant, so that we must of necessity receive it, or we
perish eternally; now a sacrament is but a prop or stay for faith as an help to
en. crease it; but it cannot entitle us into the inheritance of the sonn^s of
God as the covenant does, but only as a seal to that covenant that we by
faith received before.

But does not the want of a sacrament condemn? A. No; it is the contempt of it
that is damnable, so then, the neglect of it is a grievous sin to be repented
of, and there is hope of pardon, but if some be justly hindered from it, either
by living in some place where it cannot be had, or taken away by death, to such
God will have mercy, not sacrifice.

What is the difference betwixt a sacrament and a sacrifice? A. In a sacrament
God bestows his graces upon us, but in a sacrifice we return unto God faith
and thankful obedience.

How does our sacraments and those in the old Testament differ? A. They were
many, and ours but few; secondly, they pointed at christ to come, but these
show that he is already come; thirdly they were to the posterity of Abraham
alone, but these are to the whole church, called out of both Jew, and Gentiles.

How many sacraments is there in the church of christ? A. Two; the first is
baptism, wherein christians are admitted into the church of God; the second is
the Lords supper, whereby the church is nourished and preserved to eternal
life.

What is baptism? A. It is a washing with water as they are command (...) Mat.
28.19. In the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost: that being in the
covenant and ingrafted into christ, they may have perpetual fellowship with
him; he that believes and is baptized shall be saved, Mark 16.16. Acts 2.38.

May we baptize in no other name, nor leave out any of the three persons in
Trinity? A. No; christ is not divided, nor Paul crucified for you, neither were
you baptized in the name of Paul; I thank God I baptized none of you but
Crispus and Gaius, least any should say, that I did baptize in my own name, 1
cor. 13.14, 15.

Who are those within the covenant that are to be baptized? A. They are of two
forts: first, such as are grown in years, and join themselves to the visible
church, testifying their faith and repentance, and hold the foundation of
Religion taught in the same church they are to be baptized in: the Eunuch said
to Phillip I believe that Christ is the son of God, and so they went both
into the water and he baptized him, Acts 8.38. they were baptized of John in
Jordan confessing their sins, Mat. 3.6. repent and be baptized everyone of
you, acts 2.38. if a stranger dwell with thee and will observe the Passover of
the Lord, let him circumcise all his males, and then let him come and observe
it, and he shall be as one borne in the land, for no uncircumcised person shall
eat thereof, Exodus 12.48.

Who else are in in the covenant and ought to be baptized? A. Infants born of
christian parents; the unbeleeving husband is sanctefied by the wife, and the
unbeleeving wife is sanctified by the husband, else were your children
unclean^, but now they are holy, 1 cor. 7.14. if the first fruits be holy so is
the whole lump, if the root be holy so are the branches, romans 11.16. I will
establish my covenant with thee and with thy seed after thee, for an
everlasting covenant to be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee, Genesis
17.7.

How are children of christian parents in the covenant? A. Not as they are the
sinful offspring of the first Adam, for so they beget them in their own
likeness; nor secondly, as they are by grace the sons of God, for they are
not made the sons of God by natural generation, but by adoption; yet they
may believe for themselves and others according to the covenant of grace, Genesis
17.7. as Adam did sin both for himself and others, and as parents in
bargains do covenant both for themselves and their heirs after them; thus
the parents being the first fruits, sanctifies the whole lump of their
posterity, romans 11.16.

What is it to be baptized, In the name of the father, son and holy Ghost? A.
It is to be made one of Gods family which is his church, and to be made
partaker of the privileges thereof, as Jacob said, the Angel which has
delivered me from all evil bless the lads and let my name be named upon them
and the name of my fathers, Genesis 48.16. in that day shall seven women take hold
of one man, saying, we will eat our own bread and wear our own garments,
only let us be called by thy name to take away our reproach. Isa. 4.1

What do we learn from hence? A. We learn that in this washing of baptism
is sealed a solemn contract and covenant between God and the baptized: first,
of God the father, who vouchsafes to receive him into favor, and of God the
son to redeem him, and of God the holy Ghost to purify and regenerate him.

What does the baptized bind themselves unto? A. He promises to acknowledge
invocate and worship none other God but the true Jehovah, which is the father,
son and holy Ghost.

What is the visible or external matter of baptism? A. It is water: for the
Minister may not baptize with any other liquor, but only with natural water
according to those examples we have in Scripture, and of the primitive church.

What is the external form of baptism? A. It is the ministers washing the
baptized, according to the prescrpt of God.

Suppose it was the ancient custom to dip or dive all the body of the baptized
in the water, must their example of necessity be followed? A. No; for the word
baptize signifies sprinkling as well as dipping or diving, and says the Lord,
I will sprinkle clean water upon you, Ezekiel. 36.25. again by reason of some
cold countries, and the weakness of young Infants, necessity and charity may
dispense with ceremonies, and mittigate the sharpness of them.

What resemblance is there between the element of water, and the thing
signified thereby? A. As water washes away the filth of the body, so the blood
of Christ Jesus cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7.

What does the ac^^^ of the Minister wa^^ing the body of the baptized signify?
A. This seale^, and I confirms a double action of God: first, the ingrafting
or incorporating the baptized into Christ; as many as are baptized into Christ,
(...) Christ, Gal. 3.27. by one spirit we are all baptized into one body, (...)
secondly, it seals to us our regeneration; not he the worker (...) which we
have done, but according to his mercy he saved us by the (...) king of
regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost, ^^tus 3.5.

What does (...) water, or sprinkling it upon the baptized signify? A. It does
ra^^^ the shedding of the blood of Christ for the remission of all our sin;
and the imputation of his righteousness; arise and be bapti^^d, and wa^^ away
thy sins, calling upon the name of the Lord, Acts 22.16. and it signifies
mortification of sin by the power and death of Christ; know ye not that all
they which have been (...) into Christ, have been baptized into his death? the
(...) crucified with him that the body of sin might be destroyed, romans (...).

What does the (...) ^anc^ in or under the water signify unto us? A. It
signifies the burial of sin, or a continual encrea^^ of mortification both
by the power of Christ's death and burial; we are buried with him by baptism
in o^^is death, romans ^.4.

What does the coming out of the water signify unto us? A. It concerns our
spiritual vivification to newness of life in all holiness and
righteousness, by the power of Christ's resurrection; for like as Christ was
raised up from the dead by the glory of the father, so we all should walk in
newness of life; for if we be grafted together in the likeness of his death,
we shall be also in the (...) of his resurrection, romans 6.4 5.

What does the action of the party baptized signify, when he offers himself
before the M^^^ter and the congregation to be baptized? A. It signifies that he
does consecrate himself the Lord, and that he utterly renounceth the flesh the
world, and the devil the like figure which now saves us, even baptism, not
the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience
toward God, 1 Pet. 3.21.

Suppose any question the lawfulness of his baptism, may he be rebaptized?
A. No; for as in natural generation a man is but once borne, so he can be but
once newborn, therefore if a man be baptized be a Minister that is an
heretic, not yet degraded from his calling, and if he observe the form of
administration, In the name of the father, son and holy Ghost, it is a real
baptism.

How may a man profitably use his baptism all his life long? A. First, when
any sinful lust shall arise in thy soul, then begin to meditate of that
solemn Vow which thou did dest make to God in thy baptism: Secondly, if
through infirmity thou fall into any sin, still have recourse to thy baptism
for thy encouragement and comfort; for although baptism be but once
administered yet that once testifies, that all thy sins past, present and to
come, are washed away, 1 Pet. 3.20. Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. it is called the
sacrament of repentance, Mark 1.4. lastly, to make a profitable use of thy
baptism, then thou must not rest till thou have a feeling of that renewing
power fignified in baptism, namely, the power of Christ's death, mortifying
thy sin, and the virtue of his resurrection renewing thy spirit, soul and
body, in all holy obedience.

How is it that many feel not the fruit of their baptism? A. The fault is not
in God, but in themselves, in that they do not keep the condition of the
covenant to receive Christ by says, and to repent of their sins.

When shall a man see the effect of his baptism? A. When he receives Christ by
faith, though it be many years after then he shall feel the power of God to
regenerate him, and to work all those things which he offered him in baptism.

What is done in the Lords supper? A. The former covenant solemnly ratified in
baptism, is renewed in the Lords supper, between the Lord and the receiver.

What do the elements of bread and wine signify unto us? A. They are signs
and seals of the body and blood of Christ.

What does the actions of the Minister about the same elements signify unto
the receiver? A. They signify unto the receiver fo^re actions of God himself:
First, his taking the bread and wine into his hands, does seal unto us the
action of God the father, who from all eternity did separate and elect his
son to perform the duty of a mediator between God and man; mine elect in
whom my soul delights, Isa. 42.1. him has God the Father sealed, John. 6.27.

What does the Ministers blessing of the elements with the recital of the
promises signify and seal unto the receiver? A. The blessing of them
signifies, that those elements are now taken from a common to a holy use, and
the recital of the promises, seals unto us that action of God by which in the
fullness of time, he sent Christ to perform the office of mediator, unto
which he was foreordained.

What does the breaking of bread and pouring out of the wine signify to the
receivers? A. This seals the action of God, offering Chiist unto all, but
^iving him only to the faithful, for the increase of their faith and
repentance.

What does the receivers action in taking the bread and wine in his hand
signify? A. This seals a spiritual action, namely, his apprehending of
christ by the hand of faith, as many as received him, to them he gave power to
become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name, Ioh. 1.12.

What does his eating of the bread and drinking of the wine signify? A. This
seals his application of Chirst by the same faith, by a feeling of his true
union and communion, to increase daily by faith, as our bodies are strengthened
by the bread and wine; the cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
communion of the blood of Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the
communion of the body of Christ? 1 Cor. 11.16.

Is not the bread in the sacrament after consecration turned into the body of
Christ? A. No; first, because this sacramental bread was eaten before the
death of Christ, therefore unpossible to be a corporal eating of his flesh;
secondly, the bread is broken and distributed after consecration but the whole
body of Christ is received by every single communicant: thirdly, the bread is
the communion of Christ, therefore not his very body: fourthly, the body of
Christ was made of the substance of the Virgin Mary, therefore not of bakers
bread: fifthly, this bread is subject to mold that is left after consecration;
this shows that it is will real bread: sixthly, if the sign be turned into
the substance, then what sign remains? this would overthrow the sacramental
union between the sign and the thing signified.

But is not christ's body corporally present in the sacament? A. No; this do in
remembrance of me, 1 cor. 24.25. secondly, the heavens must receive him till
the restitution of all things, act. 3.2. Thirdly, the body of Christ can be but
in one place, he is not here, come s^ee the place where the Lord lay, mat. 28.6.

When are we fitly prepared to receive the Lords supper? A. First, if we bring
a right knowledge of man's fall, and a promised restoration into the covenant by
Christ, he is the mediator of a better covenant, which is established upon
better promises Heb. 8.6. so often as ye shall eat this bread and drink of
this cup, ye show the Lords death till he come, and we must by our knowledge
discern the Lords body 1 cor. 11.26, 29.

Secondly, we must have a true faith in Christ, for we receive so much as we
believe that we receive, for unto us was the Gospel preached, as well as to
them, but the word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in
them that heard it, Heb. 4.2.

Thirdly, we must have true repentance for all our sins, both original and
actual, being the state wherein we lay in the breach of the first covenant.

Fourthly, we must bring renewed faith and repentance to testify our
thankfulness to God for his great goodness, to receive us into a new
covenant, not of works, but of grace, wherein he promises to be merciful to
our righteousness, and to remember our iniquities no more, Heb. 12.13. and to
testify our love both to God and his people, he so loved us, that he gave his
only begotten son for us, Ioh. 3.16. and Christ gave his life a ransom for
us, mat. 20.28. therefore we should love him that first loved us, 1 Ioh. 4.19.
also our love must be to his people; if thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and
there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave thy gift
before the Altar, and go first and be reconciled to thy brother, and then come
and offer thy gift. mat. 5.23, 25.

But what if I in part find these things in me, when withal I find my heart
exceeding rebellious, and very corrupt? A. Thou may come as a welcome guest
for all that, for Christ came to preach the Gospel to such a poor heart as
thine and to heal such a broken heart, and to deliver such a captive from
corruptions, and to give sight to thee ihat feel want of it, and to set at
liberty thy bruised soul, Luke 4.18.

How shall I come to the sacrament, I want faith? A. If thou be sensible of thy
want of faith, thou may come; for it is grace that discovers thy want, and
not nature, therefore pray the Lord to increase thy faith, Luke 17.5. and say
with tears, I believe, Lord help my unbelief, Mark 9.24. then come and
Christ will ease thee, Mat. 11.28. Psalm. 55.22.

What other means has God appointed us to use for our groth in grace? A.
Prayer which is a familiar speech with God in the name of Christ, in which
either we crave things needful, or give thanks for things received, 1 Timothy 2.1.

May we not pray to Saints or Angels? A. No; for they do not know our wants;
Abraham (...) of us, Isa. 63.17, neither can they help us they pray to Gods
that (...) save, Isa. 45.20. and the command of Christ is, come unto me all ye
that are heavy laden and I will give you rest, mat. 11.28.

But may we not make Saints our med^^tours or intercess^rs? A. No; there is but
one mediator between God and man the man Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 2.5. he is our
only high Priest who is entered into heaven, now to appear in the presence of
God for us, Heb. 9.24. Christ alone is our intercessor in heaven for us, romans
8.34. heb. 7.25.

For whom must we pray? A. for all men living none exempted, but they that
sin against the holy Ghost; there is a sin unto death, I do not say that
ye shall pray for it, 1 Ioh. 5.16.

But may we not pray for the dead? A. No; when David's child was dead he ceased
praying for it, saying, now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? ^ Sam. 12.22,
23. there is no repentance in the grave when they are dead? he that is unjust
let him be unjust still, and he that is filthy let him be filthy still, and he
that is holy let him be holy still, rev. 22.11. it is the blood of Jesus Christ
that cleanfeth us from y^l sin, 1 Ioh. 1.7. and if thou be not purged thou
shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, Ezekiel. 24.13.

For what must we pray? A. Christ has taught us to pray for six things
especially: First, that God may be glorified: secondly, that God may reign in
our hearts as in his Kingdom: thirdly, that we may do Gods will faithfully,
constantly and cheerfully, as it is done in heaven.

These three c^ncerning God, what things be they that we must pray for our
s^^ves? A First, that we may rely wholly on Gods providence for all the means
of this temporal life: secondly, that our sins may be forgiven, that we may
be at peace with God: thirdly, that by his power we may be kept from all
temptations, that they prevail not against us to sin against (...).

Why are those petitions concerning Gods glory, kingdom and will, set down
before these three petitions for our selves? A. Because we should prefer Gods
glory, kingdom and will before and above all other things.

What is Gods kingdom here on earth? A. It is his church and people in which
Christ rules as King.

What is that visible Church in which Christ rules as King? A. First
negatively, it is not amongst any Libertines whatsoever, as the Antinomians,
who cry out of the bondage of his law, which is the statute law of heaven;
neither the Anabaptists, who despise the laws of men, being regulated by the
law of God: nor the Prelacy, which exalt themselves into the throne of God and
man usurping all power to themselves; nor the Brownists, which separate from
all ecclesiastical government: all (...) ^ount it a bondage that Christ should
rule as King.

Now I answer affirmatively, that church that has the truths of doctrine and
the right way of discipline according to Gods Word, and freely yields obedience
unto both, I mean in the general, although some single persons fail in any
of these, yet this is the true Corne-field of Chist, although some tares be in
it.

May any sepa^ate from that Church which has true doctrine, when there for the
present may be some want in d^scipline in the matter or in the execution. A.
No: for discipline is not essential to the being of a Church, but only to the
well being of it; it may be the Church of Christ, and yet want his discipline;
again, we may not separate from the Church till Christ separate from it.

But how shall we know when christ leaves a church? A. First, the church does
leave Christ; but while we hold the truths of doctrine, we have not left
Christ; but suppose we like a Strumpet, have deserved to be put away, and a
bill of divorce to be given to us; yet blessed be God, whose going ^ are still
seen in his Sanctuary, Psalm. 68.24.

But how do you know that a bill of divorce is not given to us? A. If Christ
had left his church here, he would have taken away the hedge of protection, and
leave us to be destroyed by the wild Beasts, Psalm. 80.12. that is, the
Magistrates sword should not have been drawn in the defense of it, neither
would he receive our offerings, Judges 13.23. Secondly, if God had left us, he
would have called away his Ministers from us; for they are not to stay where
they find none to receive them, John 4.35. but to shake off the dust of their
feet as a witness against them, Mat. 10.11. Thirdly, when christ leaves a
church, it is because he has no more to call in that church; for when Paul was
departing from Macedonia, the Lord bad him to stay, for he had much people in
that city. Acts 18.10. so blessed be God, we see the work of the Ministry
exceeding fruitful in converting multitudes to the Lord, which plainly shows
that christ has not left us.

But were not your Ministers some few years agon called from you and the h^dge
of protection broken down, and Idolatry coming in apace? A. Our affections
were then to the truths of God and the ministry fruitful by those that stayed
with us; and therefore I see no lawful call they had to depart from their
flocks when the Wolves were coming, except those whose particular persons were
aimed at; neither was it the Magistrates, by the sword of justice, according to
law that was turned against the church, but it was the Prelates usurped power
that did persecute Gods people, against both the laws of God and the laws of
the Kingdom.

What is the effect of sepration? A. Separation is the cause of distractions
and civil wars, and so ends in confusion; therefore no toleration is to be
granted to such a Vyper as separation, that eats out her mothers bowels.

What is the state of all men after they have lived a while here? A. All must
dye and be as water spilt upon the ground, 2 Samuel 14.14. death is passed upon
all, for that all have sinned, romans 5.12.

Why must Gods people dye, has not Christ taken away their sin? A. Christ
has forgiven their sin, and covered it with his righteousness, Psalm. 32.1.
but he does not take away the being of sin til death, To. 6.7. no man lives
and sins not, 1 Kings 8.46. he is a liar that says he has no sin, 1 John
1.8.

What follows the day of death? A. A particular judgment; it is appointed
(...) all m^n once to dye, and from death to ^u^gement, Heb. 9.27. the body
returns to dust, and the (...) of all return to God; the spirit of man goes
upward, Eccl. 3.21.12.7.

What follows the particular judgment? A. The general day of judgment, that
day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the earth
shall melt with fire and heat, and the works that are therein shaall be burnt
up, 2 Pet. ^.10.12.

Who shall be the Judge? A. Jesus Christ the Son of God, we must all appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, romans 14.10, 12. 2 cor. 5.10.

What will be the manner of his coming? A. The Son of man will come in a
cloud with power and great^ glory, Luke 21.27. and attended with his holy
A^gels Mark 8.38. and with all his Saints in heaven, 1 These. 3.13. and those
that are alive at that day, shall he changed in the tw^nkling of an eye. 1 Cor.
15.51, 52. and caught up into the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, 1 These.
4.17. those in heaven shall come with Christ, and those on earth shall meet
him, and they shall be ever with the Lord, the dead in Christ shall rise first,
1 These. 4.16.

What will Christ do when he is come? A. When the Son of man shall come in
his glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne
of his glory mat. 24.31. and all Nations shall be brought before him, and he
shall separate them, as a Shepherd does his sheep from the goats, and set the
sheep on his right hand, and the goats on his left, ver. 32.33.

How shall men at that day be summoned before the Judge? A. He shall send his
Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, mat. 24.31. and when the Trumpet shall
sound, the dead shall be raised, 1 Cor. 15.52. and the living changed. 51.

How will christ examine every man's cause? A. The books of every man's doings
shall be laid open, and their consciences shall be made to accuse, or to excuse
them, and every man shall be tried by the works which he did in his life time,
because that works are manifest signs either of faith or unbelief, Dan.
7.10. Rev. 20.12. 2 cor. 5.10.

What follows their examination? A. Then he will give sentence of absolution
and salvation to the godly, saying to them, come ye blessed of my Father, (...)
the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world; and to the
wicked he will say, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared
for the devil and his angels, mat. 25.34.41.

What is the estate of the godly after the day of judgment? A. The Saints
shall them inherit all things. rev. 21.7. Dan. ^.27. 2 Pet. 3.13, 14. Isa.
56.22. and they shall enjoy the presence of God, where are rivers of pleasures
for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. and they shall see christ face to face, 1 cor.
13.12. 1 John 3.2. and we shall re^gne with christ for ever, Revel. 5.10.21.1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 7.

What is the state of the wicked after the day of judgment? A. It is eternal
perdition and destruction, which stands in three things especially: First, they
shall be punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord,
and from the glory of his power, 2 these. 1.9. Secondly, their fellowship shall
be the devil and his angels, mat. 25.41. thirdly, their torment shall be fire
and brimstone hurning eternally, Rev. 21.8. Isa. 33.14. Who can dwell with
everlasting burnings, where the Worm of a guilty conscience dies not, and the
fire of Gods wrath is not quenched, mar. 9.44.46. fire and brimstone, and a
horrible tem^est, this is the portion of their cup, Psalm. 11.6.

What is the end the Lord has in all these things? A. His own glory; what if
God be willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known on the vessels
of wrath fitted to destruction, and that he might make known the riches of his
glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had before prepared unto glory, romans
9.22, 23.

Watch ye therefore and pray always that ye may be accounted worthy to escape
all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of
man, Luke 21.36. Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our
Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep through the blood of the
everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good work, to do his will,
working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ,
to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen, Heb. 13.20 21.

FINIS.

