A faithful MESSENGER Sent after the ANTINOMIANS: To try their power in their
last place of refuge, who are fled to Gods Decrees for shelter, as Ioab did to
the horns of the Altar, and say that they will dye there, 1 Kings 2.29.30.

Imprimatur Ja. Cranford.

You that were sometimes alienated and enemies in your minds by wicked works,
yet now has he reconciled,

Col. 1.21. The Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen
through faith,

Galat. 3.8. If ye hearken to these judgments, and keep and do them, then the
Lord thy God shall keep unto thee the Covenant, and the mercy which he swear
unto thy Fathers, and he will love thee,

Deuteronomy. 7.12.13. But as many as received him, to them he gave power to become
the sons of God even, to them that believe on his name,

John 1.12. LONDON, Printed by M. Oaks for T. Banks, and are to be sold in
Blackfryers, on the top of Bridewelstairs, 1644

To the READER.
CHristian Reader, the Apostle says there must be heresies among you, that
they which are approved may be manifest among you, 1 Cor. 11.19. And Christ
says: It mast needs be that offenses come, but woe be to that man by whom the
offense comes, Math. 18.7. Then rouse up thy self as against all sects and
schisms so against this one heresy trimd up with some additions by our
Antinomians, in which they confound Gods Decrees, and his worke^ together, and
also his prom^ses and performances, and they cast a cloud over the omissience
of God, and so would persuade us that he does not see his creatures perfectly
as they are, and where they are, but as if he saw a man in one kingdom, when
he is in another, because he was there, or as if he saw them on earth, when
they are gone to heaven or hell because they were there, or as if he saw them
in many places at once, or as if he s^w man's birth and death all at once, and
as if he saw Angels very good, and yet cursed Devils at the same time, and as
if he saw man in innocence, and fallen all at once, and that he should bless
all his Creatures here before, and curse them all at once. But here we may
safely make these conclusions; First, that it is against the nature of God to
see all his creatures created, and yet not created all at once.

Secondly, it is against the nature of God to see a creature in one place when
he is in ather, or in many places all at once.

Thirdly, it is against the nature of God to see his changeable creatures in
several conditions all at once, as to be in their blood: and yet justified all
at once, and to see them in their innocence, and fallen all at once; but these
men would make the God of order to be the author of all confusion: for when all
the creatures under heaven were corrupted by the sin of man, and lay under a
curse, then these men say that they were in the favor of God justified,
sanctified, called and adopted the sons of God, but can a fountain send forth
salt water and fresh, Iam. 3. If not, how shall the fountain of living water do
so. Does God say, that al his creatures were made very good, Genesis 1.31 and yet
at the same time so great part of them cursed devils and reprobates, what
blasphemy is this to charge the God of truth that cannot ly with lying and
desembling, or else with blindness, as if he did not see them clearly, and so
call them good through mistakes, as Isaac blessed Jacob, so because the heathen
shall hereafter be justif^ed through faith, Gal. 3.8. These men would make God
incapable of the passage of time here with us, and so have them just before
their time: But the times and seasons the Father has kept in his own power,
Acts 1.7. Then does not he know he can keep his promise to a thousand
generations, Psalm. 105.8. And perform it the same day. Exodus 12.41. Then
although he knew when his creatures were made very good, that some of them
would not long continue in that condition, but by sin become devils and
reprobates, yet it will not follow that God saw them so soon as they were made,
neither on the contrary will it follow that when the Lord saw the earth corrupt,
that God saw all things at that instant very good, because they were so at
first, but when he said they were good, they were so indeed, although he know
that man would fall, that so his purposes might be brought forth in their
several ages and times, wherein they were appointed, for there is a time
before the decrees bring forth, Zeph. 2.1.2. And till that time the elect are
children of wrath; Even as others all that time, they were without God and
without Christ, Ephe. 2.3.12 And without his spirit, and therefore none of his,
Romans 8.9. There was no difference till our hearts be purified by faith, Acts
15.9. The Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith of
Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe, Gal. 3.22. God saw his people
before conversion, to be enemies, and alienated in their minds, and after
conversion he sees them now reconciled, Colos. 1.21. Yet God does not change:
Neither is there shadow of changing in him, James 1.17. But the Creatures
change daily evil, and wax worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3.13. And Gods people grow
in grace as newborn babes. 2 Pet. 2.2.

Then sure the Lord sees all their changes, before the Creation God loved
nothing but himself, because there was no other object, and this love to
himself was the moving cause why he made all the creatures, to set forth his
own glory, and those that glorify him most, are the most beloved of him; then
a man that is wholly sanctified, is more beloved than he that is but in part
sanctified; and he that is but in part sanctified, more beloved than he that is
not sanctified at all; and he that has a being has something in him that God
loves, when as he that has no being, has nothing to be beloved. Then what a
folly is it to say the child of God is actually beloved of God, Justified,
Sanctified, called, and Adopted before they have any being; these things are
more largely answered in this Book, which here I have written for thy better
information; read it, and if thou receive any benefit or satisfaction herein,
give God the praise, and me remember in thy prayers. And so I commend thee to
God, and to the Word of his grace, Which is able to build thee up, and to give
thee an Inheritance among all them that are sanctified, Acts 20 32.

Thine in the Lord Jesus Thomas Bakewell.

A faithful messenger sent after the Antinomians to their last refuge, who are
fled to Gods decrees for SHELTER.
THe occasion of this addition to my former discourse against the Autinomians
tenets, is their flying for shelter to Gods decrees, which I had thought, I had
sufficiently barrd them from before, but they being sencible of their own
weakness, as not being able to behold the clear sunbeams of truth with fixed
eyes, durst not stand it out, but away they fled, but this messenger will
pursue them to their place of refuge, and try their power there, and he doubts
not of the victory, for by faith the walls of this City will fall down slat
before Gods people, And cursed be the man before the Lord, that raises up and
builds the City Jericho, Josh. 6.26. 1 K. 16.34.

But these builders have been employed in repairing this old heresy these
fourteen years, to my knowledge, for then some of these held, that a man is
actually in the favor of God, reconciled in Christ, justified, sanctified,
called and adopted, all this actually in election, such were Paul and Manasses
before conversion, yea they were borne so into the world, and I have had this
disputation in writing by me ever since, which I had with them, and now more
enlarged.

This they would prove from those words of Paul. God was in Christ, reconciling
the world to himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. I answer, this will prove nothing for their
purpose, for it is impived, there was a world before God did actually
recencileit to himself, but we know the age of the world, when it was made,
and how old it is, but for Gods decrees, they have bin from all eternity, and
are as old as himself, but if their tenets were true, we might boast of our
Progenitors, and say that Adam had his actual being as soon as God, even from
all eternity, if Gods decrees and actions, his purposes and performances, were
all actually done at the same time. But to prove this, they must be constrained
to carry the works of God to his decrees, and say, that all the works of God
were created and actually made, from al eternity, being actually made in his
decrees, or else they must be forced to bring down the decrees of God to the
works of creation, and say, that neither God nor his decrees had any being
before the Creation, and so the creatures are as old as their Creator, which
were miserable Atheism for any man to think so, says the Apostle. God by
Christ made all things in heaven and in earth, visible, and invisible, and he
is before all things, Golloss. 1.16, 17. And says wisdom, which is Christ:
The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old: I
was from everlasting, or ever the earth was, when there was no depths I was
brought forth, when there was no fountains abounding with water, before the
mountains were settled, before the hills, was I brought forth, while as yet he
had not made the earth nor the fields, nor the highest part of the dust of the
world. Prove. 8.22, 23, 24, 25, 26. And says David: Thy throne is established
of old, thou art from everlasting. Psalm. 93.2. Then surely God had his being
before the world was, and if they would believe Moses whom they so much
despise, he would show them the original and first beginning of all the
creatures in his first of Genesis, and how that the 3 persons in trinity
consulted about the creation of man, before they actually did it, saying, Let
us make man in our Image, after our likeness. ver. 26. and every days work was
done by a special command from God: he spoke and it was done, he commanded,
and it stood fast, Psa. 33.9. Thus God commanded, and the spirit of God moved
upon the face of the deep, and says Christ: When he prepared the heavens, I was
there: when he set a compass upon the face of the depth: when he established
the clouds above: when he strengthened the fountains of the deep: when he gave
to the sea his decree, that the waters should not pass his Commandment: when
he appointed the foundations of the earth: Then I was by him, as one brought
up with him: and I was daily his delight, rejoicing alwais before him. Prove.
8.27, 28, 29, 30. But after the creation, then Christ rejoices in the
habitable part of his earth: and his delight is with the sons of men, verse
31. But to say that the Creatures were actually made in Gods decree, they had
as good say they had no beginning, and so deny that article of their faith,
that God made heaven and earth? again, if they say God reconciled his people to
himself actually from all eternity in the decrees, then I demand of them when
the breach was made, which must needs go before reconciliation, will they make
the creature older then the Creator, and say they did offend before his
decrees, this cursed error is the ground of all confusion, for if they say God
actually made all things when he decreed to make them, it is as much as to say,
there was no decrees at all; There was once a question put to Austine, what God
did before he made the world, and his answer was, that he then made hell for
such Inquisiters: but if our Antinomians had bin put to answer it, they would
have said, that then God reconciled them, justified and sanctified them,
called, and adopted them, and all this actually in his decree; but here Paul
does not say God has reconciled the world, but that God was in Christ
reconciling the world; neither does he say before the world was, but when the
world was, then the truth is this, when the world was made, and Adam had
sinned, then God began actually to reconcile fallen man to himself by faith, in
the Messiah that should break the serpents head, and so God has been ever
since reconciling his elect to himself, as they fall in the several ages of
the world, says Christ: My father works hitherto, and I work. John 5.17. Yet
I grant that the Apostles, when this was spoken, were reconciled: for says
Paul, God has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. 5 18. But
others, although they were elected as well as they, yet they were not actually
reconciled to God, only they had the word of reconciliation, and the ministry
of reconciliation: and says Paul, we pray you in Christ's stead to be
reconciled to God, although by the blessing of God upon their preaching and
prayers, many were reconciled to the Lord, or added to the Lord. Acts 5.14. And
you that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your mind by wicked works,
yet now has he reconciled, Coloss. 1.21. There was a time when we were
enemies, yet afterward reconciled by the death of his son, Romans 5.10. Again,
if all things were actually done in Gods decrees, or done because they are
decreed to be done, then how will they distinguish between the decrees of God,
his works and actions. The holding of this would overthrow his decrees which are
his purposes, from al eternity to create, govern, and dispose of al his
creatures. Then art thou called to the state of grace, it is because that the
purpose of God was to do it from all eternity, Thou art called according to his
purpose. Romans 8.28. Again, it is the manifold wisdom of God made known to
his Church. It is according to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ
Jesus, Ephesians. 3.10, 11. Again, has God made known to thee the mystery of his
will, it is according to his good pleasure which he had purposed in himself,
Ephesians. 1.9. Is any saved? it is because God has purposed it from all eternity,
who has saved us according to his purpose and grace, 2 Timothy 1.9. Has God made
over to his people an eternal inheritance? It is because he did predestinate
them according to his purpose, who works all things according to the counsel
of his own will, yet they enjoy it not til the dispensation of the fullness of
times, then God will gather together all things in Christ, Ephesians. 1.10, 11.
Again, God has opened a door of faith to the Gentiles, Acts 14.27. It is
because God purposed it before, for the Scripture foresaw that God would
justify the heathen through faith, Gal. 3.8. Thus God purposed to justify
them? Again, if God should actually make all his creatures when he did decree
them, this would confound the beginning and ending of all things, but the
Prophets declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the
things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all
my pleasure: yea, I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass, I have
purposed, I will also do it, Esa 46.10, 11. And says David, in thy book were
al my members written, this was in Gods decree, yet they had no actual being:
for says he, as yet there was none of them, Ps. 139.16. The counsel of the
Lord stands for ever, and the thoughts of his heart to all generations, Psalm.
33.11. Again, for other things, the Edomites which came of Esau are become
servants to David, and to Israel which came of Jacob, 2 Samuel 8.14. It is
because the Lord had purposed it, for he told Rebecca long before, when those
two notions were in her womb, that the elder should serve the younger, Genesis 25
23. Now says Paul, this was done that the purpose of God according to election
might stand not of works, but of him that calls: for the children were not
yet born, when it was said the elder should serve the younger, Romans 9.11, 12.
Now it may be they will carpe at the next words, because it is written by
Mallac^y: J^cob have I loved, and Esau have hated, verse 13. I answer in Mal. 1,
2. It is not spoken of their persons, but of posterity: I have loved you of
Jacob, and I have hated the posterity of Esau, and laid his mountains and his
heritage wast for the dragons of the wilderness, so that Esau says, we are
impoverished, verse 3 4. And so they became servants to the seed of Jacob, 2 Samuel 8.14. But this cannot be understood of their persons, that the elder
should serve the younger, for Esau was the greater man for riches and honor,
and Jacob bowed himself seven times together to him, and called him his Lord
Esau, Genesis 33.3. Aagine, the Assyrian was a Caedar in Lebanon, yet says the
Lord: I have delivered him into the hand of the mighty one of the heathen, he
shall deal with him: I have driven him out for his wickedness, and strangers,
the terrible of the nations have out him off and left him, Ezekiel. 32.12. All
this is according to the purpose of God long before, for says the Lord, I will
break the Assyrian in my land, and upon my mountains, tread him under foot,
then shall his yoke depart from off them, and his burden from their shoulders,
(now mark) this is the purpose that is purposed, for the Lord has purposed,
and who shall disanul it, Isa. 14.25.26, 27. And so every purpose of the Lord
shall be performed against Babylon, Ier. 51.29. Therefore hear the counsel of
the Lord, that he has taken against Babylon, and his purposes that he has
purposed against the land of the Caldeans.

Thus you see what ever actions the Lord does, it is to perform his purpose
that went before, and to say that any of the works of God were done without
premeditation, or a purpose going before, were to compare him to the foolish
Builder, which did not consider before hand, and count the cost of his
Building, Luke 14.28. Or like the Ostrich, that leaves her eggs in the sand,
and forgets that the foot may crush them, or that the wild beast might break
them: She is hardened against her young ones, as though they were not hers,
her labor is in vain without fear, because God has deprived her of
wisdom, neither has he imparted to her understanding, Job 39.13.14.15.16.17.
Then what blasphemy is this to say, God does any works without premeditation,
or a purpose going before, by hab nab, as fools use to do, that have neither
wit, nor forecast: The Antinomians may do well to confider what it is to
confound the decrees and purposes of God, with his works and actions. Says
the Lord, I will perform my good word toward you, I know the thoughts that I
think toward you, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an
expected end, Jer. 29.10.11. He will perform his mercy promised, Luke 1.72.
The end shall be at the time appointed, Dan. 11.27.35. But how could these
things be, if all things were actually done in Gods Decree? again, How could
he keep his promise to a thousand Generations? Psalm. 105.8. Again, what use
were there of the faithfulness of God, which keeps Covenant to a thousand
Generations? Again, if all things were actually done from all eternity when
they were all decreed, then to what use should we have of Faith to believe
particular promises to be performed in several ages of the world, for we know
some are yet to be performed, if all were done already, how should we live by
Faith? Again, to what purpose is it said, that ye have need of patience, that
after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise? Heb. 10.36.
And what a vain thing it were to pray for the performance of any promise, if we
do believe that all is actually done already: well may these people cast off
all holy obedience to the Law of God, and faith also, from fastening upon any
promise as yet to be performed, for say they, all is done already, and no duty
is left for them to do, for they have gotten free grace that frees them from
all faith and obedience, and so at one clap, they cast away both Law and
Gospel, o my soul, come not thou into their secret, nor unto their assembly,
mine honor be not thou united, Gen 496.

But they will say, God loved his people from all eternity with the love of
good will, although not with the love of delight: I answer, it is true, the
Counsel of Gods will was from all eternity, for says Christ. This is the
Fathers will which has sent me, that all which he has given me, I should lose
nothing: And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one that sees
the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting life, and I will raise him
up at the last day, John 6.39.40. But when others are left to perish in their
sin, this also is according to the will of God, they were ordained to this
condemnation, Jude 4. And who has resisted his will, Romans 9.19. Thus all
things come to pass according to the secret will of God, a sparrow cannot fall
to the ground without his will, Mat. 10.29. Now, it will not follow that God
loves all things that comes to pass according to his will, for sin it self
could not be without his permitting will, yet I hope they will not say that sin
is beloved of God, because he permits the being of it, although his will is
good, and therefore a good will; yet I deny not but God loves his work in the
very Devils and Reprobates in the time of their being: If this be the love of
good will, they mean I shall grant as much, but yet the creature may perish
for all this good will.

Again, I demand how there can be any true love without delight, here they
would measure the love of God by their own bushel, for they say, that they
bear good will to Christ and the Gospel, but they neither love the Father,
nor his Law, but if these men did truly love the Son, they would love the
Father also, 1 John 5.1. But let them have what pretense they will, they
neither delight in the Father, nor the Son, because they abhor all Bonds, and
Covenants that should engage them to obedience, do they not rage against God,
and Christ his anointed? saying, let us break their bonds asunder, and cast
their cords from us, Psalm. 2.1.3. Neither will they hazard any thing for the
name of Christ, but says Paul, I am not only ready to be bound, but to die at
Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus, Acts 21.15. They pretend love to
Christ, and his Gospel, but yet, they will not fight, nor strive together, for
the faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. Nor contend earnestly, for the faith that
was once given to the Saints, Jude (...)

against sin, Heb. 12.4. If they did truly love Christ, they would fight
against his enemies, to rescue his Gospel, and his people whom they say they
love; but this is their love of good will, separated from their love of delight.

But suppose they say, if one man purpose to do good to another, this is
actual love; So if God purposed from all eternity to do good to his Elect,
this is actual love: I answer, A man may not only purpose to do good, but he
may also do it, and yet not love him to whom it is done: as the unjust Judge
did deliver the poor widow, because she troubled him, but not through love to
her, for he neither feared God, nor regarded man, Luke 18.4.5. And the
Pharisees gave Alms, but not through love to the poor, but to get praise
themselves, Mat. 6.2. So God may cause the Sun to shine, and the rain to fall,
he gave them a King in his wrath, and quails in the wilderness, but not in
love: But now, although men sin when they seek their own praise, and do any
good work without love, yet God does not so: Again, when one man intends to
do good to another, there is an object for his love; but before the Creation,
there was no object for Gods love but himself, therefore God loved nothing
before the Creation but himself, it was not his love to the Creatures that
moved him to create them, but it was love to himself to set forth his own
glory. Ephesians. 1.12. According us he has chosen us in him before the foundation
of the world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love.
ver. 4. Here you see Holiness goes before Love, and not Love before Holiness,
and also Obedience goes before Love, Deuteronomy. 7.12.13. John 14.21.23. And
Reformation goes before Love, Hosea 14.4.

They would set forth Gods love to his people by the love of David to Absalom;
When Absalom fled, the soul of King David longed to gee forth unto Absalom, 2 Samuel 13.38.39. And in the next Chapter the King said, Let him turn to his own
house, and let him not see my face. So he dwelt twofull years, and saw not the
Kings face, Ver. 24.28. Thus they would have God to love his people from all
Eternity, although they do not see his face, that is, although he do not
manifest himself unto them: I answer, Absalom was David's natural Son, then
although he offended his Father, yet his Sonship remained still, and Absalom
was in present being, and an Object fit for his love, being his Son; But before
the Creation we had no being, then there was no Object for Gods Love, but
himself: Again, then we were neither the Sons of God by Creation, nor by
Adoption, nor nothing in us lovely, beyond the Creation, hence I conclude, that
all the Love of God then to his people, was but a purpose to make them lovely,
and then to love them.

But they will allege the words of John, God so loved the world, that he sent
his only begotten Son that whose ever believes in him shall not perish but
have (...) lasting life. John 3.16. Here say they is actual love, going before
the sen^ing of Christ: I answer, if they look back, they may see Christ tend^ed
before, ver. 14. As the Serpent was in the wilderness, and also it may be
supposed, that Faith was given to some of them to receive, and close with
Christ, in these words, Whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have
eternal life, ver. 15 then it follows, ver. 16. God so loved the world, but
what is meant by the world here, but those believers who had Christ tendered
before, and had Faith given them to receive him; As many as received him, he
gave power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his name,
John 1.12. And so Mr. Perkins reads it in his Exposition on Jude, Page 52. He
that believes in Christ, shall not perish, but have everlasting life. But why
shall not believers perish? Because says he, God so loves the world of
Believers. So then first God gives his people Faith, and makes them lovely, and
then he loves them with actual Love: and says he in the same Book, page 104.
The proper cause of the Decree of God, must be in himself, because it was
before the creatures were, he decreed to love one, and to hate another, this he
purposed in himself, Ephesians. 1.9. God needs not go out of himself for motives
from outward respects to choose, or refuse, but because his good pleasure is
such, Mat. 11.25. Then foresight of Faith in some, or infidelity in others,
nor love to some and hatred to others, was the cause of chusiug some, and
refusing others, seeing Gods decree is in order and time before the creature,
which being the latter, cannot be the cause of the former, and says Mr. Calvin
Instit 3.22.3. Speaking of those that would have foresight of Faith and
Holiness to be the cause of Election, but says he, how shall these things
agree together, that those things which are derived from Election, should be
the cause of Election; We are elected, that we may be holy, that so God may
love us, Ephe. 1.4. Not because we are holy, so then the cause of Election was
in God himself, Ephesians. 1.9. Says he, God considered nothing without himself,
whereby he had regard too in his decrees, therefore the end of Election tends
to the praise of the glory of his grace, ver. 6. So that it was not actual
love to the people of God from all Eternity, that moved God to send them a
Savior, the moving cause was then in himself. Again, I answer from another
like place to this, Luke 7.47. Many sins were forgiven her, for she loved
much. Will they say here, the woman's love went before Gods forgiveness? If
they say no, then I say they must needs conclude the same from that place in
John 3.16. That God did not love them before the sending of Christ, and
besides, if they affirm the contrary, they overthrow their first Argument, for
then they said that they were reconciled in Christ before the world was; but
here they would have all to be done before the sending of Christ, but if this
were so, I demand to what purpose he came, if not to reconcile, and to adopt
us, and so to bring us into the love and favor of God, the discovery of their
own contradictions might be a sufficient confutation of it.

Again, the world here with God so loved, may be understood more general and
then more special: First, more general, he has disposed the whole world, and
then more special: First, more general, he has disposed the whole world, Job
34.13. that is, God disposes of Heaven and Earth, and all creatures in them,
The world is mine, meaning all things that ever God made, Psalm. 50. He shall
judge the whole world with right, Psalm. 96.13. That is, he will do all his
creatures justice, and so here, God so loved the world, John, that is, God so
loved all his creatures, and saw them all very good, Genesis 1.31. When he had
finished them, he rested, and was refreshed, Exo. 31.17. So greatly did God
delight in the works of his hands, that he was not willing they should be all
destroyed, in regard they were all very good, therefore he sent mankind a
Savior, that so all his creatures might be preserved, I mean, some of every
kind: The Elect Angels should be established by Christ, that they cannot fall,
as also the highest Heaven is established that it cannot be moved, but the
lower heavens and the earth with all the creatures in them are defiled with
sin, The Heavens are not clean in his sight, Job 15.15. And the Angels that
fell, he charge with folly, Job 4.18. And the Earth also is corrupt before
God, For all flesh had corrupted his way, Genesis 6 11.12. So then all the
creatures in the two lower heavens, and the earth are corrupted by the sin of
man, and partake with him in punishments, but by Christ they that are sound
alive at the day of judgment shall be restored agame to their first perfection,
and so remain for ever, And their earnest expectation is, when they shall be
delivered, Romans 8. See the Saints Inheritance after the day of judgment, this
world of creatures God so loved, that he sent to mankind a Savior, that some
of all the works of God may be preserved for ever, For the new Heavens, and
the new Earth which I will make, shall remain before me, says the Lord,
Isai^h 66.22.

The second exception of this word (world) is more specially to be taken for
the world of believers, that is, all the believers from the first to the last,
in the time of their being, and this world was never without beleivers since
Christ was promised to Adam and Eve, they having a justifying Faith wrought in
them they should not perish, nor any true believers that descended of them; For
God so loved the world of believers, that he sent his Son to be the Savior of
the world, 1 John 4.14. And Christ gave his life unto the world, John 6.33. And
be takes away the sins of the world, John 1.29. But these places must needs
be understood to be the world of believers, they shall never perish, but have
everlasting life, for God so loved the world of believers, is to take away
their sins; They are his people, children that will not lie; So he was their
Savior. Isa. 63.8. When Israel was a child (says the Lord) then I loved him,
Hosea 11.1. But all this will not prove that God loved him before he was a
Child, from all Eternity, before they were adopted or sanctified by the Spirit.

But they will say, God loved Jacob, and hated Esau before they were borne,
because the Apostle quoting Malachi, says; It is written, Jacob have I loved,
and Esau have I hated, Romans 9. I answer, the Prophet wrote this a long time
after their death: now if he say after their death, that God loved one, and
hated the other in the time of their being: will that prove that God either
loved or hated before they were, all that the Apostle says, was done before
they were born; is this, that the elder should serve the younger; this was the
purpose of God according to election, Romans 9.11, 12. And Genesis 25.23. Yet this
was not to be understood of their persons, but the elder nation should serve
the younger, which was also fulfilled 2 Samuel 8.14. Where it is said, that al
they of Edom became servants to David K. of Israel: Then they alleadg these
words of Moses, Deu. 7 6, 7, 8. That God loved them before they were, but in
the text there is no such matter, but is plainly spoken to those that were then
in present being, saying, Thou art a holy people, the Lord thy God has chosen
thee to be a special people: Now the reason why God chose this people, and
loved them, was not because they were more in number then other people, but
because the Lord would keep the oath which he had sworn to their fathers, verse
7, 8. But here is nothing to prove that God loved them before they were: if we
would speak of Gods love before their being, then it is this, The Lord loved
their fathers in the time of their being, and therefore he chose their seed,
Deuteronomy. 4.37. Again, if they say God sees all things at once, both past, present,
and to come? and therefore the elect that are to be justified, he ever saw them
justified, and therefore they were always beloved from all eternity. I answer
by this rule, that God once saw David commit adultery, and murder, for it was
done in his sight, Psalm. 51.4. Therefore he sees David acting those fins now,
and will see them so for ever, and because Christ once looked upon Peter, when
he denied him with cursing and swearing: therefore now he looks upon him at
this present, and sees him cursing, forswearing, and denying him, and because
Christ was once angry with Peter, and said, get thee behind me Satan, thou art
an offense unto me, and savourest not the things that be of God, but the things
that be of men, Math. 16.23. Will it follow that Peter is now an offense to
Christ, and that Christ now sees that he savours not the things of God, and
does God see Paul now persecuting his people, because he once saw him do so,
and for the sins of Manasses and Moses, who says, we have sinned in the light
of thy countenance, Psalm 90.8. Does God now see them at this present, acting
those sins which they committed when they were here, because time was when he
saw them in the very act of those abominations. A boy of 7 years old might
answer that God has perfect remembrance of them, but yet he sees them as past
and not in present being: And God once heard the groanings of Israel in Egypt
under the Taskmasters, he looked upon them, and had respect unto them, Exodus
2.24, 25. But will it follow, that now God sees Pharaoh tiranizing over them, at
this present, they being in heaven out of his reach, there the wicked cease
from troubling and there the weary be at rest, and hear not the voice of the
oppressor, Job 3.17, 18. And so time was, when God saw Hezekiah sick of the
plague, but now does God see him sick of the plague in heaven: and God saw
David's wounds stink and putrify, for it was inflicted on him for his
foolishness, Psalm. 38.5. But now does God see David's running sores in heaven,
because he once saw them in time past, or whether has he a perfect remembrance
of them, not as in present being, but as past: God saw what Amaleck did to
Israel when they came out of Egypt, Exodus 17.14. But afterward in the time of
Samuel the Prophet, says the Lord: I remember what Amaleck did to Israel, 1 Samuel 15.2. And so the Lord saw all the passages of Israel in the wilderness;
yet says he, I remember the kindness of thy youth, when thou walkedst after
me in the wilderness, Jer. 2.2. But God sees all these things now as past, yet
in his perfect remembrance, as we say, to remember such a thing past, as if it
were but now done, so then God may have a perfect remembrance of things past,
and yet not bring them back again to a perfect being: God saw all the creatures
drowned in Noah's flood, but it were folly to think that God now sees the water
spread over all the earth, above the highest mountains, and all of us drowned
in the deluge. And so for things to come, God has in his mind what to do
hereafter, as Daniel said to the King, Dan. 2.28. But the decrees are not yet
brought forth, Zeph. 2.1, 2. As for example, God has in his decree, purposed
to destroy the world with fire and brimstone, but will it follow therefore, that
God now sees all his creatures at this present in a burning flame: or whether
is it low, as David says, Thou know my thoughts long before, or a far off,
Psalm. 139.2. So God sees things that are to come, but not as in present being,
the Scripture foresaw that God would justify the heathen through faith, Gal.
3.8. But yet not in actual being, it was in his sight afar off, as a man may
have the frame of a house, or the model of it in his mind before it be
actually builded: so was all the world in the mind of God, before it was
created, God saw the moddel of it from all eternity, yet not as really done,
but only in his purpose. But when God had created all his works, he saw them
all, and said they were all very good, Genesis 1.31. But now will some of those
cursed heritiques step forth and say, that God dissembled, when he said they
were all very good, for say they, he sees all things past, present, and to come
at once, and therefore he at that time, saw some of the Angels fallen, and were
then cursed devils, and a great part of mankind were then reprobates, and all
the creatures under heaven defiled with sin at that present: how will these men
clear themselves of blasphemy, if they hold these wicked tenets, that man is
actually justified in the sight of God, because hereafter he shall be justified,
by this argument the whole earth was cursed of God, and some of the Angels were
fallen, and then cursed as soon as before they were created, yea at that
present, when God said they were all very good. And so on the contrary, when
the Angels had sinned, and were cast out of heaven, and man had sinned, and was
cast out of Paradise, and the whole earth cursed for man's sin; will these men
say, that God now looks upon devils, and sinful men, as in the time of their
Innocence, and because God once said, they were all very good, will he now say
they are very good, what blasphemy is this? God says, woe be to them that call
evil good, and will he do it: if this were so, why then were all the creatures
cursed for the sin of man, for by their argument, God did once see man
innocent, therefore God always sees man innocent: for God sees those that are
effectually called, to be actually justified, therefore he always saw them
actually justified, this is Antinomian divinity, but we say that God sees all
things that are in present being, perfectly as so: but for things past, he
has a perfect remembrance of them, as if they were in present being, but yet
he sees them as past, and for things to come, as not yet in present being; God
will hereafter justify, sanctify, adopt and save his elect, yet they are not
so, till they have faith, and effectual calling: Other sheep I have which are
not of this fold, them also I must bring in, John 10.16. But for the present
they are not brought in.

Suppose they say, Christ looked on the young man in the Gospel, and loved him,
Mat. 10.21. Although he was an hypocrite, and without any saving grace, I
answer, he loves the devil as to own his own work in him; but yet he may be
damned for all that: but suppose they say, that God in his love and in his
pity redeemed them, and carried them all the days of old, Isay 63.9. I answer,
as before, God loved his own work upon them, and so redeemed them from Pharaohs
bondage: But they rebelled and vexed his holy spirit, therefore he was turned
to be their enemy, and fought against them, verse, 10. But when God loves in
Christ, he loves for ever, John 13.1. But this love is peculiar to his people,
as David says: Remember me o Lord with that favor thou bear unto thy
people, o visit me with thy salvation, that I may see the good of thy chosen,
and rejoice in the gladness of thy nation, and glory with thine inheritance,
Psalm. 106.4, 5. Now this love is peculiar to Gods people, neither have the
elect this love from all eternity, nor yet before conversion, for Gods anger
must be turned away, and their backslidings healed, and then he will love them
freely, Hos. 14.4. Says Christ: He that keeps my commandments, is he that
loves me, and he that loves me, shall be loved of my father, and I will love
him: and if any man love me, he will keep my words, and my father will love
him, and I will manifest my self unto him; for we will come unto him, and make
our abode with him, John 14.21, 22, 23. And if ye keep my commandments, ye
shall abide in my love, even as I kept my fathers commandments, and abide in
his love, John 15.9, 10. If ye hearken to these judgments, and keep and do
them, then the Lord thy God shall keep unto thee the Covenant and the mercy
which he swear unto thy fathers, and he will love thee, Deuteronomy. 7.12, 13. But
now thus says the Lord that created thee, o Jacob, and he that formed thee, o
Israel: fear not, I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name, thou
art mine. And then after all this it follows: Since thou wast precious in my
sight, thou have been honorable, and I have loved thee, Isay 43.1.4. And lest
any should think Gods love was before the sending of Christ, the Apostles
seems purposely to prevent it, praying thus: The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, putting that in the first place, and then the love of God, and the
communion of the holy Ghost be with you all, Amen, 2 Cor. 13.14. Being
justified by faith, we have grace with God, but no peace before faith in Jesus
Christ, but then follows many privileges as free access into his presence,
and rejoicing in hope of the glory of God, because the love of God is now shed
in our hearts by the holy Ghost, Romans 5.1, 2.5. So then when Gods love comes,
then comes says: And when faith comes, then comes the holy Ghost, and dwells in
our hearts, Ephesians. 3.17. Thou have a little strength, and have kept my word,
and bast not denied my name: then it follows: They shall know that I have loved
thee, Rev. 3.8, 9. But before the creation, there was no word given to be kept,
not strength to keep it, therefore no love before the world was. Again, says
the Lord: Whom I love, I rebuke and chasten, Rev. 3.19. But did God correct any
before the creation: if he did, let them prove it: And he scourges every son
that he receives, Heb. 12.6. So then if they were adopted the sons of God
before the creation, they must show that they were corrected before, for the
spirit of bondage goes before the spirit of adoption. Suppose they say that God
commended his love to us in that while we were sinners Christ dyed for us, Romans
5.8. Therefore say they, Christ loved us, while we were in our sins. I answer,
it is true, Christ dyed for us, when we were in oursins, and Christ was tendered
unto us, in that condition, as a man may tender his love to a woman, whom he
would have to be his wife, but this will not hold, that she therefore is his
wife, because he has tendered his love to her, no, she must consent to that
motion, and then be given to him, and then she is his wife; so when God
tendered Christ unto us, and gave us faith, whereby we are capable to make a
contract, and so gives us to Christ, then we have right, and a true title to
Christ, and all his benefits, and not before.

But now, because we deny that any can be actually loved, or justified before
Faith; Suppose they like subtle Sophisters shall say, that we hold that a man
may have true saving Faith some space of time, and yet not the man justified,
because we say that faith justifies by reflecting back, and taking hold of the
righteousness of Christ: I answer, when we sat in the state of nature, we
were in darkness; but when we were baptized with the holy Ghost, and with
fire, then we see a great light, Mat. 3.10.4.16. No sooner does the candle
burn but it gives a light, says David, Thou will lighten my candle, the Lord
my God will lighten my darkness. Psalm. 18.28. But as soon as the heart is
touched, and faith wrought in it by this light, immediately it sees Christ,
then how can it choose but take hold immediately; But for us to distinguish the
time between the infusing of Faith, and the reflecting act of it, is beyond
our capacity as much, as to distinguish whether fire or light comes first to
the candle, yet in order of nature, sire must go before the light, and so
faith must go before the operation: But for the time I cannot distinguish, if
not in natural things, much less in spiritual things.

Again, suppose they say, does not God love them that have faith wrought in
their souls, before it take hold of Christ to justify us? I answer, let what
faith will be wrought in the soul, till it takes hold of Christ, it does not
justify, and therefore for the present Gods love is not to him, as to his
real child, for says Mr. Perkins, the very seeds of saving faith brings forth
groanings, and earnest desires of the favor of God in Christ, and makes us
hunger, and thirst after his righteousness, Mat. 5.6. But if the seeds of
faith do this, what will faith it self do? Is there any time for it to he
idle in the soul before it take hold on Christ to justify? I know none,
therefore when it is wrought, God loves that man as his real child, but the
more they stand upon these nice distractions, the more they display their folly.

But they reply from those words of Jeremiah, says the Lord, I have loved thee
with an everlasting love, Jer. 31.3. This say they being everlasting, is from
all eternity: I answer, when God loves his people, he loves them for ever, Jo.
13.1. His love never fails, 1 Cor. 13.8. No waters can quench this love,
Cant. 8.7. He will rest in his love, Zeph. 3.17. So his love unto his people is
eternal, He will never leave them, nor forsake them, Heb. 13.5. But all this
will not prove that God loved them from everlasting, although he love them unto
everlasting from the time of their being, and says Mr. Perkins on his
Exposition on the Creed, Page 396. God neither hates them indeed, nor loves
them indeed before they are, and concerning those two Nations that came of
Jacob, and Esau, he says, God did purpose to love one, and hate the other,
Page 374. as also many able Divines have well approved of this book before it
was published. So then although God love his people for ever, yet if we speak
of the time past beyond the Creation, or beyond their actual being, it was but
intentionall, or a purpose to love them. When God built this great Fabric of
Heaven and Earth, with all the variety of creatures in them, his first thought
was on himself, delighting himself in his own Attributes, and in the
manifestation of them to his creatures, as his power and wisdom in the works
of Creation, and his works of love, and mercy, and goodness; in the works of
his providence, and his holiness, and justice; in the punishment of sin, and
showing mercy and forgivenes to whom he pleases, Thus he made all things for
himself, Prove. 16.4. To set forth the glory of his Attributes, then the love
of God to himself was the first moving cause to bring all things about to his
own glory, as Nebuchadnezzar built Babell the great house of his Kindome, to
show forth his power and might, and for the honor of his Majesty, Dan. 4.30.
These were his first thoughts, then to accomplish this, he thought of Timber
and Stones, and such materials as he was to use in the work; but although
these second thoughts came into his mind before the work was done, yet it was
not his love to the stones and timber that moved him to build that great
Fabric, but it was the love to his own honor and Majesty that moved him to
do it; So it was not Gods actual love to the Saints that moved him from all
eternity to do all his great works, but the love to his own honor and glory
that was the moving cause of all his works, and as a man may have the model
or frame of his house in his mind before he begin to build it; So had the Lord
the model, or frame of the whole world in his mind before he began to create
them, and as man's affections are no more to one stone, than to another before
they be squared, and fitted for the building, and then he actually loves them;
So when the Lord finds us all mixed together with the wicked, There is no
difference Romans 3.22. Acts 15.9. till we are squared, and fitted, and made
living stones for his spiritual Temple, and then he loves us, and though God
saw all things from all eternity in the thoughts of his heart, yet not as being
actually then created, and perfectly finished, but they were in the thoughts of
his heart, how they should be, and where they should be, he sees all things
that are not, as if they were, not that they are really so indeed, no not in
his sight, God sees all the travels of men out of one Kingdom into another,
and their birth, and death, and their souls departure either to Heaven, or
Hell, but not as if he saw them in many places at once, this were to make the
creature Omni-present, to be in many places at once; and to say God sees our
birth and death all at once, would seem to repute him incapable of the passage
of time here with us, and so they would make him unable to perform his promise
at the time appointed; But God is able to keep his promise to a thousand
Generations, Psalm. 105.8. And perform it the selfsame day, Exodus 12.41. The
Lord bid the people write the self-same day, and shall we think that he does
not keep a strict account of time, till time be no more? yet in Heaven I
grant there is no account of time, by hours, days, and years, but we having
the account of time, and according to our account, God did see one thing
coming after another into execution, and not all being actually done from all
eternity, therefore he is faithful to perform every promise made unto his
people in the very instant of time promised, he sees the way and means which
he has decreed, to bring about all things to their appointed ends; So God from
all eternity saw his people in his purpose to give them a being, and when they
have a being, he sees them as having a being, but since the fall, he sees his
Elect in their blood before conversion, and after conversion, as his own
children, yet as having sin in them, and in the world to come as without sin:
now if they should say, that Gods love to the creatures before they were, moved
him to do all that is done to them, then I demand what moved God toward them,
when all mankind fell out of this love of God in that sin of Adam, was it not
his purpose to do them good? now if they say that God always actually loved
them, then I reply, that if this be true, Christ died in vain, but the truth
is, When we were enemies to God, we were again reconciled by the blood of his
Son, Romans 5.10. see Col. 1.21. And to say that God actually loved them before
they had any being, is all one as to say, God loved them before his own Image
was stamped upon them, which every creature has some resemblance, more or
lest by Creation, therefore being made, they were all very good, but not
before: Again, if God should actually love his Elect from all eternity, then
on the contrary, he must actually hate the Reprobate before they have any sin,
and if God should actually love the Elect from all eternity, then this love was
fruitless till the time of Creation: Again, we are all borne children of
wrath even as others, and slaves of the Devil, now, does God love any more in
us at that time, than what we had left off the work of God by Creation, and so
he loves the Devil, as to own his workeman-ship in him, then here is the
difference, God is purposed to do good to his Elect, although for the present
they lie in the guilt of Adams sin, but God has no purpose to do good unto
the Devils that sinned: Again, if God loved slaves of the Devil, then what
does hinder but such may be saved, and go to Heaven in that condition; but if
this be true, what need is there of the new Birth, nay, it matters not in what
condition we are, if God love us; But ye have not so learned Christ; If so be
ye have been taught as the truth is in Jesus; Then put off the former
conversation, the old man, which is corrupt, Ephesians. 4.20, 21, 22. Yet God
loves the least measure of grace that he has wrought in his people, He has
wrought in us that which is well pleasing in his sight, Heb. 13.21. Let us have
grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably, Chap. 12.28. I exhort you by the
Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us, how ye ought to walk, and to
please God, so you would abound more and more, 1 Thessalonians. 4.1. You please God,
now labor to please him better, walk as Christ walked, 1 John 2.6. So shall
you grow in favor with God and man as he did, and be able daily to do his
will more and more, as strength and wisdom increases, Luke 2.52. And at
length with Daniel, be a man greatly beloved, Dan. 10.11. And with Mary, highly
favored, Luke 1.28. Being full of faith, Acts 6.5. Now it is not God that
changes in his love, but the change lies in us, for Gods love is infinite in
greatness like himself, so that no creature being finite, is able to contain
this infinite love of God, it is like the Ocean Seas, nothing is able to
contain it but himself, and all the creatures are but as so many vessels of
several sizes cast into this Ocean, and every one receives his measure, but the
beasts and sowles are not able to receive so much as men, nor men before
conversion, being dead in sin, and having no hand of faith to receive it, as he
that has a new life infused into him, and the hand of faith given him, whereby
he is made more capable to receive a greater measure, nor he that is but in
part sanctified, and having the burden of sin upon him, as he that is wholly
sanctified, and freed from all sin, and so as faith increases, we are more
able to receive this infinite love of God, and some have five Talents, some but
two: now if God make some creatures more capable to receive, and then bestows
more of this infinite love upon them, this must needs be agreeable to what God
purposed to bestow on them from all Eternity: Again, some to whom God has
purposed to bestow less, yet they may have it in actual possession sooner
than those to whom God has purposed to bestow more, says Paul: Andronicus and
Iunia were in Christ before me, Romans, 16.7.

Yet Paul I suppose did soon exceed them, and so the last became first, for he
was not behind the very chiefest Apostles: he did improve his tallant more then
they all, yet while he was a persecutor, a blasphemer, and injurious, then I
say Andronicus and Iunia were more beloved then he, because his graces lay in
the purpose of God, and they had it in actual possession, again, Christ chides
some for their little faith, Mat. 14.21. And others he highly commends for
their great faith, Mat. 8.10.15.28. Some are more carnal then spiritual yet
babes in Christ, 1 Cor. 3.1. Heb. 5.12. But herein is my father glorified, when
we bear much fruit, John 15.8. Romans 4.20. Christ himself, the more he grew in
strength and wisdom, the more able was he to perform the work of
Mediator-ship, therefore as he increased in strength and wisdom, he increased
in favor with God and men. Luke 2.52. because then he was able to do more,
both for God and man: Thus the greatest vessel being cast into this ocean
recovereth the greatest measure of this infinite love of God: Again, the love
of God is also eternal, like himself, and God has made some creatures
eternal, to keep their measure that they have received, for ever, whereas
other creatures are mortal, and not able to keep that measure of love which
they have received for ever, because the vessel will decay, and so that love
which they received, returns back into the ^cean, where it was before the
creation, and for those Angels that were made eternal vessels, and yet
careless to keep their measure of love which they had received: They shall
suffer eternally the loss of this infinite love of God, Jude 5. And the rest
that did not sin, were established by Christ, but for man, all sinned, and came
short of the glory of God: the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the
promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe, Gal.
3.22. All were under the curse, and might justly have suffered eternally with
the reprobate, had not Christ redeemed us from the curse, Gal. 3.13. And he
prepared this broken vessel to make us meet for our Masters use, 2 Timothy
2.20.21. For this is the will of God, even our sanctification, and that we
should know how to possess our vessels in sanctification and honor, 1 These.
4.3.4. But God did not impart this infinite love into these vessels, before
they were, and that actually from all eternity. Again, they alleadg that place
in Ezekiel. 16.6, 7, 8, 9. That the Lord says: When I passed by thee, I saw thee
polluted in thine own blood, now when I looked upon thee, behold thy time was
the time of love: I answer first, God does not say in that time, that he looked
upon that polluted sinner, that he loved her, but thus; Behold thy time was the
time of love that is, thy time of effectual calling out of the state of sin,
into the state of grace by true faith and repentance and reformation: Thus not
my time when I saw thee polluted, but thy time when thou art washed and
cleansed, that was the time of love, for says the Lord: When I saw thee
polluted, J said unto thee live, yea when thou wast in thy blood, I said unto
thee live, verse 6. Now this was such a powerful voice, as when he said in the
creation, let there be light, and there was light, or such a voice, by which
Christ raised up dead Lazarus to life, John 11.44. For mark, I caused thee to
multiply as the bud of the field, thou art increased and waxen great, and thou
art come to excellent ornaments, whereas thou wast naked and bare, verse, 6.
This was the time of love, verse 7. For those ornaments was the righteousness
of Christ to justify her, for says he, I spread my skirt over thee to cover
thy nakedness, verse 8. Yea, she had the grace of faith-wrought in her, whereby
she was capable to enter into Covenant with God, and so says he, thou becamest
mine, verse 8. After this she declared her self to be washed with the water of
sanctification, and adorned with all those graces following, verse,
9.10.11.12.13.14. Then was she actually loved of Christ: but this will not
prove, that the elect are actually loved of God from all eternity; For when God
actually loves a man, He draws that man by those cords and bands of love to him
again, Hos. 11.4. We love God, because he first loved us, 1 John 4.19. Love is
a bond of perfectness. Colos. 3.14. But this could not draw us before we were,
the love of God is shed abroad in your hearts by the holy Ghost, Rem. 5.5. But
he that has no bowels of compassion toward his brother, how dwells the love
of God in him, Ioh. 3.17. Now keep your selves in the love of God thus, of some
have compassion, and others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire, Jude
21, 22, 23. But was Paul such a one before his conversion, when he made havoc
of the Church of God, and breathed out threatening and slaughter against the
Desciples of the Lord, did this love of God dwell in him then, our heavenly
Father will give his spirit to them that ask him, Lu. 11.13. But can they ask
him before they were: While Peter was yet speaking, the holy Ghost fell on them
which heard the word, Acts 10.44. Then was this actually done in Gods decree,
or did the holy Ghost dwell in Paul before conversion, by working or acting
grace in his heart, or was he then led by the spirit of God into all truth,
John 16.13. When he persecuted and made havocke and breathed out threatening and
slaughter against the Saints of God, was the love of God then shed into his
soul, or did he then love the Saints of God, when he so thirsted for their
blood, it is true, he then loved them, as the wolf does his prey: But the true
love of God, is the infusion of that grace of love into their soul, which both
knits them to God, and to his people, but this could not be before their
conversion, then sure it was not before their being. When God infuseth the
graces of his spirit into the soul, by those graces be sanctifies it, and
these are not the causes of our salvation, but they are a part of it, as the
first fruits of that harvest, Romans 8.33. Iam. 1.18. And the earnest of that
bargain: He has given unto us the earnest of his spirit, 2 Cor. 5.5. After
that ye believed ye were sealed with that holy spirit of promise, which is the
earnest of our inheritance, Ephesians. 1.13.14. Meaning the graces of Gods spirit,
Mat. 7.11. Compared with Luke 11.13. Therefore the promises commonly run, and
are made to them that are sanctified, and seldom or never to them that are
justified, because the perfecting of sanctification is the last work, and
brings us into full happiness to al eternity, then imputed righteousness
cease, and faith cease, aad prayer cease, and the intercession of Christ
cease, but the righteousness of sanctification that is begun is us here,
being purchased by Christ also, and wrought by his spirit in us that abides
with us, to all eternity, for it is eternal life begun in us, then what a
miserable delution is that which speaks evil of that eternal life that is
begun within us, saying, what have we to do with that dungy durty duties of
sanctification, we thank God through Jesus Christ, we have nothing to do with
them: these are works for horne-book Christians, but let me tell them, that the
promise of heaven and happiness, is only made to holiness: Blessed are the
pure in heart, for they shall see God, Mat. 5. And without holiness, no man
shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. Again, Heaven is the inheritance of them that
are sanctified, Acts 20.32. But no unclean thing shall enter into it, Rev.
21.27. Now all the persons in Trinity may be said to sanctify us: To them that
are sanctified by God the Father, Jude 1. I am the Lord that does sanctify
you, Exo. 31.13. Levit. 20.8.21.8. The very God of Peace sanctify you, 1 These.
5.23. God the father sanctifies us, by giving his son to purchase it for us,
and by sending the holy Ghost to work it in us, and by hearing and granting
those petitions which are moved in us, by his own spirit, Romans 8.26. Secondly,
God the Son is said to sanctify us, first by the purchase that he gave for it,
he has washed away our sins in his own blood, Rev. 1.5. The blood of Christ
does purge your consciences from dead works to serve the living God, Heb.
9.14. Secondly, by his ordinances, the word and Sacraments: Christ gave himself
for his Church, that he might sanctify it with the washing of water by the
word, Ephesians. 5.26. First by the word, in showing us our sins by it, and also
our duties, and begetting faith in us by it, whereby we have both knowledge of,
and power to do these duties, and to refrain those vices discovered by it, and
also by the Sacraments, by strengthening and increasing faith, and all other
graces in us. Thirdly, We are sanctified by the spirit of God, 1 Cor. 6.11. 2
These. 2.13. Now as the Father works by the Son, and the holy Ghost, so the holy
Ghost works both from the Father and the Son, therefore it is said: Your
heavenly father will give the spirit to them that ask him, Lu. 11.13. The
Father shall give you another comforter, John 14.16. And says the Son: If I go
not away, the Comforter will not come unto you, but if I depart, I will send him
unto you, John 16.7. Now says the Apostle: He saved us by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost, which is shed on us abundantly,
through Jesus Christ our Savior, Tit. 3.5, 6. The spirit of God sanctifies by
changing us into the same image from glory to glory, that is: From the glory of
grace begun, to the glory of grace perfected, 2 Cor. 3.18. And by leading us
into all truth John 16.13. This is done by inward motions and comforts,
increasing that, which he before infused into us.

Again, it is said, that faith sanctifies, that they may receive forgiveness
of sins, and an inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith, Acts
26.18. Purifying their hearts by faith, Acts 15.9. When faith takes hold and
receives the blood of Christ, and makes it ours, so it justifies us, as an
instrument or a hand laying hold on Christ the justifier; But as faith works by
love, Gal. 5.6. And stirs up all other graces in their lively motion, so it
sanctifies us, when it makes us love God unfainedly, and stirs up a lively hope
that makes not ashamed, and fear to offend God, and care to please him, and a
zeal for his glory, humility, and self denial, mortifying sin, and a cheerful
walking with God in all holy obedience: thus faith may be said to sanctify,
and although other graces were infused into us by the spirit of God, as well as
faith, yet when faith acts them, and stirs them up in their lively motion,
this second working may be called the fruits of faith, because they are acted
and increased by it instrumentally, although the graces themselves are all the
fruits of Gods spirit wrought in us, Gal. 5.22. But our Antinomians are
strangers to this kind of working, for they will have the spirit of God to do
his own work, and they must be as empty trunks for it, and as dead stones,
without life or motion, yea their faith they so much boost of, must be but a
spectator to look on, their love must free them from obedience, and their faith
is without labor, but says Paul; Remembering without ceasing your work of
faith, and labor of love, 1 These. 1.3. Heb. 6.10. Again, the Saints are not
rewarded according to the righteousness of Christ imputed to them, for then
they should be as high in glory as Christ, yet I grant that to be the cause of
our salvation, but we are saved according to the measure of our sanctification
that is wrought in us by the spirit of God: neither are the reprobates rewarded
according to the imputation and guilt of original sin, although that was the
cause of damnation, for then all should be tormented alike: but they are
rewarded according to their actual sins committed in their own persons: For he
that treasureth sin, he treasureth up wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2.5.
There are degrees of torments in hell, as there are degrees of sin here: A
wicked man's heart gathers iniquity to it self, Psalm. 41.6. Now he that
gathers most sin here, shall have the most torment hereafter, for so he
treasures up wrath against the day of wrath: Evil men and seducers wax worse
and worse, 2 Timothy 3.13. Then them that for a pretense make long prayers, when
they intend to devour widows houses, such shall receive the greater
damnation, Mat. 23, 14. And some have more means to prevent sin then others:
Therefore it shall be easier at the day of judgment for Sodom, then for
Capernaum, and for Tire and Sidon, then for Chorazin and Bethsaida, Mat.
11.22.24 Again, some their sins are as gnats and moats, and some are as huge
as beams and cammels, Mat. 7.14.23, 24. Therefore some shall be beaten with many
stripes, and some with few stripes, Lu. 12.47.48. For he shall be punished more
that sins against knowledge and conscience, against counsel and admonition,
against promises and Covenants, and under the means of grace, and clear
sunshine of the Gospel, then he that sins through much weakness and
ignorance, and beset with strong temptations, and without the means of grace,
and without admonition or counsel to the contrary the former shall certainly be
punished more then the latter, of these: Again, some, their sin is more
scandalous then others, being in some emine^t place in the world, whose example
does much hurt to others, says the Lord: Thou make the enemies of God to
blaspheme, 2 Samuel 12.14. This being against much mercy, shall be punished more
then he that has not received so much, as being in a mean place, and not taken
notice of, his sins being more private. Again, he that goes on in sin 30. or
40. years, shall be punished more then he that dies an Infant: Yea an untimely
birth is better then he, Eccles. 6.3. It is some mercy to a reprobate to be
taken away in his youth for the longer he lives here, the more he increases
his torment hereafter? his going on in sin, is a bringing fuel daily to that
unquencheable fire.

So likewise there are degrees of glory in Heaven, as there are degrees of
grace here, For every one shall receive according to his own labors, 1 Cor.
3.8. For God will render to every man according to their works, Psalm. 62.12. Now
man's works or labors differ in their goodness; First, in their kind, some are
employed in curing bodily diseases, and some are employed about curing of
souls; now this latter is a more noble work, than the former, and rewarded
accordingly; For they that are wise, shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament, but they that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the
Stars, Dan. 12.3. Now as the stars exceed the firmament in glory; so those that
are employed in the curing of souls, exceed in glory, those that have been
employed about the diseases of the body: Again, the labors of the righteous
differ in the manner of performance, some are done with a greater love, and a
greater zeal, and a greater care, and conscience to discharge their duties,
and some with less love, zeal, care, and conscience to discharge their
duties; now the former shall receive the greater reward, for so it is promised,
Every one shall receive according to his own labors, 1 Cor. 3.8. Again, they
differ in their measure; Some labor but one boure, and some bear the burden
and heat of the day; and some have better employed their talent, than others,
for some have gained ten more, and some but five more, Luke 19.16.18. So
answerable, was their glory, ver. 17.19. But suppose they object and say, those
that wrought but one hour in the day, and those that bore the burden and heat
of the day. every man had his penny, Mat. 20.10. Here I might give an answer to
this, as some have done, and say, this penny is to be understood Caesar's coin
for substance, and not for quantity, as, when Christ called for Caesar's coin
they showed him a penny. Mat. 21.19. As Well they might have brought a shilling,
if it was of Caesar's coin, but I have not liking to this answer, for when the
last received a penny, the first supposed that they should have received more,
yet they likewise received every man a penny, ver. 10. So that the quantity
being equal to those that wrought but one hour, is the thing that offends
them: Again, some it may be will answer, that such a one as Paul, coming into
the vineyard but one hour, might do as much work in that hour, as others
that had labored all the day, and so receive all alike; but this I wave also,
knowing that the most laboring Christians many times are as long and sometimes
longer in the vineyard of Christ, than those that have been something remiss,
and therefore in reason should have a greater reward, yet not for their work,
but according to their work, Psalm. 62.12. But these answers I approve not, for
in the Chap. before, Peter said unto Christ; Behold, we have forsaken all, and
followed thee, what shall we have; Christ answered, in this world an hundred
fold, that is, a sufficiency of outward things, such as they had forsaken, and
this Parable comes in as a reason of it; For the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto
an Householder, which went out early in the morning to hire Laborers into his
vineyard, and some agreed for a penny a day, and some stood to their Lords
courtesy, Mat 20.1.2.4.

Now this vineyard is the spiritual Kingdom, or Church of Christ, and this
penny, is to be understood all outward things, and this day, is to be understood
the time of our life in this world; now the Apostles left their possessions,
and so did many more, neither said any of them, that ought of the things that
he possessed, was his own, but they had all things common, Acts 4 32. Now
these went into the spiritual Kingdom, or Church of Christ; never so much as
minding these outward things, but cast themselves wholly upon their Lords
courtesy, although they take a journey all the world over, and provide neither
gold, nor silver, nor brass in their purse, nor scrip for their journeys,
neither two coats, neither shoes, nor staves, for the workman is worthy of his
meat, Mat. 10.9, 10. In like manner the seaventy disciples were sent out, Luke
10.3.4.7. Thou shall not muzzle the ox that treads out the corn, the
labourer is worthy of his hire, 1 Timothy 5.18. But does God take care for oxen, 1
Cor. 9.6. And will he not take care for those that labor in his vineyard, that
they shall want nothing that is good for them, Psalm. 34.9.10. Especially those
in the first planting of the Gospel, who left their Trades and callings, as
Paul says; But we will give our selves continually to prayer, and to the
ministry of the word, Acts 6.4. But now it is not required that we should leave
our possessions, Trades, and callings when we enter into the spiritual
Kingdom, or Church of Christ, only our heart should not be set upon these
things. So then all that can be gathered from this Parable, is this, those that
enter into the spiritual Kingdom, or Church of Christ, their outward penny for
the day of this life shall be all alike, there is no sort of men that have any
promise for more of outward things, than other men, Eccles. 9.2. But what is
this concerning the glory of Heaven? says Paul, There is one glory of the Sun,
and another of the Moon, and another glory of the Stars, for as one star
differs from another in glory, so also is the resurrection of the dead, 1
Cor. 15.41.42. So the Saints of God, they that have done most, and in the best
manner, being acted by the strongest Faith, and with the purest aims at the
glory of God, they shall receive most of God, For the Lord will render to every
man according to his work, Psalm. 62.12. Blessed are they that dye in the Lord,
one reason is, because their works follow them, Revel. 14, 13. The Lord will
give both, grace and glory to them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11. He gives
more grace to the humble, Jam. 4.6. Thus you see they that most, and best
improve their Talent of grace here, shall have both more grace here, and glory
hereafter, therefore the works of Sanctification are well-pleasing to the Lord
in a justified person, and the more Sanctification we have here, the more
glory we shall have in Heaven for ever, for what is the glory of Heaven but
the perfection of sanctification which is begun here, and the grace of
Sanctification is nothing else but glory begun, therefore the Apostle in that
golden chain of grace, he puts glorified, in the place of sanctified, Romans
8.30. He that believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall
not come into condemnation, but it passed from death to life, John 5.24. It is
eternal life to know God to be the only true God and Jesus Christ whom he
has sent, Jo. 17.3. and this knowledge is in all beleivers; So then I
conclude, he that most increases in grace here, must needs increase his glory
hereafter. Yet this hinders not the spirit of God, from being both the Author
of grace and glory, and the degrees thereof, for this sanctification is that
work of grace, wrought by the spirit of God in believers, which adornes them,
and makes them fit Temples for himself to dwell in, he infusing grace into
them, makes them all glorious within, Psalm. 45.13. This work is done only by
the spirit of God in the first infusing of it, and we are more passive in the
work, but we improving that Tallent, and growing in grace as we are commanded,
2 Pet. 3.18. In this we are laborers together with God, 1 Cor. 3.9. And so
doing, we may both increase our grace here, and glory hereafter. This
Sanctification, or work of grace that is wrought in the soul, differs both
from inherent righteousness, and from imputed righteousness; for inherent
righteousness is that civil justice that we have by the light of nature;
which is bred and borne with us, and cannot properly be called grace, but
nature; The Gentiles do by nature, the things contained in the Law, which
shows the work of the Law, written in their hearts, To. 2.14, 15. This was not
infused into us, but grows from natural principles. But the righteousness of
Sanctification, is that work of grace infused into us by the spirit of God, as
clean water that is poured into a stinking vessel, which does something corrupt
the scent of it, and takes off that sweet savor that should ascend up into the
nostrils of God, so that we dare not appear in the presence of God, at his
seat of justice, having nothing but this upon us, yet in its proper place, is
wel-pleasing to the Lord, as I said before; For he has wrought in us that
which is wel-pleasing in his sight, Heb. 13.21. But if we should presume to
put this righteousness of Sanctification, in the the place of justification, and
so stand before Gods Tribunal Seat, having only this, it would he as filthy
rags, and as a menstruous cloth, Isa. 30.22. and 64.6. and could not justify
us in the sight of God.

Now imputed righteousness, is that holiness of the humane nature of Christ,
which is without us, and remains only in Christ, and therefore it is pure,
and clean in the sight of God, as the water in the Fountain; In this alone,
we dare appear in the presence of God, and by this perfect righteousness of
Christ, without us; the defects of our Sanctification in our own persons, is
covered, so that now our works of Sanctification are accepted, and all our
failings are made up by that perfect reghteousnesse which only remains in
Christ, and imputed unto us, and all our sins are imputed to him, so long as we
carry about with us this body of sin, Christ makes interession for all our
failings, till this mortal, shall put on immortality, and this corruption,
shall put on incorruption, and we by death, be freed from sin, Romans 6.7. Then
shall this imputation of Christ's righteousness cease, and we shall be fully,
and perfectly sanctified in degrees, and this shall be our glorification, and
our happiness to all Eternity, when all defects, and weaknesses shall be done
away; This shall be the honor of all the Saints, Psalm. 149.9.

Thus you see, that God did not actually love his people from all eternity, if
we look beyond the Creation, it was but intentionall, or a purpose to love
them, and when Adam was created, then God loved him as the principle of his
creatures, and after the fall before conversion, God only loves that
workmanship of his in man that is left since the fall, and after conversion, as
his own child, yet but in part sanctified, and in heaven as wholly sanctified:
Again, some have more grace here, than others, and shall have more glory, than
others, and therefore more beloved, than others, yet the change lies only in
us, and not in God, For there is no variableness with God, neither shadow of
turning, James 1.17. Christ is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb.
13.8. And says the Lord: I change not, therefore the sons of Jacob are not
consumed, Mal. 3.6. But as all the creatures differ in their goodness, so every
one receives his measure of the love of God: take the creatures in their first
creation, yet then God did not love a dog, so well as he loved a man, nor the
fowls of heaven as the Angels of heaven.

If this were well observed, it might be sufficient to convince them of another
gross error that was then defended against me, and still they hold the same,
which is this: After a man is converted, he is as dead as before, even as dead
as a stone, and all his actions in themselves, as they came from him, are as
bad as the works of the devil. They being empty trunks for the spirit of God
to move in personally, as they say, without any change of the man, therefore
after conversion, they are as dead as before, and only those works that the
spirit of God does alone by himself in them, are good, but for those that the
spirit of God does by us, those they say, are as bad as the works of the
Devil, as for example: Suppose the spirit of God shall move us to the duty of
prayer, or any other duty according to his will, this motion they grant to be
good; but when we receive this motion by faith and perform this duty that we
are moved to do, this say they, is as bad as the work of the Devil? And when
the spirit of God moves us, and draws us, this is goed: But when we run after
him, as the Spouse says, Cant. 1.4. This is no better then the work of the
devil, and when the spirit of God persuades us that our sins are forgiven, and
that we are in Covenant with God, reconciled in Christ, this they say is good:
but when we receive and take this by our faith; This say they, is as bad as the
work of the devil: and so when the spirit of God pronounces us just, that is
good: but sanctification whereby we declare our selves just, that is as bad as
the work of the Devil. Again I answer, if it were possible to separate the
works of faith in a believer, from the works of corrupted nature, then this
might be true; Yet I grant, that their failings and sinful actions, as David's
adultery, and Peter's denying of his Mr. these were the works of corrupted
nature, because the devil was the Author of them: But there repentance and
reformation was not the works of corrupted nature, then it appears to me, that
all their actions were not so bad as the works of the devil: neither was Paul's
preaching so bad as his persecuting and blaspheming before conversion? For when
a child of God is in the way of obedience, although his actions are not
perfectly good, yet they are not without some goodness in them, being acted by
faith, and regulated by the word of God, and tend to his glory; Such actions
cannot be before conversion, neither are they to be found in devils: nay the
very sins of Gods people are not so bad as they were before conversion, as the
works of the devil: For the spirit lusts against the flesh, that they cannot
sin as they would, Gal. 5.17. Again: The life of a believer is by faith in the
son of God, Gal. 2.20. The just do live by their faith, Hab 2.4. Neither can
they live without it: So then they cannot sin as before, because the seed of
God remains in them, 1 John 3.6.9. And the spirit of God leads them into
all truth, John 16.13. And the spirit of God dwells in them so, that if the
Devil tempt them to sin, greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the
world, 1 John 4.4. And if the world tempt us (says Christ) be of good cheer,
I have overcome the world, John 16.33. And we are borne of God, and we have
faith, and this is the victory by which we overcome the world, even our faith,
1 John 5.4. And if the flesh would sin, the spirit lusts against the flesh,
that we cannot do those things we would, Gal. 5.17. Then are Gods people as
dead as before, and all their works as bad as the works of the Devil; Again,
we are made living stones, and built up into a spiritual house, and we are an
holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. But the sacrifice of the wicked is abomination, Pro. 15.
And their prayer also, Pro. 28.9. And we are made new creatures, and cast into
a new mould of Doctrine, and led by another Principle, which made Peter say,
We cannot but speak the things that we have heard and seen, Acts 4.20. We do
not obey by constraint, but willingly, Phil. 14. Thy people shall be a willing
people in the day of thy power, Psalm. 110.3. So that although we be changed,
and our heart set upon another object, yet we go on freely, the will being
changed, wheels all parts of body and soul, as a willing instrument in the
hand of Christ, who is the author and finisher of our faith. Heb. 12.3.

Then although we had no hand in the first infusion of grace, but were mere
passives in the work, yet when the new life of faith is put into us, and we
made living stones, then we are laborers together with God, and that salvation
which he has begun, we work it out with fear and trembling, and increase our
talent of faith by trading, and so shall be our salvation hereafter in greater
glory, as I showed before; For it is our only business here to improve our
Talent, Luke 19.13. And to grow in grace, 2 Pet. 3.13. And the strongest
Christians must say with the Apostles, Lord increase our faith, Luke 17.3. Then
sure our works are not so bad as the works of the Devil, neither are we as
dead as a stone, if we sin after grace is given, it is either through some
weakness, or in some passion, or through the violence of some temptation, for
there is an inward principle flat against it; Then eat thy bread with joy, and
drink thy wine with a merry heart, for God now accepts thy works, Eccles.
9.7. And so I leave the reader to judge, whether the actions of Gods people, be
as bad as the works of the Devil, and themselves as dead as a stone. Again,
my Opposite at that time maintained against me, that God was the Author of sin,
for (says he) murder is a sin, yet God commanded Abraham to slay his Son, and
deceit and robbery are sins, yet God gave way to Israel to rob the Egiptians,
Exodus 3.21. And who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers, did not
the Lord? Isa. 42.24. And lying is a sin that shuts out of heaven, yet God
sends the Devil to be a lying spirit in the mouth of Ahab's Prophets, and the
Lord stird up David to number the people, 2 Samuel 24.1. And we pray that Christ
may not lead us into temptation.

To these I answer, that God is above his Laws, and does whatsoever he
pleases; I know that the Lord is great, our Lord is above all Gods, whatsoever
the Lord pleased, that did he, in heaven and in earth, in the sea, and in all
deep places, Psalm. 135.5.6. If he add a new commandment upon some special
occasion, or if he take away, who can hinder him, or who will say unto him,
what do thou? Job 9:12. Why do thou strive with him, he gives no account
of his matters, Job 33.13. Then how dare these men call God to give account to
them? Nay but o^^man, who art thou that reply against God? Romans 9.20. Shall
he that contendeth with the Almighty, instruct him? he that reproves God, let
him answer it, will thou disa^ull my judgment, will thou condemn me that thou
may be righteous? Job 40.2.8. Then what if God was pleased to try Abraham's
faith? Heb. 11.17. Must they harbor ill thoughts against God; Touching the
Almighty, we cannot find him out, Job 37.23. Oh the depth of the riches, both
of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and
his ways past finding out? Romans 11.33. Then what if God permit the Devil to be
a lying spirit, he did not infuse lies into him, but as a just Judge upon Ahab
that would not hear the Prophet of God when he spoke the truth, he is now
punished by them that speak lies; And so was Jacob given to the spotle, and
Israel to robbers, not by infusing the sin of theft into those that robbed
and spoiled, but as a punishment of some sin in Israel, abusing those
creatures, either to pride or drunkenness, gluttony or whoredom, or some way or
other, for commonly, the sin may be seen in the punishment, certainly some way
or other they sinned with those creatures, that the Lord in justice caused them
to be taken from them, and because the Egiptians were so cruel to Israel, the
Lord by his overruling providence, who has the hearts of men in his own
hand, therefore he can easily make these enemies to be at peace with those that
please him, Pro. 16.17. So that he gave them favor with the Egiptians to lend
them jewels, and other needful things for their use, and then the Lord brought
them out of that Land, that they could not restore them again; now this was no
sin, because they did obey the revealed will of God, both to borrow, and to go
away with them; now actions are not first evil, and then God is offended with
them; but when God is offended with them, then those actions become evil; as
on the contrary, actions are not first good, and then approved of God, but
first approved of God, and then good, because he approves them: Again, God
has hedged his people about, and Christ prays God to keep them from the
evil, John 17.13. But if they grow wanton of Gods protection, and slight the
prayer of Christ, and be remiss, and careless to please God in all things,
what if God withdraw his protection from them, and so they fall necessarily
into sin and misery, must God be blamed for it, who shall bind him to keep them
from sin and misery? he gave them power at the first tostand, and they
prodigally lost that power, now, must God be bound to supply prodigals at their
pleasure? they have carelessly wasted that which they were trusted with already;
now I suppose, they themselves would not still supply a prodigal whom they
have much trusted already, and he takes no care to keep, not to improve any
thing, but spends all that comes into his hands; then why should God be blamed
for not doing that which they would not do themselves? Again, God knows how
to bring good out of evil, and he can make the very falls of his people to be
profitable unto them, so that all things shall work for their good, yea their
very sins; as we read of many failings in David, before those great and foul
sins of murder and adultery, but those falls gave him cause to see his
weakness, and seeling the smart of it in his conscience, he ever walked more
watchfully afterward; and so Peter was full of failings before that he fell
into that great sin of denying his Master, with cursing and swearing, but that
so pierced his heart with grief and sorrow, that it stirrd up more
caresulnesse to please God, and fear to offend him, than before, so that we
read not of so many of his failings after that, as before; nay after this
(says he) must we obey God, or men? judge ye, he that denied Christ through
fear of men, now he cannot but speak the things which he has seen and
heard, Acts 4.19.20. and 5.28.29. So then God may have a hand in sin as it is
an action, and yet be clear from the defilement of it, as also he is the
Author of all actions, and yet not the Author of that sin that cleaves to, and
defiles those actions; as a man is the cause why his horse moves, yet if he
move lamely, that is from himself, no sin can be committed without God, he
has a hand in all sin, and yet no sin can cleave to him. Oh the infinite
holiness of our God! Ioseph's brethren sold their brother into Egypt, yet
(says he) you did not sell me, it was the Lord that sold me hither; now they
sinned through malice to their brother, and through envy to prevent the
accomplishment of his dreams, this was their end in it why they sold him, but
God did mercy to him, and them, and their posterity, to save much people alive,
Genesis 50.2.

And the Jews crucified Christ, yet (says Peter) you have done but what God
determined should be done, Acts 4.28. But they finned in murdering him without
a cause unjustly, and all to satisfy their lust and malice upon him. But God
saw that his death was just, when he took our sins upon him by imputation, and
so condemned him for the same, yet not aiming at that end which they did, to
satisfy his malice, but in his great mercy to his Church and people, to save
their souls eternally.

Thus God by his overruling providence, can make the wrath of man to praise
him, and the remainder of wrath will he restrain, Psalm. 76.10. Like a wise
Physician, who is able to make a sovereign medicine of rank poison; he can
handle sin, and he can make good use of sin, and yet be free from the guilt of
it; for in him we live, move, and have our being, so that the hand that is
stretched cut to slay another, could not move without the Lord, and yet he is
clear from the sin of murder; for no action in it self is a sin, for God is
the Author of it, but the finfull intent of the heart makes it to be a sin, and
this was infused by the Devil, and not by the Lord. Then let us say with
David, Against thee only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight, that thou
may be justified when thou speak, and clear when thou judge, Psalm.
51.4. O Lord righteousness belongs to thee, but unto us confusion of faces, Dan.
9.7.

But these men speak rightly of themselves, out of their own mouths they may
justly be condemned, being as they say, as dead as a stone after conversion,
and all they have to do, is but to let the spirit of God do his own works
in them, and by them, so that their best works as being acted by them, are
done; But as we move a stone, so the spirit of God moves them by their own
confession, and still they are as dead as a stone, and their best works are no
better than the works of the Devil.

Again, if they sin, they say the spirit of God is the Author of it, for they
are as dead as before, even as dead as a stone, and therefore alas they cannot
sin of themselves, but as he leads them, neither can they have any thought of
sin, but as be infuseth it; As if a sword kill a man, must we blame the sword,
or the man; So if the spirit of God take and move them to do some sinful
action, must they be blamed who are as dead as a stone, or the spirit of God
that moves, and imployeth them about that sinful action.

On the horrible Blasphemy of these men against the pure and blessed spirit of
God, now in this clear and glorious Sunshine of the Gospel of Jesus Christ!
how near do these men come to that unpardonable sin? Let the judicious and
godly Reader judge, that ye may the better mark them which caused divisions
and offenses contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them;
For they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies, and
by good words, and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans
16.17.18.

These things are the substance of that disputation which I had with some of
them so long agon, and still they hold the same errors that Eaton raked out of
the dunghill of former Heretics, and now they are wrapped up in that sweet
honey-combe, that they may the better go down to poison their soul, which is
the end for which the father of lies does employ them while they are in his
service.

An answer to certain cavils made against my Book, Entitled (A short view of
the Antinomian Errors) by some of them, and sent to me in two letters, in the
name of John Walker, but I know none such.

MAster Walker, I have received your Letter, in which you make many cavils
against my Book, entitled ( A short view of the Antinomian Errors) you say
that I have trimmed up those fine Tenets in terms of my own, and given them
a name at my pleasure, with a promise of conviction, which are but so many lies
in the Front of it: For first have I trimmed them up, or whether have I not
rather stripped them naked to the eternal shame of the Authors of them; and
are they my terms, when as the Authors of them have owned them before that
grave and worthy Assembly of Divines in my hearing, and many hundreds more, and
did I give them a name? no, they were called Antinomians Errors before you were
borne, only they lay a while in the privy, or house-of-office, till Eaton
began to root among the dung for some sweet odor, and he conceived some of it
to be very sweet, and pleasing to his pallat, and so he kept it by him; and
when he was gone and left an ill savor of his dung behind, yet some there was
that made much of this dung, in special one Mr. Lankester, he put in the
press, and squeesed it, and presently in his conceit it was so sweet as the
honeycomb; then Crispe he got a scrop, and away went he like the snuf of a
candle Ishold here have told you how it poisoned Shaw, so that now he is become
a professed enemy of Jesus Christ and how young Gray was tainted and the Lord in
mercy to his Church, smore him that he died. Thus some were restrained by
imprisonment and some smitten to death, and others turned professed enemies of
Jesus Christ, yet now there is sprung up three or four in their stead, whom
the Father of lies has found for his purpose, one Simpson a child, whom he saw
began to scorn the judgment of our grave Divines sits his tooth in this thing,
and like a child is carried abous with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14.
Then he finds out Randall, that loves his (...)-bottle better than the eternal
Law of God, and instead of feeding the souls of his hearers, he fills their
bellies with sack, especially the younger sore, who came from him to their
Father, and make him let them in at one or two a clock in the night, and he not
knowing what is become of them, they tell him saying ^o Father, I have been
with Mr. Randall, and we have had as much Sack as our bellies could hold; This
man walking in the spirit of falsehood and lies, will prophecy of wine, and of
strong drink, then he shall be the Prophet of this people. Micah 2.11. He will
prophecy smooth things, and deceits as they would have him, Isa. 30.10. Then
the Devil fought for a third, and found one Battey; who loves their tenets
dearly, and he will be licking when their lips drop of that honey comb, and he
has a place of residence for green aprons to come for satisfaction, unknown,
or at least unliking to his wife. I proceed, you say that I promise you a
conviction, but you do belly me, for I will not take upon me to convince
stubborn hearts, and obstinate sinners, yet I say, if this were well observed,
it might convince them, Page 2. But if any receive any profit, benefit or
satisfaction, let them give God the praise. Now for the five tenets; First, you
say you are justified in the sight of God before faith, or calling, and yet you
say that I grant that the righteousness of Christ was purchased for all the
Elect, as well before the coming of Christ in the flesh, as afterward, but you
leave out vertually for beleivers; for (says Paul) We which have believed,
do enter into rest, but as for others, the Lord has sworn in his wrath that
they shall never enter into his rest (now mark) although the works were
finished from the foundation of the world, see Heb. 4.3. He was ordained before
the foundation of the world, and flaine vertually from the fall of Adam, but
for whom? I answer, For those who do by him believe in God that raised him
from the dead, and gave him glory, that your faith and hope might be in God, 1
Pet. 1.20.21. This well observed, might convince Simpsons bold error,
maintained before the Assembly of Divines, saying the people of God, before
Christ came in the flesh were saved for their sincere obedience to the moral
Law of God; And you say that I affirm, that this purchase was actually paid
above sixteen hundred years agon, when Christ died in our nature for us
actually and really on the Cross, all which I grant, but will it follow hence
that all the Elect have a true title to it, because the purchase is paid, when
as they are incapable to receive it, for neither is Christ given to them, nor
they to Christ, neither are they capable to enter into Covenant with Christ,
being dead in sin, and having neither life, nor motion, in that condition,
Christ may come to his own, and his own receive him not, John 1.11. And the
Ministers of Christ, may beseech them in the name of Christ, and yet not
receive him till faith be given, and they have an inward and effectual calling
by the spirit of God, then they have that privilege with Christ to have all
things, then all is yours, and not before. But by nature we are all dead in
trespasses and sins, both the Elect and the Reprobate, when Christ bought this
purchase for his Elect, therefore of necessity, we must be made alive, and have
the eye of Faith to see it, and have the hand of Faith to take hold, before we
are capable to receive, and take it; Then your consequence is false, that we
must needs be justified before faith, and calling, because that the purchase
was paid, although it was neither given by Christ, nor received by us.

The second Tenet is, that you are as perfectly righteous as Christ, and that
God cannot see your sin, and thus you are, as soon as you have a being, and
faith does but declare it to you, yet you say that I confess we are justified
at once; this I grant, that when God gives us faith, and calling, at the same
time he actually justifies us, and at once; yet I deny your damnable inference,
that all the Elect are actually justified at the same instant of time that
every one is: For as one is actually justified at once, ni one go of the world,
wherein he has his being, yet another is not justified till another age of the
world, wherein his being is, and yet all this hinders not, but that we are
justified at once, although spiders will gather poison where ever they come:
The Scripture foresaw that God would justify the heathen through faith, Gal.
3.8. But the time was not yet come, but what of his; whether is this rover
traveling, I have proved clearly by Scripture, that God sees the sin of those
that are justified, and that they are not so righteous as Christ and I see
nothing to the contrary, and sol leave this, and speak something to the last
clause of this Tenet, which is, that says does but declare this unto them;
they make it to be only an eye to see, burthey deny it to be a hand or
instrument whereby they become righteous by taking or receiving the
righteousness of Christ to themselves, by application, thatso they may be
righteous.

Yet I grant that faith declares to us something that was done before we had
it, but it is not justification nor adoption, nor sanctification, nor the love
and favor of God, nor reconciliation: yet I grant, that the world was made
before that faith was given to us, and by our faith we come to know or
understand the worlds were made by the word of God: And things that are seen,
were not made of things which did appear, Heb. 11, 3.

But will our Antinomians hence conclude, that faith is but a declaritive grace
to show them that they were justified, adopted, sanctified, and in the favor
of God reconciled, and all this before they had it, let us turn back to the
same 11. of the Hebrews, and see whether all that faith mentioned there be only
declarative, first by faith, Abel offered unto-God a more excellent sacrifice
then Cain, verse 4. Will those people say that his Sacrifice was offered before
he had faith, and when he had faith, it did but declare what was done before,
and so by faith, Enock was translated, etc. But was this done before he had
faith, and when he had faith he came to see this, and so by faith Noah
prepared an Arc to the saving of his household, but was this ark made before,
and by his faith only came to see it, and Abraham by faith when he was called,
went into a strange Country: But will they say that he went before he had
either faith or calling: and when he had faith, he came to see what he had
done, before he had it, and so by faith Sarah received strength, and conceived
seed, and was delivered of a man child, but was all this done before she had
faith, and when she had it, she came to see what was done before; And so by
faith Abraham offered up Isaac: But will they say that he was offered up before
he had faith, and by it he came to see what was done before: And so Isaac
blessed his sons by faith, and Jacob blessed the sons of Joseph, will they say
that those things were done before they had faith, and by it they came to see
what was done, before they had it: And by faith Joseph when he dyed, made
mention of the departing of the children of Israel; and if they say these
things of dying men were done before they had faith, then sure their souls
departed to fetch it, that they might come to see what they had done before
they had it, but the folly of these men cannot be hid; and so by faith when
Moses was bome, was hid by his parents, but was this done before they had
faith: By faith Moses refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter,
choosing rather to suffer afflictions with the people of God, esteerning the
reproach of Christ greater riches then all the treasures of Egypt, and by faith
he forsook Egypt: and through faith he kept the Passover: but were all these
done before he had faith, and when he had it, he came to see what was done
before; by faith they passed through the red Sea, and by their faith the walls
of Ierich^ fell down after they had compassed them about seven days, and the
Harlot Rahab by faith received the spies: but were all these things done before
they had faith? The time would fail me to speak of all, who through faith
subdued Kingdoms stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire,
and women received their dead of life, Again, no say our Antinomians, they
first subdued Kingdoms, stopped the mouths of lions, and quenched the fire,
and received their dead to life, and then they had faith to see it and not
before: and so they first receive the righteousness of Christ, and are
justified, and then they have faith to see what they have done, and so nothing
with them is done by faith, but all without it, and by their faith they only
come to see what they have done, and with the Jews, speak against all those
things which were spoken by Paul, contradicting and blaspheming, Acts 13.45.

Thirdly, you say the way to know your justification, is from a bare testimony,
you say from the spirit of God, when as you deny the operation or sanctifying
work of the same spirit of God to be any means whereby you may know it, then
you come as the false witnesses came to Christ, and say that I affirm; that
the spirit of God bears witness to our spirit, which is contrary to my
writing and to Paul's words, which faith: The spirit witnesses with our spirit,
Romans 8.16. Whereas you by your sophistry deny one of the witnesses: But our
rejoicing is the testimony of our conscience, 2 Cor 1.12: My conscience bears
witness in the holy Ghost, Romans 9.1. And you to great purpose say that no
flesh living shall be justified, as if you had been slumbring: For what of
this, I am not here speaking of the causes of our justification, but of the
witnesses, which is the spirit of God, and our spirit or conserence: But one of
these you have lost, which is your conscience, many of you which I can make to
appear, by your dealings with men, and you with me at this time.

The fourth tenet you hold, that God cannot correct you for s^n, and yet you
say that I confess that God does not punish and plague his people in wrath and
sury: but what of this. Will it hold therefore that God does not correct them
at all for sin, says David: There is no rest in my bones by reason of my sin,
Psalms 38. But if thou be made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto
thee, John 5.14. Thou shall be dumb says the Angel, because thou beleevest
not my words, Luke 1.20. But if you be not satisfied, read my book better, and
answer those Scriptures alleged to prove it, or else for shame leave
cavilling.

The fist Tenet, and so here you own them all, although you say that they are
in my trimming, but here your natural conscience flies in your face, saying,
tongue thou lie: but for this Tenet, which is, that the free grace of Christ
has freed you from the commanding power of the law of God, and yet you say
that I confess that the Judicial law was not made for us, and that the
Ceremonial Law was ended in Christ, and that we obey the morrall law freely,
without the lashing or constraining power of it, but what of this, we obey the
law, and so escape a whipipng, but the best of us may be whipped again, if we
be negligent in our obedience to it, but this is not our controvercy about the
manner of our obedience to the law of God, whether it be love, or whether it be
fear that moves us to obey it, but whether the commanding power of the law of
God be abrogated or made void to believers, so that they will not be moved by
love nor fear to obey the law, for say they, it is no rule for them. Thus Mr.
Simpson expressed himself to me, and confested the same before the Assembly of
Divines, if you would leave your sophistay, and desire satisfaction, I would
entreat you to read my book better.

In the next place, you say I must not call you Aypocrites, and sons of Belial,
and rejecters of the law of God; just like thieves and whores, who love those
sins, and as a sweet morsel can hide them under their tongue, yet they would
not be called thieves and whores, by no means, but it is my disposition, you
must bear with me, for I shall call a spade a spade, and I am the more bold now
the baudy Courts are down, yet I must needs confess it is not very toothsome
to them that are guilty, and if you say that I take upon me to be both witness
and Judge, I have answered you already, that your hereste has been condemned
by all good men ever since Luthers time, and you tax me for slandering and
accusing you, but you need not, except you could clear your selves better, and
for rash anger, but I being angry at your sins, and not at your persons, I may
be angry and yet not sin: And then you tax me with contradictions, but in the
mean time you can prove none: Then you say that I storm against those that
have inherent holiness, when I only bring it in for distinction between the
imputed righteousness of Christ, and our inherent righteousness or
sanctification. Page 1. But mark here who they be you know not, for still you
are but dead stones and empty trunks.

Again, because I say that the imputed righteousness of Christ abides in him,
and not in us, although our faith receives and makes it ours, but you say faith
abides in me, and faith is imputed for righteousness.

I answer, faith for the goodness or worthiness of it, as a grace is not
imputed, but as a hand or instrument taking hold of Christ's righteousness, and
thus faith has a long arm which can reach from earth to heaven, and take hold
of Christ's righteousness, and yet not bring it into the soul by infusion. A
Beggar can take a suit of clothes with his hand, and cloth himself, although
he do not put it into his belly, then take heed how you say that it is a lame
faith that brings not the righteousness of Christ into the soul by infusion,
that justifies you, but leaves it without; but he is the blessed man whose sins
are covered, for the being of sin is there still: You say that I affirm that
the sins of Gods people lay on Christ upon the Cross, and yet you say that I
affirm we are in a damnable estate before we believe, as if it was not Christ,
but our says that takes away our sins, but this I have answered in the first
Tenet.

Again, you say that I say God is of purer eyes then to behold sin, but here
you mistake my words again, and leave out with approbation, for the very next
words of the Prophet are these: Wherefore look thou upon them that deal
treacherously, Hab. 1.13. This was the devils practice to Christ, and his
children will follow their example. Again, you say that I confess that the
children of God have sins, and that God sees them. I answer, God sees them as
mortally wounded, and as dying daily, yet we are not freed from sin till death,
Romans 6.7. But yet God sees them, read my book better. Again, you say that I
affirm that Gods spirit will not dwell where sins are, and yet that I should say
that sin is where the spirit of God dwells, the last of these I grant, but the
first of these is a manifest lie, as if by sophistry you would make me to be
ignorant of what I have written, it is true, I say that the spirit of God will
not dwell in that foul and filthy heart where the devils reign, page 4. line
3.8.15.20. Christ will not be an underling in that soul where the Devil reigns
in full possession, but there is no such word in my book, that Christ will not
dwell where sin is, the Devil may come sometimes where Gods spirit dwells, as an
intruder where he has nothing to do, but to trouble and molest the best of
Gods people. Again, you say that I affirm some things that are doubtful, as
where I charge you to hold, that you must neither repent nor be sorry, nor pray
for the pardon of any sin past, present, or to come, neither must we hear of
it any more. I answer, I showed you my author where it was written by some of
your own gang, and I suppose you have seen it, the author was be that made the
answer to Dr. Tailors book, I doubt but that you know him, and besides your
doubt is of my proof, but you deny not the thing which shows that you are or
may be ashamed of it, you say that I affirm that you may sin, and instance a
woman that should prostiate herself to uncleanesse, and said that no law did
forbid her, nor was she under the law, but under grace: and then you advise me
to mark them that are such as make the liberty of Christians to be a cloak of
malitiousnesse, now I thank you for your good advice, and I hope I shall take
your counsel, and esteem them as sons of Belial, that will not have the law of
God to be a rule for their better obedience: My soul come not thou into their
secret, and into their Assembly; mine honor be thou not united, Gen 49.6.
Again, you say, that I wonder at such blasphemy, to say that the spirit of God
should dwell where Satan is, I answer, this is but a repetition of your lies
already answered: It is true, I say it is blasphemy to say that the blessed
spirit of God should be a companion, yea a very baud to cursed Devils, where
they rule and range, page 4. line 40. Read it better, and you say that I wonder
to hear them say they are as righteous as Christ, I answer, so I may at your
bold presumption, and you have nothing to say to the contrary, and I think my
book might convince your folly, if you had but common reason, page 6. but you
condemn me of ignorance, like Nicodemus that knew no way to be born again,
but by entering the second time into his motherr womb: But remember how you
said before, that it was a lame faith, that did not bring the righteousness of
Christ into the soul by infusion that justifies you, but this cursed error I
have answered already, but for your warrant, that Nicodemus if he had bin
questioned, would confidently affirm that Christ taught him that he must
enter the second time into the womb and be born again, I answ. The man
suspected his misapprehention of Christ, and asked him presently what he meant,
before he stirred from him, saying: How can a man be borne when he is old, Joh.
3.4. Other things you say that I affirm, but are not true, and you instance
Luther, but I must send you back to my book, and read it better, and you shall
see that he says it is a guide to truth, and a rule to sever your actions by,
else why does he examine them that fear God, to learn out of Paul to understand
it, and why does he fear that some will tread it under foot, and abolish it, and
why does he call such enemies to the truth; But you say Luther well observed
faith, the true use of the law is only to accuse, curse, and condemn, and for
no other use, page 222.223. I have not the boook in my hand at this time to see
these words, but I am confident that they are errant lies, for in reason does
Luther admonish all that fear God, to learn to curse, condemn, and accuse their
brethren: if this be so, why then do you blame me fort in your letter, and tell
me that it is against the law of all Nations, and against nature it self, but
your hellish constructions of that worthy man's work will not help you at all,
but make you the more appear to the world, to be a shameless lier like your
father the devil, but in the neck of this comes another as bad, or worse, you
say that to the people of grace, the morrall Law is principally aimed at by
Paul to be abollished, but this I have answered in the sist Tenet, and for
Calvin and Perkins, you want means and leisure, which is but a weak excuse, but
let it pass: I hope all are not of your blind opinions, you say that I affirm
boldly, that faith applying makes Christ ours: I answer, so I have, and proved
it too strongly for any Antinomian to confute; But this sucking objection I
have beaten twice from the stage already, and now let him take a kick on the
arse and be gone with silence: Then comes up nonsense saying, Christ and our
title to him, are both the free gift of God, but who denies it, you know that I
confirm it in the fourth cause of justification, but mark your next words, and
make sense of them if you can, saying, your justification by free grace in the
3 page, is as impossible as the other: you confirmed my 4th cause in saying
Christ was the free gift of God, and faith is the free gift of God, and now you
say it is unpossible as the other, but what other you mean I know not, I must
cast him off with silence, til he has more wit to express himself better, I
may suppose Randalls sack-bottle was too near him, and so I leave him to take a
nap. Then comes blind Byard, and says your contradictory alleging Scriptures,
and your making them prove the things they never did intend, in 40. places of
your book at least, but when you thought to bring them in, there was none
appeared, only one he pulls in by the head and shoulders, which is that which I
brought in to prove justification to be of free grace, because Christ was
freely given to us in these words; God so loved te world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, Jo. 3.16 And this you did confess not many lines past, that
Christ was the free gift of God, and when I proved that nothing in us moved him
to give his Son, yet this will not down with John Walker, to be of free grace,
nor to be rightly alleged for that purpose: but for the other 39. places, I
hear no more of them, but here the Ass in the Lions skin, thought to make
other beasts afraid, but when the upshot came, he could not hide his ears, nor
alter his braying, and then you conclude all with a notorious lie, saying, that
you want paper, and yet you have two sides to write, and so you end with
approbrious words, not worthy to be named and besides, I would leave a little
spot of paper to cover the writing, not knowing through how many hands, the
manifesting of John Walkers wisdom, and lies may come, for the world shall
see, who is a weathercock, and a windmill, and fit for Bedlame, now if you
have not gotten the haunt to Randalls Sack-bottle at one a clock in the night,
nor too much frequented Batties place of meeting, which is unpleasing to his
wise, there is hope that you may be brought to repentance of your Antinomian
errors, and so become a good legallest, as you scornefully use to term them,
that have any conscience to obey the law of God.

Another answer to more of J. Walkers cavils written in another Letter.
MAster Walker, I have received your Letter, wherein I find some more of your
cavils against my Book, it seems it has netled your galled concience, by
showing the damnable errors that you Ant^^omians hold, which almost persuades
you with King Ag^ippa to be a Christian, Acts 26.28. So you almost disavow
those errors in the beginning of your other letter, yet you afresh, master up
your affections, to fight against your own conscience, and will maintain
against it, that you were justified before you had either faith, or calling,
your reason is, because the purchase of it was paid 1600 years agon, although
no surrender of that righteousness was ever made unto you by Christ, the
purchaser of it, nor ever yet received by you; but to confirm this, you say,
That Christ was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God
in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. And so the just, suffered for the u^just, 1 Pet. 3.18. But
is Christ made sin in the abstract? how then was he just, when he suffered
for the unjust? and if he was a lump of sin by moulding, or infusing our sin
into him, or if Christ took away the being of sin, as Simon the Cyrenian took
the substance, and being of the Cross clearly from his shoulders, and laid it
upon his own, then we should be just before he suffered, and so by consequence
he died not for us, but for himself, being made a lump of sin in the
abstract; But if Christ were made sin it self, how then could God love him
before he suffered? and say, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased,
my beloved in whom my soul is well pleased; this is my beloved Son in whom I
am well pleased, hear him, Mat. 3.17.12. and 18.15. Does God love sin? Oh
damnable blasphemy! Again, if Christ were made sin, how came he into Heaven,
where no unclean thing shall enter? Revel. 21.27. And how came he to Gods
right hand? Surely God has no pleasure in wickedness, neither shall evil dwell
with him, Ps. 5.4, 5. To say that Christ was made sin in the abstract, is to
make him worse than the Devil, or any reprobate, for they are the creatures of
God, and some good things are in them, but so is not sin; then you must be
constrained to say Christ is not in Heaven, or forced to say, that although our
sins were imputed to him, yet was he the Lamb without spot of sin, 1 Pet.
1.19. If the least sin had entered into his righteous soul, the whole work of
Redemption had miscarried, Then Jesus was only made a surety for our sins,
Heb. 7.22. But still they remain in us, and are not in hi^, as I have told you
in my Book, Page 2, neither did Christ part with that righteousness whereby we
are justified, and leave himself nothing but sin, that righteousness that makes
us just, remains in him still, else, if you had stripped him, and gotten all
his righteousness from him, and left him to be nothing but a lump of sin, how
then could he be saved?

But is this your love to Christ you boast so much of, to reproach, and
villefie him thus, to be nothing but a lump of sin, and so unjustly take the
righteousness of the righteous from him, and as Job did, so do you condemn
God, that you may be righteous, Job 40.8. In so doing, ye degrade Christ of
his Godhead, and of his righteousness, and all this to deifie your selves;
and then you say, God sees no sin in you, because that all your sins are put
into Christ, and so you have none, for he is made sin for you in the abstract,
and you have gotten his righteousness, and so you are righteousness it self in
the abstract, oh cursed and hellish blasphemy! you might have observed my Book
better, and been convinced of this your error, for although Christ has given
to believers his righteousness, yet it remains in him still, and not in us, and
although our fins are given or charged upon him yet they remain in us still,
and not in him, Page 2. Then you would father so^e of your abominable lies
upon me, in saying it were a foolish thing to think that the holy spirit of God
should dwell where the Devil ^eignes, and leads them Captive at his will; yet
that I should say, such are all the Elect mincing my words, as the Devil did
when he tempted Christ, leaving out a sentence and so do you, for you leave
out, till they are recovered out of the snare of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2.26. But
not afterward, God be thanked; Ye were the servants of sin, but now ye are
the servants of righteousness, Romans 6.17.18. Then you belch out another
damnable lie, saying, that I should affirm, that all the Elect are made the
righteousness of God in Christ 1600 years agon, although they were not borne,
but you are ashamed to name the page, because you cannot; yet such is your
Sophistry, to make contradictions where none is, and double dealing in the
sincerest heart, and because that I say the guilt of original sin is done away
by Christ, page 2, line 4, from this the spider sucks poison, and says that I
affirm, that the being of sin is taken away, when I only say, that the guilt
is taken away; but you not only belie me, but you belie David, a man after
Gods own heart, and Moses, who was faithful in all his house, when they say,
I have sinned in the sight of God, and my foolishness is not hid from thee,
all our iniquities are in the light of thy countenance Psalm. 51.4. 69.5. and
90.8. Although they speak as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21.
Yet you say, them that say God sees the sin of his people, such belie the
spirit of God; but take heed how you give up your self to lying, and
blaspheaning the holy spirit of God, lest your sin be found unpardonable.

Then you say, that you are not corrected for sin, but this I have answered
already in my other letter, and that you know your condition from a bare
testimony of the spirit of God, this also I have answered already, and to my
Book I refer you, if you be not satisfied, only you say, when two witnesses
come together, you must hear but one of them, like some partial Judge,
although God bid you to try all spirits, as well his own, as any other, 1 John
4.1. Yet you like that branded reprobate King Ahaz, you will not tempt the Lord
to ask a sign, this you say is to mistrust him, but in this that you despise
marks and signs, you do not only weary men, but you (says the Prophet)
weary my God also, Isa. 7.11, 12, 13. But if you weary him, He will ease him of
his adversaries, and avenge him of his enemies, Isa. 1, 24. see Amos 2.13, 14.
Then you say that I affirm, that the judicial Law was ended in Christ, which
is another abominable lie, see page 14. And because I say, from the curse of
the Law, and from the reign of sin, we are freed by Christ, Romans 8.1. Gal.
3.13. From this the spider sucks poison, and says that I affirm, that we are
not under the commanding power of the Law of God, but under grace, but read
page 14 a little better.

Then you conclude, saying if you could speak with me, which is no
extraordinary matter to do, then you could show me some downright lies, and
nothing but contradictions, and Scriptures most barborously racked, and
misapplied: but not so much as one of them is named, no not so much as that one
that was brought in stead of forty in your other letter, but it seems that
your conscience has whipped you for setching that one, that now you dare write
none at all,; yet you encourage your self as the Syrians did when they were
beaten by the God of Israel on the hills, but they thought to beat him in the
valleys, but they were mistaken, 1 Kings 20.23.28. So your conscience beats you
now in your writing, that you dare not set down those downright lies, but you
think to be too hard for conscience, and in spite of it you will tell me them
when you come to speak with me; But if your conscience condemn you, God is
greater than your conscience, and knows all things, 1 John 3.20. Take heed of
the judgment of God upon liars, 2 Kings 5.25.27. Acts 5.4.5.8.9. Revel. 21.8.
and 22.15. Then knowing the terror of the Lord, we persuade men, but we are
made manifest unto God, and I trust also are made manisest in your consciences,
2 Cor. 5.11.12. If they may but freely speak.

The Errata.
P. 1. l. 9. for the, r. this p. 3 l. 9. for his, r. and his. p. 6. l. 20. for
us, r. as. p. 9. l. 19. for low, r. not. l. 36. for as, r. or. p. 12. l. 2. for
grace, r. peace. p. 13. l. 9. for distractions, r. distinctions. p. 14. l. 21
for people, r. Prophet. p 16 l. 15. for recovereth, r. receives. p 18. l 8.
for tho, r. the. p. ^2. l. 31. for proves, r. grows. p. 27. l. 10. for did
mercy, r. did it in mercy. p. ^^ l 14. for every, r. any. l. 15. for ni, r. ^n.
for ge, r. age. l. 20. for his, r. this. p. 32. l. 31, for Aypoc^ it^, ^
Hipocrites.

FINIS.

