AN ANSWER, OR CONFVTATION OF Diverse Errors Broached and Maintained By the
Seven Churches of ANABAPTISTS Contained in those Articles of their Confession
of Faith Presented to the PARLIAMENT, and other gross Opinions held by them
against the clear light of the GOSPEL.

By THOMAS BAKEWELL.

2 TIMOTHY 3.8, 9. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also
resist the truth: men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. But
they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest unto all men,
as theirs also was.

Imprimatur John Downham.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Shepherd and William Ley, and are to be sold at the
Sign of the Bible in Tower-Streete, and at Pauls-Chaine near Doctors Commons.
1646.

The Contents of this Boooke.
CHAP. I. THis Chapter contains a confutation of many errors, mentioned by
the Anabaptists in their Articles of faith, defended against me by one of their
Teachers. CHAP. II. This Chapter contains other wicked errors of the
Anabaptists, mentioned against me: First, that the bodies of men consisting of
flesh and bones, is their souls, and that they have no other: Secondly, that
the breath of men and beasts is their spirits, and that it is immortal, and
lives when their bodies are dead: Thirdly, they hold that in the Resurrection,
the bodies both of men and beasts shall rise again, and their breath shall be
again infused into them. CHAP. III. This Chapter contains wicked errors,
mentioned against me by the Anabaptists: who hold an Universal Redemption by
Christ; if not of beasts, as was mentioned in the former Chapter, yet of all
men although they be already in hell torments. CHAP. IV. In this Chapter, they
hold it unlawful to use that Prayer of Christ, Math. 6.9. as a Prayer, by the
godly, and the ungodly; with a brief confutation of that error. CHAP. V. This
Chapter contains a disputation, with the Anabaptists about the Magistrates
power, in commanding those of a contrary judgment, to conform in public
worship, or to punish them in case of refusal.
To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, The Apostasy of others should be as a warning to us: that as
we have set our hand to the plow of profession, we may not look back. Luke.
17. but go on unto perfection, and press toward the mark, and for the joy
that is set before us, we should endure the Cross, and run with patience the
race that is set before us: and never turn to the right hand nor to the left,
but go on thorough the narrow gate, along the straight way to Zion, with our
forces thitherward: and encourage our hearts to the Lord by that everlasting
Covenant, that shall never be forgotten: and we shall obtain if we faint not;
the end of our faith, shall be the salvation of our souls; if we hold out to
the end, we shall be saved; being faithful to the death we shall have the
Crown of life; then I say Good Reader take heed of Apostasy, do not begin
in the spirit, and then end in the flesh: for then your former righteousness
shall never be remembered; but for your sin you shall dye: but to those that
persevere in the way of righteousness, all their former sins shall be
forgiven, and never remembered more, but they shall be cast into the bottom of
the sea, and blotted out of the book of remembrance, and they shall be esteemed
as perfectly righteous, having no spot nor wrinckle nor any such thing; then
keep thy garments, for thou must walk with Christ in robes made white in the
blond of the Lamb: pure religion will keep thee from being spotted by the
world; and that thou may so do, keep thy self from the fornicatours of
the world, yea from both scandalous and erroneus persons: do not inquire,
saying, how do they serve their Gods, Deuteronomy. 12.31? Come not among any erronius
persons. Israel living amongst them soon learned their works. Psalm. 110.35.
enter not into their paths, go not with with wicked men, avoyde it, pass not
by it, turn from it, and come away. Prove. 4.14, 15. If they say, lo here is
Christ or there, believe them not: for there shall arise false Christ's and
false Prophets, that if it were possible, would deceive the very elect.
Wherefore if they say, behold he is in the desert, go not forth, behold he is
in the secret chambers, believe it not. Math. 24.24.26. If they preach any
other Gospel, then that the former Saints have been taught, let them be
accursed. Their new Lights is but Satan's delusion, when he transforms himself
into an Angel of light. The old way is the good way, our Fathers walked
therein, and were not confounded. Psalm. 22.44. Then if they bring not this
doctrine, receive them not into thy house, nor bid them God speed. 3 Jon.
3.10. Partake not of other men's sins, keep thy self pure, and he not
carried about with every wind of doctrine, The slight of men, and cunning
craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive with fairs words. They deceive
the hearts of the simple, and carry away captive unstable souls into
destruction: then it is a good thing the heart be established with grace. Be ye
rooted and built up in Christ, and stand fast against all the wiles of the
devil: be not like the Athenians, desiring to hear^, have not itching cares
after novelties: labor to have godliness with content, and a settled mind
upon the truth of the Gospel, so shall thou stand in these perilous days,
When iniquity abounds, and the love of many waxes cold: labor to love the
truth, and thou shall not be given up to believe li^s: labor to do the will
of God, and thou shall know his doctrine whether it be of God: and receive
nothing for truth till thou have weighed it in the balance of the Sanctuary:
let not thy affections be fastened on any thing, before thou have tried it:
receive nothing for the love of men, nor respect of persons, but search the
scriptures, and see whether those things be so, and follow Paul, but as he
follows Christ: and if sinners entice thee, consent thou not; if they say come
let us hear such a Tradesman preach, go not with them, least thou be snared
to thy destruction. Then do not tempt the Lord, nor presume of thine own
strength to stand in such temptations, but take heed least thou fall: be ever
jealous of thine own heart, for it is deceitful above all things; keep it
with all diligence, and lean not to thine own understanding; and if thou
desire satisfaction in any point in controversy, acquaint thy Pastor with it
before thou give consent to any thing new come up, or to walk in a way not
cast up from the ancient paths, reads this Book, and let the Scripture be thy
Judge, and if it satisfy thee in any thing, give God the praise, and let me be
remembered in thy prayers, and I shall remain thine, in all Christian duties to
be commanded,

THOMAS BAKEWELL.

A CONFUTATION OF Diverse Errors of the Anabaptists contained in their ARTICLES
of FAITH presented to the PARLIAMENT.
CHAP. I
This Chapter contains a Confutation of many errors maintained by the
Anabaptists in their Articles of Faith defended against me, by Mr. Spilsbury
one of their Teachers.

Their first Article they believe, that there is one rule of obedience for all
Saints in all places to be observed, of which I doubted: his answer was that
the scripture is that rule to try and judge all things.

I answer, the scripture is an eternal rule of righteousness, but not
commanding the same things to be observed by all Saints in all times, and in
all places. The Jews were commanded many things which we are not, and yet by
the Scriptures; and we are commanded many things here that cease at our death,
and shall not be done in heaven: then the same things are not to be observed by
all Saints in all places. Again if the scripture be a rule for all
Circumstances in all duties that make for outward decency and uniformity; Then
I must see a rule for these things before I give my faith to this Article. In
their next article they believe that all who know God and Christ shall have
eternal life, but vengeance shall be rendered on all that know not God and
Christ: but here I doubt they exclude all Infants that dye in their Infancy
from salvation, because they are not capable of such knowledge of God and
Christ. You answer saying you know not what is this knowledge, neither has the
scripture revealed any such that were saved. But was not Jereboams child saved,
when the Lord himself said that there was some good thing in him toward the
Lord God of Israel. 1 King. 14, 15. And did David rejoice that his child was
damned, and did he desire to go to hell to his child and rejoice in believing
it. 2 Samuel 12.23. And why should not Infants that dye be saved, when as they
may be sanctified, which is eternal life begun already? and they may be
sanctified as well as Jeremiah and John the Baptist. Jer. 1.5. Luke 1.15. Then,
are you a teacher and know not these things? but you say you will not judge
them, when as you make it an article of your faith to believe that none shall
be saved without this knowledge of God in Christ, which infants are not capable
of; yet they may have the seeds of grace in them wrought by the Spirit of God:
neither can this be denied, when as they are sanctified by the Spirit of God.
Again if I should believe this Article, I fear I should condemn many of Gods
people, which have the faith of adherence, but not the faith of evidence: for
many that live a holy life, may want a clear evidence that God is reconciled
to them in Christ, therefore I dare not give my faith to believe this Article.

Your sixteenth article is this, you believe that unless Christ had been God
he could not perfectly have known the will of God, which I doubt of: but you
answer that you believe that Christ was both God and man and the Prophet that
all must hear: but what of this? who doubts of it? but then you say that you
will decline what the Word of God does not hold forth: but I fear you will not
be as good as your word, but suppose you be; yet how does this satisfy my
doubt? Yet further I grant that no creature can fully know this secret will of
God: for Christ as man knew not when the day of Judgment should be. Mark.
13.32, Neither can one creature know what God has revealed to all creatures.
Man does not know what God has revealed to Angels, nor do they know fully
what God has revealed to men, 1 Pet. 1.12. neither does one man know what God
has revealed to the soul of another: yet all this hinders not but Saints and
Angels glorified, although they be but creatures, do perfectly know what Gods
will is to them, and their duty to him: then if you believe this article, that
Christ had not perfectly known the will of God, but that he was God: Why then
do you say that you will believe no more than the Word holds forth? The Word
says although here we see but darkely, as through a glass or latisee, yet
then we shall see face to face, and know as we are known, 1 Cor. 13.12. and
yet creatures still, not Godded with God nor Christed with Christ, and yet we
shall perfectly know his will to us, and our duty to him. Then if you be as
good as your word, you must cast away this Article of your faith.

The twentieth article, you believe that the Kingdom of Christ shall then be
perfected, when Christ shall come the second time, and reign amongst his
Saints; Here I doubt you believe that the Kingdom of Christ shall then be
perfected, when Christ shall come from heaven personally into this world before
the end of it, and reign: Monarchically here on earth a thousand years. Your
answer is that Christ's Kingdom shall then be perfected, when Gods will is
accomplished in the same: and that Christ by the brightness of his appearing
shall effect it; but in what space of time, you know not. I answer, Gods will
cannot be accomplished till all his decrees are fulfilled, which cannot be
before the day of Judgment: then shall all things that offend be gathered out
of his Kingdom, and cast into the furnace of fire Math. 13.40, 41, 42. Then
after the dissolution of all things says Peter, we according to his promise
look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness, 2 Pet.
3.13. then indeed what Adam lost shall be restored by Christ the second Adam
to its first purity, and then the Saints shall inherit all things, Revel.
21.1.7. For the new heavens and the new earth which I will make, shall remain
before me says the Lord, Isai. 66.22. then the Kingdoms and Dominions under
the whole Heavens shall be given to the Saints of the Most High, whose Kingdom
is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey Christ, Dan.
7.27. and of his Kingdom there shall be no end. Luke. 1.33. But the heaven
shall receive Christ till the restitution of all things to their first
perfection, Act. 3.21. then this article is not by the scripture held forth;
therefore I dare not give my faith unto it.

The five and twentieth article, you believe that the tenders of the Gospel
are absolutely free and no way requiring, as necessary the preceding ministry
of the Law, or any qualifications or preparations wrought by it: but only that
the naked soul as a sinner and ungodly, to receive Christ crucified, dead and
buried, risen and made a Prince and a Savior for such a sinner. But I doubt of
this, and you answer that you know nothing absolutely necessary to save man,
but Jesus Christ and him crucified, and faith to believe and apply the same:
but is not the Word of God a necessary Instrument in the hand of Christ,
whereby he works faith in us, Romans 10, 17? by which we believe in Christ: then
is not the Word of God necessary to save where it is, although God is able to
work faith in his elect without it in places where it is not, but this being
the orrdinary way for our salvation, and while this lasts, we must not seek
any extraordinary way: then you say the way that God saves men, you will leave
to him, and every man's experience, when as you make it an article of your faith
to believe that the Law of God can be no isntrumental means to work any
qualifications, as the Law to fit the soul for the seeds of grace: when as
three thousand witnesses by experience were pricked by the Law in one place.
Acts 2.37. before the Gospel was applied to cure them, and multitudes more in
scripture; besides every godly man's own experience; but your conscience has
forced you to renounce this article, and instead of believing it, you leave it
to every man's own experience.

The seven and twentieth article, you believe that the three Persons in
Trinity, are made over to Christians in their fullness; but I suppose they have
no more of God then a finite creature is able by the weak hand of faith to
receive. According to thy faith be it unto thee, Math. 8.13. But you answer God
makes known his grace and good will to man in Christ by his Spirit, so far
as he pleseth: but who doubts of this, but I suppose we are not capable to
receive the fullness of God, we have but our measure according to the gift of
Christ. Ephesians. 4 7 13. neither do we receive the fullness of Christ, but out
of his fullness we receive, John 1.16.

The nine and twentieth article, you believe that those which are believers are
in truth really; separated both in soul and body from all sin through the
blood of the everlasting Covenant; but I much doubt of this; you answer that
you believe all sin is so taken away by Christ that it shall never hinder the
salvation of any believer; but this is not my doubt; then you say for a
believer to have no sin, while he lives in the flesh, that you deny, and so
have cast away this article of your faith: in which you have published to the
world that you believe that every believer is really separated from all sin
both in body and soul by the blood of Christ: then for shame do not carry one
face in private, and another publickcly to the world.

The three and thirtieth article you believe that Christ has a spiritual
Kingdom here on earth, which is his Church that he has purchased and
redeemed: but this I grant; then you believe that this purchased redeemed
Church of Christ is visible, and a company of Saints called and separated from
the world by the Word and Spirit of God to the visible profession of faith,
and the Gospel, and baptized in the faith, and joined to the Lord, and to each
other by a mutual agreement in practical enjoyment of the Ordinances
commanded by Christ their Head and King; but I much doubt of these things, then
you answer saying you believe that the Church of Christ is a purchased people
called to their visible profession of him; and for invisible things you leave
to God till he make them visible. But here all men may see the falsenesse of
your faith; for when you should bring it into the presence of God, then you
leave it. but how dare you publish to the world that those whom Christ has
purchased and redeemed, are visible, making profession of faith and the
Gospel, and baptized and joined to the Lord, and to each other in the
practical enjoyment of the Ordinances? When as know I put you to it, you dare
not stand to it, but you will leave it to God, and so you cast away this
article also: and I think if I should go to all whose hands are at them, they
would shuffle in the same manner, and I would wish you to take them to help
you; and so if you can prove all the redeemed of Christ to be such: I am sure
he says himself other sheep I have which are not of this fold, them I must
bring in, John 10.16. then are all visible and called, and already make
profession? etc. Nay, those that are in the state of grace are not so visible;
for that white stone and that new name written, no man knows but he that has
it, Revel. 2.17. they are called hidden ones, Psalm. 83.3. and the Lord had
seven thousand which the Prophet knew not of, 1 King. 19.18. And sometimes the
Saints themselves in the visible Church may disagree: Witness Abraham and Lot,
and Paul and Barnabas, Genesis 15.7. Acts 15.39. and then the cruelty of this
article shows from whence it came, which condemns all that are not in your
Church, to be reprobates: then I cannot blame you for leaving it to God, when
you are questioned for it; but if your heart condemn you, take heed of
hypocrisy, God is greater then your heart and knows all things, 1 John. 3.21.

The four and thirtieth article, you believe that to this visible Church all
are bound to come, and acknowledge Christ to be their King Priest and Prophet,
and to be enrouled amongst his household servants: now this I grant, if you mean
the universali invisible Church: but I much doubt whether it ought to be so in
yours, or in any visible Church, but you answer that you know not how any can
be either Sons or Servants of God that are not of his household; this I grant
to be true in the invisible Church; but as I proved before, all are not
visible; so then their names ought to be written in heaven, Luke 10.20 but not
written amongst your company, then you say that you are ignorant of any
invisible Church or House of God; I answer, Ignorance will not excuse your
sin, for Christ is the Head of the body or Church, both of things visible and
invisible, Revel. 1.16, 17. then although you know not the Church of the first
borne in which the souls of just men are made perfect, yet you may know that
there is such a one, Heb. 12. and although the Saints departed know not what is
done in the visible part of the Church here, as the Prophet says, Isai. 63.16.
will this prove that there is no such thing? Again, if you know nothing in the
Church, but what is visible to all, you plainly show your self to be an
hypocrite. For spiritual things are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. there
is food which you know not of, you have not tasted of that hidden Manna,
Revel. 2.7. John 6.32. and while your name is at those articles, you want that
inward grace of faith to believe them, and so cannot see like Moses him that is
invisible, Heb. 12.27.

The six and thirtieth article; You believe that every particular Church has
power to choose for themselves meet persons into office, and none other have
power etc: but I doubt of it; you answer either the Church or the World must
choose them, and which it is let the Scripture be judge: this I grant that the
Church representative or the Presbytery sent James and John to Samaria Acts
8.14. and Paul and Barnabas another way. Chap 13.3. but no man never did labor
to gather to himself a Church, neither did any Congregation separate
themselves from the rest, and claim this power to choose officers out of their
own company, but they brought them to the Apostles to ordain them, and to
appoint or authorize them to their office. Acts. 6.3.6. The Apostles labored
to gather disciples to the multitude, having all an Interest in it, as a common
Presbytery: so then there never was any single Congregation governed by it
self, though you make it an article of your faith to believe it.

The seven and thirtieth article; You believe that you may take one of your
sheep and make him your shepherd; but I doubt of it; you answer that you know
not where the Saints should find a Pastor, if not among Church members: but
this I grant, for we must choose a Christian, and not a Jew or a Turk to be our
Minister, and we must take him out of the Church of England, and so we do when
we take them out of the Schools of the Prophets, the Universities: for a
Tradesman is placed by God otherwise, and a man without humane learning ought
not to meddle in it: it is none of his business, and he ought not to meddle
with other men's matters; yet here you make it an article of your faith to
believe that your Congregation may take one of themselves, and make him their
Pastor. I grant that we may take a man of our coasts, and set him up for a
watchman. Ezekiel. 33.2. But for you to take a sheep of your own flock, and make
him your shepherd, having no ordination, but from his fellow-sheepe: you have
no foundation in the scripture for this article of your faith.

The eight and thirtieth article; You believe that the Ministers maintenance
must be a voluntary contribution: but I doubt of it; your answer is, that all
acceptable service to God ought to be free, whereof his servants maintenance is
a part. I answer, it is true, although the Ministers wages should be certain,
yet it should be given freely: and so we should freely pay all other debts; and
although it ought to be certain yet this hinders not but we may be willing and
do it freely: and so say this is a service to God I say it is no more to God
then all other duties of the second table of the Law are: which are to be done
to men in conscience of obedience to God that commands it. But the argument why
the seven Churches will give the Minister what they list, is this because it
was Philemons voluntary contribution, if he did any thing for his man Onesimus
that had brake covenant with him and was ran away from him, and Paul intreates
him to use him kindly, Phil. 14.18. But what is this to the Ministry? Will it
follow because a servant has broke covenant, and is run away from his Master,
and now what he does for him is voluntarily, that therefore a Congregation may
do so with their faithful Pastor that abides with them? Yet I confess if a
Pastor should do with his flock, as Onesimus did with his Master, be
unfaithful and run away from them: then let him stand to their voluntary
contribution; then here is but a weak foundation for this article.

The nine and thirtieth article; You believe that baptism must be dispensed
only to persons professing faith, to disciples that are taught: but this I
doubt of; you answer saying you believe all that Christ commanded, and his
servants preached, to be truth in Gods worship, which was to baptize such as
believe; but I say the Command of Christ was not to baptize them that believe,
but it was to teach, baptizing all Nations; and his servants practice was, if
the chief in any house believed Christ to be the Son of God, they baptized
all the family without any exception of Infants or servants; for baptism is
the presse-money before they enter into the Christian warefare, it is a
Christians colors; then shall any profess himself a soldier for Christ,
before he has received his colors, or his presse-money? it were presumption
for any to do it, and it is for want of wit in those that desire it; so then
professing is rather after then before baptism, unless you would have the
Soldiers of Christ fight their warfare, and then afterward come for their
presse-money.

The fortieth article; You believe that this Ordinance must be dispensed by
dipping or plunging; which I doubt of; you answer what Christ commands ought to
be done without doubting; this I grant; but then you say that Christ commanded
to baptize by plunging; but I cannot find it; therefore I dare not give my
faith to this article.

The one and fortieth article, You believe that the persons designed by Christ
to dispense this Ordinance, are not officers in the Church only, but teaching
Disciples; this I doubt of; but you answer that a Disciple; did baptize but you
know no officer except a Deacon that did baptize: yet you deny not but they
may; but do you not know that Paul the Apostle baptized Crispus, and the
household of Stephanus and the Jailor, and all his? But whose Disciple was he?
and the Deacon you speak of. I suppose to be Philip, but he was called to be
an Evangelist, and then he baptized the eunuch. Acts. 8.21. It is there says
that he was one of those Deacons, not that he is one still; then your seven
Churches would prove that Disciples may baptize from these scriptures. Math.
26.26.28. Mark. 16.17. John 4.12. Acts 20.7. But what if Christ called his
Apostles Disciples in relation to his own Personal Ministry? will it follow
that he sent them out Disciples? if so, then he sent them out to be taught,
and baptized of all Nations; but Christ ordained twelve, and sent them out to
preach, and they were called Apostles before he sent them out. Mark. 3.14 6.30.
Luke 6.13. But then he sought for baptism in the old Testament, and there he
found that God says, bind the testimony and seal of the Law among my
Disciples. Isai. 8.16. I answer, if God bind the Law and seal the testimony
among his Ministers, then how dare these men to meddle with their Office? The
Priests lips must keep knowledge, Mal. 2.7. The Law shall not perish from
the Priest, Jer. 18.18. Aaron and his sons shall keep the Priests office,
Numb. 1.50.53.18.1. Then by this proof all but Ministers are barred from
touching those holy things: then how dare these men to meddle with that Office,
unless they were called of God, and so lawfully placed in it?

The two and fortieth article, you believe that the power to cast out, and to
receive in, lies in the whole body of the Congregation: but I doubt you mean
the execution of it, which is to be inflicted not by all, but by many. 1 Cor.
5.3. 2 Cor. 2.6. and so they are to admit of Infidels when they become
Christians: but those that are already baptized need not such admittance.

The three and fortieth article; You believe that a particular Church must try
their Officers gifts, and then they may preach publickely, and take upon them
the charge of a Pastor: but I doubt of it; your answer is, that when Christ
gives ability to any, they ought to improve it for their Masters advantage; but
I say it must be also in that place where their Master sets them, or else they
do it for their own advantage, and not for his. but you say, if they be found
false, your Churches will not be corrupted by them: but I say if children be
left fatherless, and have none to take care of them, they will soon be
corrupted: and to say that you will not be corrupted, and yet use no means to
preserve your selves, is but presumption; like Peter who said that he would not
deny his Master, and yet tarried in the High Priests hall: so your Church will
not be corrupted, and yet you take away those that are appointed to keep you
from corruption.

The six and fortieth article, you believe that none must separate from a
Church rightly constituted for corruptions that are in it: but if you do not
dissemble, you make it an article of your faith to believe your selves to be
Schismatickes.

The nine and fortieth article; You believe that you are bound to yield
subjection to all civil Laws made by the King and Parliament, and yet you
daily oppose Government.

The two and fiftieth article; you believe that you have a conscience void of
offense, both toward God and toward man, when as you cast off Gods Law in the
work of conversion, Article 25, and man's law in Ecclesiastical things;
Witness your setting up Churches without their authority: these be your
articles of faith; then you said you would believe all that is written by the
Prophets and Apostles, desiring to disclaim all heresies and opinions which
are not after Christ. But I charged you upon this promise of your own, and
upon your general promise, together with your seven Churches, to be as good as
your word, and not to dissemble in the very articles of your faith: but when I
had waited the full time appointed, and saw no answer come, I went to know the
cause of it, and he told me flatly that he would never write more unto me.

CHAP. II.
Behold greater Abominations the Anabaptists maintained against me, That the
bodies of men consisting of flesh and bones, is their Souls, and that they
have no other. Secondly, that the breath of men and beasts is their spirits,
and that it is immortal and lives when their bodies are dead. Thirdly, They
hold that in the resurrection the bodies both of men and beasts shall rise
again, and their breath shall be infused again into them.

TO these things I answer, First, That man has two natures, the one a Divine
or spiritual substance like that of Angels adorned with divine faculties, as
the Understanding, Judgment, Reason, Will, Affection and Conscience; the other
part of man is humane being made of the four Elements as all mortal creatures
are, and what casualties befall a beast may befall a man, and man has no
pre-eminence above a beast, for all is vanity, Eccle. 3.19. but the soul,
spirit, or heart of a Man, that divine thing may be bound in the bundle of
life, 1 Samuel 25.29. being uncorruptible, 1 Pet. 3.4. so then when the
corruptible body dies the spirit depart from it, and returns to God that gave
it, Eccl. 12.7. Therefore when the Scripture calls this divine thing a Spirit
distinctly, it is for the most part to be understood of those principal
faculties of it, as the Understanding, Reason and Judgment, This is the spirit
of your mind, Ephesians. 4.23. because the Spirit searches all things, yea the
deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. And when the Scripture distinctly calls
this divine thing the Heart, it is to be understood the Conscience, If thy
heart condemn thee, God is greater, 1 John 3.2. David's heart smote him, 2 Samuel
24.10. The Law written in the Heart or Conscience, Romans 2.15. And when that
divine thing is called the Soul distinctly, it is to be understood the Will
and all the affections; says Paul, We were willing to have parted unto you our
own souls because you were dear unto us, 1 These. 2.8. Hannah powered out her
soul before the Lord, 1 Samuel 1.15. Yet when that divine thing is called by any
of those names, it is to be understood the whole inward man; although sometimes
Spirit signifies the principal ruling faculties, and by Soul is meant the
Will and Affections that are to be regulated by them; and so here is meant the
Conscience as an officer in trust to see that this divine order be kept within
us, yet for substance it is the same thing, although declared by several
faculties of it.

Now I shall prove that this divine thing, the soul, spirit or heart of man,
is not the body consisting of flesh and bones; first, from the immediate causes
from whence they came, and they differ thus; we have fathers of the flesh, and
we give them reverence; but God alone is the father of spirits. Heb. 12.9.
Numb. 16.22.27.16. then although the fathers of our flesh begot our bodies, yet
says the Lord, all souls are mine, Ezekiel. 18.4. for he formed the spirit of
man within him, Za^h. 12.1. and he gave it. Eccles. 12.7. then the soul is not
the body.

Secondly, the soul and body differ when they return out of the world; then
the body returns to dust from whence it came, Genesis 3.19. and the spirit or
soul returns to God that gave it.

Thirdly, when the separation is made, the body dies; for it is appointed for
all men once to dye. Heb. 9.27. We must needs dye all, and be as water spilt
upon the ground. 2 Samuel 14.14. but after death to Judgment. When the body is
dead, the spirit of man goes upward. Ecces. 3.20, 21. to a particular
Judgment; Then this living soul, Genesis 2.7. this incorruptible heart of man
goes before the Judge, and receives either the sentence of absolution, or of
condemnation, while the body is dead; and at the resurrection, when the bodies
of all are raised, and made capable to receive their final estate, then they
shall be brought before the Judge to have the sentence passed upon them for it;
then if the soul can live and receive judgment, when the body is dead, then
the soul is not the body.

Fourthly, the body lives no longer then the soul is in it: for when the soul
of the child was gone, the body lay dead; but when the soul came into him
again, the Prophet said, see thy son lives. 1 King. 17.20, 21, 22, 23. but
to this they say, the childs sickness was so sore, that there was no breath
left in him. ver 15. therefore say they, it was not the soul but breath
returned. I answer, (...) is plain that the soul was gone, and came again at
the prayer of the Prop^^^^ (...) it is said the breath was gone, which was the
sign that the soul was gone, that they might the better believe it; but that
breath being gone, returned not again, but vanished: but the soul returning
and acting in the child, caused new breath which was never in the child
before; therefore the soul is not the body.

Fifthly, If man can kill the body, and cannot kill the soul, then the soul
is not the body: but Christ says, fear not them that can kill the body, and
cannot kill the soul, Math. 10.28. then the soul is not the body. But they
say that Joshuah killed all the souls in Mackedah, and in Libnah, and all the
souls in Lacish, Eglon, and in Hebron, Josh. 10.30.32.35.37. Therefore the
soul may be killed, and every living thing has a soul, Job. 12.10. which may
be killed or dye. I answer, these places are thus to be understood, the vital
or principal part of humane life was stone dead, for their better
encouragement against the rest of their enemies which should be killed in like
manner, and should never trouble them more, when their vitalls or humane life
is stone dead. But they say our soul is bowed down to the dust. Psalm. 44.25.
therefore the soul must turn to dust, and be buried in the grave; for says
David, Thou will not leave my soul in grave, Psalm. 16.10. I answer, it was but
David's vitalls of humane life was almost gone, and must return to dust, and be
buried in the grave. As the vitalls and spirit of a beast goes downward, so
must his. Eccles. 3.21. only the spirit or vitalls of a beast shall abide
there; but our vitalls of the body shall be raised again, and not left in the
grave for ever: but the soul that divine thing may be in glory, when the body
lies dead. As the souls of Christ and the theife were in Paradise, when their
bodies were dead on the Cross, Luke. 22.43. the souls of Abraham Isaach and
Jacob were living when their bodies were dead. Math. 22.32. and the souls of
them that are slain for the word of God, are in white robes of glory, and cry
how long will thou not avenge our blood on them, that dwell on the earth.
Revel. 6.9, 10, 11. But they say, those souls, is meant, their blood cried, as
Abels blood did, Genesis 4.

I answer Cains sin in spilling that blood cried for vengeance; again these
souls that cry, speak of their blood, saying our blood; but if the blood had
cried. it would have said how long will it be ere thou avenge me: and they are
called souls, but their blood was not their souls: unless when a man has
lost some blood, they affirm that he has lost some part of his soul; or so
many drops so many souls; then if the soul can live when the body is ^^aine,
then the soul is not the body. But then they say, Jacob begot so many souls
of such a wife, and so many souls went down into Egypt. G^n. 46.22.25, 26 27.
I answer those that went to Egypt are called souls from the better and more
noble part of man, that divine thing in them; but Jacob begot but the vitals of
humane life, and no more, as I showed before, being only a father of their
flesh, but God alone is the father of spirits: thus you see how they differ in
their original cause or descent, and also unto what they return.

Now I shall show that the soul is not the body, by differences betwixt them
while they remain together.

First, the body is the carkase, Numb. 14.29.33. 1 King. 13.24, 25. but the
soul is the hidden man of the heart. 1 Pet. 3, 4. his flesh upon him shall be
in pain, and his soul within him shall mourn, Job. 14.22. with my spirit
within me will I seek thee early, Isa. 26.9. O my soul why art thou so
disquieted within me? my soul is cast down within me, Psalm. 42.5.6.11. and
Paul puts both these together, saying, though our outward man perish, yet the
inward man is renewed daily. 2 Cor. 4.16. so then if the body be the carkase,
and the soul be some divine thing in that carkase, as you see, both these
propositions are proved, then the soul is not the body, but some divine thing
that is within it.

Secondly, while the soul and body are together, the soul may be wounded and
greived, when the body has no hurt, nor is in danger of any hurt. They were
pricked at the heart, and cut to the heart, Acts 2.37.7.54. and the Soul of
Christ was sorrowful before any hurt came to his body, Math. 26.38. and false
Prophets slay the souls of some with lies, Ezekiel. 13.18, 19. Her soul was
vexed within her, 2 King. 4.27. when her body had no hurt. A wounded spirit who
can bear? Prove. 18.14. then the soul is not the body.

Thirdly, the body may be afflicted when the soul is not, for in affliction
joy abounds. They rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for
his name, Acts. 4. they sung psalms in prisons Acts. 16. therefore the soul
is not the body.

Fourthly, the soul and body may be distinguished about holy duties; both are
required; for says Paul, glorifying God in your bodies and souls, for they
are his, 1 Cor. 6.20. but says the Lord, They sit before thee, and hear thy
words as my people, when their hearts are gone after their covetousness, Ezekiel.
33.31. They draw near with their lips when their heart is far from me. Math.
15.8. so then you see the soul may be wanting in holy duties when the body is
present, therefore the soul is not the body.

Fifthly, the soul may have sweet intercourse with God, when the body is not
active in it; Hannah prayed, when her lips did not move, and Moses prayed
acceptably when he said nothing, Exodus 14.15. and so did Nehemiah, Chap. 2 14.
God has promised to hear the desires of the heart, Psalm. 37.4.10.17. When
bodily exercise profits little, 1 Timothy 4.8. then the body is not the soul.

Lastly, to affirm that the body is the soul, will cause many absurdities;
for then to seek the Lord with all the heart and soul is but to bring their
carkases to the ordinances, and when God opened Lyd^a's heart, it was to open
her carkase. And when the Lord gives a new heart, it is to give a new carkase,
and a broken heart is a broken carkase, and a clean heart is a clean carkase,
and the renting of the heart is the renting (...) the carkase: and when the
soul of Jonathan was knit to the soul of David; if he body and soul were the
same thing, it seems their bodies were tied together, which were miserable
folly for any man to think: then I hope this may suffice to show that the
soul is not the body.

Secondly, they hold that the breath of men and of beasts is their spirits, and
that it is immortal, and lives when their bodies are dead. To this I shall
do as before, to prove that their breath is not their spirit, and answer what
they have to say to the contrary as I go along: only as I said before, that
the spirit, soul or heart of man is for the most part meant the same thing for
substance, only by spirit some times is meant the understanding or principle
ruling part of that divine thing: and the soul is meant the lower parts or
less principle, the will and affections which are to be regulated by them, and
by the heart is meant the conscience that officer of the soul, which has a
charge to see that this Order be kept; yet I say, for the most part, when any
one of these is named, all that divine thing is meant: then the breath of man
and beasts is not the spirit, I prove by these arguments.

First, man's breath is a vanishing thing, his breath is in his nostrils, and
wherein is he to be accounted of? Isa. 2 22. It is a wind that passes, and
comes not again, Psalm. 76.39. It was breathed into man, Genesis 2 7. the Lord
commanded the wind to breath, and the breath came into them; But the souls of
men are created. 1 Pet. 4.19. God is the Father of the spirits of all flesh,
Numb. 16 22. and the heart of man is incorruptible, 1 Pet. 3, 4 then the
vanishing breath of men and beasts is not their spirit.

Secondly, man and beast have all one breath, and yet the spirit of man goes
upward, and the spirit of beasts goes downwards to the earth. Eccl^s. 3.19.20,
21. therefore the breath of men and beasts is not their spirit.

Thirdly, Job makes a distinction between the spirit of man and his breath,
saying, if God should set his heart on man to gather unto himself his spirit,
mark, and his breath, Job. 34 14. Here is that divine thing, the spirit with
the signs of it which is the breath; then all flesh shall perish, and turn to
dust, but his spirit shall return to God that gave it: and the spirits of men
and Angels can live in the third heavens above the region of the winds without
breath, neither shall men when their bodies are made spiritual at the
resurrection need any breath: for it is no part of soul or body; and Legions
of spirits have been in one man, and yet I supose he had no more breath then
another man, and they might all speak, and yet the man not breath: then I
suppose the breath is but a part of the wind already created infused into
mortal creatures, while they remain mortal in this life, and then to return
and never come again. Psai. 78 39 therefore the breath of men and beasts is
not their spirits. But they say, the ^oure winds are called the four spirits
of the heavens. Zach. 6.5. Hence they conclude that wind or breath in man is
his spirit. I answer, the wind moves the clouds of heaven, as our spirits
move us, or as the vitals of beasts move them, therefore they are called the
spirits of the heavens: but our breath does not move us so, but rather some
thing within us moves us, and when our breath goes out, in speaking or
otherwise, we should dye if we had not something else within us to draw it in
again, acting with our vitals: and when that power is gone, we dye. But they
say, the body without the spirit is dead. Jam. 2.26. and that (say they) is
their breath. But if we should grant this, that the body without breath is
dead: yet it will not so follow that breath is the spirit, but that breath is a
sign of life, or a sign that there is a spirit in that body, which does
produce that breath. As the fruit of the tree is not the life or spirit of the
tree, but rather a sign that there is life in that tree that does produce
these fruits. Then they say, Man's breath of life was breathed into him. Genesis
2.7. and when the childs breath was gone, he died. 1 King. 17.17 And if God
take away breath from all mortal creatures, they dye and return to dust.
Psalm. 104.27. therefore say they, the breath of man and beast is their spirit.
I answer as before, it will not follow because the signs of life come and go
with life, that therefore it is life it self. There be many signs of life, as
eating, drinking, walking and talking, and when they cease, man dies: yet these
be but signs of life, and so is breath in men and beasts, and therefore it is
not their spirit.

Fourthly, to affirm that the breath in man and beasts is their spirits, many
absurdities would follow: for they having one breath. Eccles. 3.19. and if this
were their spirit, then a beast may have the spirit of wisdom and knowledge.
Isa. 11, and the spirit of a beast might search the deep things of God as well
as the spirit of man. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11. and the spirit of a beast may be
wounded. Prove. 18.14. and if breath were spirit, then God would delight in
broken breath. Psalm. 51. and in poor and contrite breath. Isay 66. And if
breath be spirit, some shall be borne of breath, and God will give new breath,
and all the gifts of the spirit would be nothing but more breath added; and
when the spirit also departed from Saul, his breath failed him; and those that
separate from the Church, do it because they have not the breath: Jude. 19. and
Daniels excellent gift of the spirit, was nothing but a great breath: And when
God requires that we should Sing and Pray with the Spirit, he means nothing
but breath: many more vile absurdities would follow, if we should be so
damnably blind as to believe that the breath of men and beasts is their spirit
as some Anabaptists hold.

Thirdly, they hold that in the resurrection, the bodies of men and beasts
shall rise again, and their breath shall be infused again into them. To this
as to the rest I shall show that the bodies of beasts shall not rise again,
and for brevity answer what they have to say against it, as I go along.

First, beasts have not immortal spirits, as I have showed before, unto which
their bodies should be again united, but their spirits are gone downward to
the earth. Eccles. 3.21. Then if these beasts should be raised up again, it
would be a new creation of beasts out of the earth, as they were at the first,
and could not be a resurrection of them from death to life.

Secondly, the Scripture makes no mention of the resurrection of beasts, and we
must not be wise above that which is written. 1 Cor. 4.6. but the Scripture
says, Thou bring man to destruction, and say return ye children of men,
Psalm. 90.3. As in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive, but every
man in his order, 1 Cor. 15.21.22, 23. So then although we believe the
resurrection of men, we dare not believe the resurrection of beasts. But they
say, That when the Lord has taken the breath of all creatures, and they are
dead, and turned to dust, then he sends forth his spirit, and they are created,
and so he renues the face of the earth. Psalm. 104.29, 30. this they say is a
plain resurrection of all the creatures from death to life. I answer, Here in
this place they are said by the Spirit of God to be created, and so in Genesis 1.
The Spirit of God moved upon the waters in the work of Creation. And says Job,
The Spirit of God made me. Job. 33.4. all this I grant, yet this will not prove
a resurrection, unless you make the work of Creation to be a resurrection
from death to life. But they say, this was spoken after they were dead, and
returned to dust, Psalm. 104.29.30. I answer, this is frequent in scripture: For
things that were done first, to be set down last. 1. Sam. 15.35. There is
mention of Saul's death, and Samuels mourning for him. and then Chap. 17. Saul
conferres with David about his going to fight with Goliath, and afterward he
persecutes David. But was all this after his death, because it is set down
after it. Again thou renuest the face of the earth? this cannot be meant of
the resurrection from death to life: but rather it is to be understood an
enlarging of strength and comfort after some great scarcity, with a new supply
of plenty. But here is nothing concerning resurrection from death to life.

Thirdly, the Saints of God never expected any resurrection of beasts, that
ever I read of before these Anabaptists, but they have always expected a
resurrection of men; for says Job, Job 19.25. When worms have destroyed this
body, yet in my flesh I shall see God. And Martha says, I know that he shall
rise again in the resurrection of the just. John. 11.24. and says David, My
flesh shall rest in hope. Psalm. 16.9. And besides the Saints in all ages
embalmed the dead, and buried them in coffins, and sepulchers, and clean
linen, to declare that they expected that they should rise again: but I read
of no such thing done to beasts; and they that expect their resurrection might
do well to bury them more decently: that the world may see that they believe a
resurrection of beast.

Fourthly, there is no example in Scripture, that any beast ever did rise from
death to life: but we have many examples of men and women received their dead
raised to life again, Heb. 11.35. and the man that was buried in the Sepulcher
of the Prophet, and touching his bones, he revived and stood upon his feet, 2
King. 12.21. And in the New Testament, one newly dead, and another in the
coffin, and another dead four days and many came out of their graves at the
death of Christ: then if we have so many examples of men that arose, and not
one of beasts: we must believe the one, and reject the other as an abominable
error.

Fifthly, beasts can neither dye the death of sin, nor suffer the death of
eternal punishment: neither can they rise to the state of grace, nor to the
state of glory, which were a most miserable and shameful thing for any to
affirm: therefore there is no resurrection for beasis.

Sixthly, To rise from death to life at the last day is called the resurrection
of the just and the unjust, Acts. 24.15. Now if they say that beasts have done
evil, they shall come forth to the resurrection of damnation, John. 9 25. or
if some have done good, and some evil, then some of them shall be saved, and
some damned: and then they must come before Christ the Judge on the Throne, to
receive either the sentence of absolution, or condemnation: These abominable
errors are not fitting to be named amongst Christians, much less to be
embraced, and defended by any; and it would seem incredible that any should be
so blind as to harbor such errors where the light of the Gospel comes: but
only we know at the downfall of Antichrist. The devil will stir up all the
old heresies, that ever was, to uphold that tottering Babell.

But to come again to the argument, the covenant of works was not made with
beasts, but with man only: then it was not the beasts but man only that
sinned against that Covenant, of works and man only was punished for the
breach of it, and not the beasts; although his punishments was not only upon
his person, but upon his whole estate, and so accidentally the beasts were
punished, but not as their punishment for their sin, but as man's punishment
for his sin. Then if beasts have neither sin nor punishment, from what
should they be redeemed? but they say, if all men were not redeemed, how should
they rise again? I answer, Although all men are not redeemed, neither do they
all rise by virtue of redemption: yet Christ by his power will raise those that
are not redeemed, to partake of that punishment that is due to them for acting
in that sin with their souls, when the whole man broke Covenant with the
Eternal God. But they say, it is sufficient to punish the soul eternally,
although the body rise not. I answer, if they had kept that Covenant, the body
should have had the benefit of it to eternity: therefore because it sinned with
the soul, it must suffer with it eternally. But they say the body rises
without sin. I answer, yet if it did so, the soul being filthy and coming
out of hell, will defile it, as a just requital to the body which defiled the
clean soul as soon as it was infused into it: but I suppose the bodies of
reprobates shall not rise without sin. But as the tree falls so it lies:
there is no repentance in the grave, but the same body and no other shall
arise. Job. 19.26. For sin shall lie down with him in the dust Job. 20.11. and
having the guilt of sin upon it. As a Part of the curse it shall be raised to
partake with the soul in punishment: for the whole man sinned, and the whole
man shall be punished eternally. But they say, As by the sin of one man,
death came upon all men and beasts, so by one man came the resurrection of the
dead: For in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive. 1 Cor. 15.21,
22. Answ. Beasts were but the goods of men, it was man only that sinned, and
was punished: for all men being in Adam sinned, and died for their own sin:
for it was theirs as soon as they were in him by nature; so also those that
are in Christ shall rise again to grace here, and to glory hereafter.

CHAP. III.
Turn thee yet again, and see greater abominations: They hold an Universal
Redemption, if not both of men and beasts, yet of all men: although they be
already in hell torments.

ELias will come and restore all things. I answer, Elias is already come, for
it was John the Baptist. See Math. 11.13.14. Luke. 1.17. Mark. 9 11, 12. But
John cannot redeem a soul from hell: but then they say, As all bare the image
of the first Adam, and so were cast out of that Paradise, so all bear the
image of the heavenly Adam, and shall come to his Paradise. But I say, the text
says not all: But as we have borne the image of the earthly, we shall bear
the image of the heavenly: But no flesh and blood shall inherit the Kingdom of
God. 1 Cor. 15.49, 50. But they say, though they belong in that boiling lake,
it will be happy for them in the end: for they shall be there but till they
have put off their mortal estate, and at the resurrection, these Captives
ransom shall be fully paid, and Origin was of their Judgment: but see here
how they plead for Purgatory, But those in hell shall suffer the vengeance of
eternal fire. Jude. 7. They shall depart from Christ into everlasting fire.
Math 25.41. where the fire is not quenched. Mark. 9.46. But they say, God
reprobates none, but upon some foreseen evil, nor elects any, but upon some
foreseen good: but here it seems, they hold it possible to do some good in
hell, where they blaspheme God for ever, and do not repent, to give him glory.
Revel. 16.9.11. but they say, those that sin against the Holy Ghost shall be
in danger of eternal fire, but not in it: but I say, They that blaspheme
against the Holy Ghost, shall neither be forgiven in this world, nor in the
world to come. Math. 12.32. Then how shall they escape it? but they say,
Abraham gives Dives in hell a loving title calling him Son. Luke. 16.25.
therefore there is hope to come out. I answer, It was but a complement, yet he
was the Son of God by creation, and yet not his Son by redemption from
hell. But they say, Christ would not have preached to those Spirits in prison,
if they should for ever abide there. I answer, Christ did not preach to them in
hell, but to those that were imprisoned by their sins in the days of Noah,
while the Arc was preparing. 1 Pet. 3.19, 20. and by this argument, devils may
be saved out of hell as well as they; but they say, there is hope that Judas
shall come out of hell, because Christ seems to be sorry for his being there,
saying, It had been good if he had not been borne. Math 26.24. I answer, It
had been well for Judas himself if he had not been borne, because of his
eternal misery. But his damnation adds no sorrow to Christ. Neither men's
righteousness nor his finne, nor his salvation nor damnation, neither profits
God, nor takes any thing from him. Job. 22.2, 3.35.6, 7, 8. but they say,
although he deserved to be tormented millions of years in hell, yet with
Christ there is plenty of redemption^ Psalm. 130. I answer, Christ has merits
sufficient, but not efficient for reprobates

But then if those be not redeemed out of hell torments, yet they are confiden^
that it is the truth, and nothing but the truth that Christ died for all, and
ever man in the world. Their scriptures are those, Christ was mad^ lower then
the A^ (...) that by the grace of God he should taste death for every man, Heb.
2 9. And he (...) himself a ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.6. I Answ. that neither of
these places will prove that Christ died for all the world, or for every man in
the world: for the word World is not in those texts: And if any man shall add
unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this
book, Revel. 22.18. Let us see what more proofs they have that Christ died
for all, and every man in the world.

Then they say, All we like sheep have gone astray, and we have tnrned every
man to his own way: and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all,
Isai. 53.6. I answer, this text is limited to us, and therefore is not to be
taken for all, and every man in the world: but only it was a comfort to those
to whom he spoke, being either then converted or else in the use of the
Ordinances which is the means of conversion and salvation: and therefore in
the judgment of charity, we have gone astray, but the Lord has laid on Christ
the iniquities of us all; and yet he might be deceived, as well as Paul was in
Demas. But then they say, The Angel brought glad tidings of great joy which
shall be for all people, Luke 2.10. But here I hope, they will not say, that
all and every man in the world shall be glad, and truly rejoice in Christ: for
then all and every man in the world shall be truly converted and saved, which
themselves deny; and besides the word World is not in that text.

But then they say, Christ takes away the sins of the world, John 1.29. And
Jesus Christ is a propitiation for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2.12.
I answer, That world whose sins Christ takes away, and for whose persons
Christ is an Advocate, and a Propitiation, that world must needs be saved, as
we shall see anon. But themselves do not hold that every man in the world
shall be saved, and none of them shall perish: then if they hold that some
shall not be saved, but shall perish, I hope those that perish are none of that
world whose sins Christ has taken away, and for whose persons he is an
Advocate, and that world for whose sins Christ is a Propitiation: then let us
see the meaning of this word World, which in the Scriptures has various
significations.

First, the Lord says, the world is mine, Psalm. 50.12. this is to be
understood, All the whole Fabric of heaven and earth, and all the creatures
in them; For the Lord made all things for himself, Pro. 16.4. and he desposeth
the whole world Job 34.13.

Secondly, this word World is sometimes understood this World here below in
opposition to the world to come: for says Christ, I am no more in the world,
but these are in the world; While I was with them in the world. Now I come to
thee, these things I speak in the world: I pray not that thou should take
them out of the world, John 17.11.12, 13, 15. In this world you shall have an
hundred fold, and in the world to come eternal life, Luke 18.28.

Thirdly, this word World is sometimes understoode the Gentiles, or all people
besides the Jews: If the fall of them be the riches of the world, Romans 11.12.

Fourthly, Sometimes this word World is meant the whole race of mankind: That
every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may be guilty before God, Romans
3.19.

Fifthly, Sometimes this word World is meant all the reprobates that ever were,
or ever shall be, says Christ, I pray not for the world, John 17.9.

Sixthly, This word World is sometimes taken for all the elect that ever were,
or ^ver shall be, Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world, John 1.29. John 2.2.

Seventhly, This word World sometimes is meant the wicked of the world, who are
in present being, The world hates you, John 15 19

Eighthly, The World is sometimes meant the godly in present being, Behold the
world is gone after him, John 12.19.

Ninthly, This word World is sometimes taken for the elect in present being
before conversion, Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us,
and sent his Son to be a Propitiation for our sins, 1 John 4.10. God that
purpoased to love his people from all eternity, loves them actually, as his
creatures, as soon as they have being in the world: so God loved Adam and Eve,
when they had sinned as not to hate his own work in them, but loved it, and
therefore sent them a Saviviour, God so loved the world, those in present,
being yet not as his children, till he has sent to them his Son, and has
given them says to receive him: then as many as received him, he gave power to
become the Sons of God, to them that believe in his name, John 1.12. Now let
us try whether Christ died for all these worlds; if not, let us see for which
of these worlds he died.

First, if Christ died for the universal world, then he died for devils, and
for Angels that never sinned, and for the creatures in the whole world: yet I
deny not but the Angels that never sinned, and all mortal creatures have some
benefit by his death, in respect of establishment, Isai. 49.8. but I utterly
deny that Christ died to redeem any creatures but mankind only: He took not
on him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham to make reconciliation
for the sins of the people, Heb. 2.16, 17. To save his people from their
sins, Math. 1.21. neither can it be understood that Christ died for the world
of Gentiles only: For he was sent to the lost sheep of the house of Israel,
Math. 14.24. and the Angels told the Jews, saying, Unto you is borne this day
a Savior, which is Christ the Lord, Luke 2.10. And for the world of the elect,
I know none that makes question of it, whether called or uncalled to the estate
of grace: yet in Gods due time they shall be sure to find the benefit of it;
So then here lies our controversy, they affirm that Christ died for all the
wicked and reprobats in the world: but I affirm the contrary upon these
grounds.

First, Christ died for the elect only: for says Paul, From the beginning God
has chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the spirit and belief
of the truth, 2 These. 2.13. He says, I have chosen and ordained you that you
should go and bring forth fruit, John 15.16. Christ was ordained for you who
do believe in God, seeing you have purified your souls in obeying the truth.
1 Pet. 1.20 21. As many as were ordained to eternal life believed, Acts 13.48.
that is called the faith of Gods elect, Tit. 1 1. Those who are predistinated,
he calls, justifies and glorifieth, Romans 8.30. But Heaven is not appointed
for all, it shall be given to them for whom it was prepared, Math. 20.23. Some
stumble at the word, being disobedient whereunto they were appointed, 1 Pet 2
8. Some of old were ordained to this condemnation, Jude 4. And some are called
to inherit a Kingdom prepared for them, and some are charged to depart into
everlasting fire prepared for them. Math. 25.34 41. Some are vessels of mercy
prepared for glory, and some are vessels of wrath fitted for destruction, Romans
9.22.23. Those unnatural brute beasts were made to be destroyed, 2 Pet. 2.12.
Then are some ordained to salvation, and others to damnation, and some ordained
to the means (...) and not others: and for some heaven is prepared, and for
others hell is prepared; then sure Christ did not dye for all, and every man in
the world: and that world whose sin Christ takes away, and is a
Propitiation, and for whose persons he is an Advocate, is only the elect,
which may be called a world for multitude, John 12.19. Revel. 19.6. But then
they scornfully answer, saying, they will read world always where they find
the word, elect; and elect always where they find the word World; then thus
says Christ I pray for them, I pray not for the elect, but for those that thou
have given me out of the elect, and I am no more in the elect, John 17.9.11.
And this is condemnation, that light is come into the elect, John 3.19. Thus
changing the signification of the word World, they bring in this damnable
conclusion in scornful derision of the truth of God. But they say, if Christ
died for none but the elect, then unbeleefe is no sin, and some would sin in
believing Christ has died for them, when it is not so. I answer, God gave man
faith at the first to believe that it he had done as he commanded, he should
have lived for ever, and although man has lost this grace of faith, yet God
has not lost his power to command man to use this faith. Man is to believe in
Christ; and if he do not, he sins against the Gospel: no man can sin in
believing that Christ has died for his sin, when it is not so, for if he truly
believe he shall be saved and then it is so.

Secondly Christ did not die for all, and every man in the world; for he died
for none but those which his Father gave him; He came not to do his own will,
but the will of his Father that sent him: He must do his Fathers business,
Luke 2.49. And he must finish the work he gave him to do, John 17 4. But it
is the Fathers will that all which he gave him that he should lose none, John
6.39. but all was not given to Christ; not the world, but those that thou have
given me, John 17.6. and God gave him no reprobates: for Christ gave his
eternal life, to all that his Father gave him, verse 2. And the Father
commanded him to lay down his life for those that he gave him, John 10.17.18.
But if Christ had died for more then his Father gave him, then it seems Christ
would have more then was agreed by the Father to give him, but this would
fasten sin upon Christ in not being content, but to will have more then his
Covenant: then Christ died not for all, and every man in the world; but then
they will grant that Christ died for no more then his Father gave him: for say
they All things are delivered unto him of his Father, Math. 11.27. Psalm. 2 7.8.
I answer, It is true devils and reprobates are under his Regal power to rule
them with a rod of iron; but none are under his Scepter of grace and glory
but his elect: therefore he died for (...).

Thirdly, Christ died not for all and every man in the world, for He was the
good shepherd, who gave his life for the sheep, John 10 11.15. but all are
not the sheep of Christ, neither by election nor calling: For at the day of
Judgment, Christ will divide the she perfrom the g^^tes, and sar to the
sheep, Come ye blessed, and to the goats Go ye cursed, Math. 25.33.41. then
Christ did not die for all and every man in the world: but they will grant this
saying, Christ died for all, and therefore for his sheep: but I say again
that they must be sheep either in election that shall be brought into this
fold. John 10 16. or else they are already in the fold by calling; but this
will not prove that he died for the goats and dogs that shall (...)

Fourthly, Christ dyed only for them that he knows, The Lord knows who are
his, 2 Tom. 2.19. And Christ knows his sheep, John 10.27. and as the Father
has his book, wherein the names of all his are written, Luke 10.20. So the
(...) has his book of life, Revel. 13.8. But some at the last day will neither
be found written in the book of life, nor in the Lambs book, therefore he will
profess unto them that he never knew them, Mat. 7.21, 22. Luke 13.17. So that
if Christ knows his sheep for which he died, and yet at the day of judgment
there shall be some that he never knew, then Christ did not die for all and
every man in the world.

Fifthly, Christ dyed for no more then he prayed for, and now makes
intercession but says he, I pray not for the world, John 17.9. and not to make
intercession for the Saints, according to the will of God, Romans 8.27. He makes
intercession for all that come unto God by him, Heb. 7.25. And, says he, I
pray not for these alone, but for them also that shall believe through the
Word, John 17.2. Thus Christ prayed for all the elect that shall come unto God
by him, and that shall believe in him, but some he would not pray for, but
says, I pray not for the world, Joh. 17.9. for then if Christ would not
vouchsafe to pray for all, and every man in the world, shall we think that he
would die and spill his blood for all: But say they, all were given to Christ,
and if he prays for all those that were given to him, then he prays for all.
I answer, all reprobates are given to his power, to be ruled by his rod of
iron; these are under his regal government, that they shall not do what they
list, he has a bridle for their lips, and a hook in their nose, these he
rules with rigor, and because they will not do his will they shall suffer
this displeasure: But the other he rules with sanctifying and saving grace, but
to the other he will neither give grace not glory, therefore he neither prayed
nor dyed for them.

Sixthly, Those for whom Christ dyed, it was to redeem them from all iniquity,
Titus 2.14. The precious blood of Christ redeemed us from our vain
conversation, 1 Pet, 1.18, 19. The blood of Christ shall purge your consciences
from dead works, to serve the living God, Heb. 9.14. He washed us from our sins
in his blood. Rev. 1.5. But some shall never have their sins purged, Ezekiel.
24.13. Some their sins shall never be forgiven in this world nor in the world
to come. Mar. 12.31. Then if Christ dyed to redeem from sin, and by his death
to reconcile some to God, Romans 5.10. and yet some shall never be forgiven,
neither sin purged, then Christ did not die for all and every man in the world.

But they say, Christ takes away the sins of the whole world, yet they believe
that he justifies none from their sins, till they behold and believe it, John
1.29.

I Answer, If none be justified till they believe that Christ takes away the
sins of all and every man in the world, then they shall never be justified, for
as I said before, some shall never be forgiven nor their sins purged, then if
all sin shall he token away by Christ, and yet the Father will not justify
them, this were to ta^e God to be unjust. Again, shall not I be saved unless
I make CHRIST a liar? Does he say some shall never be forgiven, and cannot I
be justified unless I believe that he takes away the sins of every man in
the world.

Again, If Christ takes away the sins of every man in the world, I would know
what else can hinder their justification or salvation? Is not God true in his
word to CHRIST, to save them that he has freed from sin, ^^s, For this is
the Fathers will, says Christ, That all which he has given me, I should
lose nothing, but that I should raise it up at the last day, John 6.39. Then
does the Father want power to keep those that Christ has redeemed? No, My
Father is greater then all, and no man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers
hand, John 10.29. Then did Christ lose them again? no, he says, All those
that thou have given me, I have lost none but the son of perdition, who was
only given to him by office but not by grace and favor: then what is the
fault, are their sins forgiven and taken away by Christ, and yet they will not
be saved, this cannot be, for says the Father to the Son, Thy people shall
be willing in the day of thy power, Psalm. 110.3. Then let Popish Arminians be
ashamed to say, CHRIST takes away the sins of every man in the World, and
yet the greatest part of it damned: For nothing but sin separates between us
and our God: Esaias 50.2.

Then they say, it is not the death of Christ that makes any difference of men,
For he gave his life a ransom for all, and would have all saved, 2 Timothy 6.1, 2.
And it is predestination and faith that makes the difference.

I Answer, It is true, It was decreed that CHRIST should die for the elect, and
their faith believes that he has done it, and so they are justified, and
shall be saved: But then they say, there be two elections, one general for
all men.

But the other is not decreed till men believe, and is particular for
believers: For say they, if God should make some men which he does not elect
to be saved, he would be the positive cause of sin in them, and then for that
sin he caused to damn them which would be miserable.

Truly I answer, God is not the positive cause of sin in any, he never infused
sin into them, he made man righteous, yet mutable, and he was not bonnd to
support him, therefore he fell, yet God did not make man to damn him, nor
desires he the destruction of any creature, but he desires the glory of his
justice, and better all creatures should perish then he should lose the glory
of his justice; as in our own case, better the creatures die then we should
want food, yet we do not kill them, as desiring their destruction, but to
satisfy our hunger, so does the Lord for the glory of his Justice.

But they say, God does not decree to damn them, till he has tried and found
that they will not be saved: but I say again, God never decreed to damn any,
but only he decreed to glorify his justice, and for that he need not stay to
see what man will do, can any deliver out of his hand, if he work, who can
let it? Esaias 43.13.

Seventhly, Those for whom Christ dyed, shall be justified and saved, for The
free gift came upon all, to justification of life, Romans 5.18. and Whom he
justified, shall be glorified, Romans 8.30.33. Who shall condemn, if Christ has
dyed for them, ver. 34. The ransommed of the Lord shall come to Sion with
everlasting joy, Esaias 35.10. But some shall neither be justified nor glorified,
but condemned and punished everlastingly, therefore they are none of those that
Christ dyed for, nor none of those ransomed of the Lord, then Christ did not
die for all, and every man in the world.

But they say the death of Christ, for all and every man in the world, is the
foundation of justifying faith.

I Answer, That cannot be, but this is rather a ground of it, that Christ has
not dyed for all but for some of mankind, and then with a special faith to
believe that he has dyed for me in particular, and this faith instrumentally
justifies us, but when we believe with a general faith, that Christ dyed for
all men, this cuts off a special faith, for our selves are one of the whole
world, and so we shall apply it to our selves no more then to any reprobates.

Then they say, If all shall be saved for whom Christ dyed, then none of them
could perish, but some shall perish for whom Christ dyed, and are damned that
he bought, 1 Cor. 8.11. 2 Pet. 2.1. I answer, It was but in the judgment of
charity that Christ dyed or bought them, but they say, Christ came not to judge
the world, but to save the world, John 12.47, 48. Therefore he dyed for all, I
Answer, while Christ is mediator, he is come to save the world, and not to
judge them that believe not, but at the last day his words shall judge them and
condemn them. So then his first coming is to save the world, not the
universal world, but the multitude of the elect, which may well be called a
world, being so great a multitude, Revel. 19. And as the Jews said, The world
is gone after him, John 12.19. Then they say, God so loved the world, that he
gave them his only begotten Son, and yet none are saved but they that believe
in him, John 3.16. Hence, say they, Christ is given to all, and yet faith makes
the difference, and has the promise of eternal life, and not the other,
although Christ dyed for them, and Gods love to all, and yet not all saved: But
if God love them, I would know what could hinder their salvation, shall Gods
beloved ones perish, so then their conclusion is this, not he whom God loves
shall be saved, but he that will of himself believe, shall have eternal life,
but it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs but in God that
shows mercy, for his will shall stand, and he will do all his pleasure.

Then they say, Christ came to his own, and his own received him not, John.
1.12. but that is not his fault, for he comes unto them, but it is their own
fault, for they will not receive him, so they conclude they are his by
purchase, and yet they will not be saved, I answer, they were his own visible
Church by a National Covenant, having his Ordinances, and distinguished from
other Nations by circumcision, and not by any true work of grace in their
heart, and so others might go to heaven, when those children of the Kingdom
are thrust out, Mat. 8.12. Or if it be spoken of any of the elect that were his
own, and yet would not receive him, it was but only at that present, yet after
they had crucified him at Peter's Sermon they received him, Act. 2.41.

Then they say, put the case that Christ takes away the sins of the world, and
this world is the elect, then it must needs follow that some of the elect shall
perish, but what a damnable inference is this? Christ takes away the sins of
the elect, therefore some of the elect must needs perish. I answer, It is true,
if we should maintain as they do, that God has elected everyman in the
world, which would be no election to take all, but the elect is a certain
number chosen of God, and given to Christ, whose sins he has taken away, or at
least is taking them away, and when that work is finished they shall be
glorified, and that world, meaning the multitude of the elect that Christ came
to save, shall certainly be saved, For the Lord has laid help upon one that is
mighty, Psalm. 89.19. He is mighty to save, Esaias 63.1. And he has finished the
work his Father gave him to do, John 17.4. and still he is his Son, in whom he
is well pleased, then how shall they miscarry, when Christ takes away their
sins, to this they have a bundle of arguments together, as if they would prove
that Christ dyed for all and every man in the world, although the greatest part
be not saved but damned.

1 They say, Christ dyed for all those that are damned, that he might get the
victory over sin, death, hell, and the Devil, by his own death and triumph
over all, Mat. 28.18. 1 Pet. 3.2. Job 2.9. Ephesians. 1.19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Philip.
1.10.

I Answer, Is it a sign of victory, over hell, death, sin, and Satan, when
they shall take from Christ those that he has bought with his heart blood, if
Christ has paid for them, shall death and hell, sin and Satan, take them out
of his hand, when as he says, no man shall pluck them out of his hand, and his
Father is greater then all, and no man shall pluck them out of his Fathers
hand, Joh. 10.28, 29. then shall the devil and sin do it to get victory to
your Savior, but it seems by this, that the Devil is your Savior and not
Christ, for if Christ have the keys of hell, then none shall perish that he
has bought, and this is his victory, that he will save them in spite of all
his enemies, Psalm. 110.2. But they say, if all the Sins in the world had not
been laid on Christ, but the sins of the elect only, then he had not gotten
the victory over all sin, but over some sin. I answer, all sorts of sins are in
his people which he has overcome, that it dies daily in them, and for the sins
of reprobates, they shall be restrained by him, and at lest, all things that
offend, shall be taken out of his Kingdom, and cast into the furnace of sin,
Mat. 13.41, 42. Both reprobates and their sins shall be cast into hell fire,
and the Saints shall inherit all things, Revel. 21.7.

Their second reason why Christ dyed for all, and yet all not saved, is this,
because he would have nothing preached to man but what is true, but if Christ
dyed not for all men, and yet the Gospel preached to all, and requires all to
believe, then some men are required to believe that which is not true. I
answer, it is not sin in God, to command man to believe in Christ, although he
knows they cannot, because he made them able at the first to do it, if he had
then required it, and if man by sin has now disabled himself, yet God is not
to be blamed for requiring that which he made them able to do at the first, no
more then a man is that has two debtors, and both disable to pay him, the one
he freely forgives, and of the other he requires the debt; nor does he require
them to believe that which is not true, when the Gospel is preached unto them,
but if they can truly believe they shall be saved, and preaching the Gospel is
the isntrumental means to work faith in men that they may believe, Romans 10.1.
and then, He that believes shall be saved, Mar. 16.16. Again, the Lord
sometimes sends his Gospel to try if men will repent and believe, and if we do
not repent and believe; it makes us guilty of a great sin in not doing of it,
when he requiers it of us, and to say God requires some to believe that which
is not true, is a sin to judge of the secret will of God before that he has
revealed it unto them.

Their third reason, why Christ dyed for all and yet all not saved, they say
is, to leave man without excuse, for man cannot say that Christ has not dyed
for him, and the Gospel was preached to every creature to leave many without
excuse. I Answer, Will God give the greatest gift that ever he gave to man as
well to reprobates, as to the elect, to leave them without excuse? Would not a
less gift then Christ himself be sufficient to leave them without excuse?
But then they would confirm this from these words of Paul, saying, The free
gift came upon all men, unto justification of life, Romans 5.18. Hence they would
gather that Christ has dyed for all men, For by him all are justified, and
have life by Christ, and yet many of them shall be damned. O hellish
inference, all this is to leave them without excuse, but the truth is this, as
by the offense of Adam judgment came upon all men that were in him by nature,
even so says this Text, by one Christ, the free gift of righteousness, came
upon all the elect, when they are in him by grace, unto justification of life,
for as none is guilty of the first Adams sin, till they are in him by nature,
so, nor is righteousness by Christ, till they are in him by grace, and not
many ages past they said, although Christ takes away the sins of all the
world, yet none are justified from the sin, till they by faith behold it, but
here they are not ashamed to say that the righteous God should pronounce all to
be just, having given them Christ to die for their sins, and the life of grace
to believe it, and after all this that God should condemn these justified
persons: What miserable blasphemy is this? Shall not the Judge of all the earth
do right? Genesis 18.25. Is God unrighteous that takes vengeance, how then shall
he judge the world? Romans 3.5, 6. Then do not harbor such blasphemous thoughts
of God, for whom he justified, them he also glorified, It is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ that dyed, Romans 8.30, 33, 34.

The fourth reason, Why Christ dyed for all, and yet not all saved, is this,
they say Christ dyed for Adam and all his posterity, because the elect should
proceed out of his loins. I Answer, as they are flesh and blood they are the
children of the first Adam, and so in him under sin and condemnation, but as
they are newborn they proceed from the second Adam, which is Christ, He
shall see his seed, and he shall see the travel of his soul, and be
satisfied, Esaias 53.10, 11. God the Father by Covenant gave them to Christ from
all Eternity, therefore says he, Behold, I and the children which thou have
given me, Esaias 8.18. But will it follow, that all must be elected because all
sinned, and must all be given to Christ because they are descended of Adam, or
must Christ die for all because all came of Adam? By this reason, what is done
to any, is done to all, if any be saved, all are saved, if any be damned all
are damned, because we have all our nature from one man, but cannot God bestow
his gift on whom he will? must all have a like, because all are alike
descended? I hope when Adam had condemned all, it was Gods free grace to pardon
any, and as many as he pleases.

The fifth reason why Christ dyed for all, and yet all not saved, is, because
by Christ all shall rise again at the last day, 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. He is called
the resurrection, John 11, 25. For by the sin of Adam all die, and so lost
their bodies, so by Christ shall all rise again, some to the resurrection of
salvatian, and some to the resurrection of damnation, John 5.29. Then say they,
because Christ raises all, therefore he dyed for all. I Answer, although it is
by Christ all reprobates are raised, that is, by his power, those vessels of
wrath that are fitted for destruction may be filled with it, and because the
body of Adam sinned as well as the soul, against an infinite God, therefore
the bodies of reprobates should be punished with their souls eternally, and
because Christ will send his Angels to gather up the bodies of reprobates, to
bring them to their souls to be tormented eternally: Is this a good argument
that Christ has dyed for them, and bought those souls and bodies, this shows
plainly they are goats, and none of the sheep that the good sheepherd dyed for,
they are dogs and shall be without, when as his sheep shall never perish, but
shall have eternal life. John 10.

Sixthly, They say Christ dyed for all, and yet not all saved, because the
Father gave him all. I answer, Those that are given in to his wrath to be ruled
with a rod of iron, to say he dyed for all such, you had as good say that he
died for devils, being so given on to his regal power, that they shall not
do what they list, but then they say he died for all, to purchase to himself
a Church: But cannot a man purchase a Lordship unless he lay down money, and
bargain for the whole World, and when he has purchased all the World, and then
stand to their courtesy, whether any will be saved or not, what miserable
arguing is this?

Seventhly, They say, Christ dyed for all, and yet all not saved, because His
Father made him Judge of all, John 5.27, 28, 29. I answer as before, by this
Argument he dyed for Devils and Angels that never sinned, for he is the judge
of all, but if Christ shall slay those that will not have him to rule over
them, and cast unprofitable servants into utter darkness, Luke 19.22, 27. and
render vengeance on these that obey not the Gospel, 1 These. 1.7, 8, 9. Is this
sufficient to prove that Christ has bought them with his heart blood when he
shall thus condemn nhem, let all wise men judge. But then they say, if Christ
should condemn these that he dyed not for, in that he would be unjust. I
Answer as before, If this were so, then Christ were unjust to condemn the
Devils, or else they must prove that Christ dyed for Devils, but men and
Angels were all condemned for their sin against the Covenant of works, and he
was not bound to send men a Savior to redeem them, and to establish those
Angels that did not sin. This may suffice to prove that Christ did not die for
all and every man in the world.

CHAP. IV.
They hold it unlawlull to use that Prayer of Christ, Matthew 6.9. at a Prayer
both by the godly and ungodly.

THey say the godly must not use this Prayer of Christ, because the fifth
petition is, forgive us our trespasses, when as they are forgiven already, and
therefore ought not to pray for pardon of sin, being pardoned already. I
Answer, David a man after Gods own heart, when Nathan the Prophet told him that
the Lord had put away his sin, yet he prayed the Lord to deliver him from blood
guiltiness, 2 Samuel, 12.13. Psalm. 51.14. and in his old age he prayed the Lord
not to remember the sins of his youth, and to pardon his iniquity, for it is
great Psalm. 25.7, 11. And although the Lord will cleanse the house of Israel
from all their uncleanness, yet for this he will be enquired of by them Ezekiel.
36.25, 26, 29, 97. And they must take up words and say, take away all our
iniquity, Hos. 14.2. and the Apostles by Christ were taught daily to say
forgive us our sins, because we sin daily, and our assurance is but for the
time present, and who knows how soon he may lose it: and say with David and
Jeremiah, I am cut off, Psalm. 31.22. Lam. 3.54. and with Job, Though thou
hold me for thine enemy, and set me as a mark for thine arrow, Job
7.20.13, 24. But they say, if any man lack assurance of Gods favor, let him
pray for it, rather then for pardon of sin, being done already, I answer
assurance of Gods favor is employed in that prayer for pardon of sin, for it
is sin only that separates between us and our God, Esaias 59 2. and we should
more desire the pardon of sin being an offense to God then our own comfort that
comes by that pardon: again, the way to get assurance and to keep it, is by
praying for the forgiveness of sins for suppose, we have at the present our
comfortable assurance, that all our sins past are forgiven, yet we sin
continually, and every new sin is as a cloud between God and us, and darkens
our assurance of it, now by this prayer we disperse and dispell these clouds
which would soon deprive us of all our comfortable assurance of Gods favor:
therefore David prays to be cleansed from all his secret sins, although unknown,
Psalm. 19.12. for all sins will cause the Lord to hide his face from us more
or less, Esaias 54.2. but they say Christ taught his Disciples to pray for
pardon of sin before he suffered, because he had then appeased the wrath of
his Father, yet afterward he required no such thing, but if Christ had not
satisfied the wrath of God before he came in the flesh, and suffered in it
then, I would know what became of all the Patriarks and Prophets that died
before, but I have often said, that God made a Covenant with Christ from all
Eternity, to give him all the Elect as they fall in the several ages of the
World upon condition, that he should give his life a ransom for them, and so
the Father set him a day, and trusted the Son for the payment of it, and gave
him all the elect, according to their Covenant that fell in those ages, before
the day of payment for the purchase, and then in the fullness of time he paid
for the purchase, and now the Son trusts the Father, to give him all the Elect
that fall in those ages since the purchase was paid: so then the death of
Christ was vertuall to save those before his coming, as well as those after,
for God was in Christ, reconciling the World or multitude of the Elect in every
age of the World from the first to the last, to give them to Christ, and so by
virtue of the Covenant, he was slain from the foundation of the World, Revel.
13.8. Therefore it is said by Isaiah, unto us a child is born, Esaias 6.9. And
Abraham saw his day and was glad, Joh. 8.58. And Christ was as pleasing to his
Father before he came in the flesh as after, for, says he, I was set up from
everlasting, then I was by him as one brought up with him, and I was daily his
delight, Prove. 22.23, 30. Therefore if Christ say in Jobs time, I have found a
ransom, then he will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life
shall see the light, Job 33.24, 28. so then in every age, when the Father gave
any to Christ, his death did vertually satisfy for them, they being in Christ
by faith, with whom the Covenant was made, but they say before Christ suffered
all power to forgive sins was in the Father, and afterward given to him, Mat.
28.18. And then and not before, he got the keys of hell and death, Revel.
1.18. I Answer, Christ had power to forgive sin before he suffered, Mat. 9.5,
6. for he was King of his Church, ever since that promise was made to Adam,
Genesis 3.15. and had the keys of hell and death ever since, although he never
made it known to the world till then, Romans 16.25. and if that covenant had not
been made before, the covenant of works was broken by Adam, all creatures had
perished eternally, but they say, although Christ taught remission of sins
after his death, yet then he did not teach to pray for pardon of sin. I
Answer, that prayer which he had taught before was to remain to the worlds end,
for says he, When you pray say, forgive us our sins, and to deny this were to
renounce all those truths taught by him before his death, and to confine our
selves only to what he taught afterward. Again, then the Doctrine of
resurrection was most in question to be resolved on, therefore he labored to
strengthen the faith in that Doctrine only, Luke 24.37, 39. John 20.27. and
this doctrine of the resurrection being confirmed, all other doctrines taught
before were confirmed also. But they say, the ceremonies of Moses Law may as
well continue now as that prayer of Christ, for he did as well then command
them to go and offer sacrifice, as Moses had commanded, Mat. 8.4. I Answer,
although the sacrifices of beasts did end at the death of CHRIST, yet the
sacrifices of prayer and praise was not then to end, for praise and
thanksgiving must be continually in heaven, Heb. 13.15. and that of those
Lepers was such a sacrifice, nine of them went not at all, and the tenth
returned to CHRIST and gave him thanks, and it was approved of him as
sufficient, Luke 17.16, 18. so then, whether they were brought to Christ by the
help of a sacrifice or immediately, it was not much material, so that they
came to him then, although the sin offering of beasts be ceased, by the
Sacrifice of CHRIST once for all, yet the sacrifice of prayer for pardon of sin
may still be a sweet incense, Psalm. 141.1. but they say, When Christ taught
them thus to pray, the Law was in its full strength, but now Christ has put an
end to the Law, which is the strength of sin. 1 Cor. 15.56. And the Law being
ended, sin also is ended, and needs no prayer for the pardon of it. I Answer,
The moral Law is eternally settled in heaven, Psalm. 119.89, 103.20. and sin
remains in hell, for they shall blaspheme God in their torments and cannot
repent, Revel. 16.9, 11. and if sin should cease, the fire would go out, for
It is sin and the wrath of God, that is like ariver of brimstone to it, Esaias
30, 33. so then as in heaven is neither sin nor misery to the elect, but in
hell is both the reprobate, and in this world all things are alike to all,
Eccles 9, 1, 2, the Soints and reprobates have both sin and misery, although
in a different manner, for it reigns in the one, and is dying in the other, but
he is a liar that says he has no sin, 1 John 1.8. For no man lives and
sins not, 1 King 8.48. Eccles. 7.20. Then feeing as the Saints have sin,
they must pray for the parden of it as the best means in the world to subdue
it, then the godly may say this prayer.

But then they say the ungodly may not say this Prayer of Christ as a Prayer,
because they cannot call God Father. I Answer, although they be none of his
children by grace and adoption yet they are his children by creation, thus Adam
was the Son of God, Luke 3.38. and so God is the Father of all things, Job
38.28. and if carnal men do pray, they may obtain some temporal things, as
well as Ahab did by fasting, 1 King. 21.29. so God hears all mortal creatures,
Psalm. 104.21.145.15.147 9. Then they say carnal men ought not to say the first
petition praised be thy name, for they cannot do it from the heart. I Answer,
the best of us all when we pray, if Christ did not put the incense of his
merits amongst them, could not be pleasing unto him, Revel. 9.3. and if none
should praise the Lord, but those that do it with their whole heart, God would
have very little praise in this world, when as every creature that has breath,
is commanded to praise the Lord, Psalm. 150.6. Then they say, none can give God
thanks, but they that have received something of him, but this I grant, for what
creature in heaven, earth, or sea, that has received nothing from God? if
there be none such, but all have received of him something, then let all praise
him. But they say, for carnal men to pray, Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done,
on earth as it is in heaven, were to pray for their destruction, but how can
that be, when they pray that the will of Christ were done hy man on earth, as
Saints and Angels do it in heaven, both cheerfully and constantly in
salvation, rather then by suffering his will upon them in hell torments for
ever. Then they say that carnal men may not say. Give us this day our daily
bread, for that is to be understood, The word of God which the Saints have had,
and still desire, but how can this be? must we ask for so much of the word as
may only suffice for a day? and does the word of God consume in the using of
it, when, not one jot of it shall fail, Mat. 5. It was the loafes that Christ
said was meat that perishes, John 6.26, 27. Again, if Christ in this petition
did not teach us to pray for temporal things then how could his prayer be
perfect, and why would he give thanks for meat that perishes, if he would
not pray for a blessing upon it: Then they say, here is to be understood that
Christ taught them to pray for his spirit, but I say again, how much of his
spirit will suffice for a day, and I hope they will not so blaspheme the
eternal spirit of God, as to say it consumes in the using of it, no, It is a
well of living water, springing up unto eternal life, John 4 14. then this,
petition being for carnal things and not the spirit of God, carnal men may
pray for them and obtain them. Then they say, if carnal men should say forgive
us as we forgive them that trespass against us, in this they would seal up
their own damnation, because they will not forgive others, Mat. 18.29, 30. But
what of this, shall they escape damnation by not saying of it? and if they
cannot, they had as good say it to obtain some temporal things, as to be both
miserable in not saying of it, both here, and also hereafter, and besides the
using well of these gifts in seeking them by prayer, and giving God thanks for
them, is Gods way to obtain better mercies; as some in asking temporal things,
by that prayer obtain spiritual mercies, Mat. 9.2. Then they say, carnal men
must not say, Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, because
they are never out of temptation. I answer, the godly are in the same
condition, tempted either by the world, flesh, or the devil, continually, and
they cannot escape them all together, except they go out of the world, 1 Cor.
6.9, 10, 11. then must they not pray and use the means to escape them. Then
they say, carnal men are temptation it self, but I say, how can that be? For
as they are Gods creatures they are good, and not to be so called, and it is
but their words and deeds that tempt, for their thoughts cannot, neither is it
all their words and deeds, but some of them only, and they have a natural
conscience to oppose those words and deeds that are tempting to others, and why
may they not pray against them, then we ought not to discourage any, but rather
teach them better, for God will destroy these families that call not on his
name, Jer. 10.25.

But when they see that they cannot prevail with the godly to cast away one
part of this prayer, and the ungodly to cast away all the rest, then they bring
arguments that no man living ought to say those words of Christ for a prayer,
first they say, it was not Christ's Doctrine, that we should say these words,
but he rather spoke them to frame other Prayers by, for he says, Pray after
this manner. Mat. 6.9. I answer, although the manner and form be there taught
by Christ, yet this hinders not, but these words may be used as a Prayer, as a
just weight or measure may serve for our present use, to wey or measure any
thing by, and yet serve for a pattern to make another by, so this Prayer may be
a pattern of true Prayer, and yet we may use the very words of at in prayer, as
we do many of David's Psalms to praise God with, except they deny all
Scripture words to be used as Prayer, and if they do not, why should this
Scripture be denied, and when Christ says, after this manner pray, we may as
well say them verbatim, after him, as a scholar may say his lesson verbatim
after his Master.

2 They say Matthew and Luke have not the same form, nor the same words nor
the same number of them, therefore not to be said as a prayer. I answer, we do
not contend that the same words in the Lords Prayer must of necessity always be
used and no other, but we hold it lawful to use those words of Christ as a
Prayer, either as it is recorded by Matthew or by Luke, or if we say them
verbatim after the one, it is no offense to the other, and if we vary in
phrase from both, it is no offense to either, only we hold that the same
words, or to the same purpose, may be used by us as a prayer.

3 They say, all the circumstances of Christ in both the Evangelists, does but
teach us how to use Prayer aright, and he does teach us the right use of
almesdeedes and fastings, which is to avoid ambition, hypocrisy, and babbling,
and the like, and how to come to God in prayer, as children to their parents,
asking bread or fish, or an egg, Mat. 6.10. Luke 11.1.18. and to make our
requests unto God for our particular wants in faith and love. I Answer, the
saying of these words verhatom which Christ, has taught us make us guilty of
ambition, hypocrisy, and babbling: and in the use of these words cannot we come
to God with feeling of our particular wants, as children to their fathers, and
in the use of them cannot we practice faith and love, they say these things,
but they cannot prove them, and till then we deny them. but will they condemn
all the Saints of God that use this prayer to be ambitious hypocrites and
bablers, and without feeling of their particular wants, and without faith and
love. these be but uncharitable slanders without any proof.

4 They say, that the Apostles which knew the mind of Christ did neither bind
themselves to these words nor others, but still prayed according to their
several occasions, as in Act. 1.24, 25.4.24 30. I Answer, although they did
not so bind themselves to these words yet it will not follow, that they never
used the same words as a prayer, and besides, they might go by this rule upon
several occasions, for although we do not find that they did teach any to
say over the Lords Prayer, yet they used set forms of prayer in their
salutations, for says Paul, it is the token in every Epistle, so I wright The
grace of cur Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen 2 These. 3 17, 18. then is
it unlawful to use the form of words which Christ has taught us, and yet
lawful for them to use their own form for a prayer, and yet they taught men
according to their occasions and necessities to make their requests known to
God, Phil. 4.6. then I say they must use the prayer of Christ, for it does not
hinder supplication in the spirit, although they were not always tied to say
those very words in their prayers.

5 They say, to pray in a strange tongue, the unlearned know not what they say,
Then how shall they say Amen? 1 Cor. 14.16. But say they, this Prayer they
knew, and would say Amen, though it were spoken in a strange tongue, therefore
they did not use it in any Language. I Answer, they might use the Prayer often
at Corinth and yet the unlearned not able to say Amen, because there was
extraordinary Prophets, and sometimes they spoke strange languages by a special
gist at such a time, the unlearned could not understand them, as at the end to
say Amen, therefore Paul bids them pray in that language, that the people might
join with them in their prayers, but suppose, they seldom used this in
strange Languages, this might cause them not to understand it, and yet this is
not sufficient to prove that they hold it unlawful to use it as a prayer, but
suppose the unlearned heard them often to say it, yet they could not say Amen
to it, unless they had a distinct understanding of the several words therein,
that their hearts and affections might go along with him that said it, and in
the conclusion witness their consent by saying Amen to it. Again, if the
people when they understand it may say Amen to it, is it unlawful, or dare
they say Amen to an unlawful prayer which is not supplication in the spirit,
nor made in the feeling of their wants, nor in faith and love, and if they may
lawfully say Amen, at the conclusion then without all question it may be said
as a Prayer.

6 They say, If Christ has commanded to use these words in that number and
order, then they sin that pray at any time and use not these words, for says
he, When you pray, say Our Father, etc. I Answer, this command of Christ
shows that he allows the use of these words, in the same number and order,
that either Matthew or Luke has recorded, yet it does not follow that we are
tied to those very words alone, and to no other in our prayers: suppose a man
send his servant on a message to his friend, and command him to say to him such
words verbatim, after this manner, or to the same purpose, then shall that
servant be counted unfaithful or disobedient, if he use the very words without
any change, or if he speak to the same purpose, when Christ sent out his
Apostles he gave them a prayer for salutation, when they came to any house to
say, peace be to this house, Luke 10.5. thereby to warrant them that they might
use those very words verbatim, or the same for substance, and either way obey
the command of Christ, so the Lord taught a form of praise to say always, the
Lord be praised, Psalm. 40.16. this does allow us to use the same words, or the
same for substance in other words, so here the Lords prayer may be used as the
same for substance, and both ways his command is fulfilled, but they stand much
upon this word, when you pray, as if it were always to be used when we pray,
but they are mistaken, for says Christ, When thou make a feast call not thy
friends, and when thou make a feast call the poor and mamed, Luke 12.12, 13.
But does this tie us never to feast our friends, and always to feast the poor
and the maimed, when the devil is cast out he says, I will return, Luke
11.24. but when the devil was cast out did he likewise return, seven devils
was cast out of Mary Magdelen, and a legion of Devils out of another, but did
they return, if not, then this word, when you pray, does extend it self to all
our prayers, but then they say, if we be tied to these words, it will exclude
inward desires to be prayers, but I say again, we are not always tied to say
those words, although we may sometimes use them, and yet we may pray acceptably
without any words or voices at all, as Moses and Hannah did, Exodus 14.15. 1 Samuel 1.13.

7 They say that form of prayer does plainly and fully direct and restrain our
ignorant and inordinate desires unto certain heads in which whatsoever is
needful and lawful to be asked I answer, although all things needful to be
asked, be contained in the words of this prayer, and thousands of petitions
more may be derived from it by Gods people, according to their several
occasions, yet it will not follow that the words of this Prayer may not be used
as a prayer: Again, to say the heads are so general, that no man can rightly
apply them to his particular occasions itself for in general respect and love
to Gods name, and Kingdom, and will, we may lawfully use these words in prayer,
although for the present our thoughts do not settle upon that particular way
and means by which his name may be sanctified, and his will accomplished, so
the Angels wait with reverence, and with a general respect to Gods will, before
they have any particular special command how to do it, Mat. 18.10. Dan. 7.10.
Psalm. 102.20. so Gods (...) a general respect of our selves to be forgiven,
and with a general respect of temptations and afflictions to be delivered
from, although for the present we think of no particular sins or temptations,
if this were not so, it were unlawful for Paul to pray at all, when as he knew
nothing by himself, yet says he, I am not hereby justified, 2 Cor. 4.4. and
David prayed to be cleansed from secret sins, Psalm. 19. and although those words
be general, yet they may have relation to particular sins and temptations, and
to particular means to glorify God, but neither, man nor Church can be in
such condition, as to reach all things needful for all persons, and all
occasions as those heads comprehend.

I answer, suppose no man nor churches case can reach unto all things
comprehended in this prayer, yet these words concern every Christian, then
they may use it as a prayer, and if we should reject this prayer, because our
condition cannot reach all things contained in it: by this argument we may cast
away all prayers, blessings and salutations in the Scriptures, for if we say,
Peace be unto you, Luke 10.5. The Lord bless you Ruth 2.4. Who can reach all
things comprehended in these sentences, for they contain the whole covenant of
grace, with all the fruits and benefits of it, then we may use it as a prayer,
although we cannot reach all things that are comprehended in it.

8 They say, if these words of Christ be used as a prayer, as well may
Ministers at the end of their Sermons, and Magistrates at the end of their
Instructions and Exhortations, say over the ten Commandments, because they do
fully comprise all duties.

I Answer, our question only about the lawfulness, and not about the
necessity of using it as a prayer: we do not say that Ministers are bound to
say over the Lords Prayer at the end of every Sermon, nor Magistrates at the
end of every instruction or exhortation: but suppose Ministers at the end of
every Sermon should say over the ten Cmmandements, as formerly they have done
upon the Lords day before Catechizing, and that Magistrates at the end of
solemn exhortations should repeat the ten Commandments, this would rather be
a testimony of their obedience to Gods Laws rather then to be any transgression
of it: again, there is no equality in this comparison, for the Lord in his
wisdom, has in his word taught us short forms of prayer for salutation, in two
or three words, because we have every day many occasions to use them, and so
we have of mutual exhortations; then what an absurd thing would it be to
conclude every salutation and exhortation with the Lords Prayer and ten
Commandments, it may be a hundred times in a week, yet this will not prove it
to be unlawful to begin or conclude a solemn exercise in a Church o^ family,
with the Lords Prayer or ten Commandments.

9 They say this Prayer of Christ is a most perfect form, wherein is no want
or superfluity, then if this be the meaning of Christ to say over those words
in prayer to God, then we ought only to use this and no other: For (say they)
if we do, it is babbling and presumption to put any other words in steed of this
prayer, that is so absolute, perfect and sufficient, and the Lord will be
worshipped with the best we have, and he is accursed that has a male in his
flock, and yet does offer to the Lord a corrupt thing, Malachie 1.14. I
answer, God does not denounce that curse upon those that do not offer the best
they have in sacrifice, but against those that offered corrupt things contrary
to the Law, Levit. 1.3.10. But this chiefly crosteth Hypocrites, who pretend
that they love God, when they do not; but for a man that had a Kow and two
sheep, Esaias 7.22. He was not required to offer his Kow, because she was the
best that he had: or if a man had ten sheep, he was not bound to offer the
best of them, only the Law required it should be without blemish, and then he
might take the tenth as they pass under the rod, Levit. 27.32, 33. Then, if
this Text prove any thing to cast away all other Prayers, but this of Christ,
then they must prove them all, but this to be corrupt things, like the torn
and lame sacrifice: for although this prayer of Christ be more excellent then
any of ours, yet this will not nullify and make ours void, no more then the
excellency of one sacrifice will make void another that has not the same
degree of goodness in it: yet this is beside our controversy, for hitherto
they have argued, that it was unlawful to use this prayer of Christ at all as
a prayer: and now they seem to argue, that all other are unlawful but this
prayer of Christ, because it is so perfect and sufficient, that there is
neither want nor superfluity in it, and yet before they said, there was so much
superfluity in it, that neither man nor Churches case could reach it, and
therefore they said, it was not lawful to say it for a prayer, and another
time they said, it was too short to reach all men's conditions and occasions,
and therefore unlawful to use it as a prayer. Thus we see their arguing is
mere caviling and not to be regarded of those that love the truth, and those
words of Christ may be blessed as a prayer, notwithstanding all their cavils
made against it.

CHAP. V.
This Chapter contains a Disputation with the Anabaptists, about the
Magistrates power, in commanding those of a contrary judgment to conform with
us in our public worship, or to punish them in case of refusal.

THey say, if a Magistrate command those of a contrary judgment to conform
with them this would make them sin against their conscience as Hypocrites, I
answered, that to come to the public Assemblies is from the Magistrate, but to
be Hypocrites is from themselves, as when a man spurs his horse, if he go it is
from the man, but if he halt it is from himself, then the cause of hypocrisy
is in your selves, and not in our godly Magistrates for commanding you to come
to our public Assemblies. Again, they command, but the outward man as his
words and actions, and his bodily presence there, but they have no law can
reach their conscience to command it, nor to inflict any punishment upon it, in
case of refusal, it is God that requires truth in the inward parts, Psalm.
51.6. and to obey from the heart, Romans 6.17. For he sees not as man sees, he
looks on the heart, 1 Samuel 16.7. if they be hypocrites, it is for want of
sincere obedience to God from the heart, but if they bring those excuses to the
Assembly, they have done all that the Magistrate commands them, then they do
not make some Hypocrites, but suppose, they commanding these of a contrary
judgment should accidentally make them hypocrites; yet so far as they obey,
they shall lose nothing by it: if they obey outwardly, they may by that receiv
blessings, as Ahab did, 1 King. 21.29. The judgment was removed from his days,
and the Pharisees had a reward, Mat. 6, 5. But those that obey from the heart
shall receive spiritual and eternal blessings, For every one shall receive
according to his works, Psalm. 62.12. Job 34.11. though not meritorious for it,
yet according to it, whether it be done in hypocrisy or in truth; then is it
not better to conform in outward obedience to obtain outward blessings, then
to be both miserable here and hereafter: and shall we blame them that seek to
pull us out of any danger, and to procure for us, although but outward
blessings. Again, it is better to sin in using the means tending to salvation,
then to sin in that way that takes Lold on hell, Prove. 7. For if you cast off
Magistrates authority, you will in time kill the Saints of God, and think in
your conscience that you do God good service, John 16.2. then bring your
conscienc to the word, and not the word to your conscience, lest you exalt your
conscience above the word. Again, when all are brought to the means of
salvation, it may please God to make those means effectual coming to the
posts of wisdoms doors they shall be blessed, and to the poole they shall be
cured.

Now I shall prove that Magistrates have power to command those of a contrary
judgment to conform with us in public worship; or to punish in (...) refuse
to obey such laws as shall be made for the preserving of peace both in Church
and State, this they have good warrant from Scripture, for King Ass. commanded
Judah to seek the Lord God of their Pathers and to do the Law and
Commandment, and Jehoshaphat sent Princes, and with them Levits to teach in
Judah, and reformed government in matiers of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 14.4.17.7, 8 9.
and 19.11. And Manasses commanded Judah to serve the Lord, and they kept the
Passover according to the commandment of King Josias, Chap. 31.4.35.16. Here
then it is plain that Magistrates have power to command obedience to the
public worship of God in relation to the Church, now we shall see their power
to punish those that are disobedient the Lord said to Moses, Take the heads of
the people and hang them up before the Sun, that bowed down to the gods of
Moab, Numb. 25.2, 3.4. And Ioash ordained, that if any man did plead for Ba^,
he should be put to death, Judge. 6.31, And Asa punished his own mother for
having an Idol in a Grove, 1 Kings 1^ 13. And when Iehu destroyed Baal out of
Israel, with all his priests and worshippers, the Lord said, Thou hest done
well in executing that which was right in (...) own eyes, 2 Kings 10.28, 30.
And Iosiash put down the Idol (...), yea, be slew all the priests of the high
places, and burnt their bones upon their (...), 2 Kings 23.5, 20. Thus they may
see that Magistrates had this power to command obedience to the public worship
of God, and to punish the disobedient, and if they have lost this power, let
them prove when and how they come to lose it.

Secondly, the Jews had the same Law of God contained in the ten Commandments
as we have, and they had the same Gospel as we, for says Paul, the Gospel was
preached to Abraham, Gal. 3.8. and Peter says, For this cause war the Gospel
peached to them that are dead, 1 Pet. 4.6. only it was to them in (...) types
and shadows, and to us more clcerly manifested, yet they were (...) by the same
Christ as we, for there is but one way to heaven. Ier. 32.39. Then why (...)
not our Magistrates have the same authority in relation to the Church as they
had, but this man denied that the Jews had the Gospel, or that faith was of
absolute necessity for salvation, flat against the Scripture, Ioh. 3.16 19, 36.
Heb. 11.6. but they having found out some new way contrary to the old and good
way, in which our fathers walked and were not confounded, Psalm. 22. They must
(...) have new Magistrates, with less authority in relation to the Church, to
command obedience to the public worship of God, or to punish the opposers of
it.

Thirdly, if Magistrates under the old Testament had this power, then much
more now under the New, because now they have greater obligation to command
obedience, and to punish the opposers of it then they had, because The Covenant
of grace is now more manifest then it was to the Jews, and if our Magistrates
had not that power, which the Magistrates in the old Testament had, our church
would not be in so safe a condition now, as it was under the Old Testament.

Fourthly. Kings and Queens must be as nursing fathers and mothers to the
Church, Esaias 49.22. but shall Kings and Queens have no authority about the
Church when they lend their power to assist it, and shall fathers and mothers
have no command in relation to the Church? and shall nurses have no power to
feed their children? Jehoshophat sent Ministers to teach in Judah, and says
the Lord, Cyrus is my sheepherd, then shall not he defend the Church as a
sheepherd does his flock? David fed them according to the integrity of his
heart, and guided them by the skilfulnesse of his hands, Psalm. 78.72. but while
the Lord looks for a man to make up the hedge, Ezekiel. 22.30. and says, he shall
be called the repairer of the breach, Esaias 58.12. In the mean time, these men
throw open the gap to the ravening lion, which shows how insufferable they are
in any Christian Church, yea, they be but like vipers, both to Church and State.

Fifthly, Princes in Scripture are called Saviors to Sion, and such are
foretold to be in our days, Obad. 21. But how can they be Saviors to our
Church, when they must neither command obedience, nor punish those that oppose
it, but God commands to punish those that intise others to Idolatry, Deuteronomy.
13.6. if they do not, they are guilty of other men's sins, 1 Timothy 5.22. and
they carry the Sword in vain, Romans 13.4. and God will have something against
them for suffering Jezabel to seduce the servants of God, and for suffering the
doctrine of Baalam, and the doctrine of the Nicolaitans which God hates, Revel.
2.14, 15, 20. The very Heathens will punish those that oppose their Religion,
and shall not Christian Magistrates do as much for the true Religion as they
do for a false Religion.

Sixthly, We are commanded to pray for Kings, and all those in authority, that
we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness, 1 Timothy 2.3. But if
they have no power in relation to the Church, to command obedience, and to
punish the opposers of it, then what a vain prayer would this be? but he that
rules over men must be just, and not only so, but ruling in the fear of God,
2 Samuel 23.3. I know, says the Lord, that Abraham my friend, will command his
household to do judgment and justice, Genesis 18. And we must obey for conscience
sake, Romans 13.7. but not bringing the conscience in obedience to man's precepts,
but we must obey men in conscience of obedience unto God that commands it. Tit.
3.1. Then let them take heed how they despise government.

But then because the Magistrates power is a burden to this man, and he would
fain ease himself of it, therefore he propounded some Queries.

1 He would know, whether the whole ground of the Jews worship, for matter and
form, was not in plain precepts and commandments, and taught them by the
Prophets, as they had immediately received it of the Lord, to this I grant
affirmatively that it was so, but then he would know, whether any Ruler,
Governor, or King of Judah either did, or lawfully might set up, alter, or
change either matter or form of that worship, and to compel the people to obey
it, or to inflict a penalty upon any in case of disobedience: I answer
negatively, that no King of Judah did or ought to set up, alter, or change,
either matter or form of Gods public worship, yet the Kings of Judah both did
and ought to command obedience to that matter, and to that form of public
worship, that was set up and received from the Prophets, as they received it
from the Lord, and also they both did and ought to punish those that were
disobedient to that form that was set up by the Lord, as all those Scriptures
before quoted witness, and so our Magistrates may and ought to compel
obedience to the outward form of the worship of God in relation to the Church,
although their power be not in the Church or over the Church, but only
assistant to the Church, then they may command obedience to it, and punish
those that despise or abuse it, yet I grant they never had nor shall have power
to alter the form or matter, or to add any new matter to it, nor take any
matter from it, this belongs to Christ alone, the head and King of the Church,
but I say again, that Magistrates have power to command outward obedience to
that form that Christ has set up, neither may the matter of any ordinance be
taken away or changed, or new inventions of our own added to them, and so for
the matter of the Sacraments, we must neither take away the bread nor the
wine, nor add any thing else, and so likewise for the persons, the subject
matter of the Church, they must be the seed of Abraham, neither may a Turk be
admitted, unless he will leave his Turkish Religion, he is not fit matter for
it, yet all this hinders not, but Christian Magistrates may command Christians
being already in the Church to obedience, and to punish those that are
disobedient to the Church.

2 He would know whether the Jews government now under the Gospel pertain to
Gentiles any more then the matter and form of the worship, and if their
government, why not all, both the Church and State, and if all, whether the
neglect of any be not under the curse, especially so much as is under the
letter of the Law. I answer, the Jews Government both in Church and State, as
it was the Judicial Law, it ought to be obeyed of none but Jews only, and as
much as their Law was but ceremonial, the matter was calves and lambs, and the
Altar and Temple, and the form was sacrifices, and diverse washings, etc.

But now Christ the King of the Church is come, he ^ath taken away much of the
matter and form of their public worship, and now all Kings and Rulers being
his deputies, ^^^st give their power to the Church, to defend that matter and
form that Christ the King of it has set up, and appointed to be thematter and
form of it, but while he pleads for the Jews matter and form he smells rank
of Judaisme, yet it is like the Jews when they are called may have their own
positive Laws for their own Commonwealth, as our positive Law is the Law of
England, But we are no more bound to the Jews positive laws, then they are
bound to our positive Laws, although those are written in the Word, and ours
are not, but besides the ceremonial law that ended by Christ, and the
Judicial law that was made particularly for Jews, they had also the eternal
moral law, and what their Magistrates did in obedience to that, our Kings and
Magistrates are bound to the same as well as they, and it was in obedience to
that law, that they commanded uniformity in public worship, and punished the
disobedient, and further I say, that our positive laws bind our Magistrates
and people as strongly being grounded on the moral law, being the law of
nature, as the Jews positive laws bound them, although theirs was written in
the Word, and ours are not.

Thirdly, He would know whether the matter and form of the worship of God
under the Gospel, lies not in as plain precepts and commandments as the matter
and form of the Jews worship, and whether to urge and compel men to any other
be not sin.

Here I shall first grant, that the matter and form now, is in as plain
precepts and commandments as the Jews was, and to compel men to any other is
sin. But here lies not our controversy, for our Magistrates neither command
other things then CHRIST has appointed to be the subject matter of the
Church, although themselves, most abominably, brought a Cat to the Sacrament.
Neither do we admit Infidels or Turks unless they leave their Religion, and
become Christians, neither do we take away the bread or the wine, or change
them, or add any thing else to them, not do we take away or change any other
ordinance, but themselves have cast away much of the subject matter of the
Church being esteemed of them but as reprobates, although many of them be the
dear children of GOD, unless they please then humors, and they have cast
away the Ordinance of singing of Psalms, and all family instructions,
admonitions, prayers, watchings over one another in love, and building up one
another in faith. Thus they have almost cast a^^y both matter and form of the
true visible Church, when as they cannot ta^e us as wanting any Ordinance, nor
of having any supersluous of our own devising.

Then if Magistrates should command any other matter or form, they would sin
in to doing, yet it will not follow that when Magistrates command the same that
CHRIST has set up that then they should sin. The Lord said to Moses', The
Magistrate gather the people together, both men, women, and children, and the
stranger that is within the gates, that they may hear, and that they may
learn, and fear the LORD thy GOD, and observe to do all the words of this
Law, Deuteronomy. 31.12. and says Christ compel them to come in, that my house may
be filled, Luke 14.23. then I hope it will not trouble your consciences to be
compelled to hear the word, which is the only way to know the Covenant
between God and Christ in our nature, and when it is known, it will bereceived,
They that know thy name will trust in thee, Psalm. 9.10. yet the Magistrates
will not command you to believe they are not Lords of your faith, but they may
be helpers of your joy, but says is the gift of GOD, the Magistrate only
commands to come to the paths of wisdoms doors that we may be blessed, Prove.
8.33. this is the way to come in to the Covenant of Christ, the Lord of the
Church, and when this is done, we need not make another Covenant with the
members, as they d^e at New England, and if they were in Covenant with Christ,
as they pretend the members need not make such soldering, for a Christian has
right to all Churches, as well as to one Church, and needs not way^ for the
members ad^mttance, although their Lordly pride besuch, while they pretend
humility, that they will not allow of it.

Lastly, he would know whether any people under heaven have power to frame the
outward government of the Church so perfectly, that it shall neither have sin
nor failing in it, i^ not then says he where is there power to command
obedience to that which is sinful. I answer, It is true, none have power to
frame such a government that has neither sin nor failings in it, therefore the
Parliament does not take upon them to frame any government for the Church,
because as I said before, their power is not in the Church, nor over the
Church, but in relation to the Church, as lending their power to assist it,
therefore they have called the assembly of Divines to search the Scripture, to
see what government Christ has appointed for his Church, who is the Lord and
King of it then there business is only to search this our and then the
Parlinment by a positive Law of the Land will command that this government
shall be observed, and no other but when all the Assembly, or the greatest part
shall conclude upon one way of government and the Parliament has established
that Government by a Law of the Kingdom then I say, although there shall be
some failings in it, yet it being as near the rule as all our Divines upon
diligent search can find out, and the Parlian^ent has made it a Statute to
be observed, it must be obeyed, and all those Scriptures and Reasons before
alleged serve to confirm it, and those that will not, do the Law of GOD, and
the Law of the King, let judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be
to death or banishment, confiscation of goods, or imprisonment, Ezra. 7.25, 26.
and then it will be but a weak excuse to renounce a positive Law of the Land
upon this ground, saying, It is not perfect without sin or failing, therefore I
will not obey it, by this argument they may renounce all our Laws and
Magistrates, for no humane Ordinance nor Magistrate can be without sin or
failing, then, by their argument, both must be cast away, and so live like sons
of Belial, without any government, but this shows how unsufferable that faction
is, to be among Christians.

But suppose, they should have free leave to frame their own government, what
they would have, upon condition it should be confirmed by an act of Parliament,
I am confident they would not agree to have it done, because they all seek to
have a gap open to turn to what Heresy they please, This also shows how
unsufferable they be amongst us. But suppose they were willing to have such a
government established as they should like of, then I would know why a whole
assembly of faithful, learned, wise, godly, and pious men should be denied
that which they will grant to a few, and some of them factious; and others
heretical, nay, why will they not grant our Assembly so much as they grant to
one single man, who sets up what government he pleases, and they all freely
obey him, when he aims at his own ends, to gather Churches that he may vent
his Heresy and faction, which is a thing to be abhorred of all godly
Christians, being more enslaved to him then ever they were to the Prelates, if
they had but eyes ^o see it. The mean time all may see how these men despise
the Magistrates power in relation to the Church, when they command obedience to
it, or punish the opposers of it.

FINIS.

