Mr. Brunskell's CASE AND PROPOSALS.
THAT the King may get and save above 400000 l. per Annum, by taking the first
Fruits or Profits of Offices, and indear many: For most Offices may be executed
by Deputy, as well as the Custos Brevium Office in the Common Pleas now is for
100 l. per Annum. And his Majesty may (if the Office be 1500 l. per Annum)
allow an experienced Person 300 l. per Annum (...) executing it, and Pensions
of 200 l. per Annum to Six Persons more, and allow the Grantees one Moiety to
live on, until his Majesty is paid what he is pleased to take: So raise his
Revenue, reward good Services, and free his Revenue from Pensions.

To make out this Proposal, and that the King will not (by doing as proposed)
invade the Property of His Ministers, Judges and Officers, but they His by
obstructing it.

The Judges and Officers execute the Laws, and proceed Ad summum jus against
Persons buying Estates, which others have no right to sell: And although the
ignorant Purchasers were deceived by the Venders, or misguided by their
Counsel, yet are made to lose their Purchase-money, yield Possession, and
refund mean Profits to the real Owners: And the Judges and Officers wresting or
dispensing with Laws in their own Case, renders them partial; for they know
that the Law is very tender of the Crown Rights; because wronging the Crown, is
pillaging the People. The Construction which the Judges make of the Saving in
the Statute of 5 and 6 Edw. 6. cap. 16. for them to sell is illegal, as
resolved by the Judges themselves in like Cases, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. c. 16. Cok.
Rep. Alton-woods Case Pl. Com. 561. Dyer 231.313. 1 Inst. 381. 18 Ed. 3. Stat.
4. 20 Ed. 3 c. 1. 12 R. 2. c. 2.
because it is repugnant to what the Act intended to remedy; neither can they
take Money for Offices, or Fees of Suitors, or New Years Gifts of Lawyers and
Officers, without dispensing with their Oaths, and the Statutes of 18 Edw. 3.
and 20 Edw 3 and 12 Rich. 2. Pl. Com. 333, 334. Hob. Rep. 233, 234. Dyer 261.
Davys Rep. 56. 1 H. 4. c. 6.
The Judges agree, where the King grants an Ancient Manor cum pertinen', That
Royalties shall not pass without being named; yet they will have Inferior
Offices pass to them by the Grant of the Office of Justice cum pertinen', or
other General Words, without the least mention of any Inferior Office by Name,
against the express Letter of the Statute of 1 Hen. 4. cap. 6. which provides,
That where the Name or Value of any Office claimed is not mentioned, the Grants
shall be void, and the Grantees punished for deceit.

The Kings and Queens of England, by Virtue of their Original Right to the
Administration and Offices incident thereto, have at pleasure, as they were
reinformed of the Name and Value of Inferior Offices, granted several, some
before, 5 and 6 Ed. 6.
others since the Statute of 5 and 6 Edw. 6. which Ministers and Judges have
disposed of without intermission some Hundred years before their Majesty's
interposed; and Grantees enjoyed the same accordingly. As for instance; Chief
Clerk and Custos Brevium in the King's (...) Custos Brevium, Clerk of the
Treasury, and Clerk of the Supersedeas in the Common Pleas, Treasurer,
Remembrancer, and Clerk of Estreats in the Exchequer, Prothonotary, Six Clerks
and Cursiters, Incorporation and Register in Chancery, Cofferer, and other
Offices in the Household; and such Interruption of their Ministers and Judges
Usage amount to a Discontinuance of their Right, and a Continuance of the
King's, Pari Ratione the King may dispose of the other Offices, as he is not
restrained by any Grant to his Ministers, or the Saving aforesaid. And the
Statute of 5 and 6 Edw. 6. provides, 5. and 6 Ed. 6. c. 16. General words of an
Act shall not debar the King of any Prerogative, Estate, Right, Title or
Interest, as cited in Mag. Coll: Case, Co. 11. Rep. The King cannot dispense
with the Stat. of 5 and 6 Ed. 6. as cited in Co. 1 Inst. 120.
That such as be Seized of Offices in Fee, may Sell, Ergo the King, Seized of
all Hereditary Rights belonging to the Imperial Crown and Dignity, may make
Advantage thereof, but Judges cannot; and the Saving implies no more, but that
the Judges may supply Vacancies, upon Death or Removal, in the King's Absence,
to avoid a Failure in the Execution of the Law, until the King think fit to
make his own Officers.

Object. Should the King dispose of all the Officers, as proposed, some
Ministers will still for Money find ways to put Good Men by, or out of Offices,
and have their own Creatures placed therein, and allege, That it is his
Majesty's pleasure to have it so, when his Majesty knows nothing of the Matter;
so their Majesty's and their Government will be more scandalized than ever,
whereas Ministers now (and not their Majesty's) are reflected on for such
doings; neither can the King know so well as his Ministers do, who are fit for
Offices.

Answ. Were such as have been put by or out of Offices, without just Cause
restored, upon paying First Fruits of Profits, as proposed; and were the Names
of such as have done, or shall for the suture, do the King and Nation good
Service, from time to time set down in a Roll, or Book of Registry, Cok. 4
Inst. Title Privy Council, 36 Articles.
to be kept for that purpose by one of the Secretaries of State, or other
Ministers, pursuant to several Ordinances made by former Kings in Parliament;
and were a Jury of Officers impannelled every Year, to present the Names of
such upon Oath as are out of Office, orderly as they are qualified by Birth,
Age, or Education; and were Offices disposed of to such to be executed by
sufficient Deputies, then in Case the Office first happening be too mean for the
first person in the Roll, Registry, or Presentment, he may, if he think fit,
enjoy it till a better fall.

The Law is as strict against Simony as can be made against selling Temporal
Offices;

It Is true, pro Cura Animarum, according to their Merit and Seniorities of
standing; and were such Presentiments returned to, and registered in the
Petty-Bagg-Office in Chancery; and were Parsons preferred by the King, and
others, accordingly as they are orderly set down in such Presentiments, and
promoted ligher as better Benefices fall, in Case their Demeanours, after such
Presentment made, render them qualified or such further Promotion. And were the
King, and such as have right of Presentation, to take the next Parson, as he
stands orderly in the first presentment, it would nake the Law effectual for
remedy of the Evils thee by intended to be redressed; and were every Parson
Obliged upon Oath to Account for, and pay the Kings real Duty out of, and
according to what Rents, Issues, and Profits he actually has and receives,
First Fruits would be a great Revenue to the Crown.

What difference is there between the King's disposing of Offices, Quaere.
as proposed, and his Ministers selling?

The Officers made by the King,

But these Evils attend Great Ministers Selling and Disposing of Offices.

First, Secondly, Thirdly, Fourthly,
Abuses discovered to R. Charles the Second, which show how the King is
wronged, and Subjects oppressed by the Mismanagement of His Ancient Casual
Revenue.
THat Officers take their own and Judges Fees upon signing Proceedings whereon
the King's Duty arise, 1 Abuse.
and leave Attorneys to Record them, when and as they please, whereby the King
often loses his Duties, and many Subjects and their Families have been ruined
by loss of their Judgments, or forced to pay for Post-Rolls, which are very
chargeable.

That Process be not signed or suffered to issue out, Remedy.
till an Incipitur thereof, or the Process at large be duly Recorded.

Officers Outlaw many for the King's Duty, called, 2 Abuse.
Capias per fine; which in many Cases is but 6 s. 8 d. whereby they get, at
least 10 l. in the King's Benth, and 3 or 4 l. in the Common Pleas; and render
no Account into the Exchecquer, of the Duties received and taken for the King.

That as Officers added their own Profit called Damage-clear, Remedy.
to Suitors Costs, because the Statute 23 Hen. 8. cap. 15. impowreth Costs to
be taxed discretionally; so the King's Fines may be added to Suitors Costs, and
Under-Sheriffs upon levying thereof, may be made to account and pay the King's
share, as they did the Officers Damage-clear.

That Officers for Eribes spare Jurors, 3 Abuse.
whereby the principal Pannels are supplied with Bystanders, too often
attending to serve the base Ends and Designs of Litigious Suitors: And
Freeholders now dance Attendance upon old Causes; which is very grievous, if
they live remote from Assizes or Sessions.

That Officers spare not any Jurors, Remedy.
without the Judges Orders recorded; and that the Freeholders may serve in
^^^^s and not attend old Causes, unless it be where a Special Jury is settled by
Order of Court.

The King is wronged of great Sums of Money yearly, 4 Abuse.
upon Actions and Informations, Qui tan and per Dom. Rege, by private
Agreements between Attorneys and their Clients, and smothering Proceedings.

That the Statute 18 Eliz. cap. 5. be observed.

Many Fines and Amercements accruing to the King by Officers Contempt,
Non-execution, Remedy. 5 Abuse.
or Mis-execution of Process, Rules, or Orders, and for other Offenses by them
committed, and never recorded, whereby Suits are retarded, and Process
multiplied, to the great increase of Officers Profits, and intolerable trouble
and charge of the Party grieved; who by that means, often expend more than the
value of the Thing in suit.

That every Contempt, Remedy.
or other Offense committed, may be recorded without delay, and the Officer, or
Attorney offending expelled the Court, if he does not pay the Fine, or
Amercement into the Exchecquer, at a day to be assigned by the Court, wherein
the Offense is committed.

That Under-Sheriffs for lucre, assign over Defendants Bail Bonds to the
Plantiff to sue, 6 Abuse.
which by the Statute 22 Hen. 6. cap. 10. are entered into only to indempnifie
Sheriffs from the King's Fines, Quia non habuerunt Corpora: and the Plantiffs
are permitted to sue the same in the Sheriff's Name, before the Sheriffs are
damnified; and the Defendants having only Comperuit ad diem, to plead thereto,
are forced to comply with their Adversaries vexatious Demands; especially when
the Original Actions, by contrivance between Attorneys and Clients, are laid so
litigiously high, that Defendants living remote from London, cannot find Bail;
and the Officer, and Undersheriff, by Combination, often deceives the King of
his Fines, or Amercement.

That Under-Sheriffs may make no other use of the Defendants Bail-bond, Remedy.
than to indempnifie themselves from the King's Fines, for the Defendant's
Nonappearance; and that such Bonds be delivered up, and cancelled, upon the
Defendant's paying the Fine, and the Damage which the Sheriff's may reasonably
sustain upon that account. And that Plantiff's making great Demands, may, at
the Defendant's Request, be compelled to give the Court satisfaction of the
reality of their Cause of Action: That Plantiffs, in Case Vexation appear, may
be fined, pro falso clamore, and Defendants admitted to reasonable Bail, as
they ought to be; and that the said Fines may be duly Estreated and Recorded,
as they ought to be.

That Judges and Officers cannot legally alter the Original Process of Courts,
7 Abuse.
without Authority of Parliament, as resolved: Cooke's Inst. part 1. sect. 101.
Bracton, l. 5. fol 413. Lritton 122. 227. Fleta, lib. 2. Yet the Judges have of
late Years made great Alterations, by Ac Etiam Bille, casual Ejectors, and the
like. And one Court interferes with another in business, against express Acts
of Parliament, 9 Hen. 3. cap. 11. 10 Edw. 1. 28 Edw. 1. cap. 4. As for
instance: The Upper Bench is appropriated to Matters, Quare Vi and Armis; the
Common Pleas to the Subjects business; and the Ex hecquer to things purely
relating to the Revenue.

If the Courts be allowed to proceed in the Method they are now in, Proposal.
it may be reasonable, that some provision be made, that the King may have such
Duties as he ever had upon the Common Pleas Proceedings.

Most Justices in Air, 8 Abuse.
Commissioners of Sewers, Stewards, and Sheriffs in Turns and Leets, and Clerks
of Markets, Estreat not their Fines and Amerciaments.

That the Fines and Amerciaments may be Estreated and Certified into the
Exchecquer, Remedy.
as the Statutes 51 Hen. 3. 14 Rio. 2. cap. 11. 7 H^^. 4. cap. 3, and 11 Hen.
7. cap. 15. direct. And that Bailiffs and Stewards do all things required of
Sheriffs, as the 27 Hen. 8. cap. 24. directs.

Under-Sheriffs take their Bailiffs Returns, 9 Abuse.
De been esse, who place many Fines and Forfeitures in Liberties and
Franchises, which are not; and the King not knowing what are his, and the Lords
of such Liberties having no Right thereto, the Officers pocket them. Also,
Under-Sheriffs often charge the King with Justices of Peace Wages, when they
attend not at Assizes and Sessions. And Sheriffs and Bailiffs oppress the
People, by reason Sheriffs let our their Balywicks to Farm, at dear Rates,
contrary to the Statute 23 Hen. 6. cap. 10.

That exact Rolls of Liberties be made, Remedy.
as the Statute 13 Edw. 1. cap. 39. directs. And that the Statutes, 7 Hen. 4.
cap. 3. 6 Edw. 1. cap. 14. 10 Edw. 1 Stat. Rutland. 27 Edw. 1. cap. 2. be duly
put in execution; and that Justices of Peace's Wages may be paid and allowed,
as the Statute 14 Ric. 2. cap. 11. directs, and not otherwise. And that
Under-Sheriffs may receive all their Bailiffs Returns and Accounts duly
attested upon Oath, before fit Persons appointed to take Affidavits in the
respective Counties, and produce the same so attested, to account by, in the
Exchecquer; and that the Sature 23 H. 6. be put in execution.

That many Persons guilty of great Offenses, 10 Abuse.
often forfeit their Recognizances, rather than stand Trial; by reason Officers
entrusted with the Execution, which is the Life of the Law, for Bribes either
smother the Recognizances, or discharge them upon wrong Suggestions, and easy
Compositions to the King, and make such as by inadvertency, and not out of any
ill design, unhappily incur Penalties, often paying great Sums of Money for
their Quietus, and Discharges; and exact what they can get of the poorer sort,
to the ruin of them and their Families.

That the Clerk of Assizes, Remedy.
Clerks of the Peace, and all Officers of the Courts of Justice, to whom it
belongs to Record Estreats, and certify any Fines, Forfeitures, and
Compositions into the Exchecquer, may duly make up their Estreats, and set down
every Fine, Forfeiture, and Composition in particular; and the Affidavits, and
Proofs, or other matter, upon which every Composition or Discharge is grounded:
also certify upon every Fine or Forfeiture not discharged, how the Person, and
his Offense does truly appear to be; that the Justices who are to approve of,
and sign all Estreats, may correct what they see amiss; and the Officers may
deliver the same so certified and attested upon Oath, that they contain all
which came to their knowledge, without Imbezelment of any.

The King's Duty of per Fine, 11 Abuse.
upon Alienations, is 10 l. in all Cases for every 100 l. per Annum, contained
in Writs of Covenant and Entry, and the Commissioners make Rent, Charges, and
Annuities for Life, pay accordingly; yet make Estates in Fee some times, one
half of the full Duty; others not an Eighth, Tenth, Twelfth, or Sixteenth part,
where the value of Estates, and occasion of levying or suffering Fines and
Recoveries differ not, as the Commissioners and Attorneys contrive the matter;
And by reason some Commissioners are apt to rate and compound higher than
others, most cunning Attorneys and Sollicitors go to him will rate lowest, and
certify them, Affirmed to be as they make them; and in Wales the Farmers screw
Fines very high.

That the Owners of the Estates contained in Writs of Covenant and Entry,
Remedy.
or some credible Person who knows the value thereof, may from time to time
certify the same, by some known Attorney to the Commissioners, who may be
empowered to abate what the King thinks fit in ease and favor to his Subjects;
as for instance: If the Estate be 200 l. per Annum, where the pr^fine is 20 l.
the Commissioners may abate 14, or 15 l. thereof, more or less, as the King
thinks fit; and so proportionably for Estates of greater or lesser Values, and
certify the Abatement made per Mandatum Dom. Regis, that the Subject may
acknowledge the King's Bounty; and the Commissioners may be enjoined to
Register all Proofs whereon they ground their Compositions: And the general
Registry may be Methodically and Alphabetically digested by Counties, and lie
open for any body at seasonable times to inspect gratis, that in case any Fraud
should afterward appear, the King may know on whom to charge it.

That Persons aggrieved by Officers and Attorneys undue practices seldom seek
Redress, 12 Abuse.
but find the Remedy worse than the Disease, by reason the Kings Attorney and
Solicitor Generals practice depends on Officers, Attorneys and Sollicitors
bringing them Clients, and the Judges take Fees in Suits, which increase as
Proceedings multiply; and large Sums of Money for Offices and New-years-Gifts,
which influences them to favor Officers, Attorneys, and Solicitors, because
the Judge most favorable, is sure of most Fees.

That the Attorney and Solicitor-General may have such Salaries as the Judges
have to acquit their private Practice, Remedy.
and addict themselves to popular Actions, Informations, and Pleas of the
Crown; and that the King dispose of all Offices as proposed, and take the
Duties arising upon Proceedings in Law and Equity into his own hands; that the
Judges who are to correct Officers, Attorneys, and Solicitors may be interested
to serve the Public. The Law, to avoid partiality provides, 8 Rich. 2. cap. 2.
23 Hen. 8. cap. 24. That no Man of Law shall be Judge of. Assize where born;
and undoubtedly the Statutes, 18 and 20 Edw. 3. were intended for that purpose.

Whereas some thousand Families are ruined by Attorneys and Sollicitors
unreasonable Bills of Cost, 13 Abuse.
and Officers Exactions.

That the Statute 3 Jacob. 1. cap. 7. and other Laws against Extortion be put
in Execution, Remedy.
and a Table of the just Fees of every Officer be duly hung up in the Treasury
of every Court and Office.

Now whereas the Administration of Justice depends on the right Construction
and Execution of the Laws in being; and the Lord Chief Justice Coke says, Cok.
Inst. 1 part, fol. 234.
That Justice will never be administered, whereby Religion, Liberty and Property
will be invaded, unless Officers come to their places as the Law requires. And
whereas to avoid partiality, it is provided by the Statute of 8 Rich. 2. cap. 2
and 33 Hen. 8. cap. 24. That no Man of Law shall be Judge of Assize where born;
and whereas the said Laws of 18 and 20 Edw. 3. 12 Rich. 2. c. 2. and 5 and 6
Edw. 6. cap. 16. were made for the due and impartial Execution of Justice; and
whereas the Statute of 27 Hen. 8. cap. 24. restored diverse ancient Authorities
and Prerogatives of Justice to the Crown, which were severed and taken away by
express Grants, and gave no Compensation to the Grantees, because their Estates
therein, were to the great detriment and diminution of the Royal Estate, and
great delay of Justice. And whereas the Grievances aforesaid, may be redressed
by a due Execution of the Laws in force, that are not Repealed, its to be hoped
the Parliament will advise and counsel his Majesty to dispose of Offices, as
aforesaid, and take away such Fees and Perquisites from Ministers as impede and
hinder a right and due Administration of Justice, and diminish the Ancient
Revenues of the Crown.

Opinions and Reports of Council, and others, in the Reign of King Charles the
Second, in behalf of Mr. Brunskell.
Attorney General North's Opinion, in October, 1674.

THat the small Fines and Amerciaments in all Courts, are wholly neglected,
which if carefully looked after, will be of considerable value: And the said
Brunskell, if His Majesty please to favor him, deserves an Employment
therein, for so useful a Discovery.

Fr. North.

Upon his Retraction, being referred to Sir Charles Harboard, he reported:

THat all the Fines are agreed to be due to the King.

Chapter Harboard.

Upon the Officers denying the Abuses to be true, the state thereof was
referred to the Examination of Sir William Jones, who reported:

THat Many of the Abuses are true, and fit to be remedied; and all, or the
greatest part may be redressed by the Judges Orders in the respective Courts.
And the Discoverer deserves all due Encouragement for the Service he has
already done, and may for the future do, in discovering these and the like
Abuses; also the assurance of a liberal Reward.

Will. Jones.

Afterward the same state of Abuses was referred in like manner to Sir Robert
Sawyer.

THat great Abuses are practiced by Clerks; and it is fit such Rules be made,
that His Majesty may not be injured; and the Orders seem reasonable in the main
to remedy them.

R. Sawyer.

Upon a draught of a Warrant for a Pattent intended to be granted to the said
Brunskel, of the Green-wax Fines, he obtained the Opinion of the Persons as
follows:

THat a Patent pursuance to this Warrant is Legal, in regard all the Money is
actually brought in by the usual and legal Process of the respective Courts: So
that the Subject is not vexed with any new way of Collecting or Process, but
things run in their usual Channel.

Jo. Simpson. Edm. Saunders. Tho. Ramond.

I Am of Opinion, the King may legally grant what is premised; and such Grant
in good hands, will be helpful to the Administration of Justice.

Will. Williams.

The Earl of Anglesey's Opinion.
I Know very well, that this Grant will be for the ease and benefit of the
poorer sort of Subjects, who are now miserably oppressed by the Exchecquer
-Officers; which makes them so opposite (against their Oaths) to the King's
making the just and merciful advantage of this his ancient Revenue of Green-wax.

Anglesey.

The Master of the Rolls's Certificate, upon the Lord Keeper North's
misrepresenting the said Brunskell.

I Know Mr. Brunskel to be a fit Person to be employed, for he was one of my
Clerks in the Rolls Chapel; which is an Office of great Trust, and did
honestly demean himself therein.

Har. Grimstone.

Opinions about Presines upon Alienation.
WHere the certainty appears what His Majesty's Duty is, the Commissioners
cannot abate thereof, having no such Power by their Commission. And in Case the
Method observed by former Commissioners, be found greatly to His Majesty's
prejudice, others more beneficial may be Law be prescribed.

R. Sawyers

IF His Majesty's Duty be certain in itself, I cannot see how the Commissioners
can lessen or abate it, without an Authority from the King: Every Person
entrusted in His Majesty's Revenue, is answerable to His Majesty for the
Execution of his Office, and by Suit in the Attorney-General's Name, being
convicted of any Fraud, or wilful breach of Trust to His Majesty's damage, is
liable by Law to make the same good.

Edw. Ward.

King Charles the Second upon the aforesaid Opinions, which are, That he might
legally grant the Green-Wax Fines, did Anno 30. of his Reign, Grant one Moiety
thereof to the said Brunskell and others, at and under the yearly Rent of 250
l. for 31 Years: But the Lord Chief Justice North prevailed to have a Clause
inserted, That it might be lawful for the King in Council to revoke the same
upon due proof of any Inconvenience to the Crown thereby: And without any proof
thereof, the said Grant was soon after represented illegal, and revoked: Now
it is adjudged legal, and granted to the Right Honorable William Lord Pawlet.

King Charles the Second upon the Revocation of the said Grant, gave the said
Brunskell a Commissioners place in the Alienation Office, and granted to him
the Office of Surveyor of the Green-Wax Fines, but the Lord Chief Justice North
and Officers, would not suffer any Rules or Orders to be settled to enable the
said Brunskel duly to execute either of the said Offices, and did cut short and
stop his Salaries till the King died; and the late King took away both the said
Offices from the said Brunskell.

Upon this happy Revolution, the said Brunskell petitioned to be restored; and
upon Reference of his Petition, with a State of the said Abuses to the said
Barons of their Majesty's Exchequer, they Reported severally, That the said
Brunskell was a Person well qualified. And the Right Honorable Sir Robert
Atkyns, more particularly Reported, who was one of the Judges in the Common
Pleas at the time of the said Brunskill's Discovery, and at every Hearing
before his Majesty in the Treasury, Countenanced it while he continued Judge in
the late Reign of the said King Charles the Second.

Sir R^bert Atkyns's Report.
I Find the Petitioner had formerly a Grant of the Office of Surveyor of the
Green-Wax, and has taken pains to inform himself in the Abuses of that
Revenue, and has good Experience in the managing of that and the other Office
mentioned in his Petition, and is every way qualified for them.

24 May 1689. To. Atkyns.

The Contents of a Certificate of Fifty Members of the late Parliament, upon
perusal of Mr. Brunskell's Case.
THat as the said Brunskell was placed in the said Of^^^^^ upon Merit, and
removed by the late King, he ought in Justice to be restored, as an Object of
his Majesty's Bounty, and fitly qualified for the said Offices; and that an
Application to Parliament is improper, unless he meet with Disappointments.

The Duke of Bolton's Certificate.
THese are to Certify the Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners of their
Majesty's Treasury, That the King has graciously promised me to restore Mr.
Brunskell to his Office of Surveyor of the Green-Wax Fines, and to his
Commissioners Place in the Alinaation Office.

30 April 1689. Bolton.

The aforesaid Abuses, Reports, Opinions, and Certificates were duly presented
to the then Lords Commissioners of their Majesty's Treasury, and many Petitions
with the same annexed, for a Hearing, yet obtained it not till about the Twenty
ninth of September. last, when both Offices were disposed of: And the present
Lords Commissioners, assisted with the Right Honorable Sir Robert Atkyns, and
their Majesty's Attorney General, did think fit to have the said Brunskell make
his Application to Parliament, which he has accordingly done.

The said Brunskell lost 300 l. per Annum, which he got by his Practice, before
he made this Discovery in October 1674. and had 60 l. per Annum in Fee, 500 l.
in Money, and has lost all, and contracted Debts upward of 2800 l. by the ill
usage he has met with in the late Reigns, for making and prose^ing the
Discovery how the just Rights of the Crown, and the Liberties of the People,
are invaded by Judges and Officers undue Practices, in discharge of his Oath,
which obliged him to maintain and defend the Kings and Peoples just Rights, and
discover what he knows to be done or suffered, to the prejudice of either.

Therefore the said Brunskell prays this Honorable House to Redress the
Grievances, and Relieve him as to your Honors Wisdoms may seen meet and just,
That your Petitioners Suffering may not make good Men afraid to discharge Oath
and Duty, and ill Persons in Office worse.

FINIS.

