Vade Mecum: OR, A COMPANION FOR A CHYRURGION: fitted for times of peace or war.

Compendiously showing the young Artist the use of every several Instrument
belonging to a CHYRURGION; and the virtues and qualities of all such Medicines
as are needful and necessary, with the manner of compounding them, according to
the most approved Authors.

As also the perfect cure of green wounds, either incised or contused, Ulcers,
Fistulaes, Fractures, and Dislocations.

To which is added the manner of making Reports before a Judge of Assize, of any
one that has come to an untimely end.

By THO. BRUGIS Doctor in Physic.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. for THOMAS WILLIAM at the sign of the Bible in Little
Britain, 1652.

T. Cross sculpsit
several scenes: a doctor examining a patient, preparing medicine, tools

The Preface.
EVery thing in the world is a natural vision, which we ought to see and
understand, for the more clear apprehension of the invisible Majesty of God,
but of all these man is the most to be admired, being the worthiest and most
excelent of all the Creators works, for whom God made all that was made. There
are some that hold an opinion that only Nature was the first cause of things,
and that there is no other God than Nature, but they are easily overthrown if
they consider, That Prima causa quod superiorem non agnoscat a qua suum esse
acceperit, ipsa sui ipsius causa est, natura vero non a seipsa sed a principio
superiori existit, cum enim finita sit (ut ex Coelorum motu patet) ab alio
certe definita est, nihil siquidem seipsum definit, ad haec si natura seipsum
fecerit (quae primae causae proprietas est) certe seipsum fecit naturaliter,
quae vero naturaliter fiunt ex praeexistente materia fiunt, ut si natura facta
sit naturaliter eam ex materia praeexistente fieri oportuerit, quod si
statuatur natura nondum existente consequiter aliquid factum esse naturaliter,
and naturam aliquid fecisse priusquam ipsamet existent, non est ergo natura
prima rerum causa.

That God made man and all things else in the world, and subjected them to the
power of man, cannot be denied, and why he did this Plato tells you: Ut a Deo
bono opera bona fierent, si ergo quaerimus, says one, quis faecerit, Deus est,
si per quod, dixit fiat, and facta sunt, si quare fiat, quia bonus est, nec
enim auctor est excellentior Deo, nec ars efficacior Dei verbo, nec causa
melior quam ut bonum crearetur a Deo bono. Now although all these things were
created of diverse natures and properties, yet by the incomprehensible wisdom
of the Creator, they were appointed to tend to one certain and common end,
namely, to serve man, and in him to show forth the infinite power and
greatness of their work master. But in man alone the treasures of his heavenly
graces are without comparison more liberally unfolded, and that in all fullness
and bounty as well in regard of the goods and commodities of this life, as also
in respect of the assured happiness and eternal felicity, which by the
especial grace of God is purchased and assured to him only in the immortality
of the second life.

And forasmuch as every Country is not furnished with all sorts of things (God
having so disposed thereof) that some should abound with those things which
others greatly want and stand in need of, the omnipotent providence has taught
us the means of transporting by water from one country to another, with small
loss, trouble, and charges, so that one Nation may communicate those
commodities to another, which the Creator has bestowed upon them all, each
granting mutual help to the other by this means.

Now this great masterpiece of the Creator, the best part of nothing, for whom
all these were made, through his disobedience, pride, ambition, intemperance,
incredulity, curiosity, from whence proceeded original sin, and that
general corruption of mankind, as from a fountain flowed all bad
inclinations, and actual transgressions which cause our several calamities
inflicted upon us for our sins, and are the impulsive causes of all the
miseries attending man; these cause the privation and destruction of Gods
image, the cause of death and diseases, of all temporal and eternal
punishments; from hence likewise proceed the isntrumental causes of our
infirmities, which are as diverse as the infirmities themselves, stars, heavens,
elements, etc. and all the creatures which God has made are armed against
sinners; they were indeed once good in themselves, and that they are now many
of them pernicious to us, is not in their nature but our corruption which has
caused it, as an ancient Philosopher notes to us by a comparison of those that
sail in a Ship upon the water, who are not above two or three fingers distant
from death, namely so far off as the thickness of the planks and timber of the
Ship is, in which they are carried into the Sea, for if that timber were taken
away from under them, they cannot avoid drowning; but we have death a great
deal nearer to us, we carry it about us by infinite causes and means, whereby
we are every hour in danger of stifeling, poisoning, drowning, etc. and that
both waking and sleeping, eating and drinking, at all times and in all places
wherever we become. It has pleased the omnipotent Creator out of his own
mere mercy, and great providence, to give knowledge and understanding of the
virtues and qualities of the creatures which he has placed in the world, and
of them to compound Medicines to withstand all such diseases as shall happen
upon the bodies of this most noble Fabric. Next therefore to God, we ought in
all our extremities to seek to and rely upon the Physician, who is Manus Dei,
and to whom he has given knowledge, that he might be glorified in his
wondrous works; read Ecclesiasticus the thirty eight Chapter, where you may
find what honor and respect belongs to the Physician, but not meaning every
one that steals the name of a Physician, for there be many Mountebanks,
Quacksalvers, Empericks, in every street almost, and in every village, that
take upon them this name, and make this divine, noble, and profitable Art to be
evil spoken of, and contemned, by reason of such base and illiterate
Artificers.

You have heard what the subject is the Artist has to work upon, the
excellency whereof I would have him diligently to consider, by contemplating
the Heavens, the Earth, the Seas, and all the creatures therein, their
excellency and admirable beauty, which were only created for the use of man,
and are maintained and preserved in their being, and moving, by one and the
same divine providence always like unto it self.

Next let him consider with what care, diligence, and respect, he ought to
behave himself toward this noble piece of workmanship, and to that end let
the Artist be honest, having a good conscience, doing nothing in his profession
negligently, or rashly, which may be offensive either to God or man; but let
him be godly, pitiful, affable, courteous, pleasant, bountiful, merry, and
mild toward his poor Patients, and profitable to the ignorant, not being moved
to passion by their peevishness, but regarding wholly what they stand in need
of, always having God the searcher of all hearts and judge of all actions,
before his eyes, who to those that do well, and discharge a good conscience
toward their Patients, will crown with greater and more precious rewards then
ever can be had from any mortal man. Let him have his Latin tongue at least,
and that not only for a little matter of discourse, as many in these days
conceive themselves to be thought scholars, if now and then they tumble out
some short sentence of Latin, which they pronounce bad, and understand worse;
but let him have it after the purest manner, that he may not only understand
any Latin Author, but also any Physicians Bill, and may be able to write a
Bill himself; neither let him think it sufficient to be knowing in the
ancient and modern rules of his Art, but he must apply himself to handle those
things Artist-like which shall come in his way beyond the old precepts; for we
every day meet with new things, and therefore he must endeavor himself to
gain the knowledge of Simples, their nature and quality, and the goodness of
them, both by the sight, taste, smell and touch, to know the good from the
indifferent, and the indifferent from the bad, as also at what time he should
gather his Roots, Herbs, Flowers, Seeds, and Fruits, and how to dry them and
lay them up, that they may be kept from putrefaction; he must also observe the
due boiling of Emplaisters, Unguents, etc. to know what medicines shall be
boiled in Brass, what in Tin, and what in Iron, and what are to be stirred
with iron Spatulaes, what with wodden, as you shall find in diverse
Compositions; let the Artist also have a strong, stable, and intrepide hand,
and a mind resolute and merciless; I mean so as that when he takes any to
heal, he be not moved to make more haste then the time requires, or to cut
less then is needful, but let him do all things as if he were nothing
affected with their cries, not giving heed to the judgment of the vain
common people, and idle prating women, who speak ill of Artists merely out of
ignorance.

Let him eschew all bad qualities especially pride, gluttony, covetousness,
which as they are odious in any person, so they are most detestable in
Chyrurgions, he being so much drawn from his practice by these vices, that he
ruins the bodies of many, yea and of diverse the souls also; I would wish the
Artist to be so free from the first, namely, pride, and that he vouchsafe to do
for the meanest and poorest of people, as much as for the greatest and richest,
for they are all alike in the sight of God; if thou see a poor wretch lying
in misery wanting the painful hand of some Artist, let him not be nice, lazy,
or disdainful, but compassionate to the meanest creature, as he would desire
others to do to him; and let him not refuse this in any manner of disease as
fearing infection, but let him go on boldly, in the fear of God, his calling
being lawful; let him encourage himself with this, that no disease is
infectious to him, that he is bound to visit the diseased, which who so
neglects, God will find him out with that disease or a worse; and know this
that the meanest of thy Patients dying, through thy neglect, their blood will
cry to God for revenge.

Gluttony is a vice which extremely hinders the Artist from following his
Calling as he ought, being given up so much to the excess of meat and drink,
that they are not capable of doing any thing that is good: A great many there
are who term themselves Artists, who mind nothing but their bellies; some
cannot pass away the day unless they begin in the Alehouse as soon as they
rise out of their beds, and so continue until night; some think they cannot
entertain their friends, nor be accounted good fellows, nor good company,
unless they drink so long as they can stand, which indeed not only overthrows
their own healths, but the healths also and lives of others, who sending to
them for help, run in a drunken fit and fall to cutting, burning, and
torturing, the poor Patient to their utter undoing, not knowing what they do,
nor how to do any thing aright, and this course of life is it which makes them
so sottish, stupid and blockish, that they are not fit to undertake or do any
thing about a Christian, yet will they venture upon any thing though never so
drunk, and from hence happen so many evil accidents as are daily seen by
Patients receiving Physic, blouding, dressing, etc. from drunken Artists; as
convulsions, palsies, pricking of nerves, distempers in wounds, and from thence
fevers, and death it self. And this many will not be sensible of, but if they
stand in need of the Artists help they find him at the Alehouse, where his
discourse is scurrility, his summum bonum a pot of Ale; and to the first
demand, he answers with three or four great oaths, and speaks high with some
strange terms, neither understood by his Patient, nor himself, enough to
fright him; O that is a brave man, a learned man, I warrant him, and ready in
his work! when indeed he is skillful in nothing but unskilfulnesse; for how can
a man expect any good from him who spends his time in such a manner? whereas
our ancient Chyrurgions labored day and night to attain to the perfection of
the Art, as diligently as Tully speaks of himself, Nullus mihi per otium dies
exit, partem noctis studiis dedico, non vero somno sed oculos vigilia
fatigatos, cadentesque in operam detineo; yet could gain the depth of it. And
this let the Artist observe, that though he be ever learning, yet he shall
never learn half of that he ought to know, for vita brevis ars longa, let him
therefore follow his practice and study, laying aside the pot and pipe, which
will but render him odious and contemptible in the sight of God and man, and
unapt and unprofitable to prosecute any good thing, either in his Calling, or
otherwise; I need not herein enlarge my self, what I have rehearsed, is too
well known, I will only give you the true description of them in a few words,
Atlantes videri volunt, quum sint statuae lapideae, fungi forsan and bardi,
nihil a saxo differentes, viles scurrae, idiotae, circumforanei, vagi asini,
praeter in verecundum frontem adferentes nihil, vulgares quisdam quisquilius
and scholarium quaedam nugamenta, indigna quae vel recipiantur in triviis; quum
interim docti viri, and vitae sanctioris ornamentis prae ditibis iniqua sort
serviant puris nominibus nuncupati, humiles, obscuri, multoque digniores licet,
egentes inhonorati, vitam privam privatam agunt.

Covetousness is as ill beseeming an Artist as any other vice, being the root
of all evils; from it arise all the mischieves in the world, quarrels,
strifes, suits, hatred, envy, thefts, polings, sackings, wars, murders,
poysonings, etc. from hence it is that God is forgotten, our neighbor hated,
and many times the son forgiveth not his Father, neither the Brother his
Brother, merely for the desire of gain. Truly I must needs say thus much for my
self, that finding i^ so detestable in all men, but especially in a Physician,
I have (to mine own power) vowed the utter ruin thereof, neither shall I ever
be reconciled to it with any persuasion, whatsoever: Hipocrates in his Epistle
to Cratena an Hearbarist, gives him this good counsel, that if it were
possible amongst other Herbs he should cut up that Weed of Covetousness by
the roots, that there be no remainder left, and then know this for a certain,
that together with their bodies thou may quickly cure all the diseases of
their minds. John Maria Duke of Millaine chastised very justly though severely
the Covetousness of a Curate who denied the burial of a dead body, because
his Widow had not wherewithal to pay him the charges of the burial, the Duke
himself going to the funerals of the dead, where he caused the Priest to be
bound to the coarse, and so cast them both into one pit. And truly I could wish
that all Artists who do deny their help or their medicines to the poor should
have some such punnishment inflicted upon them, for it is the ruin of many a
poor wrech, who lies languishing, and perishes for want of means to send to
the Physician or Chyrurgion.

But be thou neither careless nor covetous Harpey-like, to make a prey of thy
Patient by prolonging and wyer-drawing thy cure so long as there is any hope of
pay: Non missura cutem nisi plena cruroris hirudo: But as I have said endeavor
thy self to live chastely, soberly, and civily in thy conversation, that thou
may be blameless before God and man; let him always give care to the
discourses of the Learned; for Aristotle's rule is, that the more knowledge a
man has, the greater occasion of doubting is offered. Be sure thou search into
the nature and cause of the grief thou undertakest, else will it be impossible
for thee to prescribe a remedy to the sick party: a disease known (says the
proverb) is half cured.

Never administer any medicine, but first make thy supplication to the Almighty
for his Assistance to thine endeavors: and whenever thou have cured any
patient, forget not to give him humble thanks for making thee the instrument of
his glory in restoring health to the sick. These two are so often omitted by
Artists, that many times they miss of their purpose, and the divine Art is
thereby scandalized; Multa in homine bona fiunt quae non facit homo, nulla vero
facit homo quae non Deus praestet ut faciat homo, says a learned Divine.

Presume not too much on thy own wisdom and virtue, lest thou be lifted up
with a vain confidence, and puffed up with pride, for when men are carried with
an inordinate and blind love of themselves they are soon persuaded that there
is nothing in them worthy to be despised, yea they think that their ignorance
is wisdom, insomuch that knowing nothing, they suppose they know all things,
and having no dexterity to perform any one commendable work, they presume very
inconsiderately to set their hand to every great matter; but the more care and
diligence they bestow, being led with a desire to show great skill, and
thinking to win honor and renown, so much the more they discover their
ignorance and blockishnesse, purchasing to themselves shame and infamy: For a
man to know himself to be ignorant, is the best science, and so necessary for
men, that without it they cannot be truly skillful; for as I said before, the
ignorant person that knows not himself to be such an one, but supposes he
knows that which he does not, indeed is as unteachable a beast as can be.
There are held to be two main defects of wit, error and ignorance, to which all
others are reduced; by ignorance we know not things necessary, by error we know
them falsely; ignorance is a privation, error a positive act; from ignorance
comes vice, from error heresy. Socrates who by the oracle was declared to be
the wisest man then living, was greatly commended by the Ancients, because he
said he knew but only one thing; namely, That he was ignorant, and knew
nothing. These things being observed, I doubt not, but the Artist may proceed
in his work boldly, and with good success. But I know what some will answer to
all this I have said, they will me as Phaedra did her Nurse, quae loqueris vera
sunt, sed suror suggerit sequi pejora.

Now a word or two to the Patient: Thou see in every Village a sort of
Mountebanks, Empericks, Quacksalvers, Paracelsians (as they call themselves)
Wizards, Alcumists, Poor-vicars, cast Apothecaries, and Physicians men,
Barbers, and Good-wives that profess great skill, go with the name of Doctor,
which title perhaps they bought at some beyond sea University, where they
bestow this degree upon such people for their money; the phrase they use is,
Accipiamus pecuniam, demittamus asinum, and so with this title of Doctorasse,
away he flies into all Countries possessing the people with stories and false
tales, and leads them to the destruction of their bodies, if not of souls too,
that an able Physician or Chyrurgion, who has undergone a great deal of
hardship to benefit himself in his Art, can scarcely mantain himself, or know
who shall be his Patients, and these kind of creatures will give a dram, and
promise to restore a maidenhead, and do it without danger, make an abort if
need be, keep down their paps, hinder conception, procure lust, make them able
with provocatives, and how and then step in themselves.

But beware of these kind of creatures, and if thou need the Artist help,
find him out by these rules I have before prescribed, and conform thy self as
much to him as is possible, and be content to be ruled by him, else all his
endeavors will be to no good end. Be not too niggardly miserable of thy purse,
or think it too much thou bestowest upon thy self, for in seeking to save
charges thou may endanger thy health: Do not conceal thy grief through
bashfulnesse, but fully disclose it, otherwise thou do thy self great
injury; have a strong desire to be cured, and a great conceit that thou shall
receive cure; defer not too long before thou seek out for help, venienti
occurite morbo, for by this means many times, or through thy ignorance in not
taking notice of thy disease, and the danger of it, contempt, shamefastness,
supine negligence, extenuation, wretchedness, and peevishness, they undo
themselves, and often out of a foolish humor of shamefastness, they will
rather dye then discover their disease; on the other side do not entertain
that foolish fancy of aggravating thy grief, that upon every small passion,
slight imperfection, or petty impediment, if their finger do but ache,
presently run, ride, send for the Doctor, and when he comes, all is not worth
speaking of; be constant to him thou beginnest with, not changing upon with
every slight occasion, or disliking him upon every toy, aeger qui plurimos
consulit medicos plerumque in errorem singulorum cadit; again, nihil ita
sanitatem impedit ac remediorum crebra mutatio, nec venit valnus ad cicatricem
in quo diversa medicamenta tentantur. I have known those that have been so much
guilty of this, that when things have not fallen out according to their mind,
or that they have not present ease, to run to another, and another, twenty, one
after another, and they still promise all to cure them, try a thousand
remedies, and by this means they increase their mallady, and make it most
dangerous and difficult to be cured. Be not bold in trying conclusions upon thy
self without a Physicians advice and consent; if thou read a receipt in a
book makes thee believe a certain cure, yet trust it not, for many instead of
Physic, have this way taken poison, operari ex libris absque cognitione and
solerti ingenio periculosum est.

Think not the worse of the Artist if what he prescribes work not an immediate
effect, for diverse things may hinder the operation of a well applied medicine.
1. As if the Patient through the extraordinary corruption of his body, and the
decay of the humidum radicale be come to the last period of his life. 2. The
Artist may chance to send his Bill to an unknown Apothecary, who through
negligence or ignorance may alter the medicine. 3. The working of the medicine
is hindered by the Patients staying too long before he seeks for help, and so
the disease has got so much hold that it has too much over mastred nature. 4.
Because the Patient obeys not precisely the rules prescribed. 5. Because
every body is not so fit to receive medicines at all times as may happen by the
evil influence of some star, or the natural averseness of the patient. 6. The
miserableness, and covetousness of the Patient, who thinks much to give or
bestow any thing either upon the Artist, or upon himself, when to say the
truth, no wages is gotten more honestly, nor earned more painfully. 8.
Imagination as I have told, is a main matter, for the conceit and confidence of
the Patient toward the Artist, will forward or hinder the cure of a malady.
Possess not thy self with an opinion, that many have who when they are sick
refuse to send for the help of the Artist, saying, That if their time be come
they dye, that if they shall be ordained to cure, they shall be cured without
the help of Art, and with Pliny say, Omnis morbus laethalis aut curabilis in
vitam desinit aut in mortem. Vtroque igitur medicina inutilis, si laethalis
curari non potest, si curabilis non requirit medium natura expellet. But if
this Dilemma should hold good, God had given the medicinal knowledge in vain,
had also created diverse things in vain which is not to be disputed, for Physic
is Donum Dei, and as great as any that ever God bestowed upon man, and by it
the life of man is preserved, and the radical moisture nourished, even as the
fire is increased and nourished by adding combustible matter. I shall not
enlarge my self in discoursing the excellency of this Art, nor which of the
three is most honorable, to wit, Physic, Pharmacy, or Chyrurgery, but only
add thus much, that they are all three so depending one upon another, that
they cannot be separated, and in times past they were all performed by one man,
though now pride and idlensse has made them three Professions; yet to say
truly, whosoever professes one, must be skillful in the other two, else he
cannot perform his work aright.

Now a word or two to the Reader concerning my writing this Book, and so I
shall conclude, I know I must undergo the censures of many; some will say, Why
did I publish any thing in our mother tongue concerning the Art of healing,
that it will not be accounted of any worth, because none will imagine that an
Artist will publish his knowledge in so easy a way, that every one may be made
as knowing as himself, and especially in this scribbling age, when there are so
many Pamphlets of Physic, Surgery, Pharmacy, Receipts, etc. thrust forth every
day; as one very well said, Tenet insanabile multos scribendo Cacoethes. Indeed
I must confess, I do venture my credit upon a great uncertainty; but I must
tell you, tnat perusing the books that have lately issued into the public, I
find them so poor, barren, and indeed nothing at all to that purpose, they
pretend by their titles, either some kind of foolish Empericall receipts
collected out of old manuscripts, or else invectives against the divine Art of
healing, and the sons thereof merely out of a divilish mind, casting base
scandalous aspersions upon that reverend Society of Professors, whereby
ignorant people are extremely abused; now that I might discover the errors and
abuses which these base companions have hatched in these times, and withal
considering that bonum quo communius eo melius, I have taken the pains to
publish this Book, wherein I have plainly and truly (though briefly discoursed)
the most part of the practice of Chyrurgery in a more easy and certain way
then ever yet was published in the English tongue, and that way which I my self
used for seven years in these late unnatural Civill-wars according to the
method of our Ancients, not rejecting their medicines because they were old,
and therefore obsolete, for by these few which I have here mentioned, being
careful and diligent, thou may cure any wound, Ulcer, or Fistula that is
curable by Art, without any new devises which many use, that they may be
thereby counted famous, because they have something of their own invention
which they count beyond any of Galen or Hippocrates, to the overthrow, and
utter undoing of many a person; and therefore I do with Dido Queen of Carthage,
haud ignara malis miseris succurrere disco. But you will object, that I might
as well have waved this employment, being it is but actum agere, that there are
diverse elaborate pieces written by judicious men concerning this Art, so that
what I have written is merely stolen from others, the cream of other men's wit,
flowers taken out of other men's gardens: Truly I cannot deny but for the most
part it is, only give me leave with Terence, Nihil dictum quod non dictum
prius, methodus sola artificem ostendit, says weckerus, so that I may justly
say, Omne meum, nihil meum. I have laboriously collected these few flowers into
one bundle, the Composition only mine, and after that manner as never any yet
was published in English, though it is the true method of all our Ancient
Artists.

As for the rudeness of the language, and the several faults which some I
know will find with it; I answer only thus, Non dubito multos lectores hic
fore stultos, and a time may come wherein I may do as much for them. Well be
it how it will, when all is done, Laudamur ab his, culpamur ah illis, my great
occasions employing me other ways, were the cause that, Feci nec quod potui,
nec quod volui; howsoever let me desire the Reader to accept of my good will,
who have not written, ad ostentationem, as I have before told you, and at the
next impression I shall enlarge my self to the great benefit of the diligent
Artist. Farewell.

From my Chamber at Rickmersworth in Hertfordshire, this 20. of September,
1651.
VADE MECUM: OR, A Companion for a Chyrurgion.
THE Artist being armed with these and the like Instructions, let him be
provided with a handsome Plaster Box, and Salvatory; his Instruments in his
Plaster Box kept clean, bright, and sharp, his Salvatory furnished with
these Unguents following, and his Plaster Box with these Instruments, viz.

An Incision knife A pair of Sizzers A Spatula 2. Small Probes An Uvula spoone
A Levatory A capital Instrument A stitching quill with three square pointed
needls of several sizes, well set. A Director. A pair of Forceps. A Spatula
linguae. A fleme. A small rasour.
His Salvatory shall be furnished with these Unguents following: Basilicon,
Arcaeus liminent, Golden Ointment, Apostles Ointment, Lucatullies Balsome,
Diapompholigos, Nutritum, Red desiccative,


In time of War let hrm provide these Instruments following, which are
seldom used but then.

Crows Bills, Terebellium, Catch Bullet straight and crooked, Incision
sheeres, screw, probe.

His Study I would have furnished with these things following, that may be
ready upon occasion.

A dismembring knife, A Trafine, A Headsaw, A Dismembring saw, A Speculum oris,
A Glyster siringe A Cathaeter Cupping glasses Blood porrengers Spatula Mundana
Splintes Junkes A Speculum avi, Cauterizing irons, Large spatulaes, Forceps for
teeth, and a punch, a small siring. Diet pot Clyster pot Mortar and pestle
Weights and scales Searces, strayners. Tape Towe. Spunges Clouts Rowlers Thread
and Needles to make rowlers A case of Lancets always ready in his pocket.
Emplaisters.
Stictick Paracelsus Diacalciteos Bettony plaster Mellilote plaster The
lesser diachyl^ Griseum Oxycroceum Great Diachylon with gums Red lead plaster
Ceroneum Vigoes great basilicon Diasulphuris Nicotian Sir Philip Paris
plaster.
Unguents.
Aegyptiacum White ointment with Camphire Populeon Dialthaea Honey and Soape
Arregon Martiacum Agrippae Tutia Spleen Ointment.
Oils of
Roses Dill Camomile Worms Lillies Elder flowers Rue Pepper Fox Castoreum
Euphorbium Linseed Amber Nutmegs chim Costus Wax St. John's wort comp. Eggs
Whelps Olives, Bays Sweet almonds Bitter almonds Vitrioll Sulphur Antimony
Myrtells Origanum. Brickes Turpentine Spike.
Waters of
Mints Sassafras Holy thistle Triacle Roses red, dam. white Plantaine Balm
Angelica Wormwood Anniseeds Cinnamon Caelestiall Water Doctor Stevens Common
Lotion. Strong Lie Vinegar Vinegar of Roses Ver juice Spirit of Wine.
Syrups of
Wormwood Lymons Poppies Roses solutine Violets. Diamoron Sloes Oxymel simple
Honey of Roses.
Conserves of
Red Roses, Sloes Rosemary flowers Borage flowers Barberries Quinces
Woodsorrel.
Electuaries.
London Triacle Venice Triacle Diatessaron Diaphaenicon Confectio Alkermes
Electuary of the Egg Mithridate. Diacatholicon.
Opiates.
Diascordium Laudanum Paracelsi Philonium Romanum, and persicum.
Pills.
Aureae sine quibus de Euphorbio. Cochiae Ruffi de Euphorbio.
Laxatives.
Confectio Hamech Pulvis Arthreticus Aloes simple, Jobeb. Benedicta laxativa
Aloes Rosata
Simples.
Rubarbe Polypody Hearts horn casped Hearts horn burnt Euphorbium Saffron China
Salsaparilla Guiacum Licorice Juice of Licorice Licorice powder. French Barley
Anniseeds Fennel seeds Carraway seeds Cummin seeds Fenugreeke seed White
starch Sugar Nutmeggs Myrrh Mastick Pitch Rosin Turpentine Wax, yellow and
white Hearts suet Hogs suet Sperma Caeti Dragons blood Cantharides Bolus Allome
Allome burned Linseed White copperas Album Graecum Wheat bran Mildust.
Flower of
Beans Barley Wheat.
Corrosives.
Trochisks of red Lead Praecipitate Quicksilver Lapis Medicamentosus Burnt
Copperas.
Honey.
NExt I shall show you how to use every several instrument before mentioned,
together with the composition of all these rehearsed medicines, with the
natures, qualities, and operations of every one of them, according to the most
approved Authors, and the best modern practice.

Certain instructions concerning the use of such instruments as I have
mentioned in this Book.
And first of the Incision knife.

THe use of this instrument is to cut the skin, or flesh upon needful
occasions, in paring away the putrid part of a gangrenous member, after
dismembring in making fontanella's, or issues, in opening apostemes, in
scarifications, in using the cuppinglasse, etc.

Let this Instrument be always kept clean and bright, by being rubbed dry
after it has been used, and sharp as any rasour. Let the Artist ever hide it
from the Patients sight with a cloth, and also all other sharp Instruments,
for diverse reasons.

Of the ordinary Sizzers.
THe Sizzers be very useful to cut cloth for Roulers, Lint, and Emplaisters,
to cut, and clip off proud flesh, loose skin, putrid flesh, or ends of sinnews.

Of the Spatula.
THe Spatula is used to spread Emplaisters, to mingle your Unguents on your
palm of your hand, to cover your Pledgets, also to mingle and stir Unguents
and Emplaisters in the composition; and of these I wish the Artist to have
diverse sorts of several sizes, of Iron and of wood kept very clean and
handsome.

Of the small Probes.
THe Probe cannot be missing in the Chyrurgeons Plaister-box, for without it
can nothing be done artificially. The use of it is to arm the eye with soft
lints, and with the other end to sound, or make probation of the depth of a
wound: sometime the small end armed with lint, is dipped in some Oil, or
liquor, and conveyed into the bottom of an Ulcer, or Fistula, thereby to
mundifie, corrode, or heal the grief, according as occasion shall offer it
self.

Of the Uvula Spoone.
THis Instrument serves so put pepper, Salt, and fine Bole in, and putting it
under the Uvula, or palate of the mouth, being fallen, and blowing the powder
into the cavity behind it throw the hollow pipe: It also serves to warm a
medicine in, as Unguents, to dip in Tents when you want an ordinary spoone,
also to power scalding Oil, or liquor into a wound, whereto I do constantly
use it in green wounds as hereafter you shall find in the ensuing discourse of
curing of wounds.

Of the Levatory.
THe Levatory is a necessary Instrument to elevate a depressed Cranium, or
Skull, but the Artist shall in no wise be over curious, or hasty in the using
it; for if he see no evil symptoms appear he may expect natures work, by
which he shall perceive the skull depressed to rise and scale admirably. It may
also serve many times to take off a scale of a bone after amputation of the
fingers, or toes.

Of the stitching Quill and Needles.
THese are instruments that cannot be missed in your Plaister-box; you shall
therefore have in your stitching Quill at least three needles of several sizes
or bigness, with square points, well set, and ready armed with green, or red
silk oyled, your needles always kept oiled, and clean from rust, in want of
silk at any time upon necessity you may use thread, rubbing it with some kind
of emplaister: You must also have in your said stiching Quill a Tailors needle
or two with thread to sow your rollers, and make them fast in the rolling of
wounds, fractures, or dislocations.

Of the Director.
THe Director is an Instrument to guide and direct the Incision knife, in
dilation or enlarging a wound, when you are near any vessels. They are also
used in cutting for the stone.

Of the Forceps.
THese are used to take of Emplaisters, Pledgets, and Tents, to take out a
spill of a bone, to hold up any piece of superfluous flesh or skin, thereby,
the better to cut it with the sizzers, or incision knife, to take out any thing
that may chance into the ear, nostrils, mouth, or throat, to take out a bullet
lying within reach, or any thing that is offensive in a wound, and is an
Instrument of continual, and very necessary use in Chyrurgery.

Spatula Linguae.
THe Spatula linguae, or speculu^ linguae is much like an ordinary spatula at
one end, only it is perforated and cut through, the better to hold the tongue
down without slipping off; the other end is made to scrape the tongue that is
furred in Fevers, Cankers, or other affects of the mouth, it is used to hold
down the tongue when you inject any liquor into the throat, or apply any
medicine to the mouth or throat, or when you would make inspection into the
mouth or throat in any affects of the Uvula, or in Quinces, Cankers, or
excoriations of the mouth or gums.

The Phlegm
IS an Instrument used to open the gums, and separate them from the tooth you
intend to pull out, compassing the tooth with the round sharp end thereof
close to the tooth, piercing deeper by little and little, until you feel it
as low as the jaw bone: Some use to open a vein with this instrument, but for
mine own part, I do, disalow it as very uncertain, and dangerous for touching
the Nerves, or greater, vessels.

Next we must look into the Salvatory to see what Unguents we have there, to
declare the Composition of them, their Virtues and Uses.

Of first of Basilicon.
BAsilicon is an Unguent used almost in all kinds of wounds, ulcers and
apostumes, either per se or mixed with other ungue^ts, for it has the virtue
to heat, humect, and mitigate pain: it digesteth and incarnateth wounds and
ulcers, and suppurateth apostumes, either hot or cold, being somewhat thick
spread upon cloth or leather, and it mitigateth the pain thereof. It is
likewise very fitly used with Praecipitate, Aegyptiacum, or any corroding
medicine, making them work with more case, and better mundifies: it is also
good for burnings and scaldings; and is thus made.

. Cerae flavae. Resinae pinguis. Picis graecae, of each half a pound. Olei, two
pounds four ounces.
Melt the Rosin and the Pitch, in the Oil, then add the Wax and boil them to
a just consistence.

Liniment of Arcaeus.
THis Arcaeus Liniment is a sovereign balm, not to be sufficiently commended
in all wounds whatsoever, especially in those of the head, where it does,
merely of it self, all the intentions of healing, the Flux of blood being
first stayed; for it digesteth, mundifieth, incarnateth, and cleatrizeth, it
defends from accidents, and is very avodine: I have diverse times applied it
mixed with other unguents to painful ulcers, and fistula's with good success:
it is made as follows.

. Gummi elemni. Of each 1. ounce and half. Teribinthinae abietinae. Of each 1.
ounce and half. Sevi veruecini antiqui and liquefacti, 2 ounces. Pinguedinis
Porcinae antique, and liquefactae, one ounce.
Dissolve the Gum in Sack, and evaporate the Sack, then put in the fats, and
lastly the terebinte, and mingle them well together.

The golden Ointment.
THis unguent is used to incarne wounds and ulcers, being first mundified, and
it is a most precious balm to heal them; it is a good healer of burnings and
scaldings, the fire first taken out; the composition is as follows.

. Cerae flavae, one pound. Olei, two pound and half. Terebinthinae, two
ounces. Resinae pinae Of each one ounce and half. Coloplioniae Of each one
ounce and half. Thuris Of each one ounce. Mastices Of each one ounce. Croci,
one dram.
Dissolve the Mastick in Sack, then put in the Oil, Rosin, Colophony, and
Frankincense, and when they are well melted scrape in the Wax, melt that, and
then add the Turpentine, and lastly the Saffron when you take it off.

Unguent Apostolorum.
WE commonly use this Unguent to cleanse and scour foul Ulcers and
Fistula's, and to make a good ground for healing; it abateth spongeous flesh,
and is of temperature hot and dry; and is made as follows.

. Terebinthinae Of each fourteen drams. Resinae Of each fourteen drams. Cerae
albae Of each fourteen drams. Ammoniaci Of each fourteen drams. Rad.
Aristolochiae longae of each six drammes. Thuris masculi of each six drammes.
Bdellii of each six drammes. Myrrhae, Galbani Of each half an ounce.
Oppoponax, Floris aeris Of each two drammes. Lithargyti Nine drammes. Olei, If
it be Summer, two pounds, If Winter, three pounds. Aceti, as much as will
suffice to dissolve the Ammoniacum, Galbanum and Oppoponax. Make the Ointment
according to Art.
Lukatullies Balsome.
IT is good for burns, inflammations, fresh wounds, ulcers, fistulaes, being
powered in scalding hot; for so I use it to incarne fresh wounds. In bruises,
ulcers of the reins, stone in kidneyes, or bladder, with difficulty of making
water, I use to give one drachme in Sack for bruises, in white wine for tha
stone: it is made as follows.

Olei, one pound and half. Vini Hispanici, one pound.
Boil them to the consumption of half the Sack, then scrape in

Cerae albae, three ounces.
Boil them until all the wine be consumed: take it from the fire and put in

Terebintinae,

Venetae purae, washed in Rose water six ounces.

Boil them a little, then take them from the fire, and sprinkle in half an
ounce of red sanders in powder, and stir it until it be cold, lest the Sanders
lie in the bottom.

Unguent Diapompholigos.
IS good to heal painful ulcers in any part of the body, especially of the
yard, or betwixt glans and preputium, as also any fretting, or painful ulcers
of the legs, or elsewhere. It is very much used before all other unguents in
ulcers of the yard, and against all violent, painful, and corrosive ulcers,
there is scarce a better known. In Noli me tangere in the face, it has been
well experienced. and is very useful in diverse occasions: it is made as
follows:

Olei Rosati, sixteen ounces. Succi Solavi, six ounces.
Boil them until the juice be consumed: then add Cerae alba, five ounces.
Cerussae lotae, two ounces. Plumbi usti and loti One ounce. Pompholigos prae.
One ounce. Thuris puri One ounce.


Make them into the form of an Unguent according to Art.

Unguent Nutritum, or Triapharmacum.
THis Unguent is used in curing Erisipula's, excoriations, or bladderings of
the skin, and such as are called the shingles It is good to take out the fire
in burnings and scaldings, and it hinders the falling down of any moist
humor to any ulcer in any part of the body, being spread upon cap paper thin,
and laid over the whole distempered part; also against any slight scabbiness or
itching humor whencesoever it is. It is an especial good defensative against
any scalding, or vicious humor flowing to any ulcer; I do often mix it with
other unguents in curing ulcers, the composition is as follows.

Lithargyri auri, searced very fine, half a pound. Olei Rosati one pound Aceti
four ounces.
Put the Litharge into a mortar, power into it now a little Oil, then a little
Vinegar, working them up and down very well, until the Litharge has drunk up
all the liquor, and come to the consistence of an Ointment, and white.

Desiccativum rubrum
IS used to dry up and siccatrize ulcers, that by reason of their moisture are
hard to siccatrize; it is used spread on Lint, either by it self, or mixed
with a little Diapompholigos: it is thus made.

Olei Rosati omphacini, one pound and half.

Cerae albae, five ounces.

Melt them together, and put them into a leaden mortar, and sprinkle into them:

Terrae lemniae, or boli armeni of each four ounces. Lapidis calaminaris,
finely beaten of each four ounces. Litargyri auri, Cerussae, of each three
ounces. Camphorae, one dram.
Work them all very well together in the mortar to the form of an Unguent.

These are for the Salvatory; next I shall show you the making of the
Emplaisters, and then take the rest in order.

Emplaisters.
And first of Sticticum Paracelsi.
IT is an admirable Emplaister for the curing wounds and stabbes, and also in
the cure of all dangerous wounds whatsoever: it has the precedence as well for
contused wounds, as incised; for it asswageth pain, defends from accidents,
discusseth, mollifieth, attracteth, incarneth, digesteth, consolidates, and is
good for any old ache, proceeding of a cold cause; it is especial good for
ulcers on the legs, or elsewhere, in any part of the body. It is very
excellent in wounds of the head: it separateth the foul from the good flesh,
as I have experienced in members amputated in the putride part, and hinders the
growth of that which is naught.

It is a sure remedy for cut nerves, or bruised.

It draws out iron, wood, or lead from wounds being only laid upon them.

It cures the biting and sting of venomous beasts, and draws out the poison.

It maturates apostumes of any sort, being laid upon them.

It is an especial remedy against cancers, fistulaes, scrophula, Ignem
Persicum.

It eases all pains of wounds or strokes.

It is good for ruptures.

Where the head is, inflated shave away the hairs, and lay on this Emplaister
and it cures it.

It eases the pains the back being applied.

It will last in full force at lean fifty years: the composition which I use
is thus made:

Minii of each half a pound. Lapidis calaminaris of each half a pound.
Lithagyri auri and argenti of each three ounces. Olei lini and olivi, of each
one pound and half. Olei laurini, half a pound. Cerae, Colophoniae, of each
one pound. Vernicis, terebinthinae, of each half a pound. Oppoponax of each
three ounces. Galbani of each three ounces. Serapini of each three ounces.
Ammoniaci of each three ounces. Bdellii of each three ounces. Succini flavi of
each, one ounce. Olibani of each, one ounce. Myrrh Alexandrinae of each, one
ounce. Aloes epaticae of each, one ounce. Aristolochiae longae, rotundae, of
each, one ounce. Mummiae transmarinae, of each one ounce and half. Magnetis,
Hematitis of each one ounce and half. Corallorum alborum and rubeorum. Matris
Perlarum of each one ounce. Sanguis Draconis of each one once. Terrae medicatae
strigensis of each one ounce. Vitrioli albi of each one ounce. Florum Antimonii
two drammes. Croci Martis as much. Camphurae one ounce.
The manner of preparing it is thus.
THE five gummes must be steeped in Vinegar, melted, and the Vinegar
evaporated, and the gummes strayned through a pretty thick canvas, then boiled
again, and again strayned; and because of the dregs which will be strayned
out, therefore must the dose of your gummes be increased: being thus used, let
them be put into a clean pan, upon a gentle fire, until they be thick.

Put your Linseed oil and Sallet oil into another pan and put to them the
litarge of gold and silver, and let them boil ever stirring them, until the
oil be colored, then put in the Calaminaris in powder, and a little after
add the red lead working them together for almost two hours, and until they
be almost boiled enough, which you may prove by putting a drop upon your nail,
and if it congeale and run not abroad, then it is enough.

Then add the vernish, oil of bays, wax, and colophony, and when they be
all well mixed, and melted, then warm your pan with the gummes, and presently
pour into it all that is in the second pan, stirring it very fast, that it may
incorporate as it runs into the gummes, and let your pan stand all this
while on warm coals, but beware of boiling, for then your gummes will go one
way, and your oils another: afterward put in the pouders by degrees, still
stirring it for about an hour. Lastly, add your Camphyre dissolved in oil of
Juniper; if it be too hard, then put in a little more wax and Colophony.

Yon shall know when it is boiled enough, by putting a stick with some drops
of the Emplaister on it into cold water; if it be soft and stick to thy
fingers, then it must be boiled longer, until it wax harder. Then take it from
the fire, and pour it into a great vessel full of fair water, and work it
out with your hands anointed with the oils of camomile, roses, juniper,
earthwormes, Hipericon, of each a like quantity mingled together, work it thus
about three or four homes, and make it up in rowles, and keep them in soft
leather.

In the composition of this Emplaister, you shall according to Paracelsus,
observe three intentions: viz.

1 The healing by reason of the wax and Colophony.

2 The taking away of accidents, which is by gummes: viz. Oppoponax, Galbanum,
Sagapenum, Bdellium, Ammoniacum.

3 The putrefaction (for there is no wound without accidents, but is subject to
putrefaction, as worms, and evil flesh growing up) which is taken away, and
hindered by those things which do so greatly consolidate, at the mastick,
myrthe, and the like.

4 That the part be preserved from filth, sands, dry scales, cramp, convulsion,
Rupor, and the like accidents, which is done through the strength of the
minerall^, to wit the Litharge, and Lead Antimony, Cerase, Merchas^e,
Calaminaris, and the like. And so much coming concerning Pa^^^elsi.

Diacalciteos or Diapalma,
IS an Emplaister that mitigateth pain, and is a good defensative against all
venomous humors, and is used last in wounds, and ulcers, to induce a
cicatrice, which it is very good for; also it has a very good quality to
assuage the pain in the small of the back, proceeding from distempered kidneyes
coming of a hot cause, as well concerning the stone, and gravel, as in the
gonorrhea: and dissolved or relented with oil of roses, or elders, or of
linseed: it is a very good medicine to heal burnings and scaldings.

I do use it in fractures after the first opening, covering the member at
least two hands breadth upon the fracture, with the Emplaister spread upon
cloth, and in great inflammation in summer time, I do dissolve it in oil of
roses, and so apply it to the fracture: it is thus made:

Axungiae porcinae insulsae, vetustae, a membranis purgatae, two pounds. Olei
veteris, argenti spumae ritae and cretae, of each three pounds. Chalcitidis
ustae levigatae, four ounces.
Make it after this manner:

First boil the litharge, oil, and fat, a good while, ever stirring it with
an oaken stick newly cut, and the skin peeled off, and when it is grown
thick, then take it from the fire and put in the white vitrioll in want of
true Chalcites, and work and incorporate them well together, and thou shall have
a good Emplaister, which mus be cooled, and made up in rowles.

Emplaister of Bettony,
IS an especial plaster for wounds in the head.

It is good in green wounds and ulcers in any part of the body.

It mitigateth inflammation.

It detergeth, agglutinateth, and incarneth, and also cicatrizeth: and is thus
made: Succi Bettonicae Of each one pound. Plantaginis Of each one pound. Appii
Of each one pound. Cerae Of each half a pound. Picis Of each half a pound.
Resinae Of each half a pound. Terebinthinae Of each half a pound.
Boil the Wax and Rosin in the juices, always stirring them, until the
juices be wasted, then add the Teribint and Pitch, incorporating them well, by
stirring.

Emplaistrum Griseum, or of Lapis Calaminaris.
THis Emplaister I do commonly use in healing Ulcers, which are hard to be
cicatrized, and it is marvelous good in curing Buboes, as well Veneriall as
Pestilentiall. It is also the most incarnative of any Emplaister that is in
use. The composition is after this manner.

. Lapidis calaminaris prae, one ounce. Lithargyri, two ounces. Caerussae, half
an ounce. Tutiae, one dram. Terebinthinae, six drammes. Cerae albae, one
ounce and half. Sevi cervini, two ounces. Thuris electi, five drammes.
Mastiches, three drammes. Myrrhae, two drammes. Caphurae, one dram and half.
Cerae, and Sevi Cervini, as much as will serve of each to reduce the rest of
the ingredients into form of an emplaister.
Of the compound Mellilot Emplaister.
THis Emplaister is good in green wounds, for it draws, and heals well;
also it attracteth and brings forward a cold apostume, and the Emplaister
Mellilot Simplex, which is made of the juice of Mellilot, Camomile, and
Wormwood, with Rosin, Turpentine, and Wax, is an especial secret, and the
best, and onlyest thing I ever knew in curing kybed heels, and chilblaines,
either broken or before they are broken; I do use it often upon gunshot
wounds to keep the orrifice open, and to warm and comfort the part. The
compound Emplaister is made as follows:. Florum Meliloti, six ounces. Florum
Camomeli, Of each three drammes. Seminis Faenugraeci, Of each three drammes.
Baccaram Lauri, Of each three drammes. Radicum altheae, Of each three drammes.
Majoranae, Of each three drammes. Comarum absinthii. Of each three drammes.
Sem. appii, Of each one dram and half. Ireos, Of each one dram and half.
Cyperi, Of each one dram and half. Spicae nardi, Of each one dram and half.
Cassiae ligneae, Of each one dram and half. Sem. ameos, Of each one dram and
half. Amoniaci, ten drams. Styracis calamitae, Of each five drams. Bdellii, Of
each five drams. Terebinthinae, one ounce and half. Ficuum pinguium, N.
twelve. Sevi Hircini, Of each two ounces and half. Resinae, Of each two ounces
and half. Cerae, six ounces. Olei Sampsuchini nardini, Of each as much as
shall suffice.. Meliloti novi, Of each as much as shall suffice. and
Fenugraeci, Of each as much as shall suffice. and Camomeli, shall suffice.
Boil them in two pound of water to the half, then strain them and put to
the Liquor those of the former ingredients finely powdered, which are to be
beaten, adding the roots, and Figs first boiled and pulped; then boil them
again continually stirring them lest they burn; lastly add your Oils.
Turpentine, Wax, Fat, and Rosin, all first melted together, and the gums
dissolved in vinegar, and so boil them altogether a little, incorporating them
well with your spatula.

Of Dyachilon parvum.
THis Emplaister is very good to dissolve schirrhous tumors of the Liver,
spleen, reins, belly, or else where, as the composition will show, being all of
molifying and discussing ingredients; it serves generally for hot or cold
causes, but chiefly for hot. It is much used to women's breasts in childbed, when
they desire to dry up their milk, being spread upon linen cloth, and applied
over all the breast, and toward the armepit. It is thus compounded.

. Mucilaginis Faenugraeci, Of each 1 pound. Sem. Lini, Of each 1 pound. Rad.
Altheae, Of each 1 pound. Olei veteris clari, three pound. Lithargyri, one
pound and half.
Let the Litharge be finely beaten, and put to the Oil, and boiled with a
gentle fire, stirring it well with a splatter, until they be well mixed, take
them from the fire and let them cool a while, then power into the pan your
mucilages, and mingle them well, and boil them to an Emplaister of good
consistence.

Dyachilon magnum, with gummes.
THis Diachylon dissolveth, maturateth, and mollifieth hardnesses, and is
principally good in apostumes; and is compounded after this manner:. Lithargyri
auri tenuissime pulverissat, one pound. Olei Irini Of each eight ounces.
Avethini Of each eight ounces. Camomelini Of each eight ounces. Mucilaginis
rad. Altheae Of each 12 drams and half. Sem. lini Of each 12 drams and half.
Fenugraeci Of each 12 drams and half. Uvarum passarum Of each 12 drams and
half. Caricarium pinguium Of each 12 drams and half. Icthyocollae Of each 12
drams and half. Succi Ireos Of each 12 drams and half. Scillae Of each 12
drams and half. Oesypi vel Olei ex pedibus ovillis, Of each 12 drams and
half. Terebinthinae, three ounces. Resinae pinae Of each two ounces. Cerae
flavae Of each two ounces.
Mingle them and make up your Emplaister, S. a. then. these gummes following:
Bdellii Of each one ounce. Sagapeni. Of each one ounce. Amoniaci Of each one
ounce.
Dissolve the gummes in Wine, strain them, and boil them to the thickness of
honey, and put them to the aforesaid lump of Emplaister: and so you have
Diachylon magnum cum gummis.

Emplastrum Oxycroceum,
IS avodine, attracting, mollifying and comforting; asswageth pains of the
Gout proceeding of a cold cause, and is good in cold aches, and by the
attracting virtue it has, it draws out vapors, per poros cutis, or the
sweat vents in the skin, whereby it often unladeth the body of vicious and
naughty humors, which otherwise might endanger the Patient. It is thus made:.
Croci Of each four ounces. Picis navalis Of each four ounces. Colophoniae Of
each four ounces. Cerae Of each four ounces. Terebinthinae Of each one ounce
and three drammes. Galbani Of each one ounce and three drammes. Ammoniaci Of
each one ounce and three drammes. Myrrhae Of each one ounce and three drammes.
Olibani Of each one ounce and three drammes. Mastices. Of each one ounce and
three drammes.
Compound it after this manner: first melt your Wax, Colophony and Turpentine
together, then take it from the fire, and put in the Pitch while it is yet hot,
then add your Galbanum ammoniacum, Frankinscence and Myrrh dissolved in
vinegar; next put in your Mastich in fine powder, and lastly your Saffron
steeped in vinegar and powdered; and so make your Emplaister according to Art.

Emplastrum de minio.
THis red Lead plaster discusseth humors, asswageth pains, mollifieth,
repelleth; and is commonly used upon wounds and ulcers to further good healing,
and induce a cicatrize; it is used in bruised and wrenched joints, if you use
Mr. GALES composition, which I have made use of several times, and also both
to mundifie, incarnate and cicatrize.

The composition of the ordinary Minium Plaster sold in shops is as follows:
. Minii, nine ounces. Olei Rosati, one pound and half. Aceti vini albi, six
ounces.
Boil them to the just consistence of an Emplaister, let your red Lead be
beaten, and fearced very fine, boil your Oil and vinegar together till half
the vinegar be wasted, then put in your Minium, and boil it til the vinegar be
quite consumed, and the Plaster look blackish.

It is also prepared without Vinegar in this manner.
. Minii, one pound. Olei Rosati, one pound and half. Wax, four ounces.
First put your Oil on the fire with your Minium finely powdered, boiling it
with stirring until the color change to blackish, then slice in the Wax, and
boil it to the just consistence.

The other of Vigoe is thus:
. Olei Rosati oderiferi, one pound and half. Olei myrtini, Of each four
ounces. Unguenti populei, Of each four ounces. Pinguedinis Gallinae, two
ounces. Sevi castrati, Of each half a pound. Vaccini, Of each half a pound.
Axungiae porcinae, seven ounces. Lithargyri auri argenti, three ounces and
half. Cerussae, four ounces. Minii, three ounces. Teribinthinae, ten ounces.
Cerae, as much as shall suffice.
Melt all your fats in your Oils, then put in your mineralls finely fearced,
and boil them until they begin to turn blackish, then add your Turpentine
and Populeon, and lastly scrape in your Wax and boil it up.

Emplaistrum Ceroneum.
THis Emplaister is very good against any grief of the shoulders, or breast;
it eases the Liver, Spleen, and guts, helps the three sorts of Dropsies;
cures the pains of the upper guts, and the extreme fits of the Colic;
comforts the reins, and bladder; applied to the Loins and breast often, it
amendeth the distempers of them, it avails much in the griefs of the matrix;
it helps the Gowt, Sciatica, and pain in the joints; apply it to the stomach
of those that have cold Fevers, and it helps them; it cures the bitings of
mad Dogs, and the stingings of Serpents, Snakes, or other venomous creatures,
and is made as follows:. Picis (Navalis i. ex navibus vetustis derasae quae
multiplicem aquae marinae loturum sunt expertae.) Cerae flavae illotae, of each
seven drams. Sagapeni, six drams Ammoniaci Of each four drams. Terebinthinae
Of each four drams. Colophoniae Of each four drams. Croci Of each four
drams. Aloes Of each four drams. Thuris masculi Of each three drams. Myrrhae
Of each three drams. Stiracis Calamitae Mastiches Oppoponacis Of each two
drams. Galbani Of each two drams. Alluminis Of each two drams. Sem, Fenugreci
Of each two drams. Confitae i. faecis liquidae Styracis Bdelli, of each one
dram. Lithargyri, half a dram.
The manner of compounding I need not set down, because there is not any
ingredient in this, nor any the ensuing Emplaisters which is not repeated in
the former Recipes, with the ordering of them severally.

Basilicon magnum Vigo.
THis Emplaister of Vigo I have found singular for fresh cuts, and very
incarnative in Ulcers, and all sorts of wounds; and is good in fractures after
the seventh day, and is made as follows:. Pinguedinis porcinae Sevi vitulini
Castrati, of each half a pound. Sevi Hircini Vermium terrest. prae. Picis
navalis. Resinae pineae, of each two ounces. Olei Rosati, eight ounces. Succi
mellifolii Caprifolii, of each three ounces. Foliorum and sem. Hyperici, of
each one handful.
Sees them until the Juices be wasted, then strain them and put to the
Liquor, Minii
Terrae sigilatae, finely beaten. of each one ounce and half Lithargyri
utriusque, of each three ounces and half.
Sees them, ever stirring them until they become blackish, and then add to
them, Terebinthinae opt. six ounces. Mastiches tenuis. pulv. ten drams. Cerae
albae, as much as shall suffice.
And boil it to an Emplaister, or cerot, which you will, for indeed VIGO calls
it a cerot, but I use to put in as much wax as will make it an Emplaister.

Emplaistrum Diasulphuris.
THe Emplaister Diasulphuris is most excellent in the cure of all ulcers, of
what sort soever, and is made as follows:. Olei Sulphuris, three ounces.
Cerae, half an ounce. Colophoniae, three drams. Myrrhae, as much in weight as
all the rest.
Melt the Wax and Colophony in the Oil, and mix them well, then sprinkle in
your Myrrh finely powdered, and boil them with a gentle fire, ever stirring it
with a spatula until they are well mingled, then take it from the fire and
make it up.

Emplaistrum necotiani.
THis Emplaister is hot and dry, it digesteth, resolves, and dries up
humors that are cold, moist, thick, and clammy in the Scrophula, and other
hard tumors springing from a cold cause; it mightily softens and resolves the
Strumae, and all other hard tumors having their beginning from cold humors.
The composition follows. Succi Necotianae majoris, half a pound. Succi
absinthii pontici majoris, three ounces. Oleorum hyperici Irini vel sambuci, of
each one ounce and half. Foliorum absinthii pontici majoris Prunellae
Scrophulariae majoris matthioli, of each one handful. Vini albi, one ounce and
half.
Boil them altogether to the consumption of almost all the wine, and juices in
a vessel of brass, always stirring it with a wooden spatula, then strain it
in a press, then melt together these things following: Cerae flavae, four
ounces. Sevi Hircini Terebinthinae, of each two ounces. Mastices of each one
ounce finely powdered. Myrrhae of each one ounce finely powdered. Thuris, of each
one ounce finely powdered.
and put them all together to the other Liquor, and boil them a little, then
cool it, and make it up.

Sir Philip Paris Emplaister,
THis Emplaister is excellent for diverse things, if you lay it upon the stomach
it provokes appetite, and takes away any grief from the same; laid to the
belly, it eases the Colic speedily, laid to the reigns it stops the
bloody flux, running of the reins, heat of the kidneys, and weakness of the
back; it heals swellings, aches, bruises; it breaks fellons, and
aposthumes, and heals them; it draws out humors without breaking the skin:
it heals the diseases of the fundament: laid upon the head it helps the
headache, uvula, and eyes: laid to the belly, it provokes the months, and
apteth the matrice for conception. The composition is as follows:. Olei
communis, two pounds. Minii of each one pound beaten small. Cerussae of each
one pound beaten small. Saponis castiliani. twelve ounces.
Incorporate these well together in an earthen pan, Well glased before you put
them to boil, then put them upon a gentle fire of coals for one hour, ever
stirring it with a spatula, then increase fire till the red turn grayish,
continuing your stirring; drop a little upon a trencher, if it cleave not
thereto, then it is enough; dip linen clothes therein and smoth them with a
sleekstone, the rest make up in rolls, it will last twenty years.

Let the Artist observe a true boiling of all Emplaisters; for over much
boiling not only makes the Emplaister too hard, but also evaporates the
virtues of diverse ingredients: likewise, too little boiling does not
incorporate them, neither will they stick upon the place, besides the
inconvenience of carrying them; let all your gummes in any Emplaister be finely
powdered, dissolved in sack or Vinegar, and strained through a canvas, and the
vinegar or sack evaporated at the fire, and then put to the rest, where
turpentine or saffron are added it must be when the rest are boiled enough,
giving them but two or three walmes after you have put them in; and with those
emplaisters which I have here set down, you need not fear to dress any
wound whether incised or contused, or any ulcer of what sort soever.

Next I shall show you what oils and unguents it is needful to have in
readiness for store, and how ^ou shall make them, and they are these.

Unguentum
Aegyptiacum, Album camphoratu^, Populeon, Mel saporis, Dialthaea, Arregon,
Martiatum, Agrippa, Tutia, Spleneticum.
And first of Aegyptiacum.
THis unguent does scour and mundifie all rotten ulcers, and is best used
scalding hot, for then the usual pain and corrosion it procures will be the
sooner past over; in like manner, it is to be used in any venomous wounds made
either with poisoned shot, or bitten with mad dogs, or any other venomous
creature, or in great contused wounds, wherein for preventing them from the
fear of a gangrene it excels; it serves also to be used alone, or mixed
with any lotion for ulcers of the mouth or throat, especially in the scurvy.
This unguent dries vehemently, and is abstersive of temperament hot and dry,
and is made as follows:. Eruginis, five drams. Mellis, fourteen drams. Aceti
fortis, seven drams.
Boil them altogether to an ointment thick and red.

Album Camphoratum.
THe white ointment with Campheire is good to cool and heal any hot moist
pustles; it cures excoriation of the skin in any place, but chiefly in the
yard, betwixt glans and praputium; it also heals burnings and scaldings very
well, and is good to be applied to any painful ulcer, for it asswageth pain,
and heals well; it is cold, avodine, molificative, and attractive. It is made
as follows:. Olei Rosati, nine ounces. Cerussae bonae in aqua rosarum lotae,
3 ounces. Cerae albae, two ounces,
Make it into an ointment according to Art, if you will have it with Camphire,
then add to this proportion of Camphire two drams.

Vnguentum Populeon.
THis Ointment serves well to assuage the pains of the Scurvy, by annoynting
the parts grieved therewith, it asswageth pain in any part of the body, and it
eases the dolor of a caustic medicine by being applied cold upon a plegent
to the place grieved: It procures sleep in Fevers, if you annoint the temples,
palms of the hands, and soles of the feet therewith: it is cold and moist, and
is made as follows. Occulorum populi arboris one pound and half. Recentium
one pound and half. Axungiae porcinae recentis and insulsae three pounds.
Beat the buds and macerate them in the grease until such time as you may get
these herbs following Foliorum papaveris nigri Mandragorae Cimarum rubri
tenerimarum Foliorum hyosciami, of each three ounces. Solavi, of each three
ounces. Lactucae, of each three ounces. Vermicularis, of each three ounces.
Sedi seu sempervivi majoris, of each three ounces. Violarum, of each three
ounces. Umbilici Veneris, of each three ounces. Burdanae, of each three ounces.
Beat them all and mingle them with the fat, and buds, and so let them stand
ten days, then power to them a pint of Rosewater, and boil them with a gentle
fire until the water and all the Liquor be consumed; cool it a little, and
strain it, and if need be boil it again until it come to an ointment. In
want of Mandrake take a double quantity of Henbane.

Unguentum Dialthaea.
THE Unguent of Draschaea, or Marshmallows is good against all pains of the
breast, of a cold cause, and against the plurisie; it warmeth, mollifieth, and
comfort all parts of the body, which are evil disposed through cold
infirmities; it is good against stiffenes, and pains in the joints in the
scurvey. It is good for cut nerves, pains in the sides, and hardness of the
sinews, and is resolutive: and is thus made.

. Radicum altheae, two pounds. Sem. Lini, Faenugraeci, of each one pound.
Scillae pulpae, half a pound. Olei, four pounds. Cerae, one pound.
Terebinthinae of each two ounces. Gummi hederae of each two ounces. Galbani of
each two ounces. Colophoniae Of each half a pound. Resinae Of each half a
pound.
Let the Roots be well washed and bruised, as also the Fenugreeck seed Linseed,
and sea Onion, and then put them to macerate for three days in eight pound of
water, the fourth day boil them, and strain out the Muscilage, or thick
slime, and the,. of this Muscilage, two pounds.
And boil it with the Oil, until the juice be consumed, then put in the Wax,
Rosin, and Colophony, and when they ate melted, add your Turpentine, lastly
your Galbanum and Gum of Ivy dissolved in vinegar must be put in, and so boil
them all a little, then take it from the fire and stir it until it be almost
quite cold, that all may well be incorporated together.

Mel saponis.
THis is made of Honey and Soap mixed together of each equal parts, and is
applied for the first medicine to burnings or scaldings to take out the fire,
and is for that purpose exceeding good.

Vnguentum Arregon.
THis Ointment is called one of the four hot Ointments, and is generally good
against all cold affects of the outward parts of the body; it much warmeth and
comfort the sinews; it is good against Convulsions, and Cramps; it is good
to annoint the ridge bone of the back, and the Parts near the kidneys against
the pains thereof, and also to annoint the stomach and belly, upon any cold
grief; it is also good to annoint the body of them which have the quartane
Fever, the falling sickness, the pains of the joints, and the like cold
diseases: and is thus made:. Rosmarini, of each four ounces and half.
Majoranae, of each four ounces and half. Serpylli, of each four ounces and
half. Rutae, of each four ounces and half. Rad. Ari, of each four ounces
and half. Rad. cucumeris agrestis, of each four ounces and half. Fol. Lauri,
Of each four ounces. Salviae, Of each four ounces. Rad. bryoniae, Of each
four ounces. Pulicariae, Of each four ounces. Laureolae, nine ounces. Fol.
cucumeris asinini, Nepetae, of each half a pound.
Let all these be gathered in the month of May, and well cleansed, and beat them
green, and macerate them seven days in six pound of the best Oil and one pint
of Aqua vitae, then boil them until they be shrunk, and the water consumed,
then strain the Oil in the which you shall melt these things following. Cerae,
sixteen ounces. Adipis Ursini Olei Laurini, of each three ounces. Olei
Moschelini, half an ounce. Petrolci, one ounce. Butyri, four ounces.
work these all well together, then strew into them these powders following.
Mastiches, of each one ounce. Olibani, of each one ounce. Pyrethri, of each one
ounce. Euphorbii, of each one ounce. Zinziberis, of each one ounce. Piperis, of
each one ounce.
These being all finely powdered, must be sprinkled into the former, and so
reduced into the form of an Unguent.

Unguent Martiatum.
THis Unguent as it is composed of many ingredients, so it is good for many
griefs: for it discusseth cold causes in the head, sinews, and joints; it
removes pain from the breast, and stomach proceecing from cold, it
prevayleth against convulsions, it helps the resolution of the sinews, dead
palsy, and the hip-gout, the gout in the hands, or feet, and other joints of
the body; it mollifieth hard pustles and tumors in the flesh; it asswageth the
hard swellings of the liver and spleen, eases the pain in the small gutts,
and cures the ach in the reins, and is chiefly used in Dropsies, and affects
of the spleen: and is thus made.. Fol. Lauri, of each eight ounces.
Rorismarini, of each eight ounces. Rutae, seven ounces. fol. tamarisci, six
ounces. Ebuli Esbrii, vel Majoranae Sabinae Balsamitae, vel menthae aquaticae
Salviae Ocymi Polii montani Calaminthae Artimesiae Enulae Betonicae Brancae
ursinae Spargulae vel aparines Herbae venti, Vel parsetariae Pimpinellae
Agrimoniae Absinthii Herbae Paralyseos Herbae sanctae Mariae Cymarum sambuci
Crassulae majoris Sempervivi Millefolii Chamedryos Centaurii minoris Quinque
nervii, i. Plantaginis majoris Fragariae Tetrahit Quinque folii,
Of each of these four ounces and half.

Radic. Altheae, of each three ounces. Sem. Cymini, of each three ounces.
Myrrhae, of each three ounces. Fenugraeci, one ounce and half. Sem. Urticae
majoris Violarum Papaveris rubri Mentastri Menthae Satinae Acetosae Pollitrichi
Carduncelli Matrisylvae Butyri, ten drams. Adipis Ursini, Of each one ounce.
Gallinacei, Of each one ounce. Mastiches, Of each one ounce. Thuris, Of each
one ounce. Olei Nardini, two ounces. Cerae, two pounds. Maturellae Herbae
moschatae Alleluiae Linguae Cervinae Crispulae Camphoratae Medullae Cervinae
Styracis calamitae Of each half an ounce.
Your herbs being all fresh shall be shred, and infused seven days in eight
pound of Oil, and odoriferous Wine, on the eighth day boil them to the
consumption of the Wine, cool it a little and strain it; then put in again
your Oil into the pan and heat it on the fire gently, and being pretty warm
put into it your butter, suet, fats, oil, and wax, next your storax dissolved
in Wine, and a little Turpentine mingled with it, then powder your Mastick,
Myrrh, and Frankincense, and sprinkle them into the rest, then mingle and
incorporate them all well together with a spatula, and put them up.

Vnguentum Agrippae.
THis Ointment is good against the Dropsy, affects of the spleen, and pain
in the belly; it does mollify, attenuate, divide, and dissipate Oedemata
corporis, as says PHILLIP BARROVV; it is good in old affects of the sinews,
eases pain of the kidneys, and by annoynting loses the belly. It is thus
made.. Rad. Bryoniae, two pounds. Rad. Cucumeris agrestis, one pound Scillae
laminarum, half a pound. Rad. Ireos recentis, three ounces. Rad. filicis
maris, of each two ounces Ebuli, of each two ounces Tribuli aquatici, vel Ari,
of each two ounces
Beat them all fresh, and steep them in four pound of white sweet Oil the
space of six or eight days, then boil them with a gentle fire, until the
roots begin to shrink, then strain them, and put to your Oil of white wax vx.
and melt them together to the consistence of an Unguent.

Vnguentum Tutiae.
THis Ointment is a good drier, and is used in distillations of the eyes, and
is astringent, cooling, stopping, and filling up. It is thus made.. Tutiae
praeparatae, two ounces. Lapidis calaminaris saepius usti and in aqua
plantaginis extincti, one ounce.
Powder them very fine, then take. Axungiae porcinae, one pound and half.
Wish it in Rose water three or four times, then put into it your powders, and
work them well together to an ointment. Instead of hogs grease you may make
the ointment with unguent of Roses, and that will be the best.

Vuguentum Splenicum,
IS used in affects of the spleen, and very necessary to be in readiness, and
is made as follows:. Olei Capparum, one ounce. Olei Lilliorum, of each half
an ounce. Chamomelini, of each half an ounce. Butiri recentis, of each half
an ounce. Succi brioniae, of each half an ounce. Cyclaminis, of each half an
ounce.
Boil them to the consumption of the juices, and then add these things
following.

Ammoniaci aceto soluti, two drams and half. Pinguedinis gallinae, of each
half an ounce. Medullae cruris vituli, of each half an ounce. Oesypi, of each
half an ounce. Corticum rad. tamarisci, of each one dram. capparum, of each
one dram. Ceterach, of each one dram. Rad. filicis, of each one dram. Pulv sem.
Agnicasti, of each one scruple. Genistae, of each one scruple. Cerae, as much
as will serve to make them up in the form of an Unguent.


These are all Unguents very necessary for a Surgeon to have continually in
store, for with these he may be able through his own practice to dress any
wound, from the first to the last. Next we will look what Oils are fitting to
be had, and those I conceive may be such as follow, that is,

Oil of Roses.
THis Oil is avodine, and does refrigerate, and corroborate, and therefore is
good against hot diseases, as Erysepilas etc. also with Mel Rosarum, it is a
good balm for wounds in the head, and elsewhere, and has diverse other worthy
uses in Chyrurgery, and is thus made.. Oil Olive, one pound.
In the which you shall infuse four ounces of red Roses (gathered, blown and
stamped in a mortar) in a glass vessel, and set them in the Sun for seven or
eight days; then boil it a little, and strain it, and add as many more
Roses, and Sun and strain them as you did the former, shaking them every
day; do thus three several times, but let the last infusion stand forty days
in the Sun, and then you may either set them up so, or strain them out which
you will.

Oil of Dill,
IS avoydine and comforting; it concocteth crude tumors, causes sleep,
mitigateth the headache, refreshes the wearied members, strengthens the
sinews, discusseth wind, is profitable for Convulsions, and asswageth aches,
eases pains, and has many other good uses: and is thus made.

. Oil Olive one pound.

Flowers and leaves of Dill four ounces. Make three several infusions, as you
did your Roses, to the last infusion you shall put four ounces of the juice of
Dill, and boil the Oil gently until the juice be consumed.

Oil of Camomile.
Oil of Camomile resolves moderately, and calefieth by annoynting the parts
grieved; it is good for the Colic, Stone, weariness, and for Aches, Fevers,
and for all other things with the former; it is also very convenient in
Clysters for all gripings and torsions of the guts, and yields grtat comfort
to the intrayles by the good odor and warmth thereof. It is made by infusion
forty days, with the flowers and oil olive, as before you did your Dill.

Oil of Worms.
THis oil of Earth-wormes helps the aches of the joints, in any part of the
body and does strengthen and comfort well the sinews weakened and pained; and
is good against convulsions, and cramps, and is also a good balm for wounded
sinews, and is made as follows.

Vermium terrest^ium, half a pound. wash them well in white wine, and then put
to them Olei communis, two pounds. Vini, eight ounces.
Boil them in a well g^afed vessel, until the wine be consumed, then strain
it, and put it up.

Oil of Lillies.
THis oil does moderately warm, and resolve, asswageth pain, mollifieth hard
tumors, does much mitigate the violence of diseases, and is very effectual
against pains of the breast and stomach, and allayeth all the inordinate heat
of the reins and bladder, and is good with other unctious things to be used to
anoint the lower parts of women in travel; it is made as your former oils of
Lilly flowers and oil, but the yellow spikes in the midst of the flowers
must be thrown away.

Oil of Rue,
IS good for the pain in the knees, and greines, for the gowt, pain of the
head and midriffe, sprung from a hot and dry cause. It warmes and comforts the
bladder, matrice and sides, and helps their griefs, and is made of rue
bruised, and oil olive, as oil of roses is made.

Oil of Pepper.
Oil of pepper is good in any cold grief of the nerves, as the palsy, cramp,
convulsion, trembling, and luxation; it helps the falling sickness,
hip-gowt, and pains in the joints; it eases the pains of the back, and
cholicke, opens obstructions, and wonderfully helps the matrice; by calefying
it and drying up the humidity thereof; it helps the cold griefs of the
fundament, the diseases of the kidneyes and bladder, and breaks the stone, and
is made as follows. Piperis longi, of each three drammes. Nigri, of each
three drammes. Albi, of each three drammes.
Myrobal.
Chebularum of each five drammes. Belliricarum of each five drammes. Emblicarum
of each five drammes. Indarum, of each five drammes. Rad. Apii, of each three
drammes and half. Faeniculi, of each three drammes and half. Sagapeni, of
each two drammes and half. Opoponacis, of each two drammes and half.
Ammoniaci, of each two drammes and half. Hyosciami, of each two drammes and
half. Turpeti, two drammes. Zinziberis, th ee drammes. Surculorum Thymi
recencium of each one handful Rutae viridis, of each one handful
steep them according to Art in sufficient quantity of Aquavitae, and oil of
walflowers, two pound, then boil them to the consumption of the Aqua vitae.

Oil of Fox.
THis Oil is good for pain in the joints, gowt, sciatica, and cures the ache
of the kidneyes and back, and is compounded after this manner.

The fattest Fox you can get of a middle age, and well hunted, and newly killed,
and garbish him quickly, and fley him, and cut him in small pieces, and break
all his bones well, then boil him in White wine and Spring water, six pound.
Let him boil thus until half the liquor be wasted, very well scumming it
at the first boiling, then put into the vessel.

Olei antiqui dulcissimi, four pounds. Salis communis, three ounces. Florum
salviae, Thymi, of each one pound.
Then boil it again until almost all the water be consumed, and then power
into it eight pound of water wherein has been well boiled one good handful of
Dill, and another of Time, then boil them altogether her with an easy fire
until all the water be wasted, then strain it, and separate the oil from the
moisture, and keep it for thy use.

Oil of Castoreum.
THE oil of Castoreum, or Beaver-cod is good in all cold affects of the brain
and nerves, if you anoint the back bone with it, it will cure the extreme
shaking of Agues; it avayleth much in the palsy, cramp, convulsions, and all
joint ache; the composition is as follows.

. Castorei, Of each three drams. Stiracis Calamitae, Of each three drams.
Galbani, Of each three drams. Euphorbii, Of each three drams. Cassiae ligneae,
Of each three drams. Croci, Of each three drams. Opoponacis, Of each three
drams. Carpobalsami sive cubebara, Of each three drams. Spicae nardi, Of each
three drams. Costi, Of each three drams. Cyperi Of each two drams and half.
Scaenanthus, Of each two drams and half. Piperis longi, Of each two drams and
half. Nigri, Of each two drams and half. Sabinae, Of each two drams and
half. Pyrethri, Of each two drams and half. Olei, three pounds. Vini
Hispanici, two pounds.
Dissolve the Galbanum and Oppoponax in the Sack, and beat all the rest, and
put them and the Oil altogether into the Sack, and boil them in a double
vessel; then strain them, and put to the Liquor the Gummes being dissolved,
and strained, and boil them again often stirring them, that the Gums may not
stick in the bottom; let the storax be dissolved in wine by it self, and then
put to it one dram and a half of Turpentine, and so mingle them altogether.

Oil of Euphorbium
Oil of Euphorbium is very excellent in all cold griefs of the Nerves, and
pains in the joints caused by cold, it helps the pains of the Liver, and
spleen, and is a good head purge against the megrim, Lethargy, and swimming in
the head, and is thus made.

. Stavidis agriae, of each half an ounce. Struthii vel saponariae, of each
half an ounce. Pyrethri, six drammes. Calaminthes Montani siccae, one ounce
and half. Costi, ten drammes. Castorei, five drammes.
Bruise them and macerate them three days in three pintes and a half of sweet
wine, then boil them with one pint and a half of the oil of wall
gilly-flowers until the wine be almost wasted, then sprinkle into it of white
fresh Euphorbium finely powdered half an ounce. Mingle them well together, and
boil it to the just consistence.

Oil of Amber.
THis Oil is made by distillation, and is very good for the pain of the head,
resolution of the sinnewes, and falling evil, if one drop or two be taken with
water of Betony or Lavender, or in fair water it preserves from poison, and
mixed with parsley water, or malmsey, it is a singular remedy in discussing
diseases of the Reins and Bladder, bringing forth the stone, and opening the
passage of the urine; it profits in the Colic and strangullion; four drops
put into a little Angelica water, and so given to a woman in travel, refreshes
all the weak faculties of the body, confirms and opens the brain; and is
extolled by CROLLIUS for the admirablest medicine in the Apoplexy and
Epilepsie; also for the Plague, if one drop be rubbed on the nosthrils morning
and evening, it preserves the party; to one infected it is given from one
scruple to two in Cardus water; you may also make up little cakes with sugar
and some appropriate water, as Lavender water, betony water, water of lived
flowers, and mingle with it some few drops of this oil, and let them be eaten
by those that have the palsy, apoplexy, or falling sickness: In the fit of
any of the aforesaid diseases, it is good to anoint the nape of the neck, and
nosthrils, or to cast a drop or two upon the coals, and hold the patients head
over them: if you anoint a few drops of it upon the breast, and nosthrils of
women affected with the diseases of the mother, it helps it and keeps it in
its place, and this the aforesaid cakes will do being eaten: it is availeable
in fainting, or the passion of the heart; in agues three drops being taken in
Cardus water at the coming of the fit, and so sweat upon it, and the ague
will be gone: it is good to dry a catarrhous rheum: it cures the toothache,
proceeding from cold defluxions, if you mingle it with plantain water, and
gargarise it. In the yellow jaundise given with water of endive, chicory, or
selandine; in retention of women's months seven or eight drops in balm water
helps: in vomiting of blood three drops given in colts foot water, turmentill
water, or water of sloes it stays it; it cures the vertigo in the head, the
megrim, and astonishtnes; taken in fennel water it mendeth the sight, and it
helps the stitch in the side, and is thus made.

. Amber powdered, twelve drammes. Put it into a large glass, or a retort, and
power to it as much of the sharpest white wine vinegar, let them digest in
horsedung for eight days, then put to it twice so much dry sand or stints out
of the river beaten to powder, and distill it according to Art with your retort
in sand, increasing your degrees of fire as you see cause. This oil must be
rectified out of sand or salt, and then washed with rain water.

Oil of Nutmegs.
THis oil being drunk with wine drives down women's months, and also the quick
and dead fruit; the same it does if it be given in a spoone with a little
sugar; being taken with wine it takes away all pains of the head coming of
cold; it comforts the maw, and opens the liver, milt, and kidneyes; it is
excellent against beating of the heart, and faintness and swounding, if ye
drink thereof, and anoint the region of the heart therewith; it makes good
blood, and expels flegmaticke and melancholic humors, and makes a man
merry; being used at night it takes away all fancies and dreams: if any had a
wound or a broken ribbe by a fall or stroke let him drink this oil with any
wound drink, and it will help marvellously: it is good in all filthy sores,
and for all cold diseases of the joints and sinews; it makes sweet breath, it
helps the spleen if the left side be anointed; it helps all affects of the
bladder if it be drunk, and is thus made.

Nucis moschatae contusae, five pounds. Aquae fontanae, fifty pounds.
Macerate them the space of four and twenty hours, then distill them in a large
Limbecke with a cooler.

Oil of Costus.
THis oil warmeth and comforfeth the nerves, and sinews and opens their
opilations; it also comforts all the nervous parts; it is good for the stomach,
liver, and the falling of the hair, hinders baldness, and makes a good
color, and smell of the whole body; it is made as follows.

. Costi amari, two ounces. Cassiae ligneae, one ounce. Summitatum sampsuci,
eight ounces.
Bruise them and macerate them two days in sufficient wine, then boil them in
three pounds of oil olive washed with wine, in a double vessel, until the
wine be wasted.

Ole of Wax.
Oil of Bees wax heals wounds contused, and incised, laying a cloth wet
therein on the wound, being first joined together by stitching; taken one
dram with white wine, it stays the shedding of the hair on the head or
beard, the place being anointed therewith; it provokes urine being stopped; it
helps stitches, and pains in the loins, taking the said quantity in white
wine; it helps the cold gowt, or sciatica, and all other griefs coming of
cold, and is thus made.

R. Yellow wax, one pound.
Melt it and put to it powder of tile shards three pound, mingle them and put
them in a retort, and draw out the oil with a convenient heat; you may
rectify it in a retort without tiles, by adding water. Your fire shall be
made above the retort until it leave hissing, then make it under your retort.

Oil of St. John's wort compound.
THis is an admirable balm for wounds, being used as hot as it can be endured,
and at the first dressing, hotter: it is a sure medicine for all venomous
wounds, all bitings of mad dogs, or of venomous worms, very hot applied, and
the parts about anointed therewith warm, and a good cordial given inwardly:
it is good in wounds either incised, contused, or stabbed, and is indeed so
excellent that you need use no other oil; it is a comfortable medicine against
all pains, aches, and witherings of the outward limbs proceeding of cold
causes, using it warm with good friction, and a plaster of Burgundy pitch
spread on leather, and applied thereon, or rather the stiptict plaster of
Paracelsus* the composition is as follows.

. Vini albi potentis three pounds. Summitatum Hyperici maturarum, four
handsfull.
Bruise them, and macerate them in the wine, in a glass vessel well stopped
for two days, then boil it in a double vessel, and strain it hard and put to
the liquor mote flowers and tops of S. John's wort as you did before, do this
three times, and then strain it, and put to the liquor for every pound.

Olei veteris, four pound. Tereb nthmae, six ounces. Olei absinthii, three
ounces. Dictamni, of each two drammes. Gentianae, of each two drammes. Cardui
benedicti, of each two drammes. Tormentillae, of each two drammes. Carlinae vel
cardui Mariae, of each two drammes. Calami aromatici, of each two drammes.
Lumbricorum pluries in vino lotorum, two ounces.
Bruise them all and put them to the rest, and stop them close, and scumme them
forty days, then put them up.

Oil of Elders.
THE Oil of Elder flowers does lenifie and purge the skin, ia good for the
obstructions of the liver, helpful for the joints and nerves pained, the parts
grieved being anointed therewith; given in Clysters it provokes stools,
heals the yellow-jaundise, amendeth belly-ache, and eases the pains thereof,
and is made as follows.

R. Elder-flowers and Oyle-olive infused as you do oil of Roses.

Linseed-oyle.
LInseed-oyle, or oil of Flax-seed is avodine, cures convulsions, mitigateth
the hardness of the arteries, muscles and nerves, asswageth the pain of the
piles or hemorroides, and helps the unnatural clefts, chaps and fussures of
the fundament; it is used with good success to anoint the secret parts in
childbirth, and in poultisses for women's sore breasts; it is made by
expression brusing your seeds, and putting them in Balneo four or five hours,
and then strain them with a Scruepress.

Oil of Eggs.
THis Oil cleanses the skin, and takes away the filthiness, and all the
sears thereof occasioned by cuts and bitings, or at the least much diminishes
them so that they can hardly be seen; it cures burnings, kills ring-worms,
heals excoriations, and is prevalent against any ulcer, chaps, or ill matter,
arising our of the flesh, either in the hands, feet, arms, or legs, or in
any other part of the body, and is made as follows,

R. Yolks of Eggs sodden hard, put them into a glased vessel, and heat them
well at the fire, but so as they burn not, then hot as can be, put them into a
canvas bag, and press out the oil.

Note that whilst you heat them it will make your oil the better if you
sprinckle them with a little aromatic wine warm.

Oyl-olive is made of ripe olives by pressing them.

Oil of Whelps.
THiS Oil is of wonderful force to assuage pain, to bring shot wounds to
suppuration, and cause the falling away of the escar; it is thus made,

Olei lilliorum vel violarum four pound.

Boil in it two Whelps newly whelped, until the flesh part from the bones,
then put into them of

Vermium terestium praparat. one pound.

Boil them again, and strain them hard, and put to the oil.

Terahinthinae veneta four ounces.

Spiritus vini one ounce.

Mingle them according to Art.

Oil of Bays.
Oil of Bays is a Medicine callifying, mollifying, opening, and discussing,
and does much mitigate the Colic delivered into the body by Clister: It is a
present remedy against cold griefs of the brain, nerves, arteries, and loins,
the parties anointed therewith: It is good for the palsy, sciatiea, the
hardness, and pains of the spleen, and is much used, as well to cure the scab
and ring-worm, as the scurvie; and is thus made,

R. Bay Berries ripe and fresh gathered. q s. Beat them, and boil them with
sufficient water until the fat swimmeth on the top ten press them, and separate
the oil from the water according to Art.

Oil of Sweet-Almonds,
Does lenifie the roughness of the breast and throat, as also the haroness and
dryness of the joints: It is good against the consumption of the lungs; it is
also of good use to be drunk in the hectick-feavers; it stays the cough, and
asswageth the heat of urine, heals ulcers by injection, is very good in
collica or illica passio to be drunk, and administered in Clisters, and is thus
made.

R. Sweet-Almonds dry, not moldy, and well rubbed, q. s. Beat them well, and
put them in a Press, and press out the oil without heat.

Oil of Bitter-Almonds.
THis Oil does open obstructions, discusseth wind and vapors, but chiefly it
heals deafness, the hissing and pain of the ears, lenifieth the hardness of
the sinews, and makes the face and hands fair, and is made as the oil of
Sweet-Almonds.

Oil of Vitriol.
THis Oil comfort the stomach after a wonderful manner, and stirs up the
appetite; it defends the whole body from apostumes and inflammations, and
therefore it is used with good success in the plurisie, and also in vulnerary
drinks, it is approved good: It helps the infirmities of the lights taken
with the water of fennel or fumetory: it cutteth away the melancholy humors
from the stomach, being taken with balm-water: It consumes phlegm, cures the
cholick and the looseness of the belly: It quenches the thirst in fevers cures
the hickock and loathing of meat: It attenuateth the blood, defends wounded
parts grieved from fear of gangrene, or putrefaction of the blood: It
conglutinateth ruptures as well of bones as veins, and does exceedingly comfort
and corroborate all the parts of man's body, and may well be numbered as a
principal amongst cordial medicines: It is also a very good medicine, not only
in preventing the scurvie taken inwardly, but also in the cure of the scurvie
many ways, both inwardly taken with any comfortable wine, or with beer for
need, or to make a beverage therewith and daily to use is in small quantity,
namely four drops for a dose: In the calenture it excels all other Medicines
taken in plantain, sorrel, or any other water, or only in fair water: It is
good to rub foul black teeth to make them clean and white, but use it not often
for then it will consume them: In ulcerations of the mouth, throat, or uvula
that resist ordinary medicines, touch the ulcerated part but once with this
oil, and the ulcerations will heal very fast afterward with any ordinary
medicines and helps remembering as cause shall require to use due evacuations or
phlebotomie: It is good in the squinancy or augina used certain drops in a fit
gargarisme or lotion, namely to make it somewhat sour, and then gargarise warm
therewith, for it mightily quenches inflammations, and tempereth well the
blood, and being likewise a little thereof given to drink, namely six drops in
such a case it is much the better, always remembering that in all such diseases
there be looseness of the belly, and sometimes phlebotomie: Moreover, in Ulcers
and Fistulaes, scarce a better medicine is found to enlarge a strict orifice,
remove a calow, or truly to correct and prepare any inveterate Ulcer to good
healing, only by touching it with lint on the end of a probe, thereby putting
the medicine to the place where the cause is: It is a good corrective in all
purging medicines, and helps them, to do they office; for it comfort the
whole body and gives a grateful taste almost to any medicine: It is also good
to a weak stomach oppressed with phegme or slime, and helps appetite taken in
Conserve of Roses; There is no medicine more precious in pstilential Fevers.
The true and utmost dose cannot justly be set down, but must be made by the
taste, putting in so much as may make the vehicle or medicine sharp, or
sourish; for your purges they shall only b a little sharpened with certain
drops thereof, only to alter a little the taste; but in the Callenture, strong
Fevers, or pestilentiall Fevers a greater dose may well be taken according to
discretion and judgment; but note this, That if you put any of it into any
liquid medicine, as Barly-water, Juleps or such like, which you intend to
divide in several doses, let the glass be always shaken well before you pour
it out, else the oil will ly all at the bottom, and make the last dose not only
too sharp to be taken, but also dangerous: The making of it is as follows,

Of Hungarian-copperas, or of the best English-copperas, what you will.

Melt it in a skillet, then divide it into thicker pieces, which you shall
calcine upon the coals until they look a little reddish, and then powder them
and sprinkle them with the best spirit of wine, then put it into a retort that
will endure the fire, and keep your fire by degrees to the height of heat for
three days, or until the receiver being before full of fumes do become clear;
let the distilled liquor be rectified, and separate them one from another, that
is to say the spirit of wine, the sharp spirit of vitriol, and the strong heavy
oil.

Oil of Sulphur.
THis Oil is good to make the teeth white, to take away the morphew, cures
venereal ulcers, expels diseases arising from wind or cold: It is good
against the falling sickness, shortness of breath, evil affections of the
lungs, eases the Toothache, and is, being well prepared, a true cordial
medicine: The manner of making it is after this sort;

A bell of glass, holding at the least sixteen pints, for the larger it is the
better, put it upon a great earthen vessel containing about\ nine or ten
gallons, with three or four stays to rest the bell upon; let your earthen-pot
be so well nealed as that it will endure the fire, then put in your brimstone
into the pot, and set it on fire, and whelm over it the bell, casting in now
and then fresh brimstone as the first wastes; you shall have more store of oil
if you put your earthen vessel into a furnace with fire under it, that the
brimstone may be always melted: This must be done best in rainy-weather, and
in a cellar; and before you kindle your brimstone you shall smoke your bell
with sage.

Oil of Brick-bats, or Tyle-stones.
THis Oil is also called Oil of Philosophers, the oldest is the best, it does
attenuate, and penetrate upward, digesteth and consumes all excremental
matter, and is profitable for cold affections of the spleen, veins, bladder,
nerves, womb, joints, and for the Lethargy, Apoplexy, and Falling Sickness, and
many other the like griefs, and is thus made,

Old bricks dug out of the ground, and broken in pieces to the bigness of an
apple, heat them red hot in the fire, and quench them in Oil of Rosemary, or
clear old Oyl-olive, until they be full of Oil; then beat them small, and put
the powder into a glass retort, or cucurbite well fitted in a furnace, and
surely luted, and distill it by sublimation.

Oil of Turpentine.
Oil of Turpentine is taken inwardly for shortness of breath, the Ptisick,
against the Stone, the Colic, cold, and windy affections of the breast; it is
outwardly used to heal sinnews wounded, or troubled with any intemperature,
also to fill ulcers with flesh and knit them up, leaving no cicatrize in them:
it is made in this manner:.Venice turpentine twenty eight pound. Fair Water
ninety six pound.
Put them into a copper vessel with a cover, and a cooler, and distill a thin
white oil; increase the fire and you shall have it yellow; make your fire yet
hotter, and it will come red; these three liquors would be separated by
distillation again.

Oil of Spike.
Oil of Spike does calefie, attenuate, discuss, and is very profitable to
them that have the gowt proceeding of a cold cause, or to comfort any member
benumbed, also it is good against the falling sickness, and convulsions, the
temples, and nape of the neck, yea and the whole head to be anointed therewith
is very profitable; it is made as follweth:. Lavender Spike iij. Sweet Oil lb.
j. ss. Wine and water ana ij ss.
Boil them in a double vessel to the consumption of the wine and water, and
keep it for thy use.

Oil of Antymony.
THis oil is good for them that have convulsions, or any astonishing disease,
and other evil affections of the brain, four grains thereof drunk; it
asswageth the pain of the gowt, and chollicke, cures fevers, helps the
bladder ulcerate, and wonderfully helps the canker, fistula, phagadena, the
fretting or eating pox, the wolf, and all other sorts of ulcers, and it is
thus made.

. Crude Antimony of each one pound. Mercury sublimate of each one pound.
Make them into powder, and put them into a glass retort with a large neck,
and set it in a furnace of reverberation, well and close, and make your fire by
degrees, and a fatty substance will distill into the receiver hanging to the
neck of the retort, which by putting under a gentle fire will melt; that fatty
liquor must be rectified and put up close.

Oil of Myrtiles.
Oil of Myrtiles refrigerateth, astringeth, and comfort, but properly the
heart, stomach, and brain, and the nerves; it is good in fractures, for it
cooles, and resists putrefaction, it is made as follows.

. Myrtle berries bruised, and sprinkled with astringent wine lb. i. Juice of
the leaves lb ss. Oil of unripe Olives lb iij.
Steep the Berries in the Oil for the space of eight days, then boil them
and strain them, and put in more berries; do thus three times in a double
vessel, after the third straining add the juice, and boil it to the
consumption of that juice, and put it up.

Oil of Origanum.
THis Oil of Origanum cures melancholy, helps the dropsy, and cures the
Cough, the quartane Fever, and the tooch-ach, and is made as the rest of the
Oils of Vegetables.

Of Waters.
And first of Mint Water.
MInt-Water does warm and stengthen the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, or Milt,
helps concoction, stays vomit, and is very cordial, and is distilled of
spear mintes, and white wine, adding if you please a Clove or two, and a blade
of Mace.

Sassafras Water.
THis water opens all obstructions, or stoppings of the body, namely of
Liver, Lungs, kidneys, and Spleen; and thereby it is found by many experiences,
excellent against the Scurvy, the French Disease, and the Yellow-Jaundise; it
is an approved remedy against all cold Fevers, and the Dropsy, or for those
that are inclining thereunto for it provokes Urine, and sweat in a very mild,
and natural manner, and drives out many diseases by the pores of the skin; it
has infinite more virtues ascribed to it, for which I refer the Artist to
Doctor MONARDUS his Book, and will only set down the making of it, according
to his description.

. Of the bows of Sassafras half an ounce, cut as swall as may be. Water twelve
pounds.
Put them into a new earthen pot, and let them steep together two hours, then
sees it until two parts be consumed, and after it is cold, let it be strained
and kept in a glass vessel, and power to the wood three pottles more of water,
and let it sees until half a pottle be consumed, strain it cold, and keep
it as the former; let the best water be taken in the morning fasting half a
pint hot, and then keep your self warm and procure sweat, then change your
self into hot clothing and rub off the sweat, and eat of a Hen roasted, and
drink of the second Water at dinner, and supper, and in the day time; eat no
flesh at night but dry fruits, and conserves: and thus you may do so long as
you find your self grieved.

Water of Cardus benedictus.
THis water eases the pain of the head, confirms the memory, cures a
quartane, provokes sweat, and comfort the vital spirits, and is made by
distillation.

Triacle Water.
Triacle Water is good in the Plague, or Pestilentiall Fever, the French
disease, kills Worms, helps the trembling of the heart; and is good to be
mingled in Diaphoreticks; the manner of making it is as follows.

. Succi putaminis viridis nucum juglandium, four pound. Succ^rulae, three
pounds. Succorum Cardui benedictae, of each two pounds. Calendulae, of each two
pounds. Mellislae, of each two pounds. Rad. Petassitae recentium, one pound and
half. Rad. Ba^danae, one pound. Rad. Angelicae, recentium, of each six ounces.
Imperatoriae, recentium, of each six ounces. Fol. Scordii, four handful.
Theriacae Andromachi veteris and probatae, of each eight ounces. Mithridatis,
of each eight ounces. Vini canarini generosissimi, twelve pounds. Aceti vini
albi accerrimi, six pounds. Succi limonum, two pounds.
Digest them two days in horse dung: or Balneo in a vessel well closed, then
distill it in sand.

Water of Damask Roses.
DAmask Rose water does refrigerate, and comfort the heart, is good against
swouning, and causes sleep.

Red Rose Water,
Does refrigerate, bind, and corroborate the vital and animal faculties,
benefiteth the head, eases the pained ears and eyes, and does good in
inflammations, and is profitable in medicines against: Disentery

White Rose water.
THe Water of White Roses is good to put in Colliries for the eyes.

Plantaine Water,
IS astringent, and sanative, good for them that are in a Consumption of the
Lungs, in a Dropsy, or that have the bloody flux; good also against the
quartane ague; it cures the Ulcers of the veins, bladder, and excoriations of
the passage of the yard; and being drunk, helps against ardent urine, or the
sharpness of the water.

Balm Water.
THis water has a great respect to the heart, a great cordial, and of a good
smell, and taste, it is more proper to women then men, for it much respects
the infirmities of the mother, and is in the times of their pains very
profitable to take a little of it, for the safer provoking of a speedy
delivery; distill it with spirit of wine.

Angelica Water.
ANgelica Water may serve instead of Triacle and Mithridate, for a preservative
against the Plague, or any infectious air, for there is no one thing more
commended by ancient and modern Writers in that kind, then angelica is,
whereof there is good experience; it is also very stomachicall and cordial,
and being truly made will retain his strength and virtue forty years and more;
it is made as the former.

Wormwood-water.
THis water is very grateful in the stomach, for it is a balsome thereunto, it
consumes, and breaks wind mightily, and kills worms, hinders vomiting,
provokes appetite; is very good against pains in the head proceeding of a cold
cause, and is very cordial; It is made as the former.

Anniseed-water,
IS very excellent against wind in the stomach, or elsewhere in the body, and
against Asthma, Ptisick, and shortness of breath, it also breaks phlegm, and
warmeth the stomach, and is distilled from Anniseeds well macerated in Spirit
of wine.

Cynamon-water.
CYnamon water does comfort and strengthen the stomach, the liver, the milt,
the lungs, the heart, the brain, and the sinews, sharpneth the sight, is good
against venom, as also the stingings, and bitings of venomous beasts, helps
a bad or evil savouring breath, is good against loathing of the stomach, and
where you desire to warm, to open, to attenuate, digest or corroborate, in all
such cases this precious liquor excels and is made as the former.

Aqua-Coelestis.
THe Heavenly water is a principal antidote or preservative in all poisons, or
poisoned and infectious airs whatsoever, for that either received into the
body, or but only smelled unto, it helps much against infection, and does
very admirably restore again one fallen either of the Dead-palsey or
Falling Sickness, and is also good either in the Colic, or any gripings of
the guts, as also in any the weaknesses of the stomach, and against any cold
fluxes of the guts, or belly, two spoonfuls thereof given in a Clyster, and
has many more special good uses and virtues; It is made as follows.

Cinamoni, one ounce. Zinziberis, half an ounce. Santalorum omnium, of each six
drams. Caryophyllorum, of each two drams and half. Galangae, of each two drams
and half. Nucis Moschatae of each two drams and half. Macis, cubebarum of each
one dram. Cardamomi utriusque, of each three drams. Sem. Melanthii of each
three drams. Zedoariae, half an ounce. Anisi, of each one dram and half. Sem.
Faeniculi dulcis, of each one dram and half. Pastinacei silvestris, of each one
dram and half. Ocymi, of each one dram and half. Rad. Angelicae, of each two
drams. Caryophyllatae, of each two drams. Glyrynhicae, of each two drams.
Calami odorati, of each two drams. Phu minoris, of each two drams. Foliorum
sclareae, of each two drams. Thymi, of each two drams. Calaminthae, of each two
drams. Pulegii, of each two drams. Menthae, of each two drams. Serpylli, of
each two drams. Majoranae, of each two drams. Florum rosar. rubrarum, of each
one dram and half. Salviae, of each one dram and half. Rorismarini, of each one
dram and half. Betonicae, of each one dram and half. Staechados, of each one
dram and half. Buglossi, of each one dram and half. Boraginis, of each one dram
and half. Corticum citri, three drams.
Bruise what are to be bruised, and macerate them for the space of fifteen
days in twelve pounds of the best Spirit of wine in a glass vessel well
closed, then distill them in B. M. according to Art, afterward add to the
distilled water.

Specierum Diambrae, Aromaticum rosat. Diamoch. dulcis, Diarcargarit. frigid.
Diaruhodon Albatis, Electuaris de gemmis,
of each 3 drams.

Santali citrini contusi, two drams. Moschi, of each 1 scruple. Ambrae griseae
in tela rara ligatorum, of each 1 scruple. Julepi rosati clari, one pound.
Shake them all well together, that the Julep may incorporate well with the
water, then stop up the glass with wax and parchment, and let it stand until
the water be cleared.

Doctor Stevens his Water.
IT is a notable cordial-water, comforts the head and heart, yea and all the
principal faculties of the body, both annimal, vital, and natural, if it be
truly prepared; it helps all cold diseases, palseys, convulsions, barrenness,
toothach; It kills worms, cures the dropsy, stone, stinking breath, and
prolongeth life, and is made as follloweth, Cinamoni, of each one dram.
Zinziberis, of each one dram. Galangae, of each one dram. Caryophillorum, of
each one dram. Nucis moschatae, of each one dram. Granorum paradisae, of each
one dram. Sem. Anisi, of each one dram. Faeniculi, of each one dram. Carni, of
each one dram. Herb. Thymi, of each one handful. Serpylli, of each one handful.
Menthae, of each one handful. Salviae, of each one handful. Pulegi, of each one
handful. Parictariae, of each one handful. Rorismarini, of each one handful.
Flor. rosar. rubrarum, of each one handful. Chamemeli, of each one handful.
Origani, of each one handful. Lavendulae, of each one handful.
Infuse them all twelve hours, then distill them in a Limbeck, and take of the
strongest water three pounds.

The common Lotion,
IS used in ulcerations of the mouth or gums, in griefs of the yard, as well
within the passage, as also between glans and Praeputium, there are diverse
sorts according as occasion offers, but that which I mean here is only made of
Sage, Rosemary, Woodbine, and brier tops boiled in water, adding honey, and
allome; fortifying it as you see cause with Mercury dulcified, put a rag on
your finger or on a stick, and dip it into the lotion warmed, and rub the gums
hard therewith, and the ulcerated parts until they bleed; or you may make a
lotion for the mouth thus, Copperas, green, white, or blue ij. Water lb j. or
thereabouts. Honey one spoonful.
Boil these to the consumption of one third, or half, then take of lapis
medicamentosus, or Saltpeter sss. and if you have no honey, take sugar, or
juice of liquorice, or liquorice boiled therein to make it pleasant in taste,
or without, for a need, you may well use it.

Strong-Lye.
THis is Capital-lees, and is very necessary to mollify the White-caustick
when it grows dry, as also if need be, by decoction to make a lapis
internalis for to make Issues, or break Apostumes: The Liquid-caustick is made
of unslaked-lime, and capital-lees, boiled together to the thickness of an
unguent, and applied as hereafter shall be shown.

Vinegar of Wine.
VInegar helps the unnatural swellings of the belly, and also cures the
fluxes of the stomach, the parts grieved being fomented therewith: It stays
the inordinate menstrual-fluxes, the region of the liver, or the bearing parts
fomented therewith warm, namely with stuphes wet therein: It is good against
vomiting, the stomach outwardly fomented with warm stuphes wet therein: It also
discusseth and dissipateth violent hot tumors in their beginnings, yea even
those which are named Pavaritiae, or as some term them fellons. Good wine
vinegar excels in Cataplasms, as also in fomentations where avodine
medicines are to be used, provided the place be not excoriated, as namely, in
hervia humorali; in the falling down of the fundament it is approved good,
sometimes with wine used warm to foment the part withal, as also to be cast on
bricks to receive the fume thereof: In the hot gout, and in all inflammations
as the Rose or Ignis sacer, or as some call it St. Antonies fire by way of
fomentation with wine vinegar; it is a precious help also by way of gargarisme,
it is an approved remedy against Squinantia auginae, or any sudden inflammation
of the columella, or the amygdales of the throat, and if you mingle with it
Oil of Roses, you make it the better for all the aforesaid uses, and the more
cordial.

Vingar of Roses.
VInegar of Roses is very cordial, helps the stomach, refreshes nature
weakened, and is good against the faintings, and great weakness of the spirits;
but if the Artist have not Vinegar of Roses ready, he may infuse in
Wine-vinegar, a little Rose Water, and it will do almost as well: It is thus
made,

Red-rose-buds almost blown, being fresh, and the leaves clean picked from them
that are clean withered and naught, gathered very dry, and then spread abroad
in the shade to dry about three or four days lb j. Wine-vinegar eight
sextaries.

Set them in the Sun forty days, then strain the vinegar and put it up. but if
you will have it more strong of the Roses, then make a second infusion of fresh
leaves.

Spirit of Wine.
SPirit of Wine of all vegetables is the most precious thing, it is the truest
of all cordials; it preserves the body from putrefaction, and in every cold
oppression of nature it is a true helper; for the cough and all distillations
of Rhumes, and Fluxes it is a perfect help; it comfort the stomach and
provokes appetite. It helps those which are thick of hearing, one drop daily
put into the ear; it preserves a man in health, if every morning and evening
he take certain drops thereof, and defends the body that takes it from the
oppression of infectious air, and (being sick) almost in any disease, it may
safely be given as a true restorative medicine; it is good in wounds, Ulcers,
Fistulaes, and Fractures, of which another place hereafter will make mention.
It is thus made.

Of good white, Claret Wine, or Sack, which is not sour nor musty, nor
otherwise corrupt, that quantity which may serve to fill the vessel wherein
you make your distillation to a third part, then put on the head furnished with
the nose or pipe, and so make your distillation; first in ashes drawing about a
third part from the whole: as for example, six or eight pintes out of four and
twenty, then distill it again in B. M drawing another third part, which is two
pintes, so that the oftener you distill it, the less Liquor you have, but the
more strong; some use to rectify it seven times.

Of Syrups.
And first, Of Syrup of Wormwood.
THis Syrup corroborates the stomach, helps concoction, causes an appetite,
discusseth wind, opens the veins, moves urine, and kills worms, and is thus
made, Absinthii romani sive pontici, half a pound. Rosarum rubratum, two
ounces. Spicae Indicae, three drams. Vini albi antiqui generosi of each two
pounds and half. succi cydoniorum, of each two pounds and half.
Macerate them in an earthen vessel four and twenty hours, then boil them until
half be wasted, strain it and put to the straining two pounds of Sugar, and
boil it to a syrup.

Syrup of Lymons.
THe Syrup of Lymons is cordial and refrigerating, it does please and profit
the appetite, and comfort all that are sick of the pestilence, or continual
and contagious Fevers, as also all diseases on which exceeding great heat
attends, it cheareth up the heavy heart, and dispelleth sorrow therefrom, and
against all obstructions of the spleen it is a good help, and also well
approved in the cure of the Scurvy: It is made as follows; Juice of Lymons
purified by going through a woollen strayner without crushing, 7 pounds.
White-sugar, five pound.
Boil them with a soft fire to a syrup.

Syrup of Poppies.
SYrup of White-poppies has an astringent quality; it procures sleep, helps
the cough, hinders the humors which distill from the head into the throat,
causing a tickling, and is of precious use against the palsy, if it be used in
the beginning thereof: It is made thus, Capitum cum seminibus of each fifty
drams. papaveris albi and nigri, of each fifty drams. Capillorum veneris,
fifteen drams. Glycyrhicae, five drams. Jujubarum, in number thirty. Sem.
lactucae, forty drams. Sem. malvae and cydoniorum in linteo raro ligatorum, of
each one dram and half.
Boil them in eight pints of water, until half be wasted, strain it, and to
every three pounds of liquor put of Penidiorum, sacchari, of each one pound.
Boil them to a syrup.

Syrup of Roses solutine.
THis Syrup is used as a gentle and safe purge both to old and young, when they
are molested either with burning, or pestilent Fevers, or any ho distemper of
the body, and is thus made, Of Damask-roses, one pound. Fair water, four pound.
Infuse them together, then strain them, and add as many fresh Roses, do this
nine times, then take of the last infusion six pound.

Sugar, four pound.
Boil it according to Art to a syrup.

Syrup of Violets.
THis Syrup does break the acrimonie of melancho y, tempereth the heat of the
bowels, brings down the belly by purging; it helps the diseases of the
throat, as hoarsness, and the dry cough, and is a chief aid to the curing
inflammations of the breast, it helps the plurifie, and quenches the thirst
in Fevers, being put in cooling Juleps, and is cordial: It is thus made,
Violet flowers picked, one pound. Spring water hot, one pound and half. Or a
sufficient quantity.
Put them in an earthen vessel glazed, and close covered, and let them infuse
four and twenty hours, then strain them hard, take of this liquor one pound.

White-sugar, two pound.
Mingle them, and dissolve the Sugar with a continual equal heat, and put it up
for your use.

Oxymel simple.
OXymel simple is of great use for the cure of inflammations of the lungs and
throat, helps expectoration, and difficult breathing, cutteth and attenuateth
thick and slimy humors, purges the entrails without trouble, and is good both
in cold and hot affections, and is made as follows, Of the best
Aromatick-honey dispumed, four pound. Clear spring water, and of the best
vinegar, of each two pound.
Boil them according to Art until they come to a liquid syrup, but take heed
you boil it not too much lest you spoil the taste.

Diamoron.
THis syrup is profitable in gargarismes against the eating ulcers of the
mouth, it cutteth away phlegm, and cleanses the mouth and throat, and by
reason of the pleasant taste thereof, it is the more comfortable to the
diseased: It is made after this manner, Succi mororum celsi, and rubri
immaturorum, of each one pound and half. Mellis, two pound.
Boil them with an easy fire to the thickness of honey.

Syrup of Sloes.
SYrup of Sloes does refrigerate and comfort the stomach, stops Fluxes,
heals the excoriations of the intrails, and is made with the Pulpe of sloes
and sugar.

Honey of Roses.
Honey of Roses strengthens and cleanses the stomach, purges clammy humors,
helps concoction with the temperate heat thereof, allayeth and stops hot
fluxes, the phlegmone of the mouth, gums, and jaws; it is singular good with
Oil of Roses for wounds in the head, and putting to them some Aqua vitae,
makes them good to heal wounds in the joints, where the joint water gleereth
out. It is made as follows.

. pure white Honey dispumed, ten pounds. Fresh juice of red Roses, one pound.
Put them into a skillet, and when they begin to boil, throw into them of
fresh red Rose leaves picked four pounds, and boil them until the juice be
wasted, always stirring it, then strain it, and put it up in an earthen pot.

Conserves.
And first of Conserve of red Roses.
THe Conserve of red Roses is good for the heart, and head, strengthens and
comfort both, as also the bowels mitigating their heat, and stops
fluxions, and is much the more profitable in any grief, if a few drops of Oil
of Vitrioll be mixed therewith, but beware of too much: and is thus made.

. Of red Rose leaves not fully blowed, all the withered and corrupt leaves
clipped away, two pounds. White sugar, six pounds.
Put your leaves and half your sugar into a stone mortar, and beat them til
they be almost enough, then put in the rest of the sugar, and beat it up to a
Conserve.

Conserve of Rosemary flowers,
OR Conserve of Anthos, has great force in comforting the brain, and
coroborating the sinnews, and it is given with good success in the falling
sickness, Apoplexy, Lethargy, dead and shaking palsy; and is made as the
Conserve of Roses is.

Conserve of Borage flowers.
THis Conserve is a great cordial, comforting the heart and all the vitalls,
it makes a man merry, glad, and cheerful, and chaseth away all heavy sadness
and dull melancholy; and is made of Borage flowers picked, and sugar, as the
former.

Conserve of Berberries,
Does refrigerate, and is astringent, it quenches thirst and the heat of the
stomach, and bowels, it causes appetite, removes the waterish humor of
choler, cures the bloody flux, the flux of the Liver, the often gnawing and
wringing of the guts caused by choler, heals the small pox; and resists
drunkenness; and is made by stewing the fruit picked from the stalks in a pot,
set in a skillet of water, afterward strained and the pulp set in an earthen
and well glased vessel on the fire, that the watrish humidity may gently
evaporate, stirring it with a wooden spatula, then put to it for every six
pound of pulp ten pound of sugar, according to Art, boil it to a good
consistence.

Conserve of Quinces.
THe conserve of Quinces does bind and comfort the stomach, is good for choler,
stops all kind of bloody fluxes, and helps digestion; and is thus made.

Juice of Quinces clarified six pounds. Boil it until two parts be wasted,
then put to it, Of white sugar two pounds. Then boil them to the thickness of
Honey.
Conserve if Wood-sorrell.
THis Conserve does recreate and comfort the heart, removes putrid humors,
refrigerateth, and profits much in continual and contagious Fevers, being
very cordial, and is made of the herb, as the Conserve of Roses.

Conserve of Sloes.
THe conserve of Sloes is of a stiptick comforting force, very profitable to
comfort a weak stomach oppressed with crudities, it is good against all fluxes
of the belly, and also good to heal all inflammations or excoriations,
occasioned by the same, either taken on a Knife in form of a bolus, or given
in Clysters: and is made as Conserve of Berberries.

Of Electuaries.
And first of London Triacle.
THis was first appointed by the Doctors of the College of London, as a thing
very requisite, for that the price was reasonable for the poorer sort, the
ingredients thereof being nevertheless cordial, and yet such as are easy to
get; it may be used well in place of Mithridate, but because the fresh is the
best, I hold it most convenient for the Artist to keep the species ready, and
when he has occasion to use any of it, he may put to every ounce three ounces
of Honey, and warm it upon the fire, stirring it well until it be perfectly
incorporated: it is thus made.

. Cornu cervini lima derafi, two ounces. Sem. citri, of each one ounce.
Oxalytis, of each one ounce. Paeoniae, of each one ounce. Ocymi, of each one
ounce. Scordii, Corallinae, of each six drams. Rad. Angelicae, Tormentillae,
Peoniae, Foliorum dictamini, Baccorum Juniperi, Lauri, of each half an ounce.
Flor. Calendulae, Caryophyllorum seu vetonicae rubrae, Anthos, Summit.
Hiperici, Nucis moschatae, Croci, of each three drams. Rad. Gentianae,
Zedoariae, Zinziberis, Nucis, Myrrhae, Foliorum scabiosae, Succisae, Cardui
benedicti, of each two drams. Cariophilorum, Opii, of each one dram. Vini
canarini, as much as shall suffice to incorporate them. Mellis, triplum.
Mingle them on the fire, as I showed you before.

Triacle Andromache.
THis Triacle does the effects of Mithridate, Dimocrati, and is good against
the hoarsnesse of the voice, against the Jaundise, Dropsy, for wounds in the
intestines, to bring forth the young birth dead to expel and take away the
Leprosy, and Measels, to revive every decayed sense, to confirm wounds
healed, to kill all kinds of worms, to dissipate wind, to comfort the heart
and stomach, and to keep the body incorrupt, and sound; and is thus made.
Trochiscorum scilliticorum, 48 drams. Trochiscorum e viperis, of each four and
twenty drams. Piperis longi, of each four and twenty drams. Opii Thebacii, of
each four and twenty drams. Magmatis Hedychroi sicci, of each four and twenty
drams. Rosarum siccarum resectis unguibus, Iridis illiricae odorae, Succi
glycyrrhizae, Sem. napae dulcis, Comarum scordii, Opobalsami, Cinamoni,
Agarici, of each twelve drams. Myrrhae, Costi odorati seu zedoariae, Croci.
Cassiae ligneae verae, Nardi Indicae, Schaenanthi, Piperis albi, nigri, Thuris
masculi, Dictamni Cretici, Rhei, Staechados, Marrubii, Sem. petroseluci
macedonici, Calaminthes siccae, Terebinthinae, Rad. pentaphyllae, Zinziberis,
of each six drams. Comarum polii cretici, Chamaepyteos, Nardi celticae, Amomi,
Styracis calamitae, Rad. Mei, Com. chamaedryos, Rad. Phu Pontici, Terrae
lemniae, Foliorum malabathri, Chalcitidis assae vel ejus, Loco calcanthi romani
usti. Rad. gentianae, Gum. Arabici, Succi Hypocistidii, Carpobalsami vel nucis
moschatae, vel cubebarum, Sem. anisi fricti, Cardamomi, Sem. faeniculi,
Seseleos, Acaciae vel ejus loco succi, Inspissati prunellorum acerborum, Sem.
Thlaspeos, Succ. Hyperici, Sem. Ammeos, Sagapeni, of each four drams, Castorei,
Rad. Aristolochiae longae, Bituminis Judaici, Sem. dami, Opoponacis, Centauri
minoris, Galbani pinguis, of each two drams. Vini antiqui canarini, as much as
shall suffice to dissolve the ingredients. Mellis optimi, thrice the weight of
the dry species. Mingle them according to Art.


Triacle Diatesseron.
TRiacle Diatesseron, or the poor man's triacle, is good against poison drunken,
and against the bitings of venomous beasts or worms: It is also good against
all the cold affects of the brain, as convulsions, resolution of the sinews,
falling sickness, cramp, spasme, the inflation of the ventricle, or stomach,
against the defect of concoction therein, and against venomous wounds both
inwardly drunk, and outwardly applied; also it opens the obstructions of the
liver and spleen and thereby preserves the body from the disease, called the
scurvy: It procures sweat very well being taken in sack, but is mighty hurtful
to women with child, as may be easily known by the ingredients which are as
follow, Gentianae, baccarum lauri of each two ounces. Myrrhae of each two
ounces. Aristolochiae rotundae of each two ounces.
Husk your Berries, and powder and searce them, and your gentian and
Aristolochie must be slicked and dried in a folded paper and so powdered and
searced, then dissolve your myrrh in a little sack, and put to it, Mellis
optimi dispumati, two pound.
And then sprinkle in your powders, and incorporate them well on the fire.

Confection of Alkermes.
THis Confection is a preservative from Apoplexies arising from cold and
melancholy humors, does very much comfort the brain, and heart, and is
sometimes used very profitably for them that languish away by reason of a long
sickness, and are subject to swounings, but beware you give it not to any
having a flux of the belly, by reason of the azure stone that is in it, which
is purging: It is thus compounded, Succi pomorum fragantium of each one pound
and half. aqua rosarum odoratissimae of each one pound and half.
In the which you shall infuse for four and twenty hours, Scrici crudi four
ounces.
Then strain it hard, and put to the liquor, Succi granorum kermes ad nos
adjecti puri, one pound. Sugar, two pound.
Boil them to the thickness of honey, then take it from the fire, and put into
it of crude ambergreese cut small half an ounce, and when it is well melted
cast in these following finely powdered, Cinamomi electi, Ligni aloes optimi,
Lapidis lazuli usti in crucibulo,


Then powdered, and washed first in fair water, then in Rose Water or
Burrage-water four or five times, letting it dry between every washing until
the water come from it clear, of each six drams.

Margaritarum pellucidarum Praeparatarum three drams. Fol. auri, Moschi optimi
of each one dram.
Make it up according to Art.

The electuary of the Egg.
THis electuary is excellent above all other Antidotes in preventing and curing
the plague, and all pestilent disease, in expelling the infection from the
heart, and is compounded after this manner, A new laid Egg.
Draw out the white at a little hole in the top, and stuff the Egg full of
the best saffron, then cover it close with another Eggeshell, then put it into
an oven after bread is drawn out, and let it lie so long until the shel begin
to look all over black, but take heed the saffron burn not, for then all that
Egg is spoiled; then take it out of the shel and powder it very small, and put
to it as much white mustard seed in powder at it weighs, then Pulv. rad.
dictamni albi, sive Fraxinellae, Tormentillae, of each two drams. Myrrhae,
Cornu Cervini, Rad. Petasitae, of each one dram. Rad. Angelicae, Pimpinellae,
Gravorum Juniperi, Zedoariae, Camphorae, of each one ounce.
Mingle them altogether in a mortar, and add to them of the best Triacle the
weight of all the other, and then mingle them well with the Pestle for at least
three hours, pouring in now and then a little syrup of Lymons, until it come
to the form of an Electuary.

Mithridate.
MIthridate is in quality and virtue like unto Triacle, but more hot and
forcible against the poison of Serpents, mad Dogs, wild Beasts, creeping
things; being used as a plaster or drunk, it cures all the cold affections of
the head, helps the melancholic, or those that are fearful of waters; them
also that have the falling sickness, Megrim, pain in the bowels, ears,
toothache, and weeping eyes, helps the evils of the mouth and jaws, being
plaisterwise laid to the temples, by discussion gives ease to the troubled
with the Squinancy, Apoplexy, Cough, spitting of blood, Impostumes, or
inflammations of the Lungs, or any griefs within the body; and is good against
the bloudy-flux, flux of the stomach, obstructions of the guts; and against
wringing, and tortions in them; being taken with Aqua vitae, and the decoction
of Baulastians, it remedieth Convulsions and Palsy, helps the Midriffe,
wind in the hypocondria, the pains of the reins, and bladder; breaks the
stone, provokes Urine, and monthly flowers, expels other vices of the
matrix; yields a singular benefit for the Gout; profits not a little in
quotidians and quartanes a quantity drunk in wine being first warmed and then
taken an hour before the fit: it is made as follows.

Myrrhae Arabicae, Croci, Agarici, Zi^ziberis, Cinamomi, Spicae nardi, Thuris,
Sem. Thlaspeos, of each ten drams. Sescleos, Opobalsami, seu ol. Nucis,
Moschat. per express. Junci odorati, Staechados, Costi very, Galbani,
Terebinthinae, Piperis longi, Castorei pontici, Succi hypocystydos, Styracis
optimae, Oppoponacis, Fol. malabathri recentium, vel in ejus defectu, Macis, of
each one ounce. Cassiae ligneae verae, Polii, Piperis albi, Scordii, Sem. dauci
cretici, Carpobalsami, vel Cubebarum, Trochisci Cypheos, Bdellii, of each 7
drams. Nardi celticae purgatae, Gummi Arabici, Sem. Petroselinae Macedon. Opii,
Cardamomi minoris, Sem. Faeniculi, Gentianae, Fol. Rosar. rubrar. Dictamni
cretensis, of each five drams. Sem. Anisi, Asari, Acori, seu calami Aromatici,
Ireos, Phu. majoris, Sagapeni, of each three drams. Mei Athamantici, Acatiae,
Ventrum Scincorum, Summitat. Hyperici, of each two drams and half. Vini,
quantum sufficit ad solutionem gummi and succoru^ mellis deinde triplum ad
omnia praeter vinu^.
Mingle them according to Art as before.

Diaphaenicon.
THis Electuary is most used in Clysters in long and sharp Fevers purging
Choler and phlegm, it is good in the Cholick, belly-ach, and griefs of the
ventricle that arise from crudities, the dose is six drams; and is thus made.

Pulpae Palmularum mundatarum ex hydromelitae coctae and cribro cretae,
Penudiorum recentium, of each hafe a pound. Amigdalarum duleime expurgatarum,
three ounces and a half.
Bruise them and mix them with two pounds of clarified honey, and boil them a
little, then sprinkle in, Zinziberis, Piperis, Macis, Cynamoni, Fol. rutae
siccorum, Sem. Faeniculi, Dauci, of each two drams. Turpeti tenuissime triti,
four ounces. Diagredii, one ounce and half.
Mingle them according to Art.

Diacatholicon.
DIacatholicon purges gently all humor, it is conveniently used in Clysters
in Fevers, and other diseases which arise from a certain evil disposition of
the Spleen and Liver, the dose is as the former; the composition is as
follows.

Pulpae Cassiae, Tamarindorum, Fol. Sennae. of each two ounces. Polipodii,
Violarum, Rhabarbari, Sem. Anisi, Pejudiorum, Sacchari candi, of each one
ounce. Glycirrhicae rasae, Sem. Cucurbitae, Citruli, Cucumeris, Melonum, of
each two drams.
Pound those that are to be pounded, then take Polipodii recentis, three
ounces. Sem. Faeniculi, six drams.
Boil them in four pounds of rain water, or ordinary water to the wasting of
a third part, strain them and put to the Liquor two pounds of the best sugar,
boil them again with the Pulps, and when it is almost enough, add the rest
finely powdered, and make it into an Electuary.

Of Opiats.
Of Diascordium.
DIascordium is helpful in Fevers, as well contagious as otherwise; it is
good for the headache, and for the plague; avaylet in fluxes of the belly, and
tertian Agues, and is made after this manner,. Cinamomi, Cassiae ligneae, of
each half an ounce. Scordu very, of each one ounce. Dictamni Cretici,
Tormentillae. Bistortae, Galbani, Gummi arrabici, of each half an ounce. Opii,
one dram and half. Sty^acis calamitae, four drams and half. S^m acetosae, one
dram and half. Gentianae half an ounce. Boli Armeni, one ounce and half. Terrae
sigilatae lemniae half an ounce. Piperis longi Zinziberis, of each two drams.
Mellis aibi dispumati, two pounds and half. Conservae rosa^um. one pound. Vinii
cana^ini aromatici, half a pound.
Disolve the gums in the wine, and then mingle the rest according to Art to the
form of an electuary.

Laudanum Paracelsi.
THis worthy Medicine I have often used, as it h^^h been commended by the
Author himself, and ^lso by Osnaldus Crollius, and lately by that learned man
Mr. John Wooddal, who has set down the virtues thereof at large in his
Chyrurgeons Mate, whose method I follow in this book, as I have before showed;
and because the aforsaid Authors are too great a price for every one, and in
such languages which diverse understand not, and my desire being to fit my book
as near as I can to the title of Vade mecum: I will out of the said Authors,
and mine own practice set down both the virtues, and composition of this truly
Laudanum: And first, in all sharp pains whatsoever hot, or cold within, or
without the body, yea even when through, extremity of pain the parties are at
deaths door, or almost mad with the vehemence of the same; this precious
Medicine gives ease presently, yea and quiet sleep, and that safely, but much
better the body being first soluble either by nature or art, I mean by
suppository, or clyster which is better: In the Cholick with Mint-water it
eases the griping pains thereof: In the pains, and gravel of the Kidneys, it
gives present ease, and likewise in the Plurisie: In pains of the joints it is
very good: It is good to stay umes, as toothache, and other like defluxions,
in the beginnings, as namely in the toothache, dissolve four grains thereof in
Plantine-water, and put it into the ear of the aching side, and take three
grains into the body, and lie to rest; it is a sure help: In all fluxes of the
belly, whether they proceed of sharp and slippery humors, or whatsoever else
offending cause, taken with Mastick, terra sagillata, fine bole, or with any
other appropriate good medicine, it is exceeding sure, for it fortifieth the
other medicine, and doubleth their forces, adding his own also thereto: In
extreme watchings, and want of rest either inwardly or outwardly taken, it is
profitable; if outwardly you would use it, take four or six grains with three
drops of oil of Nutmegs made by expression, mix them together, and bind them
in two little clouts, and put it into the nostrils, it will marvailously
assuage pains in the head, and cause quiet rest: In the extreme bleeding of the
nose called haemorragis, it is an approved secret, that sixteen grains thereof
divided into two pills, and thrust up into the nostrils into each nostrill one
part, helps the same: In all kind of Fevers it is good to be given with
water of Wormwood or pill-wise alone, and if the heat remain after six hours,
you may give it the second time, and after that again in like time safely, not
exceeding the dose; yet let your own experience lead you, that where you see
three grains will not cause rest, in the next potion you may give one grain
more, and so increase paulatim, but increase not but upon good deliberation: In
burning Fevers it asswageth thirst, and provokes sleep, chiefly in those
Fevers in which the party seems to have some show of rest, with tedious
dreams and slumbers mixed: In the disease called Asthma, and in the Ptisick, if
it be used in water of hysop it will preserve the diseased Patient a long time:
It conserveth the natural heat, strengthens the spirits, repaireth strength
lost: It is also effectual to be given to melancholy people, which are void of
reason, and are troubled with the passions of the heart: It is likewise used
with good effect against vomiting, and the hickeck proceeding of wind,
faintness or debility of the ventricle: In the superfluous defluxions of the
excremental, or menstrual blood it is an excellent remedy with crocus martis,
or red corral: In phrensies, and madness, both inwardly and outwardly it is
good mixed with Aqua vitae, and the temples anointed therewith: In the
falling sickness, with Spirit of Vitriol or the quintessence of Camphire, with
alo oil of Almond it is usually taken; but beware you use not this medicine to
any which are feeble through a great cough, being oppressed with tough phlegm,
and shortness of breath, for there it is not good. The dose is, two three, or
four grains; if there be looseness of the belly, as is rehearsed it works much
better. It is best given in any occasion accompanied with waters, or other
medicines which are most appropriate to the diseases, and parts diseased, and
yet may very well be given alone in a Pill, which I willingly do, for that the
Patient then is least troubled with the taste thereof; the composition is as
follows, Opii Thebaici, Succi Hyoscyami debito tempore? one ounce and half.
Collecti and in sole prius inspissati one ounce and half. Spec. diambrae and
diamoschi fideliter Dispensatorum, of each two ounces and half. Mummiae
transmarinae selectae, half an ounce. Salis perlarum, Corallorum, of each three
drams. Liquoris succini albi per alcohol vini, Extracti, Ossis de cord cervi,
of each one dram. Lapidis bezoartici, Unicorni animalis vel mineralis, of each
one dram. Moschi, Ambrae, of each one scruple.
In want want of right potable gold not sophisticated, you shall add these
things, Oleorum Anisi, Carvi, Arautiorum, Citriorum, Muistae, Caryophillorum,
Cinamomi, Succini, of each twelve drops.
Make of all these a mass, or extract according to Chemistry, out of which you
may form your pills, as hereafter shall be shown; As first,

The roots and rinds of the younger hemlock, casting away the inward woody part
thereof; the time of the gathering thereof is in Summer, the Moon being in the
sign Aries or Libra, and before the full of the Moon, and if it might be done,
it were best to be gathered in the very hour the Moon enters into one of the
said signs; this observed, let the juice thereof be pressed out, and filtred,
and coagulated, then set in the Sun to harden, which done, extract the tincture
thereof with Spirit of wine; the opium must be purged in some distilled water,
as of hysop or the like, as you would wash aloes, and then extract the tincture
thereof with Spirit of wine; as also the tincture of the species of Diambrae,
must be extracted with Spirit of wine.

The juice of henbane with the extract of opium mingled together, with the
Spirit of wine whereinto they are extract before, is to be evaporated from them
ere that they be mixed with the rest of the ingredients, also the opium and
juice of henbane must be digested in chemical manner for a month at least, that
thereby their sulphurous, venomous, and dangerous vapors they have may be well
corrected, which vapors have a yellowish froth, or scum seen in the
superficial parts of them, and are very obnoxious and dangerous, which I
thought not amiss to advise the studious and industrious Chemist of; let all
the extractions be done in the true spirit of wine well rectified, and then the
longer the extract remains in the digestion, the better will by your medicine.

He that intends any part of this composition for women, must forbear the
Musk and Ambergreece, and use with it rather four grains of good Caster^um. I
mean in that one dose he intends to give the women; the Faeces of the Opium,
Henbane, species of Amber, etc. after their tinctures are extracted from them,
are to be calcined, and brought into salt, namely by infusion in some fitting
Liquor after calcination, with all due filteration, evaporation, and
coagulation, with Cohobs convenient, and added to the rest of the Composition.

And concerning the tinctures mentioned to be extracted in spirit of Wine,
after one month digestion, the spirit of Wine is to be evaporated by Balveum
Maria, the residence be almost of the thickness of honey, which done and
gathered into one convenient glass porrenger, or the like instrument, then
add the salt of Coral and pearls, and the Mummie beaten fine, and also the
Bez^ar and Hearts, Musk, and Amber all in fine powder, and well mixed the said
extracts, then add the aforesaid salts of the recited faeces, and also the
former recited Oils, all of them first mixed together with Liquor of Amber well
shaken together in a glass viol, with a few drops of spirit of wine, for that
the said spirit of wine causes the recited Oils well to incorporate; which
done, and that they are all mixed in one, and added to the former* the Laudanum
is ready, only if you could forbear your medicine so long, that it might
afterward stand in a small Alimbeck of glass with a blind head one month, it
would be much the better.

I have the rather mentioned this medicine in my book, because so many
dangerous Compositions are daily sold for current, Laudanum Paracelsi Opiati,
to the extreme hazard of the lives of very many, and to the great prejudice of
the Commonwealth; and for that the young Artist be not deceived with the false
Compositions. though indeed it is impossible to espy some cunning deceits,
which are in this medicine, yet these rules following will instruct the buyer.

First therefore see the Laudanum be even, not having any course, greety, or
gross thing in it, but that it will clearly dissolve, as juice of Licorice
will that is well made.

2. If there be either honey or sugar in it, it is false.

3. If it be not much after the consistence of juice of Licorice well made, it
is either false, or foolishly compounded, and will not keep.

4. If it retain the strong loathsome favor of Opium, it is not to be trusted.

5. If it be not merely of one color, that you can see none of the ingredients
appear at all, it cannot be good.

This Composition well and truly made, must be smooth, and well smelling, of
such indifferent hardness, that without additions you may roll it into Pills,
and is not greatly ponderous, or heavy, but it is of an unpleasant taste, and
therefore best given in a Pill, except necessity urge the contrary, or in
outward means.

Philonium Romanum.
THis Opiate is good in the plurisie, Colic, and any internal pain or
grief, it causes sleep, stays flux of blood in the inward parts, and
sneesing; allayeth the griefs of the belly, spleen, Liver, and Reins caused by
cold wind and crude humors; and takes away the hicket: the dose is one
scruple, and is augmented or decreased, as years and strength of the patient
require. It is thus made.

. Piperis albi, Sem. Hyasciami albi, of each five drams. Opii, two drams and
half. Cassiae ligneae, one dram and half. Sem. Apii, one dram. Sem.
Petroselini macedonici very, Feniculi, Dauci Cretici, of each 2 scruples 5
grains. Croci, one scruple and half. Spicae Indicae, Pyrethri, Zedoariae, of
each fifteen grains. Cinamomi, one dram and half, Euphorbii, Myrrhae,
Castorei, of each one dram. Mellis dispumati, pondus triplum.
Mingle them, and make them into an Electuary.

Philonium Persicum.
THis is good against the overmuch flowing of women's natural visits, and the
Haemorrhoids, and against the flux of the belly, against vomiting, and spitting
of blood, it does also consolidate Ulcers and veins; it is made as follows.

. Piperis albi, Hyoscami albi, of each twenty drams. Opii, Terrae Lemniae, of
each ten drams. Lapidis Haematit. praeparat. Croci, of each five drams,
Castorie. Spicae Indicae, Euphorbii, Pyrethri, Margaritarum, Succini,
Zedoariae, Doronici, Trochiscorum Ramich, of each one dram. Camphorae, one
scruple, Mellis rosati optimi triplum.
Mingle them, and make them into an electuctuary.

Pills.
Pillulae aureae, or Golden-pilles.
THese Pills are cholagogal, attracting choler, yea and phlegm too from the
superior and inferior venture, and therefore purge the head, senses and eyes,
and restore the eyesight; their dose is one dram: they are thus made, Aloes,
Diagredil, of each five drams, Rosarum rubrarum. Sem. apii, of each two drams
and half. Feniculi, Anisi, of each one dram and half. Mastiches, Croci,
Trochiscorum alhaudal, of each one dram.
Powder them, and make them up into a stiff mass with honey of Roses strained.

Pillullae Cochiae.
THese purge choler, and phlegm from the head, the liver and all other parts,
wherein such humors are contained, the ordinary dose is one drachme; They are
made as follows, Specierum Hiera Picrae Galeni, ten drams Pulpae
Colocynthides three drams, one scruple Diagredii, two drams and half. Turpeti,
Staechados, of each five drams,
Make them up with syrup of stachos into a mass.

Pills sine quibus, or without which I would not be.
THey wonderfully purge choler, phlegm, and melancholy, they are most properly
good against the cataract and dimness of the eyes, preserving the sight, and
curing the griefs of the ears, they also help the pains and griping of the
upper guts; they are thus made, Aloes lotae, fourteen drams. Myrabol.
Citrinarum, Myrabol. Chaebularum, Myrabol. Emblicarum, Myrabol. Indarum,
Myrabol. Bellericarum, Rhabarbari, Mastiches, Absinthii, Rosarum rubrarum,
Violarum, Sennae, Agaricae, Cassuthae, of each one dram. Diagredii, six drams
and half.
Make them into a mass for Pills with syrup of the juice of Fennel with honey.

Pills of Ruffus.
THese Pills are called pestilential, because they are usually given in the
pestilence, or plague, rather to prevent infection then cure the infected, the
body being freed from excrements by the Aloes, from putrefaction by the myrrh,
and by saffron the vital faculties are quickened; they are very stomachical; and
where any oppression of the stomach does require gentle purging, these Pills
excel; their dose is j s. They are thus made, Aloes optimae, two ounces.
Myrrhae electae, Croci, of each one ounce.
Make them up with the syrup of the juice of Lymons according to Art.

Pills of Euphorbium.
THese are very good against the Dropsy and Scurvy, for they calisie the
stomach, and intrails, purge water abundantly, prevail also in removing the
cause of humors, and bring aid for the pains of the loins, and gout,
proceeding from too much humidity; the dose is from j. to s. mixed with Pills
of Cochia; they are thus made, Euphorbii, Colocynthidos, Agarici, Bdellii,
Sagapeni, of each two drams, Aloes, five drams.
Make them up with syrup of the juice of Leeks.

Laxatives.
Pulvis arthreticus.
THis is a very safe, and good general purging medicine: It purges all
podagrical defluxions, and generally any humor or reflection of the body
downwards, being given in waters appropriate to the quantity of one dram; and
it is thus made, Hermodactyllorum, Turpeti opt. Diagredii, Sennae, Rasurae
cranii humani, Sacchari, of each of these one ounce powdered.
Mingle them, and keep them close in a glass.

Confection Hamech,
Purges choler, melancholy, and salt phlegm, and is therefore with great
benefit used against diseases arising from the same, the canker, leprosy, or
dry scarf, madness, ring-worm, itching, scabs, and the like, the dose is six
drams in fumaterry-water; it is thus made, Cort. myrabolanorum, Citrinarum two
ounces. Myrabol Chebularum, jugrarum, Violarum, Colocynthidos, Polypodii
quercini, of each one ounce and half. Absynthii, Thymi of each half an ounce.
Sem. anisi, Faeniculi, Flor. rosarum rubrarum, of each 3 drams.
Beat them, and steep them in two pintes of Whey one day, then boil them to one
pint, rub them with your hands, and strain them, and to the liquor add, Succi
fumariae, Pulpae prunorum and Uvarum passularum, of each half a pound. Facchari
albi, Mellis dispumati, of each one pound.
Boil them to the thickness of honey; when it is almost boiled enough sprinkle
into it Agarici trochiscati, Sennae tritorum, of each two ounces. Rhabarbari
triti, one ounce and half. Epitymi, one ounce. Diagredii, six drams. Cinamoni,
half an ounce. Zinziberis, two drams. Sem. fumariae, Anisi, Spicae nardi of
each one dram.
Make them into an electuary, s. a.

Benedicta laxativa.
BEnedicta laxativa purges out slimy humors, most especially such as are in
the joints; it draws from the head, reins, bladder, and every part, it is most
used in Clysters, the dose six drams; it is thus made, Turpeti electi, ten
drams. Diagredii, Cort. rad Esulae praep. Hermodactyllorum, Ros. rubrarum, of
each five drams, Carry ophillorum Spicae nardi, Zinziberis, Croci, Saxifragiae
verae, Piperis longi, Amomi vel ejus defectu, Calami aromatici, Cardamomi
minoris, Sem. Apii, Petroselini, Carni, Faeniculi, Asparagi, Rusci, Millii
solis, Salis gemmei Galangae, Macis, of each one dram. Mellis dispumati triplum.
An electuary s. a. It is best to keep the powders well thrust together into a
pot, and close covered, and when you use them put the honey to them.

Aloe Rosat.
Purges the head, and stomach very well, and kills worms, being made up into
Pills, and so swallowed; the dose is one dram: it is thus made.

. Aloes succotrinae lucidae pulv. four ounces. Succi rosarum damasc. depurati,
one pound.
Put them together to the Sun, or in Balneo until all the moisture be exhaled,
then add more juice, and again evaporate it, thus do four times, and then put
up the made in a pot close covered.

Simples.
And first of Aloe.
IT removes cold phlegmatic and choleric humors by purging, digesting, and
driving them out; it is a Sovereign medicine for the stomach, and outwardly
applied it stays blood amongst other astringent powders, and is incarnative.
It is the juice of a plant: the dose is one dram or more.

Joleb.
THis root powdered fine, will purge very well watery humors, and opens the
Liver, is given in the Dropsy, Scurvy, and the like to the quantity of one
dram.

Rubarb.
RUbarb is hot in the first degree, dry in the second, of an astringent nature,
is good for the stomach, and Liver, and against the bloody flux; purges
downwards choleric humors, and therefore very profitably used against hot
Fevers, inflammations, and stoppings of the Liver; the dose that binds is
half a dram with Conserve of Roses; to purge take from one dram to half an
ounce.

Polipody of the Oak,
IS dry in the second degree, opens the body, and brings away black choler
and phlegm, helps the Cholick, and griping of the belly, and also the
obstruction of the Spleen.

Hearts horn rasped.
THis is a cordial simple, given in want of Unicorns horn, and not unfitly,
it comfort the heart, and is good against poison, provokes urine, opens
obstructions, eases the Chollick, disperseth wind, kills worms in the body,
is good against pains in the reins, or bladder, and being taken upon each
occasion in Liquors proper to the former griefs, it is much the beter in force.
Hearts horn burned, and powdered, is good against the bloody, or any other flux
of the belly.

Euphorbium,
IS hot and dry almost in the fourth degree, and besides his extreme, and
notable acrymony, it has a certain faculty of purging, whereby tough and cold
phlegm with choler, and water, are taken away.

Saffron,
IS hot in the second degree, dry in the first, is good for the brain,
quickens the senses, cheareth the heart, causes digestion, helps the
diseases of the breast, lungs, and liver, it mollifieth all hardnesses, and
ripeneth all tumors.

Chyna.
CHyna roots prevail much in the cure of the French pox; and are good for the
giddiness of the head, takes away the pain of the stomach, and obstructions,
and are profitable for the dropsy, Colic, and gripings of the belly, moves
urine, causes sweat, and are helpful against Convulsions, the Palsy, and
pains of the joints, and a singular remedy against a Consumption.

Salsaparilla,
IS of a hot quality, causes sweat, specially extinguisheth the heat of
venereall poison, and is good for the articular diseases, ulcers, and
phlegmatic humors, and principally it is good against the French pox.

Guiacam,
Does exsiccate, attenuate, open, purge, move sweat, resists contagion, and
infection, and does wonderfully cure the French Pox, old ulcers, scabs, and
Ring-worms; the best use is by decoction in fair water.

Licorice.
IS in all his qualities temperate, yet inclining more to heat, it is agreeable
to the lungs, and breast; rotteth phlegm, moves expectoration, cures the
cough, helps breathing, and is profitable for the reins, taking away the
sharpness of urine, dissolveth the stone, and heals the sores of the
kidneys, and bladder.

Juice of Licorice,
IS likewise temperate in all his qualities, but exceeding somewhat in heat,
somewhat it does lenifie the throat, and mitigate the asperities of the
Arteries, cleanses the bladder, and is good for the cough, moves
expectoration, and is very profitable against all vices of the Lungs, and
throat.

Powder of Licorice,
IS of the same nature with Licorice, it is much used to roll Pills in when they
are too soft.

French-barly,
IS cold and dry in the first degree, digesteth, softneth, and ripeneth all
hard swellings; Is good for inflammations, excels against the soreness of
the throat, refrigerateth, comfort, strengthens, is abstersive, and
provokes utine: I commonly use it thus, Put a heaped spoonful into a pint of
running water, boil it a walm or two, pour out that water into a basin, and use
it when it is cold, either for Juleps or emulcions, or any other ways.

Anniseeds
ARe hot and dry in the third degree, does discuss the windiness of the
stomach and bowels, stops the bloody flux, lask of the belly, moves urine,
and monthly-visits in women, breaks and brings away the stone, helps
obstructions of the liver, amendeth the breath, and is good for the
falling sickness.

Fennel-seeds
ARe hot in the third degree, dry in the first, corroborateth the stomach,
opens the obstructions of the lungs, liver, and kidneys, and causes
abundance of milk in women's breasts.

These two seeds are used in carminative Cylsters.

Caraway-seeds.
CAraway-seeds are of the same nature, and virtue with Anniseeds, and are used
in Clysters to break wind.

Cummin-seeds
ARe hot and dry in the third degree, they attenuate, digest, resolve, discuss
wind, dissipate phlegmatic tumors, and are good against the colic, and
tympany.

Linseed.
LInseed is hot in the first degree, temperate in moisture and dryness,
softneth all cold tumors, ripeneth and breaks impostumes, draws out thorns
sticking in the body, expels wind, and griping of the belly, and cleanses
the flesh from spots.

Fenugreek,
IS hot in the second, dry in the third degree, does mollify, discuss and
mundifie; helps cold hard swellings, impostumes, and gout in the feet,
wastes and lenifieth the hardness of the milt, mitigateth heat, profitable
for the matrix in women, and cleanses the skin from many evils, as itch,
scurffe, pimples, wheals, and the like.

Sugar.
SUgar is hot in the first degree, loses the belly, is convenient to the
stomach, does cleanse, digest, take away the asperity or roughness of the
tongue and siccity, thirst or drought in Fevers, helps the reins and
bladder, and is profitable for eyes dim of sight.

White-starch,
IS moderately hot, levigateth the parts exasperated; it is effectual against
defluxions of humors into the eyes, against pustles and hollow ulcers, it
fills with flesh, stops spitting of blood, helps the roughness, and
soarnesse of the breast and throat, and eases the cough: it is very good in
the fluxes of the belly to be given in Cluysters against inflammations, and
excoriations in the intrails.

Nutmegs
ARe hot, and dry in the second degree, helps the stoppings of the liver,
milt, stomach, windiness of the belly, lask, weakness of the kidneys, and
stopping of the urine, comfort the heart and aromatizeth the stomach.

Myrrh.
Myrrh chosen fragile or brittle, light, splendent, of little drops, bitter,
sharp, which smells sweet, full of whitish veins being broken, is hot and dry
in the second degree; it opens the womb, procures women's monthly visits,
brings forth speedily the birth and is good for the cough, stitch, flux and
bloody flux; it kills worms, amendeth the breath, closes up wounds,
confirms the teeth loose, and slays the hair from shedding.

Mastick.
MAstick sweet in smell, white, splendent, brittle, old, and very dry, is hot
in the second degree; it helps concoction, stops vomiting, confirms the
power of retaining sustenance, is abstersive; it is profitable also to them
that spit blood, or that are troubled with a cough; it attracteth phlegm from
the brain, and is good for the breath.

Pitch.
PItch is hot and dry in the second degree, it discusseth, conglutinateth,
mollifieth, maturateth, suppleth the hardness of the matrix, and hard tumors,
cures ulcers, fills them that are hollow up with good flesh, and helps
cold aches, and the gout.

Rosin.
ROsin is hot, mollifying, discussing, and cleansing, and being taken inwardly
is good against the cough, mendeth the breast, provokes urine, concocteth
crude matters, loses the belly, expels the stone and gravel, and is
excellent for the cure of green and fresh wounds.

Turpentine.
TUrpentine is hot in the second degree, it is cleansing, mollifying, and
operative; it is good taken inwardly for the shortness of breath, ptisick,
stone, colic, cold, and windy affections of the breast; it provokes urine,
and sends forth gravel; it avails much in the running of the reins, used
outwardly it is good in wounds in sinewy places, it fills wounds and ulcers with
flesh, and is used much in Emplaisters and Unguents.

Wax yellow and white.
YEllow wax does mollify, and heat, moistneth temperately; it is good to
amend the milk in Nurses breasts coagulated, it assawageth pain heals wounds
and ulcers, and has commonly a place in all good Unguents and Emplaisters; it
is good medicine to be drunk or eaten, and so swallowed down for to cure the
exulceration of the stomach or intrails in fluxes, where inward exulcerations
are to be feared; white-wax is colder then yellow.

Harts-suet.
HEarts-suet is of a hot nature, does assuage aches, resolves and mollifieth
hard tumors in any part of the body, and by experience is found very good
administered in Clysters, to heal the excoriations of the right gut; for it is
avodine, and very sanative.

Hogs-suet.
IT has a lenifying, and avodine quality, and therefore it is not unprofitably
used for mitigation of sharp humors, asswaging of pain, healing of burnings
with fire, and very fitly mixed with Cataplasmes appointed for that purpose.

Sperma-ceti,
IS sour in taste, spungy, and white in show, unsavory in smell, and weighty,
having a sharp quality; it is of a cold faculty, cleanses, and digesteth; it
is good against inward bruises taken inwardly, and the place contused anointed
therewith, and a Paracelsus plaster put over it, or Greek-pitch; it is also
good for spots and morphew in the skin.

Dragons blood.
IS cold and dry in the first degree; it is of an astringent quality, it
closes up wounds and confirms the weak parts, and stays the flux of blood
inward or outward; it is used outwardly, with other astringent powders.

Cantharides
ARe used outwardly to raise a blister, and sometimes inwardly to move urine,
but not without danger.

Bole-armeny
IS very dry and astringent; it is a good medicine in resisting the fluxes of
blood, helping the Catarrhe, dysentery, and ulcers of the mouth: It is good, in
the Pestilence, and all other like infections.

Allome
Is astringent, mendeth putrified ulcers dries the moist, consumes proud
superfluous flesh, takes away the itch, and cures the scab, and is very
profitable in lotions for ulcerations of the mouth, throat, or elsewhere: Being
burnt, it is most used to dry up ulcers, and induce a cicatrize.

White Coperas,
IT is good for Collyriums, or lotions for the infirmities of the eyes, namely
against itchings, akings, smartings, defluxions, and opthalmiaes of the eyes.

Album graecum,
OR white dogs turd, is hot and astringent, stays the Lask, cures the
Squinancy, helps the Dysentery, and drives away Fevers, that come by
course; and is very good to strew the fundament, fallen down withal, being
powdered and sifted through a Lawn or Sarcenet.

Trochisks of Red-lead.
THese trochisks consume proud flesh, mundifie sordid ulcers, as also callous
or hard flesh, and wonderfully cures Fistulaes. They are thus made.

. Medullae panis crudl been fermentati, four drams. Sublimati electi, one dram.
Minii, half a dram. Aqua Rosarum, as much as will suffice to incorporate them
into a stiff paste.
Make them up into what fashion you please with the Rose water, and dry them in
an Oven, and keep them for your use.

Praecipitate.
THis Mercuriall medicine is of the same quality with Mercury, and for killing
and curing gives way to no other; it is good to cleanse and dry old ulcers,
being mingled with Basilicon; it brings new or old sores to digestion, and
stays blood being applied upon Lint; it is given in pills against the French
pox, but not without great danger, unless it be done with good advise.

Quicksilver.
IT corrodeth, kills Lice and Nits, and also the itch; wounds the
intestines, suppresseth urine, swells the body, hurts the stomach, and
belly; resolves, penetrateth, and purges.

Lapis medicamentosus.
THis stone being dissolved one ounce of it in a pint of Rainwater, or
River-water (not Well-water) and filtered from the dregs, so as it remain
clear, and so wash any old sore with it morning and night, and a linen cloth
wet in it, and laid upon it, and it will heal it in what part soever it be;
it stays all defluxions, cleanses and comfort the part affected; it
fastens the teeth, and keeps the gums from putrefaction; it is good for
redness and heat in the eyes, or humors, if the corners of the eyes be
moystened with a feather; it takes away St. Anthonies fire, Shingles, etc. if
a cloth wet in it be laid upon them, and renewed as soon as it is dry: it
heals the scabs of the hands or body, it they be washed at night; it is good
against the Cancer in the breast, or mouth, or any ulcers of the mouth, or
throat, being gargarised; it dryes Blisters, or wheales on the feet; it heals
all sorts of burninqs, if a cloth wet in it be laid upon them, it is thus made.

. Vitrioli virid. one pound. Vitrioli albi, half a pound. Alumnis, one pound
and half. Salis nitri, of each three ounces. Salis communis, of each three
ounces. Salis Tartari, Absinthii, Artimesiae, Chicoriae, Persicariae,
Plantaginis, of each half an ounce.
Put the mall into a new earthen pot, and put to them a little Rose Vinegar,
and boil them on a gentle coal fire, ever stirring them until they begin to
grow thick, then add Venice Cerusse, half a pound. Bole armeny, four ounces.
Mingle them well together, until it grows to the hardness of a stone, then
let it cool and break the pot and take it out, and keep it to your use; If you
will put in gummes, as Myrrh and Frankinscense, you must boil them very gently
lest they burn, and the strength vanish away.

Burnt Coperas,
IS made as burnt Alom is, of any sort of Coperas, and is used to abate spungy
flesh in ulcers, and also in all restrictive powders for staying of fluxes; and
it helps well with other fitting Simples to cicatrize, and also in lotions
and gargarismes it is of good use.

Honey
ENglish Honey being yellow, the favor and odor pleasant, sharp, pure,
sincere, clear, fast, or stiff, yielding little scum in decoction, is good
and very profitable for those that are coctive, as also for the stomach, if one
drink it with water, it helps the bladder, and reins, it is good for the
eyes, it mundifieth opens and heals; as for burnings and scaldings it
cures them without scar, and is very good to heal ulcers of the ears.

Bean meal,
IS cold, and moist, dissolveth all swellings, is very good for ulcers, evils,
and blastings of the genitors, and takes away inflammation of women's paps,
made into a poult is with beer and vinegar, it helps the swelling of the legs.

Barley meal.
IT is cold and dry in the first degree, dissolveth hot and cold tumors,
digesteth, softeneth, and ripeneth hard swellings, stops the lask, and
humors falling into the joints, discusseth wind, is good against the scurfe,
and leprosy, and allayeth the inflammations of the Gout.

Wheat flower,
IS hot in the first degree, stops spitting of blood, distillations of
subtle humors, helps the cough and roughness of the sharp artery,
dissolveth tumors, and cleanses the face from Lentils and spots, appeaseth
hunger and thirst, and is the principal natural upholder of the life and
health of man.

Mill-dust.
MIll-dust is used in compositions, to stay fluxes of bleeding wounds.

Wheat-bran.
IS good against the scurfe, itch, and spreading scab, dissolveth the
beginnings of hot swellings, does swage and slake the hard swellings of women's
breasts, and the decoction thereof is singular good, to cure the painful
exulcerations in the intrails given by Clysters.

Of the Crows-bills, Catch-bullets, and Terebellum.
THese Instruments are used severally to draw out bullets, arrow-heads, broken
bones, pieces of Armor, or Mail, or whatsoever else of unnatural things gotten
into any part of man's body; In the use of them great care and respect must be
had not to use extreme violence on the sudden to draw out the offending thing;
for it is not always necessary to draw it out by the way of the first wound,
but perhaps it may with far less danger be thrust quite through the member,
and taken out on the other side.

Sometimes a bullet, or arrow-head may be fixed in a bone, or between bones,
and then it is far better not to move it, then to offend the part wherein it is
lodged or settled; for in such cases oftentimes nature does better cast it
forth, then the Artist can devise to do,

Incision-sheers.
THis Instrument is to dilate, and enlarge the orifice of a wound, for diverse
respects, though many instead thereof do use the Incision-knife, yet upon
several occasions you shall find the Incision-sheers to be needful and
necessary.

The Scrue-probe,
IS an Instrument as long again as an ordinary probe, made to unscrue in the
middle, and is used where the small probe is too short to make sufficient
probation.

Dismembring-knife.
THis Instrument is used in dismembring; as namely to amputate or cut any
offensive part, or member in man's body; I mean the fleshy parts or whatsoever
else may be incised close to the bone, or between the bones, the better to make
way for the same, having always in a readiness an Incision-knife to cut
asunder in all places as the knife cannot come at.

Of the Trafine.
THis Instrument was first devised by Mr. John Woodal, a very learned man, whom
I do chiefly follow in the method of this Book, as I have declared in my
Preface, and is of more use then the Trapan, as I have diverse times
experienced, and I use it according to the said Mr. Woodals direction in his
book, which because it is not in every place, therefore I shall rehearse his
own words whereby the Artist may find the use of it, and by practice come to
gain more knowledge of it.

It is first to be considered that the pin thereunto belonging (which is in
the midst of the head) being placed truly in the Center, be artificially made
of good steel, and that it be triangular also, that it be sharp each way, well
pointed, and stand fast in the instrument, and also that it stand no lower, but
always somewhat higher then the circumferent teeth of the head of that
instrument do; for because the said pin in the center guides the
circumferent tooth-headed-saw to the beginning of the work, and in the
agitating and moving the Trafine with the hand to and fro in this work, the
said pin may first take hold ere the teeth of the instrument touch the scull,
for the said pin is not only appointed as a rule and guide, and also as the
stay to the work; which done, namely when the tooth, head, orb, or saw, has
taken round hold, then the sooner the better, the Artist is to take up the
instrument to wipe and cleanse the teeth thereof, and draw out the said pin
in the cen er, the which he may no ways omit; which done, he is by the
agitation of his hand only to and fro to pierce, and having pierced, as it
were half through, he is again to take up his instrument, and cleanse it, and
then again to proceed in piercing by the motion of his hand to and fro, until
he have in all parts gone through the cranium, which if he diligently regard in
the tender observant motion of his own hands; I mean, he that pierces shall
sensibly feel when the bone is penetrated through on each part, which
considered, then drawing of his instrument, he shall find the piece of the
cranium so removed, fixed with the head of the instrument.

But note, nevertheless there is a great care to be taken by the Artist in the
manner of the piercing, and taking out the piece of the frustrated bone diverse
ways.

And first, let him be sure ever to place the broding head of the Instrument
that pierces so, that the triangular pin in the center thereof be set upon a
firm part of the cranium or scull, yet always provided it be as near the
fractured part thereof as may be.

Secondly, the Artist is to consider, that as he which pierces the cranium
with a small straight head, such as the Trapans were accustomed to have, as is
said, by the giving way of the small scrue that fasteneth the head of the
Trapan, the patients life may be endangered, namely if the cranium be thoroughly
pierced, the instrument casually should slip down upon the dura matter, as my
self to my grief once saw; even in like manner he that uses a ragged
taper-head of a Trafine, how safe soever, may be guilty of endangering his
patient, if he be not careful in the manner of his piercing; namely that after
his instrument has taken hold round with the teeth, if he either leave the
pin untaken out, the said pin being longer then the teeth of the
instrument, he may wound the pannicle dura matter before the piece intended to
be taken out be pierced through in each part, or that he do not at the least
twice or thrice in the time of his piercing the cranium, take up and cleanse
the teeth of his instrument with a clout, thereby as it were to mistrust
himself, as fearing whether it have in all parts pierced through, or no, or how
much, or in which part he is wanting for fear of going too deep, otherwise he
may kill his patient ere he does find or perceive he is through; for a work so
seldom used, and the errors thereof being of so dangerous a consequence, the
Artist, though otherwise discreet, by omission oblivion, or other improvidence,
be wanting in some observation highly worthy of regard; wherefore it behooveth
him to suspect himself, and be cautions, for that a man can never be too wary
in such a business: for although the piece every way may be pierced, and
removed out of his place, yea and contained within the Trafine head, yea and
stick to the same, yet the Artist may by his hand be mistaken, and think it not
to be through, for that the instrument sticks as firmly, and as fast in the
place when the piece is out, and within the orb^ of the Trafine, as it did ere
it was divided, and as if it had not gone through: hereby if the Artist observe
not his intermissions by forbearing now and then his piercing, as is said, and
sometimes view his work, and cleanse the teeth of the instrument ere it be
through he is subject to go too deep, and wound the dura matter by the continued
motion of his hand, notwithstanding the piece of the cranium is completely
removed, and rests within the head of the said instrument.

Further he advises the young Artist to make trial on a Calves-head, or the
like subject, before he put it in practice upon a man; for indeed a Surgeon can
never be too fearful of omission, or of over-doing, for hereby he does often
run himself into diverse inconveniences to his great reproach and damage.

Of the head-saw.
THe head-saw is an instrument by which a vent may be given sometimes through
the cranium, and thereby the use of the Trapan, and also of the Trafine may be
forborne. I do use this instrument made about the length of a finger, and about
half an inch broad, well toothed, but not too rank, the point turning upward
like the top of a fauchion, and toothed all the way, so that with the compassed
top I can divide what I see good in the cranium, and with it also I can take
off a finger or toe as occasion shall serve; and this way I use rather then
cutting mullets or chissels, they being so apt to shatter the bones, and with
this of the member be steadfastly held, or bound to some piece of wood, it is
taken off very cleanly.

Of the dismembring-Saw.
THis is the instrument which the Artist shall never use without terror,
knowing that the subject whereon he is to work is the most precious of all the
creatures of God. The use of it is to cut in two a bone, either of the arm leg,
or thigh, after that the flesh is separated from it by the amputation-knife,
and the periostaen scraped away with the back of the same knife, that the Saw
may the more surely and firmly take hold upon the bone.

Of the Speculum oris.
THere are two sorts of these instruments, that is to say, a Speculum oris
plain, which takes hold under the chin, and holds the mouth open and the
tongue down both at one time, and is very necessary in applying medicines to
the root of the tongue, Uvula, or roof of the mouth. The other is a Speculum
oris with a scrue, thereby by degrees to force, and wrest open the jaws in the
Lethargy, Convulsions, Scurvie, and many other dangerous diseases, and for
conveying nourishment into the mouth of the Patient; and these two instruments
cannot well be missing in a Chyrurgions closet.

Speculum Any.
THe name of this instrument declares to what use it serves, namely to the
fundament, only to open the same as occasion shall be offered upon any disease
happening in that part, as excoriation, ulceration, fistula, etc. Let him that
uses this instrument have a care not to force needless dilation, lest he
bruise the muscles of the sphincter, which diverse times will mightily resist
the opening instrument, yea and the patients own will, and then if the Artist
desist not from his purpose, he may make dangerous consequences.

Of the Cauterizing-irons.
THese instruments have been far more used of the Ancients, then now they are,
they being terrible to the patients, and therefore forborne in many cures. But
they are very necessary to cauterize, or sear the end of any vein or artery in
a great flux of blood, which cannot otherwise be stayed; and to cauterize the
end or stump of a bone after dismembring, and also the ends of the veins, and
arteries; and truly, although there are other ways practiced by some, yet I
hold this way far better and surer, because the heat of the instrument does
consume the venomous humidity abiding in the part, and draws it outward, and
comfort much the parts adjacent; they are used very fitly to open Apostumes,
and to make fontanels or issues behind on the head, or in the neck in the
apoplexy, epilepsie, etc.

Of large Spatulaes.
LArge Spatulaes of wood and iron, must be always in a readiness to stir
either Emplaisters, or Unguents in the compounding, or any other liquid
composition whatsoever.

Forceps for Teeth.
THe forceps of several forms are to pull out a tooth, of which the Artist
shall be stored with two or three of several sizes and fashions, and a punch to
force out a stump of a hollow tooth, which cannot be laid hold on by the other
instruments.

Of the small siringe.
THe small siringe, though many pretend to have the true knowledge of the use
thereof, yet they fail very grossly.

Your siringe ought to be of tin or silver, kept very clean, having one for
watery injections, another for oily, well armed with tow, the spouts sound,
without flaws, and very smooth, and going very steady, not delivering the
liquor by jumps; and in using this instrument for the gonnorrhaea, when you
have put it into the passage of the yard, your best way is to rest both your
elbows on the Patients thighs, he sitting somewhat high, or standing bowing
forwards; strive not to fill the siringe too full at once, for then it will not
so easily be delivered, as being too far from thy reach, let the first be
delivered between glans and praeputium holding the praeputium close together if
it may be, only to wash the passage; the next bout thou shall take the yard in
thy left hand about the middle, not pressing it hard, and then put in thy
siringe as far as thou can leasurely, and resting thy arms as aforesaid, and
then deliver the injection, holding thy left hand so as it may not come out
again, but be conveyed to the neck of the bladder, getting another to fill the
siringe again, and deliver that as the other was, not removing thy hand, and
then the water will come into the bladder, and this way thou may inject as
much water as thou will into the bladder without pain.

Let not the medicines to be injected be too hot, nor too cold, a little warmer
then piss is the best temper, and use no mercury, sublimate, or precipitate in
the lotions, for though they have good qualities, yet to a young Artist they
may prove very dangerous, used by way of injection into the yard.

The siringe is not here limited, but is necessarily used in wounds, ulcers,
and fistulaes, for griefs in the mouth and throat, as shall be declared when we
come to speak of the curing of such diseases.

Of the Clister-siringe.
THis is is a very necessary instrument, and therefore I would advise the
Artist ever to have one in readiness well armed with tow, with two or three
pipes well fitted, that it be kept very clean, drawn out and hanged up in two
or three parts to keep it sweet and the tow from rotting, there is also
belonging to this instrument, a crooked neck like an elbow, that in what manner
soever the Patient lie, the medicine may be administered to him, and therewith
also a man may give himself a clister without the help of another. You must be
sure to have the tow put on even close and full that when you pour in the
liquor, not one drop can come out by the staffes end, and you must also have a
Clyster-pot of pewter, or rather of brass for melting, with a spout, the
better to deliver into the siringe the liquor without a funnel, and this pot
must contain at the least one pint and a half; when you put in the liquor into
your siringe, you shall draw down the staff close to the end, having a cork
ready to stop the other end, and so lay it down till you be ready to use it:
when you are ready to use it, you shall pull out the cork, holding the siringe
upright for spilling, and then serve on the head, and dip the end of it in some
fat thing, and put it up as far as you can, laying it in as even position as
you can, and then deliver it until all be in the gut, and then let the Patient
turn himself on his back, forcing himself by all possible means to keep the
medicine given him for one hour if he can. Sometimes it falls out that by
reason of the hardness of the excrement in the gut, the holes of the
siringe-pipe are like to be choked and hindered from delivering the medicine,
in such a case (the excrement being made clammy and not hardened) put upon the
end of your siringe-pipe that first enters the gut over the holes of the same
pipe, a thin oily clout that may cover all the holes, and so put it in clout
and all, thrusting the same as aforesaid, up to the thick part or head of the
pipe, then a very little as it were draw back your hand, and deliver your
Clyster with a very good force, thrusting the pipe in the delivery close up to
the body that nothing come back.

But if you find such a resistance in the gut, that the medicine by the
aforesaid means will not enter, then with the hereafter mentioned spatula
mundanum, draw out part of the hard excrements which hinder, and then proceed
as aforesaid to give your Clyster; moreover many are grown so weak, that they
are not able to retain the medicine cast into their bodies the due time, you
shall then in this case make use of some soft clout, tow, or the like to hold
it in, whereby they may take the benefit of the clyster administered.

Concerning the quantity of a Clyster to be given, we usually give a full
pint, about as warm as piss newly made, and observe that in dangerous fluxes
when we give comfortable Clysters, we oftentimes force them up as far as we
can, I mean the liquor by thrusting the staff harder; when you draw out your
siringe, let it be washed and wiped clean, and the staff drawn out of the
barrel, and hung up, and this you shall find to be a more cleanlier, easier and
safer way to administer a Clyster, both for the Chyrurgion, and also the
Patient, then the ancient Clyster-bag and pipe, which are often rotten and
putrified, that when they are used, do break in the work, and so spoil all.

Of the Cathaeter.
THe Cathaeter is an instrument very necessary amongst the rest, that if any
obstructions happen, either in the passage of the urine or neck of the bladder,
through slime, gravel, the stone, or the like accident, which by the artificial
use of a siringe cannot be removed, then is this needful instrument to be used,
as also to make search for the stone in the bladder.

If therefore you have occasion to use it, put it in gently, as follows
namely with the crooked or dependent part downward, so far as it will be put
in, being first anointed with a little oil of Almonds, or some fresh grease, or
some oil, for want of the afore-rehearsed* and being put in as you can without
much force, then feel by the root of the yard near the fundament with the
forefinger anointed with butter or oil (or the middle-finger of thy other hand)
where the end of the Cathaeter rests, or bears out, then put in the
Cathaeter, yet further toward the fundament, pressing or bearing down as it
were, a little, the lower part of the said instrument with the upper hand,
which stays the Cathaeter, then, together with the help of the lower finger
of the other hand, turn the Cathaeter upwards, putting it also withal forwards
a little, and it will slip into the bladder, then draw out the wier within the
instrument, and the urine will come forth, still keeping the instrument
carefully within the bladder, till all be run out, that gently will come
without forcing.

Moreover you may by putting in the longest finger into the Patients fundament
(the Cathaeter being in the bladder, and the water drawn out) feel easily if
any stone be in the bladder, the party grieved standing, and bending his body
likewise forward.

It willbe also necessary to have searching candles of wax, to be used in
caruncles, or ulceration of the neck of the bladder, or passage of the urine,
and by that you shall find out the place where the said grief is, and also be
able to convey apt medicines to the place grieved; but indeed it is a work that
requires good deliberation well to effect it, for an expert workman may
easilly be seen herein to err, except he take good regard.

Wherefore when by the candle you have found the certain place of the grief,
which you shall perceive when you thrust the candle into the yard by the stops
and stays which it will find in the said passage: be careful to observe the
just length to the further end of the said stop of place agrieved, and there if
you mark your candle well, you shall perceive the full length and breadth of
the disease, then upon the said candle you shall fasten the medicine you intend
for the grief; as namely, if the disease be a kind of spungy flesh, as often
it is, then a little alumen ustum, or vitriolum ustum will be fitting
medicines, or what else you know most fit for such an occasion, and print it
according to the depressed part of the wax into the waxecandle, and convey it
warily to the place, and let the candle remain in the yard, but have a care you
keep it not in till the wax melt too much, then draw it out, and arm it as
before, and put it in again, and ever alter your medicine upon the searching
candle, as you see cause; and forget not to use good injection also, which will
help much.

Of the Cupping-glasses.
YOu shall find these to be very useful in many businesses; namely, to fasten
upon a bubo to bring it forward, for which they are very good; sometimes also
to set upon the upper part of the shoulder blade to draw back humors, which
oppress the head, eyes, or teeth or against Lethargy, or on the thighs
against aches or pains there, and to bring down women's courses, or for the cure
of the Sciarica they are very good; or to draw blood or spirits to a member
withered or benumbed with the dead palsy, sometimes also they are applied
without scarifying to attract humors to a place; at another time they are set
with scarification to draw blood and choler out of any member offended with
them.

They are used diverse ways, some with tow, some with a small wax light
fastened to the bottom, some with a great candle: but for my self, I have used
all those ways yet find none better then to fasten a little dry tow to the
bottom of the g^ss with a little wax, and then rub well the part with hot
water, and a sponge where you will set your glass, then light your tow with a
candle and clap it upon the place, and it will stick fast, and draw up a great
bump, then press the skin with your finger close to the glass and it will
come off, then if it be fitting, take a lancet, and lightly scarifie the place,
and then set on your glass again, and draw as much blood as you shall think
fitting, then wish the place with fair water, and dry it well with a sponge,
and anoint it with a little fresh butter, and it will be whole; scarifie not to
deep, for that is dangerous and needless, you must have several
Cupping-glasses, some bigger then others, for the greater are for the thighs, a
little less for the arms, and the least for the hands and feet; for if your
glasses be too wide, they will not take hold.

Of Blood-porrengers.
BLood porrengers are necessary for any Chyrurgion, thereby to be the more
certain of the quantity of blood which is let forth; for since the blood of man
is so precious, it behooveth to be very careful how, and what proportion is
taken away. The Porrengers which we ordinarily use, hold about three ounces,
and to fill two and a half of these at a time, although the Patient be very
strong, is enough, although you be forced to open the vein again the next day;
for it is always better to take away a little blood at a time, then to let
forth so much as to the swouning of the Patient, by which happen many dangerous
accidents, except the party have a plurifie, or some such urgent occasion shall
offer it self; for I hold it a great deal better to offend in taking away too
little blood, then too much, but indeed our Country is now so stored with a
company of empiricall Idiots, who (whatsoever the disease be) presently upon
sight of the urine by which they discern as much as in a glass of beer, cry
out to open a vein, and then they must either bleed twelve, fourteen, or
sixteen ounces, or else they think their Patient counts not his money well
given, and thus people are abused, feeling either ache, numnesse, or a chilling
cold in that part so long as they live after.

Of the Spatula mundana.
THis instrument I have diverse times used, though it be but lately invented,
and with good success in extreme costivenesse, when no purging medicine,
either upward or downward would do any good; you may if occasion offer, open
the fundament with a Speculum any first, but most commonly it is easily forced
into the fundament of it self being anointed with grease, and so put up the
spoons end, and therewith draw out the hard and over-dried excrements, by which
means the body will return again to his natural habit.

The Diet-Pot,
IS made either of brass, or earth, and serves for boiling drinks of several
sorts or kinds, in Fevers, Calentures, etc. for boiling Lotions and other
Decoctions upon several occasions.

Weights, and Scales.
THese are things in a manner slighted by many, yet they are the things upon
which depends oftentimes the life or death of the Patient: let the Artist
therefore be stored with two pair of Scales, one for ounces, the other for
grains, with two good even beams, both them and the pans kept clean scowred;
now because many having Scales and weights scarce have the true knowledge of
them, I will therefore set down what kind of weights we ordinarily use.

There are two sorts of weights now used, the Troy weight containing twelve
ounces, and that is it which the Goldsmiths use, and we also diverse times. The
other is Averdupois weight, which contains sixteen ounces, and is used by the
Grocers and others, and is indeed generally used amongst the Apothecaries.

A pound of Avoir dupois weight has sixteen ounces, and is marked thus, lb.
An ounce has eight drachms, and is marked thus,. A drammne has three
scruples, and is thus marked,. A scruple has twenty grains, and is thus
known. And a Barley corn, Wheat, or Pepper come may be used for a grain, which
is known by this mark, gr. Two drams is the weight of eighteen pence in money,
one dram of nine pence. And our measures agreeing with our weights most usually
are as follows. A wine gallon of water contains eight pound. A pottle four
pound. A quart two pound, and has this mark, qr. A pint one pound, and is thus
noted, pi. And of ordinary Salet oils, seven pound and a half is accounted a
gallon. And thus much I thought good to write concerning the weights and
measures, that there may be no mistake in the Artist.
Of the Lancet.
Next I would advise the Artist to be always provided with a Case of good
Lancets, which he shall ever carry in his pocket, that they may be ready upon
any occasion, and also the better to keep them from rusting; let them be clean
and well set, not too spear poynted, nor too thin, for if they have either of
those faults, they will not make a good orifice.

When you come to use them, you shall (after you have taken notice of the vein
you intend to open) make a ligature about the arm some three fingers breadth
above the place you purpose to cut, in this manner: take a yard of your wosted
gartering, or a strong List, or in want of these a woman's Fillet will serve
(but linen and silk are apt to slip) put your bandage upon the arm, and turn
the ends both round the arm and meet them together on the outside, so that it
come twice about the arm, and then tie them on a single bow knot, which will
easily be loosed upon occasion; then put a thick staff in the patients stand
to gripe fast, and with your hand chafe well the vein that it may rise full, if
it lie deep and be small, you shall foment it with warm water, rubbing the
place hard with a linen cloth until the vein appear; make your orifice large,
not deep, for the larger the orifice is (so that it be not too large to spend
the spirits by tumbling out the blood too fast) the less danger there will be of
apostumation: when your orifice is too small, the place will presently puff up
with wind: always strike the vein in a little cross, not just along the vein,
nor quite overwart, but slanting, and if you go not deep enough at the first
stroke, thrust in your Lancet quickly in the same orifice a little deeper; but
if you chance to strike besides the vein, then strike presently a little
higher; when you have well noted the place you intend to cut, you shall lay
your thumb gently upon the vein just by that place, and with your Lancet
between your finger and thumb of the other hand, and your little finger leaning
upon the arm, to rest your whole hand the more steddier, gently thrust in your
Lancet as far as you shall think will reach the vein; a little stretching up your
hand, whereby you shall gently enlarge the orifice: you may partly feel when
the Lancet has entered the vein; then take forth as much blood as you shall
see convenient, then pull one end of your ligature, and by the slacking of that
the blood will stay, then with your fingers crush out the lappered blood out of
the orifice, and lay on a pledget of Lint dipped in cold water, and a linen
cloth twice double upon that, both which ought to be laid in a readiness
before the ligation be made, and then with the band bind up the arm, going
cross above and below the elbow, still making the band to cross upon the
boulder, and pin or tie it fast, but not too hard, but so as the patient may
easily endure it, neither over the elbow, for then the arm cannot be bended,
and this binding must remain until the next day, and with a garter or linen
cloth let the arm be tied to the breast.

If the patient chance to faint in the bleeding, let him put his finger far
into his mouth and press down the root of his tongue, and force himself to
keck as if he would cast, and it will help, but it he swound then bow him
forward, and clap your palm of your hand close upon his mouth, stopping his
nose between your finger and thumb, and he will come to himself again presently.

Let none blood, if he have not had a stool that day or the day before.

If any come to thee to be let blood, do it not without good advice where the
Physician advises, and thou do according to his directions whatsoever
happens thou shall go blameless.

Many will upon the least distemper run to a Barber to be blooded, which to get
twelve pence he refuses not to do against all sense and reason diverse times;
for he neither weighs the age, nor considers the disease, but fills the
Porrengers, the patient going away perhaps a little eased for the present,
perhaps worse, but most of them grow to such maladies afterward, that they are
scarce able to help themselves.

You shall have also young females that have been a little too bold with their
sweet-hearts, will come to you desiring to be blooded in the foot, and tell you
they want their natural purgation, when indeed just cause they have, therefore
have a great care in such cases, and do it not without advice either from some
learned Physician, or thy own judgment and good consideration.

The veins usually opened are in number eight, three in the arm, one in the
hand, one in the forehead one under the tongue and two in the foot.

The first in the arm is called the Cephalica, or head-veine, and lies
uppermost on the outside the arm, and is opened for aff cts of the head and
eyes, and without danger of touching either nerve or artery.

The next is the mediana or middle, or common vein, and lies in the midst of
the arm, and is opened instead of the cephalic, or basilick vein, when they
are difficult to be opened: It is cut generally in any affect of the body, but
beware of going too deep for fear of pricking the nerve or tendon of the
two-headed muscle lying under it.

The third is the basilica, epatica, or liver-veine, and lies lowest on the
inside of the arm, and is opened for to breath the liver and spleen, and has
an artery lying under it.

And because all veins have their original in the liver, therefore if the two
first will not easily be taken, then you shall bleed the median or middle
vein, or as the general rule amongst Physicians, is to take the fairest
appearing vein in the arm, except some principal occasion alter their mind.

The fourth vein is betwixt the ring-finger, and ^^e little finger, and
breaths the liver, spleen, and head, and may be opened safer in weak bodies
then any vein in the arm; you shall make a ligatu e about the wrist, and put
the hand in warm water until the vein appear, chasing it a little to make it
rise the fuller, and then with your lancet open it aslant, and let it bleed in
the water.

The fifth is the vein in the forehead, which is opened for pains in the head,
rhumes* distillations of humors, and the like; but have a care of going too
deep for hurting the perioranium, and it is opened in good success in the
phrenzie.

The sixth is the vein under the tongue, and is opened in the squinanzy,
inflammation and swelling of the amigdals, or Almonds of the throat, Apostumes
of the mouth or throat, or root of the tongue; but if the Artist be not ready
in the taking this vein, let him open the Cephalica of the side affected.

The seventh is the Saphana lying under the ancle, and is opened in warm water
as the vein in the hand is, and chiefly to draw down women monthly visits.

The eight last is the vein on the outside the leg called popletica, and is
opened in the sciatica and pain in the joints, and is opened in water as the
former.

The Artist having all his instruments thus fitted, shall keep them all very
clean, oyled, and rolled up in oily clouts, and chose that have edges shall be
ever well set and sharp, remembering always when he has used any of them to
rub them very clean, and dry before he lay them up; have also in a readiness
these things following, viz.

A Clyster-pot, Searces of hair and lawn, Splints, Tape, Spunges, Rowlets, A
mortar and pestle, Strayners, Junckes, Tow, Clouts, Thread and needles to make
Rowlers.
Of Wounds.
BEcause I will not seem tedious, I shall not rehearse the definition of
wounds, which is so much treated of already in all Authors, but show the
Artist what he ought to do, when he is called to a wounded Patient.

First, then the Artist must know that all wounds are either external, or
internal and penetrating.

The external wounds are discerned by sight, or handling.

Those which are internal and penetrating are either in the head, breast, or
lower belly, and are discovered also by sight, feeling, or by searching them
with an instrument: Now to know what internal parts are wounded by the
symptoms, you shall observe,

That if the membranes of the brain be hurt, there follows sneezing, vomiting,
bleeding at nose, or ears running, and the like; but if the substance of the
brain be hurt, those signs are increased, and bilious or sharp vomiting is
seen, also a Fever, dull understanding, with alteration of favor, and
countenance, stupidity also, and dumbness.

If the breast be wounded, the air comes out of the wound, the Patient
feels the taste in his mouth of the things applied to the wound.

If the lungs be hurt, the Patient breaths hardly with a rattling sound, and
his spittle is frothy, pale, and raw.

If the perecranium, that is the skin covering the skull be hurt, sudden, and
often sounding sometimes ensues.

If the heart be wounded, there follows a coldness of all the members,
extinction of natural beat and speedy death.

If the great veins and arteries in the breast be hurt, an immoderate flux of
blood, defection of virtue in all the faculties, a cold, and unsavory sweat
does ensue, and death within few hours.

The Diaphragma or midriffe wounded in the sinowy part, causes convulsion,
hard breathing, sharp fever, raving, and death; but if it be only in the
fleshy part it has no such symptoms, and is capable of remedies.

If the recurrent nerves be wounded, there follows loss of speech,
suppression of motion, and sense without recovery.

If the Liver be hurt, there follows vomiting, ejections of blood, much pain,
continual fever, raving, resolution of the spirits, cold sweat, and
consequently death.

The Liver and the Spleen are alike affected, when they are wounded, only the
symptoms of the Spleen are on the left side the Livers on the right.

If the Stomach be wounded, there follows frequent vomiting, swounding,
fainting, and death.

If the Guts are wounded, the excrements will come through the wound unsavory
and putrified.

If the Reins or Kidneys be hurt, there follows suppression of urine, with a
sore pain in the groin and stones, with swelling even to death.

If the Bladder be hurt, the like symptoms happens as in wounds of the Reins,
unless the sinewy parts be grieved, for then follows distention of the belly,
pissing of blood, vomiting, voiding of urine at the wound, suppression of the
faculties, doting, and death.

when the marrow of the backbone is hurt, there follows resolution of the
sinews (which hinders the function of sense and motion) voluntary evacuation
of the excrements, putrefaction of the intestines, and death.

A vein cut bleeds thick red blood.

An Artery cut, sends forth yellowish, subtle blood, thin, hot, beating, and
flying out by jumps with great violence.

Wounds dressed.
THe manner of dressing wounds, shall be first to view well the part wounded,
and to remove such things as may hinder consolidation, as hairs, broken bones,
iron, lead, wood, or whatsoever is besides nature, with fitting instruments,
and with as little pain as may be, not tearing, or breaking any adjacent
vessel, but clear the wound so, as nothing may be left to hinder the good
application of medicines to the grief. Next you shall reduce the dislocated,
and dis-joyned parts, setting and composing the veins and nerves in their right
order and places, that the beauty and due office of the member may not be
diminished and that it may conglutinate the easier, these being thus united
must be kept so together by ligature, future, and such other due, and artifical
means as occasion shall offer Then let the flux of blood be stayed if any be,
by application of the astringent powder following; first making a pledgent of
tow, dip it in the white of an egg well beaten, and strew it over with the
powder, and lay it on the wound, and roll it up decently. The astringent powder
is thus made, Aloes, Boli Armeni, Sanguis draconis, Thuris, Myrrhae, of each
one ounce.
Powder them finely, and put to them the hairs of the belly of an old Hare cut
small, and keep it for your use.

If the flux of blood be great, you shall not open it again until two or
three days be past; but if the wound be slight, you may dress it again the
next day: In all slight wounds (I mean such as are only in the flesh without
loss of substance) close them as soon a possible, and heal them according to
the first intention, that is by agglutination, by applying such things as have
power to comfort, and consolidate, not to suppurate. If the wound be great with
laceration of some vessel, whereby follows a great flux of blood; if it be an
Artery, the surest way is to cut it in two, and cauterize it at both ends with
a cauterizing button or else take it up and tie it, and then cauterize it; if
the wound be accompanied with a shattered bone, you shall not apply any thing
that is unctious near the bone, but you may dress it with Spirit of wine and
honey of Roses very hot, either by injection or tents until digestion, or
dissolve in your Spirit of wine a little myrrh and storax, and this dressing
must be likewise hot, afterward by degrees you may use Arcaeus liniment, and
Lukatullies balsome pretty warm, keeping upon it a mellilote plaster, or
Paracelsus; if the wound be in the head with fracture of the scull, you shall
next the scull lay a pledgent of dry lint, next that a pledgent armed with
Arcaeus liniment hot, over that another dry pledgent to keep the lips of the
wound from closing until the scull be closed, and over all these a plaster of
bettonica, or Paracelsus, or mellilot simple.

If it be a shot wound, then at the second dressing, you shall use this oil in
case it be a fleshly wound Ol. Catullorum, two ounces. Ol. Terebinthinae, half
an ounce, Ol. Hyperici, one ounce.


Dip in tents, and apply them hot.

But if it be a nervous part, or the bone splintred, then use this following
Spirit of wine or st ong Aqua vitae ij. Honey of Roses ^^.
Mingle them, and use it warm till perfect digestion, and this you shall use in
wounds of the head till perfect digestion, and then use Arcaeus liniment with a
little basilicon, when it is mundified, add to them the Golden-ointment,
always applying them pretty warm.

Make not your tents above the length of half a finger, and twist th m not too
hard, that the sauies be not hindered from flowing forth.

When you pull out your tent out of the wound, m^r^^el the end of it, whether
it digests or incarnates. If the wound become to perfect digestion, you shall
perce^ve the end of the tent covered with matter of good consistence, neither
too thick nor too thin of a whitish yellow color; when it incarnates, then you
shall see a small spot of a reddish matter, something like the Chylus as it
issues from the bottom of the ventricle, and you shall shorten your tents
until the wound be filled up with flesh, and then use Diapalma or De minio
plaster.

I knew some that never used any medicines to either incised, or contused
wounds save Basilicon and the Red-lead plaster, yet cured many.

When you stich a wound, you shall not set your stitches too thick, but after
this following manner: set you stitching quill to one side, and with your
needle armed with green, or red silk oyled, you shall pierce the skin through
on both sides the wound, not taking too much hold for causing of pain, nor
taking up too little lest the hold breaks before the edges be agg^u^inated;
then tie your silk (drawing he edges of the wound pretty close) with two knots
for slipping* and cut off the ends, about an inch from that you may make such
another stich; and thus do so often, until you have joined the wound.

When you come to dress a wound, let all your instrument plasters and tents,
or pledgents be laid orderly in a fair platter, with your boulsters and
rowlers; your probe armed over the eye with fine lint, either to dry the edges
of the wound when you make probation, or to make the wound clean from the
sanies that shall be in it, but in this you shall be very careful that your
lint be very fine, and do it very lightly, for the new flesh that grows is as
thin as a spiders web, and will easily be removed.

Warm your unguents in your uvula spoon, or any other spoon, and dip in your
tents so that they may be covered all save the head.

If the wound be dressed with pledgents then you shall fill it up with one
pledgent upon another, until you have made it level with the member, and then
lay on the plaster, and next a boulster of fine cloth of three folds, and
then roll it up.

You shall not need to dress any wound oftener then once in four and twenty
hours, except upon necessity.

In wounds of the head you shall use this method following,

First, shave away ths hair, and if any loose bones be, you shall take them out
gently without forcing; if the cranium or scull be depressed, raise it gently
with the levatory, but if it will not be done gently, let it remain two or
three days before you try again, for I have seen nature raise a depressed
scull of it self; next stay the flux of blood, and roll it up for two days,
in which time (if the patient has not bled much at the wound) you shall open a
vein in the arm, and if he has not had the benefit of nature, it will do well
to give him a carminative Clyster, made as follows, Decoct. com. Clysterum,
one pound. Spec. Benedict. laxat. two drams. Mellis, two ounces. Bactyri, as
much as a nutmeg. Salis, one dram.


Mingle them all, and give it warm about four a clock afternoon.

Let him eat thin broths, and drink small beer, lying in a good temperate air,
and free from noise.

But if there be a contusion without a wound, so that symptoms arise with a
tumor, then dilatation is needful that the contussd blood may issue out, and
this must not be delayed; where the scull is broken, be su e to take out clean
all spills, or splinters of bones that may lie upon the membranes covering the
brain, and at every dressing with a little sponge take out the blood, or matter
that shall fall upon them, keeping coals near the wound all the time of your
dressing for fear of cold.

If the spirits be weak, it will not be amiss to give the Patient a cordial
made after this manner, French-barley, one heaped spoonful. Running-water, one
pound.


Boil them a walm or two, and pour out that water, and when it is cold put to
it, Syrup violarum, two ounces. Confect Alkermes, one scruple.


Shake them well together, and give him a spoonful every three or four hours.

Ulcers.
When you first see an Ulcer, with an intention of undertaking the cure of it,
you shall observe whether the Ulcer pierce through the joint, whether the
ligaments be rotten, or the ends of the bones, and the like, whereby you shall
plainly see tokens of incurability; if you perceive none of these then in the
name of God go forward on this wise following:

First, give him a potion to purge him made thus: Pulv. Arthritici, one dram.
Trochis. alhaud. four grains. Rad. Jalapi praep. one cruple. Syrup. ros. sol.
two ounces. Vini albi, one ounce and half.
Shake them well together in a glass, and give it the Patient a little warm,
if he be strong, and his body be soul, else you must lessen the quantities of
the powders; after he is well purged, you shall go forward with your dressing;
and the first thing you shall use shall be basilicon mingled with precipitate
and laid upon lint, and over it a diacalciteos plaster, this will bring it to
digestion, and thicken the humor; when you perceive the Ulcer to be clean,
then you may use diapompholigos and nutritum, or the red desiccative, either of
which will both incarnate, stop the humor and cicatrize; but it will not be
amiss in the mean time to lay a defensative above the Ulcer, round about the
member made after this manner, Boli armeni, half a pound, Aceti, Succi
plantaginis, of each half a pound. Ol. rosarum, four ounces. Mytellorum, one
ounce. Albanien ovi unius.
Mingle all together in a mortar to an Unguent, and lay it upon cap paper
pretty thick, and apply it.

Three or four days after you have purged your Patient, you shall give him a
good sweat, which you may do with eight grains of Antimony diaphoretick made
into a Pill with a little Mithridate.

It will be convenient likewise to give him a dyet-drink of China,
sarsaparilla, polipodium, and the like, as you shall find in the compositions,
but this you need not do, unless it be an old foul Ulcer in abody full of
gross humors.

When you find the Ulcer begin to incarnate, you may dress it three or four
days with only dry lint, and then three or four days with unguent, and then
to dry lint again, keeping still over it either a plaster of Red-lead, or
diacalciteos.

If the Ulcer have any cavities, it will be the surest way to lay them open by
incision, and fasten a cupping-glasse upon it to draw out the filthy humors
that are gathered to the place.

Never suffer an Ulcer to be round, for that will either hardly or never heal;
and if you see the edges grow thick like lips, then you shall scarifie them
with a lancet, and let out the gross blood which hinders the healing.

To correct proud and spungious flesh in Ulcers or Fistulaes, you have
Trochisks of Red-lead.

But to cleanse and hea^ Ulcers, or Fistulaes that are troublesome, I will give
you one receipt of Feruelius, which you will find to be worthy the taking
notice of and it is this, Of the best sublimate, twelve grains, Plantain water,
six ounces.
Boil them in a well glased vessel close covered, until half be wasted, and
with this wash the Ulcer or Fistula, with a probe armed with line, as occasion
shall offer.

I will not much enlarge my self in directions concerning Wounds and Ulcers,
because I have already in my Compositions showed you the virtue the quality of
medicines fit for the purpose, and the Artist must endeavor to know the true
way of application of them by his practice; only thus much I thought good to
publish (out of mine own practice) for the benefit of the younger sort of
Chyrurgions, and so I will proceed to Fractures and Dislocations which I shall
touch very briefly.

The Cure of fractures and dislocations.
First let the Artist lay the patient in a fitting posture, that he may
conveniently extend the member, then let him appoint one man to take the end of
the member in both his hands extending it by degrees, not on a sudden and by
jumps: let him place another to hold the patient that he move as little as may
be; the Artist standing by the patient shall graspe the fractured part with
both his hands, and as the other extends the member, he shall with his fingers
reduce all the fractured bones to their places.

But before he begins to reduce them, he must make ready such things as are
needful, and necessary for the work, as first a plaster of Diapalma about
six inches broad, or so big as will cover something more than the fracture, and
long enough to compass the member; two clothes three double of the same
length, three or four splints armed with Tow, a large cloth lo lay over them,
and four or five lengths of broad Tape; and lastly a junck of straw to lay the
member in, and boulsters of cloth and tow to put in the hollow places, that the
member may lie level.

When the Artist has reduced all the fractured bones, then let him lay on the
plaster, and two men holding the part steady, let him put on his two folded
clothes, one a little above the fracture, the other a little below, so that
the edges of them may meet, then lay on the splints so near one another, as
there may be the breadth of a splint betwixt every one: let them not be so long
as to gaul the next joints, then put under your Tapes and type on the splints
gently, neither too hard for fear of gangrene, nor too slack because then the
fractured bones may fall asunder; next you shall cover all with a large cloth,
and then put it into a junck and bind it on fast putting boulsters into the
hollow places, and then lay the member upon a pillow or cushion as strait and
level as may be.

Lay all the clothes on very smooth, without wrinkle or seam, and so broad as
that the ends of the splints may rest upon them and not on the bare member, and
so let the Patient rest in his bed at least six days, unless there be pain,
or any other cause whereby you are forced to open it; then you may open it to
give it air, and so bind it up again as before until fourteen days, when you
may renew your plaster.

See that the Patient have every day a stool either by Nature or Art, and let
him have a cord fastened to his bed to raise himself by to air his back and
hips, lest they excoriate with too much lying.

If the fracture be with a wound, you must so order your clouts and splints
that you may dress the wound, and not unbinde the member, use no unctious
medicine near the bone, but dress it, as I have showed you in the discourse of
wounds.

You may do well to give the Patient a spoonful or two of the juice of the
root of Salamons seal in White Wind every morning fasting during the first six
days.

As for Dislocations, the manner of reducing them would be too tedious for my
intended brevity, I will therefore set down some short instructions which will
be necessary concerning the handling of a Dislocation after it is reduced.

You shall therefore presently anoint the joint with oil of Camomile, Dill,
Earthworms, or the like, and lay over it a plaster of Diacalcitheos, and so
roll it up artificially, and let it have rest.

Some use to lay upon a joint after it is reduced a Cataplasme of bolus, and
the white of an egg, which is very good, as I have diverse times experimented.

For tumors arising in a Dislocation, whereby the reducing of the joint will
be something troublesome, to assuage them you may make use of a Cataplasme made
of oat-meal, and Linseeds boiled in beer, or water, with a little oil of
Elders; but if the tumor be not above three days standing, then if you reduce
the bone, the tumor will presently cease.

Thus much shall suffice for this Discourse, wishing the Artist as he meets
with Authors to his purpose, to collect notes of what he finds wanting here,
for if I should set down all particulars, I should increase my book far beyond
the bounds of a pocket book, for which I intended it, that it might be ready
upon all occasions to re-in-force a weak memory.

The operations of sundry Simples.
Repercussives.
FAir water. Verjuyce. Aloome water. Acasia. The yellow in the midst of the
Rose. Clay. Flowers of Pomgranates. Bole armony. Orpin. Berberries.
Shephards-purse. Knotgrasse. Coriander. Liverwort. Morell. Nightshade.
Houseleek. Sowthistle.
Astringents.
White-starch. Asarabane. Shephards-purse. Knotgrasse. Wall-flowers. Dragons.
Horse mint. Grommel. Mace. Mother of pearl. Maden hair. Manna. Cypresse-nuts.
Doves-foot. Cinque-foil. Raspeberries. Crains-bill. Sealed earth. Burnt-bones.
Lindtree Cobwebs. Quinces. Camphire. Endive. Oade. Groundpine. Greatburre.
Bastard-saffron. Rib-wort. Dog-bane. Hearts tongue. Mints. Yarrow. Mulberries.
Goose-foot. Paper. Monks rubarb. Sanicle. Saxifrage. Salamons-seal. Medlers.
Tamarisk. Periwinkles. Dragons-bloud.
Abstersives.
Wormwood. Sothernwood. Celandine. Mulleine. Avens. Assa fetida. Garden
smalledge. Mouseare. Goats-beard. Castoreum. Gentian. Devils-bitt. Docks.
Bays. Balm. Barley. Raddish. Rosemary. Agrymony. Roots of daffadillies. Roots
of bryony, Onyons. Carawaies. Euphorbium. Lie of ashes. Pitch. Madder. Cammock.
Rye. Seen. Verjuce. Ginger.
Mundificatives.
Smallage. Beetes. Cucumbers. Cubebs. Capers. Bettony. Wood of Cassia.
Sowbread. Coloquintida. Diagredium. St. John's wort. Lupins. Honey. Palma
Christi. Tumarinds. Rosin. Agrimony. Fumatory. Beans. Hermodactils, Hysop.
Polipody. Turbith. Gith. Ground Pine.
Aperitives.
Vinegar. Mugwort. Almonds. Germander. Cubebs. Brookelime. Angelica. Smallage,
Root of Asarabacce. Rue. Carawaies. Sowbread. Hysop. Laurel. Horehound.
Grommel. Watercresses. Parsnip. Parsely. Savin.
Maturatives.
Avens. Bearfoot. Hemp. Flax-seed. Pitch. Grease. Faenugreek. Licorice. Fats.
Orage. Butter. New-figs. Devils-bit. Rapes. Briony. Buglosse. Lilly-roots.
Barley. Violets.
Stupefactives.
Mandrake. Garden-poppy. Houseleek. Oppium. Henbane. Lettuce. Nightshade.
Fleabane.
Consolidatives.
Aloes. Borax. Balausties. Cipresse. Dragant, Litharge. Dross of Iron. Grains.
Juniper. Mother-pearl. Burnt-lead. Cobwebs. Dragons blood. Myrrh. Olibanum.
Pimpenel. Asphaltum. Cerusse. Hors-tayl. Bloud-stone. Acorns. Milk. Med'ers.
Plantain. Bramble-bush. Frankinscence. Sugar. Wine.
Conglutinatives.
Silver, and the dross. Comfrey, both sorts. Cerusse. Mill-dust. Gum, Arabic.
Burnt barley. Spunge-stone. Sarcocall. Colophony. Horse-tayle. Glue. Plaster.
Primroses. Cypress nuts.
Restrictives.
Aloes. Horse-tayle. Puffes. Gum of the pine. Sorrel. Copperas. Galls.
Willow-bark. Dragons blood. Sealed earth. Juice of Brier-bush. Green Nut shells.
Burnt paper. Sumach^ Frankincense. Burnt Lead. Oak bark. Cobwebs.
Resolutives.
Dill. Ox-eye, Germander. Ground Pine. Diagredium, Fearne. Bran. Hyssop.
Sponge-stone. Lesser Comfrey. Dates. Orris. Labdanum. Pellitory of the wall.
Bread. Water-Bettony. French Lavender. Agarick. Saffron. Uenus hair. Danewort.
Fennel. Faenugreek. Mellilote. Elder.
Attractives.
Aristolochie. Garlic. Mouseare. Sow-bread. Beavercod. Dogs turd. Ammoniacum.
Leaven. Mummie. Doves dung. Stavisacre. Galbanum. Hares suet. Pepper. Polipody.
Mustard. Assa faetida. Calamint. Knot-grasse. Leeks. Brimstone. Pennyroyall.
Wheat.
Corrosives.
Root of Daffodill. Vinegar. Onions. Gall of creatures. Mercury and his kinds.
Ink. Garlic. Copperose. Flower of Brass Root of Hermodactils. Mustardseed.
Salt niter.
Adustives.
Aristolochy. Anacardus. Cantarides. Coperas. Stavisacre. Garlic, Quicklime.
Capital Lees. Pellitory
Vlceratives.
Onyons. Garlic, Figs. Rue. Wild Smalage. Cantharides. Arsesmart. Nettles. Sea
Onyon.
NExt because diverse times such things as the Artist intends to use, are not at
hand, therefore I shall show him briefly what things he may use instead of
those he has not, which are comprehended in the aforesaid Compositions.

And first for Agarick use Coloquintida, in a lesser quantity, or seed of
bastard Saffron double or treble the dose.

For Anchusa in ointments, use red Sanders, or painters lack.

For Sugar, Honey or Manna in Laxatives, but not in binders.

For Bdelliumuse Myrrh in Pills and unguents, but not in Pills of Bdellium,
because it purges blood.

For Wormwood, Roman or Pontick, you may use the Wormwood of the place you live
in.

As likewise for Parsley.

For Rhapontick use Rhabarb.

For Costus use bastard Pelitory.

For Aristolochia, use one for the other.

For Acorus use Calamus Aromat. in Purgers and movers of urine and months, but
in Vomits use Elebor or broomseed.

For Marsh-mallow roots, use Garden-Mallow roots.

For bark of Caper roots, take Bark of Tamarisk root, Elder root,
Danewortroot, Popular root, or Bays root.

For gentian, take the half of Asarum and root of Capers.

For Turbith take Agarick in trosses or Coloquintida in a lesser quantity.

For Indian leaves, and malabathrum, take the leaves of Citron, Cinnamon, Mace,
or Spike.

For Laurel leaves, take the leaves of Citrons.

For white Poppy, take the leaves of Nightshade or black Poppy in lesser
quantity, or white Henbane.

For Lettuce, use Garden endine, and contra.

For wild Savory use Lions tooth.

For Agrimony, use Asarabaccae, and half of Wormwood.

For Fullers Herb, take vomit nut and a third part of pepper.

For ground Pine, use leaves of Agrimony.

For Field-Mallowes, take them of the Garden.

For Thlaspi, or wild Cresses, use Watercresses.

For Mints, use Balsamint.

For Myrtel leaves, take the berries, or Filberds half ripe.

For wild Rue, use Garden Rue dry in great quantity, and contra.

For Lavender spike, use the kinds of Garden Lavender.

For Adianthus, use Polytrichum in the short cough, with the like quantity of
Violets, and a little Licorice.

For Turpentine-leaves, take Lentisk-leaves.

For Elder-leaves, take Danewort-leaves, and contra.

For Bettony, use Verven.

For Balm, use Horehound, Citron peels, and contra.

For Mountain smallage, use that of the Garden dry in greater quantity.

For leaves of the Wild-fig-tree, take those of the Garden-fig, and contra.

For Savoury, use Time, or Wild-time.

For leaves of Coriander, use Garden-parsly, but in outward medicines use
Wildcarrot-leaves, Parsnep-leaves, either wild or tame.

For Housleek, use the little Navelwort, and contra.

For Savine, take Cipresse.

For Dorycnium, take Mandrake, and contra.

For Fir-leaves, take the leaves of Poplar.

For leaves of Muncks Rubarb, take leaves of Docks.

For Spurge, take Tythimal.

For White-water-lillies, use the Yellow, and contra.

For leaves of petty spurge, take Tythimal.

For Female fearn, use the Male.

For Smyrnium, use Smallage or Parsely.

For Garden-nightshade, use Winter-cherry.

For Acacia, use juice of Sloes.

For opium, use juice of wild-lettice, or tame, but in a greater quantity.

For Opobalsome, use liquid Styrax, or oil of Myrrh.

For licorice, use the juice or decoction, or the juice of Raisons of the Sun.

For juice of Citrons, take juice of Limons.

For Thymelaea take Chamaelaea.

For Sowbread, take Orris.

For Aloe, take juice of Wormwood.

For Rainwater, use rather River-water then Well-water.

For Carpobalsome, use seed of Lentisk or Turpentine, or Cubebs in a lesser
dose.

For the licour of the Cedar tree, use the oil of Juniper bows, or gum of
Juniper.

For Xylobalsome, use the tendrels of Lentisk.

For Galbanum, use Sagapenum.

For Sagapenum, use Oppoponax half the quantity.

For Ammoniacum, use Beeglew.

For Oppoponax, use Ammoniacum, Bdellium, or Galbanum.

For Frankincense, use Mastich or Rosin of the pine dry.

For liquid Pitch, use Pitch dissolved in oil.

For Pissasphaltum, use Pitch and Bitumen.

For Mummie, take Pissasphaltum.

For Lacca, take Myrrh.

For Bears-grease, take Fox-grease.

For Goose-grease, take Ducks or Hens-grease.

For Capons-grease, take Hens-greas.

For Antimony, take burnt lead, and contra.

For Lithargy, take burnt-lead.

For lead, take Pewter.

For spodium, take burnt Hearts horn.

The manner how to make Reports.
FOrasmuch as upon diverse occasions, the Artist maybe called to deliver his
opinion, either of the death of any person, or of the weakness and deprivation
of any member in the function or execution of its proper office and duty, and
to give his testimony and report to a Magistrate or Coroners Enquest which may
be a matter of great concernment, I have for the benefit of young Artists, and
the good of the Commonwealth taken out of Ambrosius Paraus these following
rules, to which I have added what I have found by mine own practice.

I shall therefore wish the Artist to observe that exhortation which he gives,
that is, That he have an honest mind, and a careful regard of true piety, the
fear of God, and love to his neighbor before his eyes, that he be not carried
away with favor or affection, nor corrupted with money or rewards, but to
declare the truth wholly and without partiality.

Let the Artist be careful in the searching of such wounds as are brought to
him, that he be not deceived in making his probation, but let the Patient be
placed in the same posture he was in when he received the hurt, otherwise a
wound may seem by the probe to be small, when indeed it is mortal. If
therefore he be doubtful, then let him suspend his judgment from the first day
to the ninth, by which time the accidents and symptoms will manifest the
condition of the wound.

The general signs whereby we judge of diseases are four; for they are drawn
either from the nature and essence of the disease, or from the cause or effects
thereof, or else from the similitude, proportion and comparison of those
diseases, with the season, or present constitution of the times; Therefore if
we are called to the cure of a green wound, whose nature and danger is no other
but a simple solution of continuity in the musculous flesh, we may presently
pronounce that wound to be of no danger, and that it will soon be cured. But if
it have an Ulcer annexed to it, that is if it be sanious, then we may say it
will be more difficult and long in curing, and so we may pronounce of all
diseases taking a sign of their essence and nature. But of the signs that are
taken of the causes, let this be an example: A wound that is made with a sharp
pointed and heavy weapon, as with an Halberd, being stricken with great
violence, must be accounted great, and also mortal, if the accidents be
correspondent.

But if the Patient fall to the ground through the violence of the stroke; if a
choleric vomiting follow thereon, if his sight fail him, together with a
giddiness, if blood come forth at his eyes and nostrils, if distraction follow
with loss of memory and sense of feeling, we may say, That all the hope of
life remains in one small sign, which is to be deduced from the effects of
the wound. But by the comparing it unto the season that then is, and diseases
that assault man's body, we may say. That all those that are wounded with
Gunshot are in danger of death, as it happened in the Castle and Town of
Wallingford in Berk^, a Garrison of the late King, which being infected with
the Plague by those that fled from Abingdon which was fore visited, the air
became so disturbed, that very few wounds made by Gunshot, but proved mortal.

If the Patient fall down with the stroke, if he lie senseless, as it were
asleep if he void his excrements unwittingly, if he be taken with a giddiness,
if blood come out of his ears, mouth and nose, and if he vomit choler, you may
understand that the scull is fractured, or pierced through by the defect in his
understanding or discourse. You may also know when the scull is fractured, by
the judgment of your external senses, as if by feeling it with your finger
you find it elevated or depressed beyond the natural limits, if by striking
it with the end of a probe, when the pericranium or nervous filme that
investeth the scull is cut crossewise, and so divided there from it, yield a
base and unperfect sound like unto a potsherd that is broken, or like an
earthen pitcher that has a crack, or by a thread holden betwixt the teeth, and
the other end in your fingers, and strike upon it as upon a Fiddle-string.

But we may say that death is at hand if his reason and understanding fail, if
he be speechless, if his sight forsake him, if he would tumble headlong out of
his bed, being not at all able to move the other parts of his body, if he have
a continual fever, if his tongue be black with dryness, if the edges of the
wound be black or dry, and cast forth no sanious matter, if they resemble the
color of salted flesh, if he have an Apoplexy, Frenzy, Convulsion or
Palsy, with an involuntary excretion, or absolute suppression of the urine and
excrements.

You may know that a man has his throat, that is, his weason and windpipe cut;
first by the sight of his wound, and next by the abolishment of the function or
office thereof both ways, for the Patient can neither speak nor swallow any
meat or drink, and the parts that are cut asunder, divide themselves by
retraction upwards or downwards one from another, whereof comes sudden or
present death.

You may know that a wound has pierced into the breast or concavity of the
body, if the air come forth at the wound making a certain whizzing noise; if
the Patient breath with great difficulty, if he feel a great heaviness or
weight, on, or about the midriffe, whereby it may be gatherered that a great
quantity of blood lies on the place or midriffe, and so causes him to f^el a
weight or heaviness which by little and little will be cast up by vomiting.
But a little after a Fever comes, and the breath is unsavory and stinking,
by reason that the putrefying blood is turned into sanies, the Patient cannot
lie but on his back, and he has an often desire to vomit, but if he escape
death his wound will degenerate into a Fistula, and at length will consume him
by little and little.

We may know that the lungs are wounded by foming and spumous blood coming out
both at the wound, and cast up by vomiting, he is vexed with a shortness of
breath, and a pain in his sides.

We may perceive the heart to be wounded by the abundance of blood that comes
out at the wound, by the trembling of all the whole body by the faint and small
pulse, palenesse of the face, cold sweat, with often swounding, coldness of
the ex^^eam parts, and sudden death.

When the Midriffe (which the Latins call Diaphragma is wounded, the Patient
feels a great weight in that place, he raveth and talks idely, he is
troubled with shortness of wind, a cough and fit of grievous pain, and
drawing of the entralls upwards. Wherefore when all these accidents appear, we
may certainly pronounce that death is at hand.

Death appears suddenly by a wound of the hollow vein, or the great Artery,
by reason of the great and violent evacuation of blood and spirits, whereby the
functions of the heart and lungs are stopped and hindered.

The marrow of the backbone being pierced, the Patient is assaulted with a
Palsy, or Convulsion very suddenly, and sense and motion fails in the parts
beneath it, the excrements are either evacuated against the Patients will or
altogether stopped, the intestines putrify and rot, and death suddenly follows.

When the Liver is wounded, much blood comes out at the wound, and pricking
pain disperseth it self even unto the sword like gristle, which has its
situation at the lower end of the breast bone called Sternon, the blood that
falls from thence down into the intestines, does oftentimes infer most
malign accidents, yea and most commonly death.

When the stomach is wounded, the meat and drink come out at the wound, there
follows a vomiting of pure choler, then comes sweating and coldness of the
extreme parts, and therefore we ought to prognosticate death to follow.

When the Milt or Spleen is wounded, black and gross blood comes out at the
wou^d, the patient will be very thirsty, with pain on the left side, and the
blood breaks forth into the belly, and there putrefying causes most malign
and grievous accidents, and oftentimes death to follow.

When the guts are wounded, the whole body is griped and pained, the excrements
come out at the wound, whereat also oftentimes the guts break forth with great
violence.

When the reins or kidneys are wounded, the patient will have great pain in
making his urine, and the blood comes out together therewith, the pain
commmeth down even unto the groyn, yard, and lesticles.

When the bladder and Ureters are wounded, the pain goes even unto the
entrails, the parts all about, and belonging to the groyne are distended, the
urine is bloody that is made, and the same also oftentimes comes out at the
wound.

When the womb is wounded, the blood comes out at the privities, and all
other accidents appear, like as when the bladder is wounded.

When the sinews are pricked or cut half asunder, there is great pain in the
affected place, and there follows a sudden inflammation, flux, abscesse,
Fever, Convulsion, and oftentimes a gangrene, or mortification of the part,
whereof comes death unless it be speedily prevented.

If a Nurse through drowsinesse or negligence, lies upon her infant being in
bed with her, and so stifles or smothers it to death, which we call overlaying;
if the judgment and opinion of the artist be required, whether it dyed by
default of the Nurse, or by some violent disease lurking in the body, these
rules following shall show the truth of the matter.

If the infant were in good health before, if he were not froward nor crying,
if his mouth and nosthrils now being dead, be moystned or bedewed with a
certain foame or froath, if his face be not pale, but of a violet or purple
color, if when the body is opened, the lungs be found swollen and puffed up, as
it were with a certain vaporous foam, and all the other intrails sound; it is a
token that the infant was stifled, smothered, or strangled by some outward
violence,

If the body or dead corpse of a man be found lying in the field, or house
alone, and it be questioned whether he were slain by lightning or some other
violent death, these signs following will show the certainty thereof.

For every body that is blasted, or stricken with lightning, does cast forth or
breath out an unwholesome stinking, or sulphurous smell, so that the Birds, or
Fowls of the air, nor dogs will not once touch it, much less prey or feed on
it; the part that was stricken oftentimes sound, and without any wound but if
you search it well, you shall find the bones under the skin to be bruised,
broken, or shivered in pieces.

But if the lightning has pierced into the body which making a wound therein
(according to the judgment of PLINY) the wounded part is far colder than all
the rest of the body. For lightning drives the most thin and fiery air before
it, and strikes it into the body with great violence, by the force whereof the
heat that was in the part is soon dispersed, wasted and consumed, Lightning
does always leave some impression, sign of some fire, either by ustion or
blackness; for no lightning is without fire.

Moreover whereas all other living creatures, when they are stricken with
lightning fall on the contrary side, only man falls on the affected side, if
he be not turned with violence toward the coast or region from whence the
lightning came.

If a man be stricken with lightning while he is asleep, he will be found with
eyes open: contrariwise, if he be stricken while he is awake, his eyes will be
closed (as PLINNY writes)

Also it may be inquired in judgment, whether any that is dead and wounded,
received these wounds alive or dead, Truly the wounds that are made on a living
man if he dye of them, after his death will appear red and bloody, with the
sides or edges swollen or pale round about: contrariwise, those that are made in
a dead man, will be neither red, bloody, swollne, nor puffed up; for all the
faculties and functions of life in the body do cease and fall together by
death; so that thenceforth no spirits nor blood can be sent, or flow unto the
wounded place. Therefore by these signs which shall appear, it may be
declared that he was wounded dead or alive.

The like question may come in judgment when a man is found hanged, whether he
were hanged dead, or alive. Therefore if he were hanged alive, the impression
or print of the rope will appear red, pale, or black, and the skin round about
it will be contracted or wrinkled, by reason of the compression which the cord
has made; also oftentimes the head of the Aspera arteria is rent and torn,
and the second spondile, and the neck luxated or moved out of his place: also
the legs and arms will be pale, by reason of the violent and sudden
suffocation of the spirits: moreover, there will be a foam about his mouth, and a
foamy and filthy matter hanging out at his nosthrils, being sent thither, both
by reason that the Lungs are suddenly heated and suffocated, as also by the
convulsive concussion of the brain, like as it were in the falling sickness.
Contrariwise, if he be hanged dead, none of these signs appear; for neither
the print of the rope appears red or pale, but of the same color as the other
parts of the body are, because in dead men the blood and spirits do not slew
to the grieved parts.

Whosoever is found dead in the waters, you shall know whether they wore thrown
into the water alive or dead, by these following signs. All the belly of him
that was thrown in alive, will be swollen and puffed up by reason of the water
that is c^ntained therein; certain clammy excrements come out at his mouth and
nosthrils, the ends of his fingers will be worn and excoriated, because that
he dyed striving and scraping in the bottom of the River se^king some what
whereon he might take hold to save himself from drowning. Contrariwise, if he
be thrown into the waters being dead before, his belly will not be swollen,
because that in a dead man all the passages and conduits of the body, do fall
together, and are stopped and closed, and for that a dead man breaths not,
there appears no foame nor filthy matter about his mouth and nose and much
less can the skin of the tops of his fingers be rubbed off, for man is already
dead, he cannot strive against death.

But as concerning the bodies of those that are drowned, those that swim on the
upper part of the water being swollen or puffed up, they are not so by reason of
the water that is contained in the belly, but by reason of a certain vapor,
into which a great portion of the humors of the body are converted by the
efficacy of the putrefying heat: Therefore this swelling appears not in all
men which do perish, or else are cast out into the waters, but in them which
are corrupted with the filthiness or muddinesse of the water long time after
they were drowned, and are cast on the shore.

Many are stifled and suffocated by burning Charcoals in a close room, and
sometimes recovered, if taken in time, else quite smothered. These you shall
perceive their faces wan and pale, no pulse beating, all the extreme parts
cold, speech and motion cease, so that there is little hopes of recovering,
only as thus, put your hand to the region of the heart, and if you find any
heat and pulsation, then there is life remaining, else not, therefore if your
judgment be required concerning any persons found dead in any close room, you
shall enquire whether there were any Charcoals burned there, or observe whether
the walls or flours be new whitelimed, and the cause of their deaths will
appear.

You shall know that a person is poisoned, when as he complains of a great
heaviness of his whole body so that he is weary of himself; when as some
horrid and loathsome taste sweats out from the orifice of the stomach to the
mouth and tongue, wholly different from that taste that meat, howsoever
corrupted, can send up; when as the color of the face changes suddenly,
sometimes to black, sometimes to yellow, or any other color, much differing
from the common custom of man; when nauseousnesse, with frequent vomiting,
troubles the Patient, and that he is molested with so great unquietness, that
all things may seem to be turned upside down, when the Patient swounds often,
and with cold sweats.

Those poisons which exceed in heat, cause a burning in the tongue, mouth,
throat, stomach, guts, and all the inner parts, with great thirsts,
unquietness and perpetual sweats but if to their excess of heat, they be
accompanied with a corroding and putrefying quality, as Arsnick, Sublimate,
Roseager, or Ratsbane, Verdigrease, Orpiment and the like, they then cause in
the stomach and guts intolerable pricking pains, rumblings in the belly, and
continual and intolerable thirst. These are succeeded by vomitings, with
sweats sometimes hot, sometimes cold, with swoundings whence sudden death
ensues.

Poisons that kill by too great coldness, induce a dull and heavy sleep, or
drowsinesse, from which you cannot easily rouse or waken them; some imes they
so trouble the brain, that the Patients perform many undecent gestures, and
antic tricks, with their mouths and eyes, arms and legs, like as such as are
frantic; they are troubled with cold sweats, their faces become blackish or
yellowish, always ghastly, all their bodies are benumbed, and they dye in a
short time, unless they be helped; poisons of this kind, are Hemlock, Poppy,
Nightshade, Henbane, Mandrake, etc.

Dry poisons are usually accompanied by heat with moisture, for although
sulphur be hot, and dry, yet has it moisture to hold the parts together, as
all things which have a consistence have, yet are they called dry, by reason
that dryness is predominant in them; such things make the tongue and throat
dry and rough with unquenchable thirst, the belly is so bound, that so much as
the urine cannot have free passage forth; all the members grow squallid by
dryness, the Patients cannot sleep; poisons of this kind are Litharge,
Cerusse, Lime, Scales of brass, Filings of lead, prepared Antimony, etc.

Poisons that are moist induce a perpertual sleep, a flux or scouring, the
resolution of all the nerves and joints, so that not so much as their eyes may
be faithfully contained in their orbs, but will hang as ready to fall out, the
extreme parts, as the hands, feet nose, ears corrupt and putrify, and at which
time they are also troubled with thirst by reason of their strong heat, always
the companion of putrefaction, and oft-times the author thereof: now when this
comes to pass death is at hand; of this kind are the bitings of Serpents,
the venenate and putrefying humidity of the air, the Lues venereae and the
like.

Being to make report of a child killed with the mother, have a care that you
make a discreet report whether the child were perfect in all the parts and
members thereof; that the Judge may equally punish the author thereof, for he
meriteth far greater punishment, who has killed a child perfectly shaped, and
made in all the members, that is, he which has killed a live chide, then he
which has destroyed an Embryon, that is, a certain concretion of the
spermatick body; for Moses punishes the former with death, as that he should
give life for life, but the other with a pecuniary mulct.

I. A. B. Chyrurgion of London, being called this tenth of August instant, to
visit T. W. I found him in his bed, wounded on his head with a wound on the
left temple, piercing the bone with a fracture, and depression of the bone into
the menings and substance of the brain, by means whereof, his pulse was weak,
he was troubled with raving, convulsion, cold sweat, and his appetite was
dejected, whereby may be gathered that certain and speedy death is at hand. In
witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand.

I. A. B. Chyrurgion of London, entering the house of J. R. this twentieth of
March, found him hurt with three wounds, one on the hinder part of his head
cross the future Lambdoides, the other overthwart his right hand, cutting the
veins, arteries, and nerves, the third in the leg, from the juncture down by
the minor facile to the breadth of four fingers; all the danger I can report
is, That he will be lame of his hand though never so diligently dressed and
healed. In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand.

A direction to know by the daily judgment of the Moon, the danger of falling
sick upon any of those days.
1. HE that happens to fall sick on this day of the Moon, if his sickness
be fierce or tedious, shall quickly dye. 2. He shall be cured, though sore sick.
3. With good care and physic he may be cured. 4. He shall soon be restored to
health. 5. He shall be restored after 10. days sickness. 6. He shall not be in
danger. 7. He will hardly live above 3 months. 8. His sickness and languishing
will continue a long time. 9. After 9 days he shall have health. 10. After 10
days he shall amend. 11. He shall at last recover, though he be long sick.
12. After 12 days sickness he shall recover. 13. He shall be vexed with a long
and tedious sickness. 14. No doubt of his recovery. 15. No fear but easily to
escape death. 16. Keep him from open air, and he shall be in the less danger.
17 No Physic will do him any good. 18, 19 20. Good days. 21. Mortal and
incurable. 22. After three months he shall escape. 23. In few days he shall
dye. 24. He shall remain sick a long time. 25, 26, 27, 28 29 All good days.
30. The sick shall hardly escape, though he use many good medicines.
Invideunt alij non imitentur idem. Soli Deo Gloria.
Finis Libri.
A Table of the Contents of several things contained in this Book.
A
APostumes. page 11 Aloe Rosat. page 121 Aloe. ibid. Anniseeds. page 125 Alome.
page 131 Album Graecum. page 132 Artery or Vein hurt. page 163 Astringent
Powder. page 166 Astringents. page 170 Abstersives. ibid. Aperitives. page 181
Attractives. page 184 Adustives. page 185
B
BAsilicon. page 11 Burnings and scaldings. page 13. 12 Balsome of Lukatully.
page 14 Bladderings of the skin. page 16 Basilicon magnum. page 34 Benedicta
Laxativa. page 119 Bole-armony. page 131 Burnt Coperas. page 135 Bean meal.
ibid. Barley meal. page 136 Blood Porringers. page 153 Brain wounded. page 163
Breast wounded. ibid. Bladder hurt. page 165
C
COnserves to be in readiness. page 4 Corrosives. page 9 Camphoratum album.
page 37 Conserve of red Roses. page 89 Conserve of Rosemary Flowers. ibid.
Conserve of Borage Flowers page 90 Conserve of Berberries. ibid. Conserve of
Quinces. ibid. Conserve of Wood Sorrel. page 91 Conserve of Sloes. ibid.
Confection of Alkerns. page 97 Confection Hamech. page 118 Chyna. page 123
Carraway seeds. page 126 Cummin seeds. ibid. Canthaides. page 131 Crow-hills,
Catch bullets, and Terebellum. page 137 Cauterizing irons. page 144 Ca^h^^^r
page 149 ^^^ng-grasses. page 152 (...) of Fractures and dislocations. page 175
Consolidatives. page 182 Conglutinatives. page 183 Corrosives. page 185
D
DIrector. page 10 Diapompholigos. page 15 Desiccativum rubrum. page 16
Diacalciteos. page 22 Diachilon parvum. page 26 Diachilon magnum. page 27
Diamoron. page 87 Diaphaenicon. page 101 Diacatholicon. page 102 Dioscordium.
page 103 Dragons blood. page 131 Dismembring knife. page 138 Diet pot. page 155
A Direction to know by the daily judgment of the Moon, the danger of falling
sick upon any of those days. page 207
E
EMplaisters. page 3 Electuaries to have in readiness, page 5 Erisepela, the
cure. page 16 Excoriations. ibid. Emplaister of Bettony. page 23 Emplaister
Griseum. ibid. Emplaister Mellilot. page 24 Emplaistrum Ceroneum. page 31
Emplaistrum Diasulphuris. page 33 Emplaistrum Necotiani. page 34 Emplaistrum
Sir PHILIP PARIS. page 35 Emplaistrum Oxicrocium page 44 Emplaistrum de Minio.
page 45 Electuary of the Egg. page 98 Euphorbium. page 123
F
FOrceps. page 10 Fleme, the use. page 11 Fistula's. page 14. 13 Flesh
spongeous abated. ibid. French Barley. page 125 Fennel seeds. ibid. Fenugreek.
page 126 Forceps for teeth. page 145 Forehead vein. page 161
G
GUiacum. page 124 Guts wounded. page 164
H
HOney. page 9 Humors stopped. page 16 Honey of Roses. page 88 Hearts horn
rasped. page 122 Hearts Suet. page 130 Hogs Suet. ibid. Honey. page 135
Head-Saw. page 142 Head-veine. page 161 Hamme-veine page 161 Heart wounded.
page 163
I
INstruments. p. 1. 2. Incision knife. p. 7 Itching. p. 16 Joleb. p. 121
Incision sheeres. p. 137
K
Kidneys wounded p. 164
L
LAxatives to be in readiness. p. 5 Levatory the use. p. 9 Liniment of
Arcaeus. p. 12 Lotion the common. p. 79 Lie strong. p. 80 Lungs hurt. p. 163
Laudanum Paracelsi. p. 104 Licorice. p. 124 Juice of Licorice. ibid. Powder of
Licorice. p. 125 Linseed. p. 126 Lapis medicamentosus. p. 133 Of the Lancet. p.
156 Liver vein p. 160 Liver hurt. p. 164
M
MEl saponis. p. 40 Mithridate. p. 99 Myrrh. p. 128 Mastick. ibid. Mill dust.
p. 136 Middle vein. p. 160 Midriffe wounded. p. 164 Mundificatives. p. 180
Maturatives. p. 181
N
NEedles the use. p. 9 Noli me tangere. p. 15 Nutritum Unguent. p. 16 Nutmegs.
p. 127 Nerves hurt. p. 164
O
OIles. p. 3 Opiates to be in readiness. p. 5 Golden Ointment. p. 13 Oil of
Roses. p. 47 Oil of Dill. p. 48 Oil of Camomile. ibid. Oil of Worms. p. 49
Oil of Lillies. ibid. Oil of Rue. p. 50 Oil of Pepper. ibid. Oil of Fox. p.
51 Oil of Castoreum. p. 52 Oil of Euphorbium. p. 53 Oil of Amber. p. 54 Oil
of Nutmegs. p. 56 Oil of Costus. p. 57 Oil of Wax. ibid. Oil of St. John's
Wort. p. 58 Oil of Elders. p. 59 Oil of Linseed. p. 60 Oil of Eggs. ibid.
Oil of Whelps. p. 61 Oil of Bays. p. 62 Oil of sweet Almonds. ibid. Oil of
bitter Almonds. p. 63 Oil of Vitriol. ibid. Oil of Sulphur. p. 66 Oil of
Brickbats or Tilestones. p. 67 Oil of Turpentine. p. 68 Oil of Spike. ibid.
Oil of Antimony. p. 69 Oil of Myrtiles. ibid. Oil of Origanum. p. 70 Oximel
simples. p. 87 The Operations of sundry Simples. p. 178
P
Plaster box. p. 1 Pills to be in readiness. p. 5 Probes small the use. p. 8
Pain in Apostumes mitigated. p. 11. 12 Philonium Romanum. p. 112 Philonium
Persicum. p. 113 Pillulae aureae. p. 114 Pillulae Cochiae. p. 115 Pills sine
quibus. ibid. Pills of Ruffus. p. 116 Pills Euphorbium. p. 117 Pulvis
arthrecticus. ibid. Polipody of the Oak. p. 122 Pitch. p. 128 Precipitate. p.
133 Peri^anium hurt. p. 163
Q
Stitching Quill the use. p. 9 Quicksilver. p. 133
R
RUbarb. p. 122 Rosin. p. 129 Rep^cussives. p. 178 Restrictives. p. 183
Resolutives. ibid. The manner how to make Reports before a Judge of Assize, of
any one that has come to an untimely end. p. 191
S
SAlvatory. p. 2 Syrups to be in readiness. p. 4 Simples to be in readiness.
p. 5 Sizzers. p. 7 Spatula the use. p. 8. 10 Stone in the Kidneys. p. 14
Scabbinesse. p. 16 Shingles. ibid. Spleen vein. ibid. Spirit of Wine. p. 82
Syrup of Wormwood. p. 84 Syrup of Lymons. ibid. Syrup of Poppies p. 85 Syrup of
Roses solutine ibid. Syrup of Violets. p. 86 Syrup of Sloes. p. 88 Saffron. p.
123 Sallaparilla. ibid. Sugar. p. 127 Sperma-ceti. p. 130 Scrue-probe. p. 138
Of the dismembring Saw. p. 143 Of the Speculum oris. ibid. Speculum any. p. 144
Of large Spatulaes. p. 145 Of the small Siringe. ibid. Of the clister Siringe.
p. 147 Of the Spatula Mundana. p. 154 Saphaena vein. p. 161 Spleen wounded.
p. 164 Stomach wounded. ibid. Spinall marrow hurt. p. 165 Stupefactives. p. 182
T
TRiacle of London. p. 91 Triacle Andromache. p. 93 Triacle Diatesseron. p. 96
Turpentine. p. 129 Trochisks of red lead. p. 132 Of the Trafine. p. 138. Tongue
vein. p. 161
V
UNguents. p. 3 Uvula spoone the use. p. 8 Ulcers in the reins. p. 11 Ulcers.
p. 13. 14 Ulcers cleansed. ibid. Ulcers in the retnes. ibid. Ulcers painful.
p. 15 Ulcers in the yard. ibid. Ulcers in the legs. ibid. Ulcers cicatriced. p.
16 Uuguent Dialthaea. p. 39 Unguent Populeon. p. 38 Unguent AEgyptiacum. p. 37
Unguentum Arregon. p. 41 Unguentum Martiatum. p. 42 Unguentum Agrippae. p. 45
Unguentum Tutiae. p. 46 Unguentum Splenicum. ibid. Vinegar of Wine. p. 81
Vinegar of Roses. p. 82 Ulceratives. p. 185
W
Waters to be in readiness. p. 4 Wounds in the head. p. 11 Wounds incarned.
p. 13. 14 Water of Mint. p. 70 Water of Sassafras. p. 71 Water of Carduus
benedictus. p. 72 Water of Triacle. ibid. Water of Damask Roses. p. 73 Water of
Red Roses. ibid. Water of White Roses. ibid. Water of Plantaine. ibid. Water of
Balm. p. 74 Water of Angelica. ibid. Water of Wormwood. p. 75 Water of
Anniseeds, ibid. Water of Cynamon. ibid. Aqua Caelestis. p. 76 Water of Doctor
STEVENS. p. 78 White starch. p. 127 Wax yellow and white. p. 129 White
Copperas. p. 132 Wheat flower. p. 136 Wheat bran. ibid. Weights and Scales. p.
155 Wounds dressed. p. 165
Reader, before thou perusest this Treatise, correct these Errata's.
PAge 2. line 4. read liniment. line 9. Terebellum. l. 10. dele comma. p. 3.
14. martiatum. 21. add Colon, ad chim. p. 4. l. 22 solutine. p. 5. 16 Joleb.
l. 20. rasped. p. 8. 13. lint. p. 11. 2. quinzes. p. 13. 2. Terebint. p. 15. 4.
Terebinthinae, delendo co^ma. l. 22. solani. p. 16. 4. Erisepela's.

Books Printed, and are to be sold by Tho: Williams at his shop in
Little-Brittaine.
THe new light of Alchymy, by Michael Sandevogius, with nine Books of
Paracelsus of the nature of things; with a Chymicall Dictionary.

The Art of Distillation: By John French D. M.

Glaubers new Philosophical Furnaces: or a new Art of Distilling; in five
parts: with the tincture of Gold, or the true Aurum potabile: Also the first
part of his Mineral Work. All which are faithfully translated into English by
J.F. D.M.


