A GOLDEN-CHAIN, OR, A MISCELANY OF DIVINE SENTENCES Of the Sacred SCRIPTVRES,
And of other Authors.

Collected, and linked together for the souls comfort.

By EDWARD BULSTRODE of the Inner Temple, Esquire.

Lex Christi, est Lux Christiana.

LONDON, Printed by F.L. for W. Lee, D. Pakeman, and G. Bedel, and are to be
sold at their shops in Fleetstreet. 1657

To the RIGHT HONORABLE Sir Bulstrode Whitlock Knight, One of the Lords
Commissioners of his Highness Treasury, and Speaker pro Tempore, of the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
Right Honorable,
IT is a general Scandal, (upon what grounds I know not) thrown upon the
Professors of the Law, (especially in this age, that the practical knowledge
of the Laws of God, and of our own Nation, do seldom meet together in one
person; whereby they seem to put an incompatibility of devotion and sanctity,
into the life of Lawyers: whereas Religigion is suitable with all sorts of
vocations, and he that is not Bonus Theologus, as to himself, and that does not
make Religion his Primum, and his Ultimum, can never be well fitted for any
Profession whatsoever. It is true in the Creation, God commanded the Plants, to
bring forth their fruits, every one according to its kind; and so he commands
all Christians, who are living Plants of his Church, to bring forth fruits of
Devotion, every one in his quality, and vocation. For at ought to be
differently exercised by different men, and the practice of it, must be
accommodated to the capacity, and employments of each particular person, and
when Religion is not suitable with the lawful vocation of any man, then without
doubt, that Religion is false: For true Godliness, is so far from prejudicing
any employment, that it adorns, and beautifies it: all persons becoming more
acceptable in their vocation, joining it with true devotion. And as knowledge
is the glory of a man, so Divine knowledge is the glory of a Christian;
especially that of sacred Scripture, which is most sublime, and makes a
Christian happy to salvation. The Brick, and Straw of Egypt, is not comparable
to the Gold, and Silver Vessels in the Temple; neither are Divine Instructions
borrowed from Humane Learning, to be compared with the inestimable value of
those golden Precepts contained in holy Scriptures. For this cause, my Lord,
have I linckt together this Chain of Golden Sentences, out of the holy
Scriptures, and gathered this handful of Flowers, out of that Garden of
Paradise, to present to your Lordships hands, which if your Lordship please
sometimes to smell unto, I doubt not but they may yield some fragrancy and
sweetness. For the written Word of God affords extraordinary sweetness,
chearing a breast full of perplexities, and the power of it reforming the
disordered lives of men, and snatching us from the gates of death, to eternity.
And since God himself in the Old Testament commands us, and Christ in the New
enjoins us, to read his holy Word, and to search the Scripture; I have
therefore in the first place, made choice of those places of Scripture, that
concern our hearing, and reading the word of God; the knowledge of which, fully
understood, and conscionably practiced, is, or should be the main, and
principal end of every true Christians endeavor. I have likewise observed the
several texts concerning the several Books, mentioned in Scripture, and the
difference betwixt the Old and New Testament, and of the necessity of the
Virtue, and the Benefits of Prayer. And that we may with more ease digest those
inconveniences and distresses, which we have been acquainted with, and which
do daily threaten worse unto us. I have therefore produced several Scriptures
concerning afflictions, and the benefit of them, if seriously considered: For
how can a man suffer his heart to be dejected at the privation of any temporal
blessings, or at the load of any afflictions which God shall lay upon him, if
he consider the vanity of the first, and Gods Justice in imposing the last; and
that nothing is worth his serious thoughts, but what may accompany him to the
Mansions of Eternity. Certainly, if we seriously reflect upon the excellency of
our own nature, and think upon that happy estate which we shall arrive unto, if
we make the Law of God our meditation, day, and night, we shall then wean, and
take off our affections from this world, the cares whereof do very much clog
our souls flight to heaven, and tedder us here below. I must confess,
prosperity is a great blessing of God, and duly used, is no mean advantage,
both to ones self, and others; yet if the hand that gave, shall take away, we
must not repine, at what God formerly lent us, and thinks not fit any longer to
permit us the use of. In the next place, since our whole life ought to be a
continual preparation for death, I have collected many meditations concerning
it. And since, to perform any action well, a man must propose the end of that
action to himself; and since, of all man's actions the government of himself, in
relation to his future estate, is most important, and neerliest concerning him;
a man's being in this life, being but instrumentally good, as being the means
for him to be well in the next. I have in the last place, observed some things
concerning the day of Judgment, and the happiness we expect in the life to
come. For there remains an eternity to us, after the short revolution of time,
we so swiftly run over here on earth, and all that which in this world we call
happiness, is not valuable, in respect of the future, nor is any thing we do
here, considerable, otherwise then as it conduces to our eternal well-being
hereafter. And thus having given your Lordship an account of this small Tract,
I must beg your Lordships pardon, for putting your name in the Front of it:
being I fear an undervaluing your Lordship to prefix your name to so slender a
piece: but it being a right hand error, I hope it will be looked upon the more
favorably by your Lordship my obligations to your Lordship being so many, and
great, that I am bereft of all other means of showing my thankfulness, but by
laying hold of any opportunity of subscribing my self

My Lord, Your Lordships most faithful, and humble Servant, Edward Bulstrode.

The heads of the following Chapters.
CHAP. I.
TOuching the sacred Word of God, with certain directory rules, and
observations, to be made use of, for the more profitable, and better
understanding thereof, when we read, or hear the same: And herein is set forth,
and showed; First, How that the constant and frequent reading, and hearing of
the Word of God, is a duty and service commanded and enjoined us by God
himself. Fol. 1. Secondly, How we are to fit, and prepare our selves, for the
due performance of these so religious duties, by our prayers unto God for his
blessing thereon. 5. And herein four observations are set down, for our better
direction in the reading of the Scriptures. 6. Together with ten preparatory
directions, for our better hearing of the Word of God preached unto us. 7.8, 9.
And four special observations, showing, that all our abilities come from God
alone, who enableth us to hear his Word aright, and with profit, being preached
unto us. 10.11. Thirdly, How that we are to take into our serious
consideration, the powerfulness of the Word of God; together with the great
benefits we receive thereby. 12.13, 14, 15. And herein is set forth, and
showed, the various appellations of the Word of God in the holy Scriptures.
16.17. Fourthly, How that the due consideration by us had, in our reading,
hearing, and meditations thereon, ought to stir up in us a love thereunto, and
a rejoicing therein. 18, 19. Fifthly, How that these precedent observations
being thus made use of by us, will then work this good effect upon us, as to
make the Word of God, (which we have with the precedent cautions, thus read,
heard, and meditated on) to be a perpetual comfort ununto us, both in life and
death. 19.
CHAP. II.
Of the several Books mentioned in the Scriptures; wherein is set forth the
several names of the said Books. Together with an observation there, of the
difference between the wicked and the righteous, in the day of Judgment. Fol.
20 21, 22, 23. As also touching certain Books named in the Scripture, and now
not to be found. 24, 25. As also touching two other books, the one Liber
Providentiae, the Book of Gods Providence, and the second, Liber Iudicii, the
Book of Gods Judgments. 25, 26. As also touching another book, being Codex
Conscientiae, the Book of a man's Conscience. Together with a short tract
concerning Conscience, and the three properties, or qualities of the
conscience. 26, 27. With a description also, what conscience is, and of the
testimony of the conscience, accusing, or excusing before God. 27, 28, 29. And
also of Gods presence every where, beholding of all our actions: which should
make us the more careful, and vigilant of our selves, and of all our actions.
29, 30. As also, touching a guilty Conscience, and a good Conscience, and how
the same are qualified, and of the three special qualities of a good
Conscience, together with a more particular description of the conscience, and
showing what the same is. 30, 31. And how that the conscience of a man is as a
bridle, to keep him from offending, but as a whip, or lash afterward. 31. And
how that a man's very countenance will discover his offense; and so showing,
that though a man may be free from the Judgment of another, yet he cannot be
free from his own Judgment. 31, 32.
CHAP. III.
Of the Old Testament, and of the New, or of the Law, and of the Gospel, and of
the difference between them: wherein are set forth ten differences between the
Law and the Gospel, as appears Fol. 33, 34, 36, 37, 39, 52, 53, 54, 58. And
here is set forth likewise the fruit of a sanctified life here. 34. And also
the threefold being of man. 34, 35. As also of the good, and glad tidings of
salvation, the Gospel brings unto us. 37, 38, 39. And here is showed, how
that the Law tieth us to a due performance of all which the Law requires to be
done by us. 39, 40, 41. How that the Gospel tieth us only to believe aright in
God, and in his son Jesus Christ, and looks only upon the eye of our faith.
42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48. Together with the two reasons why Christ used this
speech, saying, Who touched me? (after that the woman having an issue of blood,
came behind him, and touched him) 43, 44, 45, 46. Herein is likewise showed how
that the just shall live by faith. 47, 48, 49. Here also is showed, that with
the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is
made unto salvation. 49. And how we are the children of God by faith, and the
power of faith. Together with the fruits thereof fully described. 49, 50, 51.
Here is also further showed, how that Christ in the Old Testament was hid, and
covered as under a veil: But in the New Testament, Christ is there revealed
unto us, and the veil of the Old Testament by him taken away. 52. The mystery
of godliness described. 52, 53. Here is likewise set forth unto us, how that
in the Old Testament we have the Law, given by Moses: but in the New Testament
we have grace and mercy, brought to us by Christ Jesus. 53, 54. Here is also
set forth, how that by the law we have the knowledge of sin, and of Gods curse
which followed thereupon. 54, 55. But by the Gospel we have the knowledge of
the free pardon of our sins, by the death of Christ, and conferred unto us by
his grace. 55, 56, 57. Here is also showed, that God who spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also, freely
give us all things. 57. Together also with the great benefits that redoundeth
to the elect children of God. 57, 58. And how that Christ has delivered us
from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us. 58. Again, here is
showed, how that the Law is as our schoolmaster, to bring us unto Christ, and
to show us the way to him: but the Gospel brings Christ himself unto us,
being the way, the truth, and the life. 58, 59. Here are also set forth
several variations of the Fathers upon these words of our Savior Jesus
Christ, (sc.) I am the way, the truth, and the life. 59, 60, 61. Together also
with St. Bernards fourfold venite; of the world, the flesh, of the Devil, and
of Christ, with their several rewards to their followers. 61, 62. With an
invitation of all to come unto Christ, and to take his yoke, being easy, upon
us. 62. Here also is set forth, the fruits, and effects of Gods foreknowledge,
in the way of predestination, election, justification, and glorification. 62,
63, 64. And how that our salvation depends on the mercy of God, in, and
through Jesus Christ our Savior, being justified by his grace. 64. Together
with a full manifestation unto us, of the free grace, and bounty of God unto
us, in the means of our salvation, and for the better grounding of our faith, a
threefold course is observed, thereby to tie us the faster unto him. 64, 65.
Here is also showed, that God does inspire us by his Word, and that this ought
to raise up in us a more certain knowledge of our election, and so to stir up
in us a Christian, and godly strife, to make our calling and election sure. 65,
66. Here is also showed, that we must not be careless in the great matter of
our election to salvation, but to be active herein, and use the means which
God has appointed for us to use, and works in us ability to do, and perform
the same. 66, 67, 68, 69. Here is also set forth unto us three effectual
notes, and signs of our election unto salvation, working in us for our greater
comfort. 70, 71, 72, 73. As also, wherein our chiefest cause of rejoicing
should consist, being in this, because our names are written in heaven. 72, 73.
CHAP. IIII.
Of prayer, and the force thereof, and how necessary, and needful a duty the
same is. Fol. 64. Herein is set forth, and showed, the ten properties of
Prayer. 74, 75, 76, 77, 78. How that Prayer is the key that opens the Scripture
unto us, and enlightens our understandings therein: with some directions to be
observed in reading of the Scriptures. 75, 76. Here is also set forth six
necessary observations touching prayer, and the use thereof. 78, 79, 80, 81,
82. As also the necessity of prayer, and that in four regards, occasioned by
our enemies, the Devil, the world, the flesh, and the wicked. 78, 79. Here is
also showed, that we must pray in all places, at all times, and that without
ceasing, for all persons, even for our enemies. 79, 80. Also we must pray to
God alone, with examples of this so doing. 81, 82. Also that we must pray with
knowledge, and with understanding. 82, 83. As also, touching public, or
Church-prayers, showing how needful they are, and in what respects, and for
whom we are there to pray, even for all persons, of what estate and condition
soever they be of. 83. Here also is the prayer set down which the ancient
Christians used to make for their Emperors. 83, 84. That prayer is like unto
Jacobs Ladder, reaching up to heaven, whereby we fly a high pitch, and do
thereby, as it were, mount up to heaven, as it were with the wings of the dove.
84, 85. That by the wings of the dove is meant Meditation and Prayer. 85. Here
also is set down for our imitation, the Prayer of St. Augustine, and of St.
Bernard. 85. That our prayers ascend up to heaven, and grace and mercy descend
down upon us. 85. Three sorts of Prayers observed by S. Bernard, that do never
ascend up unto heaven. 85, 86. That he which prays to God, and presently
offends again, does not pray as he ought to do unto God, but does, as it were,
mock and delude him. 86. That watching and prayer ought to go hand in hand
together; with the Emperor, his Pages memento unto him every morning, putting
him in mind to be watchful. 86, 87. That all our worth, and worthiness, is
only from God, and grace to us, nothing of, or from our selves. 87. The great
benefit of constant, and frequent prayer, and that in three regards. 87, 88. Of
the powerfulness of prayer, prevailing with God himself, and that in three
regards. 88, 89, 90. No better deliverance in time of distress, than by prayer
unto God. 88, 89. That God caused a house to be made, for the performance of
the duty, and service of prayer unto himself, styling the same by the name of
the house of prayer. 89, 90. That the house of prayer, and prayers therein
used, with private prayer also, the best means to remove Gods Judgments from
us. 90. Of the great and powerful effect of prayer, prevailing with God
himself: with diverse examples thereof, by way of instance what has been
wrought, and effected by diverse of the true, and faithful servants of God, and
all by prayer. 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102. That
prayer is as a strong City of refuge, for us thereby to fly unto God in our
greatest need. 103. In prayer we ought to be careful, what we ask, and how,
lest we fail in obtaining of our desires, as the mother of Zebedeus children
did. 103. That in regard we are continually in danger, we are therefore
continually to pray unto God for deliverance from all dangers: and herein we
are to observe S. Bernards rules, as touching the use of prayer: the same being
ever to accompany us, going forth, and returning, lying down, and rising again,
and for all Gods blessings on us, to show our thankfulness to him in prayer.
103, 104. Together with a threefold rule to be observed by us in our prayers to
God. 104, 105. That we are to pray with humbleness of mind, for that God
resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble. 104, 105. That we must pray
with zeal and fervency, for that the prayer of the spirit, and soul, is the
spirit, soul, and life of prayer. 105. That we are to pray to God, to teach us
to pray. 105, 106.
CHAP. V.
As touching afflictions, how necessary they are for us here in this life, and
what good use we are to make of them to our selves. 107, 108. Of the true use
of afflictions, and wherefore God lays afflictions on us in this world,
together with four special causes wherefore God lays afflictions here upon
us; all of them tending to our good. 108, 109. That through tribulation we are
to enter into the kingdom of God; and that afflictions are inseparable, but
not infallible notes of salvation. 110. That it is the cause, not martyrdom,
which makes men happy. 110. That the depth of Affliction is the chiefest
stirrer up of devotion, witnessed by some examples, by way of instance, as of
the children of Israel, David, Daniel, Jonah, Manasseh, the three children.
110. That a temporal affliction is a spiritual medicine. 111. That none can
pass from pleasures here, to everlasting delights in heaven. 111. That good
things are for good men, and ill things for ill men, though the things not
good, yet turn to the good of the godly. 111. That afflictions make a man more
humble, wary, and cautious in his ways, and they prove helpful to the godly,
yea, all things turn to their good. 111. 112. That afflictions do make us fit
vessels for Gods choice. 112, 113 How that by afflictions men will learn to
fear God. 114. That afflictions are chastisements for our sins. 114. That by
afflictions men are brought to keep Gods commandments, which they would not be
brought unto by Gods benefits. 114. Not to strive with our maker, the potsherd
with the potsherds of the earth, nor the clay with him that fashioneth it. 114.
Not to be impatient, and murmr against God in time of adversity. 114, 115.
That in time of troubles and dangers, prayer is the best refuge. 115. How that
God comfort his afflicted children with his blessings. 115. How that after
trouble, God sends comfort to them that wait patiently on him, and trust in
his mercies. 115. That afflictions work in a man repentance and humiliation.
115. That afflictions stir up a man to repentance, and will open the eyes of a
man's understanding, and will draw him to repentance when nothing else will.
115, 116.
CHAP. VI.
A Meditation upon life and death, and how we are at all times, and upon all
occasions, to fit and prepare our selves for death, that so it seize not upon
us at unawares. 117. Herein is set forth, First, the condition of our life
here, what the same is. 117. That our life here is a sea-fare. 117, 118.
Secondly, that our life here is a way-fare. 118, 119. That our life here is
full of troubles, calamities, and dangers, from the highest, even unto the
lowest. 118, 119. That our life here is also as a race, wherein we must be
running, and not stand at a stay. 119, 120. Thirdly, that our life here is a
warr-fare, and our weapons spiritual. 120, 121. What this our spiritual
armor is. 120, 121, 122. Here is also set down the fourfold condition of man.
122, 123. Of the vanity, and infelicity of man, in his first entrance into this
world, and during the whole time of his continuance here, nothing but full of
misery. 122, 123, 124. That man sucks misery even from his nurses teat, with
examples of this. 123. That man's life is nothing but misery, a pattern of
infelicity, miserable in his conception, nothing but misery in his whole life.
124. That afflictions come not forth of the dust. 124. That man is born unto
trouble. 125. That no man can assure himself of living till the morrow. 125.
That man is to account of every day, as his last day. 125. That not to be born,
by some held to be best, or being born, soon to dye. 126. Directory rules how
to live. 126, 127. That man is to erect his thoughts to a higher pitch than
that which is humane. 127. Better for a man not to be born, than not to be
regenerated. 127. That our life here is nothing without the happiness of life
eternal hereafter. 128. S. Bernards prayer. 128. That no Justification is by
the works of the Law, but by faith in Christ. 129. That our life here is the
way by which we do hasten to our end. 130. That as the hour, so our life
passes away. 130. That we must be careful how we live, necessity enforces us
so to do, with the reason thereof. 130. We came into the world, that we may go
out of the world. 130, 131. That our life here ought to be a preparation for
death. 131. That every moment in our life is a motion toward death. 131. Here
is set down a Rule to be observed in the whole course of our life. 131. That we
are to come as near good men as we can. 131. That we are to live in that
condition, in which we would not be afraid to die. 131. A good life, the cause
of a happy death. 132. Our life here ought to be a preparation for death; in
our life we are to foresee death. 132. Here is also set forth the comparison of
Death, unto the Basilisk, and the reason thereof. 132. That in life we ought to
foresee death, if in death we desire to enjoy life everlasting. 132. That the
whole life of the wicked is sin. 132, 133. S. Augustins prayer to God, to lay
on him here in this life what torments he would, so as he reserved for him life
eternal after this life ended. 133. Here is also set forth the life of man,
and whereunto the same is compared, by reason of the frailty thereof. 133, 134,
135, 136, 137. That we are to number our days, that so we may learn to apply
our hearts to wisdom. 135. We ought not to conclude of any thing for the time
to come, without this saying, if the Lord will, and we live, we will do this or
that. 136. That no man is sure of his life. 137. Here is also set forth the
frailty, mutability, and incertainty of the life of man here in this world,
being attended with so many miseries and calamities. 137, 138. That the
consideration of this, should make us not to desire any long continuance here,
but the contrary, with the hope of the fruition of a better life hereafter.
138. That all the enjoyments here in this life, are nothing but vanity. 138.
That the whole duty of man is to fear God, and keep his commandments. 138.
Here is also set forth life eternal, and the giver thereof. 138, 139, 140,
141, 142, 143, 144, 145. Touching the two Domestic keepers of our souls, (sc.)
shamefastness and fear. 141. Touching the two props, or pillars of our lives
here, (sc.) care and fear. 141, 142, 143. Secondly, concerning death, and how
we are to fit and prepare our selves for the same, with the reasons thereof.
143. To whom the remembrance of death is bitter, and to whom not. 143, 144. Not
to fear the sentence of death, with the reason thereof. 143, 144. That the
wages of sin is death. 145. That every day a part of our life is cut off. 145.
The six things to be specially remembered by us. 145, 146. That in Adam all die,
but in Christ all are made alive. 146. That the sting of death is sin. 146.
That death is compared to a quiet sleep, and wherefore. 146, 147. Not to be
troubled at the thought of death, the reason thereos. 147. Than death, nothing
more certain, than the time when nothing more uncertain. 147, 148, 149. The
meditation of Seneca upon the certainty of death, very observable, with the
fruits of the same. 148, 149. To whom death is as a refreshing, and again, to
whom it is as a punshment and damage. 149, 150. That to die the death of the
righteous, he who desires this, ought to live the life of the righteous. 150.
The difference between the life of a godly man, and the life of a worldling.
150, 151. That we ought at all times, and in all places, (both young and old)
to fit and prepare our selves for death, with the reason wherefore. 152, 153.
That nothing is more available than the meditation of our mortality. 153, 154.
That we ought so to live every day, as if we were even then to come to
Judgment, and to account of every day as our last day. 154, 155. What it is to
die well, even to die willingly, and not to fear death, with the reason why.
155, 156, 157. The saying of holy Hillarion, on his death bed, being fearful
to die. 156. That death is a port, or haven, by which we pass to joy; it is
the way of all flesh, hereupon the saying of Xerxes is observable. 157. That we
ought so to live here, as that we may enjoy life eternal hereafter. 157, 158.
That death is but as a passage to life, and as a sleep, not death. 158. That
all things by perishing, are kept alive, as the corn, it dies, and springs
again, with a comparison of this unto our death, and resurrection: death being
as a passage unto our resurrection. 158, 159. S. Augustins observation touching
the Resurrection of Christ. 159. That death is the gate unto life, a speedy
course, and passage to heaven, and a happy sleep. 160, 161. That death to the
godly is the port, and haven of health and happiness. 161, 162. That death
conjoyns, but life does separate us from Christ. 161, 162. That the highest did
ascend, and descend, the reason thereof, and the fruits we have thereby. 162,
163. That it is the part of a wise man to prepare for death, by continual
meditation thereon. 163, 164. To be willing to die, considering that the godly
by death, are called to rest, but the wicked to punishment. 164. The difference
between the hope of the wicked, and of the godly. 164, 165. Nothing more
profitable than the thought of mortality. 165, 166. Why the day of our death is
kept from us. 166. That a man's death shall be as his life is. 166, 167. That
the day of Judgment may be long before it come, but the day of death not so,
and the reason. 167. By meditation on death, to make the same familiar to us.
167. That our whole life ought to be a learning to die. 167. That death puts an
end to all sorrows. 168, 169, 170. That life is a passage to death, and death a
return to life. 168, 169. Touching our comfort in death, by Christ his
overcoming of death. 169. That sleep is a resemblance of death, the bed of the
grave, our rising again, of our resurrection. 169, 170. That the day of our
death is as our everlasting birth day. 170. We are not to grieve at the thought
of death, but rather to rejoice. 170, 171. The Sacrament called viaticum
Aeternitatis, or morientis. 171. The desire of Nazianzen to die with some
sentence of piety by him uttered at that time. 171. That death is a passage
from earth to heaven. 171, 172. That death is a separation of the soul from the
body, a location of the body in the earth, and a translation of the soul to
God. 172, 173. That man is of the dust, and to dust to return. 172, 173. That
the thought of death ought to be comfortable, in regard of Gods mercy promised.
173, 174, 175, 176.
CHAP. VII.
Of the day of Judgment, the same described, with the fruits and effects
thereof. 177. The several appellations of the day of Judgment. 177, 178, 179.
The terriblenesse of the day of Judgment, with the manner thereof. 178, 179,
180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189. Touching the manner of our
change at the day of Judgment. 187, 188. That God will deliver his in the day
of Judgment. 188. That because man was so wicked, God made the dumb creatures
to take part of the punishment with him. 189, 190. A Sermon preached upon this
text, 2 Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ.
195.
ERRATA.
Fol. 31. line 1. these words omitted, (nisi introspieere, in mentem suam.) 51.
l. 29. (that) for (the) 54. l. 1. the first (all) too much. 83. l. 6. (that)
too much. 87. l. 16. (and dignitio tua) for (est dignatio tua.) 88. l. 1.
(serio) for (serious.) 112. l. 1. (not) too much. 121. l. last (word) for
(sword) 124. l. 7.8.9. read (morbidus, putridus, cassus, auspicatus). 125. l.
3. (dives) for (dies.) and l. 13. (is) to be left out. 128. l. 3, 4. (melior)
for (melius) 136. l. 7. (shall) too much. 141. l. 28. (distinction) for
(direction.) 144. l. 22, (moriamini) for (mori^mini.) and l. 27. (O nqnom) for
(O nequam.) 148. l. 21. (ereunti) for (exennti.) 156. l. 24. (quod) for (quid.)
159. l. 14. (provectio) for (profectio.) 161. l. 17. (bono) for (bona.) and l.
26. (sciet) for (sociat.) 162. l. 7. (transgradimur) for (trunsgredimur.) and
l. 10. (temporali itinere de cursa) for (temporalis itineris decursu) 165. l.
20. (jubat) for (jubet.) 170. l. 5. (somnum) for (somnus) or somnium.) In the
Sermon, 2. division, the generality of the Judgment, we must all, (appear)
here to be left ont: the 3. division, the severity of the Judgment in this
word, (appear) here to be added.

CHAP. I. Touching the sacred word of God, with certain directory Rules and
observations, by way of Caveats, to be made use of, for the more profitable,
and better understanding of the holy Scriptures, and sacred word of God,
whenever we do either read, or hear the same preached unto us.
Deuteronomy. chap. 11. verse. 18.19.20.21.
Ye shall lay up these my words, in your heart, and in your soul, and bind them
for a sign upon your hand, that they may be as frontlets between your eyes.

And ye shall teach them your children, speaking of them when thou sit in
thine house, and when thou walk by the way, when thou lie down, and when
thou risest up.

And thou shall write them upon the door posts of thine house, and upon thy
gates.

That your days may be multiplied, and the days of your children, in the land
which the Lord swear unto your fathers, to give them, as the days of heaven
upon the earth.

Observe, Deuteronomie chap. 12. verse. 28.
and hear all these words which I command thee, that it may go well with thee,
and with thy children after thee, for ever, when thou do that which is good,
and right in the sight of the Lord thy God.

And it shall be, Deuteronomie chap, 17. verse. 18.19.
when he sits upon the throne of his kingdom, that he shall write him a
copy of this Law in a book.

And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life,
that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of this law,
and these statutes to do them.

And Moses wrote this law, Deuteronomie chap. 31. verse. 9, 10, 11, 12.
and delivered it unto the priests, the sons of Levi.

And Moses commanded them saying.

Gather the people together, men, and women, and children, and the stranger
that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear
the Lord your God, and observe to do all the words of this law.

But the word is very nigh unto thee, Deuteronomie chapter 30. verse. 14.
in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it.

The word is nigh thee, Romans chapter 10. ver. 8.
even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is the word of faith which we preach.

This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth, Joshua chap. 8. verse.
8.
but thou shall meditate therein, night and day, that thou may observe to do
according to all that is written therein: for then thou shall make thy way
prosperous, and then thou shall have good success.

Whosoever despises the word, Prove. 13.13.
shall be destroyed, but he that fears the commandment shall be rewarded.

I have sent unto you all my servants the prophets, Jeremiah cha. 7. ver. 25,
26.
daily rising up early, and sending them.

Yet they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, but hardened their neck, they
did worse than their fathers.

How do ye say, Jeremiah cha. 8. ver. 8.9.
we are wise, and the law of the Lord is with us? Lo, certainly, in vain made
he it, the pen of the Scribes is in vain.

The wise men are ashamed, they are dismayed, and taken; so, they have rejected
the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them?

But unto the wicked God says, Psalm 50. ver. 16.17.
what have thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou should take my
covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words
behind thee.

Jesus answered and said unto them, Matthew cha. 22. verse. 29.
Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God?

And Jesus answering, Mark chap. 12. ver. 24.
said unto them, Do ye not therefore err, because ye know not the scriptures,
neither the power of God.

Search the scriptures, John chap. 5. ver. 39.
for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify
of me.

And the brethren immediately sent away Paul and Silas by night unto Berea:
Acts chap. 17. ver. 10.11.
who coming thither, went into the Synagogue of the Jews.

These were more noble than those of Thessalonica, in that they received the
word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether
those things were so.

Till I come, 1 Timothy chapter 4. ver. 13. Revel^tion chapter 3. ver. 3.
give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine.

Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this Prophecy,
and keep those things which are written therein.

The secret things belong unto the Lord our God: Deuteronrmy chapter 29. ver. 29.
but those things which are revealed, belong unto us, and to our children for
ever, that we may do all the words of this law.

A preparatory Prayer, ought to be used, before our Reading, and hearing of the
Word of God.
and also to meditate thereon, so we are likewise to fit and prepare our selves
before hand, for the due performance of these so religious duties. And this
preparation ought to be by our earnest, and hearty prayer unto God, that he
would be graciously pleased to Bless us in our reading, in our hearing of his
sacred Word, and in our meditations thereon. That he would be pleased to open
the eyes of our understandings, to bless our memories, to sanctify our
affections, and so to season us throughout, with the lively grace of his holy
Spirit, inwardly working in us, that so thereby we may be the better enabled to
turn all our reading, hearing, meditations, and remembrance, into a due and
careful practice thereof, in the whole course of our lives and conversations.
And we are likewise to take heed what we hear, and how we hear.

If we desire to profit by Reading of the Word of God, Rules by St. Augustine,
to be observed in Reading the Scriptures.
we must then duly and carefully observe these few directions given us for
that purpose by S. Augu^^ine: as namely;



Secondly, we must read the same with all humility.





For as S. St. Augustine.
Augustine well observes, Beatus quis? beatus est ille homo, qui sic legit
sacras scripturas, ut verba vertat in opera. Who is happy? even he is a happy
man, that does so read the holy scriptures, that he may turn all his words into
works.

Again, Directions preparatory for our better hearing of the word of God
preached.
if we desire to profit by hearing of the Word of God preached unto us, we must
then with all care and diligence, observe these few following directions: as
namely;









Jonah was in the ship: we must not think our selves to be in security.



And that from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures, 2 Timothy chap. 3.
ver. 15.16.17.
which are able to make thee wise unto falvation, through faith which is in
Christ Jesus.

All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness.

That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.





Forasmuch as ye are manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ, 2
Corinthians chap. 3. ver. 3.
ministered by us, written, not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living
God, not in tables of stone, but in fleshly tables of the heart.



And the king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat, 1 Kings chap. 22. ver. 8.
There is yet one man (Micaiah) the son of Imiah, by whom we may enquire of the
Lord, but I hate him, for he does not prophecy good concerning me, but evil.
And Iehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so.

Now while Paul waited for them at Athens, Acts chap. 17. ver. 16.17.18.
his spirit was stirred in him, when he saw the City wholly given to idolatry.

Therefore disputed he in the Synagogue with the Jews, and with the devout
persons, and in the market daily, with them that met with him.

Then certain of the Philosophers, of the Epicureans, and of the Stoics
encountered him: and some said, What will this babbler say? other some, He
seems to be a setter forth of strange gods: because he preached unto them
Jesus and the Resurrection.



The Lord has given me the tongue of the learned, Isaiah cha. 50. ver. 4.5.
that I should know how to speak a word in season, to him that is weary: He
wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear, to hear as the learned.

The Lord God has opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned
away back.

The hearing ear, Proverbs chap. 20. ver. 12.
and the seeing eye, the Lord has made even both of them.

Behold, their ear is uncircumcised, Jeremiah chap. 6. ver. 10.
and they cannot hearken.

It is well observed by one; That



He opens the ears of men, Job chap. 33. ver. 16.
and seals their instructions.

Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire, Psalm 40. ver. 6.
mine ears have thou opened.

Lydia, and does, as it were, dig, delve, and prepare the same, to receive the
word preached, as seed sown in good ground, that so it may take deep root
downwards, and bring forth good fruit upwards, for the amendment of our lives,
and salvation of our souls.

And a certain woman named Lydia, Acts chap. 16. ver. 14.
a seller of purple, of the City of Thyatyra, which worshipped God, heard us;
whose heart the Lord opened, that she attended unto the things which were
spoken of Paul.

But that, Luke chap, 8. ver. 15.
on the good ground, are they which in an honest, and good heart, having heard
the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.

that does bless our memories, with a retentive faculty, to keep, and retain
the word which we hear preached unto us.



We must likewise take heed what we hear, and how we hear.

The powerfulness of Gods word, and the benefits we have thereby.
We are both in our reading, and hearing of the word of God, and in our
meditations thereon, to take into our serious consideration, the powerfulness
of the word of God, and the great, and unspeakable benefits we receive thereby,
diverse ways manifested unto us by these ensueing places of Scripture.

In sacra scriptura, quicquid docetur, Hugo libro 3. de anima.
veritas, quicquid praecipitur, bonitas, quicquid promittitnr, faelicitas est.
Nam Deus veritas est sine fallacia, bonitas sine malitia, faelicitas sine
miseria: ut Hugo libro 3. de anima. In the holy Scripture, Hugo.
whatsoever is taught, is truth, whatsoever is commanded, is goodness, and
whatsoever is promised, is happiness. For God is truth without falsehood,
goodness without malice, and happiness without misery: as Hugo well
observes, in his third book of the soul.

Sacra Scriptura, S. Gregory in moral.
tanto plus diligitur, quanto amplius meditatur: ut inquit St. Gregory, in
moral. The holy Scripture is so much the more loved of us, by how much the more
we do meditate therein: S. Gregory.
as St. Gregory observes.

Doctrina scripturae perfecta est, Piscator fol. 22. cap. 14.
omnia scilicet tradens, qua ad verum Dei cultum, and ad aeternam nostram
salutem sunt necessaria: ut Piscator fol. 22. cap. 14. The doctrine of the
scripture is perfect, Piscator.
that is to say, showing unto us all things necessary, both to the due worship
of God, and our own eternal salvation.

Finis seu scopus Dei in scriptura, Piscator fol. 22. cap. 13.
est crudire populum suum de recto cultu sui, and vera hominis faelicitate, and
perfecta est, tradens omnia quae sunt ad istum scopum assequendu^ necessaria:
ut Piscat. fol. 22. cap. 13. The end and purpose of God in the scriptures, is
to instruct his people and children, in the true, Piscator.
and right worship of him, as also in the happiness of man: and the same is
likewise perfect, teaching us all things which are necessary to the attaining
unto of that end.

Doctrina scripturae certo vera est, Piscator.
quippe ab instinctu Spiritus sancti profectus. erroneum igitur necesse est,
quicquid cum eo pugnat: ut Piscator fol. 22. cap. 18. The doctrine of the
Scripture is certainly true, because it proceeds from the instinct, and
inspiration of the holy Spirit of God: and therefore it falls out that
whatsoever is repugnant thereunto, must needs be erroneous.

A good encouragement for all to read the scriptures. An excouragement to read
the Scriptures.


In scripturis abundat, and quod robustus comedat, and quod parvulus sugat. In
the scriptures there is such abundance, Fulgentius.
as that strong men may there find meat to eat, and the weak young suckling may
there also find fitting food for him to suck on: as Fulgentius observes

Divinus sermo, sicut mysteriis, prudentes exercet, sic plerunque superficie
simplices refovet. Habet in public, unde parvulos nutriat, servat in secreto,
Gregory Epist. ad Leande.
unde mentes sublimium admiratione suspendat: ut Gregory Epist. ad Leandr. The
word of God, as in mysteries, does exercise the wise, so in a superficial way
of knowledge, it does comfort, and refresh the weak and simple. It has in
common, whereby it may nourish the young ones: and it keeps in secret, that
whereby it may hold in suspense with admiration, the minds of the sublimate
and learned: as Gregory observes in his epistle to Leander.

And again, as the same Author observes. Gregory Epist. ad Leande.


It is a deep, and yet a shallow foord; Ubi agnus ambulat, and ubi clephas
natat: where the Lamb may wade, and where the greatest Elephant may swim.

Or, where the weakest in knowledge and understanding, may find much comfort;
and where the greatest and most profound scholar may find matter enough to work
upon.

For since I spoke, Jeremiah cha. 20. ver. 8.9.
I cried out, I cried violence, and spoil, because the word of the Lord was
made a reproach unto me, and a derision daily. Then I said, I will not make
mention of him any more, nor speak any more in his name. But his word was in
mine heart as a burning fire, shut up in my bones, and I was weary with
forbearing, and I could not stay.

Is not my word like as fire, Jeremiah cha. 23. ver. 29.
says the Lord, and like a hammer, that breaks the rock in pieces?

But to this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite
spirit, and trembles at my word.

Hear the word of the Lord, Isaiah cha. 66. ver. 2.5.
ye that tremble at his word.

My word shall not return unto me void, Isaiah cha. 55. ver. 11.
but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing
whereto I sent it.

The word of God called a sword, Revelation chap. 19. ver. 21.
which sword proceeded out of his mouth.

The word of God is quick and powerful, Hebrews chap. 4. ver. 52.
and sharper than any two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of
soul, and spirit, and of the joints, and marrow, and is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart.

And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood, Revelation chap. 19. ver. 13.
and his name is called the word of God.

As for me, Isaiah cha. 29. ver. 21.
this is my covenant with them, says the Lord, my spirit that is upon thee,
and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says
the Lord, from henceforth, and for ever.

Blessed are they that hear the word of God, Luke chap. 11. ver. 28.
and keep it.

Receive with meekness, James chap. 1. ver. 21.
the engrafted word of God, which is able to save your souls.

Keep therefore, Deuteronomy chap. 29. ver. 9.
the words of this covenant, and do them, that so ye may prosper in all that ye
do.

As new born babes, 1 Peter chap. 2. ver. 2.
desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby.

Verily, John chap. 5. ver. 24.
verily, I say unto you, he that hears my word, and believes on him that
sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is
passed from death to life.

The word of God, The word of God, the word of Reconciliation. 2 Corinthians
chap. 5. ver. 18.19.
called the word of Reconciliation.

And all things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself, by Jesus Christ,
and has given to us the ministry of reconciliation.

To wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them, and has committed unto us the word of
reconciliation.

The word of God called the word of truth. The word of God, the word of Truth.
Ephesians cha. 1. ver. 13.


In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the gospel of
your salvation: in whom also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that
holy Spirit of promise.

The word of God called the word of life. The word of God, the word of life.
Philippians chap. 2. ver. 16.


Holding forth the word of life, that I may rejoice in the day of Christ, that
I have not run in vain, neither labored in vain.

The word called the word of Christ. The word called the word of Christ.
Collossians chap. 3. ver. 16. The word called the faithful word of God. Titus
chap. 1. ver. 9.


Let the word of Christ dwell in you, richly, in all wisdom.

The word called the faithful word of God.

Holding fast the faithful word of God, as he has been taught, that he may be
able by sound doctrine, both to exhort, and to convince the gainsayers.

Thy word have I hid in my heart, Psalm. 119. ver. 11. and 42.
that I might not sin against thee.

So shall I have wherewith to answer him that reprocheth me: for I trust in thy
word.

So then faith comes by hearing, Romans chapter 10. ver. 17.
and hearing by the word of God.



I rejoice at thy word, Psalm. 119. ver. 162. Jeremiah cha. 15. ver. 16.
as one that finds great spoil.

Thy words were sound, and I did eat them, and thy word was unto me the joy,
and rejoicing of my heart, for I am called by thy name, O Lord God of hosts.

Lord, Psalm. 26. ver. 8.
I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honor
dwells.

I was glad when they said unto me, Psalm. 122. ver. 1.
Let us go into the house of the Lord.

For a day in thy Courts is better than a thousand: Psalm. 84. ver. 10.
I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the
tents of wickedness.

O how I love thy law, Psalm. 119. ver. 97.127.
it is my meditation all the day.

Therefore I love thy commandments above gold, yea above fine gold.

I delight to do thy will, Psalm. 40. ver. 8.
O my God: yea thy law is within my heart.



Be thou faithful unto death, Revelation chap. 2. ver. 10.
and I will give thee a crown of life.

CHAP. II. Of the several Books mentioned in the Scriptures.
THine eyes did see my substance, Psalm. 139. ver. 16.
yet being unperfect, and in thy Book all my members were written, which in
continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them.

Then they that feared the Lord, Malachie chap. 3. ver. 16, 17, 18.
spoke often one to another, and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a Book
of remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and that
thought upon his name.

And they shall be mine, The difference between the wicked, and the righteous,
in the day of Judgment.
says the Lord of hosts, when I make up my Jewels, and I will spare them, as a
man spares his own son that serves him.

Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked,
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not.

Thou tellest my wanderings, Psalm. 56. ver. 8.
put thou my tears into thy bottle, are they not in thy book?

And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of the book. Isaiah cha. 29.
ver. 18.


Seek ye out of the book of the Lord, and read. Isaiah cha. 34. ver. 16.


And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great prince, Daniel cha. 12.
ver. 1.
which stands for the children of thy people, and there shall be a time of
trouble, such as never was since there was a Nation, even to that same time:
and at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found
written in the book.

And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, Daniel cha.
12. ver. 2, 3.
some to everlasting life, and some to shame, and everlasting contempt.

And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and
they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars, for ever and ever.

A fiery stream issued, Daniel cha. 7. ver. 10.
and came forth from before him; thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten
thousand times ten thousand stood before him: the Judgment was set, and the
books were opened.

But thou, O Daniel, Daniel cha. 12. ver. 4.
shut up the words, and seal the book, even to the time of the end: many shall
run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.

And these shall go away into everlasting punishment, Matthew cha. 25. ver. 46.
but the righteous into life eternal.

For the hour is coming, John chap. 5. ver. 28, 29.
in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice:

And shall come forth, they that have done good, unto the Resurrection of life,
and they that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of damnation.

Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, Psalm 69. ver. 28.
and not be written with the righteous.

He that overcomes, Revelation chap. 3. ver. 5.
the same shall be clothed in white raiment, and I will not blot out his name
out of the book of life, but I will confess his name, before my father, and
before his angels.

And I entreat thee also, Philippians chapter 4. ver. 3.
true yokefellow, help these women, which labored with me in the Gospel, with
Clement also, and with other my fellow laborers, whose names are in the book
of life.

And it was given unto him, Revelation chapter 13. ver. 7, 8.
to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them: and power was given him
over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations.

And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not
written in the book of life, of the Lamb, slain from the foundation of the
world.

The beast that thou saw, was, Revelation chap. 17. ver. 8.
and is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit, and go into
perdition, and they that dwell on the earth shall wonder, and whose names are
not written in the book of life, from the foundation of the world, when they
behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet is.

And I saw the dead, small, Revelation chapter 20. ver. 12, 13.
and great, stand before God, and the books were opened: and another book was
opened, which is the book of life, and the dead were judged, out of those
things which were written in the books, according to their works.

And the sea gave up the dead which were in it, and death, and hell delivered
up the dead which were in them, and they were judged every man according to
their works.

And death, Revelat. chap. 20. ver. 14, 15.
and hell were cast into the lake of fire.

And whosoever was not found written in the book of life, was cast into the
lake of fire.

And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this prophecy,
Revelat. chap. 2 r 2. ve 19.
God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy
City, and from the things which are written in this book.

Books named in the Scripture, and not to be found: as namely;

Is not this written in the book of (Iasher) the marginall note of an old
Bible, Joshua chap. 10. ver. 13.
being, as some read it, In the book of the righteous; meaning Moses. The
Chaldee text reading. In the book of the Law: But it is like that it was a book
thus named, which is now lost. All this in the marginall notes of an old Bible.

As it is written in the book of Iasher, 2 Samuel cha. 11. ver. 18.
or righteous, as the marginall note is.

Wherefore it is said in the book of the wars of the Lord, Numbers chap. 21.
ver. 14.
(or of the battles) which by a marginall note in an old Bible, seems to be
the book of the Judges, or a book which is lost.

Concerning the acts of David the king, behold, 1 Chronicles. chap. 29. ver. 29.
they are written in the book of Samuel the Seer, and in the book of Nathan the
prophet, and in the book of Gad the Seer. The marginall note in an old Bible,
is, that the books of Nathan, and Gad, are thought to have been lost in the
captivity.

And there shall in no wise, Revelation chapter 21. ver. 27.
enter into it, any thing, that defiles, neither whatsoever works
abomination, nor makes a lie; but they, which are written in the Lambs book
of life.

There is, as One well observes, a two fold Book of God: as namely;

Liber Providentiae, that is, the Book of Gods Providence, whereby we are
taught, to know our duties to God, and to refer our selves, and all our
actions, to his Divine Providence, and mercy: and to use his good blessings on
us bestowed, to his glory. All which, if we thus do, we shall then receive all
things necessary in this world, and life eternal in the world to come.

But if we are disobedient, and do contrary to all this; then there is a second
Book, which will be opened against us: as namely;

Liber Judicii, the Book of Gods Judgment, whereby we shall receive all the
Judgments of God, therein mentioned, and pronounced against the wicked and
disobedient.

Then shall the king say unto them, Matthew cha. 25. ver. 34.
on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared
for you, from the foundation of the world.

Then shall he say also unto those, Matthew cha. 25. ver. 41.
on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared
for the Devil and his angels.

It is observed by a Father, That there is another book, and that is called
Codex Conscientiae, the book of a man's conscience.

St. Chrysostom observes thus much, S. Chrysostom.
(sc.) That,

Conscientia est codex, in quo, quotidiana nostra peccata, rescribuntur. The
Conscience is a book, in the which, our daily sins and offenses, are writ
down, registered, and recorded against us; as S. Chrysostom observes.

And as touching Conscience;

There is a Threefold quality of the Conscience, Of Conscience.
as One observes; as namely:

Testificare de praeterito, that is, to bear testimony, and witness, of what
is done by us, and past.

Accusare, vel excusare, to accuse us, of what we have done, or else to excuse
us.

Solvere, vel ligare; That is, either to let us loose, or else to bind us fast
up.

For when the Gentiles, Romans chap. 2. ver. 14.15.16.
which have not the Law, do by nature, the things contained in the Law, these
having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves.

Which show the work of the Law, written in their hearts, their Conscience also
bearing witness, and their thoughts, mean while, accusing, or else excusing
one another.

In the day, when God shall judge the secrets of men, by Jesus Christ,
according to my gospel.

Conscientia, est, quasi cordis scientia, S. Bernard.
ut S. Bernard. The conscience is, as it were, the very knowledge of the heart.

By strength, stratagems, and policy, men do overcome their enemies: But God
convinces a man only by the guilt of his conscience, the which will convict
him at the last day, or acquit him.

Deus, S. Augustine.
coram quo judicandus sis, justus est Judex. God, before whom thou art to be
judged, is a just God, and Judge; and he will only judge us by the testimony
of our own consciences; as S. Augustine observes.

Quid prodest, Seneca.
non habere conscium, habenti conscientiam? ut Seneca: that is, What can it
profit, or avail thee, to have no witness to testify against thee, having thy
own conscience, which is as good as a thousand witnesses, to accuse thee?

Nullum putaveris locum sine test, and memineris, Deum habere te testem. That
is, Do not thou think any place free from a witness; and be thou mindful, that
God has thee thy self, to be a witness against thy self, by thy own
conscience, accusing thee, as a Father observes.

Si honesta sunt, Seneca.
quae facis, omnes sciant, si turpia, quid refert, neminem scire, cum tu ipse
scias? O te miserum, si contemnis hunc testem, ut Seneca. If the things which
thou do, are honest, and good, it is no matter then who knows thereof: But
if the things are ill which thou do, what does it then avail thee, that none
do know thereof, when as thou thy self know it. O miserable man that thou
art, if thou contemn, and despise this testimony, as Seneca observes.

Turpe facturus, te, sine test time.

When thou art doing any thing that is ill, then fear thy self; even thy own
conscience, though that no other witness be present.

In omnibus quae agis, S. Bernard.
Deum praesentem cogita, cave itaque, ne vel signo, vel facto offendas, qui ub
que praesens, cernit quicquid facis; ut S. Bernard. In all things which thou
do, think God always to be present before thee, and therefore take heed,
lest thou any ways offend, either by deed, or otherwise; for he, even that God
which is every where present, does see, S. Bernard.
and behold all that thou do: as St. Bernard observes.

Deus totus est sensus, totus visus, totus auditus: Pliny. God is altogether
sense, and understanding, altogether eyes, and seeing, Pliny.
altogether ears, and hearing; as Pliny observes.

Deus est totus auris, totus oculus, Irenaeus.
ut Irenaeus. god is all ears, all eye, he hears every thing, and he sees
every thing, which is acted, and done by us; as Irenaus observes.

Noli peccare, nam Deus vidit, Angeli astant, Diabolus accusabit, Conscientia
testabitur, Infernum cruciabit; ut Pater. Therefore do not thou offend, for God
sees thee, the Angels behold thee, the Devil will accuse thee, thy own
Conscience will witness, and testify against thee, and Hell will torment thee.

Aut si peccare vis, St. Augustine.
quaere locum ubi Deus te non videat, and fac quod vis; ut S. Augustine. If
notwithstanding all this, thou will needs offend, and commit sin, then seek
thee out a fitting, and convenient place; yea even such a place to act thy sin
in, where God may not see, nor behold thee; and then freely do what thou will.
St. Augustine.
S. Augustine.

Conscientia rea, est semper inquieta; ut Isiodor. Isiodor.
A guilty conscience is always unquiet.

A good conscience is thus qualified, and has,

in cord puritatem, Purity in the heart.

in ore veritatem, Truth and verity in the mouth. And

in action rectitudinem, Uprightness in all the actions; S. Bernard.
as St. Bernard observes.

Conscientia, nihil aliud est, secundum quosdam. The Conscience, as some do
hold, is nothing else, but the soul, reflecting on it self.

Conscientia est judex sui ipsius. Conscience in a man, is the judge of himself.

It is a secret spy in our selves, censuring all our actions, by us done, or
to be done, whether good, or bad.

Conscientia est scientia cum alio, and testis perpetuus est conscientia.
Conscience, it is knowledge with another, and our Conscience is, and will be, a
perpetual witness, for us, or against us; as a Father observes.

Conscientia, ante peccatum froenum, post peccatum flagrum. Our Conscience,
before we do offend, is as a bridle, to keep us from offending, but after we
have offended, it is then as a whipp, continually to lash, and torment us, for
the same: and this makes a man in all places, and in all companies, full of
continual fears, his conscience ever tormenting him. And as the saying is
true,

Heu quam difficile est, crimen non prodere vultu. How hard, and difficult a
thing it is, for a man not to discover his fault, and offense, even by his
countenance.

A Father, speaking of a man of an ill conscience, says thus; Though he be
Tutus a judicio alieno, free from the judgment of another; yet he is not Tutus
a judicio suo, free from his own judgment, of, and against himself; as
appeared in Judas, saying,

I have sinned, Matthew cha. 27. ver. 4, 5.
in that I have betrayed innocent blood.

And he cast down the pieces of silver, in the Temple, and departed, and went,
and hanged himself.

CHAP. III. Of the Old Testament, and of the New, Or, of the Law, and of the
Gospel, and of the differences between them.
FIrst, Novum Testamentum, est in Veteri velatum, Vetus in Novo revelatum, ut
St. Augustine. St. Augustine.
The New Testament is covered, shadowed, and hid, as it were under a veil, in
types, and figures, in the Old Testament, But the Old Testament is manifested,
and revealed in the New. Or,

Novum Testamentum in Veteri latet, Vetus Testamentum in Novo patet; ut St.
Augustine. St. Augustine.
The New Testament lies hid in the Old, and the Old Testament is laid open in
the New.



In the New Testament, we see what we are by grace, by our new birth, being
regenerated, and born anew, in Christ Jesus, and by the gracious working of his
holy Spirit in us, we are thereby renewed, and changed in our minds, and
conversations, and so hereby, our natural and corrupt being by our first
birth, is turned, and changed unto a gracious and a spiritual being, by this
our second, and new birth.

And again, In the New Testament, we also see, what we shall be after this
life, in the state of glory, of happiness, and eternity, in the kingdom of
heaven, purchased for us, by the death, and passion of Christ Jesus, our
blessed Lord and Savior; who is gone before, by his powerful Resurrection,
and Ascension up to Heaven, there to prepare a place, and a glorious being for
us.

All which is very lively set forth unto us in the New Testament.

And therefore a Father well says, That Nunquam erit in vita aeterna, cum
Christo beatus, qui non est in hac vita, in Christo sanctus. That is, He shall
never be happy with Christ, in the life to come, and eternal, who is not in
this life, holy and sanctified in Christ.

It is well observed, That man has a Threefold being, as namely;

Esse naturae, a Natural being by birth.

Been esse gratiae, a wellbeing by grace, by his new birth. And

Optime esse gloriae, his glorious being by death; the same being an entrance
into a life of glory.

These three, being all of them specified by this ensuing place of Scripture,
etc.

Jesus answered, and said unto him, John 3.3, 5, 6 8.
Verily I say unto thee, except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom
of God.

Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born of water, and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God,

That which is born of the flesh, is flesh, and that which is born of the
Spirit, is spirit.

The wind blows where it lists, John 14.2, 3.
and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, and
whither it goes: so is every one, that is born of the Spirit.

In my fathers house are many mansions, I go to prepare a place for you.

And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you
unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also.

Genesis 2.
the Old Testament, or the law, shows unto us our miserable estate and
condition we are in, by sin, and by the fall of our first parents in Paradise.

The New Testament, or the Gospel, shows unto us our happy estate and
condition we are in, by grace, by the merits, death, and passion, Resurrection,
and ascension of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

For now is Christ risen from the dead, 1 Cor. 15.20, 21, 22.
and become the first fruits of them that slept.

For since by man came death, by man came also the Resurrection of the dead.

For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.

For the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23.
but the gift of God, is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

And sin when it is finished, James 1.15.
brings forth death.

As by the offense of one, Romans 5.18, 19, 20, 21.
Judgment came upon all men, to condemnation; even so, by the righteousness
of one, the free gift came upon all men, unto justification of life.

For as by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners, so by the obedience
of one, shall many be made righteous.

Moreover, the Law entered, that the offense might abound: but where sin
abounded, grace did much more abound.

That as sin has reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through
righteousness, by lesus Christ our Lord.



In the new Testament, or Gospel, we have the joyful news, and glad tidings,
of the birth of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

And hereupon one well says;

The Gospel, or the good spel, because the Gospel brings us good, and glad
tidings of salvation, in, and by Jesus Christ.

And there were in the same country shepherds, abiding in the field, Luke 2.8,
9, 10, 11, 12.
keeping watch over their flock by night.

And lo, the Angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone
round about them, and they were sore afraid.

And the Angel said unto them, fear not, for behold, I bring you good tidings,
of great joy, which shall be to all people.

For unto you is born this day, in the city of David, a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord.

And his name was called Jesus, which was so named, of the Angel, before he was
conceived in the womb.

Behold, Mat. 1.20, 21, 22, 23.
the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him, in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son
of David, fear not, to take unto thee Mary thy wise, for that which is
conceived in her, is of the holy Ghost.

And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name Jesus, for he
shall save his people from their sins.

Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken of the
Lord, by the Prophet, saying,

Behold, Isaiah 7.14.
a Virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and shall call his
name Emmanuel, which being interpreted, is God with us.

And the word was made flesh, John 1.14.
and dwelt among us, and we beheld the glory, as of the only begotten son of
the father, full of grace and truth.

Who, 1 Pet. 1.20.
verily, was foreordained, before the foundation of the world, but was
manifest in these last times for you.

But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his son, made of a
woman, and made under the Law.

To redeem them that were under the Law, Gal. 4.4, 5.
that we might receive the adoption of sons.



Dicit Lex, hoc fac, and vive: that is, do, and perform all this which is
commanded, and live.

Now therefore, hearken, O Israel, Deuteronomy. 4.1, 2.
unto the statutes, and unto the judgments which I teach you, for to do them,
that ye may live, and go in, and possess the land which the Lord God of your
fathers gives you.

Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish
ought from it, that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your God, which I
command you.

What thing soever I command you, Deuteronomy. 12.32.
observe to do it: thou shall not add thereunto, nor diminish from it.

Ye shall do my judgments, and keep mine ordinances, Levit. 18.4, 5.
to walk therein, I am the Lord your God.

Ye shall therefore keep my statutes, Levit. 20.8.
and my judgments, which if a man do, he shall live in them: I am the Lord.

And ye shall keep my statutes, and do them, I am the Lord, which sanctify you.

Therefore shall ye keep my commandments, Levit. 22.31.
and do them: I am the Lord.

But if thou will enter into life, Mat. 19.17.
keep the commandments.

Only, Joshua 1.8, 9.
be thou courageous, that thou may observe to do according to all the law
which Moses my servant commanded thee, turn not from it, to the right hand, or
to the left, that thou may prosper whithersoever thou go.

This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall
meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe, to do according to
all that is written therein: for then thou shall make thy way prosperous, and
then thou shall have good success.

Ye shall observe to do therefore, Deuteronomy. 5.32, 33.
as the Lord your God has commanded you: Ye shall not turn aside to the right
hand or to the left.

You shall walk in all the ways, which the Lord your God has commanded you,
that ye may live, and that it may be well with you, and that ye may prolong
your days in the land which ye shall possess.

And the Lord shall make thee the head, and not the tail, Deuteronomy. 28.13, 14.
and thou shall be above only, and thou shall not be beneath: if thou hearken
unto the commandments of the Lord thy God, which I command thee this day, to
observe, and to do them.

And thou shall not go aside, from any of the words which I command thee this
day, to the right hand, or to to the left, to go after other gods, to serve
them.

For not the hearers of the law, Romans 2.13.
are just before God, but doers of the Law shall be justified.

And I gave them my statutes, Ezekiel. 20.11.
and showed them my judgments, which if a man do, he shall even live in them.

For Moses describes the righteousness of the Law: Romans 10.5.
which is of the Law, that the man which does those things, shall live by them.

For as many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse: Gal. 3.10, 12.
for it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which
are written in the book of the Law, to do them.

And the Law is not of faith, but the man that does them, shall live in them.

Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this Law to do them: Deuteronomy.
27.26.
and all the people shall say Amen.

The Gospel tyeth us only to believe aright in God, and in his son, our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ. The Gospel only looks upon the eye of our faith,
that we believe the promises of God made unto us in Christ Jesus, and that we
lay hold on him and make particular application of the benefits of his
sufferings, death and passion, Resurrecton, and ascension, unto our souls, by a
true and lively faith. And this is all we are commanded and enjoined to do and
perform by the Gospel and New Testament.

Whereupon, it was well said by one, Dicit Evangelium, Creed hoc, and vive;
that is, Only believe all this, and thou shall live.

He that believes, Mark. 16.16.
and is baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not, shall be damned.

And he said unto her, Luke 8.48.
Daughter, be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole, go in peace.

Straightway, Mark 9.24.
the father of the child cried out, and said with tears, Lord, I believe, help
mine unbelief.

And a woman having an issue of blood twelve years, Luke 8.43, 44.
which had spent all her living upon Physicians, neither could be healed of any,

Came behind him, and touched the border of his garment, and immediately her
issue of blood stenched.

For she said within her self, Matthew 9.21.
if I may but touch his garment, I shall be whole.

And Jesus said, who touched me? Luke 8.45, 46.
when all denied, Peter and they that were with him, said, The multitude throng
thee, and press thee, and say thou who touched me?

And Jesus said, Some body has touched me, for I perceive, that virtue is gone
out of me.

And when the woman saw that she was not hid, she came trembling, Luke 8.47, 48
and falling down before him, she declared unto him before all the people, for
what cause she had touched him, and how she was healed immediately.

But Jesus turned him about, Matthew. 9.22.
and when he saw her, he said, Daughter, be of good comfort, thy faith has
made thee whole: and the woman was made whole, from that hour.

Hereupon St. St. Augustine.
Augustine observes thus much upon this place.;

Cum de morbo, in morbum, laborasset, cum de morbo desperato, tunc accessit,
tetigit, and sanata est. When she labored of a great disease, and of such a
disease, that was even desperate, then, even then she came unto our Savior
Jesus Christ, she touched the hemme of his garment, and she was immediately
healed, and made whole.

And again, as touching the words of Christ, (who has touched me?)

Cum omnes te tangunt indifferenter, quomodo quaeris quis specialiter te
tangit? as one observes. When all men do alike indifferently touch thee,
wherefore do thou enquire, and ask, who harh specially touched thee.

Thus, and in this manner, tangere Christum, to touch Christ, as a Father well
observes, this was tactus fidei, the touch of her faith.

And he said unto her, Luke 8.48.
Daughter, be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole, go in peace.

St. S. Augustine.
Augustine upon this former place, shows two reasons, why Christ our Savior,
used this (before-recited) form of speech.

Prime, ut mulierem ad confessionem traheret. First, that he might hereby draw
the woman to a confession, of what she had done, and for what cause she did it.

Secundo, ut timorem mulierit probaret. Secondly, that he might hereby prove
the fear, and try the faith of the woman.

And he said to the woman, Luke 7.50.
thy faith has saved thee, go in peace.

And said unto him, Arise, go thy way, thy faith has made thee whole.

This spoken to the Samaritan, Luke 17.19.
a leper, being cleansed, and returned to give thanks.

And Jesus said unto him, Luke 18.42.
Receive thy sight, thy faith has saved thee.

But as many as received him, John 17.12.
to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on
his name.

And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness; John 3.14, 15.
even so must the son of man be lifted up.

That whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have eternal life.

God so loved the world, John 3.16, 17, 36.
that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him, should
not perish, but have eternal life.

For God sent not his son into the world, to condemn the world: but that the
world through him might be saved.

He that believes on the Son, John 11.25, 26.
has life everlasting: and he that believes not the son, shall not see life;
but the wrath of God abides on him.

Jesus said, I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believes in me,
though he were dead, yet shall he live.

And whosoever lives, and believes in me, shall never die.

To him give all the Prophets witness, Acts 10.43.
that through his name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of
sins.

Be it known unto you therefore, Acts 13.38, 39.
men, and brethren, that through this man is preached unto you, the
forgiveness of sins.

And by him, all that believe are justified, from all things, from which ye
could not be justified by the Law of Moses

And we believe, Acts 15.11.
that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved.

And they said, Acts. 16.41.
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thy house.

For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, Romans 1.16, 17, 18.
for it is the power of God, unto salvation, to every one that believes.

For therein is the righteousness of God revealed, from faith to faith: as it
is written,

The just shall live by faith.

But the just shall live by his faith. Habakkuk 2.4. Hebrews 10.38. Gal. 3.11.


Now the just shall live by faith.

But that no man is justified by the Law, in the sight of God, it is evident:
for the just shall live by faith.

But the Scripture has concluded all, under sin, Gal. 3 22, 23.
that the promise by faith of Christ Jesus, might be given to them that believe.

But before faith came, we were kept under the law, shut up unto the faith,
which should afterward be revealed.

By the deeds of the law, Romans 3.20, 21, 22.
there shall no flesh be justified in his fight, for by the Law is the
knowledge of sin.

But now, the righteousness of God, without the Law, is manifested by the Law
and the prophets.

Even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all,
and upon all that believe.

For all have sinned, Romans 3.23, 24, 25, 26.
and come short of the glory of God.

Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus.

Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood, to
declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the
forbearance of God.

That he might be just, and the justifier of him which believes in Jesus.

To him that works nor, Romans 4.5.
but beliveth on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness.

Being justified by faith, Romans 5.1, 2.
we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

By whom also we have access by faith, into this grace, wherein we stand, and
rejoice in hope of the glory of God.

There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. Rem.
8.1, 2.


Who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

For the Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the
l^w of sin and death.

For Christ is the end of the law, Romans 10.4.
for righteousness to every one that believes.

The Word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth and in thy heart, Romans 10.8, 9, 10,
11.
that is the Word of Faith, which we preach.

That if thou shall confess with thy mouth, the Lord Jesus, and shall believe
in thy heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved.

For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth
Confession is made unto salvation.

For the Scripture says, Whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed.

Whatsoever is not of Faith, Romans 14.23.
is sin.

And whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed. Romans 9.33.


It pleased God, 1 Cor. 1.21.
by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe.

For we walk by faith, 2 Cor. 5.7.
not by sight.

I live, yet not I, Gal. 2.20.
but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live,
by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.

They which be of faith are blessed, Gal. 3.9, 26.
with faithful Abraham.

For ye are all the Children of God, by faith in Christ Jesus.

In whom also, Ephesians. 1.13, 14.
after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of Promise; which
is the earnest of our Inheritance.

For by Grace are ye saved through Faith, Ephesians. 2.8.
and not of your selves; it is the gift of God.

For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14.
even so them also which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him.

Above all things take the shield of Faith.

Wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery Darts of the wicked. Ephesians.
1.16, 17.


Watch ye, 1 Cor. 16.13.
stand fast in the Faith, quit you like men, be strong.

And to whom swore he, Heb. 3.18, 19
that they should not enter into his rest, but to them that believed not?

So we see, that they could not enter in, because of unbelief.

Let us draw near with a true heart, Heb. 10.22.23
in full assurance of Faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
Conscience, and our Bodies washed with pure water.

Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith, without wavering, for he is
faithful that promised.

Now Faith is the substance of things hoped for, Heb. 11.1.
the evidence of things not seen.

But without Faith it is impossible to please him, Heb. 11.6.
for he that comes to God, must believe, that he is; and that he is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him.

The whole Chapter being special instances of Faith, Of the great Power of
faith.
in the true Servants of God, who showed the powerfullnesse of Faith in
general, and of their Faith in particular.

Looking unto Jesus, Heb. 12.2.
the Author and finisher of our Faith.

Receiving the end of your Faith, 1 Pet. 1.9, 20.
even the salvation of your Souls.

Who by him, do believe in God that raised him from the dead, and gave him
glory; that your faith and hope might be in God.

Be thou faithful unto the death, Rev. 2.10.
and I will give thee the Crown of life.

Hence is the patience of the Saints: Rev. 14.12.
here are they, that keep that Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.

Christus in veteri Testamaento est velatus, Sed in novo Testamento Christus
est nobis revelatus.

Christ in the Old Testament was hid and covered, as it were under a veil, and
was only shadowed out unto us:

But in the New Testament, Christ is there manisestly revealed unto us, and the
veil of the old Testament, by him taken away. 2 Cor. 3.13, 14, 15.


And not as Moses, which put a veil over his face, that the Children of Israel
could not steadfastly look to the end of that which is abolished.

But their minds were blinded: for until this day remains the same veil
untaken away in the reading of the old Testament: which veil is done away in
Christ.

But even to this day, when Moses is read, the veil is upon their hearts.

Nevertheless, where they shall turn to the Lord, the veil shall be taken away.

And without controversy, 1 Timothy 3.16.
great is the mystery of Godliness, God was manifest in the flesh, justified in
the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the
world, and received up into glory.

In the beginning was the Word, John 1.1, 2, 14.
and the Word was with God.

And the same was in the beginning with God. 1 John 1.1, 2, 3, 4.


And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, the
glory, as of the only begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and truth.

That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen
with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the
word of life.

For the Life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and show
unto you, that eternal life, which was with the Father, and was manifested
unto us.

That which we have seen, and heard declare we unto you, that ye also might
have fellowship with us: and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with
his Son Jesus Christ.

And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be full. Exodus 20.2.


Moses.

But in the new Testament, we have Grace and Mercy brought unto us, by Christ
Jesus.

And of all his fullness have all we received, John 1.16.
and grace for grace.

For the Law was given by Moses, John 1.17.
but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.



And the Lord God took the Man, Genesis 2.15, 16, 17.
and put him into the Garden of Eden, to dress it, and to keep it.

And the Lord God commanded the Man, saying, of every Tree of the Garden, thou
may freely eat.

But of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it: for
in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die.

And unto Adam he said, Genesis 3.17, 19.
because thou have hearkened unto the voice of thy Wife, and have eaten of the
Tree of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shall not eat of it;

Cursed is the Ground, for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it, all the
days of thy life.

In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread till thou return unto the
ground; for out of it was thou taken: for Dust thou art, and unto Dust shall
thou return.

For the wages of sin is death. Romans 6.23.


For when we were in the flesh, Romans 7.5.
the motions of sin, which were by the Law, did work in our members, to bring
forth fruit unto death.

What shall I say then? Romans 7.7, 8, 9 10, 11.
is the Law sin? God forbid, Nay I had not known sin, but by the Law, for I had
not known Lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet.

But sin taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought in me all manner of
concupiscence, for without the Law, sin was dead.

For I was alive without the Law once, but when the Commandment came, sin
revived, and I died.

And the Commandment which was ordaiued to life, I found to be unto death.

For Sin, taking occasion by the Commandment, deceived me, and by it slew me.

But by the Gospel, we have the knowledge of the free Pardon and full
forgiveness of our Sins, purchased for us, by the death and passion of Christ
our Savior, and conferred unto us, by his grace and favor, he undergoing the
full vial of Gods wrath, and judgment denounced against sin and Sinners, even
the whole curse of the Law, he endured for us, who died for our Sins, and rose
again for our justification, that we should dye unto sin, and live unto
righteousness. Romans 5.6, 8.


For then when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the
ungodly.

God commends his love toward us, in that while we were Sinners, Christ died
for us.

Who was delivered for our Offenses, Romans 4.25.
and was raised again, for our justification.

Much more then, being now justified by his blood, Romans 5.9.
we shall be saved from wrath through him.

For if when we were enemies, Romans 5.10.
we were reconciled to God, by the death of his Son, much more being
reconciled, we shall be saved by his life.

Who was delivered for our offenses, Romans 4.2.
and was raised again for our justification.

O Death where is thy sting? O Grave where is thy victory? 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57.


The sting of Death is Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law.

But thanks be unto God, which gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Who, his own self bare our sins, 1 Pet. 2.24.
in his own body, on the Tree, that we being dead to sin, should live unto
righteousness, by whose stripes ye were healed.

But he was wounded for our transgressions, Isaiah 53.5, 6.
he was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our Peace was upon him,
and with his stripes are we healed.

All we, like sheep, have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way,
and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all.

If God be for us, Romans 8.31, 32.
who can be against us.

He that spared not his own son, but delivered him up for us all: how shall he
not with him also freely give us all things?

Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? Romans 8.33, 34.
it is God that justifyeth.

Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for
us.

Christ has delivered us from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13.
being made a curse for us. For it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs
on a Tree.

For he that is hanged, Deuteronomy. 21.23.
is accursed of God.

Tenthly, Again, the Law was as our Schoolmaster, to bring us unto Christ, to
show us the way to him, and to direct us therein aright.

But the Gospel brings Christ himself unto us, who is the way, the truth, and
the life, offering of himself, to be received by us, by a true and lively faith:

Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster, to bring us unto Christ, that we might
be justified by Faith.

But after that Faith is come, Ga. 3.24, 25.
we are no longer under a Schoolmaster.

For ye are all the Children of God, by faith, John 14.1, 6.
in Christ Jesus.

Let not your hearts be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me.

Jesus says, I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man comes unto the
Father, but by me.

Upon which place St. Chrysostom thus discourses.

Quo vis ire? ego sum via. S. Chrysostom


Quid vis scire? ego sum veritas.

Ubi vis manner? ego sum vita.

Whither will thou go? I am the way.

What would thou know,? I am the Truth.

Where would thou remain? I am the Life.

And again St. Bernard, upon this place says, S. Bernard.


I am the way which leads to the Truth.

I am the Truth, that promise Life.

I am the life, which I lay down for the life of the World. And again,

Clamat errantibus, ego sum via. S. Bernard.


Clamat dubitantibus, ego sum veritas.

Clamat Lacescentibus, ego sum vita.

Christ is the way for us to walk.

Truth, us to direct; And

Life, us to refresh.

And again St. Ambrose upon this place, says.

Ambulare vis? ego sum via.

Falli non vis? ego sum veritas.

Mori non vis? ego sum vita.

Non est qua eas, Nisi per me. S. Ambro


Non est quo eas, Nisi ad me.

Surge igitur O homo, quiae

Via, vita, and veritas, veniunt at te.

Will thou walk? then I am the way.

Will thou not be deceived? then I am the Truth.

Will thou not die, then I am the life.

There is no way in which thou can walk, but by me only.

There is no way whither thou can go, but only to me.

Arise therefore O man, and that speedily, because,

The way, the life, and the truth do come unto thee.

And again St. Bernard upon these words of the Evangelist John 14.6.

Christus est via, S. Bernard. Io. 14.6.
veritas, vita.

Christ is the way, the truth, and the life.

Christus est via, sine errore.

Veritas, sine falsitate.

Vita, sine morte.

And again, S. Bernard.
Christus est Via in exemple, Ut homo.

Veritas in promisis.

Vita in remnneratione, ut Deus.

Christ is the way, without error.

The truth, without falsehood.

The life, without death.

Again Christ is The way, in his example, as he was man.

The truth in his promises.

And the life, in his free bestowing thereof on us, as he is God.

And again St. Augustine upon these words says.

Errare non vis? ego sum via. St. August.


Decipi non vis? ego sum seritas.

Mori non vis? ego sum vita.

Will thou not err? then I am the way.

Will thou not be deceived? then I am the truth.

Will thou not die? then I am the life.

From hence, St. St. Bernard.
Bernards fourfold Venite is very observable. Showing us the difference,
between the call of the Devil and his Instruments, inviting us to follow them,
and what reward they promise their followers for so doing. And the call of
Christ our Savior, and his invitation of us to follow him; and what he
promises us, for our so doing.

Dicit mundus venite, S. Bernard.
et ego Inficiam

Dicit caro, venite, et ego Illiciam.

Dicit demon, venite, et ego interficiam.

Dicit Christus, ventte, et ego reficiam.

The World says to us, come and follow me, and my reward is this, I will
infect you.

The flesh says to us, come and follow me, and my reward is this, I will
entice, and allure you to ill.

The Devil says to us, come and follow me, and my reward is this, I will
destroy you, both body and soul in hell.

But Christ says to us, come and follow me, and my reward is this, I will new
make you, and supply all your defects whatsoever.

Come unto me all ye that labor, Mat. 11.28, 29, 30.
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

Take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart: and
ye shall find rest unto your souls.

For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.

For this is the love of God, 1 Io. 5.3.
that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous.

And we know, Romans 8.28.
that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are
called according to his purpose.

For whom he did foreknow, Romans 8.29, 30.
he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he
might be the first born among many brethren. Moreover, whom he did
predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called, them he also justified,
and whom he justified, them he also glorified.

Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5, 7, 9.
who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ.

According as he has chosen us in in him, before the foundation of the World,
that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love.

Having predestined us unto the adoption of children, by Jesus Christ, to
himself, according to the good pleasure of his Will.

In whom we have redemption, through his blood, the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of his grace.

Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good
pleasure, which he has purposed in himself.

That in the dispensation of the fullness of times he might gather together in
one, all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth,
even in him.

In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, Ephesians. 1.11, 12, 13, 14.
being predestined according to the purpose of him who works all things
after the Counsel of his own will.

That we should be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted in Christ.

In whom ye also trusted after that ye heard the word of Truth, the Gospel of
your salvation. In whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with the
holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our Inheritance, until the
redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory.

According to his mercy, Tit. 3.5, 6.7.
he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost,
which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ, our Savior.

That being justiffed by his Grace, we should be made heirs, according to the
hope of eternal life.

So then, Romans 9.16.
it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that
shows mercy.

From these before-ment oned places of Scripture it does appear unto us for our
comfort, that God does hereby manifest unto us his free grace and bounty, in
the means of our salvation, and that for the better grounding of our faith
herein, he observes this course: as namely;

Noseligere, ordinare, and praedestinare ad salvationem in praescientia sua
divina, and aeterna; To choose, ordain, and predestinate us unto salvation, in
his divine and eternal foreknowledge.

Nos inspirare, renovare, and illuminare per Spiritum suum sacrosanctum; To
inspire, to renew, and to illuminate us, by the heavenly operation of his holy
Spirit in us.

Nos ligare, trahere, dirigere, stabilire, and adificare per verbum suum
divenum, and per sacramenta sua sacra; To biud, draw, direct, establish, and
build us up in the heavenly building, and knowledge of Christ, by his divine
and holy Word, and by his holy and blessed Sacraments.

St. Augustines observation is this. St. Augustine.


That God does, Inspirare per verbum, God does inspire us by his Word.

The due, and serious consideration of all this, ought not only to raise up in
us a certain knowledge of our election, but also to stir up in us, a
Christian, and a godly strife, and so to strive to make this our calling and
election sure.

Remembering without ceasing, 1 Thessalonians. 1.3, 4.
your work of faith, and labor of love, and patience, of hope in our Lord
Jesus Christ, in the sight of God, and our father.

Knowing, brethren beloved, your election of God.

Wherefore the rather, 2 Pet. 1.10.
brethren, give diligence, to make your calling and election sure, for if ye do
these things, ye shall never fall.

For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, 2 Pet. 1.11.
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Neither must we be careless in this great and weighty matter of our election
to salvation; as to say, (as some very profanely, use to say) what need I be
so mindful, and careful hereof? If I am elected, I am elected; if otherwise
it be appointed of God, all my study, and endeavor cannot effect it. Such
profane resolutions must be ever withstood by us, beaten down, and suppressed:
for we must be ever very active herein, and know thus much, as a Father well
observes, being this: namely;

Quod Deus, qui elegit te ad salvationem, elegit te etiam ad media salvationis.
That God which has chosen, and elected thee unto salvation, has also elected,
and chosen thee, to use the means to come unto salvation.

And as another Father says, St. Augustine.


Qui creavit te, sine te, non salvabit te, sine te. He which has created thee,
without thee, will not save thee, without thee. St. Augustine.

Work out your own salvation, Philip. 2.12, 13.
with fear and trembling.

For it is God which works in you, both to will, and to do, of his good
pleasure.

For God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness. 1 Thessalonians. 4.7.


Wherefore, 1 Pet. 1.13, 14, 15, 16.
gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to the end, for the grace
that is to be brought unto you, at the revelation of Jesus Christ.

As obedient children, not fashioning your selves according to the former
lusts, in your ignorance.

But as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy, in all manner of
conversation: Because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy.

For I am the Lord your God: Levit. 11.44.
ye shall therefore sanctify your selves, and ye shall be holy, for I am holy.

And the Lord spoke unto Moses, Levit. 19.1, 2.
saying.

Speak unto all the congregation of the children of Israel, and say unto them;
Ye shall be holy, for I the Lord your God am holy.

But ye are a chosen generation, 1 Pet. 2.9.
a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should show
forth the praises of him who has called you out of darkness, into his
mavelous light.

Which in time past were not a people, 1 Pet. 2.10.
but are now the people of God: which had not obtained mercy, but now have
obtained mercy.

As touching the election, Romans 11.28, 29.
they are beloved for the fathers sake.

For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance.

Who has saved us, 2 Timothy 1.9, 10.
and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according
to his own purpose, and grace which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the
world began.

But now is made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who
has abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light, through the
Gospel.

The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, 2 Timothy 2.18.
The Lord knows them that are his; and let every one that names the name of
Christ depart from iniquity.

But this one thing I do, Philip. 3.13, 14, 15.
forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things
which are before:

I press toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God, in Christ
Jesus.

Let us therefore as many as be perfect, be thus minded.

Put on therefore, Collos. 3.12, 13, 14, 15.
(as the elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of mercy, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering.

Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another.

And above all things, put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness.

And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are called
in one body, and be ye thankful.

God has chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise: 1 Cor.
1.27, 29, 30, 31.
and God has chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the things which
are mighty.

That no flesh should glory in his presence.

But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.

That according as it is written, He that glories, let him glory in the Lord.

Thus says the Lord, Jer. 9.23, 24.
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in
his might, nor let the rich man glory in his riches;

But let him that glories, glory in this, that he understands, and knows
me, that I am the Lord, which exercise loving kindness, judgment and
righteousness in the earth: for in these things I delight, says the Lord.

But some one may happily say, How shall I come to have a knowledge of this my
election unto salvation?

To such a one it may be thus answered, Notes of our Election.


Observe with thy self, whether thou feel and find in thy self the
effectual notes, and signs of thy election unto salvation, working in thee,
or not: as namely;





Peter makes mention of.

According as his divine power has given unto us all things that pertain unto
life, and godlineffe, 2 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
through the knowledge of him that has called us to glory, and virtue.

Whereby are given unto us exceeding great, and precious promises, that by
these, you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world, through lust.

And besides this giving all diligence, add to your faith, virtue, and to
virtue, knowledge.

And to knowledge, temperance, and to temperance, patience, and to patience,
godliness.

And to godliness, brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness, charity.

For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither
be barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

But he that lacks these things, is blind, and cannot see far off, and has
forgotten, that he was purged from his old sins.

If we feel these heavenly and divine virtues, and graces thus working in us,
we may then from hence, draw unto our selves, for our souls comfort, a full
assurance of our election by God, (in, and through Christ Jesus, our blessed
Lord and Savior) unto salvation, and that our names are recorded, written, and
registered in heaven, in the book of life, wherein we are only to rejoice.

And the seventy returned again, Luke 10.17, 18, 19, 20.
with joy, saying, Even the devils are subject unto us, through thy name.

And he said unto them,

Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents, and scorpions, and over
all the powers of the enemy, and nothing shall by any means hurt you.

Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you,
but rather rejoice in this, because your names are written in heaven.

Be it known unto you therefore, Acts 13.38, 39.
men and brethren, that through this man, is preached unto you forgiveness of
sin.

And by him, all that be here, are justified from all things, from which ye
could not be justified by the law of Moses.

CHAP. IIII. Of Prayer, and the force thereof, and how necessary and needful a
duty the same is.
Oration est clavis diei; that is, Prayer is the key that opens the day unto us,
to put us in mind of Gods protecting of us the night past, and of our
thankfulness to be rendered unto him for the same, with commending of our souls
and bodies to his protection for the day present.

Oration est sera noctis; Prayer ought to shut up the day; it is the key that
lets in the night unto us, with our praise to God for our days preservation,
with a recommendation of our souls and bodies unto his powerful protection for
the night ensueing.

Hereupon it is said by one, With morning prayer the day begin,
With evening prayer the night shut in.
Without this prayer sit not to eat,
Without Gods praise rise not from meat.


Oration est vinculum invincibile, ut S. Bernard. S. Bernard.
Prayer is a bond invincible, availing very much if it be fervent.

The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much. James 5.16,
17, 18.


Elias was a man subject to like passions, as we are, and he prayed earnestly
that it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth, by the space of three
years, and six months.

And he prayed again, 1 Kin. 17.17.
and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit.

All things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, Matt. 21.22.
ye shall receive.

Oration est vis Deo grata, ut S. Chrysostom. Prayer is such a force, S.
Chrysostom.
or earnest vehemence, as that the same is very acceptable, and well-pleasing
unto God.

Oration est clavis Scripturae, Origin. Origin.
Prayer is the key that opens the Scripture unto us, and enlightens our
understandings therein.

Hereupon, in reading of the Scriptures, this rule directory is prescribed unto
us; Read not this Book in any case,
But with a single eye;
Read not, but first desire Gods grace,
To understand thereby.


Oration est Deo sacrificium, Augustine. St. Augustine.
Prayer is a sacrifice wellpleasing unto God.

By him therefore, Hebrews 13.15.
let us offer the sactifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of
our lips, giving thanks to his name.

Oration est Diabolo flagellum, S. Augustine.
St. Augustine. Prayer is a whip, or scourge unto the Devil, to drive him away
from us.

And when he was come into the house, Mark 9.28, 29.
his disciples asked him privately, Why could not we cast him out?

And he said unto them, This kind can come forth by nothing, but by prayer, and
fasting.

Oration est orauti subsidium, St. Augustine.
S. Augustine. Prayer is great help and succor unto him which does pray, in
time of misery and affliction, and at all times whatsoever.

I sought the Lord, Psalm. 34.4, 6.
and he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears.

This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him, out of all his
troubles.

I cried unto the Lord, Psalm. 3.4.
with my voice, and he heard me out of his holy hill.

I will call upon the Lord, Psalm. 18.3, 6.
who is worthy to be praised: so shall I be saved from mine enemies.

In my distress, I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God, he heard my
voice out of his temple, and my cry came before him, even into his ears.

Call upon me in the time of trouble, I will deliver thee, Psalm. 50.15.
and thou shall glorify me.

The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, Psalm. 145.18, 19.
to all that call upon him in truth.

He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him, he also will hear their cry,
and will save them.

In my distress, Psalm. 120.1.
I cried unto the Lord, and he heard me.

O thou that hear prayer, Psalm. 65.2.
unto thee shall all flesh come.

Oration est armatura inexpugnabilis; Prayer is an armor of proof, not to be
withstood, invincible, as one observes.

It is a principal piece of our spiritual armor.

Praying always, with all prayer, Ephesians. 6.18.
and supplications, in the spirit, and watching thereunto, with all
perseverance, and supplication for all Saints.

Orationes sunt tormenta Christianorum, ut Pater. Prayers and supplications are
the gunns of Christians, as it were, to shoot up their prayers unto heaven.

Give me those groans, St. Chrysostom.
and sighs, quae non sunt ostentationis, sed compunctiouis, which proceed not
from vain ostentation, and boasting, but from the compunction, or pricking of
the conscience. St. Chrysostom.

As touching Prayer, Observations touching prayer.
and the use thereof, these observations do arise; as namely;



The necessity of Prayer in these regards following.



Be sober, 1 Pet. 5.8, 9.
be vigilant, because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walks
about, seeking whom he may devour.

Whom resist, steadfast in the faith.

Resist the devil, James 4.7, 8.
and he will flee from you.

Draw nigh unto God, and he will draw nigh to you.







My son, if sinners entice thee, Prove. 1.10, 11, 14, 15, 16.
consent thou not.

If they say, come with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily, for
the innocent, without cause.

Cast in thy lot among us, let us all have one purse.

My son, walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from their path.

For their feet run to evil, and make have to shed blood.



I will therefore, 1 Timothy 2.8.
that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting.



Let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, Zechar. 8.21.
and to seek the Lord of hosts.

O Lord God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thee.

Let my prayer come before thee: Psalm. 88.1, 2.
incline thine ear unto my cry.

Unto thee have I cried, Psalm. 88.13.
O Lord, and in the morning shall my prayer prevent thee.

Evening, Psalm 55.17.
and morning, and at noon will I pray.

And it came to pass, Luke 6.12.
in those days, that he went out into a mountain to pray, and be continued all
night in prayer to God.

And he spoke a parable unto them, Luke 18.1.
to this end, that men ought always to pray, and not to faint.

Every day will I bless thee, Psalm 145.2.
and I will praise thy name for ever and ever.

Pray without ceasing. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.


But the end of all things is at hand, 1 Pet. 4.7.
be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer.

Night and day, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10.
praying exceedingly.

Continuing instant in prayer. Romans 12.12.




Confess your faults one to another, James 5.16.
and pray one for another, that ye may be healed.

Love your enemies, Luke 6.27, 28.
do good to them that hate you.

Bless them that curse you, and pray for them that despitefully use you.

Then said Jesus, Luke 23, 34.
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.

And they stoned Stephen, Acts 7.59, 60.
calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord lay not this sin to
their charge.

5ly. We must pray to God alone.

Is any among you afflicted? Ja. 5.13.
let him pray; Is any merry? let him sing Psalms.

Now when Daniel knew, Dan. 6.10.
that the writing was signed, he went into his House; and his windows being
open in his Chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled down upon his knees three
times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks before his God, as he did before time.

As for me, I will call upon God, Psalm. 55.16.
and the Lord shall save me.

There was a certain man in Caesarea called Cornelius, a devout man, Acts 10.1,
2.
which gave much Alms to the people, and prayed to God always.

And I set my face unto the Lord God to seek by Prayer and Supplications, Dan.
9: 3, 4.
with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes.

And I prayed unto the Lord my God, Daniels Prayer.
and made my Confession, and said, O Lord, the great, dreadful God, keeping
the Covenant, and mercy to them that love him, and to them that keep his
Commandments.

Be careful for nothing, Philip. 4.6.
but in every thing, by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your
request be made known unto God.

I will call on the Lord who is worthy to be praised; 2 Samuel 22.4, 7.
so shall I be saved from mine enemies.

In my distress I called unto the Lord, David's Prayer.
and cried to my God, and he did hear my voice, out of his Temple, and my cry
did enter into his ears.

But when thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, Mat. 6.6.
and when thou have shut thy Door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and
thy Father which sees in secret shall reward thee openly.

S. Augustine.


Sonus mentis, est intellectus, ut Augustine.

The sound of the mind, is understanding, S. Augustine.
and no true prayer can there be, without understanding.

Again, public or Church prayers, Public and Church Prayers:
are requisite and needful, to show, that that there is, and ought to be
unanimity and conformity in the Primitive Church.

And here, we are not only to pray, for our selves, but for all others also of
what estate or Conditiou soever they be of.

I exhort therefore, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3.
that first of all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks
be made for all Men.

For Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet, and
peaceable life in all honesty, and godliness.

For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior.

And this was the use of the ancient Christians, Tertullian.
who as Tertulllian well observes, did pray for all their Emperors that they
might have and quietly enjoy,

Vitam prolixam, imperium securum, The Prayer of the ancient Christians for
their Emperors.
domum tutam, exercitus fortes, senatum fidelem, populum probum, orbem quietum,
et quaecunque hominis, et Caesaris, vota sunt.

That they might have, and quietly enjoy, --

A happy Life, a secure Empire, a safe House, and habitation, strong and
forcible Armies, a faithful Senate, honest and true-hearted People, a quiet
World, and whatsoever else either Prince, or People, can any ways wish or
desire.

That offerings be made, to the most high God, Esdras 6.3.
for the King, and for his Children, and that they may pray for their lives.

Prayer, Prayer compared to Jacobs Ladder.
as one observes, is like unto Jacobs Ladder, which appeared to him in a
Dream, reaching up to Heaven, and which he seemed to see and behold, and behold
the Angels of God ascending and descending down by it.

And he dreamed, Genesis 28.12.
and behold a Ladder set upon the Earth, and the top of it reached to Heaven,
and behold the Angels of God ascending and descending on it.

Even so by Prayer, we fly a high pitch, we soar aloft, we do thereby as it
were mount up, fly, and ascend to Heaven.

And I said, Ps. 35.6.
O that I had wings like a Dove! for then would I fly away and be at rest.

Meditatio et Oration, S. Bernard.
sunt ale Columbae, as St. Bernard observes.

Meditation, and prayer are the Wings of the Dove, and by these Wings of the
Dove, is meant Meditation and Prayer, as St. Bernard well observes.

St. Angustines Prayer to God was, S. Augustines Prayer.
That of all judgments and plagues, he would ever free him from a stony-heart,
or from a benumbed or seared Conscience.

St. Bernard Prayer was this. S. Bernards Prayer.


Bone Jesu! esto mihi Jesus.

O sweet Jesus! be thou unto me, and to my Soul, a Jesus, a Savior.

Oration ascendit, S. August.
Gratia descendit.

Our Prayers do ascend up to Heaven; and grace and Mercy does descend down upon
us, as St. Augustine well observes.

But there are some Prayers which do not ascend up to Heaven, as St. Bernard
observes; as namely,

Oration timida, S. Bernard.
A fearful Prayer.

2. Oration tepida, A dull and heavy Prayer.

Oration temeraria, A rash and hasty Prayer.

These 3 kinds of Prayers as St. Bernard observes, do never ascend up to
Heaven.

Qui orat, S. Chrysostom.
et peccat, non orat ad Deum, sed deludit, as St. Chrysostom observes.

He which does pray unto God, and then presently offends, again does not pray
unto God as he ought to do, but does even mock and delude him.

Watch and pray, Mat. 26.41.
that ye enter not into temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh
is weak.

Hereupon it is written of an Emperor that had his Page, Watch and pray.
that every morning came unto him, using to him these few words; namely,

Vigilasti Emperator, vigila.

O Emperor, have thou been watchful and careful of thy self; if so, it is
well, Mat. 24.42.
be watchful still.

Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour your Lord does come.

Watch therefore, Mat, 25.13.
for ye know neither the day, nor the hour, wherein the son of man comes.

Take ye heed, watch and pray, Mark 13.33, 35, 37.
for ye know not when the time is.

Watch ye therefore, for ye know not when the Master of the House comes, at
even, or at midnight, or at the Cock-crowing, or in the morning;

Lest coming suddenly, he find you sleeping.

And what I say unto you, I say unto all, watch.

Watch and pray, ut dignaremini, that ye may be found so doing, and accounted
worchy; whereupon says St. Bernard,

Dignitas uostra domine et dignitio tua. S. Bernard.


O Lord, all our worth, and worthiness, is only thine, and from thee, and thy
grace to us proceeding, and which we have received from thee alone, nothing of
or from our selves.

For of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace. Io. 1.16.


For it pleased the Father, Collos. 1.19.
that in him should all fullness dwell.

It is well observed by one,

That the constant, daily, The benefit of constant and frehuent Prayer.
and frequent use of Prayer, both private and public, is of extraordinary
great benefit and comfort unto the parties praying, if we do take into our
serio consideration, these ensuing particulars. As namely,









The Lord is my strength and my shield, Ps. 28.7.
my heart trusted in him, and I am helped, therefore my heart greatly
rejoices, and with my Song will I praise him.

The Lord also will be a refuge for the oppressed, Psalm 9.9.
a refuge in time of trouble.

Blessed be God that has not turned away my Prayer, Ps. 66.20.
nor his mercy from me.

But as for me my Prayer is unto thee O Lord in an acceptable time: Ps. 69.13,
16, 17.
O God in the multitude of thy mercy hear me, in the truth of thy salvation.

Hear me O Lord, for thy loving kindness is good: turn unto me according to the
multitude of thy tender mercies.

And hide not thy face from thy Servant, for I am in trouble, hear me speedily.

One observes this of Prayer.

Aeque pauperibus prodest, locupletibus aeque.

Aeque neglectum, pueris senibusque nocebit.

It gains good to poor and rich,
If use thereof be free.
And hurts youth as well as age,
Neglected if it be.


Even them will I bring to my holy Mountain, Isaiah 56.7.
and make them joyful in my House of Prayer; their burnt offerings and their
sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine Altar; for mine House shall be called an
House of Prayer for all People.

And Jesus said unto them, Mat. 21.13.
It is written, My House shall be called the House of Prayer, but ye have made
it a Den of Thieves.

And he taught, saying unto them, Mar. 11.17
It is written, My House shall be called of all Nations, the House of Prayer.

Saying to them, Luke 11, 46.
it is written, My House is the House of Prayer.



Ask, and ye shall receive.

That is, as one observes, Ask by Prayer, and ye shall receive.

And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in Prayer, Mat. 21.22.
believing, ye shall receive.

Therefore I say unto you, Mark 11.24.
What things soever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and
ye shall have them.

Thus we may behold, The powerfulness of Prayer.
and see the powerful effect of Prayer, the same prevailing, even with God
himself.

By Prayer Daniel was preserved in the Lions Den.

Then said Daniel unto the King, Den. 6.21, 22.
O King live for ever.

My God has sent his Angel, and has shut the Lions mouths, that they have not
hurt me: forasmuch as before him Innocence was found in me; and also before
Thee O King, I have done no hurt.

By Prayer Jonah was delivered in the Whales belly.

Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord his God, out of the Fishes belly. Jonah 2.1,
2, 7, 9, 10.


And said, I cried by reason of mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me;
out of the Belly of Hell cried I, and thou heardest my voice; Jonahs Prayer.
when my Soul fainted within me, I remembered the Lord, and my Prayer came unto
thee, into thy holy Temple.

I will sacrifise unto thee with the voice of Thanksgiving, I will pay that
that I have vowed; Salvation is of the Lord.

And the Lord spoke unto the Fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry Land.

By Prayer, Peter in the Prison and bound with Chains, was by an Angel
delivered from the cruel hands of King Herod.

Peter therefore was kept in Prison, Acts 12.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
but prayer was made without ceasing, of the Church unto God for him.

And when Herod would have brought him forth, the same night Peter was sleeping
between two Soldiers, bound with 2 chains, and the keeper before the door kept
the Prison.

And behold the Angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in the
prison: and he smote Peter on the side, and raised him up, saying unto him,
Arise up quickly; and his Chains fell from his hands.

And the Angel said to him, Gird up thy self, and bind on thy sandals: and so
he did, and he says unto him, Cast thy garment about thee, and follow me.

And he went out and followed him.

By Prayer the 3 Children, Dan. 3.16, 17, 18, 19, 21, 24.
Shadrach, Meshack, and Abednego, being cast bound into the midst of the fiery
furnace, were by God preserved, and delivered from the flames of fire.

Shadrach, Meshack and Abednego answered, and said to the King, O
Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter.

If it be so, Be it known unto thee O King, that we will not serve thy Gods,
nor worship the golden Image thou have set up.

Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury, therefore he spoke and commanded that
they should heat the furnace one 7 times more that it was wont to be heat.

Then these men were bound in their coats, their hosen, and their hats, and
their other garments, and were cast into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.

Then the King was astonished, and rose up in have, and spoke, and said unto his
Counselors, Did not we cast 3 men bound into the midst of the fire? they
answered and said to him, True O King.

He answered and said, Lo I see 4 men loose, walking in the midst of the fire,
and they have no hurt, and the form of the 4th. is like the Son of God.

And the Princes, governors and captains, and the Kings Counselors being
gathered together, saw these men, upon whom the fire had no power, nor was an
hair of their head singed, neither were their coats changed, nor the smell of
fire had passed on them.

When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee; Isa. 43 2, 3, and
11. I even I am the Lord, and besides me there is no Savior.
and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walk
through the fire thou shall not be burnt; neither shall the flame kindle upon
thee.

For I am the Lord thy God, the holy one of Israel thy Savior.

All these were delivered by the powerfulness of prayer, prevailing with God.

By Prayer Jacob, the night before he did meet with his brother Esau, wrestled
with the Angel, and by his earnestness and importunity of his prayer, he at the
last thereby so far prevailed with him, as that he obtained a blessing from him,
and his Brother Esau was appeased toward him, which made him greatly to
rejoice.

And Jacob was left alone, Genesis 32.24 to 28.
and there wrestled a man with him, until the breaking of the day: and he said
let me go, for the day breaks: and he said, I will not let thee go, except
thou bless me.

And he said unto him, What is thy name? and he said, Jacob.

And he said, Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel, for as a
Prince have thou power with God, and with man, and have prevailed.

And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, Genesis 33.4, 10.
and fell on his neck and kissed him; and they wept.

And Jacob said, I have seen thy face, as though I had seen the face of God;
and thou wast pleased with me.

He took his Brother by the heel in the womb, Hos. 12.3, 4, 5.
and by his strength he had power with God.

Yea he had power over the Angel, and prevailed, he wept and made supplication
unto him: he found him in. Bethel and there he spoke with us.

Even the Lord God of Hosts, the Lord is his memorial.

By Prayer Moses, for the children of Israel, prevailed against Amalek, and
overehrew him.

And Moses said unto Joshua, Exodus 17.9, 10, 11.
choose us out men, and go out and fight with Amalek to morrow, I will stand on
the top of the hill with the rod of God in mine hand.

So Joshua did as Moses had said unto him, and fought with Aamalek, and Moses,
Aaron, and Hur, went up to the top of the Hill.

And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand, that Israel prevailed: and
when he let it down, Amalek prevailed.

Joshua obtained from the Lord, that the Sun and Moon should stand still in the
firmament, Josh. 10.8, 10, 12, 13, 14.
whiles that he avenged himself on his enemies the Amorites.

And the Lord said unto Joshua, Fear them not, for I have delivered them into
thine hand. And the Lord discomfited them before Israel.

Then Joshua spoke to the Lord, in the day when the Lord delivered up the
Amorites before the children of Israel, and he said in the sight of Israel, Sun
stand still upon Gibeon, and thou Moon in the Valley of Aialon.

And the sun stood still, and the Moon stayed until the People had avenged
themselves. So the sun stood still in the midst of Heaven, and hasted not to go
down about a whole day.

And there was no day like that before it or after it, that the Lord hearkened
unto the voice of a man, for the Lord fought for Israel.

By Prayer Elijah brought down fire from Heaven, which consumed the
burnt-Sacrifice to the convincing of Baals Prophets.

Hear me O Lord, Kings 18.17.38, 39. Elijahs Prayer.
hear me, that this people may know, that thou art the Lord God, and that thou
have turned their heart back again.

Then the fire of the Lord fell and consumed the burnt sacrifice, and the wood,
and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was in the trench.

And when all the people saw it, they fell on their faces, and they said, The
Lord he is God, the Lord he is God.

By Prayer Elijah brought down fire twice from Heaven, and consumed the 2
Captains with their several fifties, coming unto him with a message from
Ahaziah King of Samaria.

Then the King sent unto him a Captain of fifty, 2 Kings 1.9, 11, 12.
with his fifty, and he went up to him, (and behold he sat upon the top of an
hill) and he spoke unto him, Thou man of God, the King has said, come down?

And Elijah answered, and said to the captain of fifty, If I be a man of God,
then let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee, and thy fifty; and there
came down fire from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty.

Again, also he sent unto him another captain of fifty, with his fifty, and he
answered, and said unto him, O man of God, thus has the king said, come down
quickly.

And Elijah answered, and said unto them, If I be a man of God, let fire come
down from heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty; and the fire of God came down
from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty.

By prayer, 1 Kin. 17.21, 22.
Elijah raised the widows son from death to life again.

And he cried unto the Lord, and said, I pray thee, let this child's soul come
into him again.

And the Lord heard the voice of Elijah, and the soul of the child came into
him again, and he revived.

By prayer Elisha caused the waters of Jordan to be divided, smiting of them
with the mantle which fell from Elijah.

He took up also the mantle of Elijah, 2 Kin. 2.14.
that fell from him, and smote the waters, and said, Where is the Lord God of
Elijah? and when he also had smitten the waters, they parted hither and
thither, and Elisha went over.

By prayer Elisha raised the Shunamites son, from death to life again.

And when Elisha was come into the house, 2 Kin. 4.32, 33, 35, 36.
behold, the child was dead, and laid upon his bed.

He went in therefore, and shut the door upon them twain, and prayed unto the
Lord.

And the child neesed seven times, and the child opened his eyes.

And when she was come in unto him, he said, Take up thy son.

By prayer Sampson pulled the house down, Judge. 16.30.
and killed more at his death, than in his life.

By prayer Ahijah obtained victory against Jeroboam king of Israel, 2 Chronicles.
13. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
with half the number, because they did rely on God.

By prayer the great army of Sennacherib king of Assyria, 2 Chronicles. 32.2, 3, 6,
7, 8, 19, 20, 21.
coming against Hezekiah king of Judah, was overthrown by the Angel of the Lord
from heaven.

And they spoke against the God of Jerusalem.

For this cause, Hezekiah the king, 2 Kin. 19.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22,
23, 34, 35, 37. Isaiah 39.37, the same.
and the prophet Isaiah, the son of Amos, prayed, and cried to heaven.

And the Lord sent an Angel, which cut off all the mighty men of valor, and
the leaders, and the captains in the camp of the king of Assyria. So he
returned with shame to his own land. And when he was come into the house of his
god, they that came out of his own bowels, slew him there with the sword.

And Hezekiah prayed before the Lord, and said, O Lord God of Israel, Hezekiahs
prayer. 2 Kin. 19.15, 16, 19, 20, 35.
which dwell between the Cherubims, thou art the God, even thou alone, of
all the kingdoms of the earth; thou have made heaven and earth.

Lord, bow down thine ear, and hear, Isaiah 36.37. the same.
open Lord, thine eyes, and see: and hear the words of Sennacherib, which has
sent him to reproach the living God.

Now therefore, O Lord, our God, I beseech thee, save us out of his hand, that
all the kingdoms of the earth may know, that thou art the Lord God, even thou
only.

Then Isaiah the son of Amos sent to Hezekiah, saying, Thus says the Lord God
of Israel, that which thou have prayed to me against Sennacherib king of
Assyria, I have heard.

And it came to pass that night, that the Angel of the Lord went out, and
smote in the camp of the Assyrians, an hundred fourscore and five thousand, and
when they arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses.

By prayer Asa king of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 14.9, 10, 11, 12.
obtained victory against Zerah the Ethiopian, who came against him, with an
host of a thousand thousand, and three hundred chariots.

And Asa cried unto the Lord his God: The prayer of king Asa.
And said, Lord, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with
them that have no power; Help us, O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, and in
thy name we go against this multitude: O Lord, thou art God, let not man
prevail against thee. So the Lord smote the Ethiopians before Asa, and before
Judah, and the Ethiopians fled.

By prayer Iudeth prevailed against the Assyrians, Judith 9.7, 8, 71.
who trusted in their strength, Judiths prayer.
force, and power. Her prayer to God to throw down their strength.

For thy power stands not in multitude, nor thy might, in strong men: for
thou art the God of the afflicted, an helper of the oppressed, an upholder of
the weak, a protector of the forlorn, a savior of them that are without help.

By prayer Judas Maccabeus obtained victory from God, 2 Maccabees 8.20, 36.
against Nicanor; and with eight thousand men obtained victory against an
hundred and twenty thousand in Babylon, because of the help they had from
heaven, and because the Jews had God to fight for them, and therefore they
could not be hurt.

By prayer Lazarus being dead, and having been four days in the grave, was
raised up again from death to life.

And Jefus lift up his eyes, and said, John 11.4, 42, 43, 44.
Father, I thank thee, that thou have heard me.

And I know that thou hear me always; but because of the people which stand
by, I said it, that they may believe that thou have sent me.

And when he had thus spoken, (...)
he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth.

And he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot, with his grave-clothes;
and his face was bound with a napkin:

Jesus says unto them, Loose him, and let him go.

By prayer, the Holy Ghost fell down upon those which believed.

And when they had prayed, Acts 4.31.
the place was shaken, where they were assembled together, and they were all
filled with the Holy Ghost, and they spoke the word of God with boldness.

By prayer, Tabitha was raised by Peter, from death, to life again.

But Peter put them all forth, Acts 9.40, 41.
and kneeled down, and prayed, and turning him to the body, said, Tabitha,
arise, and she opened her eyes: and when she saw Peter, she sat up.

And he gave her his hand, and lift her up: and when he had called the saints
and widows, he presented her alive.

By prayer, St. Paul healed the father of Publius, and others, of their
diseases.

And it came to pass, Acts 28.8, 9.
that the father of Publius lay sick of a fever, and of a bloody flux, to whom
Paul entered, and prayed, and laid his hands on him, and healed him.

So when this was done, others also which had diseases in the Island, came and
were healed.

Prayer, as a Father observes, is as a strong city of refuge for us, thereby
to fly unto God in our greatest need.

Some, in prayer, as one observes, never regard what they ask, nor how:
whereupon a Father says,

If in prayer we ask of God we care not what, we shall then be heard of him we
know not when, and have one thing granted us for another; Matthew. 20.20, 21, 22,
23. James 4.3.
as the mother of Zebedeus children had.

Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon
your lusts.

We are often, nay continually in great danger, and therefore we must often,
nay continually pray unto God for preservation, and deliverance from all
dangers.

And as S. S. Bernards observation, as touching the use of prayer.
Bernard observes thus much of often prayer, so we must duly, and carefully
follow the same rule by him prescribed: as namely;

When we go out of our house, let prayer always arm us, accompany us, and ever
attend upon us, for Gods blessing, and preservation of us.

And when we return home again, let prayer ever meet us at the doors, to return
thanks to God for our preservation.

And so again at night, St. Bernards Rules to be observed in prayer.
for our days safety.

And in the morning the like, for our nights rest.

And in all things, we are to show, and to express our thankfulness to God,
for all his good blessings on us, from time to time bestowed: and all this we
are to express, by our true, and hearty prayer; as St. Bernard observes.

And in our prayers to God, we must ever observe this rule: as namely;









Surely, Prove. 3.34.
he scorneth the scorners, but he gives grace to the lowly.

When men are cast down, Job. 22.29.
then thou shall say there is lifting up, and he shall save the humble person.

Yea, 1 Pet. 5.5.
all of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility, for God
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.



Hereupon a Father says,

The prayer of the spirit and soul, is the spirit, the soul, and the life of
prayer.

So Hannah prayed in her heart, 1 Samuel 1.13.
only her lips moved, but her voice was not heard.

The prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up.

Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, James 5.15, 16.
that ye may be healed: the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man
avails much.



And it came to pass, Luke 11.1, 20. Matthew. 6.5, 7, 8, 9.
that as be was praying in a certain place, when he ceased, one of his
disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John also taught his
disciples.

And he said unto them, When ye pray, say, Our Father, which art in heaven, etc.

CHAP. V. As touching Afflictions, how necessary they are for us here in this l
fe: and what good use we are to make of them to our selves.
BEfore I was afflicted, Psalm. 119.67, 71.
I went astray: but now have I kept thy word.

It is good for me, that I have been afflicted: that I might learn thy statutes.

Is any among you afflicted? James 5.13
let him pray: is any merry? let him sing psalms.

It is good for a man, Lament. 3.2.
that he bear the yoke in his youth.

Come unto me, all ye that labor, Matt. 11.28, 29, 30.
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek, and lowly in heart: and
ye shall find rest unto your souls.

For my yoke is easy, and my burden light.

And if they be bound in fetters, and be holden in cords of affliction. Job
36.8.


Unless thy Law had been my delight, Psalm. 119.92.
I should then have perished in mine affliction.

Thou, Judith 9.11.
O God, art a God of the afflicted, and a helper of the oppressed.

The true use of afflictions, and wherefore God lays afflictions on us here
in this world.

God does send his afflictions, and does lay the same here upon us, for these
ensuing causes; All of them tending to our good: as namely;







In my distress, Psalm. 120.1.
I cried unto the Lord, and he heard me.

For thou, O God, have proved us, thou have tried us, as silver is tried.

Thou broughtest us into the net, Psalm. 66.10, 11.
thou layedst affliction upon our loins.

Many are the afflictions of the righteous, Psalm. 34.19.
but the Lord delivers him out of them all.

The Lord does scourge them that come near unto him, Judith 8.27.
to admonish them.

Affliction comes not forth of the dust, Job 5.6.
neither does trouble spring out of the ground.

But the more they afflicted them, Exodus 1.12.
the more they multiplied, and grew.

And the children of Israel sighed by reason of the bondage, Exodus 2.23, 24, 25.
and they cried, and their cry came up unto God, by reason of the bondage.

And God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant.

And God looked upon the children of Israel, and had respect to them.

O Lord, my strength, Jer. 16.19.
and my fortress, and my refuge in the day of affliction.



Hereupon St. Augustine well says, St. Augustine.


Qui te flagitat in hac vita, ad emendum, non ad damnandum hoc facit. That God
which does here afflict and chastise thee, he does this only, and principally
for thy amendment, and not for thy ruin and destruction.

And again, St. Augustine.

Hic, St. Augustine.
ut in aeternum parcas. Lord, lay thou here on me what torments thou shall see
good for me in thy justice and mercy, so as thou reserve for me eternity after
this life ended. Lay here what afflictions thou will on me.

We must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God. Acts 14.22.


Afflictions, (as one observes) are inseparable, but not infallible notes of
salvation, for none shall be saved but he must suffer afflictions: but all that
are afflicted, shall not be saved.

Causa facit beatos, non martyrium, as one observes.

It is the cause which makes men happy, not martyrdom.

The depth of affliction is the chiefest stirrer up of devotion. Witness the
children of Israel in Egypt, David in all his troubles, Daniel in the lions
denn, Jonah in the whales belly, Manasseh in his afflictions, and the three
Children in the fiery furnace.

Hereupon Hugo well says, Hugo.


Gravamen temporale, est medicamen spirituale. A temporal affliction is a
spiritual medicine.

And as another well observes,

Nemo potest a deliciis transire ad delicias. None can pass from those vain
and transitory pleasures, and delights of this world, unto the permanent, and
everlasting delights in the kingdom of heaven.

For we must not look to enjoy here a heaven upon earth, Romans 8.28.
and likewise to enjoy heaven hereafter.

For we know, that all things work together for good, to them that love God, to
them who are called according to his purpose.

Bonis bona, malis mala. Good things to good men, and ill things to ill men; as
one observes.

Tametsi non bonum, tamen in bonum, ut St. Augustine. Nay, St. Augustine.
though the things be not good, yet they work for the good of the godly.

And as St. Bernard observes,

Afflictions do make a man to be more humble, wary, S. Bernard.
and cautious in his ways.

Afflictions and crosses, though harmfull to others, yet prove helpful to the
godly.

Yet even their sins, though not not good, yet they turn to their good, as a
means to make them more lowly, more wary.

Yea, death it self, though in it self it be evil, and the punishment of sin;
yet it is a means to free them, both from sin, and from all the fruits and
effects of it, and to restore them to that life again, which by sin once they
lost.

But now, Romans 6.22, 23.
being made free from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto
holiness, and the end everlasting life.

For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

For thou will save the afflicted people, Psalm. 18.27.
but wilt bring down high looks.

For he has not despised, Psalm. 22.24.
nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted, neither has he hid his face
from him, but when he cried unto him, he heard him.

Afflictions do make us fit vessels for Gods choice.

I have chosen thee, Isaiah 48.10.
in the furnace of affliction.

Whatsoever is brought upon thee, Ecclus 2.4, 5, 6
take cheerfully, and be patient when thou art changed to a low estate.

For gold is tried in the fire, and acceptable men in the surnace of adversity.

Believe in him, and he will help thee, order thy way aright, and trust in him.

As gold in the furnace has he tried them, Wisd. 3.6. and 4.5.
and received them as a burnt-offering.

For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of
immortality.

And having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly rewarded; for God
proved them, and found them worthy for himself.

For we know, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2.
that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved; We have a
building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.

For in this we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon, with our house
which is from heaven.

With my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea, Isaiah 26.9.
with my spirit within me, will I seek thee early in the morning, for when thy
Judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness.

Meaning, Exposition.
That by afflictions, men will learn to fear God: as the exposition is.

Afflictions are chastisements for our sins.

Jesus said unto him, John 5.14.
Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.
Thereby showing, that the afflictions which we endure, The marginall note and
observation. Nehem. 9.38.
are chastisements for our sins: as the marginall note and observation is.

Now because of all this, we make a sure covenant, and write it, and our
Princes, and our Levites, and our priests seal unto it.

Thus by affliction they promise to keep Gods commandments, The marginall note
and observation.
whereunto they would not be brought by Gods great benefits: as the marginall
note and observation is.

Woe unto him that striveth with his maker, Isaiah 45.9.
the potsherd, with the potsherds of the earth: shall the clay say to him that
fashioneth it, what make thou?

Hereby he bridleth their impatiency, Exposition.
which in adversity and trouble murmr against God, and will not tarry his
pleasure: willing that man should march with his like, and not contend against
God: as the Exposition is.

But Hezekiah the king, 2 Chro. 32.20.
and the prophet Isaiah the son of Amos prayed against this, (or for this
cause) and cried to heaven.

This shows what is the best refuge in all troubles and dangers: Exposition.
as the Exposition is.

After troubles and afflictions, God comfort his afflicted children, with
his blessings.
God uses to comfort his children, and servants which do cry unto him, with
his blessings powered down upon them.

And many brought offerings unto the Lord, to Jerusalem, 2 Chro. 32.23.
and presents to Hezekiah king of Judah, so that he was magnified in the sight
of all Nations, from thenceforth.

Thus after trouble, Exposition.
God sends comfort to all them that patiently wait on him, and constantly put
their trust in his mercies: as the exposition is.

Misery and afflictions are of this good use, as that they do excite,
Affl^ctions work in a man repentance and humiliation.
and stir up a man to repentance; as a Father observes: and that punishments
with afflictions, will open the eyes of a man's understanding, and draw him to
God by repentance, and humiliation, when nothing else will.

And when he was in tribulation, 2 Chronicles. 33.12, 13.
he prayed unto the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of
his fathers.

And prayed unto him, and God was entreated of him, and heard his prayer, and
brought him again to Jerusalem, into his kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that the
Lord he was God.

Thus Affliction gives understanding; Exposition.
for he that hated God in his prosperity, now in his misery he seeks unto
him: as the exposition is.

The due consideration hereof will be a continual comfort unto us, and as our
souls cordial in all times of affliction, and even then most of all when all
other comforts fail us.

CHAP. VI. A Meditation upon Life and Death, and how we are at all times, and
upon all occasions, to fit and prepare our selves for death, that so it seize
not upon us at unawares.
FIrst, of our life, First, Of our life here.
and the due consideration thereof.

Our life here is a sea-fare, a way-fare, and a warr-fare.



They that go down to the sea, Our life here is a sea-fare. Psalm. 107.23, 24,
25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31.
in ships, that do business in great waters,

These see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep.

For he commands, and raises the stormy wind, which lifts up the waves
thereof.

They mount up to the heaven, they go down again to the depths, their soul is
melted because of trouble.

Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he brings them out of
their distress.

He makes the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still.

Then are they glad, because they be quiet; so he brings them to their
desired haven.

Oh, that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the children of men.

Our life here is a way-fare. Eccles. 40.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
calamities, and dangers.

Great travel is created for every man, and an heavy yoke is upon the sons of
Adam, from the day that they go out of their mothers womb, till the day that
they return to the mother of all things.

Their imagination of things to come, and the day of death, trouble their
thoughts, and cause fear of heart;

From him that sits on a throne of glory, unto him that is humbled in earth
and ashes.

From him that wears purple and a crown, unto him that is clothed with a
linen frock.

Wrath and envy, trouble and unquietness, fear of death, and anger, and
strife; and in the time of rest upon his bed, his nights sleep, do change his
knowledge.

A little, or nothing is his rest, and afterward he is in his sleep, as in a
day of keeping watch, troubled in the vision of his heart, as if he were
escaped out of a battle.

Such things happen unto all flesh, Eccles. 40.8, 9.10.
both man and beast, and that is seven fold more upon sinners.

Death and bloodshed, strife and sword, calamities, famine, tribulation, and
the scourge.

These things are created for the wicked, and for their sakes came the flood.

All his ways are plain unto the holy; Eccles. 39.24.
so are they stumbling blocks unto the wicked.

Who is wise, Hosea 14.9.
and he shall understand these things, prudent, and he shall know them? for the
ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them: but the
transgressors shall fall therein.

For the good are good things created from the beginning; so evil things for
sinners.

And as this our life is a way, wherein we are continually walking, and
traveling, as wayfaring men, unto another Country. So,

Our life here is also as a race, Our life here is as a race.
wherein we must he continually running, and not to stand still, at a stay.

Know ye not, 1 Cor. 9.24.
that they which run in a race, run all, but one receives the prize? So run
that ye may obtain.

And every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things; 2 Cor.
9.25, 26.
Now they do it to obtain a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible.

I therefore so run, not as uncerteinly; so fight I, not as one that beats
the air.

Let us lay aside every weight, Hebr. 12.1, 2.
and the sin which does so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the
race that is set before us;

Looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith.

Our life is a warr-fare.
This our life is also a warr-fare; and in this our fight, our weapons are to
be spiritual.

Finally, Ephesians. 6.10, 11.
my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might.

Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles
of the devil.

For though we walk in the flesh, 2 Cor. 10.3, 4, 5.
we do not war after the flesh.

For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the
pulling down of strong holds.

Casting down imaginations, and every high thing, that exalts it self,
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity, every thought, to
the obedience of Christ.

For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against Principalities, Ephesians.
6.12. to 18.
against Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, against
spiritual wickedness in high places.

Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to
withstand in the evil day, and having done all to stand.

Stand therefore, having your Loins girt about with Truth, and having on the
Breast Plate of righteousness.

And your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace.

Above all taking the shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all
the fiery Darts of the wicked.

And take the helmet of Salvation, and the word of the Spirit which is the Word
of God.

Praying always with all prayer and supplications in the Spirit, and watching
thereunto with all perseverance and supplication, for all Saints

But let us who are of the day, 1 These. 5: 8, 9, 10.
be sober, putting on the Breastplate of Faith and Love, and for an Helmet, the
hope of Salvation.

For God has not appointed us to Wrath: but to obtain salvation by our Lord
Jesus Christ, who died for us, that whether we walk or sleep, we should live
together with him.

I have fought a good fight, 2 Timothy 4.7.
I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith.

Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness which the Lord the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day, 2 Timothy 4.8.
and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.

It is observed by one, Of Man.
that there is in Man,

Lacrimabilis inceptio.

He enters into the World crying.

Brevis dimensio.

He is here but of short continuance.

Tristis afflictio.

Sorrowful affliction ever attending on him.

And in all this there is in him,

Labilis conditio.

A falling and backsliding condition.

And in all nothing but vanity.

Infoelicitat is fabula homo.

Man is the very fable or story of Infelicity, as one well observes.

It is observed by one, that in the crying of the Child (ah) this signifies
what misery he takes from Adam.

And in crying (oh) what misery he takes from Eve.

They suck misery and crosses even from their Nurses teats.

As Tiberius, Tiberius,
of whom it is written, that he was a Drunkard, because his Nurse was given to
that vice.

And of Caligula, Caligula.
that he was bloody, because his Nurse was so.

Homo Infoelicitatis exemplum, Forturae Lusus, Inconstantiae imago, Injuriae,
et calamitatis trutina.

Man is the very Pattern, and example of Infelicity, the very sport and pastime
of Fortune to play upon, and the balance of Injury and calamity, as a Father
observes.

Quid est homo? Seneca.
morbidum, putridum, cassum, a fletu vitam auspicatum.

What is man? but even a rotten, and a corrupt thing, good for nothing; and
beginning of his Life with crying; as Seneca observes.

Nascitur, Augustine,
et statim plorat, qui et ridere poterat, futurae Calamitatis propheta.

Man is born, and presently cries, who might have laughed, being as a Prophet
foretelling of his future calamity; as St. Augustine observes.

A Father describing the misery of Man says, as follows.

Cujus conceptio culpa, Nasci poena, labor vita, et necesse mori.

Whose Conception is faulty, his Birth a punishment, his Life a labor, and a
Necessity in him to die.

Affliction comes not forth of the Dust, Job 5.6, 7.
neither does trouble spring out of the Ground.

Yet man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upwards.

Nemo tam dives,

Habuit faventes,

Crastinum ut possit

Sibi polliceri. Seneca. Seneca.


No man can any ways assure himself of living till to morrow.

Tota vita, dies unus; as a Father observes: that is, Our whole life here is
but as one day.

Non potest praesentem diem recte vivere is, qui se non eum, quasi ultimum
victurum esse cogitat; ut Pater. No man can live well, and as he ought to do,
unless he think, and account of every day to be as it were, his very last day.

Nascentes morimur, finisque ab origin pendes,
Et pubesceutes juncta senecta premit.
Nequities vitae, non sinit esse senem.
Being born, we dye, and our end hangs upon our beginning.

And as we grow up in years, old age presses upon us.

And the evils of our life will not permit and suffer us to grow old.

Optima aliorum sententia, quippe homini aiuut, non nasci esse bonum, aut
natum, cito morte perire, ut Pater. It was the opinion of some others, for man
not to be born, was good, or else being born, then soon to dye.

Many there are, Plin.
Qui non nasci, optimum censerent, aut quam ocyssime emori. Which have thought
it the best not to be born, or being born, then suddenly to end his days, as
Pliny observes.

Non nasci, Cicero.
long optimnm, proximum quam primum mori.

This the very heathens thought, That not to be born was far the best, the
next very soon to dye, as Cicero observes.

Primum bonum non nasci, secundum citius mori. The first good is not to be
born, the second, soon to die: as a Father observes.

Directory rules how we are to live. Rules how to live.


Qualis vita finis ita: that is, as the life is, so shall the end be.

In the place where the tree falls, Eccles. 11.3.
there it shall be.

Heu vivunt hamines, tanquam mors nulla sequatur,
Aut tanquam infernum, fabula vana foret
Alas! men do now live as if that no death were to follow,

And as if Hell were but a fable.

O quam contempta res est homo, nisi supra numana se erexerit! O how
contemptible a thing is man, if he do not erect his thoughts to a higher pitch,
than to that which is only humane! as a Father observes.

Praestat homini nunquam nasci, quam non renasci: and nunquam generari, quam
non regenerari; ut Pater. It had been far better for a man never to have been
born, than not to be born again; and never to have been begotten, than not to
be regenerated.

And Jesus answered, John 3.3, 5, 6, 7.
and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born
again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.

Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water
and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the
Spirit, is spirit.

Marvel not, that I said unto you, Ye must be born again.

Melior est non esse, quam esse fine Jesu; and melior est non vivere, quam
vivere sine vita: ut St. Bernard.

It is far better for a man not to be at all, S. Bernard.
than to be without Jesus Christ, and better it were for a man not to live at
all, than to live here without enjoying the happiness of life eternal
hereafter; as St. Bernard observes.

And this it was which made that good Father St. S. Bernard.
Bernard to cry out, and say,

Domine Jesu, esto mihi Jesus.

O sweet Lord Jesus, be thou unto me, and unto my soul, a Jesus, a Savior.

This likewise made another Father to say after this manner:

Non est vita, nisi vera vita, and non est vera vita, nisi aeterna vita.

There is no life here, unless the same be a true life, and there can be no
true life here, without the enjoying of life eternal hereafter; as a Father
observes.

And this our life eternal, proceeds from our Justification, and
Sanctification here, the fruit and effect of our Glorification hereafter.

Knowing, Gal. 2.16, 17, 19, 20.
that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus
Christ; even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by
the Faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law; For by the works of the
Law shall no Flesh be justified.

But if while we seek to be justified by Christ, we our selves are found
Sinners, is therefoae Christ the Minister of sin? God forbid.

For I through the Law am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God.

I am crucified with Christ; Nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives
in me; And the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the Faith of the
Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me:

Vita vitae mortalis, est vita vitae immortalitatis.

The life of our mortal life here is the life of our immortal life hereafter;
as a Father well observes.

Viam vita dicitur, per quam quilibet natus, properat ad finem.

Our life here, S. Basil.
is the way, by which every one that is born, does hasten unto his end; as St.
Basil observes.

Ut hora, Sic fugit vita.

Sic in non homini, vertitur omnis homo, ut Poeta.

As the Hour so our life passes away; and so every Man is suddenly turned and
changed, and become no man.

We must therefore be careful how we live.

And herein Boethius gives us this good rule for Directions in our Life.
Boethius.


Incumbit nobis necessitas recte vivendi, cum omnia quae facimus, facta sunt
coram oculis Judicis cuncta videntis. Boethius.

Necessity lies upon us to live well, in this regard, That all things which we
do, they are all of them acted and done before the eyes of that great Judge of
Heaven and Earth, which sees all things.

Intrasti ut exires; as one says.

Thou came into the world, that thou might go out of the world again.

And as an other well observes.

Nostrum vivere, e vita transire:

All our life here ought to be a preparation for death.

Considering this, which one observes; as namely,

Non est vitae momentum, sine motu ad mortem, huc tendimus omnes, huc primus,
huc ultimus ordo.

There is, Not a moment in our Life, without some Motion toward our Death, and
this is the true state and condition of all Mankind here.

And therefore one gives us this good Rule to be observed by us in the whole
course of our life.

Proximus esto bonis, si non potes optimus esse.

Follow then the good example of good men, and come as near to them as thou
can do, if so be thou can not be the best of all.

It is well observed by one.

Quam turpe est in eo statu vivere, in in quo non Statuas mori.

It is a very ill thing, for any one to live in that state, manner, and
condition of life, in the which he would be afraid so to die.

Male vivit, qui semper vivere incipit.

He lives very ill that is always but beginning to live well, as one
observes.

A good life is always the cause of a comfortable and of a happy Death.

While we live here, we must not only see and behold Death, but we must foresee
it, and duly prepare for it, before it comes.

One compares Death unto the Basilisk, The which Serpent, if it see an other,
before the same be seen, there is then much danger to the Party first seen by
the Serpent: but if a man does first see and descrie the Basilisk, then the
Serpent presently dies, and so no fear of danger.

Even so, If Death be not seen and provided for before hand, there is then
great danger, but if seen before hand, and so provided for, the danger is then
past before death comes.

Hereupon a Father well says,

Qui non vult in vita praevidere mortem, non potest in morte videre vitam.

He that in Life, does not foresee Death, Prosper and S. Augustinr.
cannot in Death behold, and enjoy everlasting Life.

Tota vita infidelium, peccatum est, et nihil bouum est, absq, summo bono; ut
Pater. That is,

The whole lise of the Wicked, is nothing but sin; and there is nothing good in
us, unless we have it from him, as Prosper and Augustine do both of them
observe.

Whereupon says St. Augustine. S. Augustine.


Hic urat, hic secat, ut in posterum servat. Et Domine, Domine, hic quicquid
vis, ut in aeternum parcas.

Burn me, cut me, flash me, or lay here on me what tormen^s you will, So as
thou will heal me and cure me of all maladies hereafter, and reserve for me,
everlasting life, after this life ended.

Of the life of Man, Of the life of Man, and whereunto compared.
and whereunto the same is compared in regard of the frailty, incertainty,
brevity, misery, and calamity attending even on the same.

And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, Genesis 49.7.
Few and evil have the days of the years of my life been.

O remember that my life is wind. Job 7.7.


Man that is born of a Woman, Job 14.1, 2.
is of few days, and full of Trouble.

He comes forth like a flower, and is cut down, he flees also as a shadow,
and continues not.

My days are swifter than a Weavers shuttle, Job 7.6.
and are spent without hope.

Now my days are swifter than a Post, Job 9.25, 26.
they flee away, they see no good.

They are passed away as the swift Ships, as the Eagle that hastes unto the
prey.

For we are but of yesterday, Job 8.9.
and know nothing, because our days upon Earth are a shadow.

When a few years are come, Job 16.22.
then I shall go the way whence I shall not return.

For a thousand years in thy sight, are but as yesterday, when it is past; and
as a watch in the night.

Thou carriest them away as with a flood; Ps. 90.4, 5, 9, 10, 12.
they are as a sleep in the morning; they are like grass which grows up.

In the morning it flourishes, and grows up, in the evening it is cut down
and withers.

For all our days are passed away in thy wrath: we spend our years, as a Tale
that is told.

The days of our years, are threescore years and ten, and if by reason of
strength, they be fourscore years, yet is their strength, labor and sorrow,
for it is soon cut off, and we fly away.

So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

For my days are consumed like smoke: Ps. 102.3, 4, 11.
and my bones are burnt as an hearth.

My heart is smitten and withered like grass.

My days are like a shadow that declyneth: Ps. 103.14, 15, 16.
I am whithered like grass.

For he knows our frame; he remembers that we are dust.

As for Man, his days are as grass: as a flower of the field so he
flourishes. For the wind passes over it, and it is gone: and the place
thereof shall know it no more.

Lord what is Man, Ps. 144.3, 4.
that thou take knowledge of him? or the Son of Man that thou make account
of him?

Man is like to vanity: his days are as as a shadow that passes away.

The voice said cry; And I said, Isaiah 40.6, 7, 8.
What shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof, is as
the flower of the field.

The grass whithereth, the flower fades, because the spirit of the Lord
blows upon it. Surely the People is Grass.

The grass whithereth, the flower fades: But the Word of our God shall shall
stand for ever.

Let the Brother of low Degree, Ia. 1.9, 10, 11.
rejoice, in that he is exalted.

But the Rich in that he is made low: because as the flower of the grass he
shall pass away.

For the Sun is no sooner risen with a burning heat, but it withers the
grass, and the flower thereof falls, and the grace of the fashion of it
perishes: So also shall the rich man fade away in his ways.

Go to now, Ia. 4.13, 14.
ye that say, To day or to morrow we will go into such a City, and continue
there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain,

Whereas ye know not what shall be on the morrow: for what is your life? it is
even a vapor, that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away.

For that ye ought to say, Ia. 4.15.
If the Lord will, we shall live and do this or that.

Being born again, 1 Pet. 1.23, 24, 25.
not of corruptible food, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God, which
lives and abides for ever.

For all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of Man, as the flower of the
grass: the grass withers, and the slower thereof falls away.

But the Word of the Lord endures for ever.

No man is sure of his life. Job 24.22.


What Man is he that desires life, Ps. 34.12, 13, 14.
and loves many days, that he may see good?

Keep thy Tongue from evil; and thy Lips from speaking guile.

Depart from evil, and do good, seek peace and pursue it.

How excellent is thy loving kindness O God? Ps. 36.7, 9.
therefore the Children of Men put their Trust under the shadow of thy Wings.

For with Thee is the Fountain of Life, and in this Light shall we see light.

Come and see the works of God; Ps. 66.5, 9.
he is terrible in his doings toward the Sons of men.

Which holds our Soul in life, and suffers not our feet to be moved.

By all this, the frailty, mutability, and incertainty of the life of Man here
in this World, does evidently appear unto us; and that by reason of the
miseries and calamities attending of the same, we have no moving cause to make
us to desire the long continuance thereof, here in this vale of misery, but
earnestly to desire, and hope for the fruition of a better life hereafter, and
even to say with St. Paul,

Cupio dissolvi et esse cum Christo.

I desire to be dissolved, Philip. 1.23.
and to be with Christ.

And as touching this our life here, and all the enjoyments we have therein, we
may well conclude all, and say with the Preacher,

Vanity of Vanities, Eccles. 12.8.
all is vanity.

And with this to sum up the whole duty of Man; being this,

Fear God, Eccles. 12.13.
and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of Man.

Of life eternal, Of life eternal, of the Giver thereof, and the manner of the
gift.
the giver thereof, and the manner of the Gift, with the great and
unexpressible benefits that does redound thereby, unto the dear and elect
Children of God.

Bless the Lord O my Soul, Ps. 103.1, 4.
and all that is within me bless his holy name,

Who redeemeth thy life from destruction; who crowns Thee with loving
kindness, and tender mercies.

My Sheep hear my voice, Io. 10.27.28.
and I know them, and they follow me.

And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish; neither shall
any man pluck them out of my hand.

Jesus said unto her, Io. 11.25.26.
I am the resurrection and the life: he that believes in me, though he were
dead, yet shall he live.

And whosoever lives, and beliein me, shall never dye.

And this is life eternal, Io. 17.3.
That they might know Thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent.

God that made the World, Acts 17.24, 25, 26.
and all things therein, He gives to all, life, and breath, and all things.

For in him we live, move, and have our being.

But now being made free from sin, Romans 6.22, 23.
and become Servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end
everlasting Life.

For the wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal life, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

If in this life only we have hope in Christ, 1 Cor. 15.19.
we are of all men most miserable.

The Letter kills, 2 Cor. 3.8.
but the Spirit gives life.

If ye then be risen with Christ, Collos. 3.1.
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of
God.

Set your Affections on things above, Collos. 3.2, 3, 4.
not on things on the earth.

For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.

When Christ, who is your life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with
him in glory.

Fight the good fight of Faith, 1 Timothy 6.12.
lay hold on eternal life, whereunto thou art called.

Hereby perceive we the love of God, Jo. 3.16.
because he laid down his life for us.

And this is the record, Jo. 5.11, 12, 13, 20.
That God has given to us eternal life: and this life is in his Son.

He that has the Son, has life; and he that has not the Son of God, has not
life.

These things have I written unto you, That ye believe on the name of the Son
of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on
the Son of God.

And we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding,
that we may know him that is true: and we are in him that is true, even in his
Son Jesus Christ: this is the true God and eternal life. S. Bernard.


Duo animi a Deo dati, custodes domestici, pudor, et timor. Qui pudorem amisit,
bestiae par est, qui timorem excu^^t, bestia pejor est.

God has given us two Domestic Keepers of our Souls; as namely,
Shamefastness, and Fear. He which casts away all Shamefastness from him, may
well (by way of comparison) be accounted equal unto the very beast: and he
which shakes off from him all manner of Fear, is in a far worse manner than
the beasts; as St. Bernard observes.

And for our better distinction, in the whole course of our lives here, we
ought always to have these two props or Pillars, like the stern of a ship, to
stear and govern all our action aright; as namely,

Care and Fear. Actions.




Teach me thy way O Lord, Ps. 86.11.
and I will walk in thy Truth: O knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear thy
name.

I will run the way of thy Commandments, Ps. 119.32.
when thou shall enlarge my heart.

Teach me O Lord the way of thy Statutes, Ps. 119.33, 34, 35.
and I shall keep it unto the end.

Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy Law, yea I shall observe it with
my whole heart.

Make me to go in the path of thy Commandments, for therein do I delight,



And being thus armed with these 2 good supporters,

With this constant and continual care, and fear, They will make us wary, in
all our actions, of this life, and will cause us to walk carefully, in all our
proceedings in the whole course of our life here, the which will doubtless be
a very great comfort to us hereafter.

For that as one very well observes,

A good life is always the cause of a happy and of a comfortable death.

Of our Death, and preparatifor the same.
that so Death take us not unawares, and unprepared for the same.

O Death! how bitter is the remembrance of Thee, to a man that lives at rest
in his Possessions, Ecclus. 41:1, 2, 3, 4.
unto the Man that has nothing to vex him, and that has Prosperity in all
things; yea unto him that is yet able to receive meat? O Death! acceptable is
thy sentence unto the Needy, and unto him whose strength fails, that is now
in the last age, and is vexed with all things, and to him that despaireth, and
has lost patience?

Fear not the sentence of Death; remember them that have been before thee, and
that come after thee, for this is the sentence of the Lord over all flesh.

And why art thou against the pleasure of the most high? there is no
inquisition in the Grave, whether thou have lived ten or an hundred, or a
thousand years.

Men of the World, Ps. 17.14.
which have their portion here in this life, even to them, the remembrance of
death is bitter.

But of the Tree of the good and evil, Genesis 2.17.
thou shall not eat of it; for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall
surely die.

And the Serpent did say unto the Woman, Genesis 3.4.
Ye shall not surely dye.

The Devil in his tempting of Eve, First began with a Nequaquam moriamini, ye
shall not dye.

Hereupon Saint Augustine, after the Serpent was accursed by God from the
Earth; says thus unto the Serpent,

O n quam, ubi jam esi tua nequaquam?

O thou wicked serpent, Where are now thy lying words, (Ye shall not dye at
all?)

For the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23.
but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Mors fructus a fruendo dicitur; as one observes of it:

Death is the fruit, so called, from the enjoying of it: and so death is the
fruit, or wages of sin.

Quotidie morimur, S. Bernard.
quotidie enim demitur pars vitae, and tunc quoque cum crescimus, vita
decrescit; ut S. Bernard. That is, We do dye daily, and even every day a part
of our life is cut off: as St. Bernard observes.

Homo est fatuus usque ad quadraginta annorum, deinde, Luther.
ubi agnovit se esse fatuum, vita consumpta est: ut Luther. That is, A man is
as a fool, and full of ignorance, till he attain unto the age of forty years,
and then so soon as he comes to know, and so to acknowledge himself to be a
fool, to be ignorant, and to know nothing of himself, even then, and at that
very time, his life here is, as it were, ended, gone, and spent; as Luther
observes.

Mors tua, mors Christi, fraus mundi, gloria coeli,
Et dolor inferni, sint meditanda tibi.
That is, These things thou ought to take into thy serious consideration,
and duly for to meditate thereon: as namely; On thy own death, on the death of
Christ, of the fraud and deceit of the world, of the great glory of heaven, and
on the unsufferable pains, and torments of Hell; as one observes.

It is well observed by one, That death in Christ killed life for a time, that
afterward life in him might kill death for ever.

For since by man came death, 1 Cor. 15.21, 22, 25, 26, 55, 56, 57.
by man came also the resurrection of the dead.

For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.

For he must reign till he has put all enemies under his feet.

The last enemy that shall be destroyed, is death.

O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?

The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law.

But thanks be to God, which gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Death, as one observes, is a quiet sleep, The soul, when death comes, puts
off the body, and the body buried, lives in the earth, the grave being the bed
thereof: there to remain till the morning of our resurrection, at the day of
Judgment appearing.

It is observed by one, That the true servants of God are so far from being
any ways discontented, or troubled with the thinking of death, as that they
rather earnestly desire, and thirst after it, with a Cupio dissolvi, Philip.
1.23.
a desire with St. Paul to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

For death, as a Father well observes, is but provectio, a journey, or a
laying down of this our earthly tabernacle.

Nihil certius quod quilibet debet mori, sed tempore quando, quo leco, vel
quomodo, uihil incertius.

There is nothing more certain then this, that every one must die, but when, in
what place, or the manner how, nothing is more uncertain.

Statutum est omnibus semel mori. It is dereed that all men must once die. Romans
5.14.


As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed
upon all men, for that all have sinned.

For this is the sentence of the Lord over all flesh. Eccles. 4.3.


As by one man's disobedience, Romans 5.19, 21.
many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, shall many be made
righteous.

That as sin has reigned unto death, even so might Grace reign through
righteousness, unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord.

When Lust has conceived it brings forth Sin: James. 1.15.
and Sin, when it is finished, brings forth Death.

Now nothing is more uncertain than the time when we shall die, the place
where, or the manner how we shall die.

This was therefore the meditation of Seneca, daily with himself, as is
recorded of him.

Dic tibi dormituro, Seneca.
potes non expergisci,

Dic exerecto, potes non dormire amplius.

Dic ereunti, potes non reverti.

Dic revertenti, potes non exire amplius.

When thou lie down at night in thy Bed to sleep, and to take thy rest, say
thou unto thy self, It may be thou shall never live to awake again, to behold
the light of the ensuing day.

When thou awakest in the morning, and do arise out of thy bed, say then unto
thy self, It may be thou shall never live to lie down in thy bed, to take thy
rest and sleep again.

When thou go forth of thy house about thy necessary affairs, say then unto
thy self, It may be thou shall never live to return unto thy house again.

When thou do return in safety to thy house, say then unto thy self, It may
be thou shall never live to go forth of thy house again.

These meditations ought to stir us up unto a daily and continual preparation
for death, that so death may never take us unawares, and unprepared.

Mors sanctis refrigerium, improbis autem supplicium. Death to the godly is but
as it were a refreshing, but to the wicked, death is a punishment.

Cujus vita est Christus, mors ei lucrum and maximum: Sed, Cujus vita est
mundus, mors ei damnum, and maximum: ut Pater.

He who lives like a Christian, and makes Christ his life here, death unto
him is the greatest gain that can be: But he who lives here like a worldling,
and makes the world his life, and chiefest delight here, death unto him is the
greatest detriment, and damage that can be.

Boni moriuntur been, etiamfi mors ipsa mala; ut Pater.

Good and godly men do die well, and make a happy end, although death it self,
in it self be evil. Number. 23.10.


This made the prophet Balaam to cry out, and say, Let me dye the death of the
righteous, and let my last end be like his.

Upon which place, one well observes thus much: as namely;

That he which desires to die the death of the righteous, must labor, and
strive here in this life, to lead, and live the life of the righteous and then
his death will be happy, like unto his.

Vita est vivere vitam Deo, sed vivere vitam mundo, mors est: ut Pater. To live
here a godly, and a Christian life, and to devote our selves here wholly to the
service of God, this is the only way for us after this our life here ended, to
attain unto the everlasting life of glory in the kingdom of heaven. But,

He which lives here merely as a worldly-minded man, and does here devote
himself wholly to the service of the world, and places his chief joy and
delight in the pleasures of the world, and so makes this his chief happiness,
he shall be sure after this life ended, to gain unto himself everlasting death.

The first of these shall enjoy the happiness of that blessed sentence, in the
last day, of

Come ye blessed of my Father, Matthew. 25.34.
inherit the kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world.

And the other shall enjoy the horror of that fearful sentence of malediction
in the last day, of

Depart from me, ye cursed, Matthew. 25.41.
into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.

Stulte, cur te nan disponis ad moriendum, cum sis pro certo moriturus? ut
Pater. Thou miserable man, or thou fool, Why do thou not fit and prepare thy
self for death, seeing it is most certain thou must die? as a Father observes.

Stat sua cuique dies. Virgil.


Every man has the certain time or day of his death, to him designed and
appointed: as the Poet Virgil observes.

To every thing there is a season, Eccles. 3.1, 2.
and a time to every purpose under the heaven.

A time to be born, and a time to die.

Fleres, Sir Thomas Moor.
si scires, unum tua tempora mensem,
Rides, quum non sit, forsitan una dies.
Knew'st thou, a month should end thy days,
It would give cause of sorrow;
And yet perhaps, thou laugh'st to day,
When thou must dye to morrow.
As was observed by that learned Sir Thomas Moor.

Mors tam juveni ante oculos esse debet, quam seni; ut Seneca.

Young men as well as old, ought always to be prepared for death.

Quis est adolescens cui exploratum sit, Cicero.
se ad vesperum esse victurum? ut Cicero.

What young man is there to whom it is made certainly known, or revealed, that
he in the morning, shall live until night.

Senibus, St. Bernard.
mors in januis, adolescentibus, mors in insidiis est: ut St. Bernard.

To old men, death is as it were, always knocking at their gates, and ready to
seize upon them: but to young men, death is always ready with his wyles to
ensnare, and entrap them at unawares: and therefore they ought at all times,
both young and old, to be ready, and prepared for the same.

Incertum est quo te loco mors inveniet, Sencca.
itaque tu illum omni loce expecta: ut Seneca.

It is altogether uncertain, in what place death will look for thee, therefore
do thou expect, and look for death in every place; as Seneca observes.

Mors ubique te expectat, S. Bernard.
and tu igitur si sapis, eum ubique expectabis; ut St. Bernard.

Death does wait, and look for thee every where, and therefore, if thou art
wise, thou will likewise look for death every where.

Quicquid facis, respice ad mortem. Seneca.


Whatsoever thou do, have an eye, and a serious thought upon thy death: as
Seneca observes.

Nulla res magis proderit, Seueca.
quam cogitatio mortalitatis.

Nothing whatsoever thou do, shall more profit, or avail thee, than a
serious thought and meditation, by thee had, of thy mortality: as Seneca
observes.

Sive comedam, sive bibam, sive aliud aliquid faciam, St. Hierom.
semper vox illa terribilis auribus meis insonare videtur, Surgite mortui,
venite ad judicium.

Whether I eat, or whether I drink, or what else soever I do, it seems unto
me, that I do always hear that terrible, and fearful voice resounding in mine
ears, Arise, O ye dead, and come unto judgment: as St. Hierom observes.

We shall not all sleep, 1 Cor. 51.52.
but we shall all be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the
last trump: for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised,
incorruptible, and we shall be changed.

Sic quotidie vivamus, St. Hierom.
quasi die illa judicandi simus.

Let us so live every day, as if we were every day to come unto Judgment; as
St. Hierom observes.

Omnem creed diem, supremum: ut Seneca. Let us so actibi Seneca.
diluxisse count of every day, as if the same were for certain, to be our very
last day.

Dies omnis pro ultimo habeatur; ut Seneca. Seneca.
Every day ought to be accounted by us as our last day.

Quomodo de die in diem, St. Augustine.
defenendo peccas, cum extremum diem tuum nescias. Wherefore do thou still
continue to sin, and to offend, deferring, and putting off thy repentance from
day to day, when as thou art wholly ignorant which day of thy life shall be thy
last day: as St. Augustine observes.

Id ago, Seneca.
ut mibi instar totius vitae sit dies; nec tanquam ultimum rapio, sed sic illum
aspicio, tanquam esse vel ultimus possit. I now do that, as if that this very
day were a resemblance of my whole life. Neither do I take this day as my last
day, but I do so look upon it, and behold the same, as that the same either is,
or may be my last day: as Seneca observes.

Male vivit, quisquis nescit been mori. Seneca.
He lives very ill, who knows not how to frame himself to dye well: as
Seneca observes.

Been mori est libenter mori. To dye well, is to dye willingly: as Seneca
observes.

Timor mortis est desperatio vitae aeternae post mortem. S. Chrysostom.
Fearfulness of death shows a kind of desperation of the happy enjoying of
life eternal, after death: as St. Chrystostome observes.

It is written of Charles the fifth, that he coming to the Duke of Venice his
court, and there, after royal entertainment, the Duke showed him, all the
Riches of his Dukedom, and then demanded of him how he liked the same? who
answered him in this manner; Haec sunt quae faciunt nos invites mori.

These and such like worldly pleasures, contentments and delights, are the only
things and causes which make us so unwilling to die and to leave this world.

Non mori timeo, quia bonum habeo Dominum.

I am not afraid to die, S. Ambrose.
because I have a good and gracious Lord God, to whom I am now going; as St.
Ambrose observes.

It is memorably written of holy Hilarion, who having lived fourscore years,
and being then visited with sickness, and being somewhat fearful to dye,
reasoning thus with himself; at the last he passionately burst forth into these
words; saying, Egredere, quod times anima mea?
Octoginta annes servisti domine.


Why art thou afraid O my Soul to go forth unto him whom thou have so long
time served? S. Jerome in vita Hilarionis.
Thou have now served thy Lord God fourscore years, therefore now O my Soul go
forth cheerfully unto him thou have so long time served; and having thus said,
he quietly died, as St. Jerome observes.

Death as one observes is,
Succisio non occisio, portus non orcus.
A cutting down, not a cutting quite off. A port or haven by which we pass to
joy, and not a gulf to swallow us up. And this is via universae carnis, the way
of all flesh.

It is written of Xerxes, That he having gathered together a million of Men,
went up into a high Mountain, and there looking down upon them, he presently
wept, and he being demanded why he did so? answered,

Quia infra centum annos, Because that within these hundred years, all these so
goodly Soldiers, who now do as it were, show their strength and bravery, will
yet, within that time be all of them dead.

For that Abraham is dead, John 8.52.
and the Prophets.

Therefore certain it is we must all dye, and this is by no means to be
avoided: therefore we ought to labor and endeavor our selves so to live here,
as that in the end we dye not the death eternal; But may enjoy after this life
ended, the unspeakable blessedness of the life to come, and so being assured
hereof, the thought of the death temporal will never be grievous or troublesome
unto us.

St. S. Hierome.
Hierome says thus of Nepotian being dead, That he did rather, Migrare, quam
mori, rather pass to an other place than die.

St. S. Bernard.
Bernard writes thus of one Hubertus being dead. That he did rather abire, quam
obire, fall asleep, than dye. And

St. S. Chrysostom.
Chrysostom upon the death of a godly man says, Dormit, non mortuus est,
quiescit, non periit. He is asleep, not dead, he does rest, and not perish.

Omnia pereundo servantur. Tertullian.
All things by perishing are kept alive. The Corn it dies and springs again, as
Tertullian observes.

From hence arises unto us a great comfort in our death.

But some men will say, 1 Cor. 15.35 to 44.
How are the dead raised up? and with what body do they come?

Thou Fool, that which thou sowest, is not quickened, except it die.

And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bear
grain, it may chance of Wheat, or of some other grain.

But God gives it a body as it has pleased him, and to every seed his own
body.

So also is the resurrection of the dead, it is sown in corruption, it is
raised in incorruption.

It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory, it is sown in weakness, it is
raised in power.

It is sown a natural body, it is raised a splritual boby, there is a natural
body, Tertu lian.
and there is a spiritual body.

Mors est provectio ad resurrectionem, and non mors: est janua qua intremur in
Coelum: et mors est via ad resurrectionem.

Death is, as it were a Journey or a passage unto our Resurrection, and not a
Death, and our Resurrection is the Gate or Way, by which we enter into Heaven:
and Death is the ready way unto our Resurrection; as Tertullian well observes.
S. Augustine.


Therefore well says Augustine hereupon,

Toll articulum de resurrectione Christi, et sublata est omnis spes vitae
aeterna.

Take away the Article of the Resurrection of Christ, and all our hope of life
eternal is then also taken away.

Mors est Janua vitae. Augustine.


Death is the Gate unto Life, as St. Augustine observes.

Petrus Damianus de Stephano mortuo.

Peter Damianus of Stephen being dead, Petrus Damianus.
writes thus,

Foelix somnus, cum requie, requies cum voluptate, voluptas cum aeternitate.

O happy sleep with rest, and rest with pleasure, and pleasure with the
enjoyment of eternity.

Whereupon St. S. Gregory.
Gregory writing upon the same, says,

Dulcis simul and beatus somnus!

O sweet and also happy sleep!

Mors est cursus ad Coelum. S. Chrysostom.


Death is a speedy course, race, or way to Heaven; as St. Chrysostom observes.

Again, we are here in this World as Pilgrims.

Whereupon says Augustine. S. Augustine.


Cui peregrinatio dulcis est, non amat patriam.

He whose Pilgrimage here is sweet unto him, cannot be in love with his
Country, with this life.

Mors non est exitus, sed transitus ad Coelum, and via ad Regnum.

Death does not put a final end and period unto us. but the same is, as a
passage for us unto Heaven, and the ready way by which we must enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, even into eternity, as a Father well observes.

And in this so troublesome a Sea of of this World, Seneca.
and exposed unto all the surges and tempestuous waves that can arise, there is
no Port or Haven that does appear unto the Navigators in this Sea for them to
land or arive at, but only the Port or Haven of Death; as Seneca observes.

Justo mors salutis est portus, S. Ambrose.
ut St. Ambrose de bono morte.

To the Just and godly Men, death is the Port and Haven of Health and of
Happiness.

It is our life here, which does keep and sever us from our Savior: but it is
a happy death, which does conjoyn us unto Christ our head.

Non est mors sed vita, quae morientem Christo societ: Non est vita sed mors,
quae viventem Christo seperat.

It is not death but life, which does as it were conjoyn and associate the soul
of the dying Christian unto Christ. And it is not to be called a life but
rather death, which does as it were separate the Soul of the living Christian
from Christ his Savior.

Quod interim morimur, S. Ciprian de mortalitate.
ad immortalitatum, morte transgradimur. Nec potest vita aeterna succedere,
nisi hinc contigerit exire, Non est exitus, sed transitus, et temporali itinere
de cursa ad aeterna transgressus, ut Ciprian, in tractatu de mortalitate.

For as much as we do here die suddenly, we do pass by death unto immortality;
neither can life eternal succeed, unless it happen unto us first to leave this
Life. It is not a final end, but a passage: and by the course of a temporal
journey, a passing unto Heaven.

Descendit altissimus, S. Bernard.
et sua nobis descensa, suavem ac salubrem dedicavit ascensum, ut S. Bernard.

The highest did descend from Heaven. and so by his descending he did dedicate
his ascension to be good and profitable unto us.

Ascendit qui descendit; S. Augustine.
descendit nt sanaret te, ascendit ut levaret te, ut St. Augustine.

He which ascended, is the same which descended, he descended that so he might
heal and cure thee of all thy malladies; he ascended, that so he might by the
virtue of his powerful ascension lift thee up, and make thee to ascend
likewise, John 14.2, 3.


In my Fathers House are many mansions, if it were not so I would have told you
it. I go to prepare a place for you.

And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you
unto my self, that where I am there ye may be also.

Sapientis est igitur totam in mortem, Seneca.
prominere, hoc velle, hoc meditari, hac semper cupidine ferri, ut Seneca.

It is therefore the part of a wise man, wholly to bend and prepare himself,
for and toward Death, to be willing to dye, to be always meditating on death,
and to desire the same.

And not to be like unto those of whom Seneca complains in this manner.

Nemo sine quaerula moritur. Seneca.
Quis non recusans? Quis non gemens exit; ut Seneca.

No man dies without complainings.

Who goes willingly out of this World, without expressing of some sorrow and
lamentation for the same?

But for our greater comfort in Death, St. Cyprian observes thus much.

Ad refrigerium justi vocantur, S. Cyprian.
ad supplicium rapiuntur injusti: datur mors tutela fidentibus perfidis autem
paena.

The just and godly, by death are called unto rest, and to a refreshing: But
the wicked and ungodly are suddenly snatched away by Death unto punishment.

And again Death to the godly is, as a safe Custody and Protection: But unto
the Wicked Death is as a sharp and severe punishment.

This difference is therefore observed between the hope of the Wicked, The
difference between the hope of the Wicked and the Godly.
and the Worldly-minded man; and of the Godly and truly Religious man.

The Worldly-minded man, Dum spirat sperat. Whiles that he has any breath left
in him, his hope still is to recover. But the Godly and Religious man. Dum
expirat sperat. When Life decaies, and when his last breath is ready to go out
of his body, even then, at that very instant has he hope to enjoy a far better
life.

The wicked is driven away in his wickedness, Prove. 14.32.
but the righteous has hope in his death.

Nulla res magis proderit, Seneca.
quam cogitatio mortalitatis: ut Seneca.

Nothing can more profit, and avail a man here in this life, than a serious
thought, and meditation of his mortality.

Nullius rei meditatio tam necessaria est ut Seneca. Seneca.


Meditari mortem, qui hoc dicit, meditari libertatem jubat ut Seneca.

The Meditation of nothing is so necessary as this meditation of Death is.

For to meditate on death, he which advises us so to do, commands us to
meditate on that which introduces our greatest liberty and happiness.

Mortem nemo hilaris excipit, Seneca.
nisi quise ad istam diu composuerat, ut Seneca.

No man does entertain and welcome death cheerfully, unless he have well
disposed, fitted and prepared himself long before, for that day.

Compone te igitur ad diem illum, Seneca.
ut Seneca.

Therefore fit and prepare thy self for that day.

Dies ultimus salubriter ignoratur, S. Gregory and S. Bernard.
ut semper proximus esse credatur, ut St. Gregory and St. Bernard.

Our last day, or the day of our death, is kept from our knowledge, and that
very profitably for our good, that so we should believe, and think every day to
be our last day, that so we may be always ready, fitted, and prepared for the
same accordingly.

Qualis vita, finis ita.

As a man's life is, so shall his death be.

Qualis quisque hinc exierit, S. Augustine.
in suonovissimo die: talis invenietur, in novissimo seculi die ut, St.
Augustine.

Look in what state and condition a man is in, when he departs out of this
World in his last day, even in the day or time of his death: In the self same
state and condition, shall he be found to be in, in the last day of the World,
even in the day of Judgment.

If the clouds be full of rain they empty themselves upon the earth: Eccles.
11.3.
and if the Tree fall toward the South or toward the North, in the place
where the Tree falls, there it shall be.

Long est quidem dies judiecii sed unius cujusque hominis, S. Augustine.
dies ultimus long esse non potest, quia brevis est, vita and vitae brevitas
incerta, ut St. Augustine.

The day of Judgment may be long before it come, but the last day, or the day
of death, of every particular person cannot be long before it happen, because
that this our life is short, and this shortness of our life uncertain. Seneca.


Effice igitur mortem, tibi cogitatione familiarem, ut possis illi laetns, and
alacer, obviam exire; ut Seneca.

Therefore strive, and endeavor thou, by the often thought and meditation of
death, to make the same familiar unto thee: that so when death knocks at the
door of thy heart, thou may be then ready joyfully and cheerfully to embrace
the same.

Magna autem pars est, Seneca.
et diu discenda cum adventat hora illa inevitabilis, aequo animo exire, ut
Seneca.

But it is a very great and difficult thing, and a long time in learning, for a
man to go out of this World, with a quiet and with a contented mind, when that
inevitable day and hour of our death shall come.

Vivere tota vita discendum est, Seneca de brevitatc vitae. cap. 7.
et quod magis fortasse miraberis, tota vita discendum est mori, ut Seneca, de
brevitate vitae, cap. 7.

During our whole life we must learn to live; and which is more, and it may be
to be wondered at; our whole life here must be a learning to die.

Mors omnium dolorum, et solutio est, et finis, ut Seneca.

Death is the full end and period of all our griefs and sorrows which are here
endured. Seneca.


Per vitam ad mortem transitus est; S. Ambrose de bona morte.
per mortem ad vitam reditus est, ut St. Ambrose de bona morte.

Our life is a passage unto death, and by death we return to life.

Tota vita nihil aliud est, quam ad mortem iter, ut Seneca.

Our whole life here is nothing else but a Journey unto death.

Death is the salve that cease all annoy, For our comfort in death.


Death is the Port by which we pass to joy.

For our further comfort in death.

Christus morte mortem destruxit, vitamque reduxit, ut Cyril.

Christ by his death destroyed death and the power thereof, and thereby brought
life unto us.

Mors est quae mundum redemit, Leo and St. Ambrose, de bona morte.
ut Leo and St. Ambrose, de bona morte.

It was the death of Christ which redeemed the world.

Morte illa, mors mortua est, S. Bernard.
ut St. Bernard.

By the death of Christ was death killed.

Nothing does more resemble death, than sleep.

Nothing so like the Grave as the bed.

Nothing more resembles our resurrection, than our awaking, and rising again in
the morning.

This ought to put us daily in mind of our death and resurrection.

Et Lathi consanguineus sopor, Virgil.
ut Virgil.

Sleep is a Cousin of death.

Speculum mortis somnnm, Tertullian.
ut Tertullian.

Sleep is a very spectacle of death.

Quoties dormis and vigilas, toties morieris and resurgis.

As often as thou sleep, and awakest again, so often by way of resemblance
do thou dye, and rise again, as a Father observes.

Dies iste, Seneca.
quem tanquam extremum, reformidas, aeterni natalis est, ut Seneca.

That day which thou so much fear, as being thy last day, the same day for
thy joy and comfort, is thy everlasting birthday.

Cur igitur doles, Tertullian, de patientia.
si periisse non credis, ut Tertullian, De patientia.

Why do thou therefore grieve and lament to think of this thy last day, if
thou do believe thou shall not perish thereby.

We have rather cause of rejoicing, when we think of this our last day, of the
day of our death, the same being the day of our happy change.

All the days of my appointed time, Job 14.14.
will I wait till my change come.

Ultimus and optimus medicus morberum, etiam immedicabilium est mors, Aeschilus.
ut Aeschilus.

Death is the last and the best Physician, and that of incurable diseases.

Mors aeterna quies, ut Pater.

Aerumnarum requies mors.

Death brings us to our everlasting rest, and puts an end unto all our miseries.

The ancient Counsels termed the blessed Sacrament, Or Viaticum morientis.
Viaticum Aeternitatis.

A blessed bate that the devout Soul uses to take in this life, when he is
even ready to travel for the other life.

It is very memorably observed by Nazianzen of St. Basil, Nazianzen of S. Basil.
that in his life time, he desired that when death came, he might be so happy,
as in the ending of his days, to die with some divine sentence of piety in his
mouth, at the instant before his death.

Death is as a Father observes, a passage from Earth to Heaven, from a World
of endless miseries here, to a happy Heaven of everlasting happiness in Heaven.

And he said unto Jesus, Luke 23.42, 43.
Lord remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom.

And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee to day shall thou be with me
in Paradise.

Death as one observes, is a temporary separation of the Soul from the body; A
location or placing of the body in the Earth; (from whence it was taken) and
there to remain till the last day, the day of Judgment, being the day of the
happy re-uniting of the Soul and Body together again, And a translation of the
Soul and Spirit of man unto God that gave it, who at the first breathed into
him, the breath of life.

And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, Genesis 2 7.
and breathed into his Nostrils, the breath of life, and man became a living
Soul.

All in whose Nostrils was the breath of life. Genesis 7.22.


In the sweat of thy face, Genesis 3.19.
shall thou eat bread, till thou return unto the Ground, for out of it was thou
taken; for dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou teturn.

Cease ye from man, Isaiah 2.22.
whose breath is in his Nostrils.

All flesh shall perish together, Job 34.15.
and Man shall turn again unto the dust.

His breath goes forth, Psalm. 146.4.
he returns to his earth.

All are of the dust, Eccles. 3.20.
and all turn to dust again.

Thou take away their breath, Ps. 104, 29.
they dye, and return to their dust.

The Lord created man, Ecclus. 7.8.
of the earth, and turned him into it again.

Then shall the Dust return to the earth, as it was, Eccles. 12.7.
and the Spirit shall return unto GOd who gave it.

I also am formed out of the clay. Job 33.6.


But now O Lord, Isaiah 64.8.
thou art our Father, and we are the clay.

These, and such like meditations cannot choose but make the thought of death,
to be very happy and comfortable unto us.

A good name is better than precious ointment, Eccles. 12.1.
and the day of death than the day of ones birth.

A promise of Gods mercy, A Promise of Gods mercy.
to comfort us against the day of our death.

For thou have delivered my Soul from death. Psalm 56.13.


I will ransom them from the power of the grave. Hosea 13.14.
I will redeem them from death: O death I will be thy plague, O grave I will be
thy destruction.

Verily, John 5.24.
verily, I say unto you, He that hears my word, and believes on him that
sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is
passed from death unto life.

He will swallow me up in victory, Isaiah 25.8, 9.
and the Lord God will wipe away tears from off all faces, and the rebuke of
his people shall he take away, from off all the earth: for the Lord has spoken
it.

And it shall be said in that day, Lo this is our God, we have waited for him,
and he will save us: This is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad,
and rejoice in his salvation.

For thou have delivered my Soul from death, Psalm. 116.8.
mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling.

For the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne shall feed them, Rev. 7, 17.
and shall lead them unto living Fountains of waters: and God shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes.

And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes: Rev. 21.4.
and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall
there be any more pain, for the former things are passed away.

But we had the sentence of death in our selves, 2 Cor. 1.9, 10.
that we should not trust in our selves, but in God, which raised the dead: who
delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver; in whom we trust that he
will deliver us. 2 Timothy 2.19.


The Lord knows them that are his.

Who has saved us, 2 Timothy 1.9, 10.
and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according
to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the
world began.

But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who
has abolished death, and has brought life and immortality to light, through
the Gospel.

Forasmuch then as the Chlidren are partakers of flesh and blood; Heb. 2.14, 15.
he also himself took part of the same, that through death he might destroy
him, that had the power of Death, that is the Devil.

And deliver them, who through fear of death, were all their life time subject
to bondage.

We know that we have passed from death unto life, 1 John 3.14.
because we love the Brethren: He that loves not his Brother, abides in death.

Be thou faithful unto the death, Rev. 2.10.11.
and I will give Thee the Crown of life.

He that overcommeth, shall not be hurt of the second death.

CHAP. VII. Of the day of Judgment, the same described, with the fruits and
effects thereof: the same being called,






Jacobs troubles.













nor gold, nor any thing else.







The great day of the Lord is near, Zeph. 1.14, 15.
and hastes greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord.

That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble, and distress, a day of
wastnesse and desolation, a day of darkness and of gloominesse, a day of
clouds, and thick darkness.

Alas! Jer. 30.7.
for that day is great, so that none is like it, it is even the time of Jacobs
trouble, but he shall be saved out of it.

Let all the inhabitants of the land Joel 2.1.
tremble, for the day of the Lord comes, it is nigh at hand.

Behold, the day of the Lord comes, Isaiah 13.9.
cruel, both with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the land desolate, and he
shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it.

For the stars of heaven, Isaiah 13.10, 13.
and the constellations thereof, shall not give their light, the sun shall be
darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine: I
will shake the heavens, and the earth shall remove out of her place, in the
wrath of the Lord of hosts, and in the day of his fierce anger.

A voice of noise from the city, Isaiah 66.6.
a voice from the temple, a voice of the Lord, that renders recompense to his
enemies.

The days of visitation are come, Hosea 9.7.
the days of recompense are come.

A day of darkness, and of gloominess, Joel 2.2, 11.
a day of clouds, and thick darkness.

And the Lord shall utter his voice before his army, for his camp is very
great, for he is strong that executes his word: for the day of the Lord is
great, and very terrible, and who can abide it?

Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6.13.
that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day.

The day of the Lord so comes as a thief in the night. 1 Thessalonians. 5.2.


For the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, 2 Pet. 3.10.
in the which, the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the
elements shall melt with heat, the earth also, and the works that are therein,
shall be burnt up.

The angels which kept not their first state, Jude 6.
he has reserved in everlasting chains, under darkness, unto the Judgment of
the great day.

Behold, Revel. 1.7.
he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also which have
pierced him.

Neither their silver, Zeph. 1.18.
nor their gold, shall be able to deliver them, in the day of the Lords wrath,
but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy, for he shall
make even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the land.

They shall cast their silver in the streets, Ezekiel. 7.19.
and their gold shall be removed, their silver and their gold shall not be able
to deliver them, in the day of the wrath of the Lord.

For all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy. Zeph. 3.8.


Again, Of the day of Judgment, or the last day, the same described, Of the
day of Judgment, or the last day.
by wonders showed in the heavens and in the earth: Blood and fire, and pillars
of smoke: The sun turned into darkness, the moon into blood: Joel 2.30, 31, 32.
Called the great and terrible day of the Lord, with the joy and comfort then
of Gods elect, and they which call upon the name of the Lord, they shall be
then saved, and delivered.

And I will show wonders in the heavens, and in the earth, blood, and fire, and
pillars of smoke.

The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the
great, and the terrible day of the Lord come.

And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord,
shall be delivered.

Thrust in thy sickle, and reap, Revel. 14, 15.
for the time is come for thee to reap, for the harvest of the earth is ripe.

Put ye in the sickle, Joel. 3.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
for the harvest is ripe: come, get you down, for the press is full, the fats
overflow, for their wickedness is great.

Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision, for the day of the Lord is
near, in the valley of decision.

The sun and the moon shall be darkened, and the stars shall withdraw their
shining.

The Lord also shall rore out of Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem, and
the heavens, and the earth shall shake: but the Lord will be the hope of his
people, and the strength of the children of Israel.

So shall ye know that I am the Lord your God, dwelling in Zion, my holy
mountain.

The Lord will rore from Zion, Amos 1.2.
and utter his voice from Jerusalem.

Therefore prophecy thou against them all these words, Jer. 25.30, 31.
and say unto them, The Lord shall rore from on high, and utter his voice from
his holy habitation: he shall mightily rore upon his habitation, he shall give
a shout, as they that tread the grapes, against all the inhabitants of the
earth.

A noise shall come, even to the ends of the earth, for the Lord has a
controversy with the Nations: he will plead with all flesh, he will give them
that are wicked to the sword, says the Lord.

For I will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth, Jer. 25.29.
says the Lord of hosts.

For as the lightning comes out of Matthew. 24.27.
the east, and shines even unto the west, so shall also the coming of the Son
of man be.

Immediately after the tribulation of those days, shall the sun be darkened,
Matthew. 24.29, 30, 31, 33, 36.
and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven,
and the powers of the heaven shall be shaken.

And then shall appear the sign of the son of man in heaven: Mark 13.24, 25,
26, 27, 29, 32, 33. and Luke 21.25, 26, 27, 31, 32, 33. the same with St.
Matthew.
and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the son
of man coming in the clouds of heaven, with power, and great glory.

And he shall send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall
gather together his elect, from the four winds, from the one end of heaven to
the other.

When ye shall see all these things, know, that it is near, even at the doors.

But of that day, and hour, knows no man, no, nor the angels of heaven, but
my Father only.

By these preceding places of Scripture, it appears;

That the day of Judgment, or the day the Lord, is called, by the name of the
harvest being ripe.

The harvest of the earth is ripe, and therefore to be reaped with the sickle.

By the name of a noise, that shall come even to the ends of the earth, and
that the Lord has a controversy with the Nations, that he will plead with all
flesh, and give them that are wicked to the sword.

Again, Of the day of Judgment, a farther description, and of the effects of
it.
The day of Judgment further described, with full expressions in the
Scripture, how fearful, and terrible the same shall be, and what men shall do
for to avoid the same.

And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, Isaiah 2.19. and 10.11, 12. all
to the same purpose.
and into the caves of the earth, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of
his majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the earth. Or, then shall they
go into the holes of the rocks, from before the fear of the Lord, and from the
glory of his majesty, when he shall arise to destroy the earth: as another
Translation is.

In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, Isaiah 2.20.
and his idols of gold, which they made each one for himself, to worship, to
the moles, and to the bats. Or, at that day shall a man cast away his silver
idols, and and his golden idols, which they had made themselves, to worship
them, to the moles, and to the batts, as another Translation is. That is,
Exposition.
They shall cast them into most vile, and filthy places, when they perceive
that they are not able to help them: (as the exposition is.)

To go into the clefts of the rocks, Isai. 2.20, 21.
and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory
of his majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the earth.

And they shall say to the mountains, Cover us, and to the hills, Hosea 10.8.
Fall on us.

Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us, and to the hills,
Luke 23.30.
Cover us.

And the kings of the earth, Rev. 6.15, 16.
and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty
men, and every bondman, and every freeman, hid themselves in the dens, and in
the rocks of the mountains, and said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us:

And hide us from the face of him that sits on the throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb:

For the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand?

And in those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it, and shall
desire to dye, and death shall flee from them.

Riches; Prove. 11.4.
profit or avail not, in the day of wrath, but righteousness delivers from
death.

Trust not in wicked riches, Ecclus 5.8.
for they shall not help, or profit thee in the day of punishment, or vengeance.

Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord: Amos 5.18.
to what end is it for you? the day of the Lord is darkness, and not light.
Or, what have you to do with it? as another Translation is.

Thus he speaks, because the wicked, and hypocrites said, they were content
to abide Gods Judgments; whereas the godly tremble and fear: as the exposition
is.

As if a man did flee from a lion, Amos 5.19, 20.
and a bear met him, or went into the house and leaned hard on the wall, and a
serpent bit him.

Shall not the day of the Lord be darkness, and not light, even very dark, and
no brightness in it? Or, and no light in it, as another Translation is.

Behold, 1 Cor. 15.51.
I show you a mystery, or a secret thing, we shall not all sleep, but we shall
all be changed: when the Lord comes to Judgment, some of the saints shall be
alive, whom he will change, even as if they were dead; so that this change is
instead of death to them: (as the Exposition is.) Exposition.


For the Lord himself shall descend from heaven, with a shout, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16,
17.
with the voice of the Archangel, and with the Trump of God, and the dead in
Christ shall rise first.

Then we which are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with them, in
the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.
Meaning them which shall be found alive, as the exposition is.

In this sudden taking up, Exposition.
there shall be a kind of mutation of the qualities of our bodies, which shall
be as a kind of death: as the exposition is.

And it shall be said in that day, Lo, Isaiah. 25.9.
this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us, This is the
Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad, and rejoice in his salvation.

In a moment, 1 Cor. 15.52.
in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump, or trumpet, for the trumpet
shall sound, and the dead shall be raised, incorruptible, and we shall be
changed.

For this corruptible must put on incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.53.
and this mortal must put on immortality.

I will ransom them from the power of the grave, Hosea 13.14.
I will redeem them from death: O death, I will be thy plagues, O grave, I will
be thy destruction.

Meaning, Exposition.
that no power shall resist God, when he will deliver his, but even in death,
he will give them life: as the exposition is.

Therefore be ye ready, Matthew. 24.44.
for in such an hour as you think not, the son of man comes, or will come.

Ye that put far away the evil day, Amos 6.3.
and cause the seat of violence to come near. That is, Ye that continue still
in your wickedness, and think that Gods plagues are not at hand, but give your
selves to all idleness, wantonness, and riot, Exposition. Obadiah. 15.
as the exposition is.

For the day of the Lord is near, upon all the heathen; as thou have done, it
shall be done unto thee, thy reward shall remain, or return upon thine own head.

When I heard, Habbak. 3.16.
my belly trembled, my lips quivered at the voice, rottenness entered into my
bones, and I trembled in my self, that I might rest in the day of trouble.

I will utterly consume all things from off the land; or destroy all things,
says the Lord God.

I will consume man and beast, Zeph. 1.2, 3.
I will consume the fowls of the heaven, and the fishes of the sea, and the
stumbling blocks, with the wicked, and I will cut off, or destroy man from off
the land, says the Lord. Or, I will destroy man and beast, I will destroy the
fowls of the heaven, and the fishes of the sea, and ruins shall be to the
wicked, and I will cut off man from the land, says the Lord.

Note, Exposition.
that God was not angry with those dumb creatures; but because man was so
wicked, for whose cause they were created, God makes them to take part of the
punishment with him.

Hold thy peace, or be still, Zeph. 1.7, 8.
at the presence of the Lord God, for the day of the Lord is at hand, for the
Lord has prepared a sacrifice, he has bid, or sanctified his guests.

And it shall come to pass in the day of the Lords sacrifice, that I will
punish the princes, and the kings children, and all such as are clothed with
strange apparel.

Who may abide the day of his coming? Mal. 3.2.
who shall stand when he appears? for he is like a refiners fire, and like
fullers soap. He shows, Exposition.
that the hypocrites, which did so much desire the Lords coming, will not
abide, when he draws near, for he will consume them, and purge his, and make
them clean: as the exposition is.

For behold, Mal. 4.1.
the day comes, that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea, and all
that do wickedly, shall be stubble, and the day that comes, shall burn them
up, says the Lord of hosts, and it shall leave them neither root nor branch.

But unto you that fear my name, Mal. 4.2.
shall the sun of righteousness arise, with healing in his wings: and ye shall
go forth, and grow up as calves of the stall. Meaning Christ, who with his
wings, or beams of his grace, should lighten, and comfort his Church: as the
exposition is.

Wherefore he says, Ephesians. 5.14.
Awake, thou that sleep, and rise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light.

Again, Amos 1.14.
The day of Judgment called the day of battle, and the day of the whirlwind.

FINIS.
A SERMON Preached by Mr. MASTERS, Master of the TEMPLE, in the TEMPLE-CHURCH,
At the Funeral of Henry Croke Esquire; one of the Society of the Inner Temple,
February 8. 1608.

LONDON, Printed by Fr. Leach, and are to be sold by William Lee, at the
Turks-head in Fleetstreet. 1657.

A Sermon, Preached by Mr. Masters, Master of the Temple, in the Temple-Church,
Febr. 8. 1608.
2. Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ.


THis Text divides it self into these five parts following. Text divided.


For we must.

We must all appear.



Before the Judgment Seat of Christ.

Christ, our Judge and Savior.

Of these severally, in their order.



Jude, Jude 14, 15.
14, 15. And Enoch also the seventh from Adam prophesied of such, (meaning the
wicked; there before named.)

Behold, the Lord comes, with ten thousand of his Saints,

To give Judgment against all men.



Matthew. 25.31, 32, 33, 34.
Matthew 25.31, 32, 33, 34. And when the Son of man comes in his glory, and
all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory,
etc.

The Reasons hereof.

Luke 16.1, 2.

There was a rich man, Luke 16.1, 2.
which had a steward, and he was accused to him, that he wasted his goods.

And he called him, and said, Give an account of thy stewardship.

Secondly, As the life of man is the time of working, and death is the period
thereof, so of necessity there must be a Judgment, and censure of every man's
work, with a reward thereof.

Again, In the generality, (all) this is to be observed, that there is then to
be a twofold Judgment, that is to say,





And this appears in the book of the Revelation, chap. 20. ver. 10, 11, 12,
13, 14.

And the Devil that deceived them, Rev. 20.10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
was cast into a lake of fire and brimstone.

And I saw a white throne, and one that sat on it.

And I saw the dead, small, and great, stand before God; and the books were
opened: And another book was opened, which is the book of life; and the dead
were judged of those things which were written in the books, according to their
works.

And the sea gave up her dead, which were in her, and death, and hell delivered
up the dead which were in them, and they were judged every man according to his
works.

There is to be a twofold Judgment:

The one a Judgment of dissolution, for the righteous; The other a Judgment
of condemnation for the wicked.

The first, a Judgment of dissolution, or of acquittall: The other, a
Judgment of condemnation.



The soul receives the first Judgment, being the first, and principal actour
in sin; and then the body, being quickened by the soul, and so conjoined, and
associated with the same, in the acting of sin: and in this respect it is
requisite, that there should be a second Judgment, when both body and soul
might together receive their Judgment, as they had been both of them joint
actours in sin.

And this may serve to answer an Objection which may be made of some show of
injustice, to be twice punished by two Judgments, for one and the same sin.

Again, at our appearance there, we shall be naked, and where we shall be
manifested, even all our actions, words, and thoughts, not only which in
darkness, but also, the abscondita tenebraru^, even the very hidden, and secret
things of darkness, shall be then clearly manifested: Gods books shall then be
laid open: as appears Revelation 20.12. Rev. 20.12. The several books of God.
The book of his knowledge, and the book of our own consciences, and the book
of his covenant, they shall all be then laid open, by which all our words,
actions, and thoughts, shall be laid open before us: And then our only appeal
will be to the book of the covenant, or of Gods mercy, in and through Christ
Jesus. And this may serve for an Answer to an Objection, how our thoughts
should then be manifested.

Again, a reason of the necessity of the second Judgment, when the righteous
shall not only receive the sentence of joy, of, Come ye blessed, etc. but of
praise likewise, Well done good and faithful servant. And the wicked shall not
only then receive the sentence of torment, of, Go ye cursed, etc. but also of
shame, as bad as the torment.

And so to this end, That the praise, with the joy of the righteous, and the
shame, with the torment of the wicked, might be both manifested; for this end,
a second Judgment must be.

As touching this day of Judgment, Use fro similitude drawn from thunder, and
applied to the day of Judgment.
it is observed; That as thunder strikeing one being asleep, kills him,
leaving his eyes open; but those it strikes waking, it kills them, leaving
their eyes shut: even so, in the day of Judgment, those which are then found
securely sleeping in their sins, and in the pleasures of this world, they shall
then have their natural life taken from them; that is, by sentence, and
Judgment pronounced against them; they shall be cast into Hell fire, yet with
their eyes open: that is, They shall perpetually see, feel, and enjoy the
endless torments of hell fire.

But those, contrariwise, which are then found waking, that is, those elect
children of God, continually expecting the same, being always ready, and
prepared, with oil in their lamps, (the oil of faith) to attend the bridegroom
at his coming, evermore rejoicing at the expectation of the last sound of the
trumpet; those I say, although they be deprived of this their natural life,
yet they shall have their eyes shut: that is, They shall be for ever freed from
those perpetual Hell torments, pronounced against the wicked, of, Go ye
cursed, etc. but shall contrariwise, perpetually enjoy endless joy and happiness

Next, as touching the Judge, before whom we must appear, being Christ, our
Savior. For as he came first in humility, to be judged; so then shall he come
triumphing, in his glory, to be a Judge, both of quick and dead. And then shall
they which were his judges and executioners, behold him in all his glory, who
despised him in his humility: and they shall then be all judged by him. St.
Augustine. Of Christ's coming to Judgment, the manner how.
And as St. Augustine observes; Veniet Judicaturus Christus, eadem carne qua
judicatus, sed non eadem infirmitate carnis. Christ our Savior shall come to
Judge the world in the last day, in the same flesh as he himself was judged,
but not in the same infirmity of the flesh.

From hence, Objection. Why Christ shall come to Judge the world.
an Objection may be made, why Christ, the second person in the Trinity, rather
than the Father, or the Holy Ghost, shall come in Judgment, at the last day.



and elect children of God; That he which suffered for them, being flesh of
their flesh, and bone of their bone, shall come in the end to be their Judge

And so by way of Simillitude; Similitude.
as Joseph making himself known to his brethren, saying to them, I am Joseph
your brother, whom ye sold; This was a very comfortable saying to them, being
in great fear, and especially unto Benjamin his beloved brother: even so it is
with us, in Christ his coming, to be then our Judge, being also our Savior and
Redeemer.





The reason why God the Father has given all Judgment unto his son, is this,
that he might be honored of all, as he is honored, and so to come at the last
day, to sit in Judgment.

It appears in Matthew 25.33. Mat. 25.33, 34.
That there is, and then shall be a twofold Judgment: that is to say,

Judicium separationis, verse. 33. the Judgment of separation for the
righteous; and

Judicium condemnationis, the Judgment of condemnation, verse. 34. for the
wicked.

God has right unto us by Creation, the Devil by usurpation, and by his
seducing of us. And Christ our Savior, to loose us out of the hands and bonds
of the devil, he has right unto us, by purchase and redemption, and that by
the shedding of his own most precious blood for us.

Psalms it is said, that the Saints shall judge the earth: Dan. 7.22.
and so in Daniel 7.22. And Judgment was given to the Saints of the most High.



That the Saints may then be Iudices aggravantes, amplifying, Judices
aggravantes, the Saints.
and enforcing the matter against us: and righteous men may be Iudices
approbantes, Judices approbantes, the righteous.
approving of the Judgment of the wicked: and the Apostles they are Iudices
assistentes, Judices assistentes, the Apostles. Matt. 19.28.
assisting of Christ in his Judgment.

And though it be said Matthew. 19.28. And Jesus said unto his Apostles, Ye shall
sit upon twelve thrones, and Judge the twelve tribes of Israel: this is not to
have a literal construction, but was spoken by way of similitude: Propter
similitudinem Judicii dicuntur Judicare, quia post little separationem sedentur
cum Christo in throno suo, and per eos Iudicia sua approbantur, and laetantur
in illis: and so interpretative; Quia consentire ad cum facere, interpretantur
ipsi facere, and sic sunt coadjutores cum illo, in Iudiciis suis. For the
likeness, and similitude of his Judgment, and by way of interpretation, they
are said to Judge, because that after their separation, they shall sit with
Christ in his throne, and by them his Judgments shall be approved of, and they
shall rejoice in them: and so by way of interpretation, because they do
consent, agree, and approve of the Judgment of Christ; for this cause they are
said to Judge: and so they are Coadjutors with him in his Judgments: and not
otherwise are these words to be taken. Christus Iudex Iudicans.
But Christ alone shall be then Iudex Iudicans, he only shall pronounce the
Judgment, and sentence: and this appears Matthew. 25.31, 32, 33, 34. Mat.
25.31, 32, 33, 34.
The righteous come not into that Judgment of condemnation, but into that of
dissolution, or separation.

The use of all this is, The use of all.
That seeing it is certain that there will be a second Judgment, and that we
all must of necessity, whether we will or no, appear then before the throne of
Christ: Let us therefore not only leave off to mind the world, and worldly
things, but let us have all our thoughts, affections and desires, mounted, and
elevated up to heaven, and there let us settle all our affections; and so let
us live here in this world, that when at the last, we shall be summoned by
death, and then by the Angels to appear before the Tribunal throne of Christ;
let us so lead our lives here, that when we shall appear, we may there for ever
remain, and have the full fruition of everlasting joy and happiness, and not
be thrust out amongst the number of those which shall then receive this
fearful doom, and sentence, of, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire. Matthew.
25.41. Matt. 25.41.
But that we may be then embraced with the arms of grace and mercy, and may be,
and remain amongst the number of those which shall receive the happy and
joyful sentence, Matthew. 25.34.
of, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you.
Matthew. 25.34.

And then by way of Exhortation, he advised all to be careful and diligent in
their due preparation for this last day: in regard that morte nihil certius,
and tempore mortis nihil incertius, nothing is more certain than death, and
nothing more uncertain than the time when, or the manner how we shall die, and
the rather ought we for to be careful in the whole course of our lives, in
regard that all our actions are registered. For there is the book of Gods
knowledge, in which book there is registered all our proceedings in our sins;
whether the same be through infirmity, wittingly, or willingly. Nay, therein is
likewise recorded all our sighs and groans for our sins. And the book of our
own Consciences shall be then laid open, which is now shut: and we do here
labor by all the means we can, through our own obstinacy, and rebellion, to
keep the same still shut: but then in despite of us, it shall be laid open
before us.

The due consideration hereof, ought to make us the more wary, and careful of
all our actions; and seriously to think of Solomon's advise in Ecclesiastes
11.9. Rejoice, O young man, Eccles. 11.9.
in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth: and walk
in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thy eyes: But know then, that
for all these things, God will bring thee into Judgment. And so he concluded
with this Rule to be by all observed; that is, Do violence to none, accuse no
man unjustly, and be content with thy wages. Fear God, and keep his
commandments, this is the whole duty of man. Ecclesiastes 12.13. Eccles. 12.13.


FINIS.

