THE DECLARATION OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE The Duke of Buckingham, and the Earls
of Holland, and Peterborough, and other Lords and Gentlemen now associated for
the KING and Parliament, the Religion, Laws, and Peace of His Majesty's
Kingdoms.

WITH Three Letters (delivered July the 6.) One to the House of Peers; another
to the House of Commons: And the third to the Ld. Major, Aldermen, and Commons
of the City, in Common Council, Assembled.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1648.

THE DECLARATION OF The Right Honorable The Duke of BUCKINGHAM, and the Earls
of HOLLAND and PETERBOROUGH, etc.
FInding this conjuncture to be the proper time, when this wearied Kingdom may
be delivered from those miseries, it both has and may apprehend yet to feel,
by such persons, as are il-affected to our peace; who at this time without
authority or Commissions, disperse themselves into all parts, to raise Forces,
with no other intention, but to continue a bloody and intestine war, which may
prove dangerous to the whole Kingdom from the assistance they find by the
Committees of the several Counties, who have so abused their power and the
people, by an arbitrary way of Government, as they shun and apprehend nothing
more then what we shall endeavor and seek, Peace, and a wel-setled Government;
and therefore that the whole Kingdom may be satisfied upon what grounds and
principles we go to oppose and prevent this mischief and danger, we do here
declare that we do take up arms for the KING and Parliament, Religion and the
known Laws, and peace of all His Majesty's Kingdoms: professing before
Almighty God, that we have no other design in this undertaking, but to see
this well, and speedily established, and will with readiness and joy lay them
down whenever God shall give us the enjoyment of this blessing, professing
that whatsoever may be our success and prosperity in this good Cause, we shall
not say by way of menace to the Parliament, that we will use the power God has
put into our hands, but shall bless God that he has made us the instruments
to serve the KING, the Parliament and Kingdom in the way of peace, in a just
and equal composure between them; and we hope the City and the Kingdom, will
well weigh and consider whether they may not more reasonably and conscionably
join with us in these pious and peaceable resolutions, then with those Forces
that have by their breach of faith, and their disobedience, kept up the Sword,
when those that delivered it into their hands, commanded the laying of it
down; which disobedience has brought this fresh storm of blood, that is now
falling upon this Kingdom, and all those fears and confusions that Petitions
daily show to be in the thoughts and apprehensions both of the City and the
whole Kingdom: we might add sad circumstances that are of late discovered and
broken out concerning HIS MAJESTY'S Person, and likewise a confused and
levelling undertaking to overthrow Monarchy, and to turn order that preserves
all our lives and fortunes into a wild and unlimited confusion; but we desire
not to express any thing with sharpness, since our ends and pursuit is only
peace; which shall appear to all the world, whenever we may see a Personal
Treaty so begun with His Majesty as we may expect a happy conclusion by it,
that cannot follow but by a Cessation of Arms, which in all parts of the world
has accompanied these Treaties, even between the bitterest enemies, Christians
and Turks, much more to be expected in these our civil Divisions amongst our
selves, for the Sword should not be in action as long as a Treaty of peace is
in agitation, since accidents of hostility on both sides will sharpen and
divide us rather then close and unite us. This we thought fit both to desire
and to declare that the discourses that may be raised upon our actions, may not
have power to abuse the Kingdom, as if we did only move in a way to set up His
Majesty in a tyrannical power, rather then in His just Regal government, the
which has been always found in this Nation, very well consistent with the due
rights and freedoms of Parliament, the which we do here most faithfully protest
the endeavoring a preservation of, and call God to witness of our sincerity
in this intention.

Holland. G: Buckingham. Peterborough.


For the Right Honorable, the Speaker of the House of Peers.
My Lord,
WE do here take away your jealousies by giving you a clear knowledge of our
designs; which if you shall be pleased to communicate to the House of Peers,
we hope they will find, we do not vary from those principles and grounds, we
have been engaged in, both from His Majesty and the Parliament, which God give
them grace so to think, and advise upon it, as His Majesty may find His just
rights, according to our Covenant and Declarations, and the Parliament rise and
recover the dignity due unto them, by a speedy way of settling the peace of this
distracted Kingdom.

Your Lordships most humble Servants, G. BUCKINGHAM. HOLLAND. PETERBOROUGH.


The same to the House of Commons.
To the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City in Common Council
Assembled.
HAving a long time beheld the sad calamities and miseries of these Kingdoms,
and finding no other means for redress, We are forced into this undertaking,
which we desire may be rightly understood of all that are well-affected,
especially of this City, whose actions and endeavors do sufficiently evidence
their good affections. To this end we have enclosed a brief account of our
intentions, which we hope may give satisfaction both to you, and the whole
Kingdom, whose assistance, (with Gods blessing) we desire no farther, then our
designs are real for the good and happiness both of the KING, Parliament,
and Kingdom, according to our Covenant,

Your humble Servants, G. BUCKINGHAM. HOLLAND. PETERBOROUGH.


FINIS.

